

Beautiful FLOWER ARRANGEMENTS
Sensational ideas for your home
Sue Lawley ‘Sometimes I'd rather be ironing…’
COOK IN STYLE
Marvellous melon ideas
Barbecued spare ribs
Tangy Madeira cake
Lose pounds with the low-fat diet
A new high energy plan that works — for you and him!
It's healthy!
Mum's story ‘One hug could kill my daughter’
Contents
Fashion
Divided dresses
The new trouser shape for women
Beauty
Beauty: hair conditioning
Beauty, form and fitness: our beauty update
Advice
Money: having a flutter on the horses
Consumer: unsolicited telephone calls
The lawyer advises: kidnapping
Health
Gynaecology: breast-fed babies
General Medicine: low blood pressure
Alternative health: mineral water
Homes and Gardens
Homeshop: the best of mail order shopping
Homestyle: wicker and cane furniture
DIY: fitting a bath/shower tap mixer
Plantworld: all white garden
Fiction
Perfect Alibi…
News and Views
Around and About: keeping you in the know
Job of the week: probation officer
This week's people: names in the news
Reviews: cinemas, music, video, books
Features
Talking point: trying to change a partner
Reader's story: Diabetes won't change my life
Travel: Leeds
Regulars
Readers' letters
A problem shared, You reply
Horoscopes
Animals: breeding butterflies
In the kitchen
Kitchen Notes: new ideas, menus, advice
To Knit, to sew, to make
Homecraft: Father's Day cards
Pattern: kimonos
Knitting: easy-knit cotton sweater
Games
Crossword, fig-jig
Prize word-finder, puzzle solutions
ON THIS WEEK'S COVER
REAL LIFE STORY
‘One hug could kill my daughter’
THE LOW-FAT DIET
Lose pounds with our diet plan!
BEAUTIFUL ARRANGEMENTS
Sensational flower displays at home
PROFILE: SUE LAWLEY
‘Sometimes I'd rather be ironing’
COOK IN STYLE
Marvellous melons •Barbecued spare ribs •Tangy Madeira cake
Best of the week
Lose weight the healthy way
In the supermarket recently, I crept up on the man in my life who was examining the label on a frozen gateau.
‘We can't eat that, it's loaded with calories,’ I said.
‘But it only has 4 grams of fat,’ came the smart reply.
Restricting your consumption of fats is a sound way to lose weight and a healthy way of eating for all the family.
But how do you sort out the goodies from the baddies?
Our Low-Fat Diet Plan tells you how.
It's comprehensive and really easy to follow.
And, no, we didn't succumb to the gateau.
 Caroline Richards Editor 
Our Fascinating World
Toothpaste contains cement and seaweed
In the 16th century, Elizabethans rarely cleaned their teeth but instead gargled with sugar water to sweeten the breath.
Urine was recommended as a mouthwash because its acidity was thought to prevent tooth decay!
A hundred years ago people brushed with toothpaste made from burnt eggshells or crumbled porcelain.
Weird ingredients
Now toothpaste is more palatable.
We all know that fluoride is added to fight tooth decay but modern toothpaste also contains powdered chalk, aluminium oxide (found in cement) to remove plaque, and a derivative of seaweed which is used to thicken it.
Making the stripes
A reservoir of coloured gel is put near the nozzle.
When the tube is squeezed the gel is forced through tiny holes, into the paste.
Laughter Lines
‘Did you find your horse well-behaved?
Yes, he let me go first at every fence’
‘Waiter, may I have some bread, please?
Sorry, madam, we only have toast’
PAPER SMILES
Boa constrictor, 6 ½ foot, hand reared, very good eater, likes children.
£350.
Satan and lace wedding dress.
Size 10, £50. (seen in newsagent's window)
Victorian cottage style settee and rocket, a bargain at £100.
Baby brand new £27, save £15.
Plus several other cheap bits.
Know any good jokes, seen any howlers in print?
We'll pay £5 for every one used — but sorry, we can't return anything you send.
‘Heaven to me is a great big baked potato and someone to share it with’ Oprah Winfrey
Fashion
Divided dresses
When it gets hot in the city, go for this season's favourite — the divided dress.
It's short, smart, comfortable — and cool
Soft collaring makes this mini version of the divided dress ideal for holiday wear — great for showing off tanned legs.
Create a sharper image with this updated coat-dress.
It has a shawl collar, wide belt and cuffed hemline.
Thin vertical stripes and a drawstring waist make this divided dress ideal for the fuller figure.
Dramatic African-inspired prints are toned down for softer, everyday wear.
A perennial favourite, the polka dot gets a new lease of life in bold emerald green and brilliant white.
Excellent value, this beautiful cornflower blue dress looks great on its own — but for even greater impact try adding equally bright accessories.
Around and About
Compiled by Rosalind Lowe
Clock watcher's ticking treasure
Chock-a-block?
It's more like clock-a-block for timepiece collector and repairer, Sandra Pember.
She can barely move in her Gloucestershire home for the 200 or so ticking treasures jostling for space on the walls, mantelpieces and floors — anywhere where there's a minute space to be had.
Sandra began collecting several years ago after a large repair bill for a timepiece prompted her to learn the intricate ins and outs of their workings.
She's now a fully fledged clock ‘doc’ and can repair her treasures herself.
Her magnificent antique collection, which includes a 110-year-old Black Forest Clock, is very popular with other dedicated clockwatchers, and has even been put on display at Gloucester Museum.
Luckily for Sandra and her two children, Anne, 16 and John, 11, not all the clocks are in proper working order, Otherwise, she says, ‘the noise would be incredibly deafening if they all chimed at once!’
Is this what it's like to have time on your hands?
Luckily Sandra has become expert enough to do her own repair work
A gift that really grows for you
If you are looking for an appealing gift that doesn't cost the earth, Belinda Thomas could provide a solution.
She runs Greener Gifts Ltd, from her home in Chipping Sodbury, near Bristol and will sell you 36 square feet of woodland for £25.
Belinda's project — to plant more woodland — was motivated by concern for the environment, especially the loss of the natural habitat for wildlife.
But initially she couldn't think how to raise the money for it — until she hit on the idea of Greener Gifts.
With a bank loan, Belinda bought 5½ acres of land bordering Avon and Gloucestershire and planted it with beech, lime, oak and ash trees.
Buyers receive a deed confirming ownership of a plot and can visit the whole forest whenever they want.
‘It's a gift that grows,’ says Belinda.
Contact her on 0454 320522.
Daughter Pollyanna inspired Belinda's woodland project
The best of friends
Diana, a West African gorilla, hasn't forgotten the foster dad who hand-reared her from birth.
Now 18-stone, this 16-year-old ‘baby’ still expects to be spoon-fed and cuddled by Bristol Zookeeper, Mike Colbourne.
‘It's very important that human contact is continued with gorillas who have lost their parents.
It gives them a much-needed sense of security,’ he says.
He even went into her cage just after she gave birth.
‘Diana was wary of me.
She would go to the far side and we would watch each other.
Then one day she started pushing the baby toward me, as if to say, ‘Go on.
You can look at it’.’
Gorilla Diana still has a soft spot for zoo-keeper Mike
Newsflash
First moves
A Babycham survey revealed that 83% of men favour women making the first move in relationships.
But only 78% of women want to do the asking.
Whiff of success
American researcher Dr William Dember, claims that pleasant fragrances could be beneficial to people in jobs demanding sustained attention.
We're all fibbers
Lies are essential in life, says Professor Loyal Rue — not only do we lie to others, we tell ourselves fibs to make us feel better.
Pipe dream for German artist
Some of the water-pipes in the town of Wilhelmshaven, Germany seem to have taken on a life of their own.
This pipe-monster appears to have decided to deliver the water.
If meeting him could make you reach for something a lot stronger than H 2 O, you will be relieved to hear that he's anchored to the ground.
The statue is the work of artist Heinrich Krebs.
‘Renewal of the waterworks means many specially designed pipes are discarded,’ he says.
‘I got permission for a symbolic statue, and this giant Pumpman is the result!’
Matter of opinion
Should we feel obliged to tip?
Everyone has faced the embarrassing dilemma of deciding how much extra to give a waiter, hairdresser or taxi-driver.
But when you consider today's high prices, should we have to pay more — especially when the service hasn't been good?
So is it about time we got rid of this confusing tradition?
Tipping is a great way of showing your appreciation, says June, 23.
‘Whether you've enjoyed quick service in a restaurant or had a great hair-do, giving a cash token lets people know their talents aren't taken for granted.’
When people hover for a tip, it's excruciating, says Jon, 34 ‘I don't see why people working in certain industries should be singled out for special treatment.
Milkmen and plumbers don't expect a gratuity.’
It would be far better if employers paid their workers a decent wage, says Tracey, 44.
‘They shouldn't force them to rely on this old-fashioned and arbitrary way of making up their wages — it's just not fair.
However, I do usually bow to tradition and give waiters and hairdressers a little extra.’
If people are made aware that the better the service, the more they earn, then it really is an incentive to work hard and perform well, says Tony, 28.
‘Tipping — or rather not tipping is a good way of showing your disapproval as well as your appreciation.’
Job of the week
Probation Officer
For Frances Minhinnick a normal day's work means dealing with people ‘who have broken into schools, nicked cars, committed burglaries, robberies and rape.’
As an officer with the Inner London Probation Service, she's responsible for some 30 offenders, all under the age of 21.
‘My work involves challenging people about why they offend.
I talk to them about the choices they've made which led them to offend, and help them to find strategies to avoid it in the future,’ she explains.
Her first job as a voluntary residential social worker was looking after juveniles who had ‘come through the system of care’.
After 14 months, she decide to train for the probation service.
Officers are supposed to work 150 hours a month, but Frances, 27, does more.
Her job can also mean giving up her Saturdays to attend court, or an evening to see a client who is out during the day.
She has even taken a group of clients on holiday.
Most of Frances' clients are men.
For women officers there's always the possibility that they'll have to deal with the perpetrators of sexual abuse and violence.
‘Inevitably there are going to be offences where I feel disgusted by what the person has done and I would probably say that to them.
That's quite an effective way of starting to be honest with someone,’ admits Frances.
‘Building up a feeling of trust is very important.’
Safety is another consideration.
‘I have never been physically assaulted by a client but there have been circumstances when I've thought I should be a bit careful.
If I were planning a home visit to see someone I didn't already know, I'd go with another colleague.’
Although there are many male probation officers, Frances believes that women are well suited to probation work as they ‘tend to have a degree of sensitivity and an ability to listen and to understand what pain means.
You have to like people, and treat them with patience and firmness.’
One of the pluses of the job is having really supportive colleagues.
And there are many rewards.
‘For instance, if you've been working towards getting a client somewhere to live and they get it and they come back to you and say ‘Thanks’, that is simply amazing,’ says Frances.
FACTFILE
Are you patient and enthusiastic?
To work as a probation officer, you need to be a qualified social worker and must have the appropriate CQSW qualification (Certificate of qualification in Social Work).
Studying and training usually takes two years.
Where can you get more information?
Write to the Home Office, Probation Division, 50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT.
Telephone: 071-273 3000.
Variety is a big attraction of Frances Minhinnick's job.
‘I'm not office-based — I'll go to court duty one day, a prison visit the next and perhaps a home visit the following day,’ she says.
Sherine's in fashion
When Sherine Pherozshaw couldn't find the party dress she wanted, she didn't make do with what was on offer in the shops.
She simply decided to design her own.
The result was a stunning, white lace dress — an impressive feat made all the more amazing by the fact that Sherine was only eight years old!
‘A friend of my mother's runs up the clothes for me, but I want to learn how to use a sewing-machine,’ she says.
Now 13, Sherine, a petite size eight, gets inspiration from country walks around her home in King's Langley, Hertfordshire, as well as on family holidays in Devon.
Two of her favourite outfits are a daffodil dress and a mustard, silk two-piece.
‘Natural colours are flattering,’ she says, ‘I'd never use fluorescent green!’
The young designer plans to go to fashion college, and has been busy choreographing her own charity fashion shows in the meantime.
‘My friends help by modelling the outfits.
We have a lot of fun.’
Unable to find a dress she liked, Sherine discovered her own talent for fashion
The TROUSER SHAPE for Summer
The latest look for this season is lean, elegant and very flattering.
Take your pick from bright colours, bold patterns or classic neutrals
Dramatic colours look great with neutral, slimline pants.
Choose these soft linen pants for comfort and style.
Wear these striking cropped trousers with strappy kitten-heeled shoes to show off your legs to best effect.
Team eye-catching checks and a fitted blouse with a sweetheart neckline, for the ultimate in 50s glamour.
Fashionable lacing on the waistband of these trousers helps to accentuate a trim figure.
YOUR RIGHTS
ASK THE LAWYER
Are the worried by legal problems Let barrister Fenton Bresler tell you exactly where you stand
Can I see the will?
Before my mother died she told me of a letter to me, held in the bank, which I was to receive on her death.
Since she died I have tried without success to get this letter.
The bank manager says that I cannot have it until the will's executor, my stepfather, agrees.
I've talked to my stepfather, but he denies that the letter even exists.
I've asked to see the will but he has refused.
Is there anything I can do?
I'm afraid a beneficiary is not entitled to see a will or receive a copy.
All you can do is wait until your stepfather gets the will admitted to probate.
Then it becomes public property and you can, for a small fee, obtain a copy from Somerset House in London.
As for the letter, return to the manager and explain to him that, as it's addressed to you, it is your property.
The executor has nothing to do with it!
Must I pay off our joint overdraft?
I lived with a man for 10 years.
For most of that time he took drugs.
At one time a business proposition came up and, thinking it would help him kick his habit, I agreed to a joint overdraft.
He has now left me and I'm stuck with paying a hefty joint overdraft.
What should I do?
Technically you are both liable for the overdraft and if you could find this man you could sue him.
But given his lack of money it's hardly worth it.
Banks are not soulless institutions.
Contact your manager and see what he suggests.
MONEY AND YOU
Having a flutter on the horses
If you're going to have a bet on the Derby, do make sure you understand the system
Nearly 50% of all women allow themselves a once-a-year bet on the horses, according to a recent Gallup survey conducted for the UK's largest bookmaker, Ladbrokes.
And a large number of these one-off bets will be placed with Britain's 10,000 betting shops on June 5 when the world's most famous flat race, the Derby, takes place on Epsom Downs.
Make a choice
Some people pick their horses by choosing a name they fancy, others stick a pin into the list of runners!
If these approaches seem a bit arbitrary, then learn how to assess the horse's ‘form’.
This details its past record, how its performance is expected to be affected by the jockey, whether the grass is soft or firm and the distance.
You'll find all this information, including the horse's form rating, in your newspaper.
Place your bet
Once you've chosen your horse, you can place a bet right up until the ‘off’— when the race starts.
The two most popular types of bet are ‘Win’ and ‘Each Way’(EW).
A Win bet means that the horse you select must come in first place and the amount that you win will depend on the odds.
For example, if you place £2 on a horse with odds of 5/1, and it wins, you win £10 (five times £2).
You also get your £2 stake back.
For a £1 ‘Each Way’ bet, you stake £2. £1 of this goes on the same horse to win and the other £1 goes on the same horse to finish in the first three or four places, depending on how many runners there are in the race.
This part of the bet will be settled at one fifth of the odds.
Betting tax is charged at 10p in the pound, so tax on a £2 bet will be 20p.
It's simpler and cheaper to pay it when placing your bet, rather than on your winnings.
If you go to the racecourse you can bet at the course's own betting shop or go out into the ‘betting ring’ where bookmakers have odds chalked up on boards.
If you place a bet with your chosen bookie, you will get the price he quotes, no matter how odds change before the race starts, and there is no tax to pay.
Try the ‘Tote’
Finally, you can use the ‘Tote’, available at betting shops for some kinds of bets.
All money bet on a certain race is placed in a pool, of which the winning tickets get a portion.
The size of the ‘tote dividend’ winners get depends on how much money has been staked and the number of winners.
Above all, remember that there is no such thing as a safe bet.
Be prepared to lose your money.
Next week: financial help for the disabled.
Consumer
How to put an end to telephone touts
Unsolicited calls from salespeople are annoying, but there may soon be a way to stop them
Research shows that in 1990 about 60% of us received calls from telephone salesmen, yet three quarters of us object to them.
Until now, there was little we could do about this, but complaints have been taken seriously and discussions are now under way between OFTEL, the Office of Telecommunications, and the British Direct Marketing Association (BDMA, representing companies who use telesales).
The idea is to set up a Telephone Preference Service.
Consumers will be able to put their names on a register of people who don't want to receive sales calls.
The scheme should be in operation by the end of the year, and companies will be disciplined, even disconnected, if they persist in phoning any consumers whose names appear on the register.
At about the same time, British Telecom are also hoping to introduce a formal code of practice.
At present there are just informal guidelines (found at the back of your telephone directory) which say, among other things, that sales people should state their names and their company at the beginning of the call.
They should ask if the timing of the call is inconvenient and offer to ring back if not.
And finally, they should explain at the very beginning of their conversation why they are phoning you.
At present, if you want to stop receiving sales calls, it's up to you to tell each company which contacts you not to bother you in future.
Under telephone licence regulations they must keep a list of all such requests and respect them in future.
If the calls continue, you should complain to OFTEL  or to the Data Protection Complaints Office .
The BDMA  will also investigate any complaints which are made about its member companies.
Next week: making the most of your MP 
Offenders will be disciplined
Firms must keep a list of those who ask not to be called
In Court Today
Student paralysed in car crash receives £1M
A brilliant student's seven-year battle for compensation after being crippled for life, has finally come to an end with a record award of £1.2 million.
The young man, who is now 23 years old, was only 16 when a car ploughed into him and a couple of friends as they walked home from a party.
Seven other youngsters were injured and another killed instantly.
The parents of the student were told that his chances of survival were slim.
A fight for life
But he pulled through, and after 14 months in hospital he was finally allowed home.
However, as a result of the accident, he has completely lost the use of his arms and legs and he is now able to communicate with other people only by using his parents to interpret his signs.
The young man's solicitor explained to the court how badly he was hurt in the accident.
‘He is trapped in a body which is severely disabled and will spend the rest of his life in a wheelchair.’
Going to university
The solicitor said of the award: ‘It's a reasonable figure which will give him satisfactory compensation for a very serious road accident.’
The young man, who comes from Gloucestershire, is now studying for A levels and said, through his father, ‘I am very pleased indeed.
I want to go to university and this will help me achieve that goal.’
His father commented: ‘Our son hopes to lead an independent life and this money will help him.
We will be able to provide the equipment he needs to lead a normal life, and we know he'll want for nothing in the future.’
The 18-year-old who caused the accident admitted that he'd been driving recklessly.
He was sentenced to 18 months' youth custody and was banned from driving for six years.
The award was made as part of an out of court settlement by the driver's insurance firm.
It happened to us
‘My ex-husband had kidnapped my daughter’
Wendy Almon went to pick up two-year-old Eva, but found she'd been abducted
After a long and bitter divorce, 34-year-old Wendy Almon was looking forward to starting a new life.
‘I'd finally won custody of my daughter Eva and we had just moved down from Scotland to Leeds with my boyfriend Glynn.
Things seemed to be looking up at last,’ she says.
But Wendy's happiness wasn't to last.
‘The arrangement was for my ex-husband, Thom, who's American, to see Eva, now three years old, for one week in every four,’ explains Wendy.
‘It seemed to work OK, although I was always a bit worried Thom might take Eva from me — he still had her US passport.’
Then in November last year, soon after Wendy had given birth to Bryony, her second daughter, everything began to go wrong.
‘Eva was with her father, and all was fine until the day before she was due to come home,’ recalls Wendy.
‘Thom called to say he'd be a day late, and then he just hung up.’
Wendy tried to call him back but got no reply.
‘I immediately guessed something was wrong — he always put his answering machine on if he didn't want to talk.
By the next morning I was feeling sick with worry, and so we decided to drive to Scotland to collect Eva ourselves.’
When they arrived, Wendy's worst fears were confirmed.
‘The house was empty — no furniture, nothing,’ she recalls.
‘I went into a panic.
Eva was only two then, and all I could think was that he'd stolen my little girl.
Thank goodness Glynn was there.’
Glynn immediately contacted Wendy's lawyer.
‘He first registered Eva as a missing person and then got a judge to issue an order to seek and find her,’ explains Glynn.
‘The judge agreed to sign a warrant for Thom's arrest as soon as it was clear he'd left the country with Eva.’
‘I wanted to do something, too,’ recalls Wendy.
‘So we went through Thom's mail and found an invoice for the furniture shipment to New Jersey.
I guessed that's where he had gone.’
The police, however, still needed proof that Thom had left the country with Eva before issuing a warrant.
‘We decided to contact an American lawyer.
He froze all Thom's US bank accounts, which is legal and common practice in the USA.
He also impounded Thom's furniture and had a New Jersey warrant for his arrest issued,’ says Wendy.
Thom was nearly caught in New Jersey, but he fled to another state.
‘New Jersey warrants are useless in any other state,’ explains Wendy.
‘We needed a federal warrant, which is valid all over America.
That meant the Scottish police asking the Americans to extradite Thom.
After three weeks of legal wrangling the Foreign Office finally asked the Americans for help.
But they only asked for Eva to be found, not brought home.
I thought I would never see her again.’
In the end it was the action of freezing Thom's bank accounts that finally traced him.
‘After a month in hiding he was running out of money,’ explains Wendy.
‘His US lawyer contacted ours and said he wanted to swop our daughter for a guarantee that he wouldn't be arrested!
We knew that his lawyer was in Colorado.
So I put two and two together and told the state police.’
Within days Eva was safe.
‘She was taken into custody.
We flew out the next day.
She was in my arms on January 15.’
Now safely home, Eva shows few signs of her experience.
‘She's her normal chattering self,’ says Wendy.
‘But now we're in the middle of another legal battle with Thom for compensation for the abduction.
It cost us £50,000 to get Eva back, but I'd spend it again if I had to.’
Next week: victims of hit and run drivers 
Legal wrangling goes on, but Eva's with Wendy and Glynn
‘He wanted to swop her for a guarantee that he would not be arrested’
OUR EXPERT REPLIES
Up to 1,000 children are snatched from this country by their mother or father every year.
And, although child abduction is a criminal offence, finding the child often comes too late for prosecution to take place — the parent has already left Britain.
Wendy was luckier than most.
Her daughter was taken to America which is a European Convention country (there are 16 in all).
This meant that she could have used the Convention's rulings on child abduction to get Eva back.
She'd have been given help by the Lord Chancellor's Department, and her costs would have been minimal.
But it can take many months and, as Wendy realised, the longer she waited, the harder it would be to trace Eva.
So, like many other parents in her situation, she decided to fight her own case.
But for parents whose children are taken to non-Convention countries, there is no choice.
They have to make a huge effort, spend large amounts of money and often wait months, even years, to trace their son or daughter.
And there is the likelihood that they won't get permission to take their child home.
Mental strain on parents in either situation is enormous, and often likened to bereavement.
The most important thing for any parent who suspects that the father or mother of their child will try to take them, is to make sure they give them no opportunity.
Reunite, the National Council for Abducted Children, offers advice about prevention and recovery.
It has a national and international network of lawyers and tries to link parents to each other for mutual support.
‘Tracing a child may take months, even years’
STOP PRESS
Energy Efficient?
It's now easier to check if the house you are planning to buy is ‘green’, thanks to a new rating scheme launched by the National Energy Foundation.
National Home Energy Rating (NHER) assesses the efficiency of heating, lighting and domestic appliances on a scale of one to 10.
Write to the Foundation for a list of NHER assessors in your area who will carry out a check for a fee starting at £50.
Danger of hiring DIY equipment
A recent survey by the Consumers Association (CA) showed that a third of the tools hired from 32 randomly selected shops were found to be faulty when examined by experts.
And half the people who hired items were given no verbal advice on choosing and using them.
The CA advises that all tools should come with printed instructions — already the policy of the Hire Association of Europe.
If there aren't any, ask for them.
Make sure you hire from an HAE member and ask for a demonstration.
If you do end up hiring an unsafe tool, inform your local trading standards officer immediately.
GET YOUR HAIR INTO GREAT CONDITION
With a little extra help your hair can start the summer as it means to go on — looking terrific.
Follow our advice, and get your locks ready to face up to the rigours and trials of sun, sea water and chlorine
Summer sunshine and frequent dips in the sea or pool will lift your spirits and brighten the natural lights in your hair, but you should take care to remember that, as with most things, it is possible to have too much of a good thing.
Chlorine is well-known for its drying and oxidising qualities which have the effect of bleaching the hair and reacting against the chemicals used in perms and colorants.
Sun and salt water are equally drying and a combination of all three can prove harmful to your hair leaving it looking dull and frizzy and very much the worse-for-wear.
However, it is possible to limit the damage with extra conditioning and give your locks an extra boost by taking some Brewer's yeast, Vitamin B complex or kelp tablets each day.
ADAPT YOUR PRODUCTS WHEN THE SUN SHINES
If you plan to have a perm or some colouring book your appointment 2–3 weeks before going on holiday.
Shades for sunny days
Gerard Kierans, UK Artistic Director of the Graham Webb group of salons, says: ‘Coloured hair can change in the sun so we always ask clients to let us know when they're going away.
The colourist can then take this into account when choosing the shade.’
Ian Denson of John Frieda suggests having highlights several weeks before leaving and protect your hair in the sun when sunbathing by combing through conditioner.
Products to pack
Gerard also stresses the importance of taking the right conditioning products on holiday with you.
‘Many people take an all-in-one shampoo and conditioner, then moan when their hair looks dry and brittle.
Whether your hair has been chemically treated or not, you should take extra rich products to put back the moisture removed by the sun, sea and chlorine.
Always pack products with built-in UV filters.’
STEPS TO HEALTHY HAIR
While, in the 80s, it was fine for your hair to look fashionably unkempt, the 90s is all about healthy, well-groomed hair with a natural shine.
Full of body and bounce, it should move as you do.
Follow our guide and make cutting, cleansing and conditioning work for you.
You'll soon be able to see — and feel — the improvement.
Regular trimming can make hair look thicker
The first step is a visit to your hairdresser to have your hair shaped and the split ends cut.
Even the tiniest trim gives more body.
A re-style can provide locks with a new lease of life.
Quick tricks
While you're there, ask for some styling tips from your hairdresser — most are happy to oblige and you can pick up some very useful tricks of the trade.
Gerard Kierans comments: ‘Even a simple tip can save time and effort.
For example, the easiest way to find your parting is to comb your hair back, then push it forwards until it parts naturally — this is very useful if you're caught without a mirror.’
Adding height
If you've got long hair ask your stylist to show you how to put it up.
French plaits and pleats are fashionable at present.
Some hairdressers charge extra for this but it's well worth paying a few pounds for.
GENTLE CLEANSING
Getting hair into shape means taking extra care at every stage.
If you wash your hair frequently use an extra mild shampoo that won't dry it out.
Try Daniel Field Spring Water Frequent Wash Shampoo, £2.40 for 250ml.
Choosing shampoo
Look for a formula to suit your hair type.
After washing, your hair should feel soft, yet full of body.
If it feels lank, switch to a lighter product and make sure you rinse well.
Try some massage
When you wash your hair massage your scalp to stimulate the flow of oxygen and nutrients to the hair follicles.
Apply shampoo to your hands then smooth it evenly over your hair.
Starting at your forehead and working down to your neck, firmly massage small areas at a time.
CONDITIONERS REPAIR THE DAMAGE
On healthy hair the cuticle scales lie flat, reflecting light and giving hair a healthy sheen.
When hair is damaged the roughened cuticles no longer overlap smoothly.
Conditioners help by smoothing the hair's surface and replenishing some of its natural moisture.
Don't think that just because a shampoo doesn't lather well it isn't doing its job.
Handfuls of froth simply mean that the manufacturer has added lots of foaming agents.
Find a cleanser to suit your hair type.
Hair Problems
If you're taking regular care of your hair and it still looks less than great, don't be downhearted.
Most hair care worries can be sorted out by changing your basic routine or using products to suit your hair type.
We answer three of your queries about getting hair into tip-top condition.
My hair always seems to look lank and lifeless, even though I make sure that I wash and condition it regularly.
What am I doing wrong?
Try switching to hair care products with a light consistency and make sure you rinse out any setting agents thoroughly.
The resins in these products can form a sticky coating on the hair, which makes it look dull, lank and lifeless.
Once a week, use a specially formulated shampoo to deep-cleanse your hair, like Marks & Spencer Professional Formula Anti-Build-Up Shampoo, £1.75 for 250ml.
If your hair is long, apply conditioner to the older, dryer ends only.
I've been using a leave-in conditioner on my hair and am very pleased with the results.
However, recently I've noticed white specks appearing in my hair.
Could the product itself have given me dandruff?
It sounds as though you've been using more conditioner than your hair needs.
The product that hasn't been absorbed is causing these unsightly specks.
Try using a smaller amount, massaging it between your fingers before applying hair to ensure that it's evenly distributed.
Or try a spray product like Lamaur Nu-plex Daily Leave-In Conditioning Mist, £7.45 for 236ml.
My hair seems to have lost some of its colour as I've got older.
I don't want a complete shade change but would like to cheer it up for summer.
Have you any suggestions?
Temporary colorants are a good way to add warmth, richness and shine to your natural shade.
They coat the hair with colour and, because they don't contain peroxide, won't dry or damage it.
Our favourites are J F Lazartique highlighting creams for hair.
They come in nine shades and give a short-lived burst of colour which fades over three to four shampoos.
If you've a few grey hairs and want something more lasting try their colouring emulsion for grey hair which lasts two to three months.
They're quite pricey — £13 and £8, respectively — but, unless your hair is very long, there's enough for several applications 
If you'd like to brighten the colour of your hair, but don't want to risk undermining its condition, try a temporary colorant.
These won't damage you hair at all: in fact because they contain lots of conditioning agents they can make it much more shiny and manageable.
An intensive conditioner will work much better if you cover hair with a polythene bag after applying to seal in body heat.
If your hair is long, the ends need extra attention.
Revitalise them with conditioning serum.
TALKING POINT
Is it wrong to try to change YOUR PARTNER?
Many of us try to improve our other halves from time to time— perhaps you wish he were tidier while he would prefer you a little slimmer.
But will this harm the relationship in the long term, or is a bit of criticism good for you?
Judith Leggett had told her partner Patrick Cartan, 32, yet again, that she didn't like his awful checked shirts.
But, as before, he didn't take any notice.
So she opted for desperate measures to get him to change his image.
‘I just threw them all in the bin,’ remembers Judith, 27, from Cambridge.
Luckily, Patrick saw the funny side and went out and bought some shirts his partner approved of.
Throwing out all those shirts hasn't really altered Patrick in any major way, but Judith is happier.
But can it threaten your relationship if you try to change your loved one too much?
Are women more prone than men to finding fault?
And what's really wrong with knocking a few of the rough edges off your partner?
Andrew Lloyd-Webber's new wife, horsewoman Madeline Gurdon, has tried to smarten him up.
She's encouraged him to cut his hair and lose weight, and still Andrew somehow can't help looking a little scruffy.
Zelda West-Meads of the marriage guidance counselling service, Relate, believes it's perfectly acceptable to change your partner in the way Madeline and Judith have done, although she would recommend you using more tact than Judith did.
‘If you're fed up with your partner wearing that shaggy old jumper, why not suggest that you go shopping together and help him to choose something better?’ she says.
‘Do try and be kind.’
But some people don't just try to change their other half's appearance: they want to alter their characters, too.
Rachel Browne, 25, who's a trainee solicitor from Devon, believes she's managed to influence her boyfriend Al Damon, 30, in more fundamental ways than his style of shirt.
‘He's not particularly assertive, so I try to make him more so,’ she explains.
‘He never used to notice when people took advantage of him, so I started pointing it out.
Now I think he's considerably less likely to be taken for a ride.’
Rachel does know she shouldn't try to change Al, but she says, ‘It's inevitable.
People are very seldom exactly what you would like them to be.’
Karen Gorbutt, 30, from South London, has been trying for years to get her partner, Matthew Allen, 30, to be considerate around the house.
‘The way he turns on the television as soon as he walks into the room drives me nuts,’ she says.
‘But after rowing about it for ages, I came home from work the other day and it wasn't on.
He was reading a book.
For all my nagging, he'd got the message and turned it off.’
While Judith, Rachel and Karen are sure their partners are happy to go along with the little alterations they try to make, Zelda says that interfering too much can prove to be very dangerous to a relationship.
‘Imagine how you would feel if you were on the receiving end of your criticism,’ she suggests.
Social psychologist Robin Gilmour of the University of Lancaster warns that constant criticism ‘can lead to your partner feeling resentful’.
Indeed, the cost of trying to change someone can be very high.
Victoria Lockhart, 20, finished her three-year relationship with Dennis Harper, 25, when she got fed up with his endless attempts to alter the way she looked.
She's very slim with curves in all the right places, but Dennis wanted her to be even thinner.
‘He used to buy slimming magazines for me and put them in my bag,’ remembers Victoria, who lives in Manchester.
‘When we were in restaurants, he'd say, ‘You don't want any pudding, do you?’
And he'd always ask how much I'd eaten that day.’
Sometimes his concern with changing the way she looked amused Victoria, but at other times she found it upsetting.
In the end, she explains, ‘I became more confident and  happy with the way I looked.
I didn't want to be dictated to.’
So she left.
Beth Wilson, 24, of Hull, tried to transform her boyfriend, Mojo Hughes, 24, from the outgoing man who enjoyed partying every night into someone who was happy to spend a quiet evening in with her.
‘At first he agreed that he'd much rather be at home with me.
We started spending most weekends at home together.
But it put too much pressure on the relationship, and when it finished I realised that he'd resented what I had done.
He found that he couldn't go out with the lads anymore, and he felt he'd lost his happy-go-lucky side.
After we split up he started going out with a woman who wanted to go out on the town every night — like him.’
Beth's experience suggests that people don't change deep down, even if they really want to try to please their partner.
Zelda says, ‘You shouldn't go into a relationship saying, ‘I'll alter him’, or ‘Once we're married…’, because they may not change, and what will you do then?’
So do women try to change men more than men want to change women?
Londoner Roz Jakes, 30, thinks it works both ways.
She's managed to persuade her partner, James Allen, 28, to try vegetarian food.
‘When I first met him he thought I was mad because I didn't eat meat.
Now he'll look out for restaurants we can both go to,’ she explains.
She is bringing up their daughter, Katherine, 21 months, to be a vegetarian, too.
And while James still eats chops with his meal, Roz says, ‘When Katherine asks him if she can have some of his dinner, he says, ‘Mummy wouldn't like it’.’
She won James round to her way of eating, but in return he tries to alter her, too.
‘He wants me to have really short hair, just as I did 10 years ago.’
Roz and James have both tried to change each other.
But she's noticed among her friends that women carry on trying for much longer.
‘Changing a man is a way women can show their power.
It's a way of saying to yourself, if he really loves me, he'll stop doing that because I want him to’, Roz says.
Yet Zelda says, ‘I don't think it's only women who want to change their partner.
There are times when we all want to get inside the other person's head and switch a few knobs to re-programme them completely.
Of course, that's just not possible.’
Beth Wilson disagrees, ‘I think women often have an ideal of the perfect man, and if he scores nine out of 10, then it's far too much a temptation not to want to try to change that last little bit.’
She also thinks that men tend to choose women who make up for their own shortcomings.
‘I always tried to make Mojo more organised,’ she says, ‘but all that ended up happening was that I kept his diary and sent letters off for him.
He didn't ever change himself, he just went out with organised women.’
In the end, psychologist Robin Gilmour believes, if you feel there's something that needs changing in your relationship, you should think very carefully about continuing in it.
‘The most successful relationships are the ones in which the issue of changing people doesn't arise,’ he says.
‘If you can't accept your partner as he is, you shouldn't be going out with him.’
ROD'S LINE-UP OF LOOK-ALIKES
Singer Rod Stewart hasn't changed the women he's been out with; he's just exchanged the model — they all have long blonde hair and long legs.
Social psychologist Robin Gilmour says, ‘Some people have a strong blueprint of their ideal person, so they choose a similar one each time.’
Zelda West-Meads of Relate adds, ‘Here someone is looking for their ideal, but she doesn't exist.
Rather than recognise points about themselves that need changing, what they are doing is changing their partner for a new one.
BRITT EKLAND Swedish Britt was the original blonde bombshell
ALANA STEWART Married for five years, Rod and Alana had two children
KELLY EMBERG After six years together she won £7,000 a month palimony
RACHEL HUNTER ‘This time I really mean it — she's changed my life
People are very seldom exactly what you'd like them to be
Changing the Royal image
The suits are now double-breasted and more sleek, the ties more sophisticated, the hair more stylish and the fashionable loafers are a definite improvement on the old lace-ups.
Charles has been transformed since he married Diana.
But there are some thing she can't change, like the way he shoves his hand into his pocket, his preference for classical music to Dire Straits, and looking at buildings rather than eyeing up the latest cat-walk creations 
The youngest old-fogey in town
Fashion conscious in his 40s
Your Letters
The novel idea of recycling stories
After coming across a hefty pile of best magazines prior to moving house earlier this year, I thought of a novel idea.
I cut out all the short stories from nearly 100 magazines and pasted them into a collection of scrapbooks.
So far, I've given two to friends in hospital and one to an elderly neighbour, who's begged me to let her have another one so that she can pass the first one on.
It's something I can do on long, boring evenings and gives the recipients a lot of pleasure.
I wonder if other readers will give it a try?
£25 LETTER OF THE WEEK
A truly green garden
We have a marvellous collection of birds in our garden, such as thrushes and blackbirds.
They clear the lawn of slugs and at the same time delight us with their presence.
We even have a tiny yellowhammer which visits us each morning.
We never use pesticides or insecticides and this is the wonderful result.
Square-eyed generation
Seeing a video hire shop on a Saturday night crammed with people choosing what they are going to watch that evening is a sad sight.
Whatever happened to getting together with your friends or family and talking together?
These days, everyone just sits in front of the box for entertainment.
The only thing people seem to have to talk about is television.
‘What did you watch last night?’ may be a good way to open a conversation but it's a lousy topic to continue with.
Think before you judge
I'm often surprised by people who voice their opinions and are adamant that they are right — from those who think people with a hereditary disease shouldn't have children, to people who feel strongly about disposable nappies.
How can they be so certain that their judgements are fair and just?
I wonder if they have really thought about other people's situations.
If we all tried to see things from more than our own view point, the world would be a better place.
Family reservations
My friend was fed up with preparing meals for her teenaged children who then often didn't turn up to eat.
So she decided to take ‘bookings’.
Each day her youngsters have to reserve a seat at the table and no prior reservation means no meal.
Her restaurant is now permanently booked!
JUST FOR LAUGHS
•After a big family celebration, we all grouped together to be photographed.
I noticed that my mother kept asking my boyfriend and my brother's girlfriend to move further and further over until they were almost standing on their own.
When I asked my mother what she was doing, she replied: ‘I thought if nothing were to come of your relationships, I could cut them out of the photographs!’
•When my mother arrived to stay with us, my young son Adam greeted her excitedly.
‘Will Daddy be able to do his trick?’ he asked.
‘What trick is that?’ she responded.
‘Well’, came the reply from Adam, ‘he said that if you stayed longer than a week he'd hit the roof!’
Homeshop
Ideas by post
Our choice of the best mail order buys
Join the home guard
Keep surrounding surfaces clean and clear up fast after a messy job with this practical polyethylene sheet.
It provides an ample working area and has corner fasteners to lift the edges, and help to prevent spills.
What's more, when you've finished with it simply wipe it clean and then fold it flat for easy storage.
Waterproof and tearproof, the Tidy Sheet measures 81cm square ref 8159 £2.49, p&p £1.94 on orders up to £30.
Mail order from Lakeland Plastics,
Miraculous magnet
Strong enough to lift up to 200lbs, this six stacked rust resistant magnet has an overall gripping area of 8.25cm square and will collect dressmakers' pins or DIY nails just like magic.
Mighty Magnet, £29.95 p&p £2.95.
Mail order from Science Museum Brainwaves,
THE THINGS PEOPLE BUY
Sounds in the round
Here's the world's first radio that doubles as a fun fashion accessory in its own right.
Enclosed in a transparent shell with an ingeniously designed neck strap-cum-aerial, it can go anywhere you can go.
Colourful flashing lights synchronize the sound.
Measuring 6cm across with AM/FM and headphone adaptor the Switch It radio costs £24, p&p £2.50.
Mail order from Compare,
Another tall story
Used originally by Tallymen who sat behind a high desk to keep account of cargo being unloaded, and later adapted by film directors, you'll find this seat ideal if you have a breakfast bar.
You can also have it personalised with your name.
Tallyman chair, 76cm high £36.50; letters 25p each, p&p £.45.
Mail order from Nauticalia Ltd,
Kind cleansers
This range of products, not tested on animals, includes 150ml each of Evening Primrose Oil Moisturiser, Periwinkle Skin Toner, Watercress Cleanser and a tablet of 100gm vegetable soap.
Natural Skincare Collection £9.99 p&p £.45.
Mail order from WWF UK Ltd,
Dual role jug
Whether it's for fresh juice or making coffee in the microwave, the versatile Microbist jug is a must for the modern kitchen.
Made from microwave-friendly materials, it can be used to brew and re-heat coffee quickly and removing the plunger transforms it into a stylish juice jug.
The six-cup Microbist £11.99 p&p incl.
Mail order from Life Cycle Products,
A black and white number
Let your man make a bold statement with this sporty outfit.
Top, 100% cotton £14.99, lined cotton polyester trousers with elasticated waist and ankles, £16.99, cotton baseball cap with mirror perspex ‘NYC’, £8.99 p&p incl.
Mail order from Caroline in Direct Sales, Freemans,
Ordering Goods
When buying by mail order, keep a copy of the details relating to both the company you are buying from and the item.
If you haven't heard from the firm within 28 days, write to find out why.
Never send any cash with your order.
All catalogues mentioned on this page are free to best readers unless otherwise stated.
Every effort is made to ensure prices are accurate and goods available, but best cannot take responsibility for either.
GOOD HEALTH
GENERAL MEDICINE
Can low blood pressure be a risk?
Most of us have been warned about the health risks of high blood pressure (hypertension) but few people are aware that in several European countries the opposite condition of low blood pressure (hypotension) is regarded as a medical problem.
In West Germany, up to one in 10 of the population is said to suffer.
Symptoms of hypotension include tiredness, light-headedness or dizziness and fainting, all of which could easily be attributed to other complaints.
Headaches are common, too, as are cold hands and feet.
What's confusing, though is that some of these symptoms are sometimes reported by people who suffer from high blood pressure.
Permanently low blood pressure, meanwhile, shouldn't be confused with temporary hypotension.
This normally occurs after any sudden and serious loss of blood or after excessive fluid loss following a severe bout of diarrhoea.
It can also occur after a heart attack or, if you are taking drugs to treat high blood pressure and you exceed the recommended dose.
Yet it's estimated that about one in five of us is affected.
Among young people, women seem to be more prone to it than men, while research shows that sufferers are generally of slim build and underweight.
But older men and women may be affected too, and evidence has shown that some races are more likely to have it than others.
Australian Aborigines, East Africans, Bengalis, Asians and Philippinos all have generally lower blood pressures than Europeans.
The good news is that people with lower blood pressures have lower mortality rates than those who suffer from hypertension.
And, despite claims, particularly among the Germans, French, Italians and Spanish, that it is a bad thing, many American insurance companies reckon that people with low blood pressure in middle age, far from suffering a disease, are expected to lead the longest and healthiest lives.
Patients who have hypotension can expect longer, more healthier lives
Next week: different ways to relieve pain
GYNAECOLOGY
Breast is still the best, say experts
Babies that are breastfed are less likely to fall victim to gastro-enteritis, respiratory infections and glue ear.
And it's also known that breastmilk has a special value for babies most vulnerable to infection, for example those born ill or premature.
Magic ingredients
Now new research has added to that list — this time it can help fight urine infections.
The good news is that this protective effect not only extends to babies, it applies to the nursing mothers too.
The magic ingredients in breastmilk which are thought to strike the germs responsible for causing urine infections, are a group of sugars, called oligosaccharides.
These sugars, which are found in the milk itself, and also in the urine of nursing mothers, protect in two ways.
Firstly they prevent the bacteria that cause urine infections from sticking to the skin cells in the bladder and urethra.
Secondly they act on E coli, bacteria responsible for the vast majority of urine infections.
The oligosaccharides have been found to be particularly concentrated in colostrum — the thick, creamy pre-milk that is produced by the breasts in late pregnancy and during the first few days after birth before the breastmilk proper comes in.
Not only is colostrum known to be extremely nutritious but it too has special protective properties against illness.
Protective effect
And the good news doesn't stop there.
Another group of researchers, this time in Sweden, has discovered that this protective effect doesn't only last for as long as the baby is breastfed.
The milk creates a more balanced bacterial environment in the gut, and children of six or seven who were breastfed as babies are less likely to succumb to urinary infections than their bottlefed brothers and sisters.
The lesson is to breastfeed your baby if you can.
Even if it's only for a few days both you and your baby will benefit.
Next week: can the pill help fertility?
ALTERNATIVE HEALTH
Get the most from mineral water
More people are now turning to the bottled version as an alternative to tapped
The latest decade has seen a huge increase in the popularity of mineral waters.
This is not surprising, when you consider the life history of much of our tap water.
If you live in London, yours could be the seventh pair of kidneys that your glass of water has passed through and chemicals used in farming today seep into the ground to pollute and contaminate the water.
This doesn't happen to mineral waters.
The bottles you buy today contain rain water which fell up to 80 years ago.
Filtered through hundreds of feet of layers of purifying sand, shale and rock, the rain water has been enriched with natural minerals — the most beneficial of which are calcium, for building bones, magnesium and sodium, an important constituent of salt.
Although minerals are only present in minute quantities it's worth remembering that when choosing your water.
Anyone with high blood pressure, or heart disease, for example, should avoid those with a high sodium content.
Here is a selection of the most common mineral water.
MALVERN WATER
The oldest established of the English brands.
It comes from springs in the hills above Malvern, and as these are granite, little of their composition dissolves into the water so it is very low in minerals.
Almost no taste at all, hence its wide use as a mixer with scotch!
STILL HIGHLAND SPRING WATER
One of the best-selling of the British waters.
Low in sodium and nitrates, this is suitable for those with heart and kidney problems.
EVIAN
The biggest seller of all still waters in its native France.
And because it is very low in minerals, it suits a wide range of people and is ideal for families with young children.
It's the only water that the French government recommends for mixing baby foods.
The spa at Evian has been famous since the 18th century as the place to go for the treatment of kidney stones and urinary infections.
Evian water takes 15 years to filter down from Alpine snows to the town spring.
BUXTON SPRING WATER
Very light with a delicate flavour.
There is a moderate level of minerals which has given this water its therapeutic reputation since Roman times.
It comes out of the ground at 82°F, and was drunk by Medieval pilgrims and Mary Queen of Scots.
SAN PELLEGRINO
From the Italian Alps.
Quite rich in magnesium and calcium, but low in salt.
Used since the 13th century to aid digestion.
SPA WATER
A Belgian variety with a very low salt content and one of the best known mineral waters in the world.
With its slightly metallic flavour, Spa is perfect for those on a low salt diet.
RAMLOSA
A Swedish brand.
Alkaline and moderately rich in minerals, it takes up to 80 years to filter through 295 feet of sand, clay, shale, coal and siltstone.
This selection of carbonated and still waters cam be found on most supermarket shelves.
Next Week: relief for glue ear from osteopathy
Stop Press
Reducing risk of heart attack
MEN WITH high blood pressure who are treated with a beta blocker drug are less likely to suffer sudden death from a heart attack, a new 11-country study has shown.
In all 3,200 middle-aged men were given either beta blockers or diuretics for their blood pressure over a 10-year period.
At the end of the study there were 30% fewer sudden deaths in the beta blocker group.
This, researchers believe, is due to the drug's direct action on the heart.
£2 million MS unit to open
A NEW unit is to be set up by the Multiple Sclerosis Society which will devote its time to research into MS, a disease of the nervous system.
More than £1.25 million of the £2 million needed has already been raised and the Society hopes to open the unit soon.
Pill use increase
MORE WOMEN than ever prefer the contraceptive pill as their means of birth control and many are reluctant to consider newer methods, according to a recent survey.
The National Opinion Poll (NOP) found that 32% of women were using the pill, compared with 25% in a similar poll taken in 1987.
It happened to me
‘A simple cough was enough to break her ribs’
It wasn't until Joanna Venet was seven months old that her mother, Rosemerry, realised she was suffering from brittle bones
Like any other mother, Rosemerry Venet was thrilled when her daughter, Joanna, was born.
The only trouble was that, unlike most babies, Joanna didn't seem to enjoy being bounced and cuddled.
‘She would cry, constantly,’ recalls Rosemerry, 38, from Leeds, ‘yet there was never anything obviously wrong.’
Rosemerry and her husband, Harry, 50, later found that their gentle playing had actually been breaking their daughter's bones.
For Joanna, now 15, had osteogenesis imperfecta, more commonly known as brittle bone disease.
The nightmare began when she was just five months old.
Rosemerry heard a resounding ‘crack’ as she changed her nappy one day.
Joanna had dislocated her hip and was admitted to hospital.
‘She screamed out in pain as the doctors examined her,’ recalls Rosemerry, ‘it was terrible.’
Numerous X-rays showed that Joanna had a broken left leg and had fractures to several ribs as well as her spine.
‘Everybody at the hospital seemed to be accusing me of causing the injuries.
It was like a terrible dream,’ remembers Rosemerry.
‘I knew I hadn't done anything to Joanna and at the same time I was totally confused as to how it could have happened.’
Joanna was kept in hospital for 10 weeks, during which time she was tested for all kinds of illnesses.
‘They were horrendous, long days.
I was frightened for her and frantically worried,’ remembers Rosemerry, who also had her elder daughter, Rosalind, now 17, to look after.
Joanna was diagnosed as having brittle bones.
‘Of course, we were devastated, but we knew now what had been wrong all along — and at least they couldn't blame me any more.’
The doctors told the Venets that when Joanna was four she would be able to undergo a series of operations to insert strengthening rods into her legs.
‘But in the meantime, even coughing could break Joanna's ribs — which it did many times.
Her legs were by far the worst, though — just supporting her own body weight could break them.
She'd be in plaster for six weeks each time she broke them,’ says Rosemerry.
So at just four years old, little Joanna was confined to hospital for two years while the operations took place.
‘It was heart-breaking — she looked so frail, I felt as if I'd almost lost her,’ says her mum.
Now, however, Rosemerry admits that the success was worth the sacrifice.
‘From having literally dozens of fractures she progressed so much I can't remember the last time she had one.’
And Joanna's bones have strengthened naturally as she has grown older.
She's now able to walk around the house although outside she has to use a wheelchair.
And she's determined not to be held back by her condition.
She's taking GCSEs this June and hopes to go on to ‘A ‘levels.
And each week she goes snorkelling with a disabled club.
She's even been abseiling.
‘If I can break something, I break it.
I know it will hurt for a little while, but I'll get better, so why worry?
I don't see why I can't lead a normal life,’ says brave Joanna.
‘In any case, I'm certainly going to try.’
OUR EXPERT REPLIES
Dr Colin Paterson, Senior Lecturer in Biochemical Medicine at the University of Dundee
Brittle bone disease, or osteogenesis imperfecta, has been around for at least 4,000 years.
There's even a ‘mummy’ in the British Museum of an affected child.
It occurs in all races and can vary greatly in severity.
Children with an apparently mild form of the disease can be difficult to diagnose in the early stages.
Sadly, the Venets' experience of being accused of child abuse is not uncommon.
In one case a child was removed from her mother after a fracture at the age of 18 months.
She was nearly adopted before the correct diagnosis became obvious at the age of five.
Recent research has shed light on this disease.
All or most cases result from an inborn defect in the formation of collagen, the tough fibrous protein essential for the strength of bone.
Bone is normally strong because it consists of a lattice-work of collagen fibres with calcium, the chalk-like material, in the gaps.
In brittle bone disease, collagen is abnormal in strength or in the links between the fibres.
However, it is not a problem of calcium deficiency; eating extra milk or cheese doesn't help the condition.
As the Venets' experience shows, trying to avoid fractures in brittle bone children can be very difficult.
Sometimes they break a bone without any known injury; at other times fractures don't happen when you might expect them most.
In some cases surgery can help, as it has for Joanna.
Practical help and advice is available from the Brittle Bone Society, 112, City Road, Dundee DD2 2PW.
‘Parents are sometimes accused of abuse’
With help from Rosemerry (right), Joanna leads a normal life
The deformed bone (A) is broken and steel pins (B) inserted to strengthen it (C)
‘The success of the operation was worth all the suffering’
Next week: update on hay fever
PROFILE
SUE LAWLEY
‘My idea of bliss is a pile of clean sheets and an iron’
She spends her working life in the glamorous world of celebrities and top politicians.
But when she's at home, Sue Lawley loves nothing more than getting down to some old-fashioned housework
For 17 years Sue Lawley was the serious face of the BBC.
Unafraid to pose even the most awkward questions to MPs, she was a respected political interviewer and newsreader.
Then four short years ago, shortly after she turned 40, it all changed.
Suddenly, she was hosting Wogan , dripping diamanté jewellery, wearing shiny tights, high heels and rustling short taffeta skirts.
She was pointing at her guests with red-painted fingernails and flirting with the men.
It seemed as if one of the most respected women on television had succumbed to the lure of glitzy fame.
The truth was, Sue was just being adventurous.
‘I don't think I am a born light entertainer and I don't think I'm a born serious political interviewer,’ Sue explains.
‘I think I can do a little of both.
People all the time wish to pigeon-hole you…to say that I am totally a chat-show host or I am entirely a serious headmistress figure.
The truth is I am between the two and capable of doing both.’
But last year her own late night BBC TV chat show,Saturday Matters , floundered.
Then in September, Sue announced that she was leaving the BBC after 20 years to join Granada Television which, she said, was fully prepared to give her the freedom necessary to put together the type of programme she truly wanted to make.
Her first interview for the new series, which started on Easter Monday, was a scoop half hour interview with Prime Minister John Major at No 10 Downing Street.
But reaction was typically divided.
Many viewers thought she'd used the famous Lawley charm to make him relax and talk about his childhood and family.
But others criticised her for interrupting too often and looking unprofessional as she slumped in her seat asking him about his O level exam achievements.
Sue insists that her new show will prove successful.
‘Saturday Matters wasn't a disaster, but it missed something.
I think I need to do more with people — in depth, rather than keeping the bubble in the air at frothy chat-show level,’ she explains.
Away from the cameras, Sue, 44, reveals yet another side to her character.
The only journalist to put Mrs Thatcher on the spot during the Falklands War is happy to admit that she loves housework.
When she was castaway on Radio 4's Desert Island Discs — a year before taking over the show — Sue told the then presenter Michael Parkinson that the luxury she would want on the island would be an endless supply of clean sheets and an iron.
‘It's my idea of bliss to stand in the kitchen with the window open on a beautiful summer's day, following some complicated recipe in the hope that it will come out all right,’ she says.
But while the dream now may be a domestic one, in the past Sue has allowed her work to come before her home life.
She married solicitor, David Ashby in 1974, and six years later they parted.
The couple had two children, Tom, now 14, and Harriet, 11.
‘I think perhaps I did not work hard enough at my marriage,’ she admits now.
‘That was unfortunate and has remained a huge sadness to me.
The reverberations and knock-on effects of a broken marriage are deeply disruptive and unsettling to everyone involved — you, your children, all members of both families.
However, our lives worked out, we are both happily  remarried and, since we only live a mile apart, it's very easy for the children to come and go to visit their father.’
Seven years after the divorce, Sue married TV executive Hugh Williams, 44, the former head of BBC Manchester, in 1987.
She now tries to balance home life and career — but admits it is not easy.
‘I want it all,’ she says.
‘I want my children, Harriet and Tom, to be happy and rounded and good, and the same for me and my husband Hugh, and my house and my supper table.
And I am not the only woman who wants a fulfilling working life and domesticity as well.
Yet it can sometimes make things bloody difficult.’
Still, Sue has a lot of past experience to draw on.
Her mother ran a drapery shop in Dudley, West Midlands.
‘She was a business woman six days a week and had two children — my sister and me — so she really had to organise her life,’ says Sue, whose father was a dairy farmer.
The family lived in a council flat above her mother's shop.
For those who find Sue's perfect BBC voice refined and soothing, it is a shock to learn that she ironed out her Black Country accent while studying modern languages at Bristol University.
She claims it was as a result of hearing herself say, ‘coom on, buzz,’ while waiting in a bus shelter.
She says that changing her accent while at university was not easy for her parents to accept.
‘It was difficult for me when I went home…
I know they hated me.
Having moved the other side of the fence I was determined to stay there.’
These days her voice and lifestyle belie her upbringing.
Sue now lives in Putney in a Victorian house, and the family also has a cottage in Oxfordshire.
‘It was Hugh's home, you see,’ she explains.
‘We don't get there often enough.
There's a stream where we spend hours sticklebacking.
‘It sounds a bit idyllic and it is, but it can't really happen very often for boring, practical reasons.
We love walking, but I don't like walking through charted territory.
It's nice to strike off.’
It's a comment that could sum up her working life at the moment.
She thought hard before deciding to leave the BBC to find new challenges with ITV.
It is ironic that her new show will be called simply Sue Lawley .
When she first stood in for Terry Wogan she insisted, ‘I love standing in for Wogan but I'm honestly not looking for The Sue Lawley Show with my name in lights and me swooping down a staircase.’
But Sue is adamant her new show will be different.
‘What I plan to produce for ITV, and I know they'll give me the scope, are quality, probing interviews.
To do what I do well, be proud of it, and watch it knowing that it was bloody good and entirely born of me.’
And maybe we'll see a new look, too.
‘I'm conscious of my over-perfectly groomed image which some find off-putting,’ she says.
An elegant 5ft 8in and a trim 9st 4lbs, she can wear clothes by Catherine Walker, her favourite designer, with cool elegance.
That striving for perfection spills over into her home life too.
‘My tidiness is in-built, unhappily for me.
It makes my life a misery.
I envy people who don't bother to wash up at night and leave stuff all over the place — I really enjoy going to their houses.
I wish I could stop myself from having to have everything just right,’ Sue admits.
‘I spend half my life changing beds, stuffing the washing machine and emptying wastepaper baskets.’
From junior reporter to celebrity
After graduating from Bristol University, where she had been President of the Students' Union, Sue joined the Thomson Organisation as a trainee reporter on the Western Mail and South Wales Echo in Cardiff.
On the advice of a friend, she applied for and got a freelance job with the BBC in Plymouth.
It was during the regional link-ups with Nationwide in London that she was spotted as a young broadcaster with great potential.
She joined Nationwide in 1972 and spent 12 years in the studio.
She moved to Tonight ,The Nine O'Clock News and The Six O'Clock News before leaving current affairs to stand in for Wogan .
She won the coveted job of presenter of Desert Island Discs almost four years ago.
‘It is a matter for regret that she seems to have turned away from serious current affairs interviews,’ says a founding executive of Channel 4 News .
‘She's shown that she can think on her feet, that she won't be bullied, even by a Prime Minister.
The trouble is the more she spreads herself into showbusiness, the more bland she will become.
And I think that's slightly sad.’
Sue, no doubt, will soon be proving him wrong.
‘I didn't work hard enough at marriage — it's remained a huge sadness to me’
‘My tidiness is in-built, unhappily for me.
It makes my life a misery’
‘I love standing in for Wogan, but I'm honestly not looking for The Sue Lawley Show with my name in lights’
Sue married Hugh Williams in 1987 — each partner already had two children, Polly and Amy, Harriet and Tom, from previous marriages.
She doesn't find it easy to balance her home life with her career, and relies on her husband for his sound advice
Screen debut — Sue joined Nationwide in 1972, and stayed there for 12 years
The glamorous life — Sue has moved to chat shows and Desert Island Discs
PERSONALITY OF THE WEEK
Alfred Molina
His wife was acting before he was born but Alfred insists this is the perfect relationship
For years, the only person who believed that Alfred Molina would ever become a star was his wife, actress Jill Gascoine, and he credits her for his new-found success.
‘She's cured me of all my hang-ups by giving me self-confidence,’ he says.
‘Her first professional job was before I was born, and she has taught me a lot.’
After leaving drama school, Alfred found himself struggling.
Then, out of the blue, a call came from Hollywood.
Steven Spielberg needed a tough guy for the opening sequence of the film Raiders of the Lost Ark — and Alfred got the part.
From then on his luck seemed to change.
In 1982 he landed a role in the musical Destry Rides Again , and met Jill Gascoine.He was an unknown; she was a TV star.
He was 29; she was 45.
Despite this age difference they fell in love, and five years ago got married.
‘Meeting her was the turning point in my life,’ he admits.
And that includes his career.
In 1985 came his first major screen role as the Russian sailor Sergei in the 1985 British film,A Letter To Brezhnev .
After that the plum parts began to roll in.
He starred as playwright Joe Orton's homosexual lover in Prick Up Your Ears , and will play Tony Hancock in a BBC1 television film to be shown in the autumn.
Now, with the Hollywood movie Not Without My Daughter , in which he stars opposite Sally Field, due out later this year, it looks as if he's finally set for international fame.
But, says Alfred, it would take more than Hollywood stardom to lure him away from the Sussex cottage he shares with Jill and 12-year-old Rachel, his daughter from a previous relationship.
‘When I'm away, I get so homesick for Jill.
Thank goodness I met her — I don't know how I'd have turned out without her.’
Alfred's dark looks come from his Italian mother and Spanish father
Jill made a guest appearance in El C.I.D., the jokey ITV detective series in which Alfred played an ex-policeman
‘Whenever I'm away I get so homesick for Jill.
Thank goodness I met her’
BEAUTY FORM FITNESS
HEALTHY EATING
Make the most of FRUIT
Usually, diets don't put a limit on fresh fruit but you need to choose carefully — some varieties are more slimming than others
A lot of us eat far too little fresh produce, relying instead on convenience foods, fast foods and sweets.
But, although increasing your intake of fruit and vegetables has numerous advantages and benefits — both are generally low in calories and rich in Vitamin C which helps keep colds at bay — it is possible to eat too much.
Body cleansing and energy giving
There are dozens of good points about eating plenty of fruit.
It helps with the flushing out of toxins from the body, cleansing it and restoring vitality.
Fruit is also rich in potassium which stops you feeling tired.
Grapefruit can help reduce harmful blood cholesterol levels and cranberry juice relieves cystitis.
Which is best, fresh, dried or canned?
Calorie-wise, all fresh fruit is lower than both dried and tinned.
Nibbling on dried fruit may quickly eat up your calorie allowance — just 25g (1oz) of sultanas or raisins provides 70 calories, whereas 100g (4oz) grapes provides the same.
Always stick to tinned fruit in natural juice where possible.
Compare the calories in half a fresh grapefruit (20–25 calories) to the same weight of tinned segments in natural juice (40–45 calories) or in syrup (80 calories)!
Eat it raw whenever possible
•Ideally, stick to three pieces of fruit a day.
•It's fine to eat fruit for breakfast, between meals and before a main meal but not during it as it can upset the digestion rate of the other foods you're eating.
•Raw fruit is better than cooked as a rule.
It's more digestible and no vitamins or minerals have been lost before you eat it.
•Mix soda or mineral water with fruit juices for a more refreshing drink — and get twice the amount for your calories.
A small glass of unsweetened orange juice on its own costs almost 60 calories.
•Fruit that's sharp can be sweetened up with artificial sweetener or sprinkle cinnamon on grapefruit instead of sugar.
•Guard yourself against premature ageing of the skin by eating plenty of vitamin A rich fruits such as apricots, nectarines and canteloupe melon.
Undeniably, fresh fruit is an important part of our diet.
We need it for essential vitamins and roughage.
But moderation is the key to good health.
Mix fruit juice with water for a more refreshing longer drink and check our guide (below right) for your best calorie choice
NATURAL BEAUTY
Almond treats
Rich in protein, calcium and B vitamins, almond oil is renowned for its soothing, emollient properties while the crushed  kernals can be used in skin scrubs.
SKIN POLISHER
Help dislodge blackheads by mixing a handful of finely ground almonds with enough honey and rosewater to make a paste.
Massage over your face for five minutes.
Rinse off thoroughly.
FOOT SOAK
For aching, tired feet, mix a few drops of peppermint oil with one tbsp of almond oil and add to a bowl of warm water.
Soak feet for 10 minutes.
HAIR SAVER
Dry, split ends?
Warm equal parts of almond and olive oil, then massage into ends to soften and nourish hair.
Wash out with diluted shampoo.
BEST BUYS:
Marks & Spencer Extracts from Nature Apricot, Almond and Avocado Cleanser, 200ml, £2.25.
TESTED FOR YOU
The best disposable razors
To de-fuzz quickly, disposable razors are the answer.
But can you really get a close, smooth shave without the risk of painful nicks or razor burn?
We put five brands to the test
PRODUCT
COMMENT & RATING
Bic Lady Shaver, 45p for 4
‘The sharp blade gave me a close shave in one go, but I also cut myself twice.
The razor will probably last several shaves — that's if I can put up with its luminous yellow colour!’
Rating **
Simply Smooth Hair Remover, £1.99 for 2
‘I found the wide head difficult to use as it didn't fit the contours of my skin.
I didn't need to apply much pressure and even though I cut myself once, my skin was smooth afterwards.
‘Rating ***
Wilkinson Sword Sensitive Retractor, 37p for 5
The blade glided easily over my skin and left it very smooth.
There was no irritation even though I'm sensitive.
I only needed minimum pressure to get a close shave.’
Rating *****
Gillette Blue II, £1.99 for 10
Swivel head means it follows contours of your skin well, and the double blade ensures a really close, clean, smooth shave.
Minimal hair regrowth after three days.
Blade still sharp.’
Rating ****
Boots Bodycare Disposable Razors, 89p for 5
I didn't nick my skin even though I shaved quickly.
I had to rinse quite often to get rid of debris, but it did give a close shave.
The slide-on safety cover is a good idea.’
Rating ****
OVER THE COUNTER
Summer lip shades
Strong lipstick shades are not only difficult to apply, but they can look overpowering, especially on sun-kissed skin.
A sheer, natural-looking lip tint is much better.
These ones come in four summery shades: Soft Red, Soft Pink, Damson and Coral.
Slick on just a touch of colour or use a complementary tint over your favourite lipstick to add extra gloss.
These lip tints also contain nourishing calendula, wheatgerm, Vitamin E and aloe vera and have UVB filters to give minimum sun protection for your lips.
Making scents
Aromatic oils have been used for centuries for their therapeutic and beauty benefits.
Each of the four fragranced oils used here are combined with purified tonic water and henna extract.
Inside the bottle you will find a handful of sparkling semi-precious gemstones which spiritual healers believe affect our health and well-being.
Add a few drops to your bath or massage the oil into your skin.
Buff your nails
If there's one nail-care necessity, it has to be a buffing pad.
Apart from giving your nails a natural-looking lustre, buffing regularly can help them grow long and strong by stimulating the blood supply to each nail.
This handy dual-purpose kit contains two buffers.
Use the slightly abrasive grey one to soften ridges and prepare nails for colour or use the pink one to bring out the natural shine instead of applying polish to your nails.
BULLETIN BULLETIN
Are simple formulas better for your skin?
Our cosmetics and toiletries have come a long way since the days when Elizabeth I used highly toxic lead powder to whiten and enhance her complexion!
But some dermatologists believe that today's skin products can do more harm than good.
Special screening for beauty products
Advances in the field of cosmetics mean that today superfluous ingredients and allergens can be identified, then substituted or removed, which is great news indeed for anyone with a sensitive skin.
‘The trouble is, the more ingredients there are in a product, the more chance there is of becoming allergic to them,’ says dermatologist, Steven Wright.
Natural ingredients aren't always better
It's wrong to assume that just because a cream says it contains plant extracts it's better for your skin.
‘Ten per cent of all plants are capable of leaving you with a red itchy rash or skin swelling,’ adds Steven Wright.
Tried and tested old skincare favourites
Often, products that contain only a few basic ingredients, like Simple, Nivea, Neutrogena and good old Vaseline, are the safest.
But even some of the oilier of these can prevent the skin from breathing.
Test the irritancy level of your skin by applying the product to the inside of your elbow for several days and see if there's a reaction.
FREE
Creamy moisturiser
Dry skin tends to be on the sensitive side, so choosing a moisturiser can cause problems.
Bring back softness with Boots Skin Kindly Creamy Moisturising Lotion.
Containing glycerine, sunflower oil and a blend of mineral oils, it is a great moisturiser and, being fragrance-free and lanolin-free, it's ideal for sensitive skins.
We have 1,000 150ml bottles to give away — the offer is worth £1.65.
10 MINUTE WORKOUT
Trim and firm your thighs
Follow these three exercises every day and come summer you'll be in great shape
Kneel on all fours, then rest forearms on floor, palms flat.
With your back straight, bottom muscles clenched and foot flexed, slowly lift your leg up behind you, ease it higher to the count of 16, then repeat on the other leg.
Kneel on all fours, back straight and look forward as you lift and then lower your right leg, knee bent, out to the side.
Do 16 lifts, then repeat on the other side.
This is excellent for toning and shaping inner thighs.
Lie on your right side with head resting on your outstretched arm.
Bend your lower leg slightly to support your spine and raise the other leg slowly to an angle of 45°.
Hold for a count of eight.
Repeat eight times on each side, twice.
Help and Advice
A Problem Shared
Psychologist Elizabeth John is here to help, with expert advice and practical suggestions
‘Our sons are always fighting and I can't stand the strain any more’
My married life is being disrupted by my 10-year-old stepson.
I'm 32 and have two children from a first marriage — a daughter of 10 and a son of 13.
I also have a seven-year-old daughter from a previous long-term relationship.
The boys hate each other.
They fight viciously and tell lies to get each other into trouble.
My son usually has the upper hand because he's older.
My husband sometimes scolds my stepson but more often blames my son.
All this has caused a lot of tension in our marriage.
Once my husband left me and went back to his ex-wife.
She won't have anything to do with the boy and my husband has said she used to mistreat him.
I've tried to love my stepson but I really resent him.
If things don't get better soon, I'll have a nervous breakdown or divorce my husband.
I've been through both already so I know what I'm talking about.
Please help me.
 Amanda 
Our psychologist replies
When two families start living together for whatever reason, everyone has a new role to play and, until new house rules have been established, the children are bound to feel insecure, jealous and anxious.
They have been through an unsettling time and are finding it difficult to readjust.
The boys' behaviour is their way of protesting at these changes and competing for your affection and attention.
Your son resents his stepbrother for taking up your time, and is worried that you don't love him any more.
Your stepson has to get used to a whole new family, which is a big shock for him after being an only child.
Considering the sad relationship he had with his mother problems are bound to arise.
Don't let the boys know that they have the power to cause a rift between you and your husband.
You need to present a united front and avoid taking sides or playing one child off against the other.
Begging or threatening tactics won't help in the long run either.
Your own son needs to be encouraged to behave in a mature way, while your stepson has to be reassured that he belongs in the new family.
Both are desperate for love and affection so don't hold back.
Encourage all the children to talk openly about their feelings so that hidden resentments are not bottled up inside them.
Only when the children feel less threatened will they be able to relax, and it's up to you and your husband to give them that security.
The National Stepfamily Association helpline (see box) is manned by trained staff who can advise you how to tackle this situation.
‘How can I help my friend overcome these panic attacks?’
For the last five years, a good friend of mine has suffered from panic attacks.
Recently, things have got worse and she's become agoraphobic.
Although I take her on short trips to the shops, she can't cope with going too far from the house.
It's so sad because she used to be such a lively and outgoing person.
I've looked into the possibility of counselling but all the services are miles away.
I'd appreciate any advice as I do want to help her overcome her fears and enjoy life again.
 Pauline 
Our psychologist replies
You've been a good friend but unfortunately this is not going to be enough to help your friend.
When someone can't cope with panic attacks, agoraphobia is often the consequence and treating this condition requires specialist help.
Your friend should talk to her GP, who will refer her to a specialist.
Meanwhile, she can help herself to control her panic attacks by slowing down her breathing as soon as she feels an attack coming on.
A cold wet cloth placed on her cheeks will help alleviate the symptoms.
Encourage your friend to contact Phobic Action (see box) who organise self-help groups which you could attend.
To help you both understand why panic attacks happen, read Self Help for Your Nerves (see box).
‘My husband moans that I'm not as slim as when we first met’
I'm 40 years old and feel really down in the dumps.
Six months ago I started smoking and put on a lot of weight because I was constantly nibbling.
I now weigh 13 stone.
My husband, who's 41, hates the fact that I smoke and moans that I eat too much.
Like me, he's fond of his food and drinks a lot.
He weighs 20 stone, and I worry about him being so overweight.
He gets annoyed if I say anything about it, but that doesn't stop him going on about how slim I was at 17 when we first met.
Eating is my one little comfort.
How else can I stop myself from feeling miserable?
 Margaret 
Our psychologist replies
Comfort eating and disliking yourself are two classic symptoms of depression, so try to work out why you started in the first place.
It seems that one underlying problem is your relationship with your husband, who is gradually undermining your self confidence by comparing you as you are now with the way you looked as a teenager.
This is hardly a fair comparison.
He's also applying double standards — allowing himself to eat and drink to his heart's content but disapproving when you do the same.
Don't let him persuade you to accept that he's right.
Your aim should not be to lose weight, but to bring your eating habits under your control.
Join a group like Weight Watchers (see box) who can give you support and encouragement in achieving this goal.
Meeting people who are going through the same experience will help you out of your depression.
For the sake of your health make a determined effort to stop smoking.
Contact Quit (see box), a group who help smokers to break the habit.
It's also worth visiting your GP for advice on healthy eating and how to wean yourself off nicotine.
Remember, you are your own person and it's up to you to take care of your health and decide how you want to look.
‘Since I became pregnant he hasn't been interested in me’
My boyfriend and I are both 24 and have been seeing each other for three years.
For the last year we have lived together in my flat.
Since I became pregnant five months ago, he has neglected me.
He never wants to go out with me, not even to see his parents, who live nearby.
I can't help thinking things will only get worse when I have the baby.
I am working part-time, but my maternity leave begins next month.
My boyfriend has a full-time job but barely gives me enough money for the shopping.
If I ask for extra to buy baby clothes, he says he doesn't have the spare cash.
He's out every night, sometimes until the early hours.
I'm so depressed and often cry myself to sleep.
I would throw my boyfriend out, but I'd be scared of living alone.
Why won't he give me more support?
If he's stopped loving me, surely he would have left me by now?
 Susannah 
Our psychologist replies
Your boyfriend is finding it hard to come to terms with the prospect of fatherhood and is taking his resentment out on you.
Explain to him how you feel and chat to his parents, who may rally round and give you the support he refuses to give you.
You can't force him to act responsibly but you can make sure he doesn't treat you like a doormat.
He's your partner in theory, but he doesn't fulfil that role in practice.
You may well be better off without him instead of living in limbo, not knowing what he's thinking or why he's acting in this way.
Be firm, and tell him that he must either pull his weight or leave.
It will take courage to do this, but delivering an ultimatum may bring him to his senses.
Your Replies
Readers share their own experiences of problems featured on this page, and offer advice and support
She's being forced to pay money to see her grandchild
When Annie's daughter died at the age of five, she was heartbroken.
So when her son married and his wife had a baby girl she felt as if she'd regained the daughter she'd lost.
Now her son and his wife have split up and, because her son is unemployed, he is offering limited financial support to his family.
Annie has become the subject of her daughter-in-law's revenge by being forced to pay her money to see her grandchild.
She feels she has lost a daughter all over again.
My story is similar to Annie's in that I made the same mistake and thought of my granddaughter as a substitute child.
When my own daughter was born I was a single parent, and had to work to pay the bills, so I missed the best years of her childhood.
She's now grown up with her own baby.
I no longer need to work and she was delighted when I offered to care for the baby during the week.
She looked so like my daughter did at her age, and the pleasure she gave me compensated for the lack of time I had with her mother when she was a child.
But last year my son-in-law changed jobs and the family went to live in Holland.
I was heartbroken, but I'm slowly coming to accept the situation.
We must both understand that a child needs a mother more than a grandmother.
 Maureen 
There's nothing worse than being taken for granted.
My son married two years ago and my grandson was born four months later.
We visited each weekend, and I looked after the baby during the week.
My son and his wife often asked us to bring groceries and we bought clothes for Ben.
I don't begrudge the support we've given, but I was annoyed when I realised we were being taken for granted.
They never paid for the groceries.
After a while, I told them we didn't want to be treated this way.
I was shocked by their reaction.
For several weeks we were denied access to our grandson.
In time things improved.
Our relationship is still strained, but at least we are now accepted on our terms.
Try standing up to your daughter-in-law.
It worked for me, and I hope it works for you.
 Maxine 
He has a well-paid job but he expects her to pay for the family car
Megan's been married for 18 years and still loves her husband, but resents his meanness.
Although he has a large enough income to support them both, he puts most of it into a building society and also invests money in shares.
He expects Megan to work part-time to pay for groceries and clothes for herself and their three children.
She is forced to buy things from charity shops to make ends meet.
Now he's told her that she should pay for the new family car.
You've every right to feel hard done by, so don't start thinking that you're being selfish.
Your husband is being unreasonable.
What's the point in saving everything for a comfortable old age if you're suffering hardship now?
He seems to be obsessed with investing every penny, while at the same time turning a blind eye to the needs of his growing family.
He's obviously insecure about money.
It's possible that he's trying to test your love for him.
His logic seems to be that if he doesn't give you any money, he can be sure you're staying with him because you love him, and not because of his earning power.
You must make your feelings known and ask him if this really is the case.
Tell him that you do love him, but you will have very little time and energy to show that love while you are forced to worry about where the next meal is coming from.
 Rachel 
Are you sure your husband realises just how much of a struggle you find it to keep the household going?
Husbands can easily get out of touch with the cost of living unless they do the shopping regularly and see the bills.
Don't let your resentment build up any more — explain the financial situation to him clearly and calmly.
List all your outgoings and expenses over a few weeks.
Prove to your husband that you are not extravagant but point out that it is impossible to make ends meet on a pittance.
If necessary, take him shopping with you, or better still, send him to the supermarket alone so that he realises the cost of basic necessities.
It will probably be quite an eye-opener for him!
Ask him what he's saving for — is he worried about redundancy?
Or just making sure he has enough when he retires?
Remember, marriage is a shared contract, and you and your children have every right to claim money from your husband.
 Joy 
Should she give in to her love for another woman?
Sally is 22 and has been with her current boyfriend for three years.
She has recently started a new job and feels attracted to a senior female colleague who is rumoured to be gay.
Sally is not sure whether or not she should admit her feelings to this woman.
You should really think twice before approaching this woman or before telling your boyfriend.
You may just be bored with your current relationship, and your boredom is making the idea of an affair with a woman seem all the more exciting.
Pleas don't commit yourself unless you're absolutely sure of your true feelings.
I had a similar experience several years ago, when I left college and started my first job.
I, too, felt deeply attracted to a female colleague.
I discussed my feelings with the woman in question and I slept with her, but I deeply regretted it later on and was sorry that I hadn't weighed up the consequences more thoroughly beforehand.
Things became very awkward between us afterwards and, as a result, I had to quit my job.
It all caused me severe emotional stress and a career setback.
Take my advice, think things through.
 Sarah 
I sympathise with Sally.
I was 24 and had been married for four years before I discovered I was a lesbian.
I realised the truth when I became close to a friend of a friend and gradually fell in love with her.
I caused a lot of hurt to my husband and family when I left them to live with her, but my partner, Kate, felt as strongly about me as I did about her and I know it was the right thing to do.
However, before you speak to your colleague, consider the possibility that she might already be involved in a relationship.
Perhaps you should try and find out a little more about her before admitting your feelings.
Even if she is sympathetic, it doesn't mean that she will automatically want to start a serious relationship with you just because she is gay.
You must be prepared for rejection and disappointment.
 Claire 
IF YOU HAVE A PROBLEM OR ADVICE TO GIVE…
…write to Elizabeth John, A Problem Shared,best , 10th Floor, Portland House, Stag Place, London SW1E 5AU.
If you are replying to a letter, please mention the writer's name and the date of the magazine in which it appeared.
Unfortunately we are unable to answer letters individually.
THIS WEEK'S PEOPLE
WE MEET
MATTHEW BRODERICK
It took an injured knee to convince the 28-year-old star that he wanted to become an actor.
Years later, his career reached a peak when he kissed Marlon Brando
Have you always had an ambition to act?
I wanted to be an actor when I was very little, but then I changed my mind.
My father, who's also an actor, once wanted me to be in a play that he was in, and just being asked made me cry.
I always put it off and played a lot of sport at high school instead, until I hurt my knee really badly.
Then I had no excuse not to audition for plays, and when I did I found that I enjoyed it.
Did you enjoy acting alongside Marlon Brando in the recent film The Freshman?
It was a pleasure.
The pinnacle of my career.
Just to get to meet him and work with him was a thrill, but I got to kiss him, too!
I remember having some trouble not laughing during that scene.
You also appeared with Sean Connery recently.
What was he like?
He's a very intimidating fellow.
My girlfriend is very cool and she isn't easily impressed, but when she met Sean, he looked into her eyes and said; ‘nice to meet you’, and she kind of fainted without falling over!
Are comedy roles your favourite ones to play?
I want to play as many different roles as I can possibly manage.
I guess I do have a slight leaning towards comedy, but I find if I do a bunch of comedies, I get anxious to do something dramatic, and the other way round.
Do you enjoy working in the theatre?
I find it a more natural environment.
Film-making involves acting for 10 minutes and then waiting around for two hours.
On the stage you get two hours of release, which is very pleasant.
Are you bothered that your theatre work is often forgotten?
Well, it is really strange, because I've done quite a lot of stage work, but it's funny because a lot of people — even other film actors — don't know about it.
Several times it's happened to me that someone has come up to me and asked if I've ever done a play.
I always say, ‘Me, I'm the great Matthew Broderick, stage actor.’.
Do you have any plans to get married?
Not yet.
 Anwar Brett 
Nigel decides to broaden his horizons
He's fed up with being known as The Charmer .
‘It's a name I seem to be stuck with, but it really would be nice to be called something else for a change, says actor Nigel Havers, best known for his role in the ITV series of the same name.
Now he's decided he's not just going to act, he's going to make programmes, too.
With his friend, Michael Whitehall, he's producing a new drama series for ITV called,The Good Guys , starring himself and Keith Barron.
‘It's not because I have ambitions to say ‘I'm in charge’,’ says the man who started work as a researcher on the Jimmy Young radio show.
‘I hate confrontations of any sort,’ he adds.
He sometimes has to work to maintain his cool image.
For instance, he was furious at the press speculation which surrounded the break-up of his marriage.
But rather than hit back, he listened to his father, Lord Havers.
‘His advice was to shut up and get on with it,’ says Nigel
Greta's still waiting for her knight in shining armour
It's reassuring to know that even beautiful actresses worry about what they're gong to wear to go out in the evening.
Greta Scacchi, 31, star of White Mischief and Heat and Dust says, ‘I hate the thought of standing out in the crowd.
I get all dolled up for a party and then I look at myself in the mirror and suddenly chicken out, put my jeans on, ruffle up my hair, and only then do I feel comfortable.’
Greta's latest film,The Fires Within , opens this month, but the Italian-English actress is tired of rushing from one movie to the next.
‘The film lifestyle is one of cutting yourself off from your base and your friends, your identity even.
You just keep floating off,’ she says.
‘I'm in my 30s now,’ she adds, ‘and a lot of my friends are looking round and saying, ‘Why don't you have a family, a husband and a baby?’
It's this big disappointment.
We've been waiting for the knight in shining armour and then there isn't one.
Or if there is, he turns out to be impossible to live with,’ she says.
Why Michael had to give up smoking
With a new film,The Hard Way , now showing at the cinema, it's hard to believe that Michael J Fox resolved last year to give up being a film star and spend more time with his wife, Tracy Pollan, and their son, Sam, who's three this week.
Michael met Tracy when they starred together in the American television sitcom Family Ties .
The couple have a home in Hollywood and a farm in Vermont, but Michael, who is widely regarded in Hollywood as a workaholic, found it hard to put family first and is now keen to produce his own films as well as act in them.
Despite the pressures of his work, he has managed to give up smoking.
He used to get through 60 a day.
‘As soon as Sam came along I made a vow never to smoke near him.
I didn't want him to breathe that stuff into his lungs,’ he says.
Stop Press
Murder mystery star Angela Lansbury is well on her way to becoming the highest paid female star on US television.
The 65-year-old actress wanted to quit Murder She Wrote , but she's now been offered $300,000 an episode.
It'll be hard to refuse.
Super-shy George Michael bought his Californian dream home for £3 million two years ago, but he's spent less than a fortnight in the futuristic house.
Jeremy Irons and his wife Sinead Cusack want their son Sam to learn French, so they've sent him to study in France.
But they're missing him badly, they say.
Quote of the week is from Don Johnson: ‘They say it's lonely at the top, but it's lonely at the bottom and in the middle too.’
Happy birthday this week to: Ron Wood, 45…
Jason Donovan, 23…
Suzi Quatro, 41…
Vince Clark, 30….
VINTAGE STARS
AUDREY HEPBURN
She's made just a handful of films in the last 20 years, but the actress says she doesn't miss the silver screen — she prefers to dedicate herself to children's charity work instead
Once best known for her bewitching performances in films like Breakfast at Tiffany's and Roman Holiday , today Audrey Hepburn is renowned for her work with children.
She's held the post of special ambassador to the children's charity UNICEF since 1988, visiting war-torn and poverty-stricken countries such as Vietnam and Bangladesh.
This Thursday she opens a London Symphony Orchestra concert at the Barbican centre based on Anne Frank's diaries.
Audrey, 62, will be reading selected pieces from the writings of the young Dutch girl who died in a concentration camp.
She chose the extracts herself, and suggested the idea for the concert, which is in aid of UNICEF.
Like Anne Frank, Audrey spent the Second World War in occupied Holland.
She was born in Belgium, but she and her mother were on holiday in Holland when hostilities broke out.
When the war was over, she won a scholarship to study ballet in London.
It was when she was in London that Audrey won a role in the 1951 film Monte Carlo Baby .
While she was filming in the south of France, she met the writer Colette who insisted Audrey play Gigi on Broadway in America.
With that performance, her meteoric rise from ballet dancer to actress was complete.
She went on to win an Oscar for Roman Holiday and charmed cinema-goers with films like Funny Face and My Fair Lady .
However, in 1967 she decided she'd had enough of the movies, although she did appear recently in Always , along with Richard Dreyfuss and Holly Hunter.
She has made only a handful of films in the past 20 years.
Audrey has no regrets about her decision, preferring to throw her energies into looking after children.
She has two grown-up sons, Sean and Lucas.
‘I'm potty about my two sons,’ she says, adding, ‘I've always loved children.
My work with UNICEF is now all part of it.’
Ben's serious about being funny
Ben Elton, 32, star of the BBC series The Man from Auntie , is known for his angry humour.
But he says, ‘I prefer to think that I'm passionate.
I do have venom for bullies, or for anyone who shows contempt for others.’
One of the subjects he's most passionate about is the environment.
His second novel,Gridlock (published by MacDonald, price £13.95) is out this month.
In it, he imagines what would happen to London if it became so choked with cars that no-one could move.
His first Green novel,Stark , sold more than half a million copies.
But he says, ‘I don't set out to evangelize or alert the world.
If I set out to teach, rather than entertain, I would achieve neither.
My aim is to be seriously funny.’
The show always goes on for Shirley
She says she couldn't stop singing, even if she wanted to try.
‘There's a demon inside me that says, ‘Go on, go on’,’ reveals Shirley Bassey, who's playing the Albert Hall this week at the end of another British tour.
She's also got a new album out.
‘I feel that if I don't sing, the world will pass me by,’ she says.
But the woman who was born the youngest of seven children in Tiger Bay in Cardiff has always lived life to the full.
She's been divorced twice, and travelled the world singing songs like Goldfinger and Big Spender .
But in 1984, tragedy struck when her 24-year-old daughter, Samantha, plunged to her death from the Clifton Suspension Bridge near Bristol.
Shirley, 54, took a year off before returning to the stage.
‘I take all the bad things — and the good — and turn them round and use them in my singing,’ she says.
‘I need to be wanted and loved by the audience.
When the music starts I walk out on stage and the spotlight hits me.
It's magic.
Suddenly I'm in another world.’
YOUR WEEK IN THE STARS
Astrologer Carol Morris looks at what the heavens hold this week
Gemini
(May 21–June 20)
Mercury, your ruler, begins to move through your sign, making it a good time to plan for the future.
Venus improves your already sociable nature, so it's a great week for meeting new people.
Take extra care if you are travelling.
Cancer
(June 21–July 20)
You should surround yourself with close friends — it will put you in a good mood for dealing with a financial matter.
But even if you've got plenty of money in your pocket at the moment, you mustn't let others take advantage of your generous nature.
Leo
(July 21–Aug 21)
As Venus moves into your sign, the pride you have taken in your appearance is bound to turn a few heads.
But as you are determined to live it up and have a good time, you must watch your health and try not to burn the candle at both ends.
Virgo
(Aug 22–Sept 22)
You are a perfectionist at heart.
But this week, you should try to curb your impatience with those who are slack in their work.
Concentrate instead on your own reputation by continuing to live up to the high standards you always set yourself.
Libra
(Sept 22–Oct 23)
You are good at expressing yourself, which stands you in good stead if you want to ask someone to do you a favour.
Venus enhances your social life from Thursday, and you'll find the company of your female friends is what you need right now.
Scorpio
(Oct 23–Nov 22)
A difficult aspect between Mars and Saturn could jeopardise the enviable position you are in now.
If things begin to get difficult now, don't panic — you don't want to throw everything away by headstrong action.
Be extra vigilant regarding house security.
Sagittarius
(Nov 23–Dec 20)
This will probably be a week full of frustration.
You long to get away and enjoy some freedom, but circumstances beyond your control dictate otherwise.
Take comfort in close companions who are really supportive and ready to listen.
Capricorn
(Dec 21–Jan 19)
Money problems arise this week as Saturn and Mars confront each other.
You don't want to lose what you have worked so long to achieve, so beware of hard-sell techniques.
During the next two weeks you must look after your health.
Aquarius
(Jan 20–Feb 18)
Mars is in your opposite sign Leo, making it difficult to cope with a special relationship.
Stay calm and let nature take its course.
Little things will irritate you more than usual but try to keep cool, especially when dealing with personal issues.
Pisces
(Feb 19–Mar 20)
The week begins on a bright note with some pleasant news.
During the next couple of weeks, important family discussions should be underway.
There will be a tendency for you to be accident-prone, so whatever you do, slow down, and take your time.
Aries
(Mar 21–April 20)
The tempo of living quickens this week and it will be difficult to avoid getting caught up in the frantic pace of events.
Mars charges your love-life with physical energy and passion but don't spoil it by making too many demands on your partner.
Taurus
(April 21–May 20)
Later in the week, a less seemly side to your nature emerges.
But who can blame you?
You seem to be getting very little thanks for all your hard work.
From Thursday onwards, the influence of Venus will be bringing out the artistic side of you.
Phone for your tarot future on 0898 200101
and listen to our tarot hotline.
The computer will select the cards and your personal prediction will be read.
Calls are 45p per min, 34p per min cheap rate.
THE low-fat DIET
If you enjoy your food and don't want to eat less, but do want to lose weight and reduce the risk of heart disease, this is for you.
It's full of hints and tips on low-fat eating and healthy living
How the diet works
This is a diet on which you'll find you can eat hearty, sensible-sized meals and still reduce your weight.
Unlike most other diets, it doesn't suggest that you should eat less, merely that you should eat less fat.
By cutting down the proportion of fat in your diet you can increase the other constituents (protein and carbohydrate), and because of this, you should have no hunger pangs.
If you do feel hungry, you can eat anything you like — as long as it has little or no fat in it.
Why eat less fat?
The energy content of fat is more than double that of protein and nearly three times as much as carbohydrate.
If the type of foods you eat means that all your meals are heavily loaded with fat then they will contain a lot of energy — and if you don't take a lot of exercise to burn this up, you will inevitably put on weight.
What are the right fats?
We need to cut back our intake of saturated fats as all the evidence indicates that these affect cholesterol levels — the strongest predictors of heart disease.
You should also make an effort to avoid ‘hydrogenated vegetable oil’— a process by which the oil becomes saturated.
There is also strong evidence that we should increase the proportion of mono-unsaturated fats, as these have been shown to raise the level of HDL cholesterol (see Heart Disease — the risks) in the blood.
The richest source of MUFAs is olive oil — there is a low incidence of coronary heart disease in Mediterranean countries where it's widely used.
Poly-unsaturated fats should constitute the next largest share of your fat intake, after mono-unsaturated fats.
How fibre helps
Complex carbohydrates will make up your food intake when you cut down on fats, and should provide over half your energy needs.
These foods contain soluble fibre (especially oats, split peas, lentils, chickpeas, red kidney beans, soya beans, and haricot beans) and can prove valuable in helping to reduce cholesterol.
Getting your diet right
Reduce fat intake — to 15% of your diet or less.
Mono-unsaturates (MUFAs) should make up the largest proportion of fats consumed.
Polyunsaturates (PUFAs) come next after MUFAs.
Foods containing saturated fats should be avoided.
THE FATS FOUND IN YOUR FOOD
Saturated
Watch out!
These are the greatest danger so avoid them: palm kernel oil.
butter, coconut oil, lard, margarine, suet, vegetarian suet, standard soft ,margarine
Mono-unsaturated
Evidence suggests these can help prevent heart disease: olive oil, peanut (groundnut) oil, rapeseed oil, grapeseed oil
Poly-unsaturated
Don't use these quite as much as mono-unsaturates: sunflower oil, safflower oil, corn oil, soya oil, walnut oil, all margarines and spreads labelled ‘high in polyunsaturates’
Choose olive, sunflower or soy oil.
As a general rule vegetable oils are much better for you than fats that are derived from animals
Heart disease — the risks
A rich fatty diet not only tends to make you overweight, it can also raise the level of cholesterol in the bloodstream — a predictor of heart disease.
The most important types of cholesterol are:
Low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL)— which transports cholesterol from the liver to the rest of the body
High density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL)— which transports cholesterol from the body back to the liver for excretion.
LDL helps to build up the deposits that cause heart disease, so it should be as low as possible.
HDL cholesterol should be as high as possible.
TIP: Regular exercise lowers LDL cholesterol levels, yet raises the HDL cholesterol levels — and reduces the risk of heart disease.
Seven days of low-fat eating
Our menu list will give you some idea of how tasty and interesting a low-fat diet can be.
Follow it through one week — or pick and choose the ideas that appeal to you.
MONDAY
Breakfast Oat cereal and skimmed milk, wholemeal toast, low-fat spread and jam.
Lunch Rice cakes, low-fat cheese, tomatoes and onion, apple.
Dinner Chilli con carne with brown rice, fresh green salad, fat-free yoghurt.
TUESDAY
Breakfast Bran flakes, chopped banana, skimmed milk.
Lunch Wholemeal pasta shell salad, red and green peppers, onions, chickpeas, kidney beans, tomatoes and lean diced ham, wholemeal roll with low-fat spread.
Dinner Chicken casserole, boiled potatoes in their skins, lemon sorbet.
WEDNESDAY
Breakfast Oat bran cereal, skimmed milk and stewed apple, wholemeal toast with a little low-fat spread.
Lunch Baked beans on wholemeal toast, virtually fat-free yoghurt, orange.
Dinner Grilled kipper, tomatoes, peas and boiled potatoes, banana to finish.
THURSDAY
Breakfast Porridge with skimmed milk and stewed apple.
Lunch Wholemeal sandwich with low-fat spread, fresh salad filling, eg lettuce, low-fat soft cheese, sliced tomatoes, fruit with virtually fat-free fromage frais.
Dinner Bolognese sauce made with lean mince, and wholemeal spaghetti.
Virtually fat-free yoghurt for dessert.
FRIDAY
Breakfast Oat bran cereal with skimmed milk, wholemeal toast, low-fat spread and jam.
Lunch Rice salad made with tuna, onions, red kidney beans, peppers, lettuce — mixed with plain virtually fat-free fromage frais.
Rye bread, crispbread, or high-fibre crackers and low-fat spread, virtually fat-free yoghurt.
Dinner Cauliflower in low-fat cheese sauce.
Boiled carrots and jacket-baked potato, date slice.
SATURDAY
Breakfast Porridge with skimmed milk and small banana.
Lunch Ratatouille with jacket-baked potato, brown rice or wholemeal pasta.
Apple.
Dinner Vegetable quiche (small portion), mixed salad (no dressing or a little olive oil dressing), wholemeal bread and low-fat spread, fruit.
SUNDAY
Breakfast Virtually fat-free plain yoghurt, fromage frais or cottage cheese, wholemeal toast with low-fat spread and jam or yeast extract.
Lunch Lean roast meat (visible fat removed), jacket-baked potato, lightly steamed green vegetables, oat-topped fruit crumble, fat-free yoghurt.
Supper Wholemeal sandwich with low-fat cream cheese and banana filling.
Apple or orange to finish.
Shopping List
Here's what you'll need to buy for the week's low-fat diet.
DAIRY PRODUCE
Skimmed milk
low-fat spread, natural and fruit virtually fat-free yoghurts
virtually fat-free fromage frais very low-fat cottage cheese
low-fat hard and soft cheeses.
MEAT
Very lean minced beef
Meat for roasting (very lean, with visible fat removed).
FISH
Kipper — or other oily fish
eg smoked mackerel.
CEREAL
Wholemeal flour
oat bran
bran flakes
brown rice
wholemeal pasta
wholewheat/high fibre bread and rolls or baps
rye bread
high-fibre crispbreads
crackers
FRUIT AND VEG
Fresh vegetables
salad ingredients
dried/tinned chickpeas and red kidney beans
fresh fruits — including lemons and bananas.
EXTRA
Food can be low in calories but still delicious.
Choose fruits in season to make our mouthwatering sorbet, and make sure your vegetables are really fresh for the tastiest ratatouille
Strawberry Sorbet
Serves 6.
Fat content per serving — nil; energy content per serving — 174 calories.
Make syrup by heating 225g (8oz) caster sugar and 600ml (1 pint) water together over a low heat, stir until sugar dissolves.
Simmer 10 minutes, allow to cool.
Place 450g (1 lb) hulled strawberries in another saucepan with a little water and simmer until softened.
Rub through sieve, pour into sugar syrup and make up to 1.15 litres (2 pints) with extra water.
When cool, add 10ml (2tsp) lemon juice, pour into shallow flat container.
Freeze until nearly firm.
Whisk 4 egg whites until lightly stiff.
Scrape frozen mixture into cooled bowl.
Break up, fold in egg whites, freeze until firm.
This recipe can also be made with raspberries, blackcurrants or blackberries.
Ratatouille
Serves 6.
Fat content per serving — 2g; energy content per serving — 87 calories.
Place 2 large aubergines, cubed, and 2 medium courgettes, cubed, in colander, sprinkle with salt, place plate on top.
Leave 1–2 hours, rinse, drain well.
Heat 10ml (2tsp) olive oil in large saucepan.
Slice and fry 4 medium onions until soft.
Add aubergines, courgettes, 2 large red peppers, sliced garlic and 150ml (¼ pt) red wine, cover and cook 30 minutes.
Add 4 large sliced or 400g (14oz) can tomatoes, 5ml (1tsp) crushed coriander seeds, salt and pepper to taste, cook uncovered 30 minutes, until liquid has reduced.
Stir in 10ml (2tsp) basil or 15ml (1 tbsp) parsley.
Bolognese Sauce
Serves 4.
Fat content per serving — 5g; energy content per serving — 108 calories.
Heat 2.5ml (½tsp) olive oil in saucepan and fry 1 chopped onion until golden.
Add 1 finely sliced carrot and 1 stick finely chopped celery and cook 5 minutes.
Add 225g (8oz) very lean mince to pan, stirring until browned.
Sprinkle 15ml (1 tbsp) flour over sauce.
Stir in over moderate heat.
Add 15ml (1 tbsp) tomato purée, stock, salt and black pepper.
Cover and simmer 30 minutes.
All the family can enjoy eating the low-fat way and it will do everyone a world of good.
So pack up a picnic with fresh fruit, crunchy salads and wholemeal rolls with tuna or low-fat cottage cheese fillings
LEAD A healthy LIFE
After following our low-fat diet, keep the weight off by adapting the plan to your daily diet.
Our chart will help you to choose the foods you should eat
The Best Breakfast
The first meal of the day should be substantial, otherwise you're likely to feel hungry later.
Good low-fat ways to start the day include:
Muesli, with skimmed or semi-skimmed milk.
Porridge, served with skimmed milk.
Wholemeal/wholegrain bread, ideally with no spread, or a little very-low-fat spread, plus reduced-sugar jam or marmalade, meat or yeast extract, very-low-fat curd or cottage cheese, mashed banana.
Two rashers lean back bacon (visible fat removed) plus two tomatoes and 50g (2oz) mushrooms, grilled or dry-fried, wholemeal bread or toast.
Reduced-sugar baked beans 150g (6oz) with grilled tomato and a thin slice of lean ham.
Thinly sliced Edam or low-fat hard cheese on wholemeal toast with tomato.
Boiled, poached, scrambled or dry-fried egg (no fat).
No more than three eggs a week.
Grilled or baked kipper.
Dried fruits soaked overnight in apple juice, with fat-free fromage frais.
Always be sure to start the day with a good breakfast
AVOID
Smoking and excess alcohol
No matter how well you eat, your body (particularly heart and lungs) is bound to suffer if you smoke and drink alcohol.
Smoking
Smoking is linked both to lung cancer and coronary heart disease.
Having more than 20 cigarettes a day doubles the risk compared with not smoking at all, and it takes about a year of non-smoking for that risk to return to normal.
It's far more of a risk than being overweight, so don't let the fear of putting weight on stop you from giving up cigarettes.
Alcohol
Too much can be a risk factor for heart disease.
Keep within the recommended guidelines, which are measured in units — equal to a glass of wine or half pint of beer.
•The  guidelines for men is 21 units a week.
•The guideline for women is 14 units a week.
When you're eating out
When you eat out, be aware of the high and low levels of fat in foods and you'll become more discerning in your choice.
Choose simple starters such as chilled fruit juice, melon, clear soup, salads with a little olive oil dressing, or seafood dishes without sauces.
Main courses might include fish, poultry, lean meat and vegetarian dishes, but you should avoid sauces.
Always choose jacket or boiled potatoes and fresh vegetables.
For dessert, go for fresh fruit or water ice.
Avoid sundaes and cream.
Try lower fat cheeses, such as Edam, Camembert and Brie.
Eat water biscuits or oatmeal biscuits — without butter.
Avoid cream liqueurs and take tea and coffee black or with skimmed milk.
Take more exercise
Keeping fit doesn't just make you feel better — it has real health benefits, too.
If you exercise more, you use up more of the energy from your food, so reducing your chances of putting on any additional weight.
Exercise also makes your heart stronger.
As it has to pump more blood round the body to service the muscles you're using, it will get bigger and stronger in order to do so more efficiently.
This reduces any tendency to high blood pressure, as well.
To be effective, exercise must be regular and brisk.
A leisurely cycle or stroll in the park is not enough — aim to raise your pulse rate significantly by walking a mile or two — or cycling instead of going by car
Quick low-fat lunches
Try one of these low-fat packed lunch ideas as a change from sandwiches:
Wholemeal pitta bread with your favourite low-fat sandwich filling or salad in the pocket.
Pancakes rolled up around a sandwich filling or salad.
Cold, cooked jacket potato plus a tub of salad, sandwich filling, or dip.
Pot of salad or cold cooked vegetables — eg ratatouille.
Fresh, raw vegetables — eg carrot, celery or cucumber sticks, cauliflower florets, radishes, tomatoes, rings of young sweetcorn cob — plus a low-calorie dip.
Hot soup, stew or casserole in a thermos flask, plus a roll — but no butter or margarine.
Virtually fat-free yoghurt or fromage frais, or fresh fruit for dessert.
Great sandwich ideas
Here are lots of low-fat sandwich filling suggestions — many of which are moist enough to use without butter, margarine or low-fat spread.
Avoid white bread and choose from wholemeal, rye, granary or multigrain.
Meat fillings
Very low-fat curd cheese, tomato slices.
sliced raw mushroom dipped in lemon juice and a slice of lean ham; or a slice of lean ham, chopped and mixed with 2 tablespoons plain virtually fat-free fromage frais and 1 teaspoon Dijon mustard, on a bed of shredded red cabbage; or diced cooked chicken breast, diced red or green pepper, a chopped pineapple ring, 1 teaspoon tomato purée; all mixed with enough plain virtually fat-free yoghurt to moisten; or bread spread with tomato purée topped with shredded lettuce and lean, grilled back bacon — visible fat removed.
Fish fillings
Three sardines tinned in tomato sauce, mashed, plus tomato slices; or mashed tuna mixed with chopped green pepper and chopped cucumber, on a bed of shredded lettuce; or cooked, skinned and mashed mackerel, mixed with very low-fat soft cheese, lemon juice and black pepper.
Vegetarian fillings
A grated 2.5cm (1″) cube of Edam or low-fat hard cheese mixed with Dijon mustard, 1 tablespoon plain, virtually fat-free yoghurt and black pepper; or grated raw white cabbage, carrot and celery, 1 chopped pineapple ring, 1 tablespoon peanuts and raisins mixed with 1 tablespoon plain virtually fat-free fromage  frias ; or very low-fat cottage cheese mixed with finely grated carrot, 1 tablespoon raisins, a dash of lemon juice and 2 teaspoons finely chopped onion; or bread spread thinly with peanut butter topped with chopped or grated apple and sprinkled with lemon juice.
Anchovies, red peppers and olives make a tasty sandwich
Learn to eat the low-fat way
EAT REGULARLY
EAT 2 OR 3 TIMES A WEEK
EAT ONCE A WEEK
CEREAL
Wholemeal bread, wholegrain cereals, porridge oats, crispbreads, brown rice, wholemeal pasta, cornmeal, untoasted sugar-free muesli
White bread, white flour, white rice and pasta, water biscuits, pastries, puddings, cakes made from wholemeal flour
Sugar-coated cereals, semi-sweet biscuits, ordinary shop-bought muesli, plain buns and scones
FRUIT AND VEG
All fresh, frozen and dried fruit.
Unsweetened tinned fruit.
All fresh, frozen, dried and tinned vegetables — especially peas, beans, lentils.
Baked potatoes
Oven chips labelled ‘cooked in sunflower oil’ and ‘40% less fat’(grill if possible).
Olives
Fruit in syrup, crystallised fruit, avocado, chips and roast potatoes cooked in suitable oil
FISH
All fresh and frozen fish, eg cod, plaice, herring, mackerel.
Tinned fish in brine or tomato sauce, eg sardine, tuna
Fish fried in suitable oil (those oils consisting of mono-unsaturated or polyunsaturated fats are best)
Prawns, lobster, crab, oysters, winkles, tinned fish in oil (drained) eg tuna, salmon, sardines
MEAT
Chicken, turkey, veal, rabbit, game.
Soya-protein meat substitute.
Very lean red meat, small portion, no more than once daily
Lean beef and lamb, lean pork, ham, gammon, very lean minced meat
Liver, kidney, tripe, sweetbreads, grilled back bacon, duck and rabbit
EGGS AND DAIRY
Skimmed milk, soya milk, cottage cheese, low-fat curd cheese, virtually fat-free yoghurt, egg white, virtually fat-free fromage frais Semi-skimmed milk.
No more than 3 whole eggs per week, including those in baked items, eg cakes, quiche, flans
Medium-fat cheeses, eg Edam, Gouda, Camembert, Brie.
Cheese spreads.
Half-fat cheeses labelled ‘low fat’.
Condensed skimmed milk
PRESERVES, JAMS AND SPREADS
Marmite ,Bovril .
Chutneys, pickles.
Sugar-free spreads, artificial sweeteners
Fish and meat pastes.
Peanut butter.
Low-sugar jams and marmalades
Boiled sweets, fruit pastilles and jellies.
Jam, marmalade and honey and spreads with high sugar content such as lemon curd
DRINKS
Freshly made tea, coffee (not too many, not too strong with skimmed milk and no sugar)
White wine, lager and spirits with low-calorie mixers eg soda water
Sweetened drinks, squashes, fruit juices.
Malted milk or hot chocolate drinks made with skimmed milk
BADDIES
There are some foods that you should try to exclude from your meals if you want to stay trim and slim.
Savoury
Deep-fat-fried chips, roast potatoes.
Sausages, luncheon meats, corned beef, meat pâtés, salami, streaky bacon, pasties, Scotch eggs, visible fat on meat, crackling, chicken skin.
Crisps and snacks, cream crackers, cheese biscuits.
Fish roe, taramasalata, fried scampi.
Cream soups, mayonnaise.
Sweet
Pastries, puddings cakes and sauces made with whole milk.
Suet puddings, ice cream.
Chocolate and chocolate sauces, toffees, fudge, butterscotch, carob chocolate.
Coconut, sweet or cream-filled biscuits.
Dairy
Whole milk and cream, full-fat yoghurt.
Cheese, eg Cheddar, Stilton, cream cheese.
Evaporated or condensed milk, imitation cream.
Excess eggs (no more than three a week).
Butter and all high-fat spreads, shortenings not labelled ‘high in polyunsaturates’ or  ‘monosaturates’.
Lard, suet, dripping.
Cooking tips
Trim fat from red meats.
Roast meats on a rack to drain fat.
Remove skin before cooking chicken or turkey — wrap in foil to prevent drying out.
Bake, roast, grill or fry meats slowly , without any added fat.
Dry-fry or boil mince, and pour off resulting fat.
Use less meat than the stated quantity and add canned beans to reduce fat content.
When you're out shopping choose fresh vegetables in season — and not just for you.
The entire family will also benefit from eating more wholesome foods
Personal Story
‘Diabetes made me blind — but I won't let it ruin my life’
Since losing her sight, Philippa Bastable has taken up competitive swimming and has a new career, too
During the big freeze in December last year, Philippa Bastable, like many others, was stranded for 11 hours on the snowbound M6.
But for Philippa, from Aylesbury, it was especially scary.
With no food and only a couple of bottles of Lucozade in the car, she knew that if the delay lasted much longer, her blood glucose could fall to such a dangerously low level, that she risked slipping into a diabetic coma.
Philippa has suffered from diabetes ever since she was five years old, so she knows the symptoms of both comas and hypoglycaemic episodes, which are the stage before, only too well.
‘I can recognise the warning signs straight away— I start to tremble and go into a cold sweat,’ explains Philippa.
‘As long as I drink some Lucozade straight away, then I'm OK.
But if I don't that's when I risk slipping into a coma.’
Fortunately help came in time on that particular day.
But as a sufferer of a very severe form of diabetes, 34-year-old Philippa has had to struggle not to let her illness take over her life.
Seven years ago, as a consequence of her diabetes, Philippa was left totally blind.
‘Of course I was terrified when it happened,’ she recalls, ‘but I'm not the sort to be beaten.
I was determined to carry on as normally as I could.’
It was her bubbly, outgoing nature that helped Philippa grow up with her condition.
‘I was so young when it was first diagnosed that I can't really remember a time without it.
By the time I was six I was giving myself injections, twice a day, before and after school.
I didn't really understand what it was all about except that there were always sugar lumps in my pocket for when I didn't feel very well.
That was in case I had a ‘hypo’,’ she recalls.
A more serious complication of diabetes is damage to the retina, the light-sensitive area at the back of the eye.
‘I knew that there was always the danger that I could lose my sight, but I really thought it only happened later in life,’ says Philippa.
‘So when I went for my regular eye check-up I had no idea that anything was wrong.
The surgeon took one look at my eyes and said, bluntly: ‘Well, they're a right mess, aren't they?’.
He wasn't the least bit sympathetic and I was terrified.’
After that news followed several emotionally charged months as Philippa waited to find out whether her vision could be saved.
Her GP referred her to a hospital in Watford, North London, where she underwent laser treatment to try and prevent the damage from getting any worse — but it didn't help.
And gradually, over a period of about nine months, she began to lose the use of her eyes.
‘It happened quite slowly, so I didn't stop doing the things I had always done — apart from driving.
That's why I still cope now with all the everyday things like the ironing and housework.
In a way I was preparing myself,’ she says.
Even so, there were times when Philippa crumpled under the strain.
‘I was even taken to hospital at one point thinking I had a hypo coming on, but then we realised that I was actually having panic attacks — a delayed reaction to losing my sight.
I suppose I'd never really sat down and cried about it,’ she recalls.
That hospital visit marked a low point for Philippa.
‘I only had light and dark vision at that stage.
I remember lying in bed and the only thing I could see was the dim glow of the light bulb on the ceiling.
Before I left hospital that had disappeared, too.
That's it, it's gone completely now, I thought.
That was very hard.’
But Philippa wasn't to be allowed the time to get really depressed.
‘A mobility officer from the social services got me into action straight away.
I think he was my saving grace.
Of course, there are times when it's frustrating — it can take me twice as long to find anything, for example .
But there's always a voice in me, saying, ‘I'm not going to let it beat me’.’
Gradually, with the constant support of her family and friends, Philippa learned to come to terms with her situation.
She signed up with her local college for a typing course, and later she taught herself Braille.
And when she found she was putting on some weight, she took up swimming regularly.
Three years after losing her sight she finally felt ready to start looking for a job.
‘I'd previously been trained in management and I didn't want to be an audio typist.
After all, I've only lost my sight — not my brains.
I refused to settle for second best, unless I absolutely had to,’ she says.
And her persistence paid off.
A year later she was offered a job with Rothmans to join their customer liaison department.
There she's been provided with Braille equipment and a talking computer.
And her swimming is progressing rapidly, too.
Only three years since starting swimming competitively, she has won 45 medals.
She's also in the National Blind Swimming Squad and is a real hopeful for Britain's 1992 line-up at the Disabled Olympics in Barcelona.
‘Obviously there are times when I think, why me?.
It's the smaller things that get you down — like when I went out the other day to buy a dress for my god daughter's birthday.
My fiancé, Derrick, had to make the final decision about the colour etc…
But I'm not a bitter person.
There's very little I don't do that I used to do.
You just have to accept things and get on with your life.’
‘By the time I was six, I was giving myself injections twice a day’
‘There are times when I think, ‘why me?’
But I'm not a bitter person’
Despite her disability, Philippa is very confident — she strides out with her guide dog Paula and is a medal-winning swimmer
Seven years after losing her sight Philippa now holds down a full-time job.
‘I decided to make a go of it,’ she says
NATURAL CHOICE
Remarkably versatile and elegantly styled, wicker and cane furniture for indoors and outside has never looked better and you'll find a wide selection to choose from
SITTING PRETTY
No need to skimp on comfort with these suites — they're available with deep padded cushions
Solid style
Made from bamboo poles, which are exceptionally strong, the framework of this suite is bleached and then whitewashed for a unique finish.
Extra wide seats and easy backs provide a combination of comfort and detailed eye-catching design.
Diners' delight
A clean-cut, lightweight informal style makes this natural rattan furniture an excellent choice for your dining area.
Dual role
This handmade rattan furniture has been lacquered, making it suitable for indoors and out.
It coordinates easily with an existing colour scheme and cushions can be covered in fabric from the wide range available from Laura Ashley shops.
Lattice lover
A wonderfully decorative sofa that features superb canework.
It has cushion covers that are easily removable for dry cleaning and the sofa comes complete with two matching scatter cushions.
It is shown here in antique brown but it is also available in white.
Lounging around
This comfy willow chaise longue gives you the perfect excuse for relaxing and putting your feet up.
Woven wicker
Diamond patterned cane with cotton covered cushions makes for comfort on the patio.
SUMMER COLOURS
Look out for the wide range of painted wicker that's around.
Take your pick from pure classic white or go for bolder shades
Sea view
Inspired by the grand ocean liners of the 1930s, where similar pieces were a familiar sight in the saloons and lounges, these items are available in both country blue and antique almond.
The chair comes with a loose seat pad, the table has a 6mm glass top.
Matching tray available.
Old English style
A willow green wicker armchair takes on a whole new look when a collection of pretty floral covered cushions and a deep frill are added.
Economise on fabric by only making the frill to cover the front of the chair.
Designer desk
White walls provide the perfect backdrop for this rattan desk.
The colour detail has been achieved by immersing the cane in a colour bath before it's woven and plaited into stunning and practical furniture.
A whole range of pieces is available in this classic colour combination, but just one or two items in a room would look attractive.
ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS
Look out for unusual room accessories to add the finishing touch
Neat fit
A corner shelf unit is a smart way to display ornaments.
Two into one
This wicker screen is ideal for dividing your lounge or concealing unwanted clutter.
Topping table
This circular table suits every decor.
The bottom tier is great for storing your copies of best .
KEEPING YOUR WICKER AND CANE IN TIP TOP CONDITION
If you keep your wicker or cane furniture in a well heated room or conservatory, moisten it regularly with a plant spray.
Wash down with a damp cloth — avoid using soaps.
Don't leave unvarnished wicker or cane outside.
Although it is a natural fibre, it tends not to weather well.
Never use wicker chairs to stand on for odd jobs around the house.
Did you know that traditional Lloyd Loom furniture is made from paper twisted around fine steel, which is then woven into the finished product?
If you have any original Lloyd Loom which is slightly the worse for wear, contact Graham Mancha on 029 6615121.
He can mend pieces, or advise on what to do.
HOMECRAFT
Happy FATHER'S DAY
Make your dad's day extra special with these brilliant handmade cards — each one bearing a small but welcome gift
You will need
Card: white, yellow, blue, orange, green, mauve
Sticky backed orange paper
Pritt Stick paper glue and double-sided tape
Felt-tip pens and coloured paper for letters
Patterned giftwrap and 3 red buttons
Gifts to put in cards: pens, pencils, paper clips, packets of seeds, spotted handkerchief
Tips and hints
To make a really successful card design it to complement your father's hobbies.
Adapt the idea for other special occasions.
You could design your own Christmas cards in this way and fill them with small gifts.
You could adapt the dapper Dad's card to include a smart tie or even a pair of cufflinks.
How to make the writer's card
Prepare the basic card
Mark and cut out a piece of the yellow card 30 × 20cm.
Use a craft knife for really sharp edges.
Cut a strip of patterned giftwrap 30 × 7cm.
Stick this strip across the lower half of the card for the tablecloth.
Score on the wrong side and then fold the card in half.
Draw the lettering
Either use a suitable sized stencil or trace off letters, from the magazine to spell DAD.
Mark the letters in reverse on the wrong side of the sticky orange paper, cut them out ready to stick across the front of the mug.
Then cut out a fun motif to decorate the mug.
Make the mug
From the mauve card cut out a rectangle 14 × 10cm and a handle 7cm long.
Mark in 2cm from the mug sides along base and 1.5cm from each side along top.
Join up and fold along lines.
Apply double-sided tape to the sides and do the lower edge on the wrong side.
Assemble
Position the mug centrally on to the card and stick the base.
Now position and stick the handle under one side then stick the other side.
Make sure that the mug sides are vertical and the top bows out.
Fill with a selection of colour co-ordinating pens and pencils.
The gardener's card
Cut a piece of blue card 30 × 20cm.
Then cut a strip of green card 30 × 6cm and cut deep zigzags along one edge to represent the grass.
Stick along base edge of blue card.
Score card on the wrong side and then fold in half.
For the flower pot, cut a piece of orange card 14 × 10cm.
Mark in 3cm from each side of long base edge, and mark 1cm from each side of top edge.
Join up marks to graduate sides.
Score along these lines and bend inwards for tabs.
Stick the flower pot centrally to card, as with the mug.
Cut a strip of orange card 15 × 3cm for the rim.
Score across rim 6mm from each end; bend inwards to form tabs and stick over upper edge of pot.
Choose an appropriate motif and stick to the base of the pot.
Slip gift seed packets inside.
The dapper dad's card
Cut a piece of white card 20 × 30cm.
Carefully draw on thick blue stripes.
Score, and fold card as before.
Cut 2 collars from the white card, each 15 × 6cm.
Mark and score a 1.5cm strip across one long edge.
Join this point diagonally up to the outer edges of tab.
Cut along lines to form collars and stick in place.
Cut a piece of white card 12 × 10cm for the shirt pocket.
Mark on blue stripes to match shirt.
Trim down sides so base edge is 10cm wide.
Stick to card.
Stick buttons down the front and slip gift handkerchief into pocket.
Next week: renovating a chair
The beautiful art of flower arranging
New ways with FRESH FLOWERS
You don't have to be an expert to create lovely arrangements, just follow Jenny Plucknett's advice for simple but sensational floral displays, both for everyday and for special occasions
Planning a display doesn't mean sticking rigidly to a formal design.
However, for the best effect, you do need to work out the right size and shape for your arrangement, choose appropriate containers and know which colours of flowers go well together.
Bear in mind that the container should be in proportion to the size of the flowers — small blooms are lost in a large vase.
If you just want to brighten your home, avoid an ‘over-arranged’ look by using informal containers and groupings and choosing long-lasting flowers.
For special occasions, you can be more extravagant and go for dramatic, impressive displays.
In miniature
Small containers are best for small flowers, but are also a good way to display blooms with short or broken stems.
For greater impact, try grouping several displays together as a single one can look a little lost.
Teacups, tiny jars, egg cups or even thimbles can be used.
As long as you can fit in a piece of florist's foam, it can hold flowers!
With small arrangements, make sure you check the water level frequently and top up as necessary.
Something as simple as a mug can turn a handful of pansies into a vivid display.
Here it picks out the teaset design
Vases with a difference
Your kitchen cupboards can often yield unusual but excellent flower containers.
Glass pie plates and quiche dishes are perfect for low displays.
A circular cooling rack will hold the flower stems in place.
Pretty china jugs and teapots are ideal for taller displays.
Use crumpled chicken wire to hold the flower stems in place.
Earthenware and enamelled casseroles can co-ordinate perfectly with autumn golds.
Florist's foam will help to turn a shallow bowl into a lovely container.
Start your arrangement around rim and then build up towards the middle to hide the foam
Co-ordinating colour
When you don't have a vase to match your flowers, decorate one.
Paint on oil-based paint, then partially rub off for an antiqued look.
This urn containing tulips has been aged with pinkish tones, while its base colour echoes that of the grape hyacinths.
Group for effect
To make a stunning group arrangement use the same flowers but in different containers.
Line up a row of pretty jam jars on the kitchen windowsill and fill them with daffodils, for example.
On a tray, set out a matching teapot, milk jug and sugar bowl.
Fill them with the same flowers using the colours of the china.
Wine glasses will look effective arranged down a long dinner table, alternating single large blooms with groups of tiny flowers.
Arrange jugs of flowers in order of size, choosing harmonising blooms such as violets, ranunculus and stocks
Make it smell sweet
When you plan a display, include scented flowers, either shop-bought or home-grown, so that your arrangement smells as good as it looks.
Simple to grow scented climbers include many lilies, petunias, lily-of-the-valley, tobacco plants, pinks and carnations, honey-scented buddleia, narcissus, sweet peas, freesias and summer jasmine.
Add honeysuckle (not all the varieties smell so check before buying that it is fragrant) and climbing roses.
Many of the older rose varieties also have a strong scent.
Contact Roses du temps passé and Harkness for catalogues.
To make the most of fragrant flowers such as these sweetly scented golden and white freesias and white lilies, display them by massing the flowers closely together in side-by-side containers.
Position the vases in front of an open window so that the breeze wafts the scent into the room
For longer-lasting flowers…
After buying or picking flowers recut stems and place in cool, deep water, up to neck level for at least two hours.
Submerge foliage completely (except grey) for several hours.
If the greenery is grimy add a drop of washing-up liquid.
Next hammer the ends of woody stemmed plants.
Remove leaves that will be below water level when flowers are arranged.
Poppies, euphorbias and other flower stems that contain a milky fluid, plus roses, last longer if you dip the stem in boiling water for 30 seconds.
Protect the flower head with paper or a cloth to prevent scalding it.
When some flowers start to wilt, trim the rest for a smaller arrangement.
The bright primary colours of the sunny yellow tiger lilies and gerbera, red-pink clusters of carnations and brightest blue cornflowers mix with the rusty orange nasturtiums and pink sweet peas and Sweet Williams.
All this colour is offset by the tiny yellow green flowers of lady's mantle.
In a natural arrangement use mainly medium size headed flowers with just a few large heads
The easy way to make an elegant impact
Create this stylish, colourful display in three simple steps
Setting the height
Put a block of florist's foam in a jug half-filled with water.
Insert one iris towards the back.
Trim the other to about two-thirds this height and position it in front of the first, to give a strong central line.
Then insert escallonia, leaning out, at sides of jug
Soften the edges
Insert the tiger lilies, in a triangular group overhanging the foam and jug lip.
Put two carnations, cut to the same length as the shorter iris, on either side.
Insert another carnation in a diagonal line with the tiger lilies.
Tuck in ivy to act as background
You will need
A
3 tiger lily blooms
B
2 blue irises
C
3 carnations
D
a few stems of escallonia
E
large ivy leaves
Displays for SPECIAL OCCASIONS
There are times when you want a more elaborate floral arrangement.
Whether it's for a formal dinner party or a family celebration, we show you how
At a formal dinner party, you have an excuse to be extravagant with the floral decorations.
This large display (right) in a cool, fresh, green and white colour scheme, provides a central focal point for the table, but it is not so large that it obscures the guests' view.
Tiny baskets of cherries are tucked away in the display, an idea popular in Victorian times.
They're surrounded by bear grass, asparagus fern and ivy, to create the background, and then filled out with bridal gladioli, freesias, Singapore orchids and a few fragrant roses.
This eye-catching display contains tiny baskets of fruit.
Omit the baskets on one side for a buffet table if it is set against the wall
Floral table edging
Swags create a wonderful effect on wedding or special buffet tables.
Make the base with Oasis to keep the flowers fresh for several days.
Cut a block into eight rectangular blocks, about 7–8cm in length.
Place the sections end to end, on fine grade polythene sheeting, then roll up to form a tube.
Tie each section of foam in position, with one piece of string, winding it around the plastic tube between the blocks.
Push the flowers and the foliage through the plastic.
Roses, alstroemeria and chrysanthemum heads make a luscious decoration for a long table.
Here the leaves were inserted into a swag base first to create the background.
Then the flowers were added in small groups and singly, along the garland or bunched to form a central group
Brighten up a dull corner
Paint a wicker basket white to create the perfect base for colourful flowers
Framing with foliage
A basket must first be lined with polythene to make it waterproof.
Add a block of pre-soaked Oasis and insert eucalyptus branches to make a dome shape, with some extending horizontally outwards.
Build up to form a frame for the russet chrysanthemums
Filling in colour
Trim flower stems to a similar length and bash the ends with a hammer to enable them to draw up water.
Insert the flower sprigs into the foam, within the general framework.
Start by inserting the blooms at the back then work your way along the sides and then finish at front
Use the right equipment
Florist's foam or Oasis.
When soaked, this allows stems and branches to be positioned securely and take up water.
If you're using delicate stems you may first have to make holes in the Oasis with a knitting needle.
Different foams are sold for a variety of plants and uses.
Wire netting Crumple up wire netting into a ball and push into a container.
The netting should fit quite snugly and reach to just below the rim of the container.
You can also use a circle of wire netting, shaped like a mound, to cover the top of the container.
Hold it in place with a rubber band.
Make your dinner table the centre of attraction
For an informal dinner party, don't hide your guests from one another with a giant display but rather use a series of small containers grouped to suit your table shape.
This type of display is foolproof and takes only minutes to arrange.
Wine glasses, tumblers and individual soufflé dishes are ideal containers and contents can be chosen from single giant blooms, a miniature flower and foliage display, candles and small fruits and nuts.
On a long table place containers in a row.
On a square or round table they can be arranged in a circle around a group of tall candles or a bowl of fruit.
Fix the candles in place to the base of the container with melted wax or adhesive putty.
Choose a scheme that will tone in with your tablecloth and china or pick out one small colour detail and highlight it with your floral display.
Different sized candles have been mixed with large and small blooms, including sprays of pale pink chrysanthemums, blue-dyed gypsophila and flowerheads of irises, lilies and daisy-like gerbera, all carefully arranged in pretty chunky blue glasses
How to wire flowers
Push one thick stub wire up stem, then two thinner wires through base of petals, forming a cross.
Twist down stem, cover with tape.
Tape flowers together as you work.
To wire an ivy leaf, push half a length of wire through the back of the central vein, one third down from the point of the leaf.
Fold down one wire half to lie against the stem, wind the other half around stem and wire.
Tape.
Wedding corsage
Use leaves from your most decorative house plants and add just a few perfect blooms to create a beautiful corsage for a special occasion.
Once you've mastered the basic technique (see how to wire flowers, left), then it's easy to create a corsage.
Choose flowers that complement your outfit, as well as blooms that clash for a startling effect.
Including scented flowers in the display adds a special touch.
Each flower and leaf will need to be separately wired before taping together (see left).
Once arranged, spray the corsage with water, protect in a box and place in the refrigerator to keep it fresh overnight.
This corsage uses the deep pink of nerines to mimic the colour of the dress
Design a flower tree
Trees can be made to any size.
Make a miniature for a table or have a larger pair on either side of the front door.
Choose a container to match your tree's size to keep it stable.
First, cover the ball of Oasis with leaves and moss.
Hold these in place with bent stub wires, shaped like hair pins, then add the flowers on short cut stems.
Spray to keep fresh.
For a more permanent display use dried flowers.
Use a broom handle cut to the size you require, a length of vine, or a rustic pole for the trunk.
Place a plastic bag in your pot and fill with ready mixed cement.
Push in the wooden pole.
When set, lift out and trim plastic
Using wire netting and lengths of wire attach a block of wet Oasis securely to the top of the ‘trunk’
Push foliage, then flowers, into the Oasis, or use wires to pin moss in place.
Hide cement with more moss
DIY and home hints
Fitting a bath/shower mixer
Enjoy all the benefits of a shower simply by replacing your bath taps with a mixer unit
This is the simplest type of shower to fit.
The mixer tap takes the place of the existing bath taps, and can be used either to fill the bath or provide a shower.
Bath/shower mixer taps cost from as little as £40.
However, we chose the Aqualisa Aquamixa (from £334.65), a thermostatic bath and shower mixer.
Telephone 0959 63240 for stockist details.
The integral thermostat guarantees that shower water temperature stays constant even if taps are turned on elsewhere.
1.
Turn off water
You will need to turn off hot and cold water supplies.
The gate valve for cold water will be close to the cold water cistern; the hot water valve will be near the hot water tank.
Open the taps to drain water in the pipes.
If the cold taps are fed directly from the mains, or if you have an instant water heater, seek further advice.
2.
Remove old taps
Unscrew any bath panelling and use a bath/basin spanner on the nearest tap to unscrew the nut holding the pipe to the tap, then the nut holding the tap to the bath.
If necessary use a metal bar to increase the leverage, then repeat for the further tap.
Brace the tap with a piece of wood or a cloth-wrapped spanner.
3.
Check connections
After withdrawing the old taps, check that the length of the new tap ‘tails’ matches that of the old bath taps.
If it's shorter you may need a pair of (22mm/¾″ BSP) tap adaptors; if longer, you may need to cut the pipe and then fit two new (22mm¾″ BSP) tap connectors.
Choose the push-fit kind for ease of use.
4.
Clean the surface
Remove any old sealing compound which may be present on the bath close to the tap fixing.
Take care not to scratch the surface on plastic baths.
The new tap should be provided with a sealing washer or gasket.
If it doesn't have one, buy some non-setting plumber's mastic to seal between the tap and the bath.
5.
Replace the taps
To fit the new mixer tap follow step 2 in reverse.
Make sure that you put the plastic washers provided onto the tape ‘tails’ before screwing on the back nuts and that the small fibre washers in the tap connectors are present and are undamaged.
Turn the water on slowly and tighten the nuts if there are any leaks.
6.
Fit the shower head
Drill holes and fit the wall plugs before screwing on the shower slider rail or bracket (see How to drill through tiles in best , issue 20/91).
Follow instructions for the correct height, and make sure the restraint is fitted to prevent the shower head dangling in the bath.
Test the shower before replacing the bath panel.
Top tips for a fun Father's Day
Pride and joy
Offer to clean his car both inside and out.
Tidy the boot and glove compartment as well, and, if you know how to, make sure that the car has enough oil and water.
Basket of goodies
If your father has a favourite hobby, gather together a few well-chosen gifts that you know he will like and wrap them in a presentation basket.
Alternatively, you could fill the basket with his favourite foods or toiletries.
Lazy day
Start the day as you intend it to continue and take him breakfast in bed on a tray.
Make sure he's awake first, though!
A quick card
If you've forgotten to buy a card and the shops are all closed, simply cut out some funny or pretty pictures from magazines, paste them onto a piece of card and then write your own personalised message inside.
He'll love it.
Take your pick
Choose a particular chore that you know he hates doing, such as mowing the lawn, weeding the garden or putting the dustbin out, and offer to do it yourself.
If it's something that needs doing every day, keep it up for a week.
Pooling resources
If you are short of cash, club together with brothers and sisters and combine your money so you can buy a present between you.
And finally
Don't forget granddad — remember he's a father too!
TIP OF THE WEEK
Mrs M Dunn of Oban, Scotland has a good idea for maximising space in a small bathroom.
She suggests suspending a hanging basket from the ceiling and using it to store spare soap, toothpaste, talcum powder and toilet rolls.
Plantworld
by Rosie Atkins
COLOUR CO-ORDINATION
An all-white garden
Bring a timeless tranquility to your garden with the luminous quality of green and white blooms and foliage
For a dramatic impact, mass all of your white flowers together.
However, if you lack the confidence to toss away your favourite purple lilac bush, create a similar effect on a smaller scale by concentrating on a single border, window boxes or even pots on the patio.
All-white gardens are at their most striking when enclosed by walls or dark yew hedges.
In the evening they can take on a luminous glow and fill the air with perfume.
In spring,Clematis montana will soon cover trellises and walls with a shower of white blooms.
C montana ‘Wilsonii’ is scented, too, and flowers a little later.
A white wisteria such as Wisteria floribunda ‘Alba’ can be trained to make a fragrant bower, while Solanum jasminoides ‘Album’(Jasmine nightshade) likes a sheltered position and has star-shaped flowers which bloom even in late autumn.
Of the many white roses, ‘Iceberg’, available as a climber, bush or standard, is the most popular.
Fragrant shrubs
The evergreen Viburnum tinus ‘Gwenllian’ has white flowers with pinkish buds from late winter.
For scent, you can't beat Daphne odora ‘Alba’ with its winter flowers that smell of roses.
Flowerbeds
Vinca minor ‘Alba variegata’ trails its decorative leaves over pots or shady beds, while tall containers packed with white hostas look smart.
Fragrant lilies such as lilium longiflorum and the hardier, later-flowering L. speciosum ‘Album’ are perfect for containers.
The fragrant tobacco plant (Nicotiana affinis ) should be planted in the back row of borders.
While Dicentra exima ‘Alba’, white anemones, hydrangeas, campanulas and daisies will bring interest to your flowerbeds until autumn.
Plant bulbs like white hyacinth, lily of the valley and white tulips to boost next year's display.
Iberis sempervirens looks stunning next to hosta foliage
Gardens to visit
Sissinghurst, Kent (former home of Vita Sackville-West, main picture above); Newby Hall, North Yorkshire; Hidcote Manor, Gloucestershire; Barrington Court, Ilminster, Somerset; Folley Farm, Reading, Berkshire; Grey Court, Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire; Chenies Manor, Little Chalfont, Herts.
TOPICAL TIPS
Buy a packet of nasturtium seeds and pop them into the sides of hanging baskets.
Put straw mats under strawberry plants to protect fruit from rotting.
Remove any debris from the garden pond and thin out plants showing signs of excessive growth.
Plant dahlia tubers in the garden now, covering them with 7.5cm of soil.
Avoid accidents with the strimmer by protecting young trees with plastic tubes or weed by hand.
HOW TO…plant chrysanthemums
Now is the time to plant chrysanthemums.
Choose a sheltered sunny position with well-drained and composted soil which is weed free.
To get plant out of the pot, turn it upside down with the stem between your fingers and give the pot a gentle knock.
Place a cane in the ground then make a small planting hole just deep enough to cover the roots.
Leave a depression around the stem to form a puddle when you water.
Secure plant to the cane then water well.
Water again after a few days and start feeding in June.
A BEAUTIFUL BLOOM
The Brazilian or florist's gloxinia
If you are looking for an attractive houseplant, choose this favourite
The stunning bell-shaped flowers of the Brazilian or the florist's gloxinia are often beautifully marked so they make a real splash of vibrant colour in your home.
This plant is a hybrid which has evolved over years of cross breeding with the Sinningia speciosa from Brazil.
Treat florist gloxinias as annuals and grow them from seed in spring, or grow from tubers potted up in spring so they are just covered by the compost.
Flowers last longest if kept in a cool place and given a high phosphate feed once a month.
When plant dies down, reduce the watering and store the tuber in its pot in a dry, warm place.
Repot tuber in February, start watering and you will see a repeat performance that year.
Overwatering the plant causes root rot.
Popularly known as the florist's gloxinia, Sinningia speciosa can produce beautiful trumpet-shaped flowers, ranging from shades of red, purple and pink to white, five months after sowing if kept in a greenhouse with a night temperature of 18–21°C
READERS' OFFER
Keep compost moist
Prevent plants in containers and hanging baskets from drooping during a long hot summer by adding water-retentive gel, such as Broadleaf P4, to the compost.
Normally costing £4 for 125g, this pack is available to best readers at the special price of £3 p&p inclusive.
This quantity is sufficient for 125 litres of compost, enough to plant up a considerable number of hanging baskets, pots and window boxes.
Mouthwatering MELONS
Although melons are available most of the year, they are at their best — and cheapest — now.
Cool and fragrant, these thirst quenching fruits can be eaten alone, or with cold meats or salads.
They make a really versatile choice for summer
Cucumbers and marrows belong to the same family; melons come in four basic types:
Winter melons include the slow-ripening honeydew, which is oval, smooth and yellow.
Its flesh is juicy, but has little fragrance.
Netted melons are in season from April to December and include Galia; they have a coarse crochet-like ‘net’ on golden yellow skins.
Flesh varies from green to orange and is juicy and refreshing.
Cantaloupe melons include Ogen and Charentais.
In season from July to early October.
Their skin is rough and sometimes striped, with a sweet and scented delicate flavour.
Watermelons are large and round with green or green and yellow striped skins and red flesh.
The sweet flesh is 90% water and is a great thirst-quencher.
ITALIAN HAM AND MELON STARTER
Serve Parma ham with melon — it's a classic combination
Serves 4–6
Preparation: 10 mins
1 Ogen or Galia melon
1 Honeydew melon
100g (4oz) Italian salami
100g (4oz) Parma ham
100g (4oz) mild Cheddar or Lancashire cheese
Freshly ground black pepper
Leave the melons to stand at room temperature for 30 minutes and then cut into quarters, lengthways.
Scoop away the seeds and discard.
Take a thin-bladed knife and run it closely between the flesh and the rind until they separate.
Place the flesh back on the rind, and cut the Ogen quarters into four slices and the honeydew quarters into six slices.
Place the sliced melons alternately on a large platter and fan out the wedges.
Arrange slices of salami and Parma ham between each of the melon wedges.
Slice the cheese as thinly as possible and place in the centre of the plate.
Season generously with the freshly ground pepper, then serve with plenty of crusty French or Italian bread.
Easy ways to prepare them
PEELING
Use a sharp knife to remove the skin by slicing downwards, following the shape of the melon.
Peel off a thick layer as the flesh immediately under the skin is hard and bitter.
Alternatively, quarter melon and run a sharp knife along the curve.
HOW TO DE-SEED
To prepare melons for chopping once you have removed the skin or to serve smaller melons like Galia or Charentais you need to remove the seeds.
Cut the melon in half and scoop out the seeds, which are slippery and stringy.
REMOVING WATERMELON SEEDS
Watermelon is speckled with black seeds.
If you remove these from the melon it makes eating it easier.
To do this: use a sharp knife and slice melon into wedges.
Then using the end of a teaspoon, ease out the seeds.
MAKING MELON BALLS
Halve the melon and scoop out the seeds.
Then using a specially designed melon baller (available from cookshops or larger supermarkets) or a small measuring spoon, insert it deep into the flesh, twist it and then make a full turn to form the ball.
Tap spoon to release melon ball.
A DELICIOUS STARTER
An appealing mix of three different coloured melons
Serves 4–6
Preparation: 25 mins
1 Charentais melon
1 Ogen melon
½ small watermelon
300ml (½ pt) crème fraîche or single cream
15ml (1 tbsp) honey
15ml (1 tbsp) Amaretto liqueur (optional)
50g (2oz) whole blanched almonds, cut into slivers
Halve the Charentais and the Ogen melons and scoop out the seeds.
Make melon balls using a melon baller or teaspoon.
Insert the baller or spoon deep into the flesh, twist to turn, then scoop out a ball.
Repeat using as much of the flesh as possible.
Cut the watermelon in half and scoop away as many black seeds as possible from the flesh.
Make balls as before and place in a serving dish with the others, tossing them to mix the colours.
Add the crème fraîche or cream to the honey and Amaretto, if using.
Spoon the mixture over the melon balls.
Place the blanched almonds on a piece of foil, and toast under a hot grill until they are lightly browned.
Cool, then sprinkle over the melon balls in the dish.
Serve immediately.
Adding alcohol
Amaretto liqueur is an Italian almond-flavoured liqueur, so if you like the taste of almonds and Italian amaretti biscuits you're sure to love it.
If you prefer, use any other liqueur or spirit such as brandy,Cointreau or, for something that's refreshingly different, why not try adding Pimms or sparkling white or rosé wine?
CRISP AND REFRESHING SALAD
Adding a succulent melon turns a simple salad into a low-calorie main course
Serves 4–6
Preparation: 15 mins
1 Iceberg lettuce
1 Ogen melon
1 large pickled dill cucumber
225g (80z) seedless grapes
For the dressing:
90ml (6 tbsp) freshly squeezed orange juice
120ml (8tbsp) sunflower oil
pinch each of salt, pepper and sugar
25g (10z) freshly chopped chives
Remove any damaged outer leaves from the lettuce, cut it in half, then place cut side down on a board and thinly shred each half, using a sharp knife.
Place the lettuce pieces in a salad bowl or large mixing bowl.
Cut the melon in half and scoop out the seeds.
Cut into quarters, then peel away the rind.
Chop the quarters into small cubes and add to the salad bowl, along with any juice.
Chop the dill cucumber thinly and add to the bowl.
Wash the grapes and halve them, then toss into the bowl.
To make the dressing: place the orange juice and oil in a screw-top jar with the salt, pepper and sugar.
Replace lid and shake well, then mix in the chives.
Pour over salad.
Toss together, then serve alone or with cold chicken or turkey.
Unusual combinations
Pickled cucumber provides a delicious, sharp contrasting taste to the sweet, succulent melon and grapes in this recipe but if you prefer you could use ⅓ of a medium fresh cucumber instead.
Include prawns for a special treat or add chicken or ham for a really substantial meal.
MAKE A RIPE CHOICE
A good melon should feel heavy for its size, so hold two or three and go for the heaviest.
A ripe melon will smell sweet, and yield slightly at the stalk end.
If the skin is very soft, the melon is over-ripe.
Watermelons should sound hollow when tapped and have a bright, firm flesh with no woodiness.
To ripen melons, keep them at room temperature for a few days, when ripe store in the fridge and eat as soon as possible.
Honeydew melons ripen slowly and will often keep up to a month, but smaller varieties will take less time to ripen.
Serving melons However you serve them, always take melon out of the fridge half an hour before serving, or it will be very bland and tasteless.
If you do not want to scent everything in your refrigerator, keep any ripe melons in a tightly closed plastic bag.
KITCHEN NOTES
News, views and recipe ideas for you each week
Ice cream with a touch of luxury
Did you know that ice cream can be one of the lower calorie desserts?
Slimmers, when tempted by the sweet section of a menu should go for the vanilla ice cream — at around 130 cals a scoop, it beats a wedge of cheesecake (260 cals).
But for a special treat indulge yourself with one of these luxury flavours: English toffee, pecan, Dutch chocolate, strawberry, vanilla and even clotted cream vanilla all from the Cricket St Thomas range of ice creams.
Try this delicious quick dessert: unroll a bought chocolate swiss roll.
Spread with a layer of softened chocolate ice cream and some drained, chopped, canned cherries.
Decorate with whipped cream.
Summer Herbs
The flavour of herbs comes from essential oils in the leaves, stem and flowers.
These are released when heated or crushed.
Herbs are at their best when freshly picked.
If you need to keep them longer, rinse and pat dry and store them in a sealable container in the fridge.
Freeze in a sealed polythene bag, or hang bunches in an airy room until dry, then store in an airtight jar for six months.
Delicate herbs keep their flavour better when frozen.
Tougher herbs are better dried.
CHIVES
Known as ‘the little onion’, this herb is best used raw in salad dressings, or added to dips and sauces, or to flavour savoury butter and egg dishes.
The dried equivalent is quite acceptable.
BASIL
A strongly flavoured herb, used by the Italians, who add it to their tomato-based recipes.
It has a strong aroma and pungent, but slightly sweet taste and is suitable for freezing and drying.
It adds a delicious flavour when used fresh in salads, or with lamb or summer vegetables.
CHERVIL
Used a lot in French cooking, chervil has a delicate, sweet flavour and blends perfectly with fish, chicken, eggs, cheese and many fresh vegetable dishes.
DILL
This slender, feathery herb bears a strong resemblance to fennel.
The leaves have a distinctive aniseed flavour and are also known as ‘dill weed’.
Both leaves and seeds may be used to give a mild, slightly sweet flavour to foods.
Dill is traditionally used in many fish dishes, or as a flavouring for vinegars, fresh vegetables, mayonnaise and dressings.
CORIANDER
This is mainly grown for its spicy seeds, an essential ingredient in Indian dishes.
The leaves are used in Middle Eastern and Greek cooking for their slightly spicy flavour and pungent scent.
Coriander is now widely used in similar ways to parsley — as a garnish, or sparingly in meat dishes.
ON OFFER
Low caffeine tea
Lovers of a good strong cuppa may be interested to know that there may be more caffeine in a cup of tea than in a cup of coffee.
But there is no need to feel discouraged, because there are low caffeine drinks available in the shops — like these PG tea bags that contain only one third of the normal caffeine content.
Here's your chance to sample them.
The first 750 readers to send name and address on a postcard to best PG Low Caffeine offer, will each receive a free pack of 40 tea bags.
QUICK 4 SANDWICH IDEAS
Try these fun-packed ideas for a super Bank Holiday picnic
Niçoise baguette
Slice a French stick in half lengthways and brush the bread with olive oil.
Fill it with a mixture of lettuce, tomatoes, pickled cucumbers, spring onions, tuna fish, hard-boiled eggs and some pitted black olives.
Pastrami on rye
Butter sliced dark rye bread and spread thinly with mustard.
Fill with pastrami (a highly seasoned smoked beef) and watercress.
If pastrami is too strong a flavour for your taste, then use roast beef or ham instead.
Pitta pocket
Slice wholemeal or white pitta bread and fill with cooked chicken, flat-leaved parsley, sliced tomatoes, lettuce, sliced onions and hummus — a Greek chickpea dip available from most large supermarkets and delicatessens.
Italian salad roll
Fill a halved ciabatta roll (these are now available from many supermarkets) or a crusty roll with some salami, lettuce and sliced red or green peppers.
Drizzle a little vinaigrette dressing over the salad.
and even more…
Sliced avocado, mozzarella cheese and tomato, with fresh basil leaves or pesto sauce in lightly buttered soft grain bread.
A long hoagie roll or short French stick split lengthways and filled with lettuce, turkey or ham, mustard, cheese and coleslaw.
Chopped, cooked chicken, sliced mushrooms and mayonnaise in a soft bap.
Granary bread spread with cream cheese, then topped with well-drained pineapple chunks, sliced bananas or chopped dates, plus walnuts or sultanas.
Tip: Always dry lettuce carefully when using it as a filling to prevent sandwiches going soggy.
Midweek Meal
Cut out recipes and keep in plastic folders
Barbecue spare ribs
A really cheap main course that's finger-licking good
Serves 4
1 onion, finely chopped
1 clove garlic, crushed
60ml (4 tbsp) red wine vinegar
45ml (3 tbsp) clear honey
60ml (4 tbsp) tomato ketchup
30ml (2 tbsp) soy sauce
10ml (2tsp) Worcestershire sauce
197g (7oz) can chopped tomatoes
5ml (1 tsp) French mustard
8–12 pork spare ribs
salt and freshly ground black pepper
1 bunch spring onions,
lemon wedges, to serve
METHOD
Place onion and garlic in a large jug.
Add the red wine vinegar, clear honey, tomato ketchup, soy sauce, Worcestershire sauce, canned tomatoes and French mustard, then stir well to mix.
Trim spare ribs of any excess fat, then place in a large roasting tin.
Season generously with salt and freshly ground black pepper.
Pour the barbecue sauce over the spare ribs.
Toss ribs in sauce until completely coated.
Cook for 30 minutes, then turn ribs and coat in the sauce again.
Cook for a further 20–30 minutes, cover with foil and cook for 15 minutes.
Trim spring onions and slice diagonally.
Place ribs in serving dish, garnished with spring onions and wedges of lemons.
Watercress, celery and tomato salad
Quick and easy to prepare and nutritious, too!
Serves 4
For the salad:
1 head celery
1 bunch watercress
100g (4oz) button mushrooms
100g (4oz) cherry tomatoes
For the dressing:
60ml (4 tbsp) olive oil
30ml (2 tbsp) white wine vinegar
10ml (1 tsp) Dijon mustard
pinch of sugar
salt and freshly ground black pepper
METHOD
Trim celery (keeping leaves intact) and wash thoroughly.
Cut into 2.5cm (1″) lengths.
Place in salad serving bowl.
Trim off watercress stalks, rinse and place in serving bowl.
Trim off the mushroom stalks and wipe mushrooms with kitchen paper.
Cut in half and add to bowl.
Remove tomato stalks, rinse and halve.
Add to bowl and toss salad ingredients together gently.
To make the dressing: place olive oil, vinegar, mustard, sugar, salt and freshly ground black pepper in a screwtop jar.
Shake vigorously to mix and pour over salad just before serving.
Toss salad gently to serve.
best tip Never rinse mushrooms under cold running water to clean them — they will go soggy.
All you need to do is to wipe them with absorbent paper.
Potato skins and dip
These make a tasty change to chips or jacket potatoes
Serves 4
For the potato skins:
6 large baking potatoes
15ml (1 tbsp) olive oil
salt
oil for deep frying
For the dips:
300ml (½pt) soured cream
1 bunch freshly chopped chives or 30ml (2 tbsp) dried )
salt and freshly ground black pepper
10ml (2 tsp) tomato ketchup
2 tomatoes, chopped
1 small green pepper, de-seeded and chopped
flat-leaf parsley, to garnish (optional)
METHOD
Preheat oven to 200°C (400°F, gas 6).
Wash potatoes to remove any excess dirt.
Rub a little olive oil over each and sprinkle with a little salt.
Wrap each potato in foil and bake for 1hr 5mins until just tender
Place oil in deep fat fryer.
Meanwhile, make the dips: place half the soured cream in a small bowl, and stir in most of the chives, reserving a few for garnish.
Season.
In another bowl mix the remaining soured cream with ketchup and tomatoes.
Season generously.
Stir in most of the chopped pepper, reserving some for garnish.
Heat oil in deep fat fryer to 190°C (375°F).
Remove potatoes from oven, take out of foil and cut into quarters lengthways.
Scoop out most of the potato, leaving the skin and a layer of potato, to form a boat shape.
Fry 5–6 skins at a time, for 1–2 mins, and drain on absorbent kitchen paper before serving.
Place dips in serving dishes.
Garnish soured cream and chive dip with chives and sprinkle chopped peppers over tomato dip.
Garnish skins with parsley, if using.
Cherry ice cream sundae
Treat yourself to this cool and extravagant dessert
Serves 4
300ml (½pt) whipping cream
397g (14oz) can red cherry pie filling
8 scoops vanilla ice cream
60ml (4 tbsp) chocolate sauce
4 strawberries, sliced
METHOD
Gently whip cream until softly peaking.
Do not overwhip it or it will begin to separate.
Spoon 30ml (2 tbsp) cherry pie filling into the base of 4 tall, sundae-style glasses.
Add a scoop of vanilla ice cream to each glass, then spoon or pipe on 30ml (2 tbsp) of the whipped cream
Top with 45ml (3 tbsp) cherry pie filling, then add another scoop of ice-cream and a big dollop of cream.
Drizzle over the chocolate sauce and top with the sliced strawberries.
Serve immediately.
COOK'S CLASS
Step-by-step TANGY MADEIRA CAKE
Moist, delicious and simple to make, this orange Madeira cake is drenched in a warm honey syrup after baking.
Store the loaf in a cake tin and slice it when needed — it keeps well for up to one week
Preparation: 20 mins
Cooking: 1 hour
For the cake:
175g (6oz) butter
175 (6oz) caster sugar
3 eggs, lightly beaten
100g (4oz) plain flour
100g (4oz) self-raising flour
pinch of salt
2–3 tbsp freshly squeezed orange juice
15ml (1 tbsp) orange rind, grated
For the syrup:
freshly squeezed juice of 1 orange
15ml (1 tbsp) orange rind, finely grated
45ml (3 tbsp) clear honey or golden syrup
15ml (1 tbsp) Cointreau, Grand Marnier or any other orange liqueur (optional)
FREEZING: Wrap in foil or freeze slices in polythene bags for up to 3 months.
MICROWAVE: Not suitable.
STEP 1
Grease and base line a 900g (2lb) loaf tin with baking parchment.
Preheat the oven to 180°C (350° F, Gas 4).
Using a large electric balloon whisk or hand-held electric whisk cream the butter and sugar together until really light and fluffy.
Then whisk in the beaten egg gradually, adding a teaspoon of flour with each addition to stop curdling.
Tip: If it does curdle add a little more flour and whisk again.
STEP 2
Sift the plain and self-raising flours and salt together onto a plate, then sift again directly into the creamed butter and sugar mixture.
Gently fold the flour into the mixture with the orange juice and rind.
Tip: To fold flour in use a large metal spoon in a figure-of-eight motion, as gently as possible, to prevent knocking out any of the air.
(Double sifting of the flour traps more air and helps make the cake lighter).
STEP 3
Spoon the mixture into the prepared tin and spread it level on top using a flat-bladed knife.
Bake in the centre of the oven for approximately 1 hour until golden brown and risen.
Test the centre with a warmed metal skewer — it should come out cleanly, with no cake mixture or crumbs sticking to it.
The cake should also feel springy to the touch.
Tip: Do not overcook cake as it will dry out while cooling in tin.
STEP 4
Place freshly squeezed orange juice and rind, clear honey or syrup and alcohol in a large saucepan and heat gently until honey has dissolved.
Remove the mixture from heat.
Remove cooked cake from oven and leave the cake in the tin.
Pierce small holes on top with a fine skewer.
Pour the syrup over the warm cake and leave until completely cold and all the syrup has been absorbed.
Cook's note
If you fancy adding some cherries to your cake for a fruity change, make sure, when using glacé cherries, that you rinse and dry them thoroughly with kitchen paper before folding into the cake mixture.
You could also add drained, pitted canned cherries.
Toss these in a little flour before folding into the mixture.
This will ensure that they don't sink to the bottom during cooking.
Vary the flavour
Instead of oranges, try the following:
Lemon Use lemons in the basic mixture and syrup.
Vanilla Add 5ml (1 tsp) vanilla essence and 45ml (3 tbsp) milk to the basic mixture and omit the syrup.
Cherry & Kirsch Add 50g (2oz) washed and dried glacé cherries, and 45ml (3 tbsp) milk to basic mixture.
Sprinkle with 30ml (2 tbsp) Kirsch instead of syrup.
ANIMAL WORLD
by David Alderton
AT HOME IN THE WILD
Encouraging BUTTERFLIES into your garden
You can convert your garden into a butterfly haven by simply growing a small nettle patch and planting a few special flowers
Stinging nettles are the most natural breeding ground for some of our prettiest butterflies.
So if you have any growing in a corner of your garden, cut some of them down now and by July there will be fresh growth for butterflies to lay their eggs on.
The peacock, red admiral and small tortoiseshell all lay their eggs on nettles and the young caterpillars feed on the fresh new leaves.
Butterflies feed on nectar collected from flowers and among their favourites are buddleia and sedum.
Try to plan your garden so that there are flowers with energy-giving nectar available right into the autumn.
Michaelmas daisies, which flower as late as October, are a good source of nectar for peacocks and tortoiseshells that need to build themselves up before hibernating for the winter.
The red admiral and painted lady also need to gather their strength ready for the hazardous journey back to southern Europe and North Africa.
For the spring, the pink/purple aubretia flowers are popular among butterflies emerging from hibernation, as are yellow wallflowers.
Breeding
Why not breed caterpillars and release the butterflies into the garden?
Purchase eggs, larvae, pupae and breeding cages from entomological suppliers.
For a brochure, send sae to Butterfly Farm (Christchurch), 6 Westwoods, Box Road, Bathford, Bath.
You can rear caterpillars and release butterflies, like this peacock, into your garden, provided you offer adequate feeding sites such as a bed of nettles
OUR EXPERT REPLIES
My new pair of peach-faced lovebirds produced a clutch of 10 eggs, but none of them has hatched.
Why is this?
Almost certainly because you have two laying hens rather than a pair!
They are impossible to sex by sight, but their average clutch size is less than six eggs.
You can check if they are fertile by holding each egg in front of a bright light.
If the light passes through the egg, it is infertile.
Try to swap one of the hens for a proven cock.
Which mammal has the shortest life-span in the wild?
Evidence suggests that shrews probably have the shortest lives.
The European common shrew, found throughout Britain but not in Ireland, lives for less than a year.
They breed equally rapidly, producing litters of up to 10 and can have three or four litters during their brief lives, so they're among the most prolific, as well.
REVIEWS
CINEMA
The Hard Way
A comedy double-act between the lean, nervy, James Woods and the cheeky, chubby Michael J Fox.
Woods plays an explosive but repressed Manhattan cop, with Fox as a Hollywood matinée idol who decides to shadow him by way of research for a tougher kind of cinematic role.
On the surface their pact is simple enough — Fox willingly teaches Woods about women, and Woods reluctantly teaches Fox about policing.
But their relationship frequently founders, amid much hilarity, on the rocks of the cop's cynicism of silver screen glitz and the actor's naiveté about the tough world of crime.
This is a noisy, rumbustious film that's prone to burying itself in hails of gunshots and sheets of flame.
But director John Badham keeps up the momentum successfully, carrying the action all the way to an improbably happy end.
Over Her Dead Body
Comedy thriller with Judge Reinhold and Elizabeth Perkins as murderous lovers who won't let a corpse stand in their way.
But although Enid's dead she just won't lie down, and has an uncanny knack of making her presence felt at the most inconvenient times.
 Rozencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead
Hamlet , one of Shakespeare's best known tragedies, is transformed into slapstick comedy in this film version of Tom Stoppard's popular play.
Turning the original classic topsy-turvy, Stoppard makes Hamlet himself take a back seat and elevates two minor characters to star status.
VIDEO
Cadillac Man
‘If you don't laugh, you'll cry’ is Robin Williams' motto in this humorous and very human film about Joey, a car salesman who can't resist making a sale, even at a funeral.
Joey's used to dealing with difficult customers, but when he comes face to face with a gun-toting angry young man, it takes all his soothing charm to save the day.
Frightening, frenzied and funny by turn, this makes you less quick to dismiss salesmen as selfish and sly.
She Said No
Courtroom drama.
A rapist (Judd Hirsch) sues his victim (Veronica Hamel) for libel.
Plot similar to The Accused but no less disturbing.
MUSIC
Intro
JJ
This musical duo hail from Manchester and take their name from vocalist Jan Johnston.
Their debut album provides a fine introduction to a pair who avoid grand production techniques, preferring clear vocals, a good tune and simple accompaniments.
Jan's pure voice rings out on quiet tracks such as Denim ,Blue and Going Nowhere , accompanied either by fellow songwriter Tony Kirkham on acoustic guitar or by herself on piano.
The more poppy numbers such as Come Back Baby and Slide Away have a fuller sound with the addition of violin and drums.
JJ's music is like a breath of fresh air.
It may not be very profound, but it is supremely satisfying.
BOOKS
Meridon by Philippa Gregory
Meridon is a gypsy child who dreams of clean clothes and big houses.
Little does she know she's really Sarah, last of the aristocratic Laceys, given to the gypsies at birth.
A runaway horse takes her to her ancestral home, and her past unfolds.
Torn between high society and the life of the workers on the estate, she makes many mistakes before seeing the truth.
Short-listed for this year's romantic fiction award.
(Penguin, £4.99)
Joy by Marsha Hunt
(Arrow, £4.99).
Brilliant story of three sisters who are determined to be famous but are dogged by tragedy.
Maggie Jordan by Emma Blair
(Bantam, £4.99).
Love and politics clash when Maggie falls for a hard-hearted soldier.
James Woods finds it hard to hang on to his sanity in this comic role
Salesman Joey sweet-talks his trickiest customer
Jan and Tony keep it simple with some refreshing results
TRAVEL
LEEDS
A green and pleasant city
No longer industrial and grimy, this Northern metropolis is packed with culture and history.
By Ruth Ling
Since the early 70s, the local council of Yorkshire's largest industrial city has been cleaning up its act.
It has sandblasted 100 years of black soot off Leeds' fine civic buildings to reveal the pale sandstone underneath, turned much of the city centre into a traffic-free pedestrian zone and made their old manufacturing mills into museums.
The council has also built a new art gallery dedicated to local sculptor, Henry Moore, put in an Olympic-sized pool and demolished the squalid 30s housing estate which had been planned as the largest in Europe — in its place stands the brand new West Yorkshire Playhouse.
Add to all that the claim that Leeds has more parkland than any other city in Britain, plus a wealth of historical architecture which dates back to 1152, and it's hardly surprising that England's third largest city is now fast becoming a very popular UK holiday destination.
Wander around the centre, and you could be forgiven for thinking that the whole of Leeds was built in Victorian days.
Its ornate Town Hall was completed in 1858 and was ceremonially opened by Queen Victoria herself, while the oval, glass-domed Corn Exchange was erected three years later.
These, and the many other fine Victorian buildings in the city, were paid for by the fortunes made in the 19th century in the wool manufacturing and tailoring trades.
But, outside the city centre, the architecture changes, especially with Kirkstall Abbey, the earliest surviving building in the area.
Cistercian monks arrived there in 1152 and built their large abbey in some remote fields close to the banks of the River Aire.
Today, the remarkably well-preserved ruins of the church, Abbot's House and Infirmary are set in an attractive, wooded park — though surrounded by an incongruous mass of streets and factories.
Adjacent to the monastery, in what used to be the Great Gate-house, is the Abbey House Museum with three reconstructed Victorian streets.
Just south of Kirkstall Abbey is Armley Mills, once the world's largest woolen mill.
It's now an award-winning industrial museum, and features a recreation of the city's Jewish tailoring quarter.
There's also an exhibition and 20s-style Picture Palace at Armley Mills on the early history of the movies because it was at nearby Leeds Bridge, in 1888, that the first moving images were made.
The event is marked by a plaque on the Museum of Leeds Trail, which links 40 historic sites in the city.
There are more moving images at Middleton, in south-east Leeds, where the world's first commercial railway was opened to carry truckloads of coal from Middleton Colliery to the city's mills.
Today, it's a museum with several vintage locomotives, and you can ride in an old train pulled by a steam engine.
As well as the railways, it was the Leeds and Liverpool Canal, completed in 1816, which put the city on the map.
These days, the Canal Basin bustles not with goods but with pleasure boats.
The locks and warehouses behind the City Station have been restored as Granary Wharf.
Here, beneath the Victorian vaulted brick arches, is the Arches Craft Arcade of 22 shops complete with outdoor markets and entertainment at weekends.
Leeds has always had a great market tradition: the original Penny Bazaar, forerunner of Marks & Spencer, was founded in the city in 1884 by Michael Marks.
But perhaps the grandest shopping to be had in the area is at the Victoria Quarter.
It's a wonderfully decorative place: everywhere you look, there are marble columns, mosaics, mechanical tableau clocks, decorative  terracotta, wrought iron gates and fountains.
Steel columns support the vaulted, domed glass ceilings.
When you're footsore from walking the city streets, make a visit to Roundhay Park, with its landscaped gardens and woods and the Waterloo Lake, where you can hire a boat or go fishing.
Leeds City Council has made great provisions for handicapped people in all its buildings and public places, and at Roundhay Park there are scented gardens for the blind.
The park also hosts the Leeds Show and major pop concerts and has tennis courts, bowling and putting greens, a sports arena and a golf course.
Further afield, there are stately homes to visit, such as Harewood House and Temple Newsam.
Leeds is well-equipped for sports, with 21 golf courses and 22 sports and leisure centres, but if all this action leaves you feeling in need of a rest, you can always take yourself off to the theatre.
Leeds has four to choose from.
Most famous is the Leeds City Varieties, one of the oldest music halls in the country and home of BBC TV's The Good Old Days .
There's also the Grand Theatre, which hosts touring companies and is the permanent home of Opera North.
One of Yorkshire's famous sayings is ‘Where there's muck, there's brass’.
And, while there may not be a lot of muck any more, there is still plenty of brass.
For, when it comes down to it, there's nothing to beat a brass band.
There's always one to be heard somewhere during the summer — in the piazza in front of the art gallery and Town Hall or in a park.
Whether it's the Police Band or one from a nearby mill town, there are fewer nicer ways to end a summer day in Leeds than to sit in a deckchair at sunset, listening to the haunting sound of the trumpets and trombones.
For further information contact the Tourist Information Centre,
Where to stay
Leeds has a variety of accommodation, from the modern four-star Ladbroke Dragonara and Hilton Hotels, close to the station, to homely B&B guesthouses in the Headingley area, two miles from the the city centre, and university and college residences during the vacations.
For 30s elegance and personal service, there's the imposing Queen's Hotel, overlooking City Square, while the modern Merrion Hotel is convenient for nightclubs.
The Tourist Information Centre has full accommodation details.
Getting there
By road The A1, M1, M621 and M62 are all within a five minute drive of the centre.
By rail Intercity from all over the country.
By Coach National Express to Leeds.
By air Leeds–Bradford Airport is at Yeadon, seven miles west of Leeds.
Traditional fayre
Yorkshire is famous for its roast beef and Yorkshire pudding, and many of the city's top hotels have carveries specialising in this dish, such as the Ridings Roast Room at the Queen's Hotel.
Fish and chips are a Northern favourite and always fresh here, but for a real treat go to Harry Ramsden's at nearby Guiseley, said to be the largest fish and chip shop in the world — and, with its plush decor and chandeliers, a very chic chippie!
Leeds has some splendid pubs, such as Whitelocks, a pretty Edwardian tavern in a hidden yard off Briggate, which has magnificent old cut glass, tiles and mirrors.
The TIC can tell you about the local brewers Tetleys' Heritage Inns, including the 1,000-year-old Bingley Arms at Bardsey.
Don't forget to take some Yorkshire parkin home with you — this delicious dark gingerbread is available from any good cake shop!
For fish and chips with an upmarket flavour, visit Harry Ramsden's in Guiseley
The first moving images were made at Leeds Bridge
You can hire a boat or go fishing at Waterloo Lake
The City Square (left), is perfect for a rest after an afternoon's shopping in the pedestrianised centre, just a few minutes walk away.
Or there's Thornton's Arcade (above), one of several glass-roofed malls built by Edwardian theatre designer Frank Matcham at the turn of the century
Harewood House, a few miles north of Leeds, contains the richest collection of Chippendale furniture in the world
Have a city break
You don't have to go into the country to have a relaxing holiday
Fourteen cities are taking part in a campaign to attract more tourists.
Sixty hotels in places like Birmingham, Manchester and Swansea are offering two nights B&B on any weekend this year from £26 per person.
Telephone 0792 650891 for details.
Culture city
Following Glasgow last year, Dublin is European City of Culture 1991.
Highlights are Bloomsday, from June 16, when James Joyce is commemorated with readings and walking tours; an Irish street party on August 18, and the Dublin Theatre Festival on October 7–19.
Trusthouse Forte has two-night breaks in its Dublin International Hotel or Shelbourne Hotel -telephone 0345 500400 for details.
Brighter Birmingham
With the opening of the International Convention Centre the city hopes to put itself on the tourist map.
The Hippodrome Theatre is now the home of the Royal Ballet and the Alexandria Theatre boasts the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company.
Cadbury World at Bournville tells the story of chocolate and there's a collection of historic cars at nearby Autoworld.
‘Warm-Hearted Weekends’ are being offered at a selection of hotels for £22 or £26 B&B per night (tel 021-780 4321 for further information).
Highland dancing will mark Dundee's 800th anniversary
Visit the Royal Doulton Pottery in Stoke-on-Trent
Go on a ‘Grand Tour’ with British Heritage Tours (0244 344222).
In Portsmouth, for instance, you stay at the Hilton Hotel and visit HMS Victory (above and right)
5 MINUTE FICTION
Perfect alibi…
The evening class had been Amanda's way of escaping her boring husband for a few hours.
Now it offered her the chance to get away from him for ever…
By Geoff Gomme
Elation filled Amanda.
It was perfect.
So simple, she wondered why the idea hadn't occurred to her before.
A slight adjustment to the mower and — poof!
Goodbye George.
At first, like her many other activities, the home maintenance course at the Adult Education Centre had been just a desperate device to take her away from the boredom of George.
But tonight's lesson, dealing with electrical fittings, had been a revelation.
Tonight she'd seen the way to get rid of him for good.
As she walked the short distance home, the lecturer's words ran through her mind.
‘Hundreds of people get killed every year using faulty domestic electrical appliances,’ he'd warned.
‘Bad connections, damaged leads, incorrectly wired equipment are lethal.
That's why it's so important…’
But that was when Amanda's attention had wandered.
She'd seen the possibilities at once.
All she had to do was cross a couple of wires and George would become just another victim of a tragic domestic ‘accident’.
She knew there'd be no chance indoors — George never attempted even the smallest job about the house.
But there was one job he took pride in.
Every Saturday morning — weather permitting — he mowed the lawn.
And the mower was electric…
Amanda flung off her coat in the hall and walked briskly into the lounge.
There was George — dull, dreary George — sprawled full-length on the settee, his nose deep in a book as usual.
Amanda snorted.
‘Huh!
Is that all you've done the whole evening — read?’
‘Mmm,’ George muttered, without looking up.
Amanda glared down at him.
How his eternal reading infuriated her.
Why she'd married him she couldn't imagine.
It hadn't taken her long to discover that they had nothing whatsoever in common.
He never wanted to go anywhere or do anything, while she craved excitement — a bit of sparkle in her life.
Well, after Saturday, she wouldn't have far to go to find it…
Dave Wise had moved in next door a month ago.
He was lively, witty and darkly handsome — the exact opposite of George.
The moment their eyes met, Amanda knew she wanted him.
She didn't doubt for one minute that the feeling was mutual.
They were two of a kind — extroverted and fun-loving.
Unfortunately, he was also married.
Not that his mousey little wife was any match for her own looks and personality, Amanda thought contemptuously.
She was almost as boring as George.
Amanda stalked into the kitchen and plugged in the kettle.
‘Coffee?’
‘Yes please, dear.’
Astonishing how acute his hearing could be where his stomach was concerned.
She carried the two steaming mugs into the lounge, setting one down near George's elbow.
Without lifting his eyes from the book he was reading he groped with his hand to find it.
Amanda watched.
How many times had she watched him do that?
And how many times had she thought how easy it would be to poison him?
But she'd always rejected the idea.
Poison was too easily detected.
No, she thought grimly, what she'd learned tonight was a much better way.
Amanda sipped her coffee, letting her mind dwell pleasurably on thoughts of the future.
Saturday was fine and sunny.
Amanda beamed — now George had no excuse for not mowing the lawn.
Still, it was best to make sure.
‘The grass is a bit long, will you be mowing it this morning, George?’
George looked up irritably from his bacon and eggs.
‘Don't I always?’ he snapped.
‘What makes you ask?’
‘Just wondered, dear,…’
George seemed bad-tempered this morning — unusual for him, she thought.
In the hall she chose the prettiest coat she had.
It seemed to match her mood.
‘I'm helping to set out the stalls for the hospital bazaar — should be back about midday,’ she called, as she let herself out of the house.
By 10 minutes to 12 everything was ready for the bazaar, so Amanda set out for home, tingling with a mixture of excitement and fear.
Had ‘it’ happened yet?
Suppose George wasn't dead, only injured?
Suppose someone had seen her yesterday, tinkering with the mower?
Suppose…?
But it was no use imagining; in a few minutes she would know everything.
As she turned the corner into Perry Street her heart began to pound.
Outside No 26 a crowd had gathered.
At the kerb-side stood an ambulance and a police car.
It had worked!
She had done it.
George was dead.
She was free.
Now everything was hers: the house, George's savings.
And Dave.
Two ambulance-men crossed the pavement, carrying a stretcher.
On it was a blanket-covered figure.
It had to be George.
As she drew closer, a burly, red-faced police sergeant detached himself from the crowd and moved towards her, notebook in hand.
‘Mrs Atkins?’
Amanda clapped her hand to her heart.
‘My God!
George.
Is — is he…?’
‘Don't worry, Mrs Atkins, your husband is alive and perfectly well.’
‘Alive?’
Her dismay showed all too plainly on her face.
‘But then, who…?’
‘I'm afraid the man who died was your neighbour, Mr David Wise.’
Dave?
Amanda stared open-mouthed at the sergeant, her knees suddenly weak.
‘Your husband was very lucky.
Your neighbour's car wouldn't start, so he offered to take Mrs Wise in his if Mr Wise mowed his lawn…’
Amanda began to shake uncontrollably.
Suddenly she felt sick.
She'd killed the wrong man!
Through her daze she slowly became aware of the sergeant's voice.
‘…found that someone has tampered with the wiring of the mower.
It's too obvious to be accidental.
Perhaps you could shed some light on that, Mrs Atkins…?’
The way he was looking at her, it was obvious he knew the truth.
‘No, no, no!’
Amanda tried to scream, but no sound came from her parched throat.
The sergeant's face was cold.
‘Nevertheless, Mrs Atkins, I would appreciate it if you could answer a few questions down at the station…’
George and Penny watched the scene through the window of No 28, their hands tightly entwined.
‘Well, darling,’ George murmured.
‘Everything's worked out well for us — thanks to you spotting Amanda fiddling with the mower.’
Penny snuggled closer.
‘You were the clever one — fixing our car so that it wouldn't start.’
George chuckled.
‘That was easy.
The tricky part was the mower.
The way Amanda had it rigged, it wouldn't have killed a sparrow…’
If you'd like to submit to the fiction page, please send your manuscripts (1,400 words approx) to the Fiction Editor at the address on page 3 in April or October only.