

Building Defects and their Treatment
Decay and Repair of Timber
It is mainly rot or insect attack which affects the serviceability of timber structures.
When an attack is found, it is advisable to obtain the view of a specialist who will be able to identify the type of decay and advise on the treatment of the timber, including designating any parts that should be removed.
There fungal decay is found, this expert should specify the cause and suggest measures for its elimination.
Clearly, the existence of timber decay is likely to be related to other shortcomings in the condition of the building and these faults may require rectification in addition to treatment of the timber.
Problems may have been built into the original design through the inadequate protection of timber from ground moisture, lack of ventilation or roof-slopes which were insufficiently steep to drain away all rainwater.
Equally, defects may be owed to some earlier modification of the original arrangement or construction and these changes need to be identified and corrected.
This circumstance could include the bridging of an original dpc by ‘remedial’ rendering applied over insufficiently weather-tight brickwork.
More probably, decay and deterioration of materials and installations is the result of lack of maintenance, the results of which may include blocked or broken rainwater drains, displaced roof tiles or peeling paint finishes, all of which can lead to timber decay.
Rot in Timber
Timber decay which is not owed to insect action is normally the result of fungal attack.
It aids understanding of these phenomena to recognise that the function of all timber pests is to break down and convert dead trees into soil, allowing new trees unimpeded growth.
The fact that the dead wood has been shaped for use as a building material is of no consequence to a fungus or a beetle.
The fungi are parasitical and can only live by feeding on organic matter, including wood and leaves.
In contrast to most plants, they breathe in oxygen and give out carbon dioxide.
All fungi require about 20 per cent moisture content in the host wood to germinate and although in new buildings the moisture content of the timber may be as high as 18 per cent, this is soon reduced to about 12–14 per cent by heating and ventilation of the enclosed spaces.
Therefore, in a sound, dry building there is no need to fear fungal attack.
The most serious and devastating wood fundus and the species most frequently found in old building is dry rot or Serpula lachrymans .
Having established itself in damp timber, this infection can spread to dry wood and brickwork.
Its life-cycle starts with a spore, of which there are countless millions in the atmosphere.
These spores are highly resistant tot extremes of heat and humidity and are very long-lived.
A spore which lands on wood with a moisture content of 20–25 per cent in a still and stuffy atmosphere where the temperature is between 7° and 27$C (44$ and 80$F) can germinate and then throw out hollow strands known as hyphae.
These initially hair-like fibres seek out and feed off the cellulose in the wood which is digested by the fungus to leave a dry, desiccated and fragile shell of wood-fibre or lignin which, in the absence of the cementitious cellulose, cannot continue to perform any structural role required of the timber.
Having drawn the cellulose from one section of the wood, the hyphae reach on to adjacent sections of timber to continue the process, while the strands of the initial attack unite into an equally fast-spreading cotton-wool-like growth known as mycelium.
In the later stages of an attack, strands called rhizomorphs develop from the mycelium to convey moisture from the decomposing wood to sound timber many feet away, weeping ‘tears’ on to it until it, too, is subjugated and ripe for attack.
When this action is well established, the fungus will produce a sporophore, or fruiting body, which produces millions of spores.
The sporophore is at first a whitish-grey, unpleasant-looking fleshy growth and gradually becomes more leathery and dewy.
It bursts at internals to release into the atmosphere an enormous number of rusty-red spores which are carried on the breeze to germinate in distant damp timber, starting the process afresh.
Dry rot exhibits an almost uncanny knowledge of the presence of timber and is able to thrust through brickwork mortar joints and to travel across brickwork behind plaster over great distances in its search for fresh food.
In this respect, it is quite capable of spreading from one building to another through a thick party wall.
Evidence of the existence of dry rot may be found in a musty smell pervading a suspect space; the presence of a whitish cotton-wool-like fungal growth on timber; cracking and bulging of joinery mouldings such as skirtings and door linings owed to the shrinkage of hidden fixing timber which has been attacked by the fungus; and readily apparent ravaged timber showing deep cracks across the grain, giving a ‘cubed’ appearance.
Once dry rot has been discovered, the only remedy is extermination of the fungus together with the rectification of the unhealthy conditions which invited the attack.
The fungus has no heart nor ‘Achilles’ heal and unless it is completely destroyed to its limits, it will develop fresh strength and start again to devour the timberwork.
There are two possible strategies for the treatment of an attack of dry rot.
The building owner may either employ a builder to carry out the work or opening up and eradication, or he may call in one of the numerous specialist firms to deal with the attack.
If a builder is entrusted with the work, it must be ensured through a full briefing and careful supervision that only conscientious, knowledgeable and skilled tradesmen are employed who are able to give rational advice on the proper nature and extent of the remedial treatment if the initial assessment of the degree of damage proves to be inaccurate.
The advantage of employing a specialist firm is that its tradesmen are more likely to be well trained and experienced in this field of building preservation, with a thorough and successful job being a more certain result.
However, it should be clear that any firm which issues a guarantee must inevitably err on the side of over-zealousness, which will add to expense.
The first step in eradicating dry rot is to find the heart of the outbreak and to trace its extent with great care and thoroughness.
Each branch of the fungus must be traced from its source to the growing tip, and finishes should be opened up to reveal timber 1/2m (1–1/2ft) beyond the affected material.
Floorboards, plaster, timber trim, including architraves and skirting boards, and other finishes (including apparently impenetrable tiling) must be removed from timber and masonry if the slightest suspicion exists that the fungus has reached beneath or behind them.
When the full extent of the attack is known, treatment can begin.
If fruiting bodies are present, these should be treated with fungicide to prevent the spread of air-borne spores.
Then all infected timber is cut out so that all affected wood, including apparently sound wood up to 1/2m (1–1/2ft) away from the visible extremities of the attack, is removed.
Where important structural timbers are infected but have not been weakened by the fungus, it may be practical to treat them with fungicide to retain them.
All fungus-infected timber which has been removed should be burned immediately together with any shavings or sawdust from the infected area.
Brickwork into which the mycelium has spread and any masonry which adjoins an outbreak must be similarly poisoned.
If a structural wall is too thick to absorb the fungicide to its core, it must be drilled with a series of holes into which the liquid is injected in order to permeate the entire thickness.
Wherever possible, walls should be treated from both sides.
Leading gutters and roofs, defective rainwater downpipes, mounding of adjacent soil which bridges the dpc and all other sources of dampness must be removed.
Poorly ventilated and stagnant spaces must be opened up to a constant current of air by the introduction of new ventilation openings as even a vigorous attack of dry rot can be arrested (but not reduced) by exposure to fresh air.
New timbers inserted as replacements should be thoroughly treated from every face against infection.
Common chemical treatments include pressure impregnation with copper, chrome or arsenic salts.
These are industrial processes carried out only to order unless the use of ‘treated’ timber in the rebuilding is specified from the outset.
The chemicals are water-borne and the timber takes a long time to dry out.
Even though these treatments drive the chemicals into the timber to a much greater depth than surface application by spray or brush, the wood may not be completely impregnated, particularly in the heartwood, so that notches and ends cut on site after treatment must be dipped in preservative or touched up with a brush.
If this is not done, the protection is bypassed.
Other forms of fungal decay of timber in buildings are relatively unimportant because they are not able to spread to sound wood.
However, they do indicate the existence of unhealthy conditions in which more serious trouble could develop.
As this observation suggests, combined or separate attacks from dry rot and other less voracious fungi are common in neglected and decaying buildings.
These minor fungi are generally termed wet rot.
Coniophora cerebella , or the cellar fungus, is the most common.
It cannot live on timber with a moisture content of less than 25 per cent and thus is usually found in situations too damp for dry rot.
The fungus can be identified by its fine dark brown or black strands and its green and leathery fruiting body.
A paper-thin shell of sound wood is left on the surface of the infected timber which shows deep cracks along the grain but rarely across it as may result from dry rot.
Eradication of the less serious fungi is usually a simple matter of cutting out and burning the infected timber.
However, it is wise to treat the area with fungicide as a precaution against any subsequent outbreak of dry rot which could be encouraged as the construction dries out.
Insect Action on Timber
The destructive action of beetles on timber is rarely as serious as fungal attack because an infected section is only weakened by the combined cross-sectional area of the tunnels it contains — the strength of the surrounding wood remains unimpaired.
Beetle attack which has ceased requires little attention except for any necessary repairs to the damaged timbers.
In contrast, an active attack should not be left unattended and can be identified by the clean appearance of the ‘flight holes’ and the little patches and piles of fresh bore dust which fall from them.
The main insect enemies of timber in buildings are the death-watch beetle and the common furniture beetle and the two are often found together.
It is at the larva stage of their development when boring and feeding of the grubs takes place that the damage is caused because the adult beetles do not eat and they live only for a short time.
The different species can be identified by the different sizes of their flight holes and sometimes by the type of wood attacked.
In early summer, the beetles themselves may also be found.
The death-watch beetle has a life cycle of three to ten years depending upon the nature of the timber it inhabits.
It lays its eggs in any cracks or crevices in suitable timber — hardwood is preferred, particularly the outer and softer layers of sapwood.
Timber which has already been affected by fungus or decay offers a special attraction.
The attack is usually concentrated in damp and more easily edible wood such as built-in bonding timbers, the eaves ends of rafters and the vearing ends of beams and trusses.
After the grubs have eaten extensive ‘galleries’ in the wood over a period of years, with the resultant dust being emitted in bun-shaped pellets, the larva enters a pupal stage lasting three to six weeks and emerges as a fully grown beetle.
It remains in its pupal chamber until the following spring and emerges in April, May or June to seek a mate.
It is at this time that the characteristic tapping sound which gives the beetle its name can be heard.
The flight holes are about 3mm (1/8in) in diameter.
An attack may die out if the timber becomes hard and unpalatable to the beetle with age and correct maintenance.
The common furniture beetle can be found in both hardwood and softwood, chiefly in the sapwood from close to the bark.
Therefore, it is a more serious pest in the lighter construction adopted in post-medieval buildings where the proportion of sapwood is high.
Although, as is apparent in ‘woodworm’ damage to furniture, flight holes frequently appear in polished surfaces, the eggs are laid in cracks, joints and unvarnished recesses.
They hatch out in 3–4 weeks and the larvae bore into the wood.
After a period of 12–36 months, the last 2–3 weeks of which are spent in a pupal stage near the surface, the grub becomes a fully grown beetle.
It immediately finds its way to the surface and emerges to mate in the months of June, July or August.
The flight holes of the furniture beetle are smaller than those of the death-watch beetle and are about 1.5mm (1/16in) in diameter.
Wet or damaged timber is the appetising food for the insect but apparently sound wood may be equally badly afflicted.
The house longhorn beetle is another insect pest which seems to be confined to parts of Hampshire and south-west Surrey.
It is found mainly in timbers less than fifty years old and is a much larger insect than the furniture beetle.
Its larvae bore voraciously to and fro along the grain of the wood, generally under a thin, intact surface.
The beetle emerges in June or August via a few and scattered flight holes about 6–12mm (1/4–1/2in) long which inadequately represent the true extent of the unseen damage.
Only fresh, sound wood is affected.
As applies in the treatment of fungal attack, in the eradication of insect pests it is necessary to identify the unhealthy conditions which have invited the attack, and to cure them at source.
Dampness and lack of ventilation are as welcoming to insects as they are to wood fungi and once these conditions are rectified the beetles will feel less inclined to stay.
All local dust, dirt and rubbish should be cleared away, partly to remove conditions congenial to the beetles but also to facilitate treatment with insecticide.
The full extent of the attack must be discovered in order to assess its severity.
It is important to differentiate between timbers which have been so badly eaten that their strength has been reduced, necessitating replacement, and those which, though damaged, still contain enough sound wood to continue their original jobs.
Timber which is so severely honeycombed that it is virtually useless — termed ‘frass’— is likely to coincide with the sapwood content of structural timber.
Thus some affected beams which are riddled with holes and appear to be useless, may be found, on investigation, to contain solid heartwood quite adequate to perform their structural roles.
The most extensive and expensive part of the work in some cases is the initial removal of wholly infested wood and beetle-riddled frass.
The latter can be removed by scraping or wire-brushing.
All infested wood must be cleared away and burnt and related constructional cavities must be cleaned out carefully.
When the sound timber is clean and readily accessible it can be treated with insecticide.
The methods of application are brushing, spraying and injection.
The technique in brush application should be to spread the liquid generously over the surface and onto cracks.
Spraying is carried out with a coarse spray at low pressure.
Where the bearings of timbers are inaccessible, it may be necessary to drill deep holes for saturation of the buried beams' ends by injection.
Because flight holes connect with sub-surface galleries bored by the insects, injection into these cavities is also a good means of impregnating hidden material with insecticide.
Generally, sound timbers, such as wallplates and lintels which are built into masonry and which show only one or two surfaces to the building interior, may be treated by coating their exposed faces with a thick ‘mayonnaise’ preservative paste.
The success of the treatment depends very much on the skill and intelligence of the operatives and careful supervision to ensure that attention is given to the full extent of affected areas.
Plainly, this process is facilitated if the working areas are readily accessible, well lit and well ventilated.
Any new timber which is introduced into the treated areas in repair or replacement work should also be treated with preservative containing an insecticide.
In practice, the proprietary liquids which are used in the pressure-vacuum impregnation of timber against fungal attack also contain insecticides and effectively identical products are available through builders' merchants and DIY outlets for brush and spray application on site.
In-situ Repair of Timber
In addition to rot and insect attack which may be regarded as defects intrinsic to timber, problems also arise from the way timber elements of traditional buildings were assembled.
Frequent use was made of the bressummer arrangement described in the preceding chapter for the introduction of large openings, such as shopfronts, into pre-existing buildings.
Many such heavy timber beams supporting joists of the first floor were inserted into existing buildings in such a way that their ends may have had an inadequate bearing on to slender timber ‘storey posts’ installed adjacent to the party walls.
Intermediate storey posts were sometimes added to support these bressummers and the wall above.
Problems often develop where bressummers and storey posts were installed in an existing building because of progressive sagging of the timber as well as the crushing effect of the superincumbent masonry and the onset of rot.
In later Victorian buildings, iron beams and columns replaces timber in this arrangement.
Where these members were built into the original construction, such problems would be less likely, but the causes of defects and deterioration associated with bressummers should be identified, particularly if it is the intention to increase loads upon these elements.
Conspicuous distortion of a broad opening spanned by a bressummer may call for the insertion of diagonal steel bracing, brick piers to stiffen flank walls and new intermediate supports.
A more common problem in timber upper floors and suspended ground floors is the rotting of joist-ends above built-in wallplates.
When ‘untreated’ timber (ie, wood which has not been impregnated with preservative) is built into solid walls, it has no protection from dampness in the wall and it is common for joist-ends to be shielded by a skin of brickwork only a half-a-brick thick (Fig 31).
Such joist-ends will decay if their moisture content remains over 20 per cent for long periods.
Unfortunately, there are usually no signs of an impending problem before structural failure occurs.
Moss growth on an external solid wall may suggest that the wall and its built-in joist-ends have been subjected to damp.
This condition can be corrected by temporarily propping the floor, cutting out the rotten joist-ends, treating the sound timber to be retained with preservative and restoring support to the joists through a bracket or joist-hangers (Fig 32).
The wall-plate, which is likely to be decayed, should also be removed.
Where decay has advanced along the joist into the building interior, it may be necessary to splice on a new timber end to the member, carried on a joist-hanger.
The length of this splice and the size of the bolt for making the connection depends upon floor span, loading, spacing of joists and distance of the splice from the support, but for a 4m (13ft) span in domestic-type work, with joists at 400mm (16in) centres, the splice would be 610mm (24in) long with two 12mm (1/2in) diameter bolts installed 400mm (16in) apart over 75mm (3in) square toothed-plate connectors.
To ensure that the wall retains adequate lateral restraint after the joists have been rehung, stainless steel straps at about 1,200mm (48in) centres should be installed.
In some circumstances, it may prove more economical to replace complete joists.
Overloaded or lightly structured timber floors are also likely to deflect or sag, producing a dished or sloping floor surface.
This condition is worsened by the cutting of notches in the joists to house sub-floor services like heating pipes.
Consequently, excessive deflection, or, in extreme cases, collapse, can occur.
It is often possible to fill these notches with hardwood wedges.
This measure does not correct the existing deflection but it stiffens the floor to imposed load.
Where it is not possible to strengthen a sagging floor by the addition of secondary timbers relieving the overloaded joists, it may be feasible to strengthen any integral timber beams by inserting steel flitch plates into slots formed in these members (Fig 33).
Alternatively, where access is available, steel strengthening plates can be added to a beam's top and bottom surfaces to form flanges.
These two techniques, and the addition of steel side or cross-rods respectively to strengthen individual beams or entire joisted floors at mid-span, all involve the substitution of metal for overstressed wood in the part of the member that is subject to tensile stress.
Roof trusses, as well as timber floors, can fail in a variety of ways, and failure by crushing at the joint of the principal rafter with the tie is assisted by any decay which affects this area.
As this joint is usually close to the bearing of the truss, it may be possible to repair a truss comprising small timber members with plywood gusset plates (Fig 34).
There also exists a range of specialised repair methods which use epoxy resins.
These substances are able to permeate and saturate partly decayed timber.
On hardening, the resin/timber combination acquires high strength and rigidity more akin to the cured resin than to timber.
This material will also bond well to stainless steel rods so that badly decayed timber can be drilled, stitched and glued to achieve higher strengths than the original construction.
However, this is a very expensive process which is usually reserved for repairs to failed joints in ancient timber-framed structures where the removal and replacement of individual members is impracticable.
Defects in Roof Coverings
Where a sloping roof was originally erected to the correct pitch (ie, the roof was not constructed at too shallow a slope, which would cause rain to penetrate its covering of slates or tiles) defects are invariably owed to the deterioration of the roof covering or the breakdown of joints between materials, which in roofs usually means outworn metal valley-gutters, dislodged hip and ridge cappings and deformed or poorly repaired flashings.
Slates eventually decay because of their reaction with weak acids formed from sulphur and other atmospheric pollutants dissolved in rainwater.
The slates ‘exfoliate’ and begin to absorb, rather than resist, moisture.
Slated urban roofs are likely to have reached this state after about eighty years.
The ‘grip’ of the slate on its fixing nails is not assisted by this reduction in rigidity and dislodged slates seen on old roof-slopes may have slipped because decay has affected the parts of each slate closest to the fixing nails.
A more usual reason for slipped slates is corrosion of the original iron fixing mails.
The weight of a slate will eventually sever the rusted shanks of iron nails and high winds encourage such dislodged slates to slip further out of place.
Where the general condition of a slated roof-slope is good, slipped slates may be resited by extracting the remains of the corroded fixings from beneath the overlapping course with a slater's ripper.
The head of a narrow strip of lead, zinc or copper, which will form a clip or ‘tingle’, is then fixed to the sliver of batten accessible through the joint exposed by the extracted slate and the slate is slid back into place over this strip and secured by folding the free end of the metal over the lower edge of the slate (Fig 35).
This clip fixing of slipped slates is merely an expedient which cannot forever put off the day when the permanent refixing or renewal of the entire roof covering is necessary.
There are two forms of sub-slate roof-deck construction favoured by the traditional builders which may store up serious problems for restorers of old buildings once a breach has occurred in the roof covering.
The first potentially troublesome arrangement involved the nailing of the slates to timber battens in the conventional way, but these battens were first fixed to boarding or ‘sarking’ nailed to the top surfaces of the rafters.
Even where a bituminous felt layer was laid on top of the boarding, this form of construction is likely to compound problems of rainwater penetration once a gap appears in the roof covering because the water which enters, instead of draining out of the construction at the eaves, settles on the upper edges of the local slate-fixing battens, inducing rot both in them and the boarding.
Equally bad from the point of view of damp exclusion in the circumstance of a breach appearing in the roof surface, and even worse in terms of the restrictions it places on the opportunities for salvaging slates in any wholesale reconditioning of the roof covering, is the arrangement in which the slates are nailed directly to boarding, no fixing battens having been incorporated.
If this form of construction cannot be identified from an inspection of voids in the roof surface made from the exterior, it may be possible to deduce whether or not it applies by noting the pattern of nails which have penetrated into the roof-space through the boarding.
Such an inspection should also help to identify any dampness or rot which has affected the boarding.
Where such decay is well advanced, complete replacement of the roof cladding with a boarded, counterbattened and battened construction, including underslating felt and a new slated surface, may be required.
Defective tiled roofs can produce problems identical to those posed by ageing slate roofs, but because clay plain tiles are necessarily hung on battens (not every tile is nailed except on very steeply pitched roofs) and it is not possible simply to apply tiles direct to a boarded surface as in the case of a slate covering, the problem of rotting roofing battens and sarking does not arise in connection with tiling.
Much more common in tile roofing — as it was in the cheapest form of slated roof — was ‘open batten’ construction in which the tiles are hung on battens fixed directly to the top surfaces of the rafters without any intermediate boarding.
It is in snowy weather that owners of buildings roofed in this way most regret this form of construction because wind-blown powdery snow easily enters narrow chinks in the roof surface, and where there is no underslating felt (as applies in most old constructions), the snow settles between the ceiling joists, later melting and saturating ceilings and other internal finishes.
Tiles are less durable than slates, but good quality clay plain tiles can easily last for sixty years.
Because the majority of tiles are simply hooked on to the battens, it is easier to replace a slipped or broken tile with a new unit than it is to replace a nail-fixed tile.
Owing in part to their lower cost, it has become popular in recent years to replace both clay plain tiles and slates with interlocking concrete tiles.
This policy can produce further problems.
Where roof-spaces are not well ventilated (as occurs when a roof is reclad with a more windproof and watertight construction), the close-textured nature of the concrete tiles which contrasts with the relative porosity of clay tiles may encourage the formation of condensation on their undersides, encouraging dampness and rot in stagnant roof-spaces.
More seriously, because the tiles are much heavier than either slates or clay tiles, the simple replacement of one of these traditional coverings with concrete units, where no steps have been taken to strengthen a lightly structured roof, is likely, at best, to result in deflection of the roof surface (sagging of concrete tile replacement roof surfaces is a common sight in older houses).
At worst, collapse of the roof structure may result.
Such a circumstance is far less likely to arise if defective slating is replaced either with a new natural slate roof or a surface of one of the several types of lightweight synthetic slate that are now obtainable.
A common weakness of the joint between materials in roofing results from the replacement of outworn lead flashings with a splayed mortar fillet at the junction of the roof surface with projecting chimney-stack or party-wall-parapet brickwork.
Eventual breakdown of the bond between the mortar and the brickwork introduces an open joint which draws in moisture down the back of the small lead or zinc soakers which are incorporated to drain from the roof edge any moisture that penetrated the mortar (Fig 36).
The only enduring solution to this problem is the replacement of the mortar fillet and soakers with a carefully installed sheet-lead stepped flashing.
Asphalt was often used as a flat-roof surface in older buildings in locations where it was appreciated that a sheet-metal covering would prove unsuitable because of the very large area of roof or where regular foot traffic was anticipated.
It was also used as the finish for small or irregularly shaped subsidiary roofs over bays and porches, etc.
Where it was used to coat a sloping surface, it is likely that defects will emerge, inviting water penetration, because the material tends to ‘creep’ under its self-weight.
This property is intensified by the action of sunlight on the asphalt.
As the material becomes hotter, it regains the capacity to flow which characterised it molten state at the time of its installation.
Consequently, splits appear in the surface which will admit water.
On flat surfaces this action is minimised by laying a carpet of light-reflective white limestone chippings on the asphalt, but this treatment cannot be extended to sloping sections or to roofs carrying regular foot-traffic.
A special solar-reflective white paint may be applied to these panels which will increase the life-span of the surface.
One great advantage of asphalt over other forms of sheet roof covering is its tolerance to being ‘patched’ in situ.
Small repairs may be made to a damaged surface by flooding the affected area with molten asphalt after the defective section has been cut out.
Eventual physical breakdown of the material is delayed by careful preparation of the substratum and it has always been safer to lay asphalt on concrete roof slabs than on timber boarding.
Where a defective asphalt roof on boarding is to be renewed, the level boarded surface must be covered with bituminous felt before the asphalt is applied.
The felt acts as a membrane which isolates movement in the boards from the asphalt, the natural elasticity of which may not be sufficient to absorb such movement.
Re-use of Metal Structures
The successful re-use of an existing iron structure depends on the quality of the original construction and whether it has been subjected to significant alterations.
The opportunities for successfully re-using a structure to which it is necessary to make major modifications in order to suit it to its new task are small, even with ironwork of exceptionally good quality.
This is because original structures tend to be fairly well matched to the original requirements for load-bearing.
Because iron structural members were used in circumstances where great strength was required, it is very unlikely that serious defects, such as could affect timber or masonry before they become unsafe, can arise without causing collapse.
However, less significant defects are often readily identified.
These include delamination of wrought iron which arises with corrosion, owed to the presence of slag in the material between layers of almost pure iron.
Also, it should be noted that there were no satisfactory ways of forming structural connections in cast iron by any processes such as welding, brazing or soldering.
If such techniques appear to have been used, the structure should be regarded as suspect, because all reputable Victorian engineers were aware of the risks of making connections by these methods.
Where these is no need for a retained iron structure to accept enlarged loads and it is apparent that the metal members are in food condition, not having been subjected to detrimental modifications, the chief consideration in re-using the installation is to achieve an acceptable standard of fire resistance.
The building owner must establish whether the structure will provide an acceptable period of fire resistance in its unmodified state or if it can be simply modified to meet mandatory requirements.
The performance of cast iron in fire is better than might be expected by those who have some knowledge of the dramatic reaction of steel structures to fire.
It is possible for hot iron to crack under a stream of cold water (ie, from fire brigade emergency action), but cases where this circumstance has led to premature structural collapse are rare.
Cast-iron members generally heat up more slowly than equivalent steel sections.
The strength of cast iron also decreases less rapidly with temperature.
Because of the original engineers' appreciation of its intrinsic brittleness, cast-iron members tend to be stressed to lower levels than steelwork and the way they were incorporated into buildings usually allows them to expand in a fire without generating increased stresses.
Where cast-iron columns support timber beams, the exposed surfaces of the beams may char, but they do not expand and generate lateral movements on columns as might steel beams or iron beams.
Thus there is every reason for building control officers, when assessing conversion proposals which rely on the re-use of aged iron structures, to consider the fire performance of each case on its own merits.
Consequently, it is not unusual for a local authority to confer a fire resistance capacity of half an hour on an unprotected cast-iron structure.
According to circumstances, the building inspector may be prepared to rate an unprotected cast-iron structure as one hour fire-resisting and where iron beams are partly embedded in brickwork or concrete (eg, in jack-arch and filler-joist floors) a greatly enhanced fire-resisting performance results from this partial protection.
Where the fire-resistance of a cast-iron member must be increased, it is no longer necessary to apply protective materials which conceal the shape and ‘character’ of the components.
Various intumescent materials are available which can be sprayed on to the iron, after suitable cleaning and priming, to five a fire-insulating coating.
There are ‘thin film’ and ‘thick film’materials, the former being generally described as intumescent paint and the latter as intumescent mastics.
Both types work on the principle of swelling up at high temperatures to produce a ‘charred’ foam coating which so insulates and protects the member from heat that the temperature of the metal remains well below that of the fire.
The maintenance of structures with intumescent coatings should be carefully considered, particularly if there is a risk that the covering may be removed at some future time in the life of the building.
Suitable products and the exact extent of their application should be agreed with the local authority's building control officer before the rebuilding work is commenced.
Where the surfaces of cast-iron columns and other compression members display cracks, these defects need not necessarily reduce the opportunities for re-use of these elements.
Techniques exist for the ‘stitching’ of such fractures and they include a method in which groups of holes spaced at pre-defined centres are drilled across, and at right angles to each crack.
The residual iron between these holes is then broken out and a ‘multi-dumb-bell’ shape metal ‘key’, precast in a special alloy, is inserted tightly into each serrated aperture by gentle hammering.
Many such keys are required to stitch together securely a significant crack.
When sufficient keys have been installed, their projecting parts are ground down, the new metal and the iron local to the crack is sanded, and the surface may be repainted, producing a virtually invisible repair which restores most, if not all, of the strength of the original component.
Farm Buildings
The detailed design of farm buildings changed only gradually in the past, but the rate and type of change is now very much quicker as a result of the significant alterations in farming methods which have occurred since World Wall II — primarily greatly increased mechanisation.
Consequently, the traditional buildings are generally becoming redundant.
They may be modified, but often this is not feasible, causing new structures of a very different kind to be erected.
The old buildings are then demolished or left to decay.
All farm buildings provide valuable evidence for agricultural history.
The traditional buildings tend to reflect the considerable regional differences in types of farming and in the methods of housing and threshing the crops or housing and feeding the livestock.
The old buildings that survive and can be preserved thus have a cultural significance as well as the functional potential for conversion to other uses.
Hence there follows a full description of the origin and staple features of the constituent parts of the traditional farmstead because it is important that the untutored town dweller who is contemplating the purchase and conversion of an old farm building should recognise the different building types, understand the operational influences which shaped the form of each structure, and frame his or her ideas for the conversion so that any permanent evidence of agricultural history which the building provides is not erased.
As farming methods changed, so the designs of farm buildings may have been changed to adapt to the new ideas.
The pace of change varied according to the region so that a building layout considered out of date in one area might still be fashionable in another.
The design of farm buildings was also affected by the local building tradition.
During the nineteenth century, with improvements in communications, these traditions were modified by the consequently increased sensitivity to changing preferences in architectural styles.
The speed at which an awareness of national fashions in architecture grew varied from one area to another.
Sometimes, quite independent of this influence, certain rural estates continued to practise their own distinctive styles of building.
A group of farm buildings, together with the farmhouse, forms the farmstead.
Farmsteads are found in nucleated or closely grouped settlements (ie, villages and hamlets), in small groups of two or three farms, or they are isolated.
The location of traditional farmsteads is the result of centuries of development and change.
Those that remain in villages are the survivors of a larger number of such groupings which were much reduced by the policy of enclosing open fields which was pursued during the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
Thus a settlement of two or three farmsteads, or even an isolated one, could be the shrunken remains of a village or hamlet.
The isolated farmstead may represent either the occupation of previously unfarmed land by a single farm or the movement of a farmstead out of a village following enclosure of the open fields.
Sometimes farm buildings were built away from the central farmstead.
Generally, they did not form a fresh farmstead as they lacked some necessary buildings.
The foremost non-farmstead building group and the type of most relevance to readers of this book who are seeking an old agricultural building to convert, is the field barn .
It consisted of a threshing barn, often with an attached shed and foldyard for sheltering loose cattle.
Field barns were built to serve land lying some distance from the farmstead, or which could only be reached from it by way of steep hills.
They first appeared in the seventeenth century and ceased to be built after the middle of the nineteenth century, when the advent of portable threshing machines meant that ricks could be built and threshed in the fields and field barns were no longer needed.
For this reason, many of these structures have disappeared.
The number and size of the buildings of the farmstead was affected not only by the size of the farm but also by the type of farming practised.
On an arable farm with only a few cattle kept to make manure, little provision would be made for these animals, but there would be one or more barns, stables and shelters for carts.
On a mixed farm, there would be a larger number of buildings for cattle, while on a pastoral farm the reduced need for waggon horses caused the stables to be small and there would be little accommodation for crops.
It is interesting to note that sheep had almost no effect on the form of the farmstead as buildings were very rarely provided for them.
Where land was readily acquired so that the farmstead could be enlarged in a logical way, rather than the haphazard development which resulted from the erection of buildings on whatever sites became available, individual buildings within the grouping were sited so as to maximise efficiency.
Threshed straw had to be taken from the barns to the cattle or the horses for use as feed or litter.
Because the cattle were the principal users of straw, it was important to have them near the barn.
Then the stable could be either beyond the cow-house or adjoin the barn on the other side.
For economy in building costs, these three types of farm buildings were sometimes combined into a single building.
The form most frequently found is the barn with lean-tos built against it to provide cow-houses, stables or cart-shed.
The cost of one wall was saved and because the buildings housing animals were close to the barn, they could be supplied more easily with straw.
Another common composite building placed the cow-house, stable or cart-shed under part of the barn.
The part of the barn sited on top of these areas thus became a loft raised above the threshing floor.
In some cases, this arrangement was adopted to take advantage of sloping ground.
However, the bank barn was a different response to a sloping site.
The barn was built parallel to the ridge of the bank, being entered at high level on the uphill side.
On the downhill side the barn was thus at first-floor level with the cow-house, stable or cart-shed lying underneath.
This type of building is almost unique to the Lake District of England.
Within the farmstead, the farmhouse might be attached to some, or all of the other farm buildings.
Where the barn adjoined the dwelling it is called a laithe house , and often the stable and cow-house were built beyond the barn as part of the same range.
Such buildings can be found in the Pennine region of Yorkshire and the Lake District, although these combination buildings are not restricted to the north of England, similar types being found in the West-country.
Close contact with animals and manure was not always desired, so an extreme solution was to move the farm buildings well away from the farmhouse — sometimes even out of sight of it.
Where the farmstead is sited away from the house, a labourer's cottage might form part of the group, for security reasons.
Although former stables and cow-houses may offer opportunities for conversion into dwellings, it is often the case that they were too cheaply and impermanently built and are too small to provide a structure which is easily adapted into a house.
This applies even where (as was usual) the stable incorporated a loft for the storage of hay so that this fodder could be pitched readily into the racks in the stalls below, because the loft exploited the roof space and was rarely built as a full-height upper storey.
In contrast, stables attached to large town mansions in Central London convert very satisfactorily into ‘mews houses’ because living accommodation for the grooms and coachmen was originally provided in purpose-designed upper storeys.
Barns as Dwellings
More promising as a building type for conversion into living accommodation, as many people have recognised is the barn.
This is because the barn is often the largest of the non-domestic buildings of the farmstead and the large volume which it encloses offers many options for the creation of a comfortable and characterful dwelling.
In most traditional farmsteads it was also the central point to which the other buildings related.
A comprehensive account of the function and characteristic features of traditional barns follows, because it is apparent from even a brief tour of any rural district that the treatment meted out to many old barns in the course of their conversion into houses has been insensitive, or even atrocious, and even these enormities have occurred despite their owners' clearly expressed intentions to preserve, rather than erase, the ‘barn-like’ qualities of the buildings.
The encouragement of a more enlightened attitude in would-be converters of barns is crucial to the welfare of the architectural heritage of the countryside because the number of old barns converted to date may represent only the tip of the iceberg.
It is estimated that seventy thousand old barns survive, many in poor condition.
Most are ill-adapted to the demands of modern, mechanised agriculture and, unless converted to new uses, may well disappear.
These buildings are now almost equally at risk from insensitive conversion as they are from demolition because a softening in the attitude of local planning authorities towards proposals for change of use of agricultural buildings has recently been encouraged by central government in an attempt to ameliorate the worsening financial circumstances of farmers.
Most farmers view old buildings as a liability and the relaxation of a planning authority's traditional strictness in assessing proposed changes of use of such structures enhances their development potential, makes them more marketable and encourages the owner to sell them and to put up cheaply built, impermanent and often ugly sheds for storage of crops and farm machinery.
Traditionally, the barn was a building for housing and threshing the corn and pulse crops grown on the farm, the former category comprising wheat, oats, barley and rye, and the latter including peas and beans.
It could also house hay (cut grass) and threshed straw.
Almost invariably, barns had one threshing floor, with bays for housing the crops opening off it (Fig 37 and Plate 1).
The threshing floor, which was paved, probably in contrast to the floor surfaces of the bays to either side, always ran across the barn.
The size of barns varied greatly, but there were nearly always only one or two threshing floors.
The size of the farm was not the only factor affecting the size of its barn.
The most important factor was whether all the crops were housed in the barn or whether some or all were kept in ricks in the fields, being moved to the barn for threshing.
The practice in medieval times was to house all of the grain crops in the barn, using ricks as a last resort only when the barns were full.
This procedure naturally produced very large barns.
By the early eighteenth century in Scotland and Northumberland, the bulk of crops were housed in ricks, the barns consequently being small with space for housing only one rick at a time and a threshing floor.
In contrast, the practice of storing all the crops in barns and so of erecting large buildings, continued well into the nineteenth century in the south of England and East Anglia.
Contemporary reasons for continuing to build large barns included the view that grain was better housed in barns than in ricks and was always a hand to be threshed, while the cost of thatching ricks was avoided and savings were made by avoiding the double-handling generated by moving ricks to the barn for threshing.
The barn was filled with harvested crops, leaving only the threshing floor clear.
The crops were stacked right up to the roof ridge, or close to it, so using almost all the roof space.
Until the eighteenth century it was common to house two, three or more corps together in the barn, but a later development was the use of half the barn for threshed straw, filling only one side of the threshing floor with unthreshed corn, and the emergence of this practice may have accompanied the increased use of ricks for housing crops or faster threshing by machinery.
Apart from the general qualities of broad, plain, unperforated surfaces, simplicity of shape and an impression of massiveness (particularly in stone-built barns), several other features are characteristic of traditional barns.
Perhaps the most conspicuous is the large waggon door .
The most common type is the high, wide central doorway, closed by hinged double doors.
This doorway was made high in order to permit laden waggons or carts to enter the barn and to unload from the threshing floor into the bays.
Its height also admitted light to illuminate the threshing operation and air for winnowing the husks from the threshed grain.
It was normal for pairs of waggon doors to face each other on opposite side walls of the barn (Plate 2), but in some barns the threshing floor could be approached only from one side, there being a blank wall opposite.
This prevented the through draught which was valued for winnowing and meant that carts had to back out, so it was a less popular arrangement.
High porches shielding the waggon doors are found in many surviving medieval barns and in some later examples, particularly in the South.
They were useful for increasing the size of the threshing floor and in protecting crops on this surface during inclement weather.
Laden wagons could shelter in such porches if the threshing floors were already occupied by other vehicles unloading.
The porch could also be used as a cartshed.
Barn doors commonly stopped 305–610mm (1–2ft) above the ground with a separate panel of boards below.
This was held in place by a groove in the bottom of the door jamb which projected slightly for the purpose.
This ‘lift’, as it is called, enabled the foot of the doors to clear the manure in the yard and kept pigs off the threshing floor when the doors were open.
It would also catch grain bounding off the floor with the force of flail threshing.
The second most characteristic external feature of many barns is the pitching hole , a window-like opening, covered by a wooden shutter, several of which might be provided in the side and end walls in order to pitch corn or hay into the barn from a cart standing outside.
They also admitted light and air if the barn was not full.
In shape, such apertures were roughly square, although circular openings began to appear in the early nineteenth century and are often a conspicuous feature of the brick-built Victorian estate barns of Cheshire.
Lastly,air vents were provided in the walls of barns to prevent the crops inside from becoming mouldy.
Air vents in stone-built barns were normally slits or single holes, often widely spaced and sometimes arranged in rows.
No special provision was needed in weatherboarded timber-framed barns because the boards did not fit closely together.
The greatest range of types was found in brick-built barns owing to the ease with which patterns could be formed by omitting half-bricks or narrower units without affecting the structural stability of the walls.
As in stone-built barns, slits were widely used in brick structures and they were generally arranged in rows.
Half brick-wide holes were easily arranged in rows and granted good overall ventilation.
Geometric arrays of holes appeared in the mid-nineteenth century — probably in parallel with the Victorian enthusiasm for patterned ‘polychromatic’ brickwork — and seem to be the most widespread type.
Not to be confused with air vents is the owl-hole , a nearly square or circular opening 150–230mm (6–9in) across, set high up in the gable of the barn.
This feature was first introduced in the eighteenth century to let owls into the barn to catch vermin.
Barn interiors were generally open from end to end — there was no physical separation of the threshing floor from the bays.
The commonest and oldest barn plan places the threshing floor in the middle.
A barn with a central threshing floor would be at least three structural bays in length, each bay being perhaps 4.25–5.5m (about 14–18ft) long, although the distance between roof trusses could be smaller (say, 3m (10ft)), the bays might be of different lengths and the simple triangular roof trusses might not span more than 5.5–6m (18-19-1/2ft)(Plate 3).
Barns were sometimes built with integral aisles, along the lines of a church.
Clearly, such an arrangement necessitates the use of more elaborate and comprehensive timber framing than would be employed in a narrow barn where masonry walls provide all the support for the roof.
The use of aisles permitted the erection of a much wider building than would otherwise have been possible.
Aisled barns are of the order of 9–15m (29–49ft) wide; a simple triangular truss could be made to span a building 10m (33ft) wide, but most ‘single-cell’ barns were of the width defined above and would certainly not exceed 7.5m (24–1/2ft) in width.
Aisled barns are found in two main areas of England.
Timber-framed examples have survived in an area extending from Wiltshire and Hampshire across to Suffolk and Kent.
The other area is South Yorkshire and the Pennine district of Lancashire.
In some of the barns in these latter areas, the aisles were not used for storage but were shit off for some other purpose, such as housing the cattle.
The quite complex structure of timber-framed aisled barns may present problems of maintenance and preservation, as well as constraints on flexibility of internal planning, for the would-be converter of such a building to domestic use.
However, it is clear that an imaginative treatment of this form of interior could show off the texture and complexity of the original timber structure to dramatic effect.
Threshing machines were initially more used in the north than in the south of England, commencing in the early nineteenth century.
At first, the machinery was fixed, standing within the barn.
Naturally enough, the introduction of machinery led to a new plan in some contemporary barns.
The threshing floor disappeared.
One end of the barn was completely lofted, with the corn being fed into the building at first-floor level through pitching holes.
The other part was a straw barn.
Reliable portable threshing machines were a later development and were used much more in the south than in the north.
The machine could either stand on the threshing floor of an orthodox flail-threshing barn, which provided shelter from the weather, or it could be taken to the ricks in the fields.
The first practice probably encouraged the retention of many old and large flail-threshing barns which might otherwise have fallen into disuse, inviting demolition.
Indeed, apparently traditional flail-threshing barns continued to be built throughout the nineteenth century because of their ability to house the threshing machine as well as the crops.
In contrast, adoption of the second policy guaranteed the disappearance of many old barns because they became redundant unless they were retained as covered rick-houses or stores for straw.
However, the protection of hay, straw or even unthreshed corn was more simply achieved by the erection of a more modest and inexpensive building than the traditional flail-threshing barn.
This is the hay barn or Dutch barn which is completely open on one or more sides.
Very old examples consist of brick or stone pillars supporting a pitched roof, but they were rarely built before the late nineteenth century as they were considered an extravagance.
Their use increased considerably from the 1880s when the familiar skeletal iron-framed hay barn with a curved corrugated-iron roof began to appear in all parts of the country.
It will be appreciated that these insubstantial structures cannot form as satisfactory a basis for conversion into dwellings as can the traditional masonry-built flail-threshing barn.
Rectory Farm Barn, Upper Heyford, Oxfordshire
As photographs of the original building show clearly (Plates 1–3), before conversion, this stone-built barn displayed many of the conventional features described in the foregoing account.
It included large waggon door openings in the middle of each side elevation, with storage bays to either side of the central threshing floor to which these doors gave access.
Ventilation was provided by slits sited high in its stone-built walls and the gables contained owl-holes close to the apex of the roof (Plate 1).
Unfortunately, the roof surfaces had been reclad with corrugated iron when the original locally quarried stone slates became unserviceable.
The barn was built in 1839 and was the largest structure in a range of buildings.
When the present owner purchased it, the barn was part of a redundant farmyard in the centre of the small stone-built village of Upper Heyford.
The required accommodation was a residence for a family of five and the new owner requested that the living accommodation should be on the first floor to take advantage of the splendid views to the west over the Cherwell Valley.
An attached shed to the south of the barn was demolished, and the architect, Timothy Bruce-Dick, decided to infill the gap between the barn and a range of cow-houses which existed to the north with a two-storey structure which would act as a covered link to this northern wing and provide a playroom over garages (Fig 38 and Plate 4).
As well as creating enlarged internal accommodation, this treatment also helped to form a sheltered eastern entrance courtyard, the other two sides being a grass bank on the east and a new stone wall to the south.
The existing stone walling was retained and the original massiveness of the east elevation was preserved and even emphasised by retaining the high level ventilation slits and minimising the number of new windows on this sunless side.
Bathrooms, a kitchen and a utility room, needing only small windows, were located behind this elevation (Fig 38).
The association with a traditional barn incorporating porches has been skilfully exploited in order to broaden the width of the building at its centre so that an enclosed entrance porch and a generous ‘dog-leg’ staircase, giving access to the first floor, could be included on one side, while the equivalent projection on the west side houses an oriel window serving the dining-room which gives a commanding view over the Cherwell Valley.
Where these projections of the formerly open central bay of the building are not glazed, they are finished in dark-stained timber, a treatment that has been applied to all new external and internal timberwork and is a conventional finish for the external woodwork of many local farm buildings.
The double-height entrance lobby leads to a ground-floor gallery which runs to the north end of the barn where it connects with the garages.
Off this gallery all the principal bedrooms face west over an extensive private garden (Plate 5).
From the gallery the main staircase leads up to a first-floor open-plan living/dining-room/kitchen area, the hefty roof timbers of the old barn being exposed overhead.
A further dog-leg stair leads up from this level to second-floor guest accommodation located entirely in the roof space framed by the original trusses, and a narrow bridge leads across from the head of the stair to a complementary study balcony (Fig 38).
A glasshouse was erected against the south gable to exploit the potential for solar heat gain to assist space heating of the dwelling.
On sunny winter days, panels in the original south gable can be opened to allow air trapped in this conservatory and warmed by the sun to circulate in the body of the house.
Also planned was a covered swimming-pool, linked to the main house through the former cow-houses, which would be converted into changing accommodation and general storage.
The reconstruction was undertaken by direct labour (ie, the building owner organised and executed much of the work), starting in the spring of 1979, the house and playroom link being occupied in October 1979.
Because the bulk of the work was supervised by the owner, the overall cost is difficult to assess, but a figure of £50,000 at 1979 prices probably represents the right order of expense.
Place Barn, Wilmington, Polegate, East Sussex Place Barn, Wilmington, is flint-walled barn which was formerly attached to Priory Farm at the head of the hill that leads out of the village to the South Downs.
It has a long, narrow plan, the northern end of which may have been used for stabling horses or housing the cattle.
This combination of uses is suggested by the existence of a dormer-roofed pitching hole close to the roof eaves at the north end and the two high-level square ventilation openings which are closely associated with it (Plate 6).
The waggon door was close to the south end of the barn, serving crop storage areas to either side.
The only differences between its layout and that of the ‘classic’ threshing barn were the inclusion of a hay loft, carried on brick pillars, to give an upper level at the south end and an attached cart-shed adjoining the west elevation, also at the south end.
When the new owners who proposed to convert the barn first saw it in 1978, the whole structure had been used for stabling horses, and accordingly, brick partitions had been erected to form stalls inside.
This modified use meant that the original waggon door opening had been reduced in width (Plate 7).
It was the new owners' intention to restore a more barn-like appearance.
They had lived in Holland for twenty years and had been much impressed by Dutch conversions of barns into dwellings which tend to be more simple, ‘scrubbed’ and ‘puritanical’than the often over-elaborate treatment that is applied to British projects.
Planning permission for its conversion into a dwelling existed when the barn was purchased, but the scheme was particularly disliked by one of the new owners who believed, partly for the reason cited above and partly because of her training as a sculptress, that a simpler treatment, more strongly evocative of the barn's original function, might be adopted and still give comfortable and convenient living accommodation.
Hence, in conjunction with a local architect who provided technical advice and who prepared drawings for statutory approvals, a new scheme was developed.
The strategy for the exterior was to reintroduce a ‘barn-like’ appearance.
This was more possible on the east and south elevations which adjoin the head of the village street and a public car park access road respectively than it was on the west and south sides.
This is because the former faces lack either a sunny aspect or a pleasant prospect and the preservation of privacy is an important consideration on elevations so close to the highway.
Thus, changes to the east elevation included the necessary insertion of a small and unpretentious front entrance door in a pre-existing opening and the modification of the partly infilled former waggon-door opening to simulate the appearance of the original double doors.
This was achieved without restoring the opening to its former width by applying a pair of new timber-boarded and dark-stained doors to the east elevation.
The southern leaf of the double doors was fixed open against the wall and the opposite leaf was fixed closed over a new infilling cavity-wall construction of concrete blockwork (Fig 39) and Plate 8).
Thus the appearance of a double door is created, although the actual opening is only of single-door width and is filled with one large panel of clear double-glazing.
Ensuring that the glazing of such new openings is kept well back from the external face of the walls (at least 225mm (9in)) has meant that reflection has been minimised and the ‘black hole’ unglazed-opening appearance of apertures in traditional barns has been recreated.
This treatment was also applied to the smaller door, reached via a short flight of external stone steps that previously served the upper-level hay-loft, so that the new infilling panel of clear double-glazing, set well back from the external face of the wall, helps to light a sitting room while a ‘door’, which can be swung like a shutter to seal this opening, is fixed back against the face of the adjoining flintwork.
It might be argued that this device, although an ingenious reference to the converted barn's former purpose, is not a practical feature in a dwelling because even double-glazing will not prevent the excessive heat loss and cold radiation caused by such large windows.
There is some substance to this criticism, but developments in glass technology since the date of the completion of the Place Barn project have much improved the thermal performance of double glazing.
It is now possible to obtain purpose-made double-glazed units incorporating ‘low E’, or low emissivity, glass which includes a thin and imperceptible metallic coating on the inside surface of the outer leaf of each unit to reflect interior heat back into the room while allowing solar heat to enter the building.
Hence, much larger areas of double-glazing than could formerly have been contemplated, consistent with maintaining comfort, may now be built into external walls.
To give additional light to the new upper-level sitting room, it was decided to insert a group of three fixed windows in the south elevation above an existing opening (Plate 9) and in the north elevation two similar openings were added.
The west elevation was subject to most change.
Four additional openings were made in this external wall and three existing openings were modified in order to admit adequate light to the altered interior.
The three new windows — which were flanked by brickwork jambs matching the existing brick dressings to the flintwork — were spanned by brick segmental arches, a treatment also applied to the reprofiled opening opposite the former waggon door which accommodates a new sliding aluminium ‘patio’ door within a hardwood frame.
The brick-built garage which adjoined this west elevation was demolished and rebuilt with its new external walls showing a flint facing matching the remainder of the structure.
This change also allowed a more harmonious treatment to be adopted for the roof of this outshot.
By using salvaged slates, it was possible to revise the roof of the garage to a ‘cat-slide’ form projecting out and down from the eaves of the main rear roof-slope at a slightly shallower pitch than this surface (Plate 10).
The addition of three roof windows close to the eaves of this upper roof-slope at a slightly shallower pitch than this surface (Plate 10).
The addition of three roof windows close to the eaves of this upper roof-slope could then augment the daylighting of the upper-level studio that enters through the newly-glazed original eaves-level pitching hole of the east elevation.
It was not necessary to re-roof the attached cart-shed on the west side, the pitched and hipped shape of which was retained, but the original timber-framed and boarded north elevation of this ‘wing’ was removed and replaced with a cavity wall, finished externally with salvaged facing bricks.
This projection, with the addition of a sliding door at the rear of an existing door opening, could then accommodate a bedroom.
Internally, two further bedrooms were provided, both at ground-floor level.
Between this pair of northern bedrooms adjoining the entrance door, a cloakroom with a WC and hand basin and a bathroom were installed (Fig 39).
This is also the point at which access to the upper-floor studio and store is obtained via an iron spiral staircase.
In order to create sufficient headroom within the studio, it was necessary to remove an existing tie-beam which spanned between two timber posts that helped to support the roof structure and to adapt and re-site this member at a higher level, just below the soffit of the ceiling (Plate 11).
Naturally, the greater part of the volume of this room is within the roof space and a consequence of this is that a small pre-existing ventilation opening, which was sited high up below the eaves of the barn and is now glazed to form a window, has its sill at floor level.
This room-in-the-roof terminates to the rear of a massive brick-built chimney which dominates the main central living space of the barn.
Plainly, there was no such feature in the building prior to its conversion, but its insertion has been undertaken so carefully and with such sensitivity towards the simple, almost primitive shapes and textures of the original interior that it looks like a perfectly natural element.
A huge ‘inverted funnel’ of painted, coarsely plastered brickwork lies on top of an oak beam which acts as a fascia spanning a very broad fireplace, also lined with white-painted brickwork (Plate 12).
To give a suitably ‘thick’ appearance to the painted plaster surface applied over the new brickwork of the chimney, ‘Sirapite’plaster was mixed with wallpaper paste and smeared over the overprecise profiles of the new work.
On other new internal surfaces some good ‘rough plastering’ was undertaken by very skilled tradesmen.
The introduction of the equally direct and simple brick-built chimney above the rear roof-slope hardly detracts from the reposeful form of the old barn's roof.
The central living-room extends right up into the apex of the roof, the original heavy roof timbers — rafters, purlins and tie beams — being exposed to the interior (Plate 13).
To emphasise fully the drama of this grand space, rather than remove the raised hay-loft occupying the south end of the building, it was decided to retain this area as a dining gallery overlooking the living room, with a private sitting room at the same level lying behind a new partition.
By excavating the existing ground-floor surface at this south end, it was possible to obtain a minimal, although legally acceptable, 2m (6–1/2ft) headroom for non-habitable accommodation below the gallery.
This comprises a shower room and WC, a dry-goods store, a larder, the passage leading to the third bedroom and the kitchen.
The kitchen is thus three steps down from the living-room floor level and is paved with the same material — York stone slabs approximately 60mm (2–1/2in) thick, below which a low-pressure piped hot water central-heating system is installed.
The upper-level dining gallery and sitting-room are reached from the living-room via short flight of open-riser timber stairs.
The owners who undertook the conversion of Place Barn were Mr and Mrs J. de Geus — Mrs Ann de Geus being responsible for the concept and much of the detailed design of the conversion.
They received invaluable technical advice from architect Colin Humphrey.
The builder was H. Wilson Ltd.
The conversion of Place Barn received the accolade of a Civic Trust Award in 1982.
Conversion Potential of Other Crop-Storage Buildings
Apart from the fairly standardised buildings housing the animals and the customary crops, some areas of the country also boast more specialised buildings for housing other crops, and these structures may be susceptible to conversion to valued and highly characterful accommodation.
Prominent among these buildings is the hop-kiln, which was used for drying hops (the main use for which is in beer, although they are also incorporated in other delicacies) before they could be despatched to market.
These structures are found in the hop-growing areas of Kent and East Sussex, where they are called oast-houses, and the westernmost part of Surrey, Herefordshire and West Worcestershire.
The most obvious kilns that survive are the square or circular-plan nineteenth-century type which are high rooms with tall conical roofs terminating in cowls.
They were invariably attached to a two-storey building of more conventional shape.
Circular kilns first appeared in Kent around 1805 and soon became the normal pattern there.
They are called ‘roundels’.
Roundels with tiled conical roofs require special tiles.
These are known as ‘Kent peg tapered tiles’ as they narrow in length, holes being incorporated at the narrow ends to accept wooden pegs which locate them on the roofing battens.
Until recently, these tiles, were made by hand, but now finding suitable second-hand replacement units is becoming difficult.
Square-plan kilns were not used in the South until shortly before World War I. The kilns had brick walls; inside, at ground level, there was an open brick box to contain the fire, the draught being controlled by the entrance door.
The drying floor was sited about 3m (10ft) above the furnace and was of slatted wooden construction, being made of laths or battens set fairly close together.
The hot air from the fire passed up between the laths.
The hops were spread on a horsehair cloth laid on the battens, access to this upper level being gained through a high-level door in the side of the kiln.
Above was a steep-sided cone, usually timber-framed like a roof, with a plastered internal finish and clad with tiles or slates externally.
In a few instances, the cone itself was of brick and this form of construction existed at Tibb's Oast, a mid-nineteenth century oast-house, the conversion of which is described later.
Capping this cone was the cowl.
Repair of the cowl, the most distinctive part of the oast, requires a craftsman's knowledge and skill.
Its purpose is to ventilate the kiln, enabling the moisture-laden air to be drawn from the hops.
This air is known as the ‘reek’.
The vane is the oast's rudder and ensures that the boarded surface always faces the wind, thus preserving the opportunity for moist air to escape (Plate 14).
Considerable dexterity is required to lower and raise a cowl.
It is quite normal for a cowl to weigh 200kg (31st) and extend to 4.5m (15ft) in height with a diameter of 1.8m (6ft) at its base, and four men are required to manoeuvre it.
Where vaned cowls are to be replaced, it is not advisable for them to be fixed in place, not only for the sake of authenticity, but also to simplify maintenance.
Damp must not be allowed to enter as rot can quickly result.
Until recently, cowl bases (or ‘curbs’) were made from elm, but Dutch elm disease has made this material difficult to obtain.
Today, it is more usual to replace the base with marine ply.
Tradition demands that the cowls should be painted white and it is common practice to spray their surfaces with glass-fibre to improve durability.
Normally, cowls require considerable maintenance and possible replacement every ten years — a costly consequence of owning an oast.
The vane is sometimes called the ‘finger’ or ‘flyboard’and it gave farmers an opportunity to display their individuality.
In kent, many vanes were completed with the Kentish horse motif and hunting scenes were popular.
Other animals were also depicted.
Additionally, most ‘fingers’ bear the personal mark of the executant craftsman.
Adjoining the kilns was a two-storey building, the upper floor of this structure being about 1m (3ft) below the drying floors of the kilns which were reached via short flights of timber stairs (Fig 40).
This area was used for receiving the hops and for spreading them out to cool after they were removed from the kilns.
Once the redistribution of moisture had taken place, the hops were swept into ‘pockets’.
These were long sacks which were suspended through a circular hole in the floor, called the trading hole (until presses were introduced, the hops were compressed by a man treading them in).
A later development introduced a press to compress the hops in each pocket which was held in a pocket sling.
After pressing, the pockets were tied and then stored in the ground-floor storage area, which was only required as a space in which the pockets were hung and for stoking the fires in the kilns.
Otherwise, it had no connection with hops and might be used for cidermaking, housing livestock, or as a cartshed.
The pockets of hops were stored here until they were shipped off to market or to a brewery.
It was common for the storage building to be accompanied by a pair of kilns and a complete range of such structures might be erected adjacent to a very long storage building on a site where the cultivation of hops was undertaken intensively (eg, at the hop farm of a brewery.)
Tibb's Oast, Udimore, Rye, East Sussex
This oast-house conversion is rather unusual in that four kilns or ‘roundels’ are attached to the central storage shed, a pair being placed on both sides of this building, giving a symmetrical composition.
The shed itself was largely of wooden construction, and as the photograph of its pre-conversion condition indicates (Plate 15), it was in a very ramshackle state.
Hence the first job for the new owners in the autumn of 1983 was the demolition of the decaying boarded ‘front’ elevation of this structure which filled the gap between the eastern pair of roundels.
This action enabled the new infilling east elevation clad in painted timber boards to be installed to the rear of the original wall-plane, better exposing to view the cylindrical forms of the kilns (Plate 16).
The upper floors of the storage shed were also at inconvenient levels and the discovery of wholesale decay in this joisted construction supported a policy of removing these elements and replacing them with a new upper-floor set at a level which could be extended into the roundels to give adequate headroom in the new ground-storey rooms, while ensuring that the four upper-storey bedrooms located in these projections had a sufficiently deep vertical wall surface to accommodate conventional windows.
With the drying floors removed, the brickwork of the roundels proved not to be very strong and it was necessary to span the circular spaces with timber beams before the new upper floor was installed.
It was also necessary to fabricate and fit a new rotating cowl to replace the louvred terminal which was missing from the apex of the south-east roundel.
Where the louvred cowls has survived, glazing had to be added internally in order to present wind-blown rain from entering the vents, and efforts were made to waterproof the sloping brick surfaces of the roundels' conical roofs by coating them with bitumen.
Because the junction of a pair of roundels produces a triangular interstitial space internally as well as externally, one of two such internal areas was used to accommodate a WC, which is reached from an intermediate landing of the staircase (Fig 41 and Plate 17).
Apart from the four first-floor bedrooms, all of which are housed in the roundels and which are 5.1m (17ft) in diameter, the upper storey was used to house a large games room, an airing cupboard and a bathroom.
The north-east roundel bedroom was provided with an en suite bathroom.
The lower storey includes a very generous stair and entrance hall, extending to two storeys in height at its centre within a peripheral first-floor gallery, a double garage, utility room and a large kitchen being accommodated in the western half of the former storage shed.
The dining room occupies the south-east roundel, the lounge the north-west roundel, a study the north-east roundel and the south-east roundel accommodates a fifth bedroom.
After several months' work, during which time they lived in a caravan parked on the site, the owners, Mr and Mrs Bates were able to move into the future garage area of the building in August 1984 and to continue work on the upper-floor accommodation under the shelter of the reslated roof.
The quickly erected boarded external finish of the former storage shed and the predominantly ‘dry’ construction of the internal wall linings made this a practical policy once reconstruction, during the spring and summer months, of the decayed lower-storey brickwork was complete and had produced a habitable shell.
The complete interior of the house could not be occupied until the final months of 1985 and the owners stayed for only one further year before the challenge of converting a local barn tempted them away!
Churches and Chapels
Before considering the various methods which various owners and developers have adopted to achieve the satisfactory conversion of church buildings to domestic use, it is important to be aware of the procedure through which the majority of churches become available for conversion.
In the case of the Anglican Church, whose buildings make up the largest group of ecclesiastical structures, there exists a quite involved and considered procedure which is defined by the Pastoral Measure of 1983.
Although there is no generally agreed forecast of the number of Anglican churches likely to be declared ‘redundant’, the Bridges Commission of 1960 suggested that 790 buildings could be involved.
It is noteworthy that by 1976, eight years after the original Pastoral Measure came into effect, almost 500 churches had been declared redundant by the Church Commissioners.
Of these, 37 per cent were destined for demolition.
The remainder were to be preserved or put to other uses, but delays in reaching decisions often meant that the buildings had been severely vandalised by the time they were available for conversion.
The procedure is first for the Pastoral Committee of the Diocese to consult the Council for Places of Worship, receiving from it a report which sets out the architectural qualities and historic interest of the building.
Reference is also made to other Anglican churches in the area as a choice may have to be made between one building and another.
Having decided upon a recommendation that a particular church should be declared redundant, the Pastoral Committee sends the papers relating to the proposal to the bishop of that diocese.
He has the opportunity to comment on these documents before forwarding them to the Church Commissioners.
The Pastoral Measure defines the interested parties, including the local planning authority, who must be consulted before this stage is reached.
If the Church Commissioners subsequently agree to seal a Declaration of Redundancy, advice is sought on the future of the building from the Advisory Board for Redundant Churches, a national body which was set up under the Pastoral Measure.
If the building is of architectural or historical importance, or contains fine built-in furnishings, the Advisory Board may recommend vesting the church in the Redundant Churches Fund.
This fund is another creation of the Pastoral Measure.
It is provided with an income from central government and church sources and acts as a ‘holding body’ for churches which are of sufficient importance to be preserved, unmodified, ‘in the interests of the Nation and the Church of England’.
For those churches not vested in the Redundant Churches Fund or retained by the Board of Finance of the diocese, two categories can be perceived: a) those that will be demolished (although the Advisory Board may initially withhold a demolition certificate) and b) those that can be adapted to a range of alternative uses.
Plainly, it is this latter category that is of most interest to readers of this book.
Because the resources of the Redundant Churches Fund are fairly slight related to the large number of churches which are falling into disuse, it should be equally clear that conversion is often the only way in which a creditable building can be saved from complete destruction through neglect and vandalism.
Of course, conversion can only be considered as an exercise in the conservation of a noteworthy building if the alterations are as sympathetic as possible to the fabric and general appearance of the original building.
The Church Commissioners have the right to declare a particular use as being unsuitable, and the Advisory Board is required to approve or withhold approval of the proposed adaptation.
Every diocese that is actively pursuing the problem has appointed a Redundant Churches Uses Committee whose task it is to seek out suitable alternative uses.
Enquiries related to redundant churches, and especially their adaptation, should be addressed in the first place either to the secretary of the Redundant Churches Uses Committee of the Diocese (see diocesan handbook) or to the Secretary of the Advisory Board for Redundant Churches of the Church Commissioners.
In relation to churches serving other denominations, it has been the case until recently that Roman Catholic churches have rarely fallen out of use, although the general decline in religious observance is beginning to affect some of these buildings too.
In the circumstance of their redundance, the usual prescription has been the demolition of the buildings and sale of their sites, but it is likely that where redundancy affects noteworthy buildings — and an increasing number of Roman Catholic churches, lacking the exemption from ‘listing’ currently enjoyed by the Anglican churches, are being listed as buildings of architectural or historic interest — the church hierarchy may have to consider offering them for conversion to alternative uses.
Information regarding the ownership of churches belonging to the various non-conformist sects can be obtained either from the General Secretary of the Free Church Federal Council or from the appropriate denominational headquarters.
In general, the property of the non-conformist churches is administered either directly by the denominational headquarters as managing trustees, or else legally held by this body as custodian trustee and managed by honourary officials from the local church membership.
Baptists and Congregationalists encourage the incorporation of property in the regional or County Union and the Wesleyan Methodist Church (now combined with the Congregationalists in the United Reformed Church) usually prefers the system of local personal trustees.
Among the free churches there is no set system of redundancy procedure as there is for the Anglican Church, so that it may be for officials from the local congregation to decide if and how to dispose of vacant church property.
Planning
A problem with the conversion to domestic use of a church planned in the conventional way arises from the cross-sectional shape of the building.
Staple features of the church plan since early Christian times have been the cruciform shape and the division of the interior into a high central nave, flanked on either side by lower aisles.
Although satisfactory for accommodating a large congregation in a uniformly lit space, such an arrangement does not offer the possibility of simple subdivision into a series of identical spaces suitable for use as dwellings.
One feature of this cross-sectional arrangement which is immediately apparent is the large area of roof surface which it generates, the roof surface of the central nave normally being sloped at a very steep pitch.
Thus a large, lofty volume is enclosed by the roof and is useless except for the purpose of admitting daylight to the ‘spinal’ space of the building via high-level clerestory windows.
The architects of the Gothic period exploited this device to the full, for they recognised that greater religious impact could be made by stressing the luminosity and verticality which result form its adoption.
Many converters of churches which incorporate this arrangement have naturally regarded this space as a zone in which living-rooms might be accommodated, and the beneficial use of such roof space has largely been made possible by the widespread employment of standard reversible ventilating and double-glazed roof windows.
However, the adoption of this policy alone does not solve the problem of making optimal use of the volume, because filling up the highest part of the nave with habitable accommodation arranged on one or several storeys deprives the lower-level spinal space of the church of natural light.
The solution adopted in converting several two-aisled church interiors into dwellings has been to regard this low-level central strip as a spinal access corridor serving all, or most of the flats — a sort of internal ‘street’.
This policy is shown in the scheme for the conversion of All Saints and St Barnabas, Stockwell, London, which is described and illustrated in this chapter.
In the few cases where the church plan diverges from the conventional arrangement by including only a single side aisle rather than the normal two, this volume, rather than the nave space, can be used to accommodate the dwellings access corridor, although it is noteworthy that in the conversion of St James's Church, Farnham, Surrey, which is also described in this chapter, the optimum cross-sectional treatment of such an asymmetrical plan placed the longitudinal access corridor in the former nave space, the aisle projection being used to accommodate living-rooms.
A complementary difficulty is the achievement of a physically and visually satisfactory interface between the large western window characteristic of neo-Gothic cruciform-plan churches and the floors which must be inserted in the formerly unitary volume of the high church interior in or der to provide functional habitable rooms.
These new levels invariably clash with such a feature and variations on one means of convincingly disguising what might be an unattractive junction of new and retained construction are illustrated in the following sections, which include accounts of the conversion of two conventional nineteenth-century Anglican churches.
Chapel of Nunc Dimittis and Saint Mark, Bilton, Rugby, Warwickshire
This building was erected by Richard Orme Assheton, Rector of Bilton and a local landowner, in 1983 in memory of his wife.
Its chief importance to architectural history lies in the fact that it is a very early example of the work of J. Ninian (later Sir Ninian) Comper (1864–1960), a notable church architect of the early twentieth century.
The commission to design the memorial chapel was first given to G.F. Bodley (1827–1907), an eminent church architect of the late-Victorian period, but Bodley passed it on to Comper who had been his most highly talented pupil.
Although the building was largely complete by 1893, the bell turret at the north-east corner was added in 1904 and is of a more conspicuously ‘Arts and Crafts Movement’ style than the body of the church (Plate 18).
The Rev. Assheton was an avid collector of stained glass and the original grouped ‘lancet’ windows of the side walls contain stained glass from several periods (including the Middle Ages).
The liturgical ‘east’ window — which is actually in the south wall — contains glowing Victorian stained glass designed by G. F. Bodley.
Richard Assheton may have employed the best church architects of his day because he was himself an amateur architect (he designed a church at Flecknoe, near Daventry, south of Rugby) and hence may have appreciated the difficulties of architectural design and the ability of talented practitioners to resolve them happily.
After many years of use by the local community, with regular services continuing into the early 1970s, the chapel was declared redundant in 1975.
A chance inquiry into an old debt revealed that the building had never been fully consecrated and thus would revert to Assheton family ownership after a year and a day's disuse.
Hence, around 1980, William Assheton, an architectural student whose forebears included the Rev. Richard Assheton, found he was the new owner of the building.
As his course of study at the School of Architecture, University of Manchester, demanded a period of practical training in an architect's office, William Assheton decided to spend this time working in Coventry so that in his spare time he could design and supervise the conversion of the chapel into a dwelling for his own use.
The work was carried out during the period 1980–1 and the existing building construction was found to be generally in good condition.
The well-built and massively thick brickwork walls continued effectively to exclude wind and rain although an attack of dry rot had affected the suspended timber ground floor.
This problem did not extend to the roof timbers as this construction was very well ventilated.
However, it was necessary to renew the roof covering of clay plain tiles with identical material.
The policy adopted for the conversion involved exploiting to the full the high, undivided volume of the interior to create two storeys of living accommodation.
This scheme was suggested by the need to remove the partially rotten wooden floor, thus deepening the space available for subdivision.
A small amount of excavation down to a new lower-level concrete floor slab then provided sufficient height for two habitable storeys in the central zone of the building (Fig 42).
This volume was confined to the central area because excavation was restricted to the ‘core’ of the plan in order to avoid undermining the existing external wall foundations (Fig 43).
As most of the original windows were located quite high in the side elevations of the chapel, they could become low-level windows lighting the new upper storey, and space enough remained in the formerly imperforate lower-level panels of the side walls to introduce new ‘tripartite’ windows sited vertically below the original openings in order to light the rooms of the lower storey.
This area — which throughout, is somewhat lower than the original ground-floor level (necessarily retained in the entrance hall)— accommodates three bedrooms.
Because the achievement of a habitable room height in this lower storey necessitated deeper excavation of the central zone, the bedrooms too incorporate a change in floor level.
A short flight of stairs adjoins each entrance door and leads down to the central sleeping area.
This arrangement also produces a shallow perimeter ‘ledge’, parallel to at least one external wall, which can be used as a window seat.
This disposition of rooms made it possible to treat the residual high-level space as a single living/dining/cooking area, with the kitchen located at its northern end, divided from the generous living-dining-room only by a head-height folding screen.
This arrangement allowed the elaborate wooden structure of the steeply pitched roof — now much closer at hand following the insertion of the upper floor — to remain unmodified, an impressive preserved construction ‘oversailing’ the new living accommodation.
The original windows of the ‘east’ gable and the side walls having become low-level lights closely related to the new upper floor, the fine stained glass they contain can now also be admired at close range.
William Assheton's attitude to the design of the conversion was based on the view that although the building might function as a house, it ought still to be recognisable as a church.
This preference has produced at least two problems.
First, the adoption of lightweight construction for new partition walls and the structure of the upper floor, although kind to the integrity of the original building fabric, has led to excessive sound transmission between rooms, a condition which is exacerbated by the inversion of the normal domestic arrangement — ie, the siting of the living-rooms over the bedrooms.
The architect owner admits that it might have been better to regard the converted building primarily as a house and to order priorities for the location and constructional ‘envelopes’ of rooms accordingly.
This would have meant adopting dense and heavy new construction for partitions and the upper floor (ie, solid-brickwork dividing walls supporting a slab or concrete planks).
Secondly, the new proximity of the original side windows to the floor of the living-room quickly revealed the propensity of the stained-glass panels to admit draughts and clearly it would be wise to install secondary glazing within these openings to seal leaks, even at the expense of losing an uninhibited view of the coloured glass.
Also, following the removal of the suspended timber ground floor and the excavation of sub-floor earth so that adequate headroom could be obtained in the lower-storey bedrooms, it was necessary to install a continuous waterproof membrane below the new concrete floor slab in order to prevent penetration of the construction by rising damp.
The product adopted for this task was a laminated bitumen and polyethylene sheet material which demands very careful attention to the formation of joints between sheets if groundwater penetration is to be entirely excluded.
On reflection, the owner felt that it would have been better adopt the traditional method of ‘tanking’ the semi-basement lower floor with in situ asphalt.
An aesthetically satisfactory answer to the need to insert additional windows to light the new lower-level accommodation was found by not only siting the new openings in the same vertical alignment as the original triparite lights, but also by aiming to reproduce the general appearance of the existing windows.
Absolute fidelity to the prototypes would have demanded the use of stone mullions, sills and lintels framing wrought-iron casements as well as the reproduction of the segmental-arched profile which caps each opening.
However, insufficient height was available to install windows copying the attenuated shape of the original ‘lancets’ and the unquestioning reproduction of the arch form in the new windows would have produced a weaker visual result than the treatment which was adopted — the insertion of new tripartite lights capped by a simple square-headed profile (Plates 18 and 19).
In this way the original window apertures ‘read’ satisfactorily as the high level ‘extension’of lower, squatter openings, rather in the manner that, in the internal view of a cathedral nave, the triforium openings of the nave arcade are vertically extended and handsomely terminated by the high-level clerestory windows.
Also, expense was spared by the adoption of a simple square-headed shape in contrast to the original arched profile, and it was the cost consideration which similarly led to the new window sills, mullions and lintels being manufactured in reconstructed stone to match the existing dressings, rather than the natural material.
Reproduction of the slender frames of the original wrought-iron casements was effected by having the new fixed and opening lights fabricated from standard steel sections, colour-coated to match the finish of the original metalwork.
St James Court, Farnham, Surrey
The conversion of St James's Church, East Street, Farnham, Surrey, which was completed in 1980, was probably the pioneering development of the current spate of residential conversions of churches for multiple occupation.
The church was built in 1876 to the designs of Henry Woodyer (1816–96), an accomplished church architect who designed many ecclesiastical buildings, a large number of which are located in Surrey.
The building's external walls are faced in ironstone setts with Bath stone dressings to corners and door and window openings.
By virtue of its considerable size and its elevated site, the church makes a significant contribution to the townscape of Farnham's ‘east end’.
It is the sole building of good quality in this predominantly commercial and rather nondescript part of the town.
As Farnham's second Anglican church, it was never very successful in attracting large congregations and was declared redundant in 1974.
The Church Commissioners proposed its demolition because they were unable to identify any alternative use for the building.
As often applies in such cases, it became evident that the church was held in some affection by the local residents and, in response to public concern, the local planning authority, Waverly District Council, initiated a search for alternative uses.
The council's Conservation Officer interested his colleagues in the Architect's Department in investigating possible residential use of the building.
An architectural analysis of the structure showed that conversion of the church into council-owned dwellings, rented to young people, was practicable.
It was also the only alternative use for which finance was available.
Thus the church and its site were purchased for £20,000 in 1979 by Waverly District Council, while the adjacent church hall was sold off separately by the local diocese for conversion into two small private dwellings.
The fact that the church was not of the highest architectural quality eased some of the problems that could have been associated with its conversion into flats.
The creation of several dwellings within a building previously devoted to one use necessitates the division of the original large single volume of the church interior and the loss of the special qualities of light, spaciousness and acoustics which that large volume possesses.
Compartmentation of the interior means that the building is experienced in a new way — details which were once distant (and which may have been executed in the knowledge that they would not be viewed at close hand) are seen in ‘close-up’ for the first time and in relation to much smaller and more intimate spaces (Plate 20).
Despite the architect's awareness of the radical transformation that would be effected by conversion of the church into dwellings, it remained his objective to retain the essential character and best qualities of the original building and to keep the existing stonework as untouched as possible.
This aim could have been frustrated by the need to keep costs to the minimum in order to maintain the economic viability of the project, but both requirements were satisfied by confining all new openings to the roofs of the aisle and the nave.
Alterations to these surfaces were less expensive than any modification of the walls and had less impact on the overall appearance of the church.
Cost considerations also controlled the amount of restoration work which was undertaken.
Such work had to be minimal if the project was to remain viable.
Fortunately, the church was in very sound structural order — only one small area of dry rot was found in the course of the conversion — and restoration work was confined to the replacement of several crumbling gable coping stones and related ‘kneelers’, together with wire-brushing of some small areas of stonework where this was necessary.
No attempt was made to return either the interior or exterior stonework to its original condition.
The accommodation provided by the conversion consists of 16 flats of which 6 are two-person units.
The remaining 10 dwellings comprise 9 bed-sitters and one apartment with a separate bedroom.
As it was difficult to convert the square-ended chancel into living accommodation and it was felt important to retain part of the church in its original state, this area was left almost untouched in order to operate as a multi-purpose ‘community room’.
An intermediate floor was inserted in the adjoining transept to form a small communal lounge linked to the first-floor corridor by a balcony crossing the chancel and by a small staircase to the ground floor (Fig 44).
This space had previously accommodated the organ loft.
Preservation of the chancel as a single space allowed the high stained glass of the east window to be retained in its original form without interruption from new intermediate floors.
Other communal accommodation includes a kitchen, laundry, two bathrooms (a shower is provided in each flat) and two store rooms).
The conversion of St James's did not result in the classic consequence church conversion — namely, the creation of a central lightless dwellings access corridor between two lateral banks of living accommodation.
This is because the church has an asymmetrical plan with a single southern aisle rather than the more usual arrangement of south and north aisles flanking a central nave.
Thus the interior contained only a single row of nave arcade columns (Plate 21) and the comparative narrowness of the plan meant that there was space for only a range of shallow ancillary rooms — stores, bathrooms and laundry (Fig 44)— on the north side of the ground-floor flats access corridor once dwellings of suitable size, restricted to the spans of the nave arcade bays, had been accommodated.
This arrangement has helped to reduce the potential oppressiveness of the resulting internal corridor because the northern ‘strip’ of service rooms also accommodates the two staircases that serve the two publicly accessible upper floors of the building and natural light spills into the ends of the corridor through the glazed enclosures of these features, reducing the room's apparent length.
Only the second-floor dwellings are on two levels.
Single-storey units occupy the ground and first floors (Fig 44 and Plate 22).
Constructional Details
With the exception of the stained-glass east window, all the original windows of diamond-shaped leaded lights set in wrought-iron frames were removed and replaced with purpose-made steel frames containing simple rectangular side-hung casements.
The residual top section of glass within the arched section at the head of each window was replaced by a panel of glass directly bedded in the stonework.
The tiled roof over the single south aisle was stripped off and partly replaced with bronze-coloured aluminium glazing bars framing bronze-tinted ‘anti-sun’ glass, the upper panels of which are laid to the same slope as the original roof, the lower panels producing a range of shallow vertical windows, the combination of which gives ‘conservatory’lighting to the first floor flats (Plate 23).
The remaining small areas of flat roof, extending from the vertical glazing almost to the eaves of the aisle roof, accommodate roof-lights admitting natural light to the ground-floor flats which would otherwise be only poorly lit by the original lancet windows of the aisle wall.
The end wall of the aisle, adjoining the main entrance, os the only place where alteration of the existing stonework was undertaken.
The original tiled roof oversailed this wall with a conventional tiled verge.
In order to ‘contain’ the higher profile of the new, glazed aisle roof, the wall was raised slightly with new ironstone masonry, producing a parapet wall under a new sloping stone coping.
The architect, Roy Toms, of the Waverly District Council, was worried about what could have been an unsympathetic alteration to a venerable building, but a visit to St Martin's, Dorking, another Woodyer church, confirmed that its architect had adopted raking parapets to terminate the aisle roofs there, and the discovery of this period precedent vindicated the use of this treatment at St James Court.
The original suspended wooden ground floor was entirely removed after penetration of this structure for the installation of the new cross-walls and their foundations showed that some residual sections were badly affected by woodworm.
The new ground floor is of in situ concrete and contains horizontal drainage ducts.
Few additional loads were placed on the original structure.
The two main additional floors are largely carried on new masonry crosswalls which are, in turn, carried on their own new strip-footing foundations.
The structure of these intermediate floors comprises closely spaced pre-cast concrete beams, the intermediate voids being infilled with ‘hollow pot’ units.
On top, a sand/cement screed gives a solid, level floor finish.
This heavy construction, which has good sound-insulating properties, provided an economic solution to the problem posed by the need to insert new floors in spite of the fact that all the beams had to be manhandled into position because there was no access for mechanical handling.
The new third floor, which is the upper floor of the two-storey dwellings, is of conventional joisted timber construction.
As applies almost invariably in the conversion of columnated church interiors, compartmentation of the interior of St James's adheres strictly to the original division of the nave into bays which, in this case, placed the columns at approximately 3.5m (11–1/2ft) centres.
Contract Details
When detailed drawings of the scheme had been prepared, they were put out to competitive tender and the resulting offers were assessed by the Department of the Environment against a ‘cost yardstick’ related to similar newly built accommodation.
Consequently, the ministry concluded that the conversion represented ‘good value for money’ and the contract was awarded to builders John Worman Ltd on a fixed price basis.
The eventual cost of the conversion was £238,000 and the reconstruction period extended to fifteen months, the work being completed in the last quarter of 1980.
In late November of that year, the first tenants moved into the building and the development almost immediately became the only award-winning refurbishment scheme in the Department of the Environment Housing Awards for 19891, despite tough competition from more than four hundred entries.
It is important to recognize that an identical project promoted at the present time would not offer good value for money in comparison with a new-build scheme.
This is because St James's Church was not listed as a building of architectural or historic interest after it was declared redundant and thus the cost of the building work would attract Value Added Tax at the standard rate.
A new-build scheme providing equivalent accommodation would be exempt from this tax.
Only if a building is listed can this significant premium on construction costs be avoided, although the majority of disused churches which are offered for conversion are of ‘listed’ status.
The only note of criticism which can be sounded in relation to the admirable job of careful conversion which created much needed and characterful dwellings within the shell of a disused church at St James Court emerges from the preservation-conscious atmosphere of the present day.
This mood might question the suitability of making the radical alterations to the aisle roof and the almost equally severe remodelling of the south slope of the nave roof which were implemented here (Plates 24 and 25).
Although it is clear that these changes were made in order to admit light to the new, deep-plan living accommodation, it is conceivable that the judicious use of ranges of standard reversible and ventilating roof windows might have provided an answer to this requirement which would have been less erosive of the original external appearance.
Church of All Saints and St Barnabas, Stockwell, London SW8
This church was erected in the mid-nineteenth century in an area of South London which was being developed, to an overall plan, as a residential estate.
In a pattern of development which took the form of a circus containing a garden at the centre, with roads radiating towards the cardinal points, the land was divided into small plots which were developed by various builders between 1843 and 1850.
While the estate was being developed, a site was conveyed to the Church Building Commissioners for the erection of the church of St Barnabas.
The foundation stone was laid on 27 July 1848 by the Duke of Cambridge.
The building was erected by builder George Myers at a cost of £4,800 to a design by architects Isaac Clarke and James Humphrys.
Accommodation was provided for a congregation of about 1,500 people and the church was consecrated on 24 June 1850 by the Bishop of Winchester.
It is noteworthy that Ralph Vaughan Williams was at one time the organist here.
The axis of the nave of the church is also the centre-line of the road which leads east from the central circus of Lansdowne Gardens.
Before conversion, the building had a simple plan with a nave and aisles of six bays terminated by a shallow semi-octagonal apse at the east end.
In conformity with the principles of the Ecclesiological Society, whose views on church design were increasingly influential in the 1840s and '50s, no internal gallery was provided.
Also in deference to their preferences, the building was carried out in the Early English Gothic style, its structural brickwork being faced externally with Kentish ragstone dressed with Bath stone at corners and door and window openings.
The central nave of the church was clerestoried and a slender bell-turret of octagonal plan was subsequently installed against the south-west corner of the nave, projecting slightly beyond the south aisle.
The interior was plain with two-light windows lighting the apse.
The nave arcading was borne on alternate octagonal and circular stone columns with foliated capitals and supported a timber roof carried on ‘hammer beam’ trusses.
Originally, the east window contained rich stained glass portraying St Barnabas and St Paul.
The church was restored in 1948 and was refurnished with the organ from All Saints Church nearby.
All Saints Church had been erected in 1876–8, but after being damaged during World War II, it was demolished and most of its parish was combined with that of St Barnabas so that the latter church was renamed All Saints and St Barnabas.
In the post-war years and partly in consequence of much local redevelopment, congregations declined and the church was eventually declared redundant in the early 1980s.
The building and its site were purchased from the Church Commissioners by the Society for Co-operative Dwellings, a secondary housing co-operative, in mid-1983.
The society-s proposal to convert the church into dwellings followed on from the same sponsor's conversion of a similar local and redundant Anglican church, St James's, Knatchbull Road, Stockwell Park.
SCD acted on behalf of a primary housing co-operative, Ekarro Housing Co-operative, who were active in the area, housing single people referred to them by various caring agencies.
They had already purchased and converted the adjacent vicarage into twelve dwellings and seized the chance to convert the church to provide more units to house the majority of the co-operative on one site.
In the early 1980s, such churches were not yet recognised as vehicles for providing housing and this ignorance of the potential of All Saints and St Barnabas generated a low purchase price which was a vital element in making the financing of this publicly funded scheme work within accepted limits.
The support of the client co-operative,, the local planning authority and the earlier experience at St James's, Knatchbull Road, helped to persuade the Housing Corporation to fund the scheme.
Quite independent of the social merits of re-using a redundant building to provide comfortable dwellings for local people at modest rents, a main factor encouraging the retention of All Saints Church was the value accorded by the local authority planners to the building for its contribution to the townscape.
In this respect the Planning Department preferred the ‘permanent’ use offered by conversion to rented housing to a transitory use, such as might result from re-use of the building as, say, a carpet sales warehouse.
In fact, the alternative course open to the Church Commissioners of demolition of the building and sale of the site might not have been easily pursued, had they chosen to adopt that route.
Although All Saints is not a listed building, it lies within a conservation area so that any proposal to demolish it would have been subject to same scrutiny as plans for the demolition of a listed building.
It is far from clear that the necessary Listed Building Consent for demolition would have been forthcoming from the local authority.
By the same token, in contrast to the conversion of St James's, Knatchbull Road, where 50 per cent of the cost of external repairs to this listed building was met by English Heritage, only 25 per cent of the cost of this work at All Saints was covered by a central government grant.
Funds were also provided by Lambeth Council as the local Inner City Partnership Authority, for the execution of landscaping and external works.
Fortunately, the church did not have the problems or liabilities which result from the existence of an associated graveyard.
Although an adjoining area of ground had been purchased for this purpose, it was never developed as a burial ground and its virgin state allowed the Ekarro Housing Co-operative to complement the conversion of All Saints and St Barnabas with a new building, in the style of the surrounding villas, accommodating further flats for co-operative members (Plate 26).
The total contract cost of the church conversion and the adjacent new building was of the order of £1.25 million and the work extended over twenty-one months.
The accommodation provided through the conversion of All Saints and St Barnabas comprises 25 flats, consisting of 4 bed-sitters, 2 single-bedroom units, 8 double-bedroom units, 5 two-study-bedroom units, 2 three-study-bedroom units, 2 two-double-bedroom units, 1 three-bedroom unit and 1 single-bedroom unit, the last two dwellings being sited at ground-floor level for the use of disabled people.
The planning principles adopted included keeping the common circulation areas and services central — all-internal kitchens and bathrooms back on to the spinal corridor which occupies the central strip of the former nave space (Fig 45).
To obtain additional internal volume and a satisfactory relationship between new floor levels and existing or modified window openings, the original ground floor, which consisted of two panels of suspended timber construction under the areas formerly accommodating pews, separated and flanked by strips of tiled floor on a solid base where the gangways ran, was removed to give a further 400mm (16in) of height.
The resulting cavity below the central ground floor corridor has been used to house horizontal drain-runs and other services.
Naturally, the new dwellings had to be so arranged as to satisfy the requirements of building regulations and a significant stipulation of the old Constructional By-laws for Inner London under which this design was produced, related to the amount of daylight which must be admitted to habitable rooms.
The requirement of the old London Building Acts was that an area of window equal to at least 10 per cent of its floor area should be provided to light a habitable room.
This requirement is continued by the current Building Regulations (1985).
Thus it can be seen that there is a clear relationship between the depth of each habitable room which is confined to the width of a church's nave arcade bay and the usable area of the related existing window in the side wall.
It is common for these perforations in the broad surfaces of church external walls to be small.
At All Saints and St Barnabas the difficulty of a comparatively small total area of existing windows failing to light adequately a much increased area of floor-space has been overcome in two ways.
First, the reduction of the ground-floor level so that five storeys could be accommodated satisfactorily in the building height meant that the new first floor would cut across the aisle windows if they were left unmodified.
As the existing windows were more than large enough to light the second-storey accommodation to building regulations standards, it was decided to shorten these openings.
The enlarged opaque panel thus formed below each of these ‘paired lancet’ windows was then perforated with a new opening containing a steel-framed French window to admit light to each living-room of the outer ranges of ground floor rooms (Plate 27).
Secondly, the third-floor accommodation, lit only by the small clerestory windows of the nave (composed of shallower paired lancets), managed to obtain the necessary amount of daylight from the glazing being placed at the rear of the original traceried stonework where the splayed internal window-revels generate an area exposed to daylight which is larger than the window area seen from outside (Fig 46).
Services and Construction
Individual gas supplies were not provided in the services included in the rebuilding, partly because of the difficulties in projecting the resultant chimneys and flues through the external surfaces — the appearance of which was closely watched by officials of English Heritage.
The dwellings are heated by communal gas boilers, the fuel used being heat-metered into each flat — occupants have the option of reducing or suspending the flow of the low-pressure hot water central hearing — while a ‘landlord's meter’ records the amount of heat used in common areas.
The structure of the ‘infilling’ construction relies on support provided by new load-bearing masonry cross-walls which were installed in this lateral alignment on the centre-lines of the nave piers.
‘Separating’ floors — ie, those which separate one ‘layer’of dwellings from the flats located above or below — are of concrete construction and most of the new concrete floors were executed by laying down pre-cast concrete planks which then received a steel-reinforced concrete screed as a structural topping.
As the existing and new foundations are founded on a common ‘ballast’ subsoil, it was not found necessary to install movement joints between the new and the old constructions, although this policy was adopted in the reconstruction of St James's, Knatchbull Road.
Where individual dwellings have intermediate floors, these were carried out in traditional timber joisted construction, the joists being hung from the new masonry cross-walls on joist-hangers.
In addition to the residential accommodation, the converted church includes an entrance and main stair lobby which extends to the full height of the north aisle, incorporates two arches of the original nave arcade and gives an impressive indication of the powerful verticality of the original church interior.
An adjoining one-and-a-half-storey-high common-room and a laundry associated with the rear entrance are also provided for the use of residents.
Constructional problems which were encountered during the contract included the discovery of the serious decay of a considerable area of the Kentish ragstone facing.
Where this problem was found at high level on the aisle gable walls, it was owed to a poor constructional detail.
The original stones of the sloping gable coping had simply been bedded on the slate-roof covering of the aisles at their verges so that rain entering the joints between the coping stones had saturated the top courses of the stone facing and caused premature decay.
This condition has been corrected by replacing the defective detail with a conventional sloping stone coping oversailing a ‘secret gutter’ of in situ lead which terminates the new roof slating, the new coping being bedded on an impervious damp-proof course (Plates 28 and 29).
Replacement of the eroded ragstone facing could have provided a problem were it not for the fact that the builder who was employed to undertake the conversion was dismantling an identically constructed church at Canterbury at the same time and thus it was possible to import salvaged ragstone from the demolition for re-use at All Saints and St Barnabas.
As this description of the reason for the decay of the stonework suggests, the original roof surfaces also presented increasing problems and complete replacement of the roof slating was necessary.
In contrast to the policy adopted at St James's, Knatchbull Road, it was decided to re-roof All Saints and St Barnabas with natural slates rather than the cheaper synthetic slates that had been used on the earlier project.
In this way, slates salvaged in the process of stripping the roof could be re-used, and, in fact, one complete nave roof-slope was reslated with salvaged material.
Because the salvaged slates were of a size which is not readily obtainable today, the other roof-slope was reclad with new Welsh slates of conventional ‘Countess’ dimensions; 500x250mm (20 x 10in).
The different sizes of slate used on each main roof-slope is of little consequence because the two surfaces cannot be seen together.
Because All Saints and St Barnabas has a broadly symmetrical plan and it is therefore logical to dispose dwellings to either side of a spinal corridor, the church has been converted in accordance with this principle at the lowest levels where the cross-section is widest (Fig 47).
In conformity with the conventional treatment, where the cross-section narrows from a church with a central nave and side aisles at the lower levels to a narrow, lofty nave only at upper levels, optimum use is made of this space by filling it with a single range of dwellings.
Because it is a high volume, it is usually necessary to install two-storey units in this space (compare St James Court, Farnham).
In the case of the very high void at All Saints and St Barnabas, three-storey units take up most of the volume.
This arrangement denies natural light to the body of the spinal corridors which serve the ground-, first- and second-floor dwellings, giving them an institutional quality that is only slightly reduced by the relief from the cellular treatment of space offered by the lofty entrance lobby and main staircase space at the west end.
Nevertheless, the insertion of twenty-five comfortable and characterful dwellings into the complicated interior of this church is a tour-de-force of three-dimensional geometry.
The ‘collegiate’ quality of the three-level dwellings which are sited in the topmost section of the nave and which are reached via integral winding staircases is particularly delightful.
The project architect was Angela Clemo of Southbank Architects who continued the work following the reconstitution of the Society for Co-operative Dwellings into a secondary housing co-operative which does not offer in-house architectural services.
The builder was R. Durtnell Ltd.
Schools
Specialised buildings for the education of children have a relatively short history in Britain.
Throughout the greater part of the nineteenth century, most people were averse to official intervention in social and family affairs and the Victorian age can be seen as an era in which individualism was the leading social ethic.
The two main political parties — Tories and Liberals — agreed on a minimal role for the state in the nation's affairs.
It was widely believed that if the individual was allowed to follow his own interests, within the law of the land, then general good would result.
Yet many people in Victorian Britain were not indifferent to the widening divisions between rich and poor that seemed to be a consequence of this ideology.
Most saw it as an evil, although the ways suggested to combat the condition varied greatly.
Eventually, it was recognised that some of the results of the laissez-faire mentality could pose a threat to social stability and the health of rich and poor alike.
Hence there was an extension of the powers of local government and the state intervened after 1870 to provide universal elementary education.
The establishment of a system of elementary education available to all the country's children was one of the great achievements of late Victorian Britain..
Before W. E. Forster's Elementary Education Act of 1870, educational provision was haphazard.
Secondary education was available for the more fortunate and higher education was reserved for the privileged few.
In early Victorian times illiteracy was widespread.
The churches played a significant part in dealing with this condition and the parish schools were the most important providers of elementary education.
They were were usually built with donations from private individuals, many prompted by charitable feelings, others by the belief that education was an antidote to revolution.
Government grants became available later in the period to assist all denominations to establish schools.
The parish school was usually small and relied on one teacher, whose small house was often part of the school buildings.
The school master might be assisted by an unqualified ‘pupil-teacher’.
There was a shortage of trained teachers and the planning of schools reflected this circumstance; most of the instruction was done in a large school-room, off which there might be one or two classrooms which were used for teaching smaller groups.
A larger school might have separate school-rooms for boys and girls.
An entrance porch, cloakrooms and lavatories made up the rest of the accommodation.
The simplest arrangement is apparent in the original building of the village school at Shawell, Leicestershire, the conversion of which is described and illustrated later in this chapter.
The original fabric of Shawell school also displays another quality that is characteristic of mid-Victorian church schools — the neo-Gothic style of architecture.
An urban example of this type of school, St Peter's at Vauxhall, South London, is also described in this chapter.
Probably the adoption of the Gothic style for church schools is not so surprising when it is considered that the design of schools was a subject in which the influential Ecclesiological Society — the significant impact of whose views on church design has already been referred to — was prepared to interest itself.
In an article of 1847 in its journal,The Ecclesiologist , the society advocated a separate roof for the school-room and the headmaster's house with the classroom set at right-angles to it and a lean-to cloakroom.
Separation of the sexes was also considered desirable where this could be achieved.
The school should be ‘the prettiest building in the village next to the church’.
Of course in conformity with ecclesiological principles, schools were expected to be in the Gothic style.
High Anglican architects such as William Butterfield (1814–1900) and George Edmund Street (1824–81) took up these ideas and produced a series of parish schools which combine simple planning and construction with details they had developed for church architecture.
The elevations, as well as the planning, are frequently extremely plain.
In St Peter's school at Vauxhall which is described later, we see the work of another very talented church architect, John Loughborough Pearson (1817–97).
The design of Victorian village schools often manifests a concern for the use of local building materials and the desire to create a picturesque silhouette.
In the vast majority of these buildings, the entire accommodation was single storey, the central schoolroom being lit by very high, arched windows located in the gables.
The problem of designing parish schools in towns was greater.
Often they are not unlike village schools, but where space was limited on a cramped city-centre site, multi-storeyed buildings were erected.
In an extreme case, it might be necessary to put the playground on the roof.
J. L. Pearson avoided this arrangement at St Peter's by confining the two-storey teaching accommodation to the perimeter of the wedge-shaped site at the rear of his church, the central ‘spine’ of the plan linking the blocks on the east and west site boundaries to create two largely internal courtyards which operated as children's playgrounds (Fig 53).
Like Shawell school, St Peter's was built in the 1860s and so preceded the Elementary Education Act of 1870 that called for large numbers of schools, mainly in crowded urban areas, to be built with public rather than private money.
London, for example, had over four hundred such Board schools by 1895.
Many of them were designed by E. R. Robson (1835–1917) who was the first architect to the London School Board.
Robson's work was influential, partly because in 1874 he published School Architecture , a book in which he illustrated a number of London Board schools.
As they often occupy cramped sites, London Board schools are usually multi-storey buildings.
In their planning they retain the large central school-room, but the provision of classrooms is greater than the norm established by the church schools.
The members of the School Boards were more secular in their thinking than the builders of the earlier parish schools, and although some designers used the Gothic style, it was argued that ‘…a continuation of the semi-ecclesiastical style…would appear to be inappropriate and lacking in anything to mark the great change which is coming over the education of the country’.
The new ‘Queen Anne’ manner of the time seemed to be a style that would permit greater freedom of planning and lacked the associations with religion evoked by neo-Gothic forms.
The London Board schools were usually built of yellow London stock brick with red brick dressings, although the later buildings, and the majority of contemporary schools erected in provincial cities, were carried out entirely in red brick.
Tall, white-painted window frames, subdivided by many glazing bars, were placed under segmental arches of red brickwork and the most prominent features were the high gables which gave the buildings a varied and lively skyline.
This craggy silhouette invariably was further enhanced with tall chimney stacks and, often, a crowning bellcote, cupola or turreted staircase towers.
Most of the early London Board schools have been replaced or altered and most of those which survive remain in use as schools.
However, the inner city depopulation of recent years has led to falling rolls in city schools and the consequent rationalisation of local education has caused certain Board schools to become redundant, releasing them for alternative uses.
In Bethnal Green, in East London, two such schools at Olga Street and Bow Brook, have been converted into dwellings.
The planning principle of converting the barrack-like main blocks of these buildings into flats has been the exploitation of the 4.2m (14ft) standard height of each classroom by siting a mezzanine ‘sleeping gallery’ on the internally located kitchenette/bathroom areas, overlooking a ‘double-height’living-room which is lit by the large and lofty classroom windows.
An identical approach has been adopted in the conversion into flats of the former Ducie High School, Greenheys, Manchester.
The conversion to a house of the former village school at Airton, in the Yorkshire Dales, which is one of the following case studies, shows how a similarly ‘standard’ type of local authority school — in this case in a rural location — can be transformed into a convenient and characterful dwelling without adversely affecting its external appearance.
The Old School, Shawell, Leicestershire
Shawell is a small village close to the boundary of Leicestershire with both Warwickshire and Northamptonshire.
As an old-established settlement, it had boasted its own school since 1604 and the schoolmaster's house of this date, although much altered, survives on an adjoining site.
The school was founded as the result of a bequest made by a local landowner, John Elkington Esq, and a copy of his will, dated 2 April 1604, is in the possession of the present owners of the school, Mr and Mrs Goddard.
Although the surviving school building as of much later date, it has a fairly complicated history.
A school-room of brick construction was erected on the site of the ancient building in 1862.
A simple, single school-room with an entrance porch on the east side, it catered for the children of Shawell and the surrounding villages until after World War I. It is significant that even such a simple building as this was not immune from the stylistic preferences of contemporary architects and the steeply pitched roof-slopes of the schoolroom are ‘stratified’ with bands of alternating plain and fish-scale pattern tiles in true ‘High Victorian’fashion.
This treatment is shown clearly in the photograph of the east elevation, taken in Edwardian times, with the schoolchildren crowding the entrance steps (Plate 31).
Similarly, the three-light windows below pointed arches and the brickwork of the otherwise plain gables is relieved by a diaper pattern formed in ‘header’ bricks of contrasting colour.
By 1922 the single school-room was no longer adequate to meet the needs of the local school population, so the full width of the building was extended eastwards under a pair of pitched roofs to create a second classroom, head-teacher's room and internal side entrance lobby replacing the demolished attached porch (Plate 32).
The final alteration came in 1959 when, at long last, internal WCs serving the staff and pupils were added in a single-storey flat-roofed extension to the south.
It will be appreciated that even after these enlargement, Shawell school was not a large building.
When a new junior school was built in a nearby village in the late 1970s, the building became redundant.
The present owners knew the village through visits to a local pub and became aware that the old school was standing empty.
Their offer to buy the building was accepted by the Leicestershire County Council and they moved onto the building in 1981.
Since then they have been effecting a gradual programme of repair, restoration and alteration.
It was plain that the existing accommodation — two classrooms separated by a half-glazed folding partition, a head teacher's office and WC block — did not provide an arrangement that could be easily adapted to give convenient living space.
An essential first step was to create a bedroom and this was formed from the larger part of the former WC block.
By retaining the other elements of the plan of this block, the main entrance that had been created in 1959 could be maintained as the ‘front door’ with the bathroom/WC being reached from the adjacent entrance hall (Fig 48).
It was similarly easy to convert the head-teacher's office into a kitchen adjoining the side-entrance lobby.
This left a suitable strategy for conversion of the former classrooms to be decided.
Because twin gables flanking a central valley gutter had been adopted to cap the elevation of the 1922 extension, it was not possible to form an upper storey in this section.
Fortunately, the classroom located below this block was the smaller of the two, and because it adjoined the kitchen, it made a logical dining-room.
To the rear of the glazed, folding partition lay the larger, higher volume of the original school-room.
It was believed that this area offered more opportunities for conversion into convenient living space.
However, the most significant obstacles to this plan were the deep trusses of heavy timbers which spanned the roof space at two locations to brace purlins supporting the rafters of each roof-slope (Fig 49).
Instead of giving a clear internal height of 6.9 (22–1/2ft)(extending up into the apex of the roof space), headroom beneath these two trusses was reduced to 4.4m (14ft) at the junction of their curved braces with the tie-beams, thus denying the opportunity to install two storeys of habitable accommodation at these points.
To make optimum use of the volume, an ingenious device was employed.
It seemed sensible to reserve each end bay of the roof space for a bedroom, lit by a new window installed either in an adjacent roof-slope or in the flanking gable.
Each bedroom would be reached via a staircase sited in the central bay, but headroom for a lower-storey living-room could not be achieved below this stair and still give an adequate height for a door opening beneath the truss tie-beams, allowing unobstructed access from the main landing into the bedrooms.
Thus the stair was installed with a mezzanine-level landing, giving a headroom below of only 2.05m (6–1/2ft)— ie, the height of a conventional internal door — and allowing an equivalent headroom below the tie-beams of the roof trusses above.
A short flight of three steps beyond the line of each truss and to the rear of each bedroom door then ascends to the floor level of each end-bay bedroom (Fig 50).
In this way, the new upper floor is prevented from crossing the original three-light arched windows which serve the end bays of the lower storey, and the stair is prevented from conflicting with the central window of this range by the introduction of a further quarter-landing at an intermediate level that turns its lowest flight parallel to the side elevation at a level just below the window-sill (Fig 49).
The area below the stair then becomes part of the lounge, extending back from the glazed folding doors that separate it from the dining-room (Fig 48).
To introduce daylight into each of the new upper-storey bedrooms, instead of puncturing the patterned brickwork of the gables, it was decided to construct large dormer windows matching the style of the existing windows of the lower storey.
these have been installed under new steeply pitched roofs which harmonise with the form of the main roof (Plate 33).
The cost of installing these features and retiling the remainder of the roof was assisted by a Repairs Grant provided by the local authority.
The need for remedial work on the roof covering became apparent when the worn-out lead valley gutters began to leak, although discomfort from this source had to be endured for almost two years until the Repairs Grant was awarded.
Perhaps the regrettable feature of the conversion of Shawell school — which is being carried out with great care and sensitivity — is the retention of the 1950s flat-roofed WCs extension which, almost gratuitously, fails to relate in any way to the form of the original building.
It is unfortunate that the space enclosed by the 1862 building, together with its 1922 extension, was too small or too lacking in services provision to offer a convenient corner for installation of the new bathroom and WC.
The logical re-use of existing services has led to the retention of the overly utilitarian postwar outshot when it would have been better to demolish it and to restore the four-square appearance of the pre-war building.
Village School, Airton, North Yorkshire
This village junior school, built to a standard county council plan in the inter-war period, like Shawell school, was converted into a dwelling by the efforts of the occupants.
The building was purchased by a local clothing manufacturer to provide a family dwelling and a small office for the administration of his company.
Like Shawell school, it is a high-roofed structure, but it is slightly more complicated in having a T-shaped plan (Fig 51).
Separate entrances for boys and girls were located in the small north wing which forms the leg of the ‘T’(Plate 34).
In 1980, the owner approached a local architect, John Wharton, to provide him with a design that could be easily executed by direct labour and it was immediately apparent that exploitation of the high volume of the main east-west wing of the building would be the best way of obtaining the maximum accommodation.
Although the apex of the pitched roof of this wing was 6.5m (21ft) above floor level, unlike the arrangement that applies at Shawell school, the internal space did not extend up to the roof ridge-board.
A broad central strip of flat ceiling existing above the classrooms to give a maximum headroom of only 4.3m (14ft) which could not be divided horizontally to give two storeys of habitable room-height.
Hence it was decided to remove this ceiling and its supporting joists and to resite it at a higher level.
This was achieved by installing new ceiling joists, at 400mm (16in) centres, bearing on the top surfaces of the large purlins that support the rafters at the centre of their span.
Following the installation of a suspended ceiling of plasterboard and plaster skim coat below these joists, a headroom of 2.6m (8–1/2ft) could be achieved in the new upper storey, the floor of which was formed from boards nailed to 50 x 150mm (2 x 6in) joists at 400mm (16in) centres.
Below this floor, a headroom of more than 2.4m (8ft) resulted in the residual lower-storey space.
The main east-west wing of the school originally accommodated two classrooms — as at Shawell, divided by a glazed, sliding-folding partition.
Above this central partition lay a heavy timber roof-truss, supporting the purlins and extending down to suspended ceiling level.
As it was impractical to remove this essential structural element, the new first-floor construction had to terminate on this line, so the added floor was restricted to the east side of the central truss.
The western half of this wing could then be dedicated to a ‘double-height’ living-room with French windows opening out, through a deepened former window opening, on to the garden.
Hence, over this section, it was not necessary to remove the existing ceiling, but a desire to emphasise the still lofty volume of this room caused the client to request the insertion of a ‘minstrel's gallery’ upper level over part of this area.
By the introduction of a 75 x 75mm (3 x 3in) square-section hollow steel post sited close to the centre of the room for the support of heavy timber trimmers, it was possible to construct a gallery which extends between the flank walls on modestly-sized 38 x 150mm (1–1/2 x 6in) joists, carrying boards which give a platform 2m (6–1/2ft) wide overlooking the larger part of the living-room.
Headroom equivalent to door head-height could just be achieved both below and above this gallery and under the retained ceiling.
Access to the gallery is obtained via a removable ladder.
The remainder of the upper-storey accommodation, which was created at a slightly higher level in the eastern half of the main east-west wing, is reached from the ground floor via a spiral stair.
It comprises two single bedrooms and a double bedroom.
At ground-floor level, the stair devolves into a central hall, from which access is gained to the single lower-storey bedroom, a waiting lobby associated with the office, and the bathroom/WC as well as the living-room which is reached by passing below the gallery.
Also reached through a door located below the gallery is the kitchen, which re-uses the former ‘Boys' Entrance’ to the school as the new main entrance to the dwelling.
Apart from housing the bathroom/WC and the kitchen, there is sufficient space in the small norther wing of the school for a small utility room to be provided en suite with the kitchen.
Apart from the deepening and modification of the existing central window openings of each main gable to create garden access doors, the only other alterations to the external appearance were modifications to the existing very high classroom windows of the east and south elevations to reconcile them with the newly inserted upper floor and gallery.
Because these two constructions are at different levels, the existing fixed and ‘hopper-vent’ windows of eight lights were removed and replaced with sash-pattern frames incorporating top-hung, open-out casements, boarded panels infilling the gap between the head of the lower-storey vent and the sill of the upper-storey window (Plate 35).
As there is a trio of high and narrow lights in each main gable, the problem of reconciling this glazing with the added upper floor was less critical than in a case where large windows, surmounted by pointed arches, occupy the gables — this is almost a standard feature of Victorian village schools.
As applies with the treatment of such windows in the western gables of churches, it is probably kinder to the existing architecture to avoid a ‘collision’ between the new floor and the broad and high-arched opening.
In most cases of the conversion of schools that incorporate this feature, the owners have wisely left space between the edge of the added floor and the window to give a mezzanine platform overlooking a ‘double-height’ living-room, as in the arrangement adopted at the west end of the main wing of Airton school.
Because the stone-built, partly render-clad building proved to be extremely sound, little alteration to the exterior or renewal of materials was necessary.
Indeed, it was even found possible to reuse the characteristic roof-top ventilator of the school-room as the vented enclosure in which to terminate internally located pipes that provide fresh air to the new bedrooms.
St Peter's School, Vauxhall, London SE11
The church of St Peter, Vauxhall, was built between 1863 and 1865 on part of the area formerly occupied by the Vauxhall Pleasure Gardens; its altar is on the site of the Neptune Fountain, and the late-eighteenth-century house which adjoins the church and is now the vicarage was originally the home of the manager of the gardens.
Its architect was J. L. Pearson, a highly accomplished church designer, most of whose work was for the ‘High Church’ wing of Anglicanism.
Because the established church played a major role in the provision of education before the passing of the Elementary Education Act of 1870, it is not surprising that the lofty, brick-built church of St Peter shares its site with a school.
The site is shaped like a truncated wedge and Pearson placed the majority of the school buildings along its east and north sides.
However, this does not provide sufficient accommodation, so a high two-storey wing was erected on the west boundary and was linked across to the eastern range by a short ‘spinal’ block, creating two courtyards following completion of the church, for the erection of the school preceded construction of the church by two years.
The northern courtyard, with a fairly open aspect to the west, was the boys' playground, while the south court provided a play area for the girls.
The building not only accommodated schools for boys and girls, but also an art school and a soup kitchen (later converted into a school-room).
Alterations to Pearson's design were made by the architect J. T. Knowles in 1873.
Over the years, the buildings were subject to many more changes and extensions as facilities were added or improved.
The aspect of the north playground to the west was largely lost with the construction of an independent WC block, and part of the eastern range fronting St Oswald's Place, which originally accommodated the art school, was rebuilt as a flat-roofed block after bomb damage during World War II (Plate 36).
In terms of consistency of architectural style, this was a regrettable change, because Pearson's carefully crafted High Victorian Gothic treatment of tall sash-windows spanned by pointed arches of ‘polychromatic’ brickwork was replaced by a much more utilitarian brick ‘box’, fenestrated with standard steel-framed casements arranged horizontally and contrasting strongly with the pre-existing forms.
The development of more modern schools in the locality, combined with falling numbers of pupils from this depopulating ‘inner city’ area, caused the closure of the school in 1977.
The north wing of the otherwise redundant building was leased to a gymnasium/health club.
In 1982, the school was put on the market by the agents to the Church Commissioners and the Inner London Education Authority.
At that time, Russell Mills, an artist who was looking for a dwelling that would be large enough also to provide studio space, realised that the building might subdivide suitably to meet, at low cost, the similar needs of fellow artists and designers.
With the help of an architect, Tony Fretton, he deduced that even if the north wing continued as a gymnasium, the remainder of the accommodation would divide satisfactorily into six residential/studio units.
Despite the fact that only three weeks were available between his first viewing of the premises and the date for submission of offers, Russell Mills managed to find five collaborators, and their tender succeeded in competition against bids from office developers, engineering firms and an art college.
The would-be occupants and their architect had successfully, demonstrated to the vendors that the character of the Grade II listed building would remain undisturbed by its conversion into dwellings.
The six participants also took a risk in buying the building without planning permission, but some months later they obtained consent for change of use from school premises to residential/studio units and the architect was able to instruct a builder to commence Stage 1 — the conversion of the building into six basic, serviced ‘shells’.
This stage of the work took nine months.
The north wing of the school would have made three extra units, but as it was rented out to the health club, the new owners decided to maintain this arrangement.
Because it is not possible for more than four people to share a freehold, the owners of each of the six units formed themselves into a management company in order to buy the building; each became a director of the company and was given a 999-year lease of his or her dwelling.
The purchase price of each unit was chiefly related to its area, although other factors entered in, such as the amenity offered by the single private garden.
It was also clear that some of the new occupants needed studios with specific qualities.
For instance, two potters who share a unit required ground-floor premises to accommodate their heavy kiln and to allow easy access from the street for the delivery of materials.
Similarly, a photographer who also occupies a ground-floor unit needed a huge room that could operate as a photographic studio.
A designer chose the only flat with a garden and a fashion consultant, Juliet Mann, who is similarly keen on horticulture, chose the only unit with a flat roof so that she could establish a roof-top conservatory above her flat.
From the start, the participants decided that firm agreements should be made in advance in writing.
Thus, their solicitor drew up a document detailing joint responsibility for communal maintenance of roofs, courtyards and external paintwork.
Money from the rent of the gymnasium is put back into the company to pay for repairs, contract window-cleaning and other matters of mutual concern.
If any of the present owners wish to sell their share of the converted building, the remaining directors must approve the new purchaser, but otherwise the dwellings can be sold in the normal way.
It is clear that a main attraction of the project for its participants was the opportunity offered to obtain a large amount of space in a Central London location for a modest outlay.
In fact, the average size of unit 110sq m (1,200sq ft) and since the school was purchased in 1982 for £162,000, an average-size unit cost £27,000.
However, all the new occupants were faced with considerable expense in converting their areas of the building into habitable accommodation because each newly formed unit lacked even basic services provision, and by 1986 most people had spent an additional £55–60,000 on their conversion.
Tony Fretton, the architect who had devised the original division of areas to form six units and who had advised on the allocation of flats, was retained by both Russell Mills and Juliet Mann to design the interiors of their dwellings.
Russell and Ann Mills' flat is particularly impressive as it is located on the upper floor of the school's west wing (Plate 37 and Fig 53) and so extends up into the apex of the steeply-pitched roof.
The vast room of 21.3 x 5.4m (70 x 18ft) had been divided into three classrooms separated by half-glazed partitions.
One of these was removed to form the large general living area, at the end of which is the dining table, with the kitchen hidden behind panelling formed from painted tongue-and-groove boarding.
The partitioned end of the room is north-facing and makes an ideal studio, lit, as it is, by the original tall neo-Gothic windows.
The architect has cleverly preserved the integrity of the lofty space by restricting an inserted upper level to the central section of the room.
This zone accommodates a double bedroom with en suite bathroom and, being mainly in the roof space, is lit by a large new roof-light.
The necessary insulation of the thin roof construction against heat loss was achieved by draping a glass-fibre quilt, laminated with aluminium foil, beneath the rafters.
The silvery underside of this material is exposed to the interiors of the studio and living/dining areas, but these are such lofty spaces that this inexpensive treatment does not detract from their grandeur.
The colour scheme is monochromatic throughout in accordance with Russell Mills' preference to keep the space ‘…clear and simple, everything visually quiet’.
Selective demolition of some post-Victorian accretions (like the independent WC block on the western boundary) helped to make the building more suitable for its new use, but otherwise external alterations were very modest.
This follows the ethic pursued in the conversion of similarly old city-centre premises in New York of leaving exteriors more or less alone so as not to attract attention.
Other than some waterwashing of the exuberant polychromatic brick arch that surmounts the entrance to the former south playground (now the communal car park), no cleaning of external brickwork has been undertaken.
In the same way, only modest repairs were needed to the steeply pitched slated roofs — wholesale reroofing was not necessary.
The northern playground is in the process of being transformed into a communal garden as earth and foliage replace characterless tarmac.
The scheme is an impressive realisation of the idea of combining uses within units contained in a single building — in this case, living space and craft/design studios.
However, it must be emphasised that the flexibility shown by the local authority in approving this combination of residential and occupational functions within individual units is very unusual and was probably encouraged by the planners' recognition that this approach could act to conserve a listed building with the least possible alteration of its character.
The combination of different uses in separate parts of one building, rather than within individual units, is dealt with in the final chapter.
Mills, Factories and Warehouses
Probably the most common type of conversion project at the present time is the adaptation of a mill or warehouse into a block of dwellings.
The riverside warehouses of the London docklands have become favourite subjects for this treatment during the last decade and an outstanding conversion of one such building — Thames Tunnel Mills — is described in this chapter, while the final chapter of the book contains an analysis of a similar building that has been converted to house a range of new uses, including sixty apartments.
However, conversion of more modest manufacturing and storage buildings into individual dwellings has occurred over many years — possibly even centuries.
It will be appreciated that before widespread industrialisation, the erection of highly specialised buildings was something of a rarity.
It used to be the normal practice to adapt buildings for different purposes over their lives.
Evidence of the logical development of this practice can also be found in one ow two early industrial buildings.
At least one small nineteenth-century factory in Dentorn, Greater Manchester, as an area noted for the manufacture of hats, was built with certain architectural features included so that it might easily be converted into a terrace of houses.
should there be a downturn in trade.
Only since the general adoption of the policy of specialisation engendered by the Industrial Revolution has it become common to demolish and rebuild rather than to adapt and extend.
So natural had this practice become that only in the past fifteen or twenty years has there grown up in Britain the idea of conserving redundant industrial and commercial buildings and putting them to new uses.
Early candidates for this treatment among industrial buildings, and prior to the enthusiasms of the last twenty years.
were traditional watermills and windmills which had become redundant with the introduction of steam, and later electrical power.
Before describing the opportunities and shortcomings of such structures for conversion to domestic use, it is necessary to say something about the process of grinding grain to produce flour, because the anatomy of these buildings was dictated by this process.
Corn-milling is one of the oldest and most necessary human occupations.
The main good grains on which we depend for an essential part of our daily diet come from plants belonging to the family of grasses and cannot be readily digested until the tough outer shells are broken up and, sometimes, removed.
A grain of wheat, for example, consists essentially of three parts: the bran, made up of several outer coverings, the germ (the embryo of the new plant) and the endosperm, the starchy centre which is made into flour.
Various methods have been developed to break open such cereal grains and to extract flour.
During the Iron Age, the first rotary mill appeared in Britain.
It consisted of a stationary lower bed stone and an upper stone that was turned above it while grain was fed through a central hole or ‘eye’ in the top stone.
The grain was ground between the faces of the stones which came to be grooved to give a better cutting action, and the ground meal was distributed to the outside edge of the stones for collection.
This method of grinding grain had to await the human skill to fabricate tools from two materials because three wooden parts were essential to the rotary mill: the rynd which bridged the eye of the runner stone and enabled it to be hung on top of the wooden spindle , and the handle , used for turning the running stone.
The spindle, projecting upwards from the centre of the bed stone, was at first fixed to carry the runner stone a little above the bed stone, but later the elevation of the spindle could be altered to allow regulation of the gap between the stones and so control the fineness of the meal.
The rynd and the spindle soon came to be made from iron to be more durable, and the handle was developed to become a lever for turning the runner stone by animal power.
Eventually, the handle was superseded by a power drive applied to the spindle, and its successor is the central shaft of all windmills and watermills.
Water power was first used to turn millstones about two thousand years ago, the earliest waterwheels being horizontal, fixed to the projecting lower end of the spindle.
From the first century AD, the principles of gearing were understood and used by the Romans, so that a horizontal millstone could be turned by a vertical waterwheel.
The Romans probably introduced the geared watermill and are first recorded in England during the last quarter of the twelfth century.
By the end of the thirteenth century, they were common landmarks in the English countryside.
During the eighteenth century, corn-milling had to keep pace with the growth of population and industry.
The form of mills had developed only slowly since the Middle Ages, but by the middle of the eighteenth century the technology of wind and water power was being investigated scientifically and there was competition for mill sites because of enlarging industrial needs.
Established corn mills often had first claim to the use of watercourses, but their machinery needed modernising to improve efficiency.
Steam power was first used to drive corn mills in the 1780s following its adoption in textile mills and the building of Albion Mill, beside the Thames at Blackfriars, London, in 1784, greatly influenced the development of milling.
It was the first purpose-built flour factory and had twenty sets of millstones driven by two steam-engines.
The success of Albion Mill marked the beginning of the move from the trade's dependence on small country watermills and windmills, often with only two or three sets of stones, to larger merchant mills built close to centres of corn trading and importing.
In the late nineteenth century, when vast quantities of grain were shipped into British ports from overseas, the milling industry became concentrated at ports and in towns with good canal, rail or road links.
The method of milling grain between two stones probably reached its peak in Britain in the watermills and windmills of the early nineteenth century.
The rival method of using metal rollers for milling corn had been tried as early as the sixteenth century but was generally only adopted for malt-milling until, in 1834, a Swiss engineer substituted rollers for the original stones in the reconstruction of an existing mill.
In consequence of his success, mills using both stones and rollers were built in Britain from the 1860s.
The first successful flour-manufacturing plant using only rollers was the Manchester mill established by Henry Simon in 1878.
By 1881 he had built the first fully automatic milling plant at Chester and from that time, mechanically powered roller-milling rapidly supplanted stone-milling in the mass production of flour.
In medieval times, bringing corn to the mill was the responsibility of the customer.
It was brought by the customers when required for use rather than all at once so that large-scale storage was not needed at the mills.
Horse-drawn and water-borne transport became important with the expansion of trade during the eighteenth century.
To simplify the handling of sacks of corn, facilities such as loading ramps, waggon bays and internal or external hoists that could lift sacks to the top of the mill for storage were installed.
Both windmills and watermills were built taller or larger to accommodate additional machinery and grain storage space, and an extra floor was often provided above the rest of the accommodation so that grain could be emptied into bulk storage bins and led through spouts to millstones as required.
In modern mills, grain is stored in silos which are often separate from the mill and near to a bulk intake point.
The business of manhandling sacks has been replaced by automation, the grain being conveyed mechanically or pneumatically direct to the mill.
Types of Mills
Windmills
Various types of windmill emerged, and it is possible to distinguish the characteristics of these among the survivors.
Post Mills were first built in the twelfth century and there is little difference in design between the early examples and those constructed in the nineteenth century.
Built mainly of wood, the rectangular boarded body of this type of mill turns on a central post to face the wind.
At the foot of the post are horizontal beams and diagonal beams to carry the weight of the uprights.
It is plain that such essentially lightweight structures, the form of which is determined almost entirely by operational considerations, may offer few opportunities for conversion into comfortable living accommodation.
Smock or frock mills are so called because their shape is said to resemble a man dressed in a smock.
Constructed from wood on a circular base, this type of mill was usually eight-sided, although six-, ten- and twelve-sided mills were also built.
In this type, only the cap of the mill and sails rotate to work the grinding stones, so the wooden walls are either sloped or battered to allow free movement of these elements.
These mills, which sometimes have a tarred brickwork plinth with the wooden structure painted white, are more frequently converted into houses than the less enduring post mills.
Tower mills are similar to smock mills in shape and working machinery, but brick or stone is used for the structure instead of wood.
Porous brickwork tower mills were often tarred against the weather and in Sussex they were frequently tile-hung.
Tower mills can be seen all over Britain, but south-east England houses more wooden smock mills.
In East Anglia, the Midlands and the North, stone and brick-built mills become more common.
Many mills in low-lying country were built to power drainage pumps.
Although many windmills have been converted to domestic use, it is plain that there are distinct limitations on the opportunities for winning convenient living accommodation from these structures.
A major constraint upon the straightforward re-use of a windmill as a dwelling is imposed by its circular or polygonal plan which tends to conflict with conventional cubical furniture and may only be reconciled satisfactorily with purpose-made, built-in fitting (Plate 40).
The cylindrical rooms which are logically formed within the tower at several levels are usually of quite small diameter — indeed, decreasing diameter the nearer they are to the top of the tower.
Windmills share these limitations with other cylindrical structures such as lighthouses and martello towers and these qualities have tended to cause most owners of these types of buildings to regard the tower form as only one element of a new house created from the salvaged structure, the remainder of the accommodation being a newly built extension which more suitably houses a spacious entrance hall, additional bedrooms and, possibly, an attached garage.
An example of such a conversion, in which the former windmill is only partly recognisable, has recently been completed at Ramsey, Cambridgeshire (Fig 54).
However, it is only fair to add that, in this case, the surviving windmill structure was little more than a ruinous stone stump before conversion work began (Plate 41).
Most owners of ‘recycled’ windmills are also naturally disinclined to reinstate the wooden sail structures of their mills because of the considerable maintenance liability which is imposed by restoration of these complex and highly exposed features.
Watermills
Following the Romans' introduction of the geared watermill into England, many such mills were established — the Domesday Book lists 5,624 mills, although a good proportion of these would have been worked by horses or oxen rather than water.
In the Middle Ages these mills were the property of the lord of the manor who possessed ‘soke rights’, which meant that anyone growing corn on his manor was obliged to have it ground at the lord's mill because hand mills were outlawed.
The miller would then deduct a proportion of the grain in payment for his services.
As a result of the soke system, the medieval miller was often the subject of suspicion and distrust.
The amount of toll-in-kind payable for the service of milling the grain varied according to region and period, but the average charge was one-sixteenth part of the grain by volume.
No miller was allowed to buy or sell grain or flour except surplus toll corn until after the reign of Elizabeth I and although the influence of the soke began to wane during the seventeenth century, toll-in-kind was not replaced by a monetary charge until an act of 1796.
Even then, old habits died hard, and at Wakefield, Yorkshire, one of the most important grain markets outside London, the milling soke was not finally abolished until 1853.
Arguments and local strife were often caused by the building of a new watermill because the necessary raising of weirs and cutting of races would affect the flow of water to other mills on the same stream.
The number of mills that could work effectively on the same stream was limited, which led to smaller streams being used by means of building dams to create mill-ponds.
In these smaller waters, the miller could work by day and his mill-pond would be replenished at night.
Seasonal and tidal changes posed problems for mills situated on larger rivers.
Waterwheels could not function at low water, so adjustable wheels were made.
Installation of these devices proved costly and very few were used.
The floating mill, moored to a bridge or pier in the cities, solved this problem, but in the country the miller had to moor in open stream and grain had to be conveyed to him by boat.
Use was also made of the power of the sea by constructing tidal mills along the coast.
As these buildings were constantly threatened by storms and high tides, it was important to choose a sheltered position protected from gales.
Several such mills have survived along the south coast of England on shores where the Isle of Wight gives protection from the prevailing south-westerly winds.
Mills were often built on an estuary where the water could be trapped upstream at high tide by sluice gates.
In other parts, a sea wall would be built at a suitable inlet to enclose a mill-pond.
The miller's day was dictated by the movements of the tides because his source of power would only be available for short periods of two or three hours at a time.
Early waterwheels were made of wood, but as cast iron developed the miller made use of this new material for his machinery.
Wooden wheels decay quickly with the cycle of immersion in and emergence from the water.
Thus it is rare to find a wholly wooden wheel intact today.
Cast-iron wheels were too expensive for the miller to install, so a hybrid construction emerged.
The hub, bearings and rims of otherwise wooden wheels might be made of iron.
Wheels made completely of iron began to be used during the eighteenth century.
Each wheel was made in sections and assembled at the mill, paddles made of wood being retained.
Iron fittings could replace wooden components gradually, allowing major alterations to take place over a long period.
This atmosphere of making changes only slowly and of preferring a tried and tested ‘free’ source of power to more efficient engine-driven plant can be savoured at Lockyer's Mill, Clapton, near Crewkerne, Somerset, a mill of 1864 in which grain is still milled commercially by water power provided by the River Axe (Plate 42).
As well as milling corn, water-powered mills have been used for weaving and spinning.
In Sheffield, until the 1930s, power from a waterwheel was even used to grind cutlery.
Textile Mills
When the mills of the North of England are referred to, we think immediately of the nineteenth-century factories which were built for the purpose of manufacturing yarn and textiles, rather than buildings containing corn-grinding machinery.
The earliest textile mills were similar to the traditional water-powered flour mills because they consisted of load-bearing masonry external walls and wooden floors held up by timber posts or cast-iron columns and often occupied equally remote rural locations in order to exploit fully the power provided by the rushing streams of narrow Pennine valleys.
With the introduction of steam power from the later eighteenth century, the necessity for a streamside location disappeared and, particularly in regard to cotton spinning, a climate of high humidity became a more important requirement.
Hence the enormous success of Oldham, a hilly settlement in East Lancashire with considerable reserves of coal, situated only 11km (7 miles) from Manchester, the greatest yarn market in the world in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
By 1871, Oldham had more cotton-spinning spindles than any country in the world outside the USA and it maintained that position of superiority until 1937.
At the peak of production, around three hundred cotton mills were concentrated on Oldham.
A writer in an edition of the Manchester City News of 1908 recorded that such a vast hive of industry could overpower even a worldly-wise observer:
‘the smoke of the innumerable tall chimneys lies over all like a poultice…houses and shops go on for ever, and at the back of them, blotting out all the rest of the world, rise great precipitous mills like frowning cliffs, at whose base are the small houses where the folks live like coneys at a mountain foot.
The cotton mill was essentially a container for machinery, simple in design and unfussy in appearance.
Many multi-storey mills impressed — and continue to impress — by their sheer size.
The basic dimension of a mill was its width which determined both the length and the height, and which was itself determined by the length of the cotton-spinning ‘mule’.
The increase in maximum width of these buildings from 30m (99ft) in 1868 to 48m (158ft) in 1905 was necessary in order to accommodate the longer mules which were enlarged to their technical optimum, consistent with rigidity, of 1,392 (116 dozen) spindles.
These wider mills were thus squarer than their predecessors which had tended to be long and narrow.
Consequently, it was necessary to introduce more daylight into the broader interiors and this became possible in the 1890s with the use of reinforced-concrete floors and steel girders.
The arched window was allied to the brick jack-arch system often employed to achieve an incombustible floor construction and tended to produce an opening which was disproportionately high related to its width.
In contrast, the square-headed window spanned by the steel beam of the new technology could have a width disproportionate to its height.
Taken together with the replacement of the solid, load-bearing external walls by rows of brick piers flanking narrower infill panels, this development allowed the area of window relative to wall to increase to a maximum in the 1900s when the façades of mills became more glass than brick.
Elevations were ultimately reduced to a matrix of concrete-encased steel beams and columns, the voids between which were filled with large, gridded, steel-framed windows surmounting low infill panels of brickwork.
Mills of the Oldham type were usually five storeys high with a warehouse and conditioning room in the cellar.
The most impressive interior space of the mill was the engine room, from which power was transmitted to each floor by means of a rope-race that used cotton ropes of local manufacture.
This arrangement was adopted from the 1870s.
Because raw cotton is an inflammable material, mills had to be made fireproof either in whole or in part.
The adoption of iron instead of wood for floor beams helped to achieve this aim.
The sprinkler, invented in the USA in 1881, was a further safeguard against the dire effects of fire and its introduction into cotton mills produced the water towers which crown the main external staircases of many of the later mills.
Internally, a hardwood floor surface helped to maintain an equable temperature, permitted work to be done in bare feet and simplified the recovery of waste cotton.
In Oldham, and other towns of East Lancashire (but not in West Yorkshire where stone was plentiful), the chief constructional material was brick because it was cheaper than stone.
At first bricks were made on site from abundant local clay.
Later they were supplied by specialist brickmakers whose numbers increased greatly during the last quarter of the nineteenth century.
Each mill was likely to require around 4 million bricks, 2 acres of glass and 2,200 tons of iron and steel.
Mill-designing architects and mill builders avoided any superfluous decoration, dispensing with the external rendering and cornices between the storeys that would have been demanded by classical precedent.
Often the sole ornament applied to mills was projecting angle piers and a small cornice near the top of the facade, surmounted by a ‘blocking course’ of bricks, although some very large mills built during the Edwardian period, when labour and materials were cheapest, display elaborate decorative brickwork.
It is apparent that the conversion to domestic use of a textile mill up to 48m (158ft) wide is like to pose problems.
Partly for this reason and partly because of slight local demand for living accommodation so markedly individualistic as apartments created in former textile factories (which may not be entirely free from unpleasant associations), only one or two of the smaller, older and picturesquely situated textile mills have, to date, been converted into dwellings.
Warehouses and Factories
The large urban or dockside warehouse is a building type strongly related to the grander grain and textile mills, not only because it often stored the raw materials or products processed by these latter buildings, but also in its constructional composition.
The storage of grain or many bolts of cloth imposed loads upon the structures of these buildings almost as heavy as the machinery contained in the textile mills and therefore their construction had to be equally robust and similarly fireproof.
Many cotton warehouses displaying gridded elevations reminiscent of those of the mills themselves were erected in central Manchester, ‘Cottonopolis’ in the period leading up to the start of World War I, and the later the building, the more elaborate and showy was the architecture.
For the largest and most prominent buildings, located in that city's Whitworth Street area, colourful cladding of their steel skeletons with elaborately moulded glazed terracotta blocks was de rigueur.
The conversion of one building of this confident era, Granby House of 1908, is the final project described in this chapter.
Following a series of projects in which it has been shown that mills and large warehouses may satisfactorily be converted into dwellings, some interest has been shown in the possibility of treating redundant factories similarly.
A four-storey former clothing factory at Ipswich, Suffolk, has been converted into 103 flats, 24 of which are roof-top penthouses which were sold to leaseholders, the remaining 79 dwellings being ‘fair rent’ flats for council and housing association nominees.
The cost of this project, which was completed in 1983, was almost £2 million.
In Glagow, the former Wylie and Lochhead Cabinet Works on Kent Road has been converted into a block of 196 flats for sale and its sumptuous Grade A listed stone-clad main elevation has been carefully restored.
In the other main cities of Scotland, where most city-centre residents are flat-dwellers, tenements being the predominant residential building type, several other large commercial or industrial buildings have recently been converted into dwelling complexes.
In Dundee, a former jute mill has been converted into 72 flats, while in Edinburgh a scheme at High Street/Bell Street is creating 172 flats in former bonded warehouses.
A Glasgow ‘suburb’ is to witness a very large scheme involving the restoration of the five warehouses at Spiers Wharf, the terminus of the Glasgow branch of the Forth and Clyde Canal at Port Dundas, to create almost two hundred dwellings for sale.
However, apart from the pioneering Ipswich project and Glasgow's Kent Road Cabinet Works scheme, elsewhere in Britain little has yet been done to promote, or to try to demonstrate, the advantages of re-using redundant factories as dwellings.
This may be because the ‘classic’ factories of the twentieth century tend to be low-rise, usually single-storey structures, built to very broad plans from cheap and impermanent materials.
Consequently, they require radical alteration and major upgrading of their constructional envelopes, local environment and services to make them suitable for subdivision into saleable dwellings.
To date, it appears that no developer has been prepared to challenge the accepted policy by retaining and adapting a low-rise factory structure for housing rather than choosing demolition and redevelopment.
Watermill, East Sussex
This building was erected in the nineteenth century and was the first mill on the site.
A stream, which is a tributary of the River Ouse, was dammed to create a large millpond which feeds the waterwheel.
The structure of the wheel remains alongside the north-west elevation of the mill, although the wooden paddles have entirely rotted away and it cannot be made to turn (Plate 43).
A broad wheel of small diameter, it is of the overshot, pitch-back type and sits below a ‘launder’, or large iron tank, which accepts water from the ‘flume’, connected with the mill-pond, so that water is ducted on to the top of the wheel, causing it to rotate backwards.
The benefit of this arrangement is that the wheel does not lose efficiency in the manner of the traditional overshot wheel which is continuously fighting backflow turbulence at its junction with the tailstream.
As in many early industrial buildings, the original layout of this mill was very simple.
A large block of rectangular plan, containing all the mill machinery — axles, gearing, etc — adjoined the waterwheel.
The construction of this block comprised a ground-storey brickwork plinth, perforated with a handful of windows where these were necessary to light the interior, surmounted by a timber-framed and boarded upper-storey structure, a third ‘attic’ storey being accommodated largely in the void formed by the steep-sided pitched roof.
From the gable of the south-west elevation projects a boarded ‘lucarne’, or sack hoist enclosure, a feature which is characteristic of many older flour mills.
because this main block is quite wide at more than 8m (26ft), and the considerable weight of stored grain and flour sacks had to be supported safely, the span of the floors between the flank walls was halved by introducing a central row of cylindrical cast-iron columns sited at approximately 2m (6–1/2ft) from front to rear.
These columns support stout timber beams, on to which bear the joists, running parallel to the flank walls, that carry the boarded floors.
This is the classic structural/constructional arrangement of the small watermill of lowland England.
However, this mill differs from the simple prototype in having a brickbuilt outshot against its south-east elevation which was constructed to house an auxiliary steam-engine that would be brought into use during periods of drought.
A prominent detached brick-built chimney served the engine and adjoins the north-east corner of the extension (Plate 44).
The present owners purchased the mill in 1976 after part of it had been used to house chickens and the mill-pond had been used for fish-farming.
It had ceased to operate as a flour mill as early as 1938 and in the immediate post-war period it was used as a seed store.
Thus it will be appreciated that the building was in a rather unkempt and neglected state when the present owners began to restore the structure in 1983.
Prior to their purchase of the building, the owner of the adjoining mill house had made two attempts to obtain permission from the local authority to change the use of the mill from industrial premises into a dwelling, but it was only with the current owners' application of 1977 that planning permission for this change was granted.
The mill-pond was drained for a three-year period in order to allow some necessary excavation.
Derelict pig-pens were demolished and a vast amount of chicken droppings had to be dug out and carted away.
A goose paddock was transformed into the garden.
Following the demolition of a wooden fuel-store lean-to that had adjoined the south-east elevation of the engine house, most of the restoration work consisted of the replacement of decayed material.
The pitched roof of the main block was re-tiled and large areas of the painted external weatherboarding (including the whole of the rear gable) were taken down and replaced with new material backed with a lining of bituminous felt to better exclude the wind.
The plan for converting the large volumes of the mill interior into living accommodation involved retaining the entrance into the lean-to engine house and using it as the main entrance to the building.
The brick shell of this element could then accommodate an entrance lobby, study, cloakroom, sewing-room and stair hall, giving access to the main first-floor living room, also entirely located in the engine-house outshot (Fig 55).
To light this room it was necessary to introduce a range of large windows into the flank wall of the engine house, just below eaves level.
More importantly, the existing upper floor of this outshot proved to be too close to the lean-to roof to give a habitable room-height, so rather than raise up the roof level of the entire extension, it was decided to reduce the level of the upper floor to create adequate headroom.
Access to the dining room in the north-east corner of the main block was then made via a short flight of stairs.
Beyond the dining-room, in the north-west corner of the main block, a breakfast/dining-room was located, separated from the bathroom and dressing room associated with the main bedroom, by a dogleg staircase located at the centre of the north-west elevation (Fig 55).
The lowest level of the main stair with its related rear hall, a large L-plan bedroom with en suite bathroom and a utility room, while the top storey has been reserved for two more bedrooms and a further bathroom.
Conversion of this space has yet to take place and the unlined timber skeleton of the boarded external-wall construction of the upper storeys remains on view to the interior, awaiting its insulation and internal finishes.
In consequence of its importance as a relic of local industrial archaeology, the mill has been listed as a building of architectural or historic interest (Grade II), a status which has not been jeopardised by the very careful treatment of the building by its present owners in their continuing programme of conversion and conservation.
Castle Mill, Dorking, Surrey
The existence of a mill on the site of Castle Mill, Dorking, is noted in the Domesday Book.
It takes its name from Betchworth Castle, a medieval mansion that was altered in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries but is now a ruin.
The original building (which can still be discerned today) was a simple block of rectangular plan adjoining a ‘breast-shot’ waterwheel, powered by a mill-stream fed from the River Mole.
With the construction of the South Eastern Railway Company's nearby Reading-Tonbridge line in the mid-nineteenth century, an increase in trade for the mill was anticipated, and an extension, equal in height to the main block, was built on its south side.
Naturally enough, the new, faster, mode of transport acted to reduce trade rather than to increase it and the mill suffered declining fortunes until it ceased to operate as a flour mill shortly after World War II.
It became derelict rapidly, a picturesque feature of the local landscape, until the late 1960s (Plate 45).
During this period it was recognised by the local planning authority as a building of considerable local importance, and, accordingly, was listed Grade II.
The family who had owned and operated the mill continued to live in the imposing nearby mill house, but were unable to fund a restoration of the redundant mill, so that when a Repairs Notice was served on them by the local authority, they were obliged to sell the building.
It was purchased by an architect, Michael Manser, in 1969, for what would now be regarded as a nominal sum.
At that time, Michael Manser lived and practised in South Kensington.
He was anxious to obtain a weekend retreat close to London and the derelict mill promised conveniently located, characterful accommodation.
His decision to purchase the mill heralded the start of a thorough and extensive process of restoration.
The construction of Castle Mill consists of a brickwork plinth, surmounted by timber-framed and weather-boarded upper storeys, and an attractive mansard roof capped its blocky form.
It is easy to see that this was a practical means of enclosing a large volume which then could be used for the storage of grain, and the profile is reminiscent of the gambrel-roofed hay barns in the USA.
This treatment contributes to the quality of verticality and stateliness which characterises the building, soaring above the tail-race of the mill-stream (Plate 46).
The essential structure of the mill — both masonry and timberwork — was found to be very sound.
Even the boarded cladding was in need of only piecemeal repair rather than wholesale renewal.
The slate roof was treated similarly, although the need to install central heating meant that the roof ridge at the junction of the main block with the nineteenth-century extension had to be punctuated by a new chimney.
Internally, the existing building incorporated floors on seven levels because the floor levels of the Victorian extension did not ally with those of the original block.
As the majority of the mill machinery remained — waterwheel, axle, pit wheel, ‘wallower’, power shaft and millstones — and these components were chiefly situated in the lowest storey, Michael Manser decided to retain most of these items in a ‘set piece’ display, reminding visitors of the mill's former function, and visible from the generous entrance hall of the house through a glass door (Fig 56).
An existing external door was re-used as the main entrance and the new straight-flight stair, giving access to the first-floor living-rooms, was located on the site off the former upper storeys' access ladder.
The rest of the ground floor, occupying the Victorian extension of the main block, converted satisfactorily into a garage, boiler room and tankroom for oil storage once the existing timber floor of this section had been replaced by a concrete slab.
Below this new slab it was practical to install a sewage collection chamber of 1,818 litres (400 gal) capacity, associated with a macerator and pump, allowing waste to be reduced and then pumped through a small-diameter pipe to a private sewer manhole 150m (492ft) away.
All new soil stacks installed in the building discharged into this sealed sub-floor collection chamber.
At first-floor level, the volume of the main block allowed the inclusion of a large stair hall, kitchen/breakfast-room and dining-room en suite with a ‘gazebo’ formed from the original outshot that projected over the waterwheel.
An attempt was made to preserve a sense of the large, formerly unitary space of the mill's second storey which had had to be subdivided to create the dining- and food preparation rooms, by ‘unifying’ the stair hall and dining-room through very large sliding doors which formed the end panels of the dining-room rear wall.
In normal circumstances, these full-height panels would be slid back to ensure a ‘flow’ of space up the straight-flight stair from the entrance hall, through the first-floor stair hall and into the dining-room.
To satisfy the demands of the local authority's building inspector, who was not happy with this lack of fire compartmentation in a single-staircase building incorporating many levels, these sliding doors were tensioned against counterweights so that in the event of a fire, fusible links in the cables restraining the counterweights would melt, causing the weights to drop and drawing the doors closed.
This area of the first floor had housed four millstones as well as the upper section of the power shaft.
The architect-owner decided to retain one of these stones as well as the timber shaft and these features make a prominent contribution to the character of the dining-room.
From the first-floor accommodation of the main block, and to the front of a brick-built hearth serving the new chimney flue, the slightly raised floor of the Victorian extension, reached via a pair of steps and through double doors, provided the site for the drawing-room.
The loading door formerly incorporated in the east elevation of the extension was replaced by a large fixed window of plate glass.
The second floor could then become the bedrooms level.
A further single-flight stair, in this instance incorporating winding treads at its base, discharges on to the large second-floor landing, off which radiate all four bedrooms (Fig 56).
Because, at this level, the floor of the extension is considerably higher than the floor of the main block, the master bedroom is reached from this landing via a flight of five stairs.
Extension of this elevated level into the south-west corner of the main block allowed an en suite bathroom to be attached to the master bedroom.
The subdivision of the remaining, very large volume of the third storey of the main block into three further bedrooms and a bathroom was accomplished by installing new timber-framed partitions, cranked on plan, which thus provided built-in wardrobes for all the secondary bedrooms.
From the second-floor landing, a ladder-like stair, more steeply raked than those serving the lower floors, leads up to a large loft, wholly accommodated in the roof space of the main block, which was not exploited as living accommodation in the original conversion scheme.
Michael Manser sold Castle Mill soon after its conversion was complete and since that time it has had two further owners, the first of whom installed a lift linking the ground-floor entrance hall with the first-floor dining-room, the generous volume of which has been somewhat reduced by the intrusion of the lift shaft into its south-west corner.
The flow of space between dining-room and first-floor stair hall so valued by the Mansers was shunned by the succeeding owner who replaced the large sliding doors and fixed centre panel with a conventional solid partition incorporating a hinged access door.
Some further windows were added, puncturing the weatherboarded exterior and tending to reduce the opacity of the walls which is so characteristic of simple and strong early industrial buildings.
The third set of owners since the mill's ‘reincarnation’ extended the living accommodation into the former storage loft contained by the roof.
They were also watermill enthusiasts and continued the work of restoration that was begun by Michael Manser by restoring the waterwheel to working condition.
The elm paddles of the iron wheel were renewed and the mechanism was modified to operate on the ‘undershot’ principle because a lowering of water levels brought about by a local flood alleviation scheme made impracticable the restoration of the original ‘breast-shot’arrangement.
The great care taken by Michael Manser to conserve the majority of the existing building in his scheme for its conservation was recognised in European Architectural Heritage Year 1975 when he received a Civic Trust Heritage Year Award for the restoration and adaptation of Castle Mill.
Thames Tunnel Mills, Rotherhithe, London SE16
The story of the conversion of Thames Tunnel Mills at Rotherhithe on the south bank of the River Thames in central London provided a clear contrast to the foregoing accounts of the renovation of traditional water-powered, corn-grinding mills in Surrey and Sussex.
Thames Tunnel Mills is, in fact, two buildings, which together formed a warehouse and flour mill.
The western half of the block was a six-storey flour mill of around 1850.
Internally, a grid of cast-iron cruciform-plan columns supported massive timber beams bearing joisted and boarded floors.
The eastern half was a warehouse, a storey higher than the mill and built later, around 1890.
Steel beams and columns supported its intermediate floors.
The building was in use for its original purpose until the early 1960s, but by the time it was acquired for conversion into dwellings in 1977, it had lain empty for more than ten years and was decaying rapidly because the upper floors and roof covering of the mill had been destroyed in a fire.
At that time, the building could have been said to typify the dereliction of the whole London docks area.
In the post-war period, these districts had undergone precipitous decline from their pre-war position as thriving communities servicing the world's largest port.
Consequently, much demolition of ‘life-expired’ riverside wharves and warehouses was occurring.
Many acres of land were cleared to await future development and there were few places either north or south of the river where a group of traditional waterside commercial buildings remained.
Fortunately, Thames Tunnel Mills adjoins the handsome early-eighteenth century church of St Mary, Rotherhithe, so that when the Department of the Environment designated the church and the surrounding buildings as an outstanding conservation area, the building became eligible for grant aid from the Historic Buildings Council and their help was crucial to the funding of the development.
The scheme of conversion was designed to provide fair rent accommodation for 118 mainly young, single, local people, either in bedsitters or flats which two or four people would share.
Seventy-one flats were created.
Such provision was thought to be important in a borough where the majority of housing is in local authority estates with little provision for single people.
The scheme was innovatory in providing housing at controlled rents in a converted building on a spectacular riverside site, something which previously had been regarded as the preserve of affluent owner occupiers.
Although the flats are very compact, generally following the standards laid down for this type of housing in DoE Design Bulletin 29, they share the facilities of a jetty on to the river, and a roof-top conservatory and roof garden, all of which were made possible by a £200,000 grant from the Historic Buildings Council.
These are feature additional to the normal provision in this type of housing.
The brief for the architects, Hunt Thompson Associates, from their housing association client, was to explore the suitability of the building for conversion into flats, subject to the standards and cost limits laid down by the Housing Corporation and the Department of the Environment.
It was immediately apparent that the main challenge to the ingenuity of the designers was the considerable width of the building, which, at 20m (66ft), was more than double the dimension usually found in residential buildings.
It followed that it would be sensible to locate elements not needing daylight — stairs, lifts and corridors — in the interior of the building.
Kitchens, bathrooms and entrance lobbies to flats could also be placed internally.
As every flat needs to have these service spaces, and such spaces occupy a fixed minimum area in a flat of any size, it made sense to maximise this internal accommodation in order to utilise fully the broad interior, and this was achieved by making the majority of flats one-bedroom or bedsitter units.
The advantages of adopting this planning policy informed the decision that the development should be primarily for single people.
Although it was beneficial both to optimal planning and the creation of much-needed accommodation to maximise the number of rooms that could be sited internally, the aggregation of these spaces was still inadequate to ‘fill up’ the middle of the broad interior, and in the flour-mill section of the building the residual central space was devoted to a full-height internal courtyard or ‘atrium’which rises through seven storeys to terminate in a glass-roofed conservatory.
In the centre of the plan of the eastern half of the building, the original grain-storage silo structure of the warehouse was retained for use as a lift, staircase and refuse chute (Fig 58).
Corridors giving access to the flats in this half wrap around three sides of the silo and are extended as galleries, supported by timber beams and cast-iron columns, salvaged from the original internal structure, to enclose the atrium, which allows daylight to penetrate down to every floor of the building.
Grouped around the bottom of the atrium are a common room giving access to a riverside terrace, a laundry and the caretaker's office and flat (Fig 57).
At the top of the atrium, the pitched-roof-profile roof-light was made larger than was strictly necessary in order to provide a conservatory complete with tropical plants (Plate 48) which leads out on to a landscaped roof garden capping the western half of the building.
It is clear that some provision of communal rooms is important in the conversion of old buildings to multiple occupation, and consistent with other comparable projects analysed in this book, the common room of Thames Tunnel Mills is logically located at ground-floor level.
However, the architects' view is that this communal aspect of the building is most clearly expressed architecturally by the central atrium, a space overlooked by the lift lobbies and the galleries of each upper floor that gives access to the flats.
The difficulties encountered in negotiating all the necessary approvals, particularly the funding, for a scheme which departed from the norm of fair rent housing explain the exceptionally long period of four years that preceded commencement of the building contract.
A major problem that arose at an early stage was the reconciliation of the local authority's requirements for one car-parking space per flat with the DoE's refusal to fund a scheme in which the entire ground floor would be used for parking.
A compromise was eventually negotiated in which the space to the west of the building, originally planned as a garden, was devoted instead to a car park and to compensate for this loss of amenity, the Historic Buildings Council then agreed to pay for the provision of the jetty and roof garden.
When the Housing Corporation refused to contribute to the cost of these features, the HBC relaxed its general policy of contributing only 50 per cent of the cost of eligible items and met the full cost.
The condition of the original internal structures and existing buildings was so bad that cost studies showed that, as well as offering higher standards of fire and sound insulation, the provision of an entirely new structure within the retained shell of the building would be cheaper than a process of repairing and upgrading the surviving framing.
This policy of renewal was effected by installing a replacement internal structure of load-bearing brick walls and in situ concrete floors.
A consequence of this decision could have been the creation of evidence that the project was merely an exercise in ‘façadism’— the policy of retaining only the external skin of a building as a ‘screen wall’ to new accommodation, which often creates a disagreeable distinction between the ‘stage set’of the preserved shell and the entirely rebuilt interior.
In order to avoid this ‘skin deep’ quality, in the central atrium the brickwork of the original party wall between the buildings has been preserved at the eastern end of this space to the full height and width of the block.
Similarly, by re-using salvaged beams and columns to ‘frame’ the atrium, a character has been given to this space which is evocative of the interior of the original building, yet does not mock its new use.
All circulation spaces within the building — corridors, galleries, staircases and lift lobbies — have been designed so as to exploit the brick-built elements of the original structure.
Elsewhere, new brickwork flanking circulation spaces and certain living-rooms has been painted and in every flat at least one wall-panel of the original brickwork is left exposed.
Efforts to retain the character of the original building externally extended to a decision not to clean the brickwork.
Repair and repointing work was kept to a minimum and new pointing was carefully matched to the colour of the original joints.
Features such as cranes, loading bays and the 25m (83ft) high free-standing chimney were retained and the original windows were replaced with steel casements of similar pattern (Plate 49).
The importance of maintaining the relationship between the building and the river was expressed not only in the provision of the boat jetty, which is linked to the common room, but also in the balconies, connected to the main circulation galleries of every floor, which overlook the water.
Clearly, all flats located in the northern part of the building enjoy views both up and down the river, because the building is located in a concave curve of the Thames.
Several flats have living rooms in which the loading-bay doors of the original warehouse have been converted into fully glazed French windows sited behind simple steel railings.
The contract for construction of a residential development wholly or partly funded by the Housing Corporation may be awarded to a builder only if he submits the most favourable tender in competition.
Thus, when Hunt Thompson Associates had completed the technical information, six contractors were invited to submit tenders for the reconstruction of Thames Tunnel Mills on a fluctuating price basis.
When these offers were received, it was apparent that the lowest tender considerably exceeded the cost acceptable to the Housing Corporation, who insisted that savings of £170,000 should be made before this lowest price could be accepted.
The architects duly made economies, although they were dismayed that these had to include the reduction to a dwarf wall of the high wall intended for the street side of the car park because they felt that the omission of a high wall at this point would detract from the character of Rotherhithe Street.
However, the Housing Corporation refused to fund this item.
The Historic Buildings Council was unable to increase its grant to pay for this work and it was only because of the intervention of the chairman of the planning committee that an exceptional grant to cover the extra cost was obtained from Southwark Council.
At an earlier stage the council had accepted the architects' proposal to replace the chainlink fencing around the adjacent churchyard with cast-iron railings of period appearance.
These were installed under a separate contract and Hunt Thompson Associates' supervision, and they have considerably improved the appearance of the conservation area.
The tender submitted by J. L. Eve Construction Ltd, was reduced to £2,024,681 after making economies, and this figure was accepted in November 1980.
Work commenced on site in January 1981 with an anticipated contract period of 104 weeks.
Practical completion of the project was ultimately achieved in March 1984.
The resultant cost per square metre of gross floor space was £401.62.
The common areas of the building are maintained to an immaculate standard by the resident caretaker and a small team of cleaners — there is no evidence of abuse of staircases, lifts or corridors as is apparent in many local authority or other housing association schemes.
Reflecting the great care taken by the architects to conserve and enhance the qualities of this former industrial building as a significant element in the metropolitan riverside scene, the project has received several awards, including a Doe Housing Design Award and a Civic Trust Award, both of which were presented in 1985.
‘The Old Wharf’, Arun Navigation Terminus Warehouse, Billingshurst, West Sussex
The River Arun, from Littlehampton on the English Channel to Pulborough in West Sussex, has been navigable since the seventeenth century.
The upper reaches of the river remained unnavigable until, in the late eighteenth century, it was decided to construct a parallel canal, drawing water from the river, from Newbridge near Billingshurst to Pallingham Quay, above Pulborough, where the canal would join the river.
This project was promoted by Lord Egremont who wished to improve the condition of local agriculture by upgrading transport facilities.
A terminus wharf was established at Newbridge.
In 1816, the logical extension of this waterway to join the waters of the Wey Navigation, about 26km (16miles) to the north, and hence to establish an inland navigation between London and the English Channel, was completed with the opening of the Wey and Arun Junction Canal, whose main sponsor was again the second Lord Egremont.
Traffic carried by the new truck waterway thus increased beyond the volume of goods which had been conveyed along the old cul-de-sac Arun Navigation and it was necessary to extend the waterside storage buildings that had been established at Newbridge.
Hence, in 1839, the Arun Navigation Company erected a substantial brick-built warehouse on the Newbridge site and this wharf quickly became a busy centre for the collection and conveyance of agricultural produce from the Billingshurst area until competition from the newly constructed railway robbed the canal of most of its traffic in the late 1860s.
Thereafter the canal went rapidly into decline.
The Wey and Arun Junction Canal was formally closed in 1871, leaving Newbridge Wharf as the terminus it had been before construction of this waterway, until the closure of the Arun Navigation in 1888.
Following the demise of the canal, the old wharf buildings found a new use as hay barns for the adjoining farm.
The buildings continued to be used for this purpose until the mid-1980s when an enterprising manager of a local farm realised that something could be done to salvage the structures for a more profitable use.
Not until recently did the West Sussex County Council wish to encourage the development of tourist-related activities in parts of the county other than the Channel coast, but a change in policy, provoked by the recognition of the potential of the rural hinterland for attracting tourists, allowed the new owner of the wharf warehouse to contemplate its conversion into a guest house and family dwelling because the project became eligible for grant aid from the English Tourist Board.
The warehouse had suffered considerably from the neglect associated with its low-grade use as a hay barn and was little more than a masonry shell devoid of weather-tight windows and doors when the work of conversion commenced.
Large trees had rooted in the canal bank below its east wall, obscuring its impressive waterside location (Plate 50).
Internally, some evidence of the building's commercial use remained — notably the shaft and pulleys of a large wooden rope-hauled hoist, sited close to the apex of the roof space, which the present owner has carefully restored and integrated into the building as a relic of its former use.
This was possible because the topmost floor of the two-and-a-half storey building is entirely in the roof space, obtains all its daylight from a new roof-light and therefore cannot be used easily for habitable accommodation.
It is reserved for use as a children's play area.
The first floor accommodates the bedrooms for the guests — each bedroom being paired with an en suite bathroom — together with sleeping accommodation for the proprietor and his family, while the ground floor includes a large guests' lounge, TV room and breakfast room to the east of the main entrance/staircase hall.
To the west of this space lies the guests' dining-room, a large kitchen incorporating a dining area for the family, a pantry, living-room, utility room and small office adjoining the secondary entrance (Fig 59).
Also included in this ‘private’ section of the building is a straight-flight staircase which leads up from the small hall containing the secondary entrance to serve the family's first-floor sleeping accommodation.
The architects, Derek Irvine Associates, were obliged to locate the main ‘public’ staircase at the centre of the plan with light flooding in through the roof-light which straddles the roof ridge above, because the considerable width of the building — 11.4m (37ft)— necessitated some means of introducing light into the middle if gloomy internal corridors were to be avoided.
Considerable care has been taken to retain a ‘period’ appearance to the building.
The existing roof covering was completely stripped and the rafters were brush-cleaned.
Glass-fibre quilt insulation was laid between them and, following the application of roofing felt, new timber roofing battens were fixed to accept the sound slates which had been salvaged from the original construction.
Only small quantities of imported second-hand slates were needed to supplement the re-used material.
A brick-built chimney had to be integrated into the reconstituted roof and new lead flashings were provided to reconcile this feature, as well as the added roof window, soil vent pipes and roof-light, with roof surfaces.
Repairs to the existing masonry were carried out in matching brickwork and the purpose-made joinery of new windows and external doors has been retained in its natural colour under a clear sealant, rather than being painted, which might have detracted from the mellow textures of the renovated building (Plate 51).
To furnish the interior authentically, the owner sought out period items — panelled doors, chimney pieces, etc — from local buildings that were to be demolished and installed them in appropriate positions.
Various panels of brickwork have been left exposed rather than plastered over, and the original heavy timber floor beams generally continue to project down below ceilings.
Outside, equal care has been taken to ensure a picturesque setting for the restored building by removing most of the jungly vegetation which formerly swathed the canal banks, dredging the canal and regrading the banks so that guests are greeted with a pleasant prospect from the ground floor lounge and the ‘wharfside’ location of the building is appreciated (Plate 52).
The owner wished to reconstruct the wharf structure which had disappeared since the active days of the waterway, but no drawings or photographs of this feature could be found.
The restoration of the warehouse and the adjoining 457m (500yd) length of canal is viewed with enthusiasm by the Wey and Arun Canal Trust, a society which has worked since the early 1970s for the complete restoration of the Arun Navigation and the Wey and Arun Junction Canal between Pallingham and the River Wey, and which has restored the opportunity for navigation to several stretches of these waterways.
Granby House, Granby Row, Manchester
Granby House is a seven-storey building of 1908 which was built as a cotton warehouse.
Its outside walls are largely of pressed red brick, although there is a plinth and decorative band courses at various levels, carried out in Portland stone (Plate 53).
It is in the heart of Manchester, but for many years industry and commerce have been moving away from the city centre, increasing the risk that only a lifeless core will be left.
The city council recognises the need to re-inject life into the potentially deserted central area, particularly after business hours, and it is considered that there is no surer means of achieving this aim than by encouraging young people to live in the city centre again.
Before the conversion of Granby House, it was not clear how this could be done without incurring enormous expense.
A local housing association believed that the conversion of an existing building into an attractive block of flats would assist the process of regenerating the city centre, provided a sound building could be obtained cheaply.
After several previous attempts, the Northern Counties Housing Association found and converted Granby House into flats with the help of an Urban Development Grant.
Northern Counties is a large housing association, with its headquarters in Manchester, which has specialised in fair rent and shared ownership housing schemes.
In recent years, when there have been reductions in public funding for housing associations, it has been developing an increasing proportion of properties for sale in order to maintain and expand its activities.
The association wished to be involved in a major city-centre conversion but needed to be sure that the selected project would succeed.
The essence of the association's idea was to develop flats for sale and this would make it possible to bring in private institutional finance — eg from a building society which might then become involved in providing mortgages for the individual purchasers.
It is noteworthy that this type of conversion scheme was becoming fashionable in London, but the great difference was that flat prices in the capital were, and remain, very much higher that those applying in Manchester.
However, in the latter city, building costs were almost as high as those of London, so some form of subsidy was necessary.
It was believed that an Urban Development Grant might meet this need and Manchester City Council agreed to support the association's application for this form of government assistance.
On the private sector side, the Nationwide Building Society were interested in participating.
This left one further matter to be resolved.
The development of housing for sale with the use of private funding cannot be carried out by a registered housing association — Northern Counties Provident Housing Association — had to be set up.
While these arrangements were being formulated, the developer was looking for a suitable building.
Granby House is listed Grade II and stands within the Whitworth Street Conservation Area.
Following its use as a cotton warehouse, the building had been the headquarters of a mail-order company and ended its commercial career accommodating the offices of a number of small businesses.
It was the fourth building in the area that the association considered for conversion and had studied in detail.
Selecting the optimum building and obtaining it on satisfactory terms are matters of great importance where institutional finance is involved.
In each case, the association had commissioned structural surveys, followed by feasibility and market studies.
Indications of the purchase price of each building were obtained and full funding proposals were prepared.
Although conversion of each of the first three buildings considered was potentially viable, all three failed one or more tests of the practicality/viability analysis.
When Granby House came on to the market early in 1983, it looked more promising.
It was in good condition, its shape and window arrangement made the formation of a central light-well unnecessary, and the city council were keen to prevent it from falling into long-term disuse.
However, the Regional Development Officer of the housing association insisted on carrying out the same thorough appraisal of its potential that had been applied to the previous buildings.
Consequently, an architect and builder were invited to prepare and cost a conversion scheme.
The association's own quantity surveyor and marketing department made detailed investigations.
On the basis of a building purchase price of £200,000, the total cost of the project would be £1 million, or about £16,000 per flat.
The average selling price for a one-bedroom flat in Manchester was reckoned to be around £11,000 at that time (in contrast to at least £25,000 in London).
The prices being asked for vacant buildings in Manchester were quite high, being based on ‘hope value’ rather than use value.
After much negotiation, the association was obliged to pay a purchase price of £210,000 for Granby House at the end of 1983.
The Nationwide Building Society agreed to put up £703,000 at 2 per cent above their normal rates because of the experimental nature of the scheme.
Manchester City Council supported an application for an Urban Development Grant of £300,000.
At this point, the builder on whose estimate the scheme was based went into liquidation, so a new contractor had to be found.
It was decided to enter into a fixed price ‘design and build’ contract with a major firm and to appoint an external project manager to oversee the building work.
It was felt that these arrangements would lessen the risk of the association being drawn into difficulties if anything else went wrong.
Following a tender competition, the offer from Fairclough Building Ltd. was chosen, but the cost had now risen to almost £1.3 million, partly because of the imposition of VAT on building operations in the 1984 budget.
Because Granby House was a listed building, the contractor eventually became exempt from this tax, but as he could not reclaim any VAT he had already paid to suppliers, he had to pass most of it on to the developer.
The increase in cost also necessitated a fresh application for Urban Development Grant.
The Nationwide Building Society felt that they could not increase their investment because it was linked to unchanged valuations and therefore the new ratio of public to private funds had to be higher than before, even though the housing association was prepared to invest some of its own resources.
£601,000 was applied for, including a contingency sum of £50,000.
In the event, only £575,000 of this grant was taken up.
It took several months to obtain approval and construction work started only in August 1984.
The fact that the building is listed limited the opportunities for external alterations, and internal layouts had to respect existing window locations (Fig 60).
It was possible to leave untouched the greater part of the existing structure.
The general construction is of brick external walls with a central masonry spine wall running from front to back.
The building is covered by a reinforced concrete roof of mansard profile, which houses the seventh storey.
The structure of the open warehouse floors consisted of cast-iron columns supporting steel, iron or heavy timber beams.
On these members 75mm (3in) thick pine floorboards are fixed, performing a structural function as well as providing a floor surface sufficiently substantial to resist the heavy loads imposed by stored textiles.
The structural alterations consisted of the removal of the existing goods lifts, the addition of two passenger lifts and the formation of various internal doorways in existing internal masonry.
The architects, John Cottam Partnership, found space for 61 flats, comprising 50 one-bedroom and 11 two-bedroom dwellings.
The enclosure of individual flats within the large open floor spaces was achieved with the use of metal-stud and plasterboard partitions.
Metal-framed suspended ceilings were installed throughout, two layers of ‘fireline’ board being incorporated at ceiling level in order to provide a one-hour period of fire resistance between storeys.
The partitions contain sound insulation and thermal insulation to the level required for inclusion of projects in the Electricity Board's Civic Shield Award Scheme.
All dwellings and the hot water system are heated using off-peak electricity.
The flats were sold on 125-year leases and priority was given to first-time buyers.
Owing to the delays that had occurred since the marketing studies were made in 1983 and because of the attractiveness of the finished scheme, it was found that considerably higher prices could be obtained for the flats than had been originally foreseen.
Most of the apartments were sold quite quickly, raising a total of £1.1 million.
Even so, this did not cover the full cost of the project, confirming that some form of subsidy was essential.