

EXCLUSIVE!
JOAN COLLINS: HOW I LOOK FABULOUS AT 57
WIN!
WIN! £5,000 WORTH OF FREEMANS FASHIONS MUST BE WON
SPEND!
SPEND!
THE HIGH PRICE OF BEING A SHOPAHOLIC
PLUS!
HOW TO GET THE BEST OUT OF YOUR HAIRDRESSER
100 NEW IDEAS
GREAT LOOKS AT HIGH STREET PRICES
Contents
EDITOR'S LETTER
Never mind the other man's grass.
As a teenager, I longed to have a curtain of hair like Paul McCartney's or John Lennon's.
What joy to be referred to as a mophead!
In the event, whenever I did try to grow it, it ended up looking like Jimi Hendrix's.
And it was no comfort having old ladies telling me how they wished they had naturally curly hair.
I even resorted to going to a hairdresser who guaranteed that I'd emerge with dead straight hair.
She failed.
But was that really her fault — or was I presenting her with an impossible task?
To find out both sides of the hairdressing story and discover how cutter and client can both emerge happy, turn to page 56.
And if you haven't yet found the right hairdresser for you, just turn to page 93 and a fantastic invitation from Wella.
 Richard Barber 
THE BOTTOM LINE
by Alison Everitt
HOW TO GET THE CUT YOU REALLY WANT…
FEATURES
4 20 WINTER WARMERS
Smart underwear for you — and him
12 LOOKS JUST LIKE THE REAL THING
Can't afford designer clothes?
With these you won't know the difference
20 YOU KNOW IT MAKES AN AWFUL LOT OF SCENTS
Why every woman should have a wardrobe full of perfume
24 ALL ABOUT JOAN
At last!
Discover the beautiful secrets of La Collins
28 KEEP IT SIMPLE
Classic shifts to take you anywhere and everywhere
30 THE HIGH PRICE OF BEING A SHOPAHOLIC
Meet the women who know — and the counsellors who've helped them
35 HOW WE HELPED YURI KEEP ONE JUMP AHEAD
The start of the Bolshoi shines brighter than ever
38 IT'S BETTY BOO-TIFUL!
The girl behind the singer
40 A DAY OUT IN CAMDEN
What people are wearing to market
42 THE CREAM OF THE CROP
Stylish sweaters, classy colour
48 ALL THINGS BRIGHT
A range of new looks to dazzle 'em!
56 HOW TO GET THE BEST OUT OF YOUR HAIRDRESSER
Yes it's all down to you…
60 TWINKLE TOES
Let patent go to your feet
62 HAPPINESS IS…
BEING JAKKI BRAMBLES
Find out why she's smiling
66 DO WE BRITS GET THE CLOTHES WE DESERVE?
The experts talk — and a chance for you to have your say
71 STEP INTO THE SIXTIES
…
See how we dressed up some visitors to Clothes Show Live
78 ME AND MY JEANS
Five winning ways to wear denim
85 THE ANCIENT ART OF BEATING STRESS
And the message is massage!
93 HAIR'S TO YOU!
Your opportunity to get a free haircut from Wella
94 YOU'RE LOOKING SWELL, BABY!
Some blooming marvellous star turns
REGULARS
7 UPFRONT FASHION
All that's new on the fashion front
8 UPFRONT BEAUTY
All that's new on the beauty front
76 YOUR VERY GOOD HEALTH
Dr Cathy Read on health matters
92 STOCKISTS
Where to buy our featured clothes
97 JOIN THE CLUB
Become a Priority Reader
98 ASK JEFF
Your fashion questions answered
OFFER
96 CLOTHES SHOW GEAR
Sweatshirts, T-shirts, jogging bottoms, caps…even carrier bags!
COMPETITION
90 WIN A WARDROBE
£5,000 worth of fabulous Freemans fashions to be won
BEAT THE BIG CHILL
20 WINTER WARMERS
BRIEF NOTES
•Marlon Brando became a star to underwear manufacturers when he greatly boosted their sales by appearing in a vest in the film ‘A Streetcar Named Desire’.
•Clark Gable, on the other hand, caused vest sales to drop drastically when he took off his shirt in ‘It Happened One Night’, to reveal a completely bare torso.
•Madonna's always believed in the importance of underwear — even going to far as to exhibit it outside her clothing.
upfront fashion
Fancy undies, glittering treasures and — for one of you — a unique waistcoat
WET LOOK
When is a swimming costume not a swimming costume?
When you don't have to get wet to wear it…
Yas Wear has produced a black, Fifties style costume — too nice to save for the beach.
It costs about £30 from selected branches of Top Shop and Coppernob.
Call 071 323 0410 for your nearest branch.
JEWEL IN THE CROWN
Recently opened at the Museum of London's Treasury is ‘Treasures & Trinkets’— jewellery from pre-Roman times to the 1930s.
The collection includes Queen Victoria's jewelled parasol, plus trinkets from the Middle Ages.
The gold brooch shown here dates from the 1860s and is encrusted with diamonds and garnets.
The exhibition is open until February 1992, at the Museum of London, London Wall, EC2.
Call 071 600 3699; admission is free.
WHAT A WAISTCOAT!
Willie Ninja, World Champion ‘Voguer’, arrived at the British Style Show in this waistcoat commissioned by Pimm's from Tom Gilbey.
The white silk/satin waistcoat emblazoned with the Pimm's logo (below) is a one-off, and we're giving it away to one lucky reader.
Send you name and address, before March 14, on a postcard to,Clothes Show Magazine Waistcoat, 20–26 Brunswick Place, London, N1 6DJ.
OOPS!
In our January issue, we omitted to say that we could not have taken the photographs of readers in all the colours of the rainbow without the cooperation of Debenhams in Western Road Brighton.
Apologies — and many thanks.
IT'S A FREEBIE!
On release from February 11 is the video of Peter Greenaway's ‘The Cook, the Thief, his Wife and her Lover’,(cert 18), in which the costumes are designed by Jean Paul Gaultier.
We've got 25 videos, worth £14.9 each, to give away.
Call 0839 900 91 before March 14 and leave your name and address.
Calls charged at 33p/minimum cheap rate, 44p/minimum other times.
THIS YEAR'S MODEL
Adel Rootstein produces the most stylist shop mannequins.
Each year she chooses a famous personality to base the design on — past models included Twiggy and Joan Collins.
The mannequin, pictured below, will be unveiled in Selfridges in London.
After that, look out for it in department stores nationwide.
BE A SPORT
Famous for their unisex jeans, Joe Bloggs have now moved into ladies-wear.
Check out their sweat tops and bottoms in black or white with gold detailing — from £25.99.
Call 061 831 7550 for stockist details.
UNDER COVER
Hennes want you to flaunt your underwear this spring.
Their new range includes patterned bodies, cycle shorts and wrap-around tops.
Ribbed cottons are decorated with pastel florals and shell motifs — available at branches of Hennes from the end of February.
upfront beauty
Gloss your hair, smooth your skin — and indulge in an everlasting kiss!
MUM'S THE WORD
Tease your Mum this Mother's Day — give her the new Plénitude Contour Regard from L'Oréal, for her ageing eyes!
The cream contains active liposomes to nourish the skin — and keep her youthful!
It costs £5.99 for 15ml, available from leading chemists.
A more tactful idea would be a new Body Shop perfume.
Fuzzy Peach (ripe peach), Juba (lemon and orange) and Camomella (camomile) are on sale from February 18 — less ageist than a wrinkle cream!
SMOOTH OPERATOR
Hair removal can be a messy business, but Inverness now do a clever Roll-On Depilatory which is easy to apply and it doesn't drip.
Take advantage of our 50p off coupon on page 92 (reducing the cost to £2.25).
Telephone 0628 776 217 for your nearest stockist.
NATURAL HIGH
Here's old-worth beauty with a modern approach — natural and cruelty-free.
Goodebodies products are handmade from traditional formulas.
Recommended is the Country Apple Conditioning Gel Shampoo — £1.95 for 50ml.
Telephone 0423 500 206 for mail order and stockist enquiries.
SEALED WITH A KISS
Avon calling…with their Endless Kiss!
At long last you can possess an lipstick that never fades — due to certain capsules that release colour every time you press your lips together.
A strange idea, but it does save reapplying your lipstick after every cup of coffee.
Telephone Marion Darby on 0345 023373 to find out your nearest Avon representative.
IT'S A FREEBIE!
Sensitive skins need the gentle touch — Moistura fragrance Free products from Cyclax provide the perfect solution.
The range includes a cleanser, toner and moisturiser, which have been specially formulated for irritable complexions.
We have 250 travel packs to give away.
Call 0839 900092 before March 14 with your name and address.
Calls charged at 33p/minimum cheap rate, 44p/minimum other times.
GLOSS OVER IT
Expert Anthony Mascolo's hair flair can be seen on page 35.
The newest of his Tigi Linea products are those in the Gloss Concept range.
Best of all is the Pure Gloss lotion which smoothes and shapes hair, leaving it wonderfully soft and polished.
For stockists, call 081 569 9196.
SKIN DEEP
Anyone can enjoy a facial.
The Helena Harnik Clinic in London reports that 30 per cent of its clients are male — a sign that boys are changing their ideas and learning to respect their skin.
The Clinic is offering a 25 per cent discount on a facial and manicure package for readers of the Clothes Show Magazine — male and female!
Normally £47, take along this issue before March 14 and it will cost only £35.
After the treatments, beauty products will be available at the clinic with a 15 per cent discount.
Helena Harnik Clinic, 19 Upper Berkeley Street, London W1 (071 724 1518).
looks like the REAL THING
Fancy designer labels tend to come with fancy price tags to match.
Want to know ho you can afford to buy the latest looks?
Then just read on…
RALPH LAUREN
Ralph Lauren, born in New York in 1939, formed his first company in 1968 to become the designer who most represents an archetypal American way of life.
His secret?
Designer separates which do not date and are eminently wearable.
The rural past provides inspiration for a lot of his clothes; a tweed jacket, drill jodhpurs and a white shirt are very Ralph Lauren.
His collection for spring/summer 1991 combines a sporty feel with short, sexy dresses in fresh colours.
Attention to materials and cut can make his clothes ideal for an active, yet stylist life-style.
River Island provides our version with a red chiffon scarf for the finishing touch.
The original costs £890 but you can look much the same for £30 and go wild in accessories to add your own signature.
EMILIO PUCCI
Emilio Pucci has recently experienced a surprise resurgence of popularity in the fashion world.
Born into an Italian upper-class family, he boasts the title of marchese and can claim Catherine the Great and de' Medici among his ancestors.
His clothes, originally worn by Lauren Bacall, Jackie Kennedy and Marilyn Monroe, were given a great boost recently when worn by the likes of Madonna and Deee-Lite.
With a signature print that resembles crazy paving and stained glass windows, Pucci clothing cannot fail to attract attention.
The outfit Madonna is wearing costs £340, and Browns of South Molton Street, London, are the only stockists of it in England but, with a bit of confidence, you can spend a fraction of that.
Our ‘Pucci’ cost only £42.99.
THIERRY MUGLER
Thierry Mugler designs clothes with impact.
Diana Ross sauntered down the catwalk this season wearing little more than a feather boa and a smile.
The likes of Naomi Campbell and Linda Evangelista were clad from head to toe in leather, rubber, latex and PVC.
Mugler, who was born in France in 1948 and started designing when he was 22, never fails to come up with collections that are outrageous and fun.
It is his show in Paris which attracts hoards of fans (some of whom are hardened fashion journalists) all keen to catch the first glimpse of Thierry's latest creations.
Fans are prepared to pay inflated prices for the Mugler style.
The catsuit in the picture above costs a cool £1,760, but it isn't impossible to find cheaper alternatives.
Our version is by Pink Soda and costs just under £60.
JOE CASELEY-HAYFORD
At just 34, Joe Caseley-Hayford is one of Britain's most consistent and respected designers.
He was nominated for Designer of the Year in 1989 and continues to produce the original, quality clothing.
His collection for this summer consists of simple shapes in chiffon and satin.
Stretch bra tops and slip dresses in pink and cream are painted with delicate flowers.
Leather gilets, chainmail dresses and leather biker jackets with hot pants are worn with huge Afro wigs for a funky Seventies feel.
But the slip dresses in the catwalk picture do not come cheap and to achieve this daring look you need to buy not one, but two dresses (not for the faint-hearted, being virtually see-through) making a total retail cost of £522.
We created our Clothes Show look by simply adding one dress on top of another with a satin body underneath.
Our outfit comes to £211 — still expensive but these dresses are quality items each of which would look good on their own.
Unlike the Joe Caseley-Hayford outfit, our copycat dresses are made in a much less revealing fabric.
GIORGIO ARMANI
Giorgio Armani was born in Italy in 1934.
In 1975, together with Sergio Galiotti, he launched his own label.
By the end of the Eighties, he had opened Emporio Armani in London's Brompton Road, selling his younger, less expensive range.
Like many designers at the top end of the market, he has an impressive range of accessories, from scents to handkerchiefs — making the range slightly more accessible.
Probably best known for his classic suits, his entire collection exudes a cool elegance.
The predominant colour for spring/summer 1991 is being, cropping up on the catwalk in shift dresses, shorts and wrap-around sarong-style skirts.
The key to Armani's style is loosely cut clothes with simple accessories to create a beautiful timeless feel.
The suit in the picture above costs around £600.
However, a similar outfit can be created with a silk camisole and flattering suit.
For that extra touch of mystique we've chosen a pair of dark sunglasses.
At £164.99, it's still a sizeable investment but French Connection have a good reputation for making clothes that last — and any of these items could, of course, be teamed with other items.
Versatility equals value for money.
COCO CHANEL
Coco Chanel was born in France at the beginning of the century.
Throughout her career she successfully broke the rules of haute couture until her name became synonymous with French chic.
Responsible for Chanel No. 5 and the ‘little black dress’, her genius has assured her name will never die.
Over-the-top accessories accompany all her collections, from fake pearl chokers to quilted handbags and gilt belts.
The inset shows a signature Chancel suit with a short skirt, in keeping with today's daring lengths, and the famous handbag.
Explore junk shops and markets for costume pearls and earrings to recreate this expensive look.
A Chanel suit alone costs over £1000.
Our version cost £60!
WHY EVERY WOMAN SHOULD HAVE A WARDROBE OF perfume
You don't always wear the same clothes wherever you go so why wear the same old fragrance?
With one to match every mood, you know it makes scents!
For those of us who are spared having to wear a uniform to work, the notion of getting out of bed and putting on exactly the same clothes, every day, is simply too boring to contemplate.
And — in 1991 — so it has become with fragrance.
For while your granny may have been content to envelope herself in a cloud of ‘Tweed’ each and every morning of her life — never daring to deviate from her ‘trademark’perfume for so much as tea with the vicar — most of us, today, possess a positive wardrobe of perfumes to play with.
In fact, it could be said that the only women these days who sport one single fragrance, all the time, are those famous glamour-pusses — Joan Collins, Elizabeth Taylor, Paloma Picasso, and so on— who are paid several millions of dollars a year to endorse a ‘signature’ scent, on condition they never allow gossipy fellow lunchers in smart restaurants to get an illicit whiff of ‘Chanel No 5’as they swan by.
These days, most women's lives are so varied that no single scent will take us from gym to office, from desk to dinner — let alone dawn till dusk.
Nevertheless, to be avoided at all costs is turning each day into a ‘patchwork quilt’ of conflicting perfumes.
Zooshing a citrus scent over an ultra-floral one finished off with a spritz of something exotic and musky before tonight's hot date, may leave your man more bewildered than bewitched by clashing notes battling for supremacy behind your earlobes.
Thanks to improved fragrance technology, perfumers are now able to offer us subtly differing strengths of the same scent for different moments during the day: eau de parfum (freshest of all) eau de toilette, parfum de toilette, esprit de parfum, parfum — or even, for some famous names, parfum extra, ideal for knocking 'em dead at several paces.
And don't forget all the ‘you-know-the-scent-now-try-the-bath-range’ opportunities.
Of course, possessing a wardrobe of perfumes can seem an expensive indulgence — but because scent stirs the senses so effectively, it is worth every penny, beaming us back, quicker than you can say ‘Tardis’, to happy memories of holidays and favourite people.
Mercifully, these days, it's easier to avoid costly mistakes by splashing out on a large bottle of something which is transformed into ‘Eau de Old Socks’ by your skin's individual chemistry: if you ask politely in department stores, many perfume houses gladly hand out miniature sample vials of their wares, enabling you to make up your mind away from the high-pressure squirtings of over-zealous tester-bottle-wielders.
And with ‘perfumed strips’ now impregnated into the pages of so many magazines, it's possible to try new scents for a single day without venturing further than your friendly newsagent.
There is a logical — physiological — reason for changing your perfume frequently, too.
After a while, if we constantly wear the same, favourite scent, we can become immune to its charms.
In our brains, the cerebrum (the part connected to the olfactory, and other senses) controls our subliminal consciousness, determining the threshold of our sensory perceptions.
In time, spraying on the same scent habitually can make us completely insensitive to it.
By varying your perfume choice with the frequency you change your smalls, you never build up that resistance (and thereby avoid the risk of all but suffocating colleagues in a crowded lift with too much ‘Shalimar’ while you still can't smell a thing).
Also, hormonal changes during the month can alter the chemistry of a perfume on our skin, so what smells great today may be decidedly ‘iffy’ by next Thursday.
Of course, nowadays, fashions in fragrance do mirror those in clothes; it's no coincidence may of the world's best-sellers have been created by top designers.
The next big thing, you'll be interested to hear (and so will your gran), are nostalgic perfumes: anything by Caron or Mary Chess, Guerlain's early fragrances, and look out, too, for a revival of Schiaparelli's show-stopping ‘Shocking’, in a bottle designed by painter Salvador Dali.
But just because your adored, powerful 1980s-style fragrance is now as démodé as a Dynasty-style shoulder-pad, that doesn't mean you should cast it aside.
Just as you keep much-lived garments in your closet slip into long after they've gone out of style, bottles of your favourite fragrance still have a place in your library of perfumes, too.
Most perfumes remain potent for around six months.
But don't for one moment feel you're fickle if you change your perfume constantly, on a whim.
Having a wardrobe of fragrances is as exciting as owning a vast array of stylish clothes (with the advantage, after you've made your initial choice, that perfumes always fit).
With so many contemporary scents to choose from, you can always find the right perfume for the occasion — and best of all, it's never held up a the dry cleaners!
SWEET SMELL OF SUCCESS
The character of a scent develops slowly on the skin as it notes come into play.
Tune into the harmony of your developing fragrance: Top Notes are the first scent you'll smell, but these are volatile and don't last.
Next come the Middle Notes, which permeate as the personality of the fragrance develops, interacting with your skin's natural chemicals.
A few minutes later, the Base Notes come through, and you're left with the final, true fragrance created by the Master perfumer, Guy Robert, creator of scents for Dior and Hermès.
His ‘Exclusively Yours’ counter at Harrods offers an hour's consultation, during which he'll create your personal fragrance formula.
This is decanted into a crystal bottle and your initials etched into the glass stopper.
But, at £150, it's not cheap!
Still, it's less than Joy by Jean Patou, a mere £568 for 30ml, contained in a crystal baccarat.
However, it does also come in an Eau de Toilette, at a more affordable £23.
MAKE THE MOST OF IT
When trying out perfumes, limit yourself to four; after that, you'll become ‘fragrance blind’.
Try not to rub at your skin after applying scent — you'll upset the balance of fragrance notes and spoil its character.
If unopened, perfume will keep for about a year.
But once a bottle is open — use it!
The air in half-empty bottles causes evaporation and deterioration.
An old fragrance that's past its prime will become oily, strong-smelling, and may look darker in colour.
Beware of over-doing it.
After a while, you can't smell your own scent — but everyone else certainly can!
Tuck empty scent bottles into your wardrobe and drawers, leaving the tops off so that your clothes can soak up the subtle aroma left in the bottles.
MEMORIES, MEMORIES…
Femme by Rochas was originally created by Marcel Rochas in 1944 as a wedding present for his new bride.
No 5 by Chanel herself, from the fifth sample.
As five was also her lucky number, the perfume was named after it.
Said by Marilyn Monroe to be the only thing she worse in bed.
When Dior stunned the world with his ‘New Look’, he also launched the equally revolutionary Miss Dior in 1947.
Created in 1936,Blue Grass , by Elizabeth Arden, was inspired by fresh fields and blue skies of Grasse in France.
It was the forerunner of today's popular ‘sweet floral’ fragrances.
L'interdit by Givenchy was created for Audrey Hepburn in 1957 by designer Hubert de Givenchy.
Originally, she had sole claim to it but now everyone can buy this classic scent.
MATCH THE MOOD
Here's our pick of the scents to match five very different outfits — and the women who wear them.
A SCENT OF MICHAELA
Choose a lively, spontaneous scent to match the carefree, natural look of blue jeans and casual top.
Try:
Eau de Patou by Jean Patou, from £15;Wrappings by Clinique, from £25;Cristalle by Chanel, from £15 (purse spray):Lauren by Ralph Lauren, from £30;Eau de Givenchy by Givenchy, from £16.75.
A SCENT OF JANE
Go for an intoxicating, soft fragrance to add to the drama of that special romantic ball dress.
Try:
Le Jardin by Max Factor, from £6.95;Femme by Rochas, from £24;Roma by Laura Biagiotti, from £22.50;L'Air du Temps by Nina Ricci, from £21;Trésor by Lancôme, from £30 (in Harrods from march, countrywide from May).
A SCENT OF BETTE
Find an extrovert perfume to complement your most outrageous outfit.
Try:
C'est la Vie!by Christian Lacroix, from £24;Les Parfums by Salvador Dali, from £20;Paloma by Paloma Picasso, from £25;Ma Liberté by Jean Patou, from £20;Ysatis by Givenchy, from £25;Capucci by Capucci, from £18.
A SCENT OF MICHELLE
Select a sophisticated, sensual scent to match your little black dress Try:
Coco by Chancel, from £31;Teatro Alla Scala by Krizia, from £30;Y by Yves Saint Laurent, from £21;Dioressence by Dior, from £31;Caroline Herrera by Antonio Puig perfumes, from £28.25.
A SCENT OF DIANA
Choose a perfume as confident and modern as your smartest suit.
Try:
Calandre by Paco Rabanne, from £21:Chamade by Guerlain, from £24.50;Escada by Margaretha Ley, from £29.50;Knowing by Estée Lauder, from £32;Montanta by Claude Montana, from £20.
Halston Classic by Halston, from £16.25.
‘If we constantly wear the same scent, we become immune to it’
All about Joan
She'll be 58 in May — so how does Joan Collins do it?
By Richard Barber
‘I've got quite a lot of hair but it's fine so, to make it look good, I need to spend a great deal of effort on it.
Since time is something I don't have too much of these days I look for other solutions like hats, turbans, scarves or wigs and pieces.
I wore a short wig in the recent production of Noel Coward's Private Lives .
When I took it off afterwards, my hair was a mess, so I put on a turban or tied in back with a band, which is what I do every day.
I was my hair every other day and usually only go to my hairdresser before a party.
Actually, I didn't go to the hairdresser once during the five months I was in Private Lives and my hair became healthier from not being subjected to heated rollers or setting lotion.
There's too much hype connected to most beauty products so I've never become a slave to any particular shampoo.
I spend more time on my face and skin than I do on my hair.
I use a bath oil in my bath — there's an American one I like — and then a moisturising body lotion: Vaseline Intensive Care or Nahema by Guerlain or, of course, Spectacular by Joan Collins!
I'm extremely lucky in that I have no cellulite.
I know girls in their twenties who do, so I realise how fortunate I am.
Part of the reason could be to do with my genes: my other and grandmother were both very beautiful women who looked after themselves.
Mummy instilled a beauty routine into me as a young girl which is as automatic to me now as brushing my teeth.
I am also extremely aware of what I eat.
I don't diet because I don't believe in it.
It's an old maxim but it's true: to a great extent, you are what you eat.
I disapprove of diets so strongly because I think it's wrong suddenly to deprive your body of certain foods.
The likelihood is that you'll go back to your old ways so you'll have achieved nothing.
The better approach, in my opinion, is to eat the right foods in the first place.
There's no mystery about it.
It's just common sense.
Hamburgers, friend and processed foods, canned drinks, too much caffeine, too much starch — all of them are bad for you.
My weakness is chocolate but the occasional indulgence makes all the rest worth it.
And yes, I drink alcohol but only wine and champagne and usually only in the evening.
During the day I drink only mineral water, fresh fruit juice, coffee or tea.
I never drink anything out of a can and hardly ever eat anything tinned, either.
The exceptions are baked beans, tuna fish and, particularly, sardines which are so good for you.
I also love those individual dinners from Marks & Spencer.
Their Chicken Kiev is delicious, and as for their garlic bread…fabulous!
When it comes to make-up, I'm absolutely convinced that cosmetics are the greatest protector of the skin yet devised.
All the women I know who have worn make-up all their lives have good skins.
But the women who haven't bothered with make-up — unless they've taken superlative care of their complexions — have now got skin that shows the ravages of time.
I think it's an old wives' tale that make-up ruins the skin.
As long as you remove it properly and moisturise and tone your skin, it's the very best way of preserving it.
Make-up definitely acts as a mask against the elements.
I like to use cosmetics as close to my natural skin colour as possible.
I always emphasise my eyes more than any other feature.
In fact, I arrived at a look I liked fifteen years ago and I have hardly changed it since then.
The only time I change the colour of my make-up is when I have a tan.
I don't deliberately put my face in the sun — but you can't help picking up a slight tan from reflected sunlight, particularly if, like me, you swim a lot.
It's merely a question of altering your foundation to match your skin colour.
I don't like exercising very much.
I can think of very little more boring than lying on the floor and doing sit-ups and leg lifts every morning.
So I don't.
All I do is 10 or 15 minutes of my own exercises every other day when I remember.
When it comes to clothes and the British high street, I think the standard has dropped radically in the last five years.
It's unbelievable how shoddily made most things have become and how expensive, too.
One of the few exceptions is Marks & Spencer.
I bought my son a selection of clothes at Christmas and was really impressed with both the designs on offer and the reasonable prices.
I then tried Miss Selfridge for my two girls, Tara and Katy.
With the exception of some of the Lycra fashions, I was appalled at how hideous everything was.
I just don't like the styles for young women.
The skirts are far too skimpy and short, the shoes too clumpy.
Apart from Edina Ronay, Bruce Oldfield and Caroline Charles, British fashion today is sad.
I prefer to shop in Paris, or in America.
Vivienne Westwood, Designer of the Year?
I mean,please !
Is it any wonder that more and more women resort to wearing jeans and anoraks?
I went into Harrods recently and I couldn't believe how revolting most of the clothes were — and they weren't cheap, either.
For £200, I expect to be able to buy something that's good-looking and well-designed.
I've settled now for a sort of uniform during the day of a skirt, silk shirt and a jacket, with a three-quarter length cashmere coat over it in winter.
I tend to wear black suits in the evening although I must admit I'm getting slightly bored with black now.
I buy most of them in America from designers like Anne Klein or Donna Karan — the choice in America is so much wider.
Walking through Saks or Bloomingdales in New York is great.
You can see every designer under the sun.
It's fabulous.
My weakness is costume jewellery — I have my own line — and anything for the hair: hats, headbands and scarves.
But when it comes to clothes, I'm absolutely ruthless.
If I'm going to spend several hundred pounds on an outfit, I make sure I get real value out of it and will wear it a lot.
I'm a hoarder when it comes to clothes — I still wear some of the clothes designed for Alexis in Dynasty .
As for perfume, I wouldn't dream of wearing anything other than Spectacular by Joan Collins!
I am often asked whether I approve of cosmetic surgery — and I do not.
Too often, there can be real dangers attached.
In America, it's becoming ridiculous.
People as young as 30 are undergoing surgery.
And it doesn't always have the desired effect.
I saw some pictures recently of a famous movie star with a lift…frightening.
If you're unhappy with your face, I can see that you might be tempted.
But I don't think everyone is as aware as they should be of the after-effects.
I have seen too many people who have looked odd after cosmetic surgery.
And it doesn't always last.
A girlfriend of mine had the bags under her eyes removed but, two years later, she's acquired a new set.
So what is she to do?
Have cosmetic surgery every two years?
I wouldn't dream of letting a surgeon anywhere near my eyes.
I think it's incredibly dangerous.
My attitude to ageing is that it's inevitable so there's very little you can do about it.
I take care of myself, I eat sensibly, I try to maintain my face and body as best I can but I'm not obsessive about it.
And I know that I'm incredibly lucky to have such tremendous energy.
I feel no different whatsoever to how I felt when I was 30.
A lot of it is to do with attitude.
I had dinner with an actor the other night who managed to tell me three times throughout the meal that he was 50.
He's a very attractive man who looks younger than his age so why the hang-up?
I was told when I first entered this business that a pretty girl is on her way out at 23 and all washed up at 27.
Look at the starts of the films from the Thirties and Forties.
They were all teenagers or in their early twenties.
Well, I wasn't prepared to believe that my career would be over almost before it had started.
So I've looked after myself but I've worked hard as well because I like a certain lifestyle and it costs a fair amount to sustain.
I never, ever worry about my age.
It simply doesn't occur to me.
And, anyway, we're all aware of the alternative.
Death.’
I emphasise my eyes more than any other feature
It's an old wives' tale that make-up ruins the skin
I love hats, headbands and scarves: I also wear wigs and pieces
I always wear Spectacular by Joan Collins!
My weakness is costume jewellery — I have my own line
I buy my clothes in America — British fashion today is sad
I use bath oil and moisturising body lotions
I don't like exercising much but I do swim a lot
‘I never worry about my age.
It simply doesn't occur to me’
‘I feel no different now to how I felt when I was 30’
Joan past and present.
Way back in 1955, a buxom young Joan took on Cleopatra in the film Land of the Pharaohs (left).
With hands still firmly on hips, Joan went on to become the face that launched a thousand mannequins
The Doris Day era.
Bright and wholesome, as a cowgirl (left) and tropical temptress (above)
Far left: Sixties swinger — and forerunner of The Bitch ?
Left: as a Russian ballerina in Nutcracker .
Young and innocent in the film Sea Wife (below left) and, more credibly, as the fiery Alexis in Dynasty (below).
keep it simple
Not for nothing has the shift remained a timeless classic.
Here's our pick of the best.
the high price of being a shopaholic
We all joke about shopping till we drop but for some people it's a reality.
Josephine Fairly talks to two reformed shopaholics — and to the expert counsellors
Everyone likes an occasional splurge, some of us — like Imelda Marcos (she of the 3,000 pairs of shoes and 500 bras)— more than others.
Whether it's to reward ourselves for an achievement, or to lift our spirits, many women find little can compete with the rustle of tissue paper and the thrill of slipping into a pristine new outfit.
All of us probably envy the ability of Imelda, Ivana, Diana and co to indulge themselves with a glorious shopping spree whenever the desire grips them.
But, increasingly, with the availability of easy credit, it's possible to shop till you drop on a shoestring salary.
‘Buy now, pay later,’ the banks exhort us.
For a number of shopaholics, however, that price turns out to be dizzyingly high — when shopping turns from a pleasure, or an occasional treat, into an uncontrollable obsession that chomps its way through the bank account, with sometimes disastrous effects.
Once upon a time, of course, when you craved new clothes, you had to save for them — a quaint custom almost as outdated as horsedrawn carriages and farthingales.
I remember once thinking my mother was stark raving bonkers as she regaled me with a tale of the time she scrimped for six months to buy a pair of elbow length, white kid evening gloves, which set her back the equivalent of two weeks' wages.
But she certainly never suffered from that sick feeling in the pit of her stomach — familiar to many a credit-card flexer — when the post flops on the mat each morning.
‘When everyone bought things for cash, if you couldn't afford something — well, it was tough luck,’ agrees Simon Gelsthorpe of Bradford Health Authority, who's worked with a wide range of adult emotional and psychological difficulties (including chronic addictions).
‘But nowadays, it's all too easy to get carried away.
So many people have credit cards, because it is quite tough to get through daily life today without one.’
That's not to say that everyone will succumb to the temptation to use their credit cards willy-nilly, but for addictive personalities credit cards can lead all too easily into temptation.
‘Compulsive spenders suffer the same urge to go on a binge as compulsive drinkers, eaters or non-eaters,’ declares Dr Christopher Cook of London's Middlesex Hospital Psychiatry Unit.
‘Addiction begins when shopping sprees become a means of relieving tension and anxiety.
People who feel unloved and depressed often alleviate those stressful feelings by going out and buying things.
However, shopping can eventually become an end in itself.’
‘Just as there is comfort in eating, so there is comfort spending — buying things to make yourself feel better,’ observes Simon Gelsthorpe.
‘In fact, they're very similar; the benefits are equally short term.
Most comfort eaters enjoy it while they're eating, but the downside is they soon start to pile on the pounds.
You may feel good when you get home and try on your new dress but, in the long-run, it too can create more problems, piling on the debt.’
There is, of course, a considerable difference between enjoying a passion for fashion and being a spendaholic.
Strange as it may sound, compulsive shoppers very often don't even wear their look — in contrast, of course, to the average shopper who flaunts a new frock or jumper to death.
DIANNE'S STORY
Dianne is 26 and a (reformed) high-spender: ‘The joy was the act of shopping itself.
Often, I wouldn't bother to try things on — I'd look at the price tag and think ‘I've got to have this,’ especially if I thought it was a ‘bargain’I might not see again.
More often than not, when I got my booty home, I'd never even hang it up; it would sit in the carrier bag or the shoe-box under my bed.
It didn't matter what I bought; it still wouldn't have satisfied the continual, gnawing desire for more.’
The first step on the path to beating the problem — as with any addiction — is to acknowledge it's there.
Quite often, there's a moment of truth — the realisation that there's no way you can actually make all the minimum payments on your credit cards Then, the secret is to seek out the reason for your burning desire to go barmy in Benetton, or wherever your compulsion manifests itself.
In addition to those who shop to assuage feelings of ‘inner emptiness’(commonly described by sufferers), obsessive spending can also be an aggressive act.
‘If a woman isn't working, her husband's bringing home the pay cheque and it's seen very much as ‘his money’, compulsive spending can be a way of getting back at him if she's angry,’ explains Simon Gelsthorpe.
‘Alternatively, a woman may have low self-esteem, feeling she can only impress others or make them like her by buying status symbols or the latest fashions.
‘The majority of compulsive spending is comfort spending — and in order to cure it, it's necessary to confront the cause of your discomfort, the emotional pain which shopping only temporarily eases.’
In the short term, he explains, ‘Confrontation can be even more painful, but it's the only way, in the end, to treat the underlying reason for over-spending.
If you're unhappy and miserable because you're lonely, then you have to find other ways to address that than going out and buying something to wear, or getting drunk.
In the end, a new Lycra frock is never going to give you the warm, rosy glow of friendship.’
Wherever possible, though, he recommends turning to family and friends for emotional help with the problem, rather than going it alone.
‘But if partners or those around you aren't able to help, then it may be time to seek professional help.’
Your GP may be able to point you in the right direction, and it's worth finding out if the psychology department of your local hospital takes referrals.
If you've slid into debt, there is also, crucially, the practical side to tackle — the going on a ‘financial diet’.
People might consider destroying their credit cards or just leaving them at home.’
Simon suggests, ‘only using a cheque book for household bills and so on.
Another step is never to go shopping without a list, and to be strict about only buying what's on it.’
My own ruse was to ‘swap’ credit cards with an equally debt-ridden friend; for three months we had to travel halfway across London to retrieve our own card and ask ‘permission’before making a purchase!
It worked a treat.
‘That's fine for a short-term arrangement,’ insists Simon, ‘but, ultimately, people have to learn to take control of themselves .’
The dreaded bank manager often turns out to be highly sympathetic, once a customer comes clean.
Arrangements can be made to consolidate debts and pay them off gradually.
Citizens' Advice Bureaux can also put compulsive spenders in touch with debt counsellors, who are able to assess their clients' finances and thus establish an escape from what can feel like a financial swamp.
The good news, meanwhile, is that reformed shopaholics almost always speak of a silver lining to the cloud which hung over their lives (and bank accounts).
Explains Dianne: ‘I value what I have now.
I enjoy going out to buy something, having saved up for it, far more than I ever did when my favourite phrase was ‘charge it, please’.
I think now about what I'm purchasing, whether it'll go with my other clothes and accessories.
My wardrobe may not be as current these days, and I hardly saw a movie for a year and a half while I was getting myself back on my feet financially.
But now, when friends talk about using credit cards, I say ‘do yourself a favour — cut them in half’!’
‘And,’ she adds, ‘at least, they don't call me Imelda any more…’
CATHY'S STORY
‘I've been in love with new clothes ever since I can remember.
As a child, even though my parents were divorced and my mother didn't have much money, I would scream and shout whenever she tried to put me in some of my sister's hand-me-downs.
So, for me, the best thing about starting work was being able to go shopping every weekend and buy things without having to ask someone for money.
I'd wander down the high street, frittering away on whatever took my fancy.
I'd wear my shopping trophies on Saturday night, and over the next week…
But the following weekend, I'd have shopping fever again.
‘It was fine while I was on weekly wages.
But then I got promoted at work and suddenly I had a salary to borrow against.
Store cards were the beginning of my downfall.
All my favourite high street shops seemed to be offering them if you just walked in off the street so I snapped up several.
You only had to pay back the five per cent minimum each month.
Within a couple of months I'd splurged about £2,500 on all sorts of high-fashion clothes.
I worked hard all week and so felt that I deserved them, I suppose.
‘Increasingly, the ‘thrill of the chase’ gripped me.
I was obsessed by new clothes to the extent that I'd lost interest in something if it was more than a few hours old.
My sisters and friends loved me; they were getting all these barely-worn cast-offs.
My mum kept telling me she thought I was spending too much, but I'd always tell lies about the price of things.
‘I'd already stretched my credit to the maximum when the bank gave me a cheque guarantee card that was also a credit card.
So I used that to its limit, too.
By the time I was 22, I'd run up nearly £4,000 in debt, and was beginning to fall behind with the payments because I rested sending money off to pay for clothes I'd fallen out of love with.
I was running up an unauthorised overdraft, too; I'd stopped opening statements ages before because they made my hand shake and my tummy wobble.
The crunch came when my bank asked for my credit card back and demanded I pay off the overdraft at once.
I had to ask Mum to lend me the money — it was the most humiliating moment of my life.
‘She marched me off to see my bank manager.
I explained the situation to him and he arranged a single loan to pay off the store cards.
(I realised I had to cancel them, otherwise I'd get the balance down a bit, then get clothes fever again.)
Mum felt that she's failed me by not stopping me sooner, but it was me who'd let us both down.
When we talked about it at length, I realised that I'd been using clothes to buoy myself up emotionally, ever since my father left when I was 10.
When I understood the reason for my compulsive shopping, it became possible — though not easy — to stop.
I was lucky to have my family's support, and soon after, I met a really nice man at work; we've been seeing each other ever since.
The acid test was when I told him why I never had any money to spend, but he was very understanding.
I don't want to be ‘kept’ by him, so if I can't afford to go out we just stay in and read together or just watch television.
When we do go out, I've still got plenty of clothes and no longer feel I have to have something brand new.
‘Now I just draw out from the bank a spending allowance for the week — to pay mum back, to cover essentials and for a few little extras.
If I cut corners, I have something left on Saturday to go shopping with.
I've almost paid off the debt and soon I may have enough to put something aside for savings.
That'll be a first.’
ARE YOU A SPENDAHOLIC?
Below is a list of questions for you to ask yourself.
If you answer ‘yes’ to two or more of these questions, it's time for a little self-examination — you could have a problem.
Do you borrow for items you used to buy with cash?
Do you find that you are only able to make the minimum payments on your credit cards?
Is an increasing proportion of your weekly/monthly income being used to pay off your debts?
Is your cushion of savings small or non-existent?
Are you at, or near, your credit limit?
Do you take out a new loan before the old one is paid off?
Do you take out a new loan to pay off the old one?
Are you unsure how much you actually owe?
Are your monthly credit payments more than 15–20 per cent of your net income, excluding rent or mortgage?
Would you be in immediate financial difficulty if you lost your job?
‘Compulsive spenders will binge in the same way as alcoholics’
‘By the time I was just 22, I had run up a clothes debt of nearly £4,000’
FASHION SOLUTIONS
How we helped Yuri keep one jump ahead
He may be the principal dancer at the Bolshoi Ballet but, when it came to fashion, Yuri Vasyuchenko was trailing way behind.
The Clothes Show Magazine leapt to the rescue
When top Bolshoi ballet dancer Yuri Vasyuchenko strides through the streets of Moscow, his compatriots treat him like a rock star.
Small wonder, really, since he looks like a rock star — of the Bon Jovi ilk, as it happens.
But somehow, now that the 34-year-old Yuri is spending more time away from his homeland — touring with the Bolshoi to Europe, America and the Far East, starring in Sleeping Beauty, Romeo & Juliet and Swan Lake , meeting politicians and top businessmen, even being presented to royalty — that shaggy, laid-back image doesn't sit so well on his broad shoulders.
‘It is very difficult for us Russians,’ he explained, in a strong native accent.
‘At home, we have no fashion magazines to help us.
When we come to the West, it's like Christmas — so many shops, so much to buy.
The problem is, we don't know how to put it all together.
I wish I could see more magazines, to give me ideas and guidance.’
Time for the Clothes Show Magazine 's expert team to step into the limelight and take a bow: award-winning hairdresser, Anthony Mascolo, from Toni & Guy, and fashion assistant Saska Graville, who'd been chosen to work on Yuri's new look.
‘This is great,’ he smiled.
‘I love clothes — but I hate trailing round the shops.’
The first big challenge was the dynamic dancer's hair, which we all agreed was bit like a Seventies pop star's.
‘That's because I usually cut it myself,’ grinned Yurk, ‘and I'm a ballet dancer, not a hairdresser.’
Because of the romantic roles that Yuri dances, however, it was very important not to alter his image too much, maintaining length but subtly improving both the shape and texture of his hair.
‘Yuri's problem is that he has very fine hair,’ said Anthony, carefully snipping feathery layers into the rather worried-looking star's tresses.
(Well,you try explaining the finer points of haircutting to a Russian whose grasp of English, while good, is far from perfect.)
‘It will still look messy, the way he likes it — but much more modern, too’ declared the master scissor-wielder with confidence.
Not that Yuri need have fretted for a moment — as the softer shape emerged, a big smile spread across his strong features.
‘Usually, I don't trust anyone else with my hair — but I like this very much.’
So keen was he on the results — secured into place with a handful of mousse (a completely new and highly intriguing concept to Yurk!) that he agreed to let Tony & Guy's team work on the colour, later in the week.
‘Yuri's been experimenting with bleach,’ observed Anthony.
‘It's given him a slightly orangey colour.
What he really needs is to have some blond streaks to lift it a shade or two.’
By now, Yuri was really beginning to enjoy himself.
Appropriately enough for a photo session with one of the fittest men in the world — capable of dancing for hours without a break — we'd taken over a corner of top London gym, The Peak, at the Hyatt Carlton Tower Hotel.
Yuri soon started tapping his sock-clad feet in tune to the beat of the music, while one floor below several women in leotards went for the burn.
‘I don't just like to do ballet — I like disco dancing, too,’ he revealed to us.
In fact, the clothes Yuri had worn to our shoot — an American jacket and trousers with a grey shirt and fur-lined black trainers — wouldn't have looked at all of place on the dance floor of Stringfellows, but Yuri was after a smoother image.
At first, he expressed surprise at the colours Saska had picked for his new look — a sludgy, greyish-green suit by top Italian designer, Giorgio Armani, teamed with a dusty tobacco silk turtleneck and cardigan from Nicole Farhi, to encourage Yuri to break away from his preferred monochromes.
‘I really don't think they're my colours at all,’ he commented.
‘Usually, I wear black, grey, khaki.
But I'll give it a try…’
Five minutes later and, having shrugged on Armani's uncluttered lines and the sensuous Nicole Farhi knitwear, Yuri was clearly thrilled with the result.
‘Normally, I go for very sporty clothes,’ he said.
‘But I like this classic look.
If I walked through Moscow now, they wouldn't recognise me.’
He smiled, giving us the impression that — after all the adulation he usually experiences — he might find that something of a relief.
Clothes buying is hardly Yuri's preferred foreign pastime, though: ‘When I travel, I prefer to sneak off to look at cars and buy accessories for the ones I have at home — a Volvo, an Audi, a Volkswagen, a Japanese Micro bus — and my favourite, an old Chevrolet.
They're just what I would call my real hobby,’ he confessed.
He also has a motorcycle, and owns up to a passion for all kinds of biker gear.
‘I really love leather jackets and jeans.’
Today, though, we were aiming to avoid that rock'n'roll gear in favour of a more relaxed, off-duty style.
Saska has chosen some soft denim jeans and a chunky silk Aran-knit.
‘This would be great for travelling — and warm enough for those brutal Russian winters,’ said Saska, as our star slipped into something decidedly comfortable, and performed a rather more professional twirl than most make-over ‘guinea pigs’can manage.
It's natural that Yuri should so enjoy dressing down , when for some much of his life he has been zipped into elaborate Bolshoi costumes, his cheekbones and eyes accented by thick, expertly applied theatrical make-up.
And in addition, of course , much of his time — several punishing hours each day, since childhood — is spent in well-worn practice gear.
So we thought we'd riffle through the rails of leading dancewear manufacturers to find something a shade more exciting than saggy tracksuit bottoms.
‘This is great,’ he laughed, pleased with the new, more cosmopolitan Yuri he now saw reflected in the mirror.
‘I must admit I was a little anxious before we started because I've looked the same for years — but now I'm very happy with my new style.
It's given me plenty of ideas for when I next go shopping in London, New York, Los Angeles, Bangkok, wherever.
Thank you!’
Finally, as if rewarding us for our efforts, Yuri provided us with what was for us the highlight of the day — an impromptu performance (to a disco beat) which left us in no doubt at all as to why this tall, handsome athlete is Russia's leading ballet super-Tsar!
‘If I walked through Moscow now, they wouldn't recognise me’
INSIDE MY WARDROBE
It's Betty Boo-tiful!
Betty Boo is the hottest new singer in the British charts.
The girl behind her is Alison Clarkson.
Can you tell them apart?
From West London straight to the top end of the British pop charts, Betty Boo is a pop star who's definitely going places.
The girl behind the Boo persona is Alison Clarkson, a talented, highly original 20-year old from Shepherd's Bush, London.
She has created pop's answer to Barbarella, dressing her up in clothes fit for a material girl.
The Clothes Show Magazine team invited Alison to show us some of her favourite outfits, as well as a selection of clothes that Betty wears.
Can you spot the difference?
Alison arrived in what she described as her ‘old school tights’ and a pair of Jigsaw hotpants.
‘I used to dress very casually, always wearing trainers.
Now I really love dressing up and I've given all my trainers away to my brother.
I've got a big wardrobe at the moment but it mainly consists of shoes — I bought these boots from Read or Dead.’
For the next picture, it was on with the stage makeup and into something a little more outrageous — Betty's turn, in other words.
Alison complained of the constant temptation she undergoes to buy the clothes that are picked for Betty Boo.
Sure enough, she fell in love with the Arabella Pollen dress brought along by the Clothes Show Magazine .
‘It's a perfect fit and I'm absolutely mad about it,’ said Alison.
She was true to her word.
Just a couple of weeks later, Betty popped up on the BRIT awards.
No prizes for guessing what she was wearing.
The final outfit was one that Alison had brought along with her.
Would she wear it off stage or was it strictly for Betty Boo only?
‘Betty Boo would never wear anything that Alison Clarkson didn't like.
I love Betty's outfits — the clothes I wear have got to be out of the ordinary.
I haven't had a chance to wear this outfit to go out yet — but I will.’
‘I find it difficult to get shorts and trousers to fit me.
I've got more of an athletic figure than a womanly figure — and I've hardly any waist’
‘I hardly ever wear dresses as they never fit — you always see me in shorts.
I love this, though, because it gives me a waist
‘This outfit is very cartoonish, very Mickey Mouse, and I like that.
I like to be flamboyant and have an excuse to dress up’
Day out in CAMDEN
How do you spend your Saturday mornings?
The Clothes Show Magazine went to Camden in north London to find out…
TAMA & JESSIE
‘We're here to recover from last night’
JIMMY, STALLHOLDER & CORINNA
‘I've got my curlers in ready for tonight’
PAUL, STALLHOLDER
‘Some of these clothes are antiques; I've just spotted a stain on one of them!’
RACHEL
‘I love my poncho; it keeps me very warm’
THE CREW FROM HUFFS FOOD STALL.
SPIKE (IN THE STRAW HAT)
‘The hole in my hat is so I can easily scratch my head!’
ALAN, CRAIG, FRANCINE & MONIQUE, STALLHOLDERS
‘Alan made Francine's jacket — we all end up swapping clothes from each other 's stalls’
SEAN, DANIEL JON & JEFF
‘We're here to buy clothes — Jon wants some Champion trainers’
SOO SCOTT, STALLHOLDER
‘I think more people should wear hats’
ENRIQUE & CHRISTINA
‘The clothes here are cheap and brilliant’
DANIEL
‘I've done modelling before — will this be a funny shot of me?’
EILEEN, STALLHOLDER
‘I've lined this hat to keep my head warm’
MR JAMESON & CHARLOTTE
‘We're just browsing — all this shopping has worn us out’
KATHLEEN, BAR ARIZONA
‘I shave my head once a week’
ALL THINGS BRIGHT
Cast off those winter blues and burst into spring with sizzling, vibrant hues.
Choose hot reds and golds, tangy lime or fresh floral prints — whatever you do, don't be dull
how to get the best out of your HAIRDRESSER
Having your hair cut in a professional salon can be even more traumatic than going to the dentist.
And more expensive, too.
So who's to blame?
Probably the hairdresser and the client, as Sally Moulsdale discovered.
As every woman knows, her hair is her crowning glory, or rather she knows that it should be, but there are those of us who are unhappily aware that, too often, our looks fall down on the job.
The answer should be simple.
Go to a hairdresser, ask him or her to come up with a style that suits you, your hair, your lifestyle, and emerge looking and feeling great.
However, things are not that easy.
The relationship between a woman, her hair and her hairdresser can be fraught with complications.
‘I remember one client who burst into tears before I'd taken the first snip,’ said top London stylist Trevor Sorbie.
‘That's how emotional and intense it can be and I can understand that.
I believe that a haircut can change people's lives.
Certainly, a lot can be read into a hairstyle.
A woman with well-cut permanently glossy hair gives a good impression of being in control of her life.
Someone who's forever pushing her hair out of her eyes, or stuffing it up in a clip on top of her head simply looks harassed.
Not for nothing did Sue Ellen's hair flop when she became an alcoholic.
She was a fallen woman, and her hair knew it.
It doesn't end there.
Your hair may be well cut, but if you're a trendy executive and your latest hairdo is just that tiny bit mumsy, you may as well hibernate for a few months.
With such a lot riding on the snip of a scissor, it's not surprising that the breast beneath the hairdresser's gown is heaving with unrealistic expectations and conflicting emotions of hope and fear.
‘I go into a hairdresser's hoping that a new me will emerge,’ said Barbara Scott, a mother of three who works part-time.
‘I want someone to create a style that will make me look fabulous, and which doesn't need any care at all.
I believe that if it's cut well enough that should be possible.
Instead, I sit there while the stylist blow dries for an hour, thinking: ‘Oh God, another disaster’.
I still live in hope, though, always changing hairdressers, praying the next one will give me my perfect style.’
For Claire King, the European promotions manager for EMI, going to the hairdresser is worse than going to the dentist.
‘My overwhelming emotion is fear.
I feel a victim as soon as I arrive in the salon.
My dream is for someone to say: ‘I understand your hair and your lifestyle; this cut will really suit you.’
In reality, I feel I'm one up of I don't come out in tears.’
So what is the problem?
Why do perfectly confident women feel intimidated as soon as they walk through the door of a salon?
The main problem is one of communication,’ said John Peers, who was voted Midlands Stylist of the Year at the latest British Hairdressing Awards.
His clients have been known to fly from Jersey to his Birmingham salon in order to have him tend their tresses.
‘The consultation before the cut is so important.
The hairdresser must listen to the client, and vice versa.
They should chat until they come to a realistic agreement about a style that will suit her hair and lifestyle.
This preliminary chat should be much higher on the agenda than it is in many salons.’
Trevor Sorbie is in complete agreement.
When first choosing a hairdresser, he strongly advises booking a consultation rather than an appointment.
‘A hairdresser's not worth his salt if he's not prepared to give a consultation,’ he said.
‘It's the best way of adverting a disastrous haircut.
At a consultation you're not in the vulnerable position that you are in a hairdresser's chair.
You're in a position of strength as a potential client who is checking out the service on offer.
You can find out a lot in a short chat, and you have the option of leaving with no harm done.’
That could be a comforting thought when you have to contend with dominating hairdressers who think like Michael Rasser of the famous Michaeljohn salon (cut and blow-dry £50).
He was recently quoted as saying: ‘I've got a terrible habit when people bring in a picture and say they want to look like that — I invariably tear it up in front of them.
They're usually terrified — but, in those circumstances, you have to establish your superiority right away.’
While the hairdressers I spoke to admitted the cult of the dominating hairdresser was strong in the last decade, they all feel it's now on it's way out.
Trevor Sorbie thinks the patronising attitudes of some salons can be explained by the youth of the stylists.
A glamorous 20-year-old who spends two hours in front of the mirror each morning is unlikely to empathise with a working mother of three.
‘Younger stylists are also under the impression that they're getting into an exciting and glamorous business,’ said Trevor.
‘They tend to think they'll be cutting trendy hairstyles all day.
But real people come in all shapes and sizes.’
Edinburgh hairdresser Charlie Miller agrees, and any employee who thought differently would be out on his ear.
Charlie, Avant-Garde stylist of the Year, holds very strong views about client relations and they are like music to the ear.
I almost booked a flight and an appointment on the spot.
‘There isn't a problem between a hairdresser and his client as long as the hairdresser can listen, understand and interpret what the client is saying.
Women want to walk out feeling good.
Their wellbeing is in our hands, so it's our job to ensure they leave feeling uplifted.’
Charlie's personal idea of bliss is for a long-haired client to walk in an allow him to create one of his more advanced shapes, but he would never impose his styles on an unwilling customer.
‘I'm just as happy to do a granny's hair,’ he said cheerfully.
‘I think hairdressers have got a bad reputation as so many of them try to dominate the client.
Techniques in hairdressing have advanced enormously and it's fantastic what you can do, but unfortunately some hairdressers abuse that power.
I think that attitude has been very bad for the industry as a whole.
Too many people have been upset by their experiences at the hands of a hairdresser.’
Annette Mieska is in the business of putting right the damage.
She runs ISM, business and training consultants to the beauty and hairdressing industry, and many of her courses are devoted to improving customer care.
‘Good technical skills are not enough,’ she said.
‘Training in client awareness is important, too.
Young hairdressers must learn to treat the client as a person, not a head of hair.
Often they see their profession as a creative art form, which is fine as long as they recall it is also a service industry.’
Annette's courses teach students sensitivity to body language and facial expression as well as practice in interpretative skills.
‘After all, words like ‘wispy’ and ‘short’mean different things to different people,’she said.
‘I encourage hairdressers to avoid jargon, which can be very patronising.
I then teach them how to check they are both on the same wavelength.
I think the best way to teach hairdressers might be to make them become clients.
How would they like a stranger to be in control of the way they look for the next six months?’
Annette also feels strongly that the ‘mystique of the salon’ should be dissolved.
‘They're like secret societies,’ she said.
‘It can be a mystery to the client how the hairdresser made her hair look that way, and she has no idea how to achieve the same effect.
That's not good enough.
You're paying for the hairdresser's services and part of that is to receive whatever information about your hair you need.
You should be told how to keep that look for the next eight weeks.’
It seems that we do have some rights after all!
We don't have to sit there and take whatever we get.
We can decide what we want.
We cant take time to talk to the stylist before they wield the scissors.
We can complain if we're not treated properly.
But at the back of my mind a little voice says, ‘He's the hairdresser, he knows best, let him do what he wants and I'll walk out looking like a princess.’
Maybe I've found my perfect hairdresser.
Although John Peers is very willing to listen, to advise, to agree on a style, his favourite client is the one who walks in an says, ‘Do whatever you think is best’.
Some day John, you, me and my once-blonde head of hair are destined to meet…
Next month: don't miss our 16-page supplement on curly hair — how to look after it if you've got it, how to get it if you haven't!
THE WORST THINGS YOU CAN SAY TO A HAIRDRESSER
Another perm, please.
The same as usual, please.
I'd like a complete change of style, but don't take off more than an inch.
What have you done?
This isn't what I meant at all!
I'd like a Princess Di hairstyle, please.
My old hairdresser used to do this style, only it looked much better when he did it.
THE BEST THINGS YOU CAN SAY TO YOUR HAIRDRESSER
‘Can I tell you about my hair?’
That way, you then get his attention and he is obliged to listen to you.
Take time to tell him something about your tastes and lifestyle — and the sort of style you think might suit you.
Listen carefully to what he has to say about your hair, and the sort of style he thinks might look good on you.
Ask for ideas and suggestions if none are given.
Before he gets out his scissors, repeat what you have agreed on, to check that you're both talking the same language.
Bring a picture of your preferred style.
At least it provides a starting point to the discussion, even if it can't be copied.
Dress well and wear make-up to the salon.
This will make a favourable impression on the stylist and you'll get a more stylish haircut.
Get some professional tips on how to look after your hair and how to maintain the style at home.
The architecture of hairdressing in the 18th century at the ‘Academie de Coiffure’ in Paris
‘My overwhelming emotion is fear.
I feel a victim as soon as I arrive’
Game, set and seduction.
Playboy Warren Beatty homes in with the dryer on Julie Christie in the film Shampoo .
Pictures: The Mansell Collection: The Kobal Collection
‘The cult of the dominating hairdresser is at last on its way out’
twinkle toes
Whether it's boots or shoes, slip-ons or sandals, you're bound to take a shine to the latest in leather.
It'd be patently absurd to ignore them!
happiness is…
Jakki Brambles
She's only 23, she's got her own daily show on Radio One and she's just got married.
No wonder Jakki Brambles can't stop smiling.
When most people of her age are just setting their first tentative steps on the bottom rung of life's ladder, Radio One's most successful — and, it must be said, best-looking — female disc jockey is riding high.
She's not exactly miserable at home, either.
But to start at the beginning.
Jakki Brambles never had any ambitions to be a disc jockey.
She went to drama school on a scholarship in the Isle of Wight — a long way from her home in Ayr.
Rather than go straight on to drama college, she decided to take a year out to travel.
That required money.
‘I didn't want to work in a shop or a bank so I wrote to my local radio station, West Sound, asking if I could make the tea.’
Jakki had been there a week when, in true fairytale fashion, one of the regular disc jockeys upped and left.
It was a small station in a rural area with very few employees.
A week later, and aged all of 19, Jakki Brambles was broadcasting live to the west coast of Scotland.
‘And the terrifying thing I realised very quickly was that you have to be yourself.
Being an actress is relatively easy in that it's someone else's words you speak.
Being a DJ is all down to you.’
With her parents' move to the Isle of Aran, Jakki had next to no money for food after she'd paid her rent.
‘I used to run competitions offering a free T-shirt to the first person who arrived at the station with a burger and chips.
I'd have a mountain of food for supper!’
Despite this dodgy sideline, the station renewed Jakki's contract after three months.
About a year later, her fairy godmother struck again.
The man who had run the neighbouring Radio Clyde in Glasgow moved south to London's Capital Radio.
He was looking for female voices, he remembered Jakki, invited her to submit some tapes and — presto!— she was offered a job in The Smoke.
By then she'd saved enough money to go to Australia, but decided in the end that she could always travel later.
She was at Capital for 18 months.
It wasn't a happy experience.
‘It was very competitive with everyone stabbing everyone else in the back as they tried to become stars.
I didn't fit in.
I was only in it for a lark.’
After a year, Jakki considered leaving and secured a job at a tiny radio station just off Australia's Great Barrier Reef.
‘And then, blow me, I got offered a job at Radio One.
Again I thought, well, the world's there whenever I want it and I had been presented with an incredible opportunity.’
She's been there fore 18 months now and she loves it.
‘They were on the look-out for a female DJ so everyone was very up for me from the word go.
I immediately got a lot of media attention — Radio One couldn't have made me fail.’
With her own drive-time show every evening from Monday to Thursday, Jakki is thriving.
‘After nine months of doing the early morning show and the Breakfast Show with Simon Mayo, I was half-dead.
I'd been existing on two or three hours' sleep a night.
Now I feel human again.
‘The early evening is my best time of day; I can also play my type of music — Harry Connick Jnr to Oleta Adams to Jesus Jones.
I love Frank Sinatra.
I love Def Leppard.
My taste is pretty catholic!’
From the start, Jakki popped up on Top of the Pops .
‘I found it very hard at first, lacking confidence about how I looked.
But I'm beginning to enjoy it now and I positively like my regular spot on Going Live because I have to interview people which I love doing.’
Even so, all her powers were put to the test when she flew to America to interview Madonna.
Jakki had just returned from an idyllic holiday in America (more of which in a moment) when she was told to get back on a plane because the Material girl had finally agreed to give an interview on Radio One.
She'll never forget it.
‘I was given a chauffeur-driven tour of Beverly Hills and then taken to the famous Sunset Marquee Hotel.’
The day of the interview arrived — and Madonna cancelled.
‘I felt so let down.
I'd come 7,000 miles at three days' notice — and for what?’
At last, however, the Radio One crew were told they might get 10 minutes maximum down at the Disney Studios where Madonna as rehearsing for her world tour.
Eventually, the summons came.
Jakki was ushered into the star trailer.
‘And it was really tough.
For the first 10 minutes, she sat with her back to me and refused to turn round.
I was frantic.
I knew I was meant to get an hour's worth of broadcastable material.
‘Luckily, I'm a big fan so I knew my stuff and, gradually, Madonna softened.’
An hour and a half later, Jakki had a great interview in the can.
So who else has been a memorable interviewee?
Well, Janet Jackson was also a challenge but, again, Jakki felt she cracked her.
Paul McCartney was uncomplicatedly nice.
And Kylie's become a positive regular.
‘She used to be a bit of a lost soul,’ says Jakki, ‘but she's changed a lot recently and I think that's all down to Michael Hutchence.
She's head over heels in love — but them so am I…’
When Jakki's parents moved to Aran, a near neighbour, Jim Sherry, agreed to keep and eye on her.
In time, Jakki moved to London, Jim to America to work as an exhibitions organiser.
They kept in touch and then, last March, Jakki took up Jim's invitation to visit him for a week's holiday.
‘It was extraordinary.
Within hours of landing, we were hopelessly in love.
We'd been friends for so long, we couldn't understand what was happening.’
After a week together, Jakki flew back to Britain in floods of tears, only to fly back to the States again three days later to interview Madonna.
‘I arrived in LA mid-afternoon on the Wednesday.
Jim flew down from San Francisco early that evening.
By midnight, he'd asked me to marry him.’
They married at Christmas.
So how does Jim deal with is wife's celebrity?
‘He handles the whole situation really well,’ says Jakki, ‘but then he doesn't have an ego problem.
He's happy for me and proud of me, too.’
She smiles.
‘But then, when my work's done and I go home, I'm happy to be his wife.
Very happy indeed.’
Which is where we came in.
‘I'd wear this to a meeting at Radio One — it's rare for me to look very smart but to be taken seriously you really do have to dress seriously’
Winning smiles.
Jakki Brambles interviews Kylie Minogue for Radio One (above).
Seriously smart (left): jacket, Marks & Spencer.
Black polo, Blazer.
Leggings, French Connection.
All Jakki's own
‘Leggings and hi-tops are very me — verging on the scruffy.
Clothes like this are good for the location filming on Going Live — warm, comfortable and bright, which is vital for TV
‘For Top of the Pops , I make an effort to look glammed up but not too much — the knackered shorts tone the outfit down a bit’
‘When I do go out somewhere special I like to go completely over the top in the glamour stakes — different hairdo, glittery accessories and high heels’
DO WE BRITS GET THE CLOTHES WE DESERVE?
Ever felt the clothes on sale in British high streets could be better designed and better made?
Ever felt the Europeans do it better?
Hilary Burden asked for some expert views — and, overleaf, we ask your opinion
Last year, I treated myself to a £40 fake fur mini skirt (British label) with the latest leopard print.
I wore it just about half a dozen times, during which the button came off and the lining split.
It's now somewhere in the back of my wardrobe, waiting for Oxfam.
For the wear I got out of it, I probably should have paid half the price.
How many times have you bought something that has let you down (and not complained) or worn a garment for just one season simply because it was the latest gimmick?
So why aren't we, the British public, demanding better quality from our fashion manufacturers and retailers?
In Britain, the top end of the fashion market is ridiculously designer-expensive.
At the lower end, the chain store boom of the last decade means the equivalent one-season wonders may be cheap but that's exactly how long they last — one season.
The problem is that there's little to offer in between; high street quality seems almost a contradiction in terms.
So, when the trade barriers come down across Europe next year, what will be the implications for our fashion industry?
It's an economic argument but it's also about image — and we all know how important that has become in stereotyping countries.
Just think of stylist Italians clad in leather, or of the French in anything chic-but-not-denim.
Peter York, management consultant and author of The Harpers & Queen Sloane Ranger Handbook , fears that, come 1992, Britain's fashion status will suffer.
According to York, the rest of Europe has distinctively different ideas about what fashion is.
‘The home market isn't demanding enough about the quality and finish compared with its European counterparts,’ says York.
‘Compounding the problem is that, compared with German manufacturing, we're still very much a sweatshop sort of industry.
I wish I thought better about the opportunities 1992 has to offer, but realistically I don't think we've even begun to limber up for the competition.’
Last year, Britain's clothing exports were worth £2 billion (20 per cent up on 1989's figures).
Half of that went to countries in the European Community, but we still lagged behind other European countries.
British Fashion Council Chairman Sir Ralph Halpern cites ‘the limited horizons of our own-label manufacturers’ as one of the major weaknesses.
‘There is quite a sameness in high street stores in Britain,’ he told the Clothes Show Magazine , ‘whereas what customers really want is more individuality.
If the fashion industry responded by establishing better links through design and manufacturing to the high street, it would then be able to provide the customer with a more individual product.’
Susan James, Head of the London College of Fashion, agrees.
Her students, she says, are well prepared for Europe, and have been for a long time.
The college has produced a dictionary of fashion terms in four languages, and has also established links with a fashion college in Germany in order to swap ideas and practices.
The problem, as she sees it, lies with manufacturing.
It's not good us training designers who then just sit and work in a creative vacuum.
The vast bulk of mainstream manufacturers in this country don't know how to use our designers.
There are a lot of missing links between design and product development because of manufacturing's hidebound attitude.
Good designers are forced to get their stuff made in other countries simply because they can't get the quality of manufacture that they want here.’
Katharine Hamnett is one of them.
She is acutely disappointed by the government's lack of investment in the clothing industry in this country, and highly critical of the industry itself, which she says just doesn't realise the potential of its designers.
‘It's such a cruel irony,’ says Katharine, ‘that British fashion is the base of European fashion.
Many of the big European names are being churned out by British design teams who have been trained at the expense of the British taxpayer.
We're actually funding European imports into Britain instead of British exports out of it.
Sir Ralph Halpern believes our manufacturing industry has a great deal to learn from labels such as Benetton and Hennes in Europe, and The Gap, Ralph Lauren and Calvin Klein in the States, in terms of creating brand and image.
‘The total turnover of our top UK designers, who are so well-publicised,’ he says, ‘doesn't match even Ralph Lauren's.
There is no such high street equivalent in this country, which there should be.
‘What we need is to put more focus on creating brand-consciousness — and by that I mean everything that makes up a brand, such as style, colour, fashionableness, image, price, quality.
We need brands that have relevance to both the high street and European market, which is far more brand-conscious than our own.’
There is an inherent danger in all this for our clothing industry which is that, unless manufacturers wake up, there will continue to be far more opportunity for European merchandise to come here, and little for ours to get elsewhere.
This, of course, would be catastrophic for the industry.
It's Sir Ralph Halpern's view that if it hadn't been for the current worldwide recession, many more outside brands would have been introduced to the UK market.
This means the real fight begins once the recession is over (Halpern believes this will be in time for the next general election, coinciding with the introduction of the Single European Market in '92).
‘It is only when European brands land on our doorsteps and people flock to buy them that manufacturers will respond to the competitive threat,’ explains Halpern, ‘because it's a fact that British society has become complacent and insular.’
We have to ask ourselves, as consumers, exactly what part we have to play in all this.
Does a disorganised clothing industry with little commercial interest in quality simply reflect our own limited needs and aspirations?
It's interesting to note that, while the French and the English spend similar amounts of money on clothes, the French have by far the more stylist reputation.
A quick poll at the French Embassy in London established that the French spend more money on fewer items — looking for quality not quantity.
Mignon Matthews, who runs the international modelling agency Matthews and Powell, agrees that the French are definitely top of the chic list in Europe.
‘British girls are fairly low-key and often lack confidence,’ says Mignon, who scours the country auditioning potential models.
‘They tend to want everything handed on a plate to them instead of adding their own personal touch.
The French are far more inventive, as are the Italians.
I'm aware that Britain saw many style advances in the Eighties, thanks to the high street revolution at places like Next, Principles, Richards and Marks & Spencer.
But what we really need is a sense of ourselves — which the French and Italians simply ooze.’
Lesson learned?
Maybe I'll think twice about buying the fake-fur-leopard-print-whatever next time, and spend the money on an assertiveness course instead!
But seriously, let's get our message to the manufacturers clear.
Smarten up your act or we might just stop buying British, as the Europeans take over our high streets offering us fashions with a much better image, manufactured to a much higher standard.
NOW TURN THE PAGE AND HAVE YOUR SAY
IS BRITISH BEST?
PART A
FIRST, TELL US ABOUT YOURSELF
1
How old are you.................................
2
Which country do you live in?....................................................
3
How much money do you spend on clothes (excluding shoes and lingerie) per month?
under £20
£21–£40
£41–£60
over £60
4
What influences you to buy clothes?
a girlfriend
your boyfriend
your mother
advertising
fashion magazines
how other people are dressed
the latest fashion shows
5
Which high street store do you buy most clothes from (excluding lingerie and shoes)?....................................................
6
How often do you feel really satisfied with a brand new outfit?
always
usually
sometimes
rarely
never
7
What, for you, are the most important criteria when buying clothing?
(Score from 1–7, 1 being the most important)
quality
original/innovative styling
colour
comfort
fit
price
fashionableness
PART B
NOW TELL US WHAT YOU THINK
8
Do you feel high street stores are giving you what you want in clothing?
Yes, on the whole they do
Not really, but I tolerate them
No, I avoid them by shopping elsewhere or making my own
9
Do you think clothes are over-priced?
Yes, they're a total rip-off
Yes, if the quality was better, prices would be more acceptable
No, they're about right
10
Which country do you rate as the most stylish in Europe?....................................................
11
How would you rate Britain's image in terms of style?
(Marks out of 10).................................................
12
Please add any additional comments you may have on a separate piece of paper, in no more than 100 words.
If you wish to enter our lucky draw, please fill in your name and address below.
We're giving away 15 great cotton sweatshirts from Joe Bloggs in various autumnal colours — one size fits all.
Send this form to:Clothes Show Magazine /Brit Survey, Redwood publishing, 20–26, Brunswick Place, London, N1 6DJ.
Name.........................................
Address...................................................................
Postcode...........
‘British fashion manufacturing is still a sweatshop industry’
Above: Katharine Hamnett, top fashion designers, is acutely disappointed at the government's lack of investment in the industry.
Right: Peter York, author: ‘I wish I thought better about the opportunities that 1992 has to offer’
Left: Mignon Matthews, head of Matthews and Powell model agency, thinks the French are top of Europe's ‘chic list’
Right: Sir Ralph Halpern, Chairman of the British Fashion Council: ‘I think, to compete with Europe, we should focus on brand-consciousness — which means everything from style, colour and image to fashionableness, quality and price’
‘Highly talented designers end up working in a creative vacuum’
CLOTHES ON THE ROAD
stepping into the SIXTIES……at CLOTHES SHOW LIVE!
The snow may have fallen crisp and even on the NEC in Birmingham but that didn't dampen the enthusiasm of everyone who attended Clothes Show Live .
Inspired by the Sixties, we asked a few brave souls to take the plunge and dress up like latter-day Twiggys.
Find out what happened overleaf
A whirlwind tour of Sixties fashion.
Above: Twiggy, the girl who epitomised the Sixties ‘look’.
Above centre: minis, donny caps and patent boots and shoes — all authentic Sixties style.
Above right: I can see right through you!
Plastics — that here leave little to the imagination — were widely used in fashion.
Right: the Op Art movement heavily influenced textile design.
Far right: beam me up!
Space travel was a reality and its influence was enormous.
Photographs: Camera Press, Rex Features
The Clothes Show Magazine team recreate the Sixties at the NEC in Birmingham
Richard Curtis, 20, student (far right): ‘I prefer a more classical look although I do like the shirt.
But I wouldn't wear the trousers or the hat!’
Shirt, about £50, Johnsons.
Leather trousers, £125, Johnsons.
Hat, £24.50, The Hat Shop
Denise Noel, 11, sales rep (right), and Lara Johnson, 22, window-dresser (far right): ‘I love this look!’ said Denise.
‘I'd wear this outfit to a club,’ said Lara.
Denise's leggings, £70, Wet.
Top, £29.95, Jigsaw.
Belt, £12.99, Pink Soda.
Lara's bodysuit, £34.99, Komodo.
Boots, £54.99, Shelly's
Nicky Ritchie, 19, student (left): ‘I love the jacket.’
All-in-one, £55, Jigsaw.
Jacket, £490, Joe Casely-Hayford.
Hat, £50, The Hat Shop.
Earrings £2.99, River Island.
Shoes, Nicky's own.
Gail Adshed, 18, student (right): ‘I'd buy all but the tights.’
Skirt, Gail's own.
Boots, £39.99, Shelly's.
Rights, £7.99, Mary Quant.
Top, £27.99; pendant, £4.99; earrings, £5.99, Pink Soda
Manjit Dedgun, 18, student (above): ‘I'm glad the Sixties look is back in fashion.
The hair and eye make-up are particularly flattering.
I'm not sure about these clothes, thought — they're a bit weird.’
Dress, about £19.99, Komodo.
Mac, about £120, Toute Passe.
Glasses, £8.99, Pink Soda.
Kerry Richards, 22, nanny, and Robyn Williams, 18 months (right): ‘I like the hair but the trousers are too tight and the shoes feel really clumpy.
Robyn loves her outfit, though.’
Robyn's all-in-one, £18.90, Benetton.
Kerry's top, £19.99, Komodo.
Trousers, £39.99, Monix.
Shoes, £39.99, Shelly's
Ann Jefferson, 26, marketing executive (left): ‘I'm naturally blonde but I think I look better as a brunette — I'm absolutely stunned.
The make-up's brilliant — and I'd definitely wear this catsuit.’
Halter-neck catsuit, £35, French Connection.
Frilly shirt, £55, Red or Dead.
Shoes, £39.99, Shelly's.
Earrings, £2.99, River Island
Margaret Dixon, 20, university employee (right): ‘I wouldn't wear the top but I like the leggings — they're nice and bright.’
Leggings, £15.90, Benetton.
Top, £50, Rokit.
Pendant, £29.99, Mary Quant.
Sunglasses, £8.99, Pink Soda.
Sarah Bamber, 19, company secretary (left), and Jason Boore, 21, engineer (near left): ‘I don't think the hair's really me but the eye make-up is very striking.
I love the leggings,’ said Sarah.
‘I'd wear the jumper and the trousers any time,’ said Jason.
Sarah's top, £34.99, River Island.
Leggings, £24.99, Top Shop.
Shoes, £39.99, Shelly's.
Earrings, £6.99, Pink Soda.
Jason's jumper, £120, Chris Parry.
Ski pants, £58.99, Johnsons.
Belt, £57, S-Tek
Janet Bond, 42, hospital employee (left): ‘I remember all this from the first time round!
It's the false eyelashes I like best.’
Coat, £54.99, Dorothy Perkins.
Sunglasses, £8.99; earrings, £6.99, Pink Soda
Chris Goodenough, 19, student (above): ‘I prefer the Seventies style, although I would wear this top.’
Shirt, £35, Red or Dead.
Trousers, from a selection at Benetton.
Shoes, £60, Red or Dead.
Sunglasses, £39.50, Samco
Seema Dewitt, 19, sales assistant (left): ‘I like the eye make-up.’
But what about the outfit?
‘I'd never, ever wear it again!’
Trousers, £80; jacket, £125, Wet.
Boots, £39.99, Shelly's.
Earrings, £6.99; belt, £12.99, Pink Soda
Kelly Pearce, three (left): said Mum ‘Kelly loves dressing up.
I'd happily buy her this.’
Jacket, £32.90; pants, £9.90, Benetton.
Shoes, £6.99 Woolworths.
Laurence Stone, 27, blacksmith (right): ‘I wouldn't wear this every day on the street but it would be good fun for a club.’
Trouser, £125, Johnsons.
Jumper, from a selection at Benetton.
Belt, £19.99; pendant, £29.99, both Mary Quant.
Sunglasses, from a selection at Samco.
Photographs: Peter Brown.
Hair and make-up: Laurence Close at Camilla Arthur; Lisa Eldridge.
Stockists are on page 92
YOUR VERY GOOD health
Dr Cathy Read brings you the latest on health news and views, from the dangers of drastic exercise to the benefits of sensible sleeping — and a scary tale of birds
BIRD ALERT
If you still have those old-fashioned milk bottles delivered to your door — watch out for birds!
Researchers in Wales have linked a stomach bug known as campylobacter jejuni , with bird attacks on milk bottles.
Magpies and jackdaws appear to be the major culprits and the problem occurs most in the spring.
If the birds do peck through the foil bottle tops, doctors warn against drinking the milk as it could be contaminated with the bug.
LESSENING THE PAIN OF INFERTILITY
A friend of mine in her late thirties has spent the last five years building up a successful business.
However, she recently asked what it was all for if she could not have a child.
After years of tests she and her partner still don't know the cause of their infertility.
Because of the haphazard way infertility is managed, thousands of couples are in a similar situation.
Fortunately, help is at hand in the form of the Infertility Management Programme, devised by Mr Rajat Goswamy, Medical Director of The Churchill Clinic Fertility and IVF Centre in London.
The programme is designed to find the cause of a couple's infertility in just one month.
It involves five or six visits to a clinic or hospital for key investigations which include blood tests, semen analysis, an ultrasound examination and a minor operation to check that the woman's tubes are clear.
Once the problem has been identified, the couple can start appropriate treatment — with the right treatment, Mr Goswamy predicts, many more infertile couples will conceive.
The Churchill Clinic charges £1,050 for the basic Infertility Management Programme.
Alternatively, the tests can be carried out free on the NHS, and although the NHS clinics and hospitals are unlikely to be able to provide an answer within one month, Mr Goswamy believes that, with proper organisation, a three month programme should be possible on the NHS.
Infertility Management Programme booklets are available from The Churchill Clinic, 80 Lambeth Road, London SE1 7PW (071 928 5633).
Couples can also request one of the clinic's booklets for their GP which explains how to get the same tests on the NHS.
SPORTS INJURY
If you're thinking of getting into shape, take it easy and build up slowly — a frantic training programme greatly increases risk of over-use injury.
So, always warm up thoroughly and remember, once you have an injury, pressing on only causes further damage.
One sports injury on the increase is sportsman's, or Gilmore's groin which occurs when tendons in the groin tear due to excessive stretching and twisting.
An operation is often the only cure for this painful condition.
In particular, footballers are prone to Gilmore's groin — Paul Barker and Bryan Robson have both made a successful return to the sport after the operation.
AIR QUALITY AND THE DOE LADY
Call the Department of Environment's air quality information line and a lady with a cheerful voice will most probably inform you that you have been breathing ‘good’ or ‘very good’air for the previous 24 hours.
If not, she will tell you that the air quality has been ‘poor’ or ‘very poor’.
What, you may ask, is the meaning of it all?
The DOE's air quality information, also published in newspaper and television weather reports, is based on three air pollutants.
They are nitrogen dioxide, mainly produced by car exhausts; ozone, from car exhaust fumes reacting with sunlight; and sulphur dioxide, produced by power stations and diesel engines.
If levels of any of these reach the ‘poor’ category, normally healthy people may suffer from headaches and irritation of the nose and eyes.
Asthmatics are more prone to suffer attacks when any one of these pollutants hits the ‘poor’ mark, and some sensitive people may even be affected when the air quality is describes as ‘good’.
The government hasn't yet decided what advice to issue when air quality drops off.
But it makes sense to limit your activity — if you exercise outdoors when air quality is poor, you're more likely to suffer adverse effects.
STAYING SLIM
Most people who actively diet usually end up piling weight back on.
A study carried out at the University of California in Berkeley compared woman who maintained 20 per cent weight loss over two years with dieters who relapsed.
The former were patient, they set small goals they could meet, stuck to their personally-devised diet plans and took regular exercise.
Also, while eating more healthily, they did not completely restrict favourite foods.
In contrast, relapsers tended not to exercise.
They had lost weight by taking appetite suppressors, fasting or going on highly restrictive diets they could not sustain, avoiding all favourite foods.
Not surprisingly, they felt deprived and easily resumed old eating habits, often in response to stress.
ME AND MY jeans
Young or old, rich or poor, famous or not, almost everyone, it seems, owns a favourite pair of jeans.
Helen Carey talked to five fans
Everyone loves jeans — they're tough, comfortable…and sexy.
When Nick Kamen took off his Levi's 501s in a launderette, jeans became one of the most potent sex symbols of the past decade.
And, ironically, the more worn they are, the more appealing they become.
Jeans are a staple part of everyone's wardrobe — from the boy next door to the rich and famous.
And now that they can be found in every colour under the sun, they're even more versatile.
Coloured, bleached, stonewashed, there's little that hasn't been done to denim.
So what's left for the Nineties?
According to Manchester's The Legendary Joe Bloggs Incorporated Co, trends go in cycles.
So, after instigating a revival of the widest flares since Slade and The Sweet first strutted their stuff, they're all set to do the same for drainpipes.
And customising is all part of the fun — cut-offs, fringes, holes, patches.
Designer of the Year Vivienne Westwood included ripped denim in her Spring/Summer 1991 collection.
Already a fashion favourite, you can bet it'll be the rage this summer, too.
Cowboys may wear them out of necessity and convicts in the USA may have been given them as part of their uniform, but one thing's for sure, whatever the reason, most people simply wouldn't live without them.
IN THE BEGINNING…
The word jeans originates from the place name Genoa where sailors from the port hit on the idea of making trousers from the sturdy sailcloth.
Denim is the name of the blue woven cloth first made in the French town of Nimes.
So now you know!
JEAN GENIES
Nick Kamen
Gloria Vanderbilt
James Dean
The Waltons
Brooke Shields
Status Quo Anyone from Manchester!
FREE!
FREE!
Shake off those blues and put a little colour into your life.
Levi's is offering six lucky readers the chance to win a pair of Black Tab 408 coloured jeans, worth about £40.
Available in white, green, red, black or mustard, you're spoilt for choice.
Send your name and address to Clothes Show Magazine /Levi's Offer, Redwood Publishing, 20–26 Bruswick Place, London N1 6DJ.
The senders of the first six cards out of the back pocket on March 15 will be the winners.
Don't forget to include your waist size and colour preference.
KEN LEHRAIN, OWNER OF KEN'S WESTERN STORE, ROMFORD.
‘These Wranglers are good for horse riding — in other words, plenty of bum room!’
Ken has been into western styling since he was a child.
He's been running his shop for the past 30 years, selling everything from garters to saddles!
Basic Wrangler jeans, about £29
PADRAIG, AGED 13 MONTHS.
Padraig's mum, designer Charlotte Squire, said, ‘I prefer them to look quite large and these are a good basic style.
He also has a great pair of extremely shabby second-hand jeans that look brilliant!’
Jeans, £7.99, Asda
JANE ANDREWS, EVENTS CO-ORDINATOR, WEMBLEY CONFERENCE CENTRE.
‘White jeans are generally pretty unforgiving but I find these comfortable and not too unflattering!
Although nearly every person in the country wears jeans, I think there are quite a few who shouldn't!’
Next jeans, £29.99
DANIELLE CLARKSON, AGED 14.
‘The Joe Bloggs flared jeans didn't really catch on in Peterborough where I live.
These new ones are great.
All my jeans are environmentally friendly — they don't get washed very often, which of course saves on detergent!’
Jeans, £29.9, The Legendary Joe Bloggs Incorporated Co
MATT ROSE, MODEL.
‘I recently shot an advertising campaign for Levi's in San Francisco.
It was a brilliant job to do.
Not only did I get to model the clothes how I liked, I got to keep them all afterwards.
I nearly always wear baggy 501s, but these coloured jeans are pretty good, too.’
Black Tag 408 jeans, about £40, Levi's.
Stockists are on page 92.
Styling: Helen Carey.
Photographs: Mel Yates
the ancient art of beating stress
Pummel life's tensions away with a new book on the Oriental art of massage.
Josephine Fairley reports
They called stress the disease of the Eighties.
But now that the Nineties are in full swing, has anyone out there discovered that the phones have stopped jangling, their Filofax is miraculously blank, or the traffic clogging our roads has withered to a trickle?
Not flipping likely.
All these factors — and many, many more which are now a fact of our fast-paced, deadline-packed daily lives — are still helping to create symptoms of stress to the point where a single encounter with an apparently dyslexic British Telecom directory enquiries operator can all but tip us over the brink.
All of us have different levels of tolerance to the demands on our mental energy.
And, while a little pressure can do us good — without it some of us mightn't even bother to slither out from under the Slumberdown in the mornings — too much is definitely a bad thing.
Doctors' surgeries are filled with sufferers from countless illnesses which often fall into the category of ‘stress-related’: high blood pressure, anxiety, ulcers, depression, tension, exhaustion, insomnia, phobias, skin conditions such as eczema; and PMT can also worsen when we're under intense pressure.
It's believed that stress can actually depress the immune system, leaving us pretty to every cold and bout of flu, and also to more serious complaints.
Not to mention the toll it inevitably takes on our looks!
So, it's vital to zap stress fast whenever it threatens to overwhelm you.
Strangely enough the best stress-buster of all has been around for thousands of years: massage.
Long favoured by those long-lived Orientals, who recognise that touch can create powerful changes in our minds and bodies, massage is fast being acknowledged by more and more people in the West as a perfect antidote to our pressure-cooker lifestyle.
Now, thanks to an excellent new book called Massage for Total Relaxation , by Nitya Lacroix (Dorling Kindersley, £9.99, published on April 25) all of us can learn to massage the stress away whenever it builds up.
Although many of the massage techniques in this illustrated guide are for two people to practise on each other, as you can clearly see from the simple techniques over the page, massage is something that you can successfully achieve alone.
Nor does the book confine itself to a run-down of the different massage strokes; it also ventures in to the territory of relaxation tips, body awareness exercises and meditation techniques to instill a sense of calm.
As Nitya Lacroix explains total relaxation isn't merely physical — it's a harmony between body and spirit, an elusive state which surely all of us strive for.
But when it works, ‘beneficial change is brought to the vital organs, the mind is calmed, the emotions are settled, and our sense of wholeness is restored’.
According to Ms Lacroix, all of us, in response to events in our lives, build up a ‘body armour’, a personal pattern of tension and strain creating harmful postural habits.
Do you scrunch up your shoulders a lot?
Stand with your arms tightly clasped in front of your body?
All these things prevent the body's energy flowing smoothly, and those energy ‘road-blocks’ are not only the result of stress — they can also compound the problem.
Self-massage can help break through this built-up tension — and, luckily, the most effective zones for self-massaging are the hands and feet.
Without even being aware of it, tension ‘collects’ there — so when it all gets too much for your, you can slip off your shoes and unwind with a little self-massage, without getting too many strange looks from colleagues.
As a preventative, anti-stress technique, self-massage sets you up perfectly for the day ahead — and works brilliantly as an end-of-day treat.
Try it after a relaxing bath or shower when you can indulge in a little pampering with aromatic oils and lotions to make the whole experience more enjoyable.
Simply turn the page for the exercises we've chosen specially for you from Massage for Total Relaxation — and then face the world with a new sense of inner calm.
Who knows, you may never blow your top in a traffic jam again!
Your step-by-step guide to self-massage
Simple, quick and satisfying, self-massage prepares you for the day ahead, restoring energy and easing tension from a weary body.
As well as being relaxing, it keeps your skin in good condition, and boosts your self-esteem.
Care for your body using the strokes below and regularly massage the different areas you can comfortably reach.
Pay attention to your hands and feet, which are constantly under pressure and strain, and you will find your whole body benefits.
MASSAGE STROKES
By applying tapping, pummelling and squeezing strokes to many different areas of the body, you will eventually feel both supple and relaxed.
The vibration created with tapping strokes revitalizes the body.
Pummelling invigorates by boosting the circulation towards the skin and stimulating the nerve endings, and it gives the body a glowing, toned look.
Squeezing strokes help restore you after a tiring day by alleviating tension from tight, sore muscles.
Tapping
This stroke is particularly good in areas where the flesh fits tightly over the bone, such as the scalp, forehead and upper chest.
Keep your wrists loose, elbows at right angles, and tap your fingertips quickly and rhythmically over the area.
When working on the scalp, start at the front of the head and move over the back, down the sides to the neck.
Pummelling
To break down tension in the shoulders and arms, buttocks and thighs, make loose fists and, keeping your elbows and wrists relaxed, drum quickly over the flesh.
Let the hand spring away as it touches the skin.
Use one hand on the arms, shoulders and neck, two on the lower part of your body.
Squeezing
To boost circulation in the thighs and calves, place your hands on the skin, fingers pointing away from you.
Press with the thumbs and fingers to scoop up flesh, squeeze gently but firmly, and slowly release.
FOOT MASSAGE
As well as relaxing the feet, a foot massage relieves the posture and back.
Sit on a stool and massage one foot at a time by placing it on your thigh, knee bent up at a right angle.
To relax the feet totally, start by soaking them in for 20 minutes in some herbal bath salts.
Close your eyes, breathe deeply and relax your body.
Dry each foot by wrapping it in a towel and squeezing all over.
At the end of the massage, briskly rub your feet to revitalize your energy.
Squeeze the calves to remove stiffness.
Rotate the ankle five times in each direction.
Stroke around the ankle bone with your thumb and fingers.
Next, hold the foot between both your hands for about a minute or two to soothe it.
Using a firm press-release motion, work alternate thumb pads rhythmically over the surface of the sole.
Start at the ridge at the base of the toes and work to outside edge of the heel.
Support the foot with one hand.
With the other thumb pad make tiny circles from the top of the arch to the inner edge of the heel.
Repeat three times.
Make a loose fist with your right hand and firmly slide your knuckles from the outside edge of the heel to the base of the toes.
Repeat this three times.
Now, gently stretch-pull each of your toes between your thumb and index finger.
HAND MASSAGE
To keep your hands supple and free from tension, massage them frequently.
This is very important if your work involves many repetitive movements, or pushing, pulling, typing and gripping tools.
Use your thumbs, fingers and the heels of your hand to stroke and stretch the muscles and tendons in the hands in wrists.
Invigorate your hands at the end of a massage by rubbing them together until vibrant, then relax them.
Flex your wrist up and down, and rotate it several times in both directions.
To massage your palm, support the back of your hand with your fingers and make small rotary motions with your thumb pad over one spot at a time.
Massage the mound at the base of the thumb very well.
Start below the lowest knuckle and pull along each finger and thumb with your other thumb and index finger.
Press the fingertips.
Then wiggle the finger and thumb joints.
Support the hand with your fingers.
Slide your thumb down between each tendon, from beside the knuckle to the wrist.
Using pressure from your thumb pad, squeeze the web of your hand with thumb and index finger, making rotary movements on one spot at a time.
To ease tight hands, place them together, palm facing palm, elbows at right angles.
Slowly raise elbows so your palms separate and fingers press together.
Fig 1
Fig 2
Fig 3
Fig 5
Fig 6
Fig 7
Fig 8
Fig 9
Fig 12
CLOTHES SHOW NEXT MONTH
100 NEW IDEAS TERRIFIC TROUSER SUITS…
RAINWEAR FOR KIDS…
CUT A DASH IN A CARDI…
HIGH GLAMOUR IN LUTON
WIN!
WIN!
WIN!
THE MAKEOVER OF A LIFETIME FROM BOOTS
SPECIAL REPORT OUR GUIDE TO BRITAIN'S TOP HEALTH FARMS
EXCLUSIVE A 16-PAGE SUPPLEMENT ALL ABOUT CURLY HAIR
PLUS!
GARY GLITTER JULIAN CLARY MICA PARIS
ON SALE MARCH 18 PRICE £1
CLOTHES SHOW COMPETITION
WIN A WARDROBE!
£5,000 worth of fabulous Freemans fashions to be won
1st PRIZE
— Two first prize winners will each win £1,000 of high quality fashion goods of their choice from the Freemans catalogue
2nd PRIZE
— Four runners-up will be spoilt for choice and each win £500 to spend at Freemans
3rd PRIZE
— Five runners-up will each win £200 worth of Freemans fashions — style at your fingertips!
ENTRY FORM
Shopping together
Cooking a meal for two
Arranging surprise weekends away
Remembering special occasions
Buying flowers
Sharing chores
Name
Address
Postcode
Tick box if you would like to receive a copy of the Freemans spring/summer 1991 catalogue
Please tick if you DO NOT want to receive further information linked to this competition
Send your entry to:Clothes Show Magazine , Freemans Competition, PO Box 43, St Leonards-On-Sea, TN38 9NM, to arrive by March 18, 1991
Age (please tick) under 20 20–25 25–30 30–40 40–50 50 plus
You can win a complete new wardrobe for yourself and your man, so read on!
Freemans and the Clothes Show Magazine have got together to bring you this fantastic competition.
The two first prize winners can each choose £1,000 worth of items from the Freemans catalogue, and there are fabulous second and third prizes to be won.
Shopping by mail order at Freemans is not only easy but pleasurable as well.
So, if your man baulks at the idea of trailing around the shops, then this is the competition for you and him.
As well as offering high quality womenswear, Freemans has launched the 1991 spring/summer menswear collection with something for everyone.
The Freemans man wears pastels in up-to-date shades of blush pink, powder green and pale cream.
Tailored suits are teamed with polo-shirts and, if he's the outdoor type, there are pages of sports-inspired casual wear.
On the opposite page we've put together three outfits from the Freemans catalogue spring/summer collection — just to give you an idea of what you could win.
Cool, refreshing pastel shades are just right for a long hot summer!
Using the unrivalled Freemans mail order service means a complete wardrobe could be delivered to your door without the hustle and bustle of the high street.
To complement the collection, Freemans offers its own exclusive brand names like B-90's jeanwear and the Club Clothing collection, alongside established labels like Ben Sherman, Reebok, Levi's and British Knights.
If you're interested in the new Freemans spring/summer 1991 catalogue, order by calling free on 0800 900 200 quoting X09.
The Freemans orderline is open 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and items are delivered free.
They also offer interest-free credit for up to 50 weeks.
It's easy shopping at your fingertips!
So why not put pen to paper and win a wardrobe of fashions.
Enter our fantastic competition — you'd be mad not to!
HERE'S WHAT TO DO
All you have to do is put the qualities for the Man of the Nineties listed on the coupon in order of what you consider to be important, from one to six.
So, if you think ‘cooking a meal’ is most important, write 1 in the relevant box on the coupon, and so on.
Competition rules are on page 92.
COMPETITION RULES
1
The competition is open to all readers resident in the UK, except employees of Freemans, Redwood Publishing Ltd, BBC, their families and agents.
2
Entries must be received no later than first post on Monday March 18, 1991.
3
No responsibility can be accepted for entries lost in the post.
4
Prizes are as stated only.
No cash alternatives will be given.
5
Only one entry per person.
Entries can be on a postcard laid out in the manner of the entry coupon.
6
The decision of the judging panel is final.
No correspondence will be entered into.
7
All entrants to the competition are deemed to have accepted the rules and agreed to be bound by them.
HAIR'S TO YOU!
Picture yourself with a fabulous change of image and, for some of you, it could come true — thanks to Wella.
Famous for their hair care products, Wella want you to experience their benefits to the fullest.
No fewer than 12 lucky readers, representing six different regions including Northern Ireland, will be invited to London to have their hair dramatically transformed.
We're looking for six pairs of women — friends, mother and daughter, sisters, it doesn't matter —both y of whom would like to have a radical new haircut, maybe a perm, or even a change of colour.
It's not for the faint-hearted but, if you're prepared to put your hair in Wella's hands, we're sure you won't be disappointed.
You'll be invited to London, all expenses paid, on March 26 and 27 as one of the six couples, and you'll stay overnight in six comfortable twin-bedded rooms in the Regent Crest Hotel, situated in the West End.
And there's more!
On the evening of March 26 there will be a celebratory dinner at the Campana Restaurant in Marylebone High Street for everyone involved to really let their hair down.
All you have to do is to decide you want a complete transformation, find a partner who also wants one and send us a recent photograph of each of you (we'll return them if you enclose an SAE).
The successful candidates will also be able to see the finished results of their new look in the June edition of the Clothes Show Magazine .
For the chance of a lifetime, simply fill in the coupon and send it to the address below, together with your photographs, no later than Monday March 4, 1991.
APPLICATION FORM
Name
Address
Telephone
Northern Ireland
Scotland
The North
The Midlands/Wales
The South West
The South East/East Anglia
Please tick the region you represent
Send your entry form and photographs to:Clothes Show Magazine /Wella competition, Redwood Publishing, 20–26 Brunswick Place, London N1 6DJ.
you're looking swell, baby!
Pregnancy is a condition, not an illness.
So there's no excuse for letting your appearance go to pot — as these star mums amply prove
Controversy may have raged round the royal head of Marina Ogilvy but she had the good sense to choose a dress she could wear after her baby was born
Yazz (right), the living embodiment of radiant motherhood, arrives, smiling, at the BRIT awards
If you're going to have one, then have a big one is the motto of Brigitte Nielsen (right)
Working girl she may be but, having turned 40, Sigourney Weaver (right) took time out for motherhood
‘Well, ah declare!’
Jerry Hall swaps maternal notes with Ursula Andress (left)
Anneka's challenge (below) was having a baby in exactly nine months
Pamela Stephenson (right) looks terrific with only moments to go — and she'll be able to wear the outfit later
‘Lady’ Geldof (right) steps out in style in a little white number
Miami nice!
Don Johnson holds on to a chic Melanie Griffith (above)
Yep, even pregnant, the flawless Yasmin Le Bon (near left) looks fabulous
Oh dear!
A barely recognisable Bette Midler (left) breaks nearly every maternity-wear rule — and it shows
Sally Whittaker (left) and Gail Tilsley (above) before giving birth to a couple of cushions in Coronation Street 
Sadie Kemp — wife of Gary (left)— didn't let impending motherhood cramp her fashion style
The Grand Young Duchess of Pork (right)before she became Slimmer of the Year
CLOTHES SHOW offer
stylish sweatshirts, T-shirts, jogging bottoms, baseball caps, plus bags and catalogues
Due to popular demand, here is another chance to look great in our exclusive Clothes Show casual gear.
Comfortable and stylish, the collection includes T-shirts, sweatshirts (with or without hoods), jogging bottoms and baseball caps.
They're made from a hardwearing cotton/polyester mix (black and white T-shirts are all cotton) and come in black, white or grey.
Choose any combination of colours to suit you.
Complete with the distinctive Clothes Show logo, they're good-looking, practical and excellent value for money.
Plus, there's a unique opportunity for you to purchase a Clothes Show Live carrier bag and catalogue.
Priced at £3.50 at the NEC show, we're offering them for only £2.50, inclusive of postage and packing.
You can't lose!
To order: complete coupon in block capitals and send to Clothes Show Magazine Offer, Dept 6, Banaman, 97 King Street, Cambridge CB1 1LD.
Allow up to 28 days for delivery.
Enquiries phone 0223 314868.
Offer subject to availability and open to readers resident in the United Kingdom.
If not entirely satisfied, return within 14 days for a full refund.
All prices include VAT and p&p.
CLOTHES SHOW CLUB
become a priority reader
Keep perfect time, have a passionate kiss, take a balloon trip and have your favourite magazine delivered to you!
Kiss-A-Glam
We've chosen the ultimate seductive gift — the world's first renewable lipstick, in passionate red.
All Club Members will receive an Endless Kiss lipstick in Eternal Poppy, to give their lips prolonged pulling power.
These new lipsticks contain thousands of colour fluid capsules which are released every time lips are pressed together — from drinking, or even from kissing!
Endless Kiss gives a smooth finish and it contains a protective sunscreen.
Although Club members will receive this luscious lipstick free of charge with their magazine, Endless Kiss lipsticks can be bought from Avon for £2.99.
High Fliers
Our free-entry competition could whisk you away from it all on the romantic trip of a lifetime.
We've got together with Flying Pictures to take you and your partner on a hot-air balloon ride, drifting through the air with a bird's-eye view of the local countryside.
British Rail travel to the nearest take off point, and champagne will be included on the trip.
We're also giving away a cosy pair of totes Toasties — unique mittens for feet, with treaded soles — and a pair of gloves to keep you both warm on your flight.
50 runners-up will also receive a pair of Toasties.
See the Club letter for how to enter.
Timely Offer
Evening elegance can be let down by everyday watch wear.
But we have organised a massive discount from Lorus Quartz, to add glamour to your night-time fashion.
These classic ladies' wrist watches have a teardrop-shaped face and a delicate bracelet to grace your wrist.
Choose from a pearl bracelet with matching face, a patterned silver bangle, or a gilt-finished double strand bracelet.
All three models come complete with battery, gift box and a 12-month guarantee.
Reduced almost to half price, this is an offer to watch out for!
Normally priced at £34.99, we are able to offer these beautiful watches at just £17.99.
See the Club letter for details on how to take advantage of this great offer.
Join the Club
Don't miss out on the fun!
Join our Clothes Show Club today.
It's great value — for £15 you receive:
*
Your favourite magazine sent to your home each month for a year
*
Exclusive discounts off high street clothes and accessories
*
A host of free gifts sent to you throughout the year
*
Easy to win competitions
PRIORITY CLUB APPLICATION FORM
I wish to become a member of the Clothes Show Priority Club
Name
Address
Postcode
Telephone
I enclose my cheque/postal order for £15 for one year's membership to the Priority Club, payable to Redwood Publishing Limited.
Or debit my Visa/Access Card No.
Expiry Date..................
I wish my membership to commence with the....................
Issue (Please state month)
Return to:Clothes Show Priority Club, 15 Moorhurst Road, Castleham Industrial Estate, St. Leonards-On-Sea, East Sussex, TN38 9NB.
A new world beckons.
Win a hot-air balloon trip for two — and some totes Toasties (below)
Keep elegant time with our Lorus Quartz dress watch offer (top) and sustain some passion with our Endless Kiss free gift lipstick (above)
Ask Jeff
Worried about your looks?
Jeff Banks is here to help
PETITE FEET
My biggest headache is shoes!
I am 5′ 1″ tall and a size 10–12, but only take size 2½–3 in shoes.
Please don't tell me to buy children's shoes as I already do so when I need a flat pair, but I like high heels and am finding it increasingly difficult to buy them.
I am also on a limited budget.
Any answers, please?
 Mrs Jean Little, Leeds 
I sympathise with your problem: being advised to wear children's shoes is not really the answer, is it?
However, all is not lost!
Marks & Spencer have most of their styles in a size 3 for ladies, as do Dolcis branches nationwide.
Gamba, the dancewear shop, have a size 2½ and 3 in ladies' evening shoes.
Phone them on 071 437 0704 for mail order.
FASHION FACE-LIFT
I'm sure you've heard it thousands of times before but I am fed up with the way I look.
I have dark skin and hair and am a size 16.
Working as an au pair I spend most of my time in the house with young children, so I dress casually — usually in tracksuits or jeans.
I need to be practical but would like to look feminine as well.
Shopping is restricted to my day off.
Can you solve my dilemma?
 René Margaux, Bradford 
Firstly, think about your hair and make-up — maybe try a new hairstyle which could dramatically change you.
Look through magazines to find the kind of style you'd like.
For clothes, I suggest catalogues for a good selection.
Also, try Richard Shops or the latest Country Casuals range.
Go in and tell the assistant you just need to try things on before you start buying anything, and enjoy the experiment.
Fashion Extra is one excellent catalogue catering for larger sizes.
Call 0800 269396, or write to FREEPOST 5, London W1E 4NN.
LIP READ
My lips are often chapped and sore, which makes it difficult to apply lipstick as it won't stay on and looks unpleasant.
I use lipsalve but it doesn't seem to work.
What should I do?
 Annabel Jules, Hendon 
Lips chap in the cold and burn in the sun so they need constant protection.
Blisteze is good for this problem.
Use hourly or apply moisturiser every hour over a few days, with a touch of Vaseline to follow.
If you use a greasy lip block under your lipstick, the lipstick will just slide off.
Lipsalve is basically a wax which is okay to stop moisture loss but, for intensive healing, moisturiser and Vaseline are best.
Make your own natural remedy by melting 40g of beeswax in a double boiler, blending in 30g of honey and then 55g of sesame oil.
Finally whisk to a smooth consistency and stir — you'll find it works a treat!
ON THE PISTE
I'm going skiing next month for the first time.
I would really like to wear some fashionable clothes on the slopes but haven't got a clue where to start looking.
Do you know of any shops selling ski wear which looks good and is reasonably priced?
 Antony Jevans, Guildford 
Most good sports departments in the major stores sell ski war but there are some excellent specialists.
Try Ellis Brigham (081 890 6116 for details) and Snow and Rock (0753 830868 for mail order).
My tip is to go for really good quality ski pants in black with braces and team that with a jacket that suits your style.
I suggest starting with a cheaper jacket until you get hooked — and you can always wear it at weekends afterwards.
Layering is vital so good thermal vests and long johns are a must.
Make sure your ears are protected and get good gloves.
Alternatively, Ski World does a great hire service and you can buy on your return.
They are at 41 North End Road, London W14 (071 602 4820).
CARING FOR SUEDE
I recently purchased an expensive pair of brown suede shoes.
However, I find it difficult to keep them clean.
Can you suggest a special cleaner I can use that will not spoil the colour?
 Paul Stockwell, Buckinghamshire 
Suede shoes do take an effort to keep them looking good.
If you've just bought suede shoes I suggest you spray them with suede guard to prevent them getting dirty.
Punch make one for £1.95.
Also, invest in a wire or rubber suede brush to lift the nap of the suede.
Then, give them a Meltonian shampoo (£1.85) regularly.
All of these items can be bought from department stores.
I have a pair of brown suede brogues that are really worn and I prefer them in their frazzled state!
HAIR-RAISING!
I have long dark hair which I have to wear tied back for college.
I am fed up with French plaits and ponytails and refuse to wear my hair in a bun.
Any other ideas?
 Juliet Leo, Hove 
There's nothing wrong with a bun as long as you decorate it with a hair accessory.
Lots of hairdressers now have accessory counters so why not have a rummage?
Emma Peel hairbands are still okay, although they're becoming less fashionable, but snoods are upcoming.
A snood is like a hairband with a net attached to it.
Fenwicks of Bond Street in London have a great selection on offer.
EYE CONTACT
I wear contact lenses and find that eye make-up, particularly mascara, irritates my eyes.
Do you know of any good products — for example, a mascara that doesn't flake when it dries?
 Danielle Clifford, York 
Firstly, buy a good quality moisturising/conditioning mascara — avoid anything that has extra fibres to lengthen lashes.
Apply one coat only, as more than one coat encourages flaking.
Almay produce a hypo-allergenic range.
Try their new moisturising treatment mascara at £6.95.
Elizabeth Arden also have an excellent mascara.
Both products are available from chemists and department stores.
If you have a fashion or beauty problem, write to Jeff Banks,Clothes Show Magazine , 20–26, Brunswick Place, London, N1 6DJ.
Sorry, no personal correspondence.