

FREE!
A SAMPLE OF SENSIQ GENTLE BALANCED MOISTURISING LOTION
If not attached, see your newsagent
1OO NEW IDEAS SIZZLING SUMMER FASHION FROM THE HIGH STREET
WIN!
A WEEK AT A HEALTH FARM
EXTRA! 8 PAGES OF GREAT NEW HAIRSTYLES
PLUS!
GIORGIO ARMANI JEFF BANKS GLORIA ESTEFAN
Contents
EDITOR'S LETTER
June is for Giorgio, Jonathon, a couple of jolly clever patterns — and just about anything else you care to mention.
Meet the man with the surname everyone knows, Giorgio Armani, who arguably adorns more bodies worldwide than any other living designer.
But who is he?
Anthea Gerrie flew to Milan to meet the man in person, exclusively for the Clothes Show Magazine .
Jonathon Morris is a young man going places.
You'll know him as Adrian from BBC1's Bread .
But not for much longer.
Oh, he's not abandoning his most famous role; but he's about to pop up in all sorts of other places — and sporting a groovy new haircut…
Betty Jackson may well be a designer whose clothes you admire but whose price tags you can't afford.
Handy with a needle?
Then turn to page 18 and take advantage of two of her patterns offers from Vogue — both at a smart price — and produce six essential items for summer.
Plus, there's some really smashing fashion for you — and him; eight pages of terrific new hairstyles, courtesy of Wella, for 12 lucky readers; and your chance to win a week at a fabulous health farm.
Like they say, June is busting out all over!
 Richard Barber 
FEATURES
4 20 SIZZLING SWIMSUITS
…to help you splash out in style
10 GIORGIO ARMANI
Meet the man behind the label
18 SIX EASY PIECES
…from two designer patterns
22 ALL ABOUT GLORIA
Why Ms Estefan has never felt better
26 WHAT AN OFFER!
Just the swimsuit for summer — and just the robe, too!
28 WELLA!
WELLA!
WELLA!
12 lucky readers get the hairstyle of their dreams
38 JONATHON MORRIS MOVES CENTRE STAGE
And even Adrian Boswell wouldn't recognise him!
42 AND THE LIVING IS EASY…
Pretty comfortable ways to while away the summer
50 FRENCH DRESSING
Pure chic for you — et lui
58 WHAT THEY'RE WEARING IN LEEDS
And where to go when you're there
61 BETTER BY DESIGN
We follow the fortunes of a Smirnoff Student Awards finalist
66 PEPSI AND SHIRLIE…
Striking a brand new pose
71 BURSTING INTO BLOOM
The Clothes Show Magazine — and Pretty Polly — pop up in Manchester
78 AND THE BRIDE WORE…
Whiskers!
No kidding!
82 ME AND MY HAT
How to keep one step ahead
86 STRAW GALORE
Little extras that look a lot of fun
94 WHO WEARS WHAT ON THEIR WEDDING DAY
You'd be amazed!
REGULARS
7 UPFRONT FASHION
All that's new on the fashion front
8 UPFRONT BEAUTY
All that's new on the beauty front
64 YOUR VERY GOOD HEALTH
Dr Cathy Read with the latest medical news, views and research
80 JOIN THE CLUB
Become a Priority Member and reap the rewards
92 STOCKISTS
Where to buy our featured clothes
COMPETITION
94 WIN A WEEK AT A HEALTH HYDRO
…four times over!
THE BOTTOM LINE
by Alison Everitt
THE RECYCLED WEDDING…
DRESS WORN BEFORE.
GROOM MARRIED BEFORE.
SPLASH OUT!
20 SIZZLING SWIMSUITS FOR SUMMER
IN THE SWIM
•Most professional male swimmers shave off their body hair to make them more streamlined and thus swim faster.
Of course, Duncan Goodhew doesn't have to — he's a natural winner.
•: One of the world's best and most versatile swimming pools is Ponds Forge International Swimming Pool in Sheffield.
It's got two moveable walls to change the size and floating floors to change the depth.
•: The 1930s saw the demise of the overly modest bathing costume, and the reason was sunbathing, not bathing.
Suddenly it was in vogue to have an all-over tan — so the barer the body the better!
upfront fashion
Stylish tips from us to you…from saving elephants to wrestling kids!
PURE JEANIUS!
Casualwear pioneer BSCO has crossed jeans with sweatshirt joggers and come up with Sweat Jeans.
These unisex classic jeans made from soft cotton jersey are cut just like their denim equivalents and have double stitching and metal studs.
Available in navy and black detailing, black with wine and vice versa.
Sweat Jeans cost only £30 from BSCO stockists nationwide — call 081 451 2155 for details.
As a special offer, we've got 35 pairs of Sweat Jeans to give away.
Send your name, address, size (S, M, L) and colour choice to Clothes Show /BSCO, 34 Bridge Road, London, NW10 9BX.
Offer closes June 14.
PLAIN & SIMPLE
Classic styles in mouthwatering colours are the ingredients that make up Great Plains — a new range from French Connection.
Shapes are kept simple — shirts and T-shirts — and fabrics are pure cotton or silk.
From fern to sunflower, strawberry to maize, there's a kaleidoscope of shades — so why not try a new shade this summer?
REALLY WILD
Elefriends, the charity set up to help African elephants, is £8,000 better off thanks to Monsoon.
It received £1 for each ‘Viva Elephant’ T-shirt to support Greenpeace.
For more information on Elefriends call 0306 713320.
IT'S A FREEBIE!
This stripy suit for mini wrestlers is a heart-melting design from Manhattan Kids, and it's ideal for swimming and all kinds of sports.
We've got 13 of the red and blue striped cotton/Lycra suits, worth £16 each, to give away.
Call 0839 900091 before June 14 with your name, address and child's age (from 6 months to 2 years).
Calls charged at 33p/minimum cheap rate, 44p/minimum other times.
Call 0388 420088 for a Manhattan Kids catalogue.
ONE STEP AHEAD
We've got five pairs of the new ladies' red suede Dance trainers from Matchstick, worth £24.99, to give away — they come in black (right) and blue, too.
Send your name, address and shoe size on a postcard to Clothes Show Magazine /Matchstick, 20-26 Brunswick Place, London, N1 6DJ.
Winners drawn on June 14.
Available from Freeman Hardy Willis, Barratts and Tandem.
SORRY!
In our May issue, we forgot to credit the jacket pictured in ‘Down Town Dressing Up’(left).
It comes from Principles and costs £95.
upfront beauty
From boys' own beauty to designers who make scents — all for you
IT'S A FREEBIE!
Finesse Intensive Conditioner is an ideal way of treating holiday hair, repairing damage done by sun, sea and chlorine.
We have 100 tubs, worth £2.49 each, to give away.
Call 0839 0900092 before June 14 with your name and address.
Calls charged at 33p/minimum cheap rate, 44p/minimum other times.
HEAD START
Leading hairdressers have very clear designs on your head this summer.
Keith at Smile in London would like to be ‘shaving hair into strong shapes, styles that are forward-looking and not Sixties.’
Pam Roscoe, UK Art Director at Vidal Sassoon says, ‘Styles will be more dishevelled and bohemian.’
Antoinette, leading stylist at Trevor Sorbie, predicts: ‘The look will be soft and off the face.’
A final tip from Charles Worthington at Worthington's: ‘In a recession people expect value for money.
They want a strong haircut that everyone will notice.’
The choice is yours…
LIPSMACKING
New from Cosmetics To Go, ‘Mistress's Lipstick’ comes in a tin with sandpaper to sharpen the crayon.
New Gikaku lip creams include dark Gluhwein and iridescent Blue Pearl.
Call 0800 373366 for their catalogue.
OH BOY!
Beauty for boys is a growing business — it's not just the girls who enjoy pampering themselves.
Brylcreem cater for the complexion-conscious male with Sensus, five new skincare products — skin-sensitive Shaving Foam and Gel, soothing After Shave Gel and Mousse, plus a Moisturiser.
Clinique have a no-nonsense approach to men's skincare — dermatologically-tested products in simple packing.
Their range includes an Anti-Blemish cover-up cream — because, despite what they might say to the contrary, boys like to hide their spots, too!
As the ultimate luxury, hairdressers Molton Brown have created a men-only salon for boys to get a haircut in peace!
Molton Brown will also provide them with a deeply relaxing scalp massage at the same time.
Telephone 071 499 2046 for further details.
COVER STORY
To be kind to your skin, why not try the mild products from Sensiq's new collection of skincare products?
Developed for three skin types, the cleansers, toners and moisturisers are all pure and fragrance-free.
Test the gentleness for yourself with this month's cover gift — a fab sample of Sensiq's Gentle Balanced Moisture Lotion.
Enriched with Vitamin E, the lotion is light to apply and perfect for you sensitive skin sufferers.
Lovely stuff, lucky you!
HEAVEN SCENT
Paris fashions may be just for the rich, but the rest of us can enjoy beauty products from the designers.
C'est La Vie (above) from Christian Lacroix is a powerfully floral fragrance —not for those who like a subtle smell.
And now, body and bath products have been added to the range.
Prices start from £8.50.
Equité from Christian Dior lends elegance to your cleansing routine.
Beautiful packaging and sensitive formulas make these six products a very classy way to clean your face.
Prices from £7.95.
giorgio armani — the man behind the label
He's one of the most famous names in fashion but little is known of the man himself.
Exclusively for the Clothes Show Magazine , Anthea Gerrie flew to Milan to meet Giorgio Armani on his own home ground and put a face to the name.
As the rain beat a dull rhythm on Milan's sludge-coloured buildings this spring, Italian designers were proclaiming the return of brilliant colour behind the facades of the word's most industrial fashion capital.
Versace dazzled with psychedelic prints, Dolce & Gabbana sent corsets disguised as frocks shrieking down the catwalk and even the conservative Genny showed micro-skirted green and orange checks instead of the restrained tailoring that made them, made Milan…made Italy the world's leading fashion force.
Only one Milanese was still proclaiming that ‘greige’ is good — and even he sent out token blasts of red, purple and pink to acknowledge a hankering for colour which he personally does not believe in.
Giorgio Armani wears navy, beige and more navy — punctuated with the occasional white T-shirt — and he has built an empire on the principle that nothing becomes a woman so much as every shade of sludge on the mud flats.
‘I have taken to colour like a new lover,’ he pronounced unconvincingly over a cappuccino in the sparse urban palazzo that doubles as his office and town house.
‘But it's colour that is filtered.
The violet, the green, the red in my collection, they're all underlined in beige — neutrals are still the foundation and women who can't wear strong colours shouldn't even try.
It's a sombre story for a colourful age, just as Milan is a dull home for Italy's finest designers — but the world buys it, and buys it big.
Armani's empire has an annual turnover of about £400 million, growing constantly as devotees the world over continue to sport his exquisitely-tailored neutrals which are the epitome of power-dressing in the late 20th century.
We are not just talking power-dressing for women; Armani makes men look even better than the fairer sex in a way that's so thoroughly macho it's no wonder the world's aggro merchants have taken him to their hearts as eagerly as Hollywood's glitterati.
Mafia henchmen, Wall Street asset strippers and football hooligans from Turin to Tokyo all love to give attitude in their Armanis.
‘I'm aware that, for some, my clothes are a power statement,’ admits the man who dressed both the bad guys in The Untouchables and good guy Don Johnson in Miami Vice .
Richard Gere, Tom Cruise and Harrison Ford love their Armanis — and so, interestingly, do rival designers, from John Galliano, Bruce Oldfield and Alastair Blair to Armani's own kinsman and fashion rebel, Moschino.
Maximum impact through minimum statement is what Armani is all about — and the maestro himself lives out the philosophy in his personal life.
Wearing — always — dead simple casual clothes that flatter his lightly-tanned complexion, pale silver hair and famous aquamarine eyes, he dines on spartan, spiceless fare in his minimalist palazzo on Via Borgonuovo, where blank corridors link white-walled offices with the plain, pictureless apartment where he lives alone while a bodyguard sleeps below.
‘I'm going to carry on wearing navy myself,’ he adds, somewhat unnecessarily, as we discuss the newly-expanded spectrum of his professional palette.
There was once a good deal more colour and laughter in the life of this tight-lipped fashion genius, when a second apartment in the palazzo was occupied by his business partner and close friend Sergio Galeotti, who died in 1985.
The designer who today shows so little emotion was devastated and he still keeps a mural of revered fashion figures (Mary Quant and Vivienne Westwood are two of his heroines) with Galeotti at the centre situated behind the enormous, clutter-free desk that's one more powerful statement.
Armani shot down in flames those who thought the empire he founded in 1974 would die with the demise of the business half of his partnership; he learnt fast and today manages to be all money, all business, without sacrificing the brilliant creative edge which has made him fashion's greatest superstar for the past decade.
Giorgio Armani was born in Piacenza, a provincial town in northern Italy with was blitzed in the war.
He studied medicine for two years but the sight of  blood made him sick so, always a lover of shopping, he defected to the world of retail.
After a sound seven-year grounding as a buyer for La Rinascente — Italy's answer to Selfridges — he started designing menswear for Italian fashion giant of the Sixties and Seventies, Nino Cerruti.
In 1966, he met Sergio Galeotti, the man who was to shape his destiny, at the seaside resort of Forte dei Marmi — where Armani still has a beach house today.
The architecture student who believed anything was possible set up home with the designer — and put his dynamic business brain to use in helping Armani to launch his own label in 1975.
Now, Armani is Italy's new Great Dictator but his genius is that, having handed down his basic dictate — that both women and men look their best in unstructured tailoring applied to traditional menswear fabrics — he has succeeded in turning himself into the Great Listener.
The most important part of his empire in the recessionary Nineties is the lower-priced Emporio Armani line, sold both in London and Glasgow, which takes all its inspiration from the street.
‘He's always keeping his eyes on what the kids are wearing and nudging us about what we see out there, what we hear them asking for,’ says Caroline Freeman, an Armanishly elegant stick insect who works on his British team.
Street fashion is big on pazzazz, low on subtlety.
Thus, while the Giorgio show bristled with understated elegance this spring, the Emporio extravaganza was a riot of wild colour and audacious shapes, featuring eye-popping tartans and sizzling satin trenchcoats along with the sludgy, tweedy garments which constitute the cut-price clothes of more typical Armani fashion
Emporio has brought Armani to the masses; Italian taxi drivers and British bovver boys alike fork out quite happily for sweaters, jeans and T-shirts featuring the world-famous winged emblem.
‘Expanding Emporio is the most important aspect of my business plan for the next five years,’ says the maestro, confidently plotting his way to a bright future as less resilient designers wring their hands or close shop.
‘As well as opening more boutiques in England, France and Germany, I'm working on ways of making the clothes cheaper.
‘It's not a question of bringing them to more people — Emporio has never been for the poor — but of morals; with the Nineties there comes a new thinking about how much it's right to spend on clothes and I certainly go along with that.’
Armani, pushing 60 but still dressing 25, seems to regard Emporio as a means of expressing his personal infatuation with youth.
He stocks his stores with fresh-faced young assistants to whom he hands down a rigid dress code like a strict father: no nail varnish, no high heels — no dark tights even.
In the office, he can be such a hard taskmaster that his closest  aide, Gabriella Forte, describes his attitude before each new collection as a ‘rape of the staff’.
Still, they love him — and he loves them.
He surrounds himself with an entourage of loyal courtiers, some from the store, others from the office, taking several at a time for convivial weekends of dog-walking, tennis and log fires at his country villa on the River Po — a sharp contrast to the rather gloomy, solitary week nights he spends in the industrial wasteland of the Via Borgonuovo.
One of the highlights of Armani's recent dark and relatively joyless years since Galeotti's death was the opening of the London Emporio on the Brompton Road three years ago.
On this great day, when he cut the ribbon on a shop built to remind him of the Italian department stores of his childhood —‘they always had a restaurant, because part of the treat of shopping was lunching out’— he was so happy and relaxed that it was easy to swallow inhibitions and ask him whether he wasn't bothered about being known, through the films he has chosen to dress, as the creator of designer violence.
Instead of showing me the door, he roared with laughter: ‘So what if I clothe gangsters on the screen?
The Mafia wear my clothes in real life; it's all good business!’
Indeed, among the more bizarre places to find an Armani are holes in the wall in the Sicilian hill villages around Corleone where unlaundered mafioso cash comes out at tea time every day in search of status-promoting glad rags — the same suits that turn up simultaneously in posh Paris bistros, Los Angeles lizard lounges and the boardrooms of the most respectable British banks.
Ironically, considering they are bought mainly by people who don't need to ask the price, Armani considers that the selling point of his signature clothes is that you can wear them forever.
‘Nobody who spends £500 on a jacket wants to discard it the following year,’ he believes, insisting that no Armani design dates before it dies of old age.
Nonetheless, designs vary significantly from one year to the next, even if the subtle, sludgy fabrics remain essentially the same.
This year, Armani is pairing longer-than-ever cardigan jackets with tiny little shorts in matching suiting, sometimes weaving the two together in a one-piece coat-dress.
He is putting more structure into his clothes and using rather more natural fibres than man-made miracle fabrics.
He has acknowledged the Italian trend towards overtly sexy clothes by cutting flirty side slits on a curve in his short skirts and stitching a provocative little hitch into them.
‘But that's a token compared to the sex circus on other catwalks in Milan this spring’ he sniffs.
And it's true that, without ever resorting to circus gimmicks, Armani manages to make the world's sexiest women — Michelle Pfeiffer and Julia Roberts head the list — even sexier.
If there is one danger facing Armani, it's that of becoming trapped in his own stereotype; when the day finally comes that he tires of the simple suit and sensational jacket, the world may just insist that he keeps on making them.
He confesses this is why he's started leaping out in uncharacteristic new directions which discomfit the regulars, playing with bright colours and polka dots when the world expects sludge and subtle stripes ad nauseam .
‘I was becoming a prisoner of myself,’ he says frankly, ‘a prisoner of beautiful jackets.
I had to fight for the right to cut dresses as well as suits, to make evening dress as well as day wear and even now, when I've proved myself in those areas, I have to fight members of my own staff who believe I should still stick to producing powerful women's suits.
‘The collection I showed this spring would have been unthinkable three years ago — so many dresses, so much evening wear.
But I really couldn't see the sense in women wearing Armani by day and then letting someone else dress them by night.’
His early attempts at evening wear were often disastrous, inspiring groans at the Oscars when Michelle and Julia showed off their sludgy simplicity to an overdressed audience hungry for sparkles and sequins.
But he listened and learnt and for next winter he has harnessed Hollywood-style glamour to make evening wear that really works, adapting his tailoring to sequined, beaded and embroidered jackets of unbelievable opulence.
‘I don't think the same way as other designers,’ he shrugs, shuddering at the billowing skirts, fussy bows and complicated ornaments that are characteristic of the set-piece ball gowns of the Paris couture.
‘For me, sumptuousness of fabric is more effective than importance of shape.’
His glorification of the subtle and simple cocks a snook at the overblown excesses that have given Paris couture the kiss of death.
Yet ironically, it is in the couture — the dying art of dressing the world's 1,000 richest women — that he sees the seed of his own future as he tires of elevating ready-to-wear to an art form.
‘As Emporio spreads and grows, I will concentrate more on doing a few limited pieces for the special clients who buy my signature line,’ he smiles, betraying a special fondness for those who grudge no expense for a new take on a shoulder-line, a fresh twist to this year's lapel that simply cannot be copied in a less fluid fabric at a lower price.
He takes an impish delight in shocking the press and dismaying the clients as he prepares to change direction: ‘To be provocative is important, and change is vital for personal survival.
‘This spring collection is the most radical I've ever shown and in many ways it marks a new beginning for me.
I feel as though I am starting to write a new story in the book of Giorgio Armani.’
‘I have taken to colour like a new lover, but it's colour that's filtered’
Classic Armani…exquisitely tailored clothes in every shade of sludge on the mud flats.
Him: suit jacket, £680; striped shirt, £190.
Her: checked jacket, £595; silk chiffon scarf, £105; gold earrings, £60 — all by the maestro himself.
Styling: Karen McCartney.
Photograph: Martyn Thompson.
Hair and make-up: Val Garland at Gamilla Arthur.
Stockists are on page 92
Above: the many faces of Armani — from clothes to perfume and jewellery.
Sepia advertisements capture the timelessness of his art.
Photograph: Graeme Montgomery
Above, from top to bottom, Armani devotees: Don Johnson for Miami Vice , Anjelica Huston, the bad guys in The Untouchables , Harrison Ford, Michelle Pfeiffer, Julia Roberts.
Anthea Gerrie stayed in Milan courtesy of the four star luxury Jolly Hotel Milanofiore.
Phone: 0800 282 729 for information
‘I was becoming a prisoner of myself — a prisoner of beautiful jackets
VOGUE PATTERNS
6 easy pieces
Create six essential items for summer at a snip with Betty Jackson's Vogue Patterns, here and over the page.
Betty Jackson is one of the most respected and successful designers in Britain, with a reputation for producing stylish, comfortable and versatile clothes.
She launched her own company, Betty Jackson Ltd, in October 1981 and has never looked back.
With a list of accolades under her no doubt stylish belt — including the prestigious British Designer of the Year Award in 1985 and an MBE in 1987 — she has certainly had an illustrious career.
Of course, true style doesn't come cheap.
For many of us, Betty Jackson's clothes are simply too expensive so we jumped at the chance to feature the latest Betty Jackson Vogue patterns.
This two-pattern wardrobe provides six exclusive designs.
Pattern No 2620 offers three loose-fitting shirts, while No 2621 offers a high-waisted skirt, narrow trousers and long collarless coat.
Both come in sizes 6–10, 12–16 or 18–20.
Alexander Fabrics kindly supplied us with a combination of cotton gingham, poplin, crepe de Chine, taffeta and silk dupion.
If you're using a delicate fabric, remember that it needs special care.
Always use a fabric conditioner such as Comfort Pure Silk after washing.
Now all you have to do is choose your fabric according to your pocket and create your own designer wardrobe.
VOGUE PATTERN OFFER
Your 1991 summer wardrobe starts here!
Vogue Patterns are delighted to offer these designer patterns by Betty Jackson at a special introductory price to Clothes Show Magazine readers.
Buy one pattern for £4.65 instead of the normal price of £7.65 (a saving of 39 per cent).
Buy both patterns for just £8.65 (a saving of 43 per cent).
Receive (if required) a list of professional dressmakers who are working in your area.
Pattern coupon on page 92
Styling: Marie Willey.
Photographs: Iain McKell.
Hair and make-up: Linda Burns at Camilla Arthur.
Stockists are on page 92.
Sizzle in vivid green and hot orange; cool down in gingham
all about Gloria
Miraculously recovered from a serious accident, singer Gloria Estefan tells how she tends her Latin looks.
‘My husband Emilio and my stylist buy most of my clothes because I hate shopping!
I feel most comfortable in what I call my ‘hang out’ clothes: jeans, T-shirts, sloppy sweaters and so on.
But I know it's important to look good on stage so all my stage clothes are custom-made for me by a man called Franco Carretti.
I've always had tremendous energy.
I've spent more than 15 years singing and touring and I still enjoy it but it's important to keep your body in good condition when you're on the road.
It's too easy to end up living off junk food.
I have a nutritionist who travels with me and works out a daily menu.
I'm not naturally slim, and any excess weight I do put on shows because I'm only 5′ 1″.
I watch what Emilio and our 10-year-old son Nayib eat, too.
I don't drink any alcohol but I love papaya juice and drink tons of mineral water.
It helps keep your skin clear.
Living in a hot place like Miami takes its toll.
I do sit out in the sun occasionally, but I make sure I'm well protected.
Even though I come from Cuba and have naturally dark skin, it's very dry so I always carry my Must de Cartier body lotion with me.
A lot of people ask me if my hair is permed but it's just naturally thick and curly.
I have it cut every three months to keep it healthy.
I wash it every day and use plenty of light conditioner but I don't stick to one brand.
I think you should change your shampoo and conditioner once in a while to avoid product build-up.
I have to wear make-up on stage or on photo shoots.
Some people wear it all the time because they think it acts as a barrier against the weather but I believe in letting your skin breathe so I always wear as little as possible.
I don't stick to one particular brand but I would never be without my face powder and I usually go for the heavy Sixties-style eye make-up — lots of black kohl pencil and mascara.
I've lived in Miami since I was two years old but when Emilio and I started singing professionally, back in the late Seventies, we sang only in Spanish.
By the mid-Eighties we were singing in English too, and we began to catch on in English-speaking countries.
When our album Cuts Both Ways was released in 1989, I couldn't believe how successful it was.
It sold more than a million copies in Britain alone and won me the Billboard award for best singer/songwriter in America.
Right up until early last year everything was going so well.
All that was put on hold on March 20, 1990.
We were on a bus, on our way to a concert, when we were hit by a truck.
My son Nayib broke his collarbone and Emilio broke a rib and dislocated his shoulder.
I was thrown to the floor and broke my back.
I was in hospital for nearly three months and, at first, the doctors thought I might not be able to walk again.
But with the aid of two eight-inch metal rods fixed either side of my spine, and 18 hours' intensive exercise and physical therapy a week, I made progress.
Consequently, my exercise regime is a little more rigorous than most!
I have to spend three hours a day doing all sorts of muscle-building and strengthening exercises.
I also do a lot of aerobics and Emilio and I regularly play racketball.
Even before the crash I took a great deal of exercise — you have to work at staying in shape.
And I certainly don't believe in having cosmetic surgery.
I'm 33 now and I can't imagine a time when I would ever consider using it.
People should learn to like their bodies and live with their faults.
After all, I have had to live with a big bottom all my life!
My new album was written during my convalescence at home in Miami and, although the songs are a record of my experience, I don't want Into the Light to turn into ‘the accident album’.
The single Coming Out of the Dark is a celebration of my recovery.
I'm now playing live again, and I want the audience to see my recovery as a positive thing.
No matter how bad a problem seems, you deal with it and go beyond it.
Every song on the album contains something of my own experience over the last year but the words are applicable to everyone.’
I always go for heavy, Sixties-style eye make-up, though I'm not sure black does much for brown eyes!
I have to wear make-up on stage but I prefer to let my skin breathe and just wear the minimum
Too much sun is very drying — I use lots of Must de Cartier body lotion to keep my skin supple
Most of my clothes are chosen by Emilio, my husband, and my stylist — I hate shopping
It's a good idea to change brands of shampoo and conditioner to avoid a single product build-up
I have to work at keeping slim and limit my favourite food, a Cuban recipe of fried bananas!
Since my accident, I have to spend three hours every day doing muscle-building and strengthening exercises
‘I want the audience to see my recovery as a positive thing’
DOUBLE TAKE
Ever dreamed of placing your hair problems in the hands of the professionals?
It takes some pluck but, as you'll see, the results can be sensational!
12 readers get a colourful new look
As you'll recall, in the March issue of the Clothes Show Magazine , Wella offered our readers the fantastic opportunity to win a complete hair makeover.
From the hundreds of entries we received, 12 winners were finally chosen to represent six regions throughout the UK and you can see the stunning results over the next eight pages…
Sally Gilbert-Smith and Ruth Gilbert from Cornwall — Sally, 28, who works in Lloyds Bank in Newquay, entered herself and her mother for the competition because it seemed like the perfect opportunity for the experts to show them off to their full potential.
‘We've always been too scared to have anything drastic done to our hair — until now,’ said Ruth.
Sally's long blonde hair was in real need of conditioning and re-colouring.
Louise Hignett, a stylist from Keith Hall the Hairdressers salon in Arnold, Nottingham, cut off the damaged ends and texturised it throughout to encourage the curl and take some of the weight out of it.
Colourist Chris Walton used Medium Blonde and Terra Rosa from Wella's Colour Touch range to change the tone and deepen the overall colour of Sally's hair at the same time as encouraging its  shine and improving the general condition.
Finally, hair was dried using the System Professional Curl Reactivator to enhance the curl and give extra body.
Ruth's hair was out of shape and didn't do justice to her strong bone structure so stylist Caroline Stacey, also from Keith Hall the Hairdressers, but from their Leicester salon, decided to take the weight out of the back leaving the top longer.
Kerry Hayden took care of Ruth's colour by partially covering the white with lowlights.
She alternated blonde colours from the Wella Koleston 2000 range to add subtle warmth.
Caroline then applied High Hair Volumising Mousse before blow-drying into a new, face-flattering shape.
Sally and Ruth were delighted.
‘I feel like a million dollars’, said Ruth.
Kukkay Sarn and Meera Patel from London — 24-year-old Kukkay works as a buyer for British Airways and her friend Meera is a 22-year-old student at the London College of Fashion.
‘It was a spur of the moment idea to enter,’ explained Kukkay.
‘I haven't had my hair cut for about a year and neither has Meera so I thought it was time for a change.’
To give Kukkay's hair a more voluminous look, Chris used a Wella Optaform permanent wave on Molton Brown permers.
The result?
A spiral corkscrew perm that just has to be washed and left for a full-bodied look.
Once it was dry, Louise styled Kukkay's hair by twisting it up at the back to create fullness on top while still leaving it curly and ‘free’.
Caroline cut the split ends off Meera's hair but decided she should keep the length.
As Meera is growing out her fringe, Caroline simply gave it more shape to tidy it up.
Meera was a little nervous about having her hair coloured so Chris used the non-permanent Colour Touch.
Caroline gathered the hair into a high ponytail and then barrel-curled it (turning under individual sections).
She used High Hair Soft Wax to keep it smooth.
Both girls were very pleased with their new styles.
‘I feel so glamorous I can hardly recognise myself!’ said Meera.
Clare Macmahon and Elaine Duffy from Warwickshire — schoolgirls Clare and Elaine decided to enter the competition because they were bored with their hair and eager for a change.
Louise took a couple of inches off Clare's hair to tidy it up and get rid of the split ends.
Hair technician Kerry decided Clare's fine thick hair was ideal for a spiral perm.
Using Wella Optaform permanent wave lotion, and winding the hair on Molton Brown permers, she created a soft but strong style.
Elaine was perhaps the most adventurous of our Wella winners.
She gave the stylists the go-ahead to do whatever they wanted.
Caroline was delighted and set to work transforming her straight, shoulder-length hair into a glamorous new look.
She cut the hair close to the nape of the neck, leaving it long on top to keep it soft and then graduated at the back to create a heavy wedge.
Chris then used a permanent colour on the longer hair on top, and chose Natural Light Brown, Plum Brown and Medium Burgundy from the Koleston 2000 range.
By taking diamond-shaped sections and alternating the colours he gave Elaine's hair depth and shine and increased the ‘textured’ effect of the cut.
Caroline put the final touches to the style using High Hair Moulding Glaze for a firm hold and glossy finish.
Both Clare and Elaine couldn't have been happier.
‘I'm so excited,’ said Elaine, ‘I didn't think a style like this would suit me but it does.’
‘It's so nice to have a new look’, added Clare.
All 12 winners having met up the evening before for an Italian meal at The Campana in London's West End, followed by a night at The Regent Crest Hotel, the second half of the group arrived bright and early at the studio, ready for their transformations the next day.
Jean and Becky Joplin from Yorkshire — mother Jean, 42, and daughter Becky, 19, both work in the family's marketing business.
The decided to enter the competition because they were thoroughly bored with their hair.
Jean had straight brown hair with a few layers cut into the top; stylist Patrick Cameron, Artistic Director for the Alan Paul group of salons, suggested a tousled look which would suit her heart-shaped face.
Keeping the length almost the same, he restructured the front with a textured cut for a more casual look.
Colourist Chris gave Jean an all-over permanent colour in Deep Velvet Brown mixed with Dark Blonde highlights for contrast through the front.
The hair was softly blow-dried onto the face using High Hair Volumising Mousse.
Jean was thrilled: ‘It's lovely to be pampered by the professionals!’
Becky described her hair colour as ‘drab and boring’.
She'd had a colour put in last autumn which was growing out, so Chris decided to enhance the natural warmth of the hair and add additional shine using a non-commitment colour, Natural Dark Blonde, mixed with persimmon from the Colour Touch range.
The result was a beautifully rich, uniform colour.
Becky wanted to keep her hair long but experiment with different styles.
Patrick began by blunt cutting the ends then, after blow-drying, he pulled the hair into a high ponytail which he lightly backcombed before splaying it out on the top of the head.
Using Wella's High Hair Form & Finish Spray for extra hold, he pinned the hair and brushed it flat for a sophisticated Sixties style.
Becky was absolutely thrilled: ‘It's gorgeous!
I love it.’
When asked if she was going out that evening, Becky replied, ‘Well, I wasn't, but I certainly am now!’
Betty and Barbara Keys from County Antrim, Northern Ireland — mother Betty works part-time as a shop assistant and Barbara has an office job.
She's  also a member of the Clothes Show club.
Entering the competition was entirely Barbara's idea and when the phone call came through to say they'd won, Betty was quite shocked to discover that she, too, was going to London to have a makeover — but she soon came round to the idea!
Stylist Patrick recommended a softer shape for Betty, instead of the severe brushed-back style she'd worn for years, as well as a complete reconditioning of the ends.
Patrick first cut her hair into a soft convex bob before Kerry, using a spatula and slide technique, coloured the hair with a selection of blonde and soft brown shades from Wella's Koleston 2000 range to help disguise the grey and give a variegated effect.
The hair was blow-dried to give lots of body using Wella's High Hair Volumising Mousse.
The new look was really striking and soft-spoken Betty was modestly delighted with her transformation.
Barbara was bored with the bob she'd had for the past four years and was ready for a complete change.
Patrick decided to give her a brand new bob, slightly concave at the back with an undetermined weightline, a heavy drop in the front and a definite fringe.
The end result was a sensational bob with a really Sixties feel to it.
Once Barbara had had a good look at her new style in the mirror, she was very pleased with the change.
To give soft lights to the hair, Kerry put some foil highlights in, using Blonde shades from Wella's Koleston 2000 range.
Only the top layers were done, as the contrast with the darker layers underneath added depth to the overall appearance.
Michelle Lynagh and Colette McIntyre from Ayrshire — despite their very different looks, these two are sisters.
Michelle, 24, works in an electronics factory while Colette, 15, is still at school.
Michelle has an abundance of waist-length hair and although she was prepared for a radical cut, Patrick recommended keeping the length but blunt-cutting it to a clean, straight line: ‘You don't have to have mountains cut off to look different,’ he said.
A non-permanent colour added both warmth and shine to Michelle's hair — colourist Kerry opted for a mix of Havannah and Natural Dark Brown from the Colour Touch range.
Patrick then dressed Michelle's hair into a sculptured, Japanese-type style by twisting two ponytails up round each other on top of her head, holding the hair firm with Wella's High Hair Form & Finish.
Michelle does put her hair up herself but said it usually slips out because ‘there's just too much of it, besides, it's just so well-conditioned!’
Patrick explained it should be stiff enough in the first place in order to stay up, achieved with the help of a product like the one he'd just used.
Michelle loved the new, warm colour of her hair but admitted, ‘I might take a little more than 10 minutes to achieve this amazing sculptured style!’
Colette's old perm had almost grown out and the rest of her hair was rather flat and needed a strong new shape to lift it.
Paul Cochrane, from the Alan Paul salon in Lambs Conduit Street, London, opted for a bob with a Sixties feel, slightly concave at the back through graduated cutting for a softer shape.
The bleached ends were growing out so new High Lift Natural Blonde highlights from the Koleston 2000 range were put in by Chris to soften the colour.
The hair was then blow-dried Sixties-style, softly flicked at the ends, using High Hair Sculpting Spritz.
The result was extremely smart.
Colette's initial reaction was: ‘This feels very funny,’ but, as the minutes passed, she warmed to the new, much shorter style — and she loved the colour.
The transformations complete, all six readers were lined up for the final photograph.
As the smiles go to prove, it was the perfect ending to a perfect two days — and all thanks to Wella.
JONATHON MORRIS moves centre stage
Already famous as Bread 's Adrian Boswell, Jonathon Morris now wants to be well-known — as himself.
Jonathon Morris is a man in a hurry.
He's currently halfway through making the next series of BBC1's hit comedy,Bread .
But, given the demands on his time, it's a wonder that dreamy Adrian will get a look-in at all when the show returns this autumn.
Every week, Jonathon records a new edition of the quiz show The Movie Game (BBC1, Weds).
And when he isn't belting up to Liverpool to rejoin the Boswells, he's busy rehearsing for what could be the biggest challenge of his career.
Taking on the title role originally created by Michael Crawford in the Seventies, Jonathon opens at the Opera House in Manchester in September as Billy .
Three weeks later, the show is scheduled to move to London.
‘I've always danced and sung but I'm having intensive training for both now,’ says Jonathon.
He'll be putting his lungs to good use soon to record the album of the show.
A new song, written especially for Jonathon by John Barry (who won an Oscar for the musical score of Dance With Wolves ), will be released as a single in June.
Jonathon Morris, you will have gathered, is going places — and no one could be happier than the man himself.
But he's determined to get it right.
‘I want people to come and see me playing Billy , not Adrian Boswell, in the same way as they went to watch Michael Crawford, not Frank Spencer.’
Time will tell.
Meanwhile, Jonathon sleeps deeply at night even if sometimes for not quite long enough.
‘But I'm not complaining.
I'm very happy with how things are going at the moment.’
Nor does he wish to begrudge what Bread has done for his career.
He's been in it for five years (only he and Jean Boht have been with the show from the beginning) and he's proud of that, he says.
During that time, his screen character has developed, but you just wait, says Jonathon, and see what happens to Adrian in the autumn.
He won't divulge what, but ‘it affects my appearance, too’, and he points to his new haircut, a welcome improvement on Adrian's slightly leftover hippie look.
For someone who seems so firmly in control of his career, Jonathon Morris claims a surprising lack of confidence when it comes to his personal appearance.
‘I just don't feel I've quite cracked it yet.
I don't like scruffiness — and I do like clothes.
I just want to be comfortable.
My ambition is to have a different look each day so that I can't be labelled.’
Living near Chelsea's King's Road certainly helps, although Jonathon first got interested in fashion, he says, when he was living in Manchester.
‘There's a shop there called L'Homme which I particularly like.’
But the trouble with buying clothes, he finds, is that if you do it alone (he's single), you can get a bit blinkered.
‘You only have your own narrow vision — and that's not usually a good thing.
But I know I wouldn't stop with a second opinion.
I'd want a third and fourth and so on.’
When left to his own devices, Jonathon inclines towards Italian clothes because of their style (echoing the Fifties), their cut and their colour.
‘I've got a slight frame so French clothes tend to hang a bit too loosely on me.’
For someone who claims to be insecure about his appearance, he seems pretty well informed on the subject of fashion.
He smiles his gleaming smile: ‘Oh, don't get me wrong.
I love dressing up.
Since I spend most of my working life wearing clothes I wouldn't normally be seen dead in, it's one of my life's real pleasures.’
Adrian Boswell, it seems, has a lot to answer for.
‘I'm going to buy this.
I don't own anything like it.
I'd wear it to do Wogan .’
Sand brush cotton chinos, £70.
Polo Ralph Lauren.
Buttermilk jacket, £79.99.
Next for men.
Cream short sleeve shirt, £73, Reporter
‘I wouldn't buy this because I think striped shirts have been overplayed — and I prefer black jeans.’
Blue striped shirt, £69, Paul Smith.
Jeans, £29.99, Next Directory, No M34839
‘This is my sort of everyday look — good for rehearsing in.’
Cream sweatshirt, Jonathon's own.
Mustard bomber jacket, £79.
Principles for Men.
Jeans, £40, Paul Smith.
Shoes, Jonathon's own
‘I'd wear this because it's a classic look with a slight difference — and I think the colour's great.’
Petrol blue suit, £169, Principles for Men.
Black crew neck, Jonathon's own
‘I spend most of my working life wearing clothes I wouldn't be seen dead in,’ says Jonathon, seen above, far right, with the rest of the cast of Bread .
His own taste (left) is a zip sweater, £150, from Polo Ralph Lauren.
Styling: Sian Banks.
Photographs: Martyn Thompson.
Grooming: Val Garland.
Stockists are on page 92
and the living is easy…
From loose fitting to loads of swing, the simple summer frock is back in style.
Wear it with a hat and a sunshine smile!
Free as a bird in a simple panelled ivory linen dress (this page), £71, Hobbs.
Right: for that individual touch try a hand-printed dress, £110, to order from Antoni & Alison.
White straw hat, £9.99, Miss Selfridge.
Far right: silk shift dress, £59.99, Next.
Straw bag, £72, Fred Bare.
Bracelet, £7.50, Angie Gooderham
In the swing in an oyster slip dress (far left), £29.99, selected branches of Miss Selfridge.
Daisy embroidered dress, £24.99, Zygo.
Silver shell pendant, £8.99, Oasis.
This page: cotton dress, £20.50, French Connection.
Rough edged straw hat, about £12, Sandra Philips
Easy, lazy days in a loose silk dress (this page), £93.
Chinatown, worn over tight fitted shorts, £70, Duncan & Namara.
Right: chocolate dress, £29.90, Benetton.
Plain straw hat, about £10, Sandra Philips
Simple, summery, swinging.
This page: T-shirt dress, £16.99, Gallery at Top Shop.
Straw hat with wooden beads, £65, Fred Bare.
Large shell pendant, £7.99, Pink Soda.
Right: mint dress, £35, French Connection.
Styling: Karen McCartney.
Photographs: Keith Henderson.
Hair: Robert Johnson for Paul Mitchell Systems.
Make-up: Robert Johnson for Kanebo.
Shot in Florida.
Travel courtesy TWA; accommodation courtesy Horizon Holidays (021 632 6282).
Stockists are on page 92
french dressing
Seductive simplicity and relaxed elegance are the key to modern chic — and nobody flaunts it better than the French.
With continental classics in vogue, you can both follow suit.
Bonne chance!
CLOTHES SHOW PROMOTION
GET fresh!
Good grooming reaps instant benefits and, while you can't change your looks overnight or develop instant muscle, a sophisticated scent will speak millions for your confidence.
Celsius is a complete range of complementary products so you can build on your scent by degrees, from a stimulating shower gel to a refreshing splash of Celsius Aftershave.
So, while the stylish collection graces your bathroom shelf, Celsius will be enhancing your own natural charms…
Left: You don't need to spend a fortune to get fresh!
Kick the day into action with refreshing Celsius Body Splash
Opposite, below: keep your cool even when working up a sweat.
Co-ordinating deodorant, body spray and talc ensure that you smell good while you work on looking good.
Left: Celsius start every day off right with the fresh citrus top notes of lime and bergamot.
Pepper and cyprus oil spice up the day, while a hint of patchouli and sandalwood linger softly into the evening hours…
Props: Harvey Nichols, Lillywhites.
Photographs: Tony Chau.
Hair and make-up Robert Johnson at Terrie Tanaka.
Stockists are on page 92 (see Celsius)
what they're wearing in LEEDS
Saturday night and Yorkshire lads and lasses are ready for kick-off
Where it's at: Leeds is the third largest city in England, with a population of around three quarters of a million.
It's about halfway between London and Edinburgh, about level with Liverpool and Hull, and it's easy to get to by train, plane or automobile.
There's no shortage of things to do in Leeds, whether you're after high culture or street cool.
Nightclubbing
The Warehouse, 19–21 Somers Street (0532 468287).
Mr Craig's, 54 New Briggate (0532 42224).
The Gallery and Ricky's, 9 Merrion Street (no phone).
Two clubs in one place.
Eating
Hansa's, 72–74 North Street (0532 444408)— vegetarian.
La Grillade, Wellington Street (0532 459707)— French.
Bibi's, 16 Greek Street (0532 430905)— Italian.
Maxi's, 6 Bingley Street (0532 440552)— Cantonese.
Arts
Cinema — the Hyde Park Cinema (0532 752045) is independent and lit by gaslight.
Leeds International Film Festival takes place in October.
Theatres — West Yorkshire Playhouse (0532 222141): Civic (0532 455505); Grand Theatre (0532 440971): City Varieties Music Hall (0532 430808).
City Art Gallery, The Headrow — a fine collection of 20th century pieces, plus the Henry Moore Study Centre, Craft Shop and Design Centre — a visual feast.
Shopping
The Arcades — Thornton's, County, Grand and Queen's: all Victorian pedestrian areas.
Granary Wharf, Central Basin — diverse crafts from all over the world, reached by walking under the City Station.
Corn Exchange and Waterloo Antiques, Crown Street — period clothing, furniture, prints, paintings, jewellery and bric-a-brac in two adjacent centres.
Dave, Andy and Gavin
‘We've just borrowed this gear from a shop called Occi-Mizoki.
When our band The Joy get to Number One we'll come back and buy it all.’
Tracy and Tracy
‘Leeds is far too expensive for clothes, so we go to Manchester.’
Andrea and Zoe
‘We like wearing bright colours.
We're both wearing Benetton today.’
Simon Crawford
‘My duffle coat was bought for me in Manchester.
It doesn't have pockets but I liked it because of the red buttons.’
Angela Sibbles
‘I bought this gold parka in Leeds and the jeans are by Moschino.
I buy all my clothes here — there's no need to go to London.’
Carmen and Nicky
‘We would rather pay for designer labels than go to high street shops.’
Sarah
‘I had my top made for me and it cost £70.
If it's well made I'll pay the price whatever it is.’
Cathy and Stuart
Cathy: ‘I tend to buy most of my clothes from Next, but this top isn't — I'm not telling you where I bought it!’
Stuart and Charlie
Stuart: ‘My jacket is by Colin Harvey from Brother to Brother in Sheffield.’
Charlie: ‘There's life and death and in-between there's Leeds.’
Katie and Donna
Katie: ‘I'm always buying new clothes.’
Donna: ‘I don't spend much on clothes — i go to secondhand shops.’
Steve
‘I bought this because I wanted something brightly coloured for winter.
My other clothes at home are all by John Richmond.’
Jo Williams
‘My friend Sarah makes most of my clothes for me.
She does brilliant rip-offs for a snip of the real thing!’
Words: Sian Banks, Debra Stottor.
Photographs: Johnny Greig.
During our stay in Leeds we visited: The county Arcade shopping centre; AMS Leeds Bowl, Merrion Centre (0532 451781); The Gallery; Mr Craig's; The Warehouse.
We stayed in Leeds courtesy of The Hilton Hotel, Neville Street (0532 442000).
The Hotel Metropole, King Street (0532 450841).
better by design
Ever wondered how a design gets from the sketchbook to the catwalk?
We found out by following the progress of one of this year's semi-finalists at the annual Smirnoff Fashion Awards — a competition which celebrates student design…
Beginning, Resourcing, Believing and Remembering are four stages in the ‘States of Man’, the imaginative brief set for the 1991 Smirnoff UK Fashion Awards which take place in June as part of a week of college fashion shows.
Promostyl, a fashion forecasting bureau, presented the design ideas to fashion students nationwide.
Entrants had to pick one of the four sections and develop their design from the abstract ideas that they found there.
Three thousand students applied, all chasing the prestige of winning the world's largest student fashion competition.
It took a team of distinguished judges several hours to emerge with the final shortlist of 60 semi-finalists.
Jeff Banks guided the judges through the piles of paperwork.
Vivienne Westwood, current British Designer of the Year, had a very clear idea of what she was looking for: ‘Something unorthodox that people haven't seen before.
‘Talent is a rare thing, not as universal as people seem to think — creativity is not something that can be taught,’ she says.
Alongside Vivienne were Kim Hunt, Fashion Designer of Elle , and Alan Couldridge, Deputy Course Director at the Royal College of Art.
Kim was learning more than she'd bargained for from the entries: ‘I hadn't realised that the all-in-one body had been such an immensely influential piece.
I was quite shocked by the thousands of variations on that theme.’
Alan Couldridge was more philosophical about the entries.
‘This competition brings out the best and the worst in fashion students.
It's a big stage event with a very abstract brief, very exciting but not a fancy dress show.’
The Clothes Show Magazine was present at this nail-biting stage  of the proceedings, ready to make a selection of our own.
It was semi-finalist Amy Moore's printed housecoat that won the approval of the magazine's Deputy Editor, Karen McCartney.
‘Amy's drawing caught my attention because it was a simple but dramatic interpretation of the brief.
I felt the processes involved in the production of the fabric and star-fastening would be interesting to follow.’
Amy's eye-catching gold and brown design was entered in the ‘Believing’ section of the competition.
The brief made diverse references to faith, South America and nostalgia.
Having tracked down Amy, we asked her to explain what attracted her to ‘Believing’: ‘I'm obsessed with flamenco at the moment and that fitted with the ‘Believing’ references to exotic South American styles.’
Amy had a wealth of ideas to inspire.
‘I go to flamenco classes, collect pictures of elaborate dance costumes and I've been to lots of shows.’
The stylised housecoat that Amy eventually submitted to Smirnoff is the result of endless refinements and changes to design.
We wanted to know exactly how the final garment evolved.
Amy explained: ‘I started off drawing a wrap covered in lots of tassels and big flowers — all very whacky.’
The wrap developed into something more substantial and the full-length coat shape emerged.
This is when the pattern-cutting started and Amy produced the first calico toile.
This rough version of the finished garment is made to check that the design can be produced effectively.
‘Calico is horrible to use but you have to make toiles to perfect your design.
After three different versions I decided on the plain raincoat shape, tied with a belt.’
Having achieved the shape, Amy had to solve the problems of the pattern she had designed to decorate it.
‘The brief for ‘Believing’ described patchwork effects and harmony through colours.
For this print, I was thinking back to the patterns of light and shade created by strong sunlight.’
The dappled effect could be created through print or appliqué, but each had drawbacks.
‘The patterns get larger towards the bottom of the coat and this gradation is difficult to print.
It takes ages because the garment has to be done in sections — it's much easier if the shapes are all the same size.’
Appliqué was Amy's other option — cutting out the brown shapes, dying them and then sewing them back on individually.
‘I thought it would take too long to do but it was easier than the problems of printing.’
The final, crucial element of Amy's design was the starfish button.
‘I saw it in a magazine and blew the picture up on a colour photocopier.’
This unusual button presented a few problems.
‘It had to be light so as not to pull the fabric around but something like polystyrene would have fallen apart.’
The solution was a light wood, varnished to make it harder, and then carved into a perfect reproduction of Amy's photocopied design.
With the housecoat made up and endless hurdles overcome, it was time for the real test — replacing the clothes stand with a model.
Amy brought the complete outfit, including Lycra shorts — also her own design — to a photographic studio and saw her design move for the first time.
‘At college, we have to find tall skinny people to try our designs on.
I've never seen any of my clothes on a professional model.
It's amazing to see the coat as part of a complete look — with the hair and make-up complementing it.’
The final takes place on June 5, and the Clothes Show will be there with the cameras, so you can see the event for yourself.
To Amy — and all the other finalists — good luck!
Above: the printed housecoat, designed by student Amy Moore, which was selected by the Clothes Show Magazine .
Left: Jeff Banks shows Amy's design to the judges
The Smirnoff competition judges: above, Kim Hunt and Alan Couldridge; left, current Designer of the Year, Vivienne Westwood.
Also on the judges' panel were Caroline Baker (Fashion Director,Mirabella , Lucille Lewin (Managing Director, Whistles), Myrene de Premonville (Fashion Designer) and Sebastien de Diesbach (Promostyl).
Left: Amy's design amidst other entries that reached the Smirnoff semi-finals
Reportage photographs: Flo Smith
The Smirnoff Student Fashion Week is from June 3–7, 1991.
The Fashion Awards are on June 5.
All events are at the Business Design Centre, London N1.
For tickets and information, call 071 379 4444
Slaving over the drawing board or the painstaking pattern-cutting stage (1,2).
Working on the calico toile, a rough version of the finished garment (3,4).
The final toile on the clothes stand (5)
Amy at the stove, experimenting with coloured dyes (6,7,8,9): ‘For this print, I was thinking of patterns of light and shade created by strong sunlight.’
Painting the wooden starfish brooch (10), and the finished article (11).
‘Having my design photographed like this has been a really exciting experience’
The stunning final results of Amy's finished garment.
Shoes, Shelly's.
Words: Saska Graville.
This photograph: Martyn Thompson.
Hair and make-up Val Garland at Camilla Arthur
YOUR VERY GOOD health
Dr Cathy Read with the latest on the health front, from help for hay fever to odour-absorbent paint
THE HEALTHY ALTERNATIVE
Like it or not, alternative medicine often reaches parts of the body ordinary NHS treatment fails to reach.
Chinese herbalists have gained a reputation for treating eczema, masseurs for relieving the pain of some kinds of arthritis and cranial osteopaths for quietening crying babies.
Alternative medicine is also becoming increasingly popular — the latest figures show that one person in seven has seen a complementary practitioner within the past year.
Even so, finding your way around the alternative medicine maze may be a problem.
Few alternative therapies are available on the NHS, so you may have to find a practitioner yourself — and not everyone who practises complementary medicine is adequately trained.
Now a new book,The Reader's Digest Family Guide to Alternative Medicine* , has been published to help you find out when alternative medicine may be helpful and whether or not the claims made are valid.
And it also tells you how you can find a fully trained practitioner.
For instance, if you need an osteopath, look out for the letters MRO — this means that the osteopath has completed a four-year course and is registered to practise.
* The Reader's Digest Family Guide to Alternative Medicine is available from bookshops at £24.95.
THE END OF SNORING?
Do you wake up regularly to a deafening snore and feel there is no alternative but to give your partner a hefty prod?
According to Swedish ENT specialist Dr Bjorn Petruson a small plastic device could make all the difference to those noisy nights.
The Nozovent, which is worn just inside the nostrils at night, reduces snoring by making breathing easier.
Nozovent costs £5.99 for a pair and is available from Inphormed at Worthy Park House, Abbots Worthy, Winchester, Hants SO21 1AN.
THE WONDERS OF FISH OIL
Oily fish is a topic this page has already covered in a previous issue, so you'll know that a regular meal of oily fish — herring, mackerel, trout and the like — can actually halve your risk of having a heart attack.
Fish oil supplements have also been found to help people suffering from psoriasis, arthritis and SLE — a disease which causes skin rashes and joint pains.
And that's not all.
Doctors now believe one of the constituents of fish oil — eicosapentaenoic acid — could help beat cancer.
Laboratory studies show that fish oil may prevent weight loss and cause cancers to shrink.
It also seems to work against cancers resistant to standard anti-cancer drugs.
Tests on patients are to go ahead this year.
If successful it will mean gentler treatments for cancer sufferers as many drugs currently in use have toxic side effects.
ODOURS NO LONGER LINGER
It looks as though sweaty locker rooms will be a thing of the past as Swedish scientists have developed a smell-absorbing paint.
In tests at Linkoping University the paint removed around 80 per cent of smelly chemicals — absorbing them through tiny pores.
Wallpaper also absorbs smells but, unlike the new paint, tends to retain them.
So, it could be goodbye to body odour — but only in the right room.
HAY FEVER
Watch out, hay fever season is approaching — and one in 10 of us will be affected.
Hay fever is really an allergy to pollen and the peak time is early June.
At the start of the season sufferers usually begin to experience problems when the pollen count reaches 50.
But that's just the start; counts of 200 are not uncommon and in summer 1984 the pollen count in central London reached a record 820.
Medical treatment for hay fever is now much better than it used to be.
Eye drops and nose sprays are among the most helpful treatments.
If you're expecting trouble it's worth consulting your doctor early as some treatments work best if started in advance.
Antihistamine tablets can be bought from the chemist without a prescription.
Make sure the ones you buy don't cause drowsiness and avoid any combination drugs.
And remember — if you're using eye drops for your hay fever, leave your contact lenses out.
WAIST NOT
If you're watching your weight the ideal period between weigh-ins is one to two weeks, says Dr Tom Sanders, Lecturer in Nutrition at the University of London.
Most people gain weight in cycles and too frequent or infrequent weighing will mean that you miss the tend.
The size of the problem?
According to a recent survey, 35–45 per cent of British adults are overweight and 8–12 per cent are very overweight.
And while a little plumpness may not do much harm, being very fat is a definite health hazard, increasing the risk of heart disease, gall bladder disease, some cancers and arthritis.
Pepsi & Shirlie striking a pose
Gone is the girlie-girlie image of yesteryear…the dynamic duo Pepsi and Shirlie are back — with a new look and single to boot.
Four years ago Pepsi and Shirlie were enjoying considerable chart success and media attention.
The singles Heartache and Goodbye Stranger both reached the top 20, and countless magazines profiled their public and private lives.
This publicity did the girls harm as well as good — they were overexposed.
It was six months before their debut album was in the shops and by that time public interest in them had waned.
With a new single,Someday , written and produced by George Michael, Pepsi and Shrlie are relaunching themselves.
Determined not to repeat past mistakes they are doing things differently this time round.
The most striking change in the duo is their image — our pictures show Pepsi and Shirlie as you've never seen them before!
They've thrown away their frilly skirts and put on some more grown-up clothes.
Pepsi explained the transformation: ‘We were far too girlie-girlie before.
When we started off we were in our puffballs, but we're definitely not that dressy now.’
Shirlie explained, ‘This time we wanted clothes that felt comfortable but also looked strong.’
Pepsi outlined the problems behind their new style: ‘It was difficult coming up with a look that was original, that didn't look like Kylie or Madonna but retained their strength — I think we've cracked it though.’
The girls spent a long time putting their new  wardrobe together.
They sketched their ideas and then looked for clothes to match.
Shirlie described the process: ‘We knew we wanted strong shapes, with big jackets.
I'm always happy when I'm wearing trousers and a jacket that covers my bum!’
It's easy to forget that it's over eight years since Pepsi and Shirlie first sang with Wham! and Shirlie still laughs at the memories: ‘When we started out I had one dress and I wore it to every photo session — I couldn't afford any more!’
It's not only her clothes that have changed — George Michael is now famous the world over.
‘We've always been really good friends but hadn't worked together for a long time.
He's such a huge star now that I was actually nervous when I walked into the studio with him.’
Pepsi and Shirlie may not have reached George's superstar status but they know the direction they're moving in —‘We don't want to be bubblegum one-hit-wonders.
Our image is now very strong but we've also got the music to carry us through.’
All we can say is don't look back!
Above: Pepsi and Shirlie four years ago, in the days of the puffball and the ‘girlie-girlie’ image.
Right, Pepsi: polka dot all-in-one and shirt, Jean Paul Gaultier; shirt, Plein Sud; tights, Wolford; gloves, Harrods — all Pepsi's own.
Below, Shirlie: top and skirt, Plein Sud; boots, Shelly's; necklace, S-Tek; tights, Wolford — all Shirlie's own
‘This is one of the cutest outfits I've ever worn — I look like some kind of exotic jockey’ Pepsi, above
‘The crossover back of this top looks really stunning when I've got a good suntan’ Shirlie, left
‘This is me — this is how I dress up to go out’ Pepsi
‘I'm in love with this belt at the moment, I wear it all the time’ Shirlie
Pepsi: Jacket and trousers, John Galliano; bra top, Dolce & Gabbana; belt, S-Tek; boots, Office — all Pepsi's own
Shirlie: all-in-one, Jean Paul Gaultier; shirt, Dia Positive; waistcoat, John Galliano; belt, S-Tek: gloves, Harrods; tights, Wolford — all Shirlie's own
Right, Pepsi: coat and necklace, John Galliano: bra top, Joe Casely-Hayford; trousers, Plein Sud; belt, Next; boots, Office — all Pepsi's own.
Shirlie: jacket, top and skirt, Plein Sud; spotty shirt, Junior Gaultier; necklace, S-Tek: boots, Shelly's — all Shirlie's own
‘This outfit's crazy — don't mess with me in this!’
Pepsi
‘I'm always happier when I'm wearing something that covers my behind’ Shirlie
Left, Pepsi: top, Dolce & Gabbana; skirt, Plein Sud; necklace, John Galliano — all Pepsi's own.
Shirlie: jacket, Plein Sud; bra top, Joe Casely-Hayford; trousers, John Galliano; belt, S-Tek — all Shirlie's own
Words: Saska Graville.
Photographs: Tim Palmer.
Hair: Tracy Kurtulus at Vidal Sassoon Salons.
Makeup: Janet Dunford
‘This top takes a while to put on properly but it's worth it in the end’ Pepsi, far left
‘I love this outfit — I feel quite boyish in it’ Shirlie, left
CLOTHES SHOW ON THE ROAD
bursting into bloom
This spring, the catwalks were strewn with bold, beautiful flowers.
See what happened overleaf when we went north to practise our own floral wizardry on a few of those bright young Mancunians…
Julie Owens, 30, personnel assistant (right): ‘I'd rather the skirt was a bit longer and I prefer a court shoe.
I like the top — and I think the hair's great.’
Chiffon shirt, £16.99, Hennes.
Skirt, £33.90, Stefanel.
Blue body, £21.99, Pineapple.
Suede loafers, £34.99, Jones Bootmakers.
Silvia Clear Sheers, £2.30, Pretty Polly.
Kerry Hardman, 30, housewife, and Allanah, 5,(right): ‘I like this outfit.
It feels light and floaty — just right for summer.
And I think Allanah looks lovely — she can take lots of bright colours.’
Kerry's shirt, £22.99, Zygo.
Skirt, £38, Jigsaw.
Allanah's dress, £13.99, Blooming Marvellous.
Flower from a selection at John Lewis.
Mark Taylor, 19, student (left): ‘I like the shirt.
I'm not mad about the tie but it's quite smart.’
Silk shirt, £39.99, French Connection.
Silk tie, £30, Rhiannon.
Joanna, 18, schoolgirl (left): ‘This dress is shorter and tighter than I usually wear.’
Dress, £75, Jigsaw.
Shoes, £65, Red or Dead.
Earrings, £11.99, Oasis.
Admiral Clear Sheers, £2.30, Pretty Polly.
Georgina Brecker, 21, journalist (far right): ‘I don't think anything sleeveless is very flattering!’
Sister Alexis, 18, student (right); ‘I'd wear the hot pants — without the flowers.’
Georgina's jeans, £30, French Connection.
Body, about £29.99, Scruffs.
Hat, £46.95, The Hat Shop.
Pendant, £21.95, Fenwick.
Alexis's hot pants, £30; top £25, Juliette Spatchett at Hyper Hyper.
Earrings, £12.99; ring, £9.99, Zygo.
Barely Black Ultra Clear Sheers, £2.55, Pretty Polly.
Caroline Yates, 16, schoolgirl (right): ‘I think the hat's brilliant — just right for now’.
Dress, £29.99, Zygo.
Hat, £55, Fred Bare.
Espadrilles, £29.99, Jones Bootmakers.
Silvia Clear Sheers, £2.30, Pretty Polly.
Flowers, John Lewis.
Sonya Miller, 17, trainee hairdresser (right); ‘This is OK but I feel more comfortable in dresses.’
Roselyn Wong, 17, student (far right): ‘This is just my style — especially if I was going out.’
Sonya's top and leggings, about £29.99 each, Scruffs.
Loafers, £49.99, Jones Bootmakers.
Admiral Clear Sheers, £2.30, Pretty Polly.
Toby Reader, 18, trainee engineer (above) with Anita Lawson, 18, student: ‘At first I didn't like this,’ said Toby, ‘but it's growing on me.’
Said Anita, ‘I like this dress.’
Toby's jeans, £32.99, BSCO.
Shirt, £42.99, Wild Woman at Ted Baker.
shoes, £50, Red or Dead.
Flowers, from a selection at John Lewis.
Anita's dress, £180, Karen Boyd.
Shoes, £17.99, Manfield.
Two pairs of Sunblush Clear Sheers, £2.30 each, Pretty Polly.
Andy Gordon, 19, student (right): ‘I like all of this stuff, no problem.’
T-shirt, £16, French Connection.
Shorts, £32.50, Levi's.
Trainers, £36.99, Wasp at Champion Sports.
Debra Phillip, 19, trainee designer (below): ‘This blouse is beautiful.’
Shirt, £46, Hobbs.
Skirt, £67.20, Karen Boyd.
Shoes, £39.99, Jones Bootmakers.
Ultra Clear Sheers, £2.55, Pretty Polly.
Andrea Berry, 20, student (above): ‘The shorts and tights look good.’
Body, £21.99, Pineapple.
Shorts, £17.99, Zygo.
Loafers, £49.99, Jones Bootmakers.
Silvia Clear Sheers, £2.30, Pretty Polly.
Lindsey Ahmet (far left) and Natalie Stirrup (left) both 3½, stole the show!
Lindsey's T-shirt, £6.95, Blooming Marvellous.
Silk scarf (as skirt), from £9.99, Tie Rack.
Pendant, £14, Carol Bright at Hyper Hyper.
Natalie's A-line T-shirt, £16.90, Benetton 012.
Pendant, £18, Lanssa Kay at Hyper Hyper.
All socks, £1.99, Littlewoods.
Flowers, from a selection at John Lewis.
Emma Jones, 16, student (right): ‘I think this is gorgeous; I'd definitely buy it.’
Vest dress, £26.99, Zygo.
Waistcoat, £228, Karen Boyd.
Shoes, about £45, Red or Dead.
Barely Black Ultra Clear Sheers, £2.55, Pretty Polly.
SHEER GENIUS
Summer's here, hemlines are high: it's time to put your best foot forward and show off your perfectly dressed legs — and no-one knows how to flatter them more perfectly than Pretty Polly.
Bright florals are the rage this season so you'll need a subtle shade of tights to complement rather than overpower your outfits.
Silvia, Admiral and Sunblush in the Clear Sheers range will go with virtually anything, or, for a darker but equally delicate look, choose Barely Black Ultra Clear Sheers.
And, just for fun, you can even mix your own palette by wearing two pairs at once to create a different shade.
On the Road in Manchester
Milan: high-waisted elegance by Krizia
New York: Linda Evangelista models for Bill Blass
Paris:chez Chanel
Paris: tropical orange from Ungaro
Top designers said it with flowers this spring: a floral jungle by Bill Blass (above); black and floral trousers by Krizia (above left); a splash of colour from Chanel (far left) and Ungaro's tropical sarong-style fantasy (left).
Top left:Clothes Show on the Road with Pretty Polly at the Arndale Centre, Manchester
Photographs: Peter Brown.
Hair and make-up: Ya'nina at Artistic Licence and Robert Johnson at Terrie Tanaka.
We stayed at the Britannia Hotel, Portland Street, Manchester (061 228 2288).
Stockists are on page 92
CLOTHES SHOW PROMOTION
Even a typical British summer can wreak havoc with your skin, so with the holiday months approaching, it's time to nurture a beauty regime that will guard against the sun's drying effects.
We cleared through the overgrowth of new products to find the secret of a truly rosy complexion!
natural BLOOM
Faced with shelves groaning with skincare products, each bearing baffling scientific claims, making the right choice can seem an impossible task.
And if your skin is sensitive and easily irritated, finding suitable products can be doubly difficult.
With these problems in mind, Sensiq has developed the ideal skincare range to complement their range of cosmetics.
Using only the mildest ingredients, all products are fragrance-free and suitable for sensitive skins.
And it's easy to find exactly which ones are right for your skin, as the entire range is colour-coded, using four pastel shades to identify the three different skin types, plus the Extra Care range.
Shell pink is the colour for dry skins in need of extra care and lots of moisture.
A light, creamy Gentle Purifying Cleanser softens as it cleanses and the Gentle Moisturising Cream is easily absorbed to sooth the skin and offer long-lasting protection.
Peach is the colour for normal and combination skins.
Gentle Clarifying Lotion offers thorough cleansing without stripping the skin of its natural moisture, while Gentle Balanced Moisture Lotion helps maintain the skin's natural elasticity.
Both products are designed to bridge the gap between the dry cheeks and the greasy central ‘T-zone’ that typify the normal and combination skin type.
Aqua has been specially designed for oily skins.
A refreshing Effective Cleansing Gell and Oil Free Hydrating Lotion help control excess oil gently but effectively, leaving skin shine-free but without over-drying it.
Powder Blue signifies the Extra Care range of products which can be used on all skin types.
The range consists of an Overnight Replenishing Treatment, a Soothing Skin Tonic and an oil-free pH balanced Effective Eye Make-Up Remover.
An uncomplicated and easy-to-use range, Sensiq's light-textured formulas are quickly absorbed and gentle on your skin, leaving it feeling much softer and smoother without a trace of stickiness.
The Sensiq skincare range has been extensively researched and screened, and most common allergens and irritants have been omitted.
In fact, when compared with another leading sensitive skincare brand in independent laboratory tests, the Sensiq Skin Care Collection was found to be seven times less likely to cause irritation.
For extra protection, some products contain a protective sunscreen plus Vitamin E to enrich and condition your skin.
Sensiq products are kind to your conscience, too.
None of them have been tested on animals and all bottles are recyclable.
What's more, the prices won't hurt your pocket, either; a small investment for a clearer, smoother skin.
Turn yourself into a natural beauty this summer by adopting a good skin care routine now with the help of Sensiq.
Proper cleansing and moisturising are essential to avoid the effects of sunbathing and those long, late summer nights.
Sensiq's lovely pastel colours reflect the sunny feeling and identify your ideal skin products according to skin type.
And with prices in the collection starting at only £3.32, Sensiq should leave your bank balance looking as healthy as your skin.
Photograph: Peter Underwood.
Hair: Gregory Cazaly at Satellite.
Make-up: Virginia Nicholls at Image
and the bride wore whiskers!
…
And the groom came as The Mad Hatter.
Sally Watkin talked to three adventurous couples who defied the tradition of the white wedding and opted for something completely different.
TREVOR AND ERIKA
‘I'm late, I'm late, for a very important date…’
If Erika Payers had failed to get to the church (registry office, actually) on time, it would have been entirely in keeping with her costume.
For when Erik and her husband, Trevor, from Oxford, eventually decided to tie the knot after living together for eight years, the prospect of a conventional white wedding didn't even enter their heads.
‘We both dislike formality and stuffy weddings where everybody does what their parents want,’ explains Erika.
‘My nickname was ‘Rabbit’ because of my prominent front teeth — so when we decided to get married, I instantly thought of dressing up as the White Rabbit in Alice in Wonderland .
And Trevor being the Mad Hatter in top hat and tails fitted in perfectly with my idea.’
Ever since they met, the Payers have shared a love of fancy dress and playing practical jokes on their friends.
Their wedding was no exception.
Not wishing to put their nearest and dearest to enormous expense the happy couple omitted to mention on the invitations that they were getting married.
Instead, Erika and Trevor billed the big day as a going-away party.
They'd both jacked in their jobs (he's a computer programmer; she's a physiotherapist) and were planning to backpack round the world for a few months.
‘We lured 150 people to a party by promising them lots of food and drink and a magical mystery tour,’ laughs Trevor.
Getting the guests to don fancy dress wasn't a problem.
‘They were used to our mad schemes and wearing outrageous clothes for parties was normal in our crowd.
Everybody always enjoyed themselves when we dressed up — wearing peculiar clothes usually creates an instant talking point, even between total strangers,’ says Erika.
Far from being influenced by superstitions about her groom seeing her outfit before the big day, Erika enlisted Trevor's help in making it.
‘He made the ears out of an old pair of mouse ears I'd used for a previous party,’ she says.
‘I bought a pair of white Wrangler dungarees and a Laura Ashley blouse I knew I'd wear again.
I borrowed a veil from my aunt, who said that, at the age of 50, she couldn't imagine herself needing it again.
It's just as well — I cut two holes in it for the ears!
The whole outfit only cost about £75.’
They did the deed in nearby Abingdon Registry Office, thanks to a very sympathetic registrar who managed to enter into the spirit of things.
‘When he said, ‘This is a serious and solemn occasion’, people started to laugh,’ remembers Trevor.
‘And when he said, ‘I declare you man and wife’, everyone threw their hats into the air!’
After the ceremony, the newly-weds cycled the eight miles back to the reception (held in a friend's garden) on their tandem.
‘We only hope that when our sons, baby Toby and Charlie, marry, they do it as outrageously as we did,’ say Trevor and Erika.
ANDY AND ALISON
Television presenter Alison Holloway wore white (well, cream, to be exact) twice to get married: for her first wedding to Alistair Watson, son of veteran British screen start Jack Watson, and second time around, when she got hitched to TV comedian Jim ‘Nick Nick’ Davidson.
Small wonder then that when, in December 1989, after two divorces, she finally married the man of her dreams, freelance TV producer Andy Ward, she decided to give tradition the elbow.
She met Andy while working on a production of Carmen at Sky Television, and at their wedding, her two outfits stole the show.
For the Wandsworth Registry Office ceremony, Alison sported a fringed pair of extremely brief black shorts teamed with a great Jasper Conran jacket.
Later, she wore an extravagant Russian-style creation for the church blessing.
‘I thought the clothes were great,’ says Alison, who combines a full-time job for British Sky Broadcasting, newsreading and presenting a current affairs/magazine programme with hosting the quiz show,Run The Gauntlet , for ITV.
‘I fancied getting married in black because it seemed to throw tradition to the winds, and looked very dramatic.
I wanted to wear really bright red lipstick too, just  for the sheer hell of it!’
Up until the day before the wedding, she was planning to wear the Jasper Conran jacket, teamed with matching long skirt.
‘But then I thought, no, let's go crazy,’ says Alison, ‘so I went shopping and found the shorts in a shop on the King's Road that specialises in tight gear.
I wore them with a pair of black leather gloves trimmed with fake fur, and the jacket, which has padded shoulders and is trimmed with feathers.’
As for the Russian angle, it came about because of a dream.
‘A couple of months before the wedding, I woke up in the middle of the night worrying about the arrangements, and the only thought in my head was ‘Russia’.
I wanted to get away from the boring white theme, but the only dress I really liked was one by David Fielden which had white fur and beading.
When I asked if they could make me an identical one trimmed with black fur and beading instead, they were horrified but they agreed in the end.’
Alison was a little coy about how much her Russian dress cost, but, according to the staff at David Fielden, their cheapest frock is at least £1,000.
To complete the outfit, Alison had a pair of Victorian ankle boots made in the same material as her dress, and got a local milliner to make her a stunning hat.
The unusual theme was carried through the entire wedding, with vodka and schnapps served at the back of the church.
The reception, complete with Thai barbecue, was held in a marquee in the back garden of their south London home, and the newly-weds jetted off for a honeymoon in New York.
Poor Andy knew nothing about the fact that his bride was planning to sport shorts for the most important vows of her life.
‘The colour drained from his face when I pulled up in the wedding car dressed all in black,’ recalls Alison, grinning at the memory.
‘And as I put one leg out of the door, he looked slightly taken aback, because he could see that my leg was bare.
His mouth just dropped open!’
And Andy's response?
‘Alison's got a very individual style, so I've learnt to expect the unexpected, I thought she looked fabulous.’
NICK AND ALISON
Alison Cryer has always loathed the idea of white weddings with all the trimmings.
In fact, to start with, she wasn't even that keen on the idea of marriage itself!
‘I don't really believe in marriage, but I didn't want to lose my husband either, so I gave in,’ she explains.
Alison, who runs a company specialising in marketing travel and tourism, has known Nick, an architect, for about 12 years, but they didn't get together until he became her lodger.
To start with, Alison planned to wear a white evening dress.
‘But I showed one or two to Nick and he said, ‘I hope you're not wearing white; I expect you to wear something colourful.’
So I went out to look for something else.
When I saw the red dress, I knew that was the one I wanted.
It's designed by Tomasz Starzewski, who made the dress that Viscount Althorp's wife, Victoria, wore for their wedding.
It cost just over £1,500, which was about three times my budget, but I just had to have it.
But I've already worn it lots of times since and I'll always wear it.
Not surprisingly, she was the centre of attention at her own wedding, two years ago, at Auchterader House in Gleneagles, a Scottish country house hotel.
‘Word had got round that I was wearing red, but I think the guests were relieved when they saw me, and realised my dress wasn't too outrageous,’ says Alison.
The last word must go to Nick: ‘She said it was going to be different, but I didn't realise quite how different.
I have a vivid memory of her descending the stairs to the conservatory where we said our vows.
I was totally thrilled.’
‘We both dislike weddings that are stuffy and formal’
Wedding in Wonderland.
The Mad Hatter and the White Rabbit (alias Trevor and Erika Payers) pose for the perfect shot (above) and then ride off in tandem to their reception, a distance of eight miles (left)
The Scarlet Bride.
Alison Cryer (below) in her red-hot wedding gown, with husband Nick Hyams, at the reception.
The bridal bouquet is somewhat out of the ordinary, too!
From Russia with Love.
Andy Ward and his bridge, Alison Holloway (above), dressed in a fur-trimmed David Fielden gown for the church blessing (suitable for Siberia, too.)
And for the registry office (below), Alison sports a brief pair of tassled black shorts teamed with a Jasper Conran jacket
CLOTHES SHOW CLUB
become a priority reader
Save £50 on a Cover Girl makeover, try new slimline recipes, and keep your clothes clean on holiday
Sweet Nothings
A spoonful of sweetener helps the calories go down — replace one teaspoon of sugar with a teaspoon of Canderel Spoonful, a granular sweetener, and you'll save 18 calories.
Canderel is made with NutraSweet so, unlike some saccharin sweeteners, it doesn't have a bitter aftertaste.
It can be used just like granulated sugar, spoon for spoon, in drinks, desserts, cereals and some recipes.
And our free gift this month is a recipe leaflet showing you how to create delicious calorie-reduced meals.
We also have 200 jars of Canderel Spoonful and their recipe book called Sweet Thoughts (worth £11.84 in total) to give away.
See the Club letter for full details.
Picture This
Inside all of us there is a sultry, glamorous model just waiting to step under the studio lights.
Or so Cover Girl can prove with their amazing ‘before’ and ‘after’shots seen above.
You provide the potential, they provide a professional make-up artist, stylist and photographer.
Et Voilà , a beautiful model emerges.
And you can show off the new you with a set of stunning pictures which are ready just two hours after the session.
The million dollar look usually costs £95 for a session but Clothes Show Club members can now get the star treatment with a massive saving of £50.
Our special offer session will cost £45.
You don't have to buy enlargements.
Photographs are available from £30 a print, and collections of framed pictures from £295.
The Cover Girl Studio is at 74 New Bond Street, London W1.
See the Club letter for details of this offer.
Wash Away
The last thing you want to lug on holiday is a full-size pack of washing powder, yet a few items always need a handwash.
That's where Dylon's Getaway travel wash comes in.
It's a concentrated cream detergent in a handy 100ml tube which should last for up to 20 washes.
Getaway is simple to use, suitable for all fabrics and works perfectly in hot, cold and even sea water.
A 100ml tube usually costs £1.09 from department stores, supermarkets and chemists, but we have 100 to give away free to Clothes Show Club members.
Details are in the Club letter.
Wella Way
Congratulations to Club member Barbara Keys who was chosen from hundreds of entries to have a makeover together with her mum, Betty.
We brought them over from County Antrim in Northern Ireland for an expenses-paid trip to London and an image transformation by haircare experts from Wella.
Turn to page 30 to see the stunning results.
Join the Club
Don't miss out on the fun!
Join our Clothes Show Club today.
It's great value — for £15 you receive:
*
Your favourite magazine sent to your home each month for a year.
*
Exclusive discounts off high street clothes and accessories.
*
A host of free gifts sent to you throughout the year.
*
Easy-to-win competitions.
ME AND MY HAT
You might be mad to wear one but, whether it's a creation for Ascot or a woolly pull-on number, there's a hat to top off any outfit
Hats are funny things — you either love them or you hate them.
There are people who never leave home without one, while others feel ridiculous wearing something on their head.
We found some people who are just mad about hats and discovered why they like their favourite headgear.
Thelma Speirs is a professional hatter, and one half of the design duo Bernstock & Speirs.
She has been in the hat business since 1982 but a devotee for far longer.
‘I've never been scared to wear hats, although I know some people are.
When I was a student, I wore some quite outrageous numbers — I remember a huge red velvet one with a big black bow on the front.’
Nowadays, Thelma's hats are less flamboyant.
Making hats for a living and looking at them all day long has mellowed her taste somewhat.
‘I'm much more restrained now in the hats I choose to wear.
I like classic hats — this baseball cap, for instance, or a bowler hat.
Bernstock & Speirs' hats are designed to be easy to wear.
Daytime hats — that's my style these days.’
Restrained is not the word you would choose to describe Caron Wheeler's style of dressing.
The extrovert singer, famous for her work with Soul II Soul, is a confirmed hatter, and her taste is for the exotic, never the ordinary.
‘I wouldn't feel dressed without something on my head or a really good hairdo — it's got to be a hairdo or a hat!’
Caron's love of hats is nothing new.
‘I've always worn headgear of some sort or another.
I used to buy lots of hats at Oxfam, as well as headwraps and authentic African styles.’
The cane hat that Caron is wearing here lets her show off her dreadlocks.
‘It's taken me 10 years to grow them this long so I don't like hiding them completely under a hat.’
The hat is a fragile structure that winds its way around Caron's head, spiralling upwards — unusual to say the least.
‘It's a veil and I can then weave my hair through it.
It's perfect to wear when I'm on stage because it's not heavy.’
Caron's philosophy is clear: ‘Wearing a hat makes you feel complete — like a bottle with a lid on.’
Rachel, Liz and Pieng share a flat and a taste for handmade hats.
Here, they're wearing a matching floral set that Rachel made for them.
‘I started making hats when I gave up my job and needed something to do.
My first successes were in fake fur — we had one each.
We all liked wearing them so I made everybody one in flowery silk.’
How do Liz and Pieng feel about Rachel's creative streak?
‘Her hats are beautiful and fun,’ they said.
Liz has good reason to be enthusiastic.
‘I've got a tiny head and I could never find hats to fit.
Now Rachel tailor-makes them for me.’
Have they ever gone out all together, a trio of matching flowery heads?
‘We did once and we got loads of comments — Liz even got chased down the road by a tramp!’
Daniel Halpin's favourite hat is designed by Bernstock and Speirs.
‘What really attracted me to this hat was its shape — it reminded me of the ones American tourists wear.’
He also had a more unusual reason for needing something on his head.
‘When I bought this hat, I'd just had a horrible haircut so it covered up the mistake nicely.’
His only reservation is the hat's colour.
‘The blue is a bit too close to the sky blue of the West Ham football kit, and I'm not a fan!’
Hats are a family favourite with Buster, Kim, Naomi and Jordan.
The straw hats they're seen in here are only a fraction of the collection they've amassed at home.
Family friends enjoy the hats, too.
‘Whenever people visit our house, they try them on.
It often turns into a ‘hat party’ with friends sitting around wearing all sorts of styles while they have a drink.’
It would seem from the variety of hats people wear that anything goes.
The materials used vary enormously — cane, straw, leather, satin — whatever takes your fancy And remember, if the hat (or cap) fits, then you know what they say…
A HAT FOR ALL SEASONS
Fancy a hat?
If you feel adventurous, you could follow Rachel's example and make one for yourself.
It's easy to do if you follow a pattern — and we've found a perfect one.
Marigold Hats have produced a simple pattern for a soft hat with a turned-up brim.
You can pick the material, and even use beads or sequins to liven up the design.
Send a postal order or cheque payable to Helen Furber, for £2 (inc p&p), to Marigold Hats, 4 High Street, Shrewsbury SY1 1SP.
Caron Wheeler: ‘This isn't exactly an everyday hat, it's far too delicate.
It's perfect for a special occasion or a video.’
Thelma Speirs: ‘This hat is nice and cartoony, good for nightclubs.
If I wasn't a hat designer I'm sure I'd have loads of hats anyway.’
Baseball cap with bow, about £35, Bernstock & Speirs
Liz (left), Rachel (right), Pieng (front).
Rachel: ‘I loved the print of this material but I didn't know what to make with it.
The hats emerged as a result of just messing around with it.’
Daniel Halpin: ‘My last hat was a flowery one, the same shape as this but a bit more girlie.’
Gaberdine and leather fisherman's hat, about £55, Bernstock & Speirs
Words: Saska Graville.
Photographs: Caroline Hughes.
Hair and make-up: Cathy Lomax at Elite.
Make-up for Caron Wheeler: Pat McGrath at Unique.
Styling: Wunmi.
Chairs from SCP Ltd (071 739 1869).
Stockists are on page 92
Buster (left), Kim (right), Naomi (front left), Jordan (front right).
Kim: ‘We've never all gone out in hats at the same time — we'd get far too many rude comments.’
Kim's straw hat, about £80, from a selection at UBU Hats.
Naomi's straw cap, £3.50, Woolworths.
(The rest were bought years ago!)
straw galore
Brighten up those lazy hay-zy summer days with a rainbow of raffia and straw
Styling: Karen McCartney.
Photographs (of model): Tim Palmer.
Still-life photographs: Mel Yates.
Hair and make-up: Gilda White at Carol Hayes.
Stockists are on page 92
CLOTHES SHOW NEXT MONTH
ON SALE JUNE 17 PRICE £1
FIND OUT HOW TO SHOW YOUR BODY TO ITS BEST ADVANTAGE
WIN!
YOUR GREAT CHANCE TO STAR IN A HAIR ADVERT
PLUS!
PAULA HAMILTON JOHN FASHANU GABRIELA SABATINI
NEW IDEAS
YOUR COMPLETE GUIDE TO HOLIDAY FASHION AND BEAUTY 
CLOTHES SHOW COMPETITION
WIN A WEEK AT A HEALTH HYDRO
Four winners, and their partners, will enjoy a week at top health farm Springs Hydro — plus £100 worth of treatments from beauty specialists DeCleor.
You could win a week at Springs Hydro — and bring a friend or partner along with you as a part of the prize.
And, as if that weren't enough, while you're there you can enjoy £100 worth of additional treatments from DeCleor, who offer a comprehensive range of aromatherapy and plant-based beauty products.
Springs Hydro is one of the country's finest health farms, a haven of tranquillity where you can cast off the strains and stresses of life and feel thoroughly pampered — both mentally and physically.
The setting is idyllic — acres of landscaped gardens near the pretty spa town of Ashby de la Zouch in rural Leicestershire — and you'll feel immediately at one with your surroundings.
This purpose-built health hydro has been designed around the needs of the guest so your every whim is catered for.
Amid the peace and comfort of your surroundings, you can enjoy healthy and delicious food, natural therapies and treatments, and any exercise can be as rigorous or as gentle as you wish.
We're always told we are what we eat, and Springs provides delicious healthy cuisine with that in mind.
The food is well-balanced and freshly prepared, using organically grown produce wherever possible, and there are qualified dieticians on hand to advise you.
On arrival, you'll enjoy a relaxing body massage followed by a facial session.
And with the additional treatments from DeCleor you'll be glowing from top to toe by the end of the week.
There is also a wide range of sporting activities to enjoy: a gymnasium with the latest fitness and toning equipment, dance and relaxation classes, indoor swimming pool, sauna, steam rooms, plunge, whirl and splash pools, archery, tennis, cycling, croquet.
There's even a golf-driving range.
And there are highly qualified instructors on hand to advise you.
In fact, Springs boasts a one-to-one ratio of staff to guests.
But don't be intimidated by all this talk of exercise.
If it suits you, you can relax with a long refreshing drink on the poolside terrace — and drink in the atmosphere as well.
One of the beauties of Springs is that you dictate the pace.
For further information call 0530 73873, or write to: Springs Hydro, Arlick Farm, Packington, Nr Ashby de la Zouch, Leicestershire LE5 6TG.
HERE'S WHAT TO DO
It's easy!
All you have to do is answer the three multiple-choice questions (right) by circling the correct corresponding letter in the coupon and send, to the address given, by Friday June 14, 1991.
1 Daley Thompson is famous for which one of the following?
a
Decathlon
b
Pentathlon
c
Triathlon
2 What is a vegan?
a
A small animal that feeds on grass or plants
b
A person who doesn't use any animal products at all 
c
Someone who excludes meat and fish from their diet
3 Which one of the following is aerobic exercise?
a
Weightlifting
b
Yoga
c
Brisk walking
COMPETITION RULES
1
The competition is open to all readers resident in the UK, except employees of Springs Hydro, Redwood Publishing Ltd, BBC, their families and agents.
2
Entries must be received by no later than first post on Friday, June 14, 1991.
3
No responsibility can be taken for entries lost in the post.
4
The prizes are as stated only and no cash alternatives will be given.
5
Only one entry per person.
Entries can be on a postcard laid out in the manner of the coupon.
6
The decision of the judging panel is final.
No correspondence will be entered into.
7
All entrants to the competition are deemed to have accepted the rules and agreed to be bound by them.
Springs Hydro is set in acres of landscaped gardens in beautiful rural Leicestershire (1).
The gymnasium is equipped with the latest fitness and toning equipment (2).
Tennis is just one of the many sports you can enjoy at Springs(3).
There are also plunge, whirl and splash pools (4)…and a fabulous indoor swimming pool (5).
Or just relax in the comfortable surroundings — it's a home from home (6).
Have tensions pummelled away with a relaxing body massage (7).
And, at all times of the day, look forward to delicious healthy cuisine (8).
who wears what on their WEDDING DAY
Everyone pushes out the boat to look their best on the Big Day — so imagine what it must be like if money's no object.
Now read on…
Anthea Turner (above) radiant after her marriage to Peter Powell — but what a shame no one told him about Head and Shoulders 
And the bride wore…the sitting room curtains!
Victoria Lockwood (left) begins her sometimes bumpy marriage to Charles Althorp
Some women will do anything in the name of beauty…
Emma Samms (above) even had one leg chopped off to get into her bridal gown
Third time lucky?
Madeleine Gurdon (above), becomes Mrs Lloyd Webber, Mark III
Emma Thompson (below) is so busy these days, she had to stay in her panto costume to marry Kenneth Branagh
A touch of class: ‘Royal’ florist Jane Packer (above) bursts into bloom on her own wonderful wedding day
Les Dawson (left) on, um, the happiest day of his life
Round-the-world yachtswoman Tracey Edwards (right), after sailing down the aisle
The Moore, the merrier: Roger, of that ilk (below), puts his right leg in on daughter Deborah's big day
Frank Bruno (left) makes an honest woman of Laura — know what we mean?
Rod and Rachel (left), embarking on what will be the longest-surviving marriage in the history of the world.
Ahem…
No, Pauline and brother Pete (above)aren't breaking the law.
This is Wendy Richard's real life big day with actor Peter Dean joining in the jollities
Leaving her screen baby behind in Coronation Street , Helen Worth (left) joins Michael Angelis in the world's most frequently recurring soap — marriage
Ask Jeff
Worried about your looks?
Jeff Banks is here to help
MAKING FACES
I feel I'm not making the most of myself because I can't apply my make-up well.
I'd love a true professional to give me some tips, particularly on which brands are best.
Do you know of anywhere that offers such a service?
 Anna Teane, Bushey 
Confidence is the most important thing when applying make-up and you must experiment with new colours, techniques and brands until you find what suits you.
I recommend you go to The Face Place where you can have a complete make-up for £16 which lasts for an hour.
The idea behind it is that you can't achieve a total look with one brand but must combine products from both ends of the market for a contemporary image.
They make up half your face in colours to suit you, advising you on technique, and you make up the other half of your face to match.
So you get pampered and taught all-in-one!
If you want further information or to make an appointment contact Joan Price's Face Place, 33 Cadogan Street, London SW3 (071 589 9062).
MOTH-EATEN
I have an extremely voracious moth in my wardrobe which is gradually devouring all my clothes!
I hate the smell of moth balls and refuse to use them.
Do you know if there are any alternatives?
 Jane Ireland, London N7 
Moths can be a real pest but they needn't be a permanent one.
Vapona make ‘Moth Killer' which tends to be sweeter-smelling than moth balls.
It costs £1.35 and is available from major department stores including John Lewis of Oxford Street.
You hang it in the wardrobe and although you may not find the smell unpleasant, the moth certainly will!
BELLE OF THE BALL
I'm going to a ball this summer and I have to wear a formal full-length dress.
I don't want to buy one as not only are they very expensive but I'm unlikely to wear it again.
Do you know of a reputable dress hire shop in my area who will be able to kit me out?
 Tanya Woods, St Albans 
Just For The Night stocks a wide range of evening dresses in sizes 8 to 20, from the simple to the very glamorous.
Prices range from about £40 to £60 depending on the dress.
They also keep a basic court shoe in three heel sizes: low, medium and high, which they can dye almost any colour to match your chosen gown.
With their selection of jewellery, handbags and jackets as well, you need look no further.
Contact this excellent hire shop at 80 Sandridge Road, St Albans (0727 40759).
They're open from 9am to 4pm Monday to Friday; late (7pm) Thursday; 10am to 4pm Saturday, and also by appointment.
SAVING SPACE
I live in a one-bedroomed flat with very little cupboard space and I'm fed up with the piles of clothes and shoes I trip over all the time.
Please tell me how I can arrange my valuable wardrobe space so that I'm able to get the most out of it?
 Charles Dash, Wolverhampton 
The best thing to do when faced with cupboard traumas is to buy lots of clever accessories that hang from every available hook.
You will have to be organised or you'll never find anything but it is worth it.
Brimglade do a garment rail for about £18 (plus £9 carriage if ordered direct).
Call 04027 52085 to order or to get details of local stockists.
To keep your shoes off the floor why not get a hanging shoe rack with multi-purpose compartments?
It hangs over any thickness of wardrobe rail and fastens with Velcro.
Machine washable, this little life-saver can be found at Argos for £6.90.
CAREER PROSPECTS
I'm studying for my A levels at sixth form college and am very interested in pursuing a career in fashion writing and styling.
However, I've no idea what qualifications I need or if there are any courses available.
Can you help?
 Tara Rubins, London NW3 
A good specific training is an asset to anyone interested in pursuing a career in the highly competitive fashion industry.
To be a fashion writer, you must have good writing skills — it's not enough simply to like clothes.
When it comes to styling, artistic flair and imagination are essential.
The London College of Fashion offers a variety of courses including a two year BTEC/Higher Diploma in Design for Fashion Writing and a two year diploma for Fashion Styling.
You need 5 GCSE O Levels (including Art) as well as an A Level pass in English (or a relevant BTEC diploma).
For further information write to Maria Holmes, Fashion Career Promoter, London College of Fashion, 20 John Princes Street, London W1M 0BJ (071 629 9401).
Central St Martin's College has a wide variety of BA degree courses.
Contact Wendy Dagworthy, Course Director, Central St Martin's College of Art and Design, Southampton Row, WC1B 4AP (071 753 9090).
LIFELESS LOCKS
I recently had a perm which I'm very pleased with.
However, my hair is beginning to look rather dull and I'd like to get it back to peak condition as soon as possible.
Do you have any helpful suggestions?
 Anna Murphy, Ely 
Perming is one of the main causes of lifeless hair but it is avoidable if you use the correct products to protect and moisturise it.
Using a shampoo specially formulated for permed hair is one way to combat the damage caused.
Daniel Field does a range of organic and mineral hair products, available from major Boots stores nationwide.
You should try the Remoisturising Shampoo (£2.40 for 250ml), and condition with the Plant Remoisturising Treatment.
Both products have been produced specifically for permed, damaged hair and they replenish moisture lost in the perming process.
If you have a fashion or beauty problem, write to Jeff Banks,Clothes Show Magazine , 20–26 Brunswick Place, London N1 6DJ.
Sorry, no personal correspondence