

22COMMENT THE GUARDIANWednesday November 8 1989 More than just another disaster.
THIRTY FIVE people died and others were maimed for life in the Clapham rail disaster in December last year because work was done in a slovenly, haphazard way and was then left unchecked.
The disaster was all the more stunning because people had come to assume that such things didn't happen.
In most years, rail deaths are few: in some there are none at all.
Clapham, indeed, accounts for nearly half the 77 fatalities of the last ten years: compare that with the 5,000 deaths and 300,000 injuries every year on the roads.
Yet yesterday's report on the Clapham crash, confirming the picture which emerged throughout the Hidden inquiry, makes an event which seemed at the time totally unexpected look almost inevitable.
This was a system hopelessly under strain.
Under strain for a start because it was technically ill-equipped to avert disaster or to cope with the consequences when disaster struck; under strain from commercial pressures which, as the inquiry puts it, ‘compromised’ safety; under strain above all because the people on the spot couldn't or wouldn't cope, were weary from gruesome working hours (the senior signal technician who heads the list of the culpable had had only one day off in the past 13 weeks), lacked adequate training, or simply couldn't be bothered.
The bulk of the blame for all that is placed on British Rail, which knowingly permitted these things to continue.
Though individuals are nailed, the greatest villain of all is the system.
In a desperately competitive climate, where anyone bright and competent could go down the road and pick up a better paid job with kinder hours and more congenial working conditions from someone like British Telecom, the railways ran a service dependent on people who belonged to a narrow and inbred working culture, with outdated procedures of training and promotion, and an institutional reliance on overtime working, whose wholly disgraceful dimensions are symbolised by the fact that maximum weekly hours were only recently cut to 72 hours a week.
The Transport Secretary, Mr Cecil Parkinson, assured the Commons yesterday that financial considerations would not stand in the way of implementing Sir Anthony Hidden's 93 recommendations.
On the technical side, remedial work is in many cases already on the way.
But the job of lifting the standards of people employed, giving them proper training, and paying a wage which breaks dependence on overtime and lifts morale: this together must far exceed the costs of the technology, and it isn't by any means clear what the bill will be or where the money will come from.
All of which is not just a problem for a properly penitent British Rail: it's a problem for government too.
Government fixes the format in which BR has to work; and if, as the Hidden report attests, many of its problems today reflect lack of past planning, lack of farsighted investment, living from hand to mouth, then that is not just BR's doing.
Government compounds all these problems when it sets down working parameters which fail to reflect the value the country gets from a system that is run efficiently, can shift people to destinations with exemplary speed and safety — as Europe consistently demonstrates.
It is sad, and somewhat ominous, that so little of that should have been reflected in the sombre statement which Mr Parkinson made in the House yesterday..
A service in chaos.
THE nation's ambulance service was in manifest chaos yesterday.
There was no service in London, with all 71 stations and 455 vehicles off the road.
The only accident and emergency relief was provided by the police, part-time St John ambulance volunteers running 20 vehicles, and the Red Cross.
Outside the capital, accident and emergency services were being provided in most areas, but the ban on emergency work was tightened.
The service was facing its biggest crisis since the ambulances came to a stop in the Winter of Discontent ten years ago.
Like Labour in 1979, the Conservatives have put military ambulances on standby.
They move in today.
What has gone wrong?
There are three key causes of the shambles: Mr Kenneth Clarke; the failure to separate emergency from non-emergency work; and the Whitley Council negotiating machinery.
The Health Secretary accused the unions of ‘posturing and pretending’ to run a 999 service yesterday.
He was right.
By refusing to keep open two-way radio links, the crews had effectively ended a proper emergency service.
The move was signalled last week and, true to their promised response, management suspended the workers involved in the disruption.
But ‘posturing and pretending’ went far beyond the unions.
Mr Clarke has been indulging in just that himself, putting up the luckless Duncan Nichol, chief executive of the health service, to take the initial flak under the pretence that the dispute is not his direct responsibility.
Yet it was Mr Clarke, not Mr Nichol, who was involved in the critical decisions — the cash limit for the NHS, the 6.5 per cent offer to ambulance workers (compared to seven per cent for nurses, eight per cent for doctors and nine per cent for ancillary workers); and today's introduction of military ambulances.
Ambulance workers on emergency work do deserve a much higher increase.
They have progressed far beyond routine first aid.
Their paramedical skills cover highly technical procedures: intubation, infusion and defebrillation.
The crews are able to resuscitate heart attack patients, replace fluid intraveneously after severe blood loss, and insert tubes to maintain air supplies in unconconscious casualties.
Yet the ambulance worker is only being offered £10,000, when a fire officer is being given £13,000 and a Metropolitan police constable can earn £25,000.
But only two million out of the 20 million journeys which ambulance crews carry out each year are emergency calls.
Nine out of 10 are routine calls, many of which could be carried out by mini cabs.
Mr Duncan Nichol wants to separate the emergency from the non-emergency work.
He is right to pursue this line.
Wiltshire and Northumbria have already shown how much can be achieved.
The ramshackle Whitley Council negotiating machinery is the other reason why the ambulance workers have lost out.
Until this year, the three independent review bodies which make recommendations for nurses, doctors and the professions allied to medicine have given much higher awards than the Whitley Councils.
As Lord McCarthy noted some 13 years ago, the management side of the councils comprise ‘employers who do not pay and paymasters who do not employ.’
A much more flexible system which would allow local managers to negotiate local rates — on a national pay spine — is needed.
A crisis; an agenda for reform and honesty.
One Mr Clarke cannot duck away from if he wants to avoid a second Winter of Discontent..
Opening, closing.
PRINCE CHARLES is jolly good at opening things.
He needs to be for the next four days in Hong Kong, because he will be hard at work cutting ribbons and laying foundation stones.
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, the Hong Kong Island Divisional Headquarters of the Red Cross, the new Cultural Centre, and many more.
He is even re-opening the already opened Eastern Harbour tunnel and subway crossing.
It is all standard royal stuff, but not much help to the millions who fear that Hong Kong will not remain open after 1997.
The whole point of a visit to Hong Kong now, five months after Tiananmen Square, should be to declare with royal authority that Britain shares the concerns of the Hong Kong people and is determined to do something about them.
There was already a rather perfunctory air to the Queen's visit three years ago, as if it were just a required coda to her tour of China.
When the Prince and Princess of Wales quite rightly scrapped their tour of the mainland, they had the opportunity to make a contrasting point in Hong Kong.
Unless they can say something relevant in the next four days, the many Hong Kong critics who believe the visit is a waste of dollars will be absolutely right.
It did not help at all that upon arrival yesterday the royal couple instantly touched base in that comforting symbol of past British power, the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank.
If there is a failure of imagination to use the royal visit creatively it will also be a failure of nerve.
Britain still cannot decide when to play the mandarinate game of silence with the Chinese and when to break the rules (as Beijing does all the time.)
The ideal tactics should be a mixture of both, but only if a clear message can be communicated to the Hong Kong people that someone is standing up for them somewhere.
Instead the latest developments in Sino-British relations have left them even more confused than before.
China claims that the Hong Kong Government recently gave a written commitment to limit the activities of the pro-democracy movement in the territory.
The government denies this, but has published the text of a letter from its Political Adviser to the New China News Agency (Beijing's embassy in Hong Kong) suggesting that it did.
In a tone of meek appeasement, the letter draws attention to the arrest by Hong Kong police of anti-China demonstrators outside the agency's National Day reception.
It also reminds Beijing that permission has been refused for local protesters to erect a replica Statue of Democracy on a permanent site.
It ends by assuring Beijing that the Hong Kong Government will have ‘a prudent regard for the special circumstances of Hong Kong and the interests and concerns of the Chinese Government.’
Meanwhile the flood of letters of a very different sort from anxious Hong Kong citizens to this and every other newspaper office continues.
So do the Chinese press statements asserting that Hong Kong is ‘entirely a business between China and Britain’ and should not be discussed, formally or informally, at any international forum.
The only two Hong Kong legislators who consistently dare to speak out, Mr Martin Lee and Mr Szeto Wah, have been threatened with expulsion from the committee now drafting China's post-1997 Basic Law.
Our latest Foreign Secretary has yet to publicly pick up the file marked Hong Kong.
There is still endless dithering on how broad a ‘safety net’ Britain will extend to its citizens.
They may rightly feel that it is all really rather appalling.
Letters to the Editor
Black set to be US governor.
THE black Democratic candidate for Virginia state governor, Mr Douglas Wilder, was heading for an historic victory last night, writes Simon Tisdall in Richmond, Virginia.
If he wins, it will be the first time a black person has been elected to a US state governorship.
He is likely to be thrust into the national political limelight.
With 35 per cent of the precincts declaring, Mr Wilder had 51 per cent of the vote.
The Republican candidate, Mr Marshall Coleman, polled 49 per cent.
Mr Wilder won strong support among women and gained 44 per cent of the white vote, according to a CBS exit poll.
The poll also pointed to a clean sweep for the Democrats in elections for lieutenant-governor and attorney-general.
In New York, television computer projections suggested Mr David Dinkins, a Democrat, would become the first black mayor of the city, beating the Republican, Mr Rudolph Giuliani.
East German crisis grows after cabinet steps down.
By Anna Tomforde in Bonn
EAST Germany's embattled government resigned last night in a surprise step foreshadowing important changes in the make-up of the Communist Party's powerful politburo and policy shifts in response to continuing popular pressure.
The resignation of the Communist-dominated cabinet was announced at a press conference by the newly-appointed government spokesman, Mr Wolfgang Meyer.
As he spoke, several thousand East Germans demonstrated outside the central committee building in East Berlin where the politburo was locked in critical talks.
The government's resignation is the most sweeping political change in East Germany's 40-year history.
Commentators said Mr Egon Krenz, the new party leader and head of state, and the politburo would now have to act swiftly to call free elections as the only way out of the crisis.
The Bonn government said the resignation was insufficient and free elections must follow.
The stepping down of the government followed resignation calls from all five of East Germany's minor political parties, and from a deputy minister of culture.
They said the cabinet's resignation could only be a first step in an attempt to regain credibility.
Led by the Prime Minister, Mr Willi Stoph, aged 75, the government will continue in a caretaker role until a new cabinet is chosen.
The demonstrators again demanded that Mr Krenz should step down.
They also pressed for free elections.
It had become increasingly clear over the last few days that the anger of East Germans is focused on the Communist Party and that it can only be a question of time before the party has to relinquish its leading role and allow political competition.
The 160-member central committee today discusses changes in policy and the country's leadership.
The East German leadership's dilemma was underlined by mass demonstrations in a dozen cities on Monday night and the continuing flight of young East Germans yesterday through Czechoslovakia.
Since Saturday, 30,000 refugees have reached West Germany, crossing the border at a rate of about 200 an hour.
Mr Meyer implored East Germans to remain.
‘Our Socialist fatherland needs each and every one.’
A leading East Berlin churchman, Mr Manfred Stolpe, said he feared Mr Krenz's reform offers had already been overtaken by events and people's hopes.
Mr Stolpe said East Germans had recently discovered their power, and Mr Krenz had not succeeded in restoring the leadership's credibility.
In further pressure on East German leaders, academics at the influential Potsdam Academy sent an open letter to the central committee.
It said that ‘the party's ignorant and arrogant behaviour over the years towards reserved and moderate criticism provoked the crisis.’
Meanwhile, there were signs last night that the Interior Ministry is about to recognise the country's biggest opposition group, New Forum.
For the first time last night, the official ADN news agency published a statement by the group, and a regional newspaper printed a ‘catalogue’ of New Forum demands yesterday.
An East German parliamentary committee yesterday dismissed a draft travel law, saying that the 30 days' travel to be granted a year in no way met people's expectations.
Mr Krenz has already announced the dismissal of five ‘old guard’ politburo members, including the hardline Interior Minister, General Erich Mielke.
But it is widely expected that further heads will have to roll if the discredited Communist Party is to retrieve the situation.
Challenge for Krenz, page 23 Bonn ‘will benefit from refugee influx’, page 10
Army takes over in 999 dispute.
By Keith Harper, David Brindle and Patrick Wintour
TROOPS will be used to provide emergency ambulance cover in London from this afternoon in what the unions yesterday described as a political attempt by the Government to escalate the dispute.
Army ambulances were put on standby although government sources last night admitted they had no idea who would drive them.
A number of army drivers and some civilian Ministry of Defence drivers are available, but not enough to cover a 24-hour period.
Moreover, none of the possible drivers have any knowledge of inner London routes.
Health service managers fear the project will fail.
Union leaders said drivers would need police navigators.
The decision to use the army was taken by the Health Secretary, Mr Kenneth Clarke, despite the fact that ambulance staff are still offering emergency cover.
Mr Clarke's decision followed the suspension of 2,500 staff at 71 London stations for refusing to work normally.
The crews want an increase on a 6.5 per cent pay offer.
Ministers and unions last night said they despaired of ending the dispute.
A last minute attempt by the London employers to open talks this morning was turned down by union leaders.
Mr Duncan Nichol, the NHS chief executive, told the Guardian yesterday that the Government's negotiating position is that it wants to split the service so crews with medical skills can earn extra money and non-emergency services can be contracted out.
Mr Nichol said the Government wants to settle the dispute with a deal that would allow local managers to top up the pay of crews with paramedical skills in a move towards the separation of the 999 service from routine ambulance work.
It would give designated emergency crews the chance to achieve pay parity with firemen.
According to Mr Nichol, such a deal could increase pay rates in London by 30 per cent and elsewhere by 20 per cent.
It would be a step towards a likely decision to put non-emergency services out to contract.
This has already begun in some parts of the country.
The idea was immediately rejected by the main health service union, Nupe, which said last night the Government was trying to split the ambulance staff.
‘We want a pay deal now to solve all our problems and a formula which would prevent us from taking action in future,’ a spokesman said.
The Government's formal negotiating stance on pay was set out by Mr Clarke, who said there was no question of increasing the general 6.5 per cent offer.
The troops will join the police, who were reluctantly involved yesterday after the London ambulance service said it could not cope.
The employers admitted troops would provide an inferior service.
Mr Clarke said: ‘I see no reason why the NHS management should give a higher offer in response to industrial action and then have to close down beds and reduce patient services to pay for it.’
Mr Nichol, however, said there was ‘plenty to talk about’ including the idea of a local flexibility deal, put at the conciliation service, Acas, two weeks ago.
The proposed deal would be modelled on a settlement this year for 130,000 NHS administrative and clerical staff.
Mr Nichol said ambulance staff could receive pay premiums worth more than £3,000, in recognition of extra training, local recruitment problems and other factors such as merit or long service.
Only 10 per cent of the 20 million annual ambulance journeys are emergencies.
At present, crews typically rotate between 999 and routine work, making it difficult to designate crews for higher pay.
It is the first time troops have been brought in during an industrial dispute since 1978.
Mr Clarke told the Commons he was doing it with great reluctance.
Mr Robin Cook, Labour's health spokesman, said Mr Clarke had given no good explanation for his precipitate action.
He advised arbitration.
Mr Chris Spry, for the London ambulance service, said the army's help was sought because crews were not answering radio emergency calls.
The police could only cover accidents, not doctors' referrals.
The action in London had an immediate effect elsewhere, particularly in Greater Manchester and Wales.
Soldiers in front line, page 3; Politics, page 6; Leader comment, page 22; Duncan Nichol interview, page 23
Black set to be US governor.
THE black Democratic candidate for Virginia state governor, Mr Douglas Wilder, was heading for an historic victory last night, according to a CBS exit poll, writes Simon Tisdall in Richmond, Virginia.
If confirmed, it will be the first time a black person has been elected to a US state governorship.
The poll of 60 voting precincts gave Mr Wilder 55 per cent of the vote.
The Republican candidate, Mr Marshall Coleman, polled 45 per cent.
Mr Wilder won strong support among women and gained 44 per cent of the white vote.
The poll also pointed to a clean sweep for the Democrats in elections for lieutenant-governor and attorney-general.
In New York, a high turnout convinced supporters of Mr David Dinkins, a Democrat, that he will succeed in his attempt to be the city's first black mayor.
Early exit polls suggested that he had a 10-point lead over Mr Rudolph Giuliani, a Republican.
News in brief: ‘Millions lost’ in Rover sale.
The Department of Trade and Industry may have lost millions of pounds over the sale of the Rover Group to British Aerospace, a National Audit Office report is thought to have concluded.
Page 24.
School funding campaign.
The National Union of Teachers has launched a multi-million pound advertising campaign to win public backing for greater investment in education.
Page 8.
Black MP on front bench.
The Labour leader, Mr Neil Kinnock, has appointed Mr Paul Boateng to his front bench Treasury team, the first black MP to be given a front bench post.
Page 7.
CO2 freeze blocked.
Mrs Thatcher yesterday flew to the US to address the UN on the environment as Britain blocked a global freeze on carbon dioxide emissions.
Page 24.
Runcie swings synod.
A last-minute call for courage by the Archbishop of Canterbury yesterday pushed the General Synod to approve ordination of women priests.
Page 24.
Birmingham Six setback.
The Home Secretary will not reopen the Birmingham Six pub bomb case in spite of pleas by leading churchmen.
Page 2.
Nuclear safety cash loss.
More than £20 million in research costs has been lost on an abandoned nuclear safety programme.
Page 2
Rail staff face disciplinary action as Clapham report criticises BR.
By Michael Smith and Alan Travis
DISCIPLINARY action is to be taken against 11 rail workers after the official report into the Clapham Junction train crash criticised British Rail for allowing working practices to slip to ‘unacceptable and dangerous’ levels.
The report by Sir Anthony Hidden QC, published yesterday, said there is a ‘collective liability which lies with British Rail’.
The Director of Public Prosecutions will decide in the next few weeks if BR must face corporate manslaughter charges over the disaster on December 12 which claimed 35 lives.
The crash in south London was caused by faulty wiring undertaken by the 11 signal engineers and managers during the signal modernisation.
But Sir Anthony found no common link with later crashes at Purley and Glasgow.
However, the driver of a train involved in the Purley crash earlier this year has been charged with manslaughter.
He is due to appear in court on November 16.
While the report does not specifically link the disaster with cuts in government funds, ministers will be under pressure to demonstrate that safety is not being impaired by tight cash limits.
The results of recent behind-the-scenes attempts by Mr Cecil Parkinson, the Transport Secretary, to win extra funds from the Treasury for transport infrastructure are due to be unveiled this week.
The BR chairman, Sir Robert Reid, said last night the board accepted in full the findings and 93 recommendations of the Hidden report.
It catalogued ‘positively dangerous’ work practices, poor management, inadequate training and supervision and inherent weakness in the safety culture of BR in a list of 16 separate ‘relevant errors’where things had gone wrong over a number of years.
Sir Anthony stopped short of blaming BR or the Government for creating the climate but added: ‘There must be a better way of doing things.’
Mr Parkinson is to meet Sir Robert today for discussions on how to meet the ‘demanding schedule’ imposed by Sir Anthony's recommendations.
Mr Parkinson told the Commons yesterday that BR would be given three months to report on its progress.
Mr Parkinson has ordered BR to implement the safety recommendations, including installation of airline-type black boxes in rail cabs, more safety inspectors, train cab radios and research into rolling stock.
In a separate development, BR yesterday contacted the four rail unions asking for urgent talks on a review of pay and working practices in its signalling and telecommunications division.
It hopes to make a fresh attempt to limit excessive overtime, heavily criticised in the report.
Sir Anthony said the overtime system was ‘outdated and wasteful’.
He also warned the present pay structure was failing to provide the correct size and quality of workforce.
Mr John Prescott, Labour's transport spokesman, condemned government transport policies, saying signalling staff cuts were a direct result of the 51 per cent cut in BR finances in the past five years.
Sir Anthony said BR should ensure the organisational framework exists ‘to prevent commercial considerations of a business-led railway from compromising safety’.
Mr Parkinson told the Commons in response: ‘BR will need to consider what further expenditure will be required.
I can assure the House that finance will not stand in the way of implementation of the report.’
Sir Robert last night rejected calls for his resignation and explained that 50 of the recommendations made by Sir Anthony were already in hand or implemented at an estimated cost of £20 million.
‘As I said after the accidents at Clapham and Purley, my job as I see it is to make sure that we implement all the recommendations.’
But he also disclosed that the 11 BR employees singled out for specific criticism by the Hidden inquiry would face disciplinary action, ranging from reprimand to suspension or dismissal.
Ten have been moved to other jobs, including the senior signalman, Mr Brian Hemingway, who was named as being directly responsible for the faulty wiring at Clapham Junction.
Mr Clifford Hale, a senior employee in the signals and telecommunications division, resigned yesterday afternoon.
Sir Robert said Mr Hale, who had worked for BR for 30 years and was called the captain of the ship in the Hidden report, had indicated he wished to take early retirement.
The BR watchdog body, the Central Transport Consultative Committee, said last night it was evident the crash was caused by human error, although it became clear that arrangements for supervising and auditing the quality of work were ‘lamentably defective’.
‘Slipshod’ BR, page 5; Leader comment, page 22
Threat to sue by stewardess.
Mrs Lynn Hooper, aged 25, of Eastleigh, Hampshire, the British Airways stewardess alleged to have sold champagne to passengers, is to leave BA and accept £9,500 compensation.
She is threatening to sue Mr Peter Owen, BA director of operations, unless he retracts a claim that the offer of her job back a ‘second chance.’.
Children hurt in blast.
Twenty-seven schoolchildren were injured in an explosion at Hartsdown leisure centre in Margate, Kent, yesterday while watching firemen fighting a blaze there.
£400,000 van hijack.
An armed man yesterday hijacked a security van and stole £400,000 after his woman accomplice drove their car into the back of the Group 4 van in central London, police said..
Liver patient improves.
The condition of the liver transplant patient Mrs Aisling Barnett has improved since she was given a Japanese drug, which is still undergoing clinical trials, to stop her body rejecting her new liver.
Girl snatched.
Police issued a nationwide alert after Emma Louise Hyde, aged six, a ward of court, was snatched from outside her school in Cheadle Hulme, Cheshire.
They want to trace her natural parents, Paul and Susan Gort..
InkInc regains grant.
Sheffield University students have overturned the decision of their student union executive and voted to give a £2,700 grant to the magazine InkInc, winner of this year's Guardian/NUS student media award for best magazine.
Waddington will vote for hanging.
By John Carvel Home Affairs Editor
THE Home Secretary has told colleagues that he expects a fresh Commons debate on the death penalty before the next election and that he would speak and vote for its restoration as a deterrent for some murders.
While Mr David Waddington does not intend to use his office to promote capital punishment, and will maintain the tradition of a free vote for MPs, his intervention in a renewed debate would provide the most passionate support for it from the Government front bench since it was abolished in 1965.
The vehicle for raising the issue again will be the Criminal Justice Bill which Mr Waddington expects to introduce in the 1990/91 parliamentary session.
The bill's main purpose will be to encourage non-custodial punishment in the community for less serious offenders, but ministers believe that the opportunity presented by debate on the measure will be taken to promote the cause of hanging.
In the Commons vote in June last year a majority of 123 was against any change, and MPs believed the issue had been settled for this Parliament.
Mr Waddington believes that the death penalty would offer the public protection in deterring some people from murder.
Whether he wants to limit the penalty to certain categories of murder or whether he favours leaving its use to the discretion of the courts and the Home Secretary is not clear.
He is understood to be pressing ahead with the rest of the agenda set by his predecessor, Mr Douglas Hurd, including a white paper proposing less use of imprisonment for non-violent offenders.
He is also expected to confirm Mr Hurd's decision to ignore the European Court's ruling against seven-day detentions under the Prevention of Terrorism Act.
Home Office crime statistics for 1988 published yesterday show that the peak age of offending by male offenders rose from 15 to 18, largely because fewer juveniles were charged with shoplifting.
Birmingham Six case stays closed.
By John Carvel and Paul Hoyland
MR DAVID Waddington, the Home Secretary, has decided not to reopen the Birmingham Six pub bombings case despite an appeal by the city's leading churchmen.
Mr Waddington is prepared to accept a request by Mr Gerry Collins, the Irish Foreign Minister, to discuss the case.
But Home Office officials indicated that, in the absence of new evidence, Mr Waddington would make it clear that he would be unable to take any initiative.
Campaigners for the Birmingham Six had hoped that a new Home Secretary might reconsider the convictions in the light of the discovery that the confessions of those convicted of the Guildford pub bombings had been fabricated, and the subsequent release of the four.
Mr Waddington is understood to take the view that the Court of Appeal last year reassessed the Birmingham confessions before concluding that they were properly taken and voluntarily given.
He stands by the decision of his predecessor, Mr Douglas Hurd, that there is no need for further investigation.
The question of whether the convictions were safe, and the need for a review to allay public anxiety in the light of the Guildford findings, is raised in a statement by the joint presidents of the Birmingham Council of Christian Churches: the Most Reverend Maurice Couve de Murville, Archbishop of Birmingham; the Right Reverend Mark Santer, Bishop of Birmingham; and the Reverend David Good, representing the Birmingham Free Churches.
They doubt whether the Court of Appeal would reach the same conclusion today as it had last year about the reliability of the convictions, since the Guildford case had raised questions on the adequacy of reviews of possible wrongful conviction.
They also note that an inquiry is being conducted into alleged malpractice by the serious crime squad of the West Midlands force.
‘Justice is not served by even the slightest suspicion of injustice,’ the Rt Rev Santer said yesterday.
Twenty-one people were killed and 167 injured in the explosions at two Birmingham city centre pubs in 1974.
Kinnock reshuffle brings back Clare Short and puts more women into traditional male jobs Boateng first black to join a front bench.
By Patrick Wintour
THE Labour leader, Mr Neil Kinnock, made history yesterday when he appointed Mr Paul Boateng to his front bench Treasury team, the first black MP to be given a front bench post in Parliament.
Mr Boateng's appointment was part of a reshuffle announced late last night by Mr Kinnock of his middle and junior ranking front bench spokesmen following the Shadow Cabinet elections last week.
Mr Kinnock also sprang a surprise by restoring Ms Clare Short to the front bench less than a year after she resigned as spokeswoman on Employment in an acrimonious row with Mr Kinnock over the party's stance on the Prevention of Terrorism Act.
Ms Short is to join the social security team, now led by Mr Michael Meacher.
Other important moves include the transfer from the Northern Ireland team of Ms Mo Mowlam, the MP for Redcar, who joins Mr Gordon Brown's new industry team as spokeswoman on City affairs.
Her promotion, following last week's appointment of Ms Margaret Beckett as shadow Treasury Chief Secretary, underlines Mr Kinnock's willingness to put women MPs into subject areas traditionally regarded as male preserves.
Mr Roger Stott, a member of the industry team moves to Northern Ireland in a straight swop with Ms Mowlam.
The other new appointees to the front bench are Mr Nigel Griffiths, a former whip who joins the trade and industry team, Mr Elliot Morley, the MP for Scunthorpe, who will speak on agriculture, and Mr Tony Worthington, the MP for Clydebank and sponsor of the Right of Reply bill, who joins the Scottish team.
Mr John Garrett, the former Industry spokesman and MP for Norwich South, has been a given a new job of trying to improve Labour's support in the South.
He will report directly to Mr Kinnock.
Mr Henry McLeish, who was a Scottish front bench spokesman, is transferred to employment under the leadership of Mr Tony Blair.
A total of 81 Labour MPs, including 11 women, now hold front bench posts, one of the largest numbers ever recorded.
No MP was dismissed in the reshuffle.
Attention however last night focussed inevitably on Mr Boateng's appointment.
The 38-year-old Methodist son of a Ghanaian cabinet Minister, Mr Boateng is a former solicitor who has become a strong supporter of Mr Kinnock's leadership since becoming an MP.
A GLC councillor from 1981 and chairman of its once villified Police Committee under the regime of Mr Ken Livingstone, he is one of four leftwing black Labour MPs elected in the l987 general election.
He enlivened his acceptance speech as MP for Brent South with the words ‘Brent today, Soweto tomorrow’.
Since becoming an MP, he has used his acute brain and mischievous wit to ridicule Tory MPs.
His trademark is an endless supply of baggy designer suits, but his modernity belies an old fashioned belief in diligence and grasp of detail.
Favour was first bestowed upon him by Mr Kinnock in l987 when he was appointed to the policy review group on democracy for the individual and the community convened by Roy Hattersley.
Although he never made his views public, he is believed to have argued in favour of the review group supporting some form of electoral reform.
There was strong criticism amongst black Labour Party members last year when no black was appointed to the front bench in that year's reshuffle and again when Mr Alistair Darling, the MP for Edinburgh Central, was given the race relations brief.
Mr Boateng attracted some notoriety recently when he appeared on the front page of the News of the World wearing nothing but a G-string.
The photograph had been taken some years ago at a GLC panto.
‘Millions lost’ in Rover sale.
The Department of Trade and Industry may have lost millions of pounds over the sale of the Rover Group to British Aerospace, according to a National Audit Office report.
Page 24.
Emissions freeze blocked.
Mrs Thatcher yesterday flew to the US to address the UN on the environment, as Britain blocked a global freeze on carbon dioxide emissions.
Page 24.
Black MP on front bench.
Mr Paul Boateng has been appointed to Labour's front bench Treasury team, the first black MP to be given a front bench post in Parliament.
Page 7.
Runcie swings synod.
A last-minute call for courage by the Archbishop of Canterbury yesterday pushed the General Synod to approve ordination of women priests.
Page 24.
Birmingham Six setback.
The Home Secretary will not reopen the Birmingham Six pub bombings case in spite of pleas by the city's leading churchmen.
Page 2.
War criminals' escape.
Evidence has been uncovered showing how Britain played a leading role in preventing hundreds of Italian war criminals standing trial.
Page 8
Army to take emergency calls.
By Keith Harper, David Brindle and Patrick Wintour
TROOPS will be used to provide emergency ambulance cover in London from this afternoon in what the unions yesterday described as a political attempt by the Government to escalate the dispute.
The decision to use the army was taken by the Health Secretary, Mr Kenneth Clarke, despite the fact that ambulance staff are not on strike.
They are still offering to provide an emergency service.
Mr Duncan Nichol, the NHS chief executive, told the Guardian that the Government's negotiating position is that it wants to split the service so crews with medical skills can earn extra money and non-emergency services can be contracted out.
Mr Clarke's decision followed the suspension of 2,500 staff at 71 London stations for refusing to work normally.
The crews want an increase on a 6.5 per cent pay offer.
A late night attempt to resume talks today by the London ambulance employers ended in failure just before midnight when the unions rejected the call.
The unions' chief negotiator, Mr Roger Poole, said earlier on television that emergency services would be guaranteed without conditions.
Mr Nichol said the Government wants to settle the dispute with a deal that would allow local managers to top up the pay of crews with paramedical skills in a move towards the separation of the 999 service from routine work.
It would give designated emergency crews the chance to achieve pay parity with firemen.
According to Mr Nichol, such a deal could increase pay rates in London by 30 per cent and elsewhere by 20 per cent.
The idea was immediately rejected by the main health service union, Nupe, which said last night the Government was trying to split the ambulance staff.
‘We want a pay deal now to solve all our problems and a formula which would prevent us from taking action in future,’ a spokesman said.
The Government's formal negotiating stance on pay was set out by Mr Clarke, who said there was no question of increasing the general 6.5 per cent offer.
The troops will join the police, who were reluctantly involved yesterday after the London ambulance service said it could not cope.
The employers admitted troops would provide an inferior service.
Mr Clarke said: ‘I see no reason why the NHS management should give a higher offer in response to industrial action and then have to close down beds and reduce patient services to pay for it.’
Mr Nichol, however, said there was ‘plenty to talk about’, including the idea of a local flexibility deal, put at the conciliation service, Acas, two weeks ago.
The proposed deal would be modelled on a settlement this year for 130,000 NHS administrative and clerical staff.
Mr Nichol said ambulance staff could receive pay premiums worth more than £3,000, in recognition of extra training, local recruitment problems and other factors such as merit or long service.
Only 10 per cent of the 20 million annual ambulance journeys are emergencies.
At present, crews typically rotate between 999 and routine work, making it difficult to designate crews for higher pay.
It is the first time troops have been brought in during a dispute since 1978.
Mr Clarke told the Commons he was doing it with great reluctance.
Mr Robin Cook, Labour's health spokesman, said Mr Clarke had given no good explanation for his precipitate action.
He advised arbitration.
The House was called to order at one stage by the Speaker, Mr Bernard Weatherill, after Mr Clarke accused crews of waiting at stations ‘pretending’ to be ready for work.
Mr Chris Spry, for the London ambulance service, said the army's help was sought because crews were not using their radios to answer emergency calls.
The police could only cover accidents, not doctors referrals.
He challenged the unions to lift restrictions on radios, the movement of staff between stations and the carrying of seriously ill patients.
If this was done, the army would not be employed.
The action in London had an immediate effect elsewhere as crews began to protest at the Government's intervention.
Greater Manchester shop stewards agreed to halt all routine work in protest against suspensions and Welsh crews promised to stage work-ins if suspensions went ahead.
Soldiers in front line, page 3; Politics, page 6; Leader comment, page 22; Duncan Nichol interview, page 23
Army needed ‘to aid police’.
By Keith Harper and David Fairhall
THE South West Thames regional health authority requested the army be drafted in for ambulance work when it became clear the police could not cope, according to ambulance mangement.
Mr Chris Spry, for the London ambulance service, said the police were unable to meet the demand for accident services, particularly those phoned through to hospitals from family doctors.
About 50 military vehicles will supplement 53 from the police and voluntary organisations, such as the St John Ambulance.
The sickest patients will be carried by voluntary groups, the next by the army, with the least ill by the police.
The army will be based at police stations and will be allocated calls via the police.
Of the 103 vehicles in use, 60 will serve London north of the Thames, and 43 the south.
Normally the London ambulance service maintains 175 emergency ambulances on duty during the day and 75 at night.
All military and voluntary vehicles will be given some of London's equipment, including special orthopaedic stretchers and chairs.
Mr Tom Crosby, chief officer for London, agreed that the level of care would drop but insisted that the army crews had some medical training and were not basic infantry men pressed into service.
The unions were challenged to lift restrictions on radios, the movement of staff between stations and the carrying of seriously-ill patients.
If these concessions were made the army would not be employed.
Mr Chris Humphreys, London secretary of the National Union of Public Employees, warned that bringing in the troops would cause long delays and unnecessary suffering.
Army personnel did not know their way around London and would need police escorts.
He was sure that the army would not be welcomed by the public.
He said: ‘It is obvious that Kenneth Clarke intends to try to starve our members back to work.
The Government cannot pretend to be concerned with security at army barracks and then, without regard for the soldiers, put them on the streets of London as easy targets for the terrorists.’
Management yesterday began suspending ambulance staff in retaliation to the work to rule tactics of the unions.
The troops' intervention in the ambulance strike is being authorised under a Whitehall arrangement which enables one department to request ‘military aid to the civil ministries’ from the Ministry of Defence and pay the bill afterwards.
This arrangement means there is no need for Mrs Thatcher to consider declaring a State of Emergency, as Mr Heath's government did during the 1973 miners' strike.
That would only be necessary if the troops had been requisitioning other people's equipment.
Mrs Thatcher has never declared a state of emergency.
Troops have been used more than 30 times since the second world war to replace striking workers.
During the 1970s they were called out to clear hundreds of tons rubbish from the streets of Glasgow during the 1975 dustmen's strike.
Two years later dozens of Green Goddess military fire engines were brought out of storage to cover the firemen's strike.
During Mrs Thatcher's administration, troops have found themselves involved in five industrial disputes — to operate prisons in 1980/81, to drive ambulances in 1981 and 1982, to cover for civil servants during a dispute at the Coulport submarine base in 1981, and to help with car parking during the rail strike of 1982.
Richard Norton-Taylor adds: Contingency plans for the use of troops in ambulance disputes were drawn up shortly after the Government came to power in 1979, Whitehall documents show.
They were drafted by the Ministry of Defence and Department of Health.
Department of Health officials wrote to regional administrators in 1980 with details of a new plan — code-named Bittern — providing for ‘the use of service ambulances and drivers in the event of an industrial dispute’— the decision now taken yesterday by ministers.
Two other plans, not activated now, were also drawn up.
One, code-named Concord, dealt with how the armed forces would drive NHS ambulances, and the other, code-named Lionel, with a limited service in a strike involving certain ancillary workers.
Brittan rebuts Thatcher terms for EC progress.
By Michael White, Chief Political Correspondent
ANOTHER Conservative heavyweight was publicly aligned against Mrs Thatcher over Europe last night when Sir Leon Brittan, vice-president of the European Commission, denounced ‘the dangerous illusion of total sovereignty’ as an impediment in battles for a free-market Europe already largely won.
He called for British entry into the Exchange Rate Mechanism in months rather than years and the creation of a European central bank with ‘one pound equals ‘x’ ecus’on bank notes.
He even envisaged the absorption of East Germany into the Twelve, not as a new state but as an ‘extension of the territory of an existing member’.
As the Prime Minister reproached Mr Nigel Lawson for resigning the Chancellorship ‘with such suddenness and haste’— and over personality not policy — her isolation was highlighted by the ex-minister whose enforced resignation in the Westland affair of 1986 is being likened by disaffected MPs to the recent sacrifice of Mr Lawson.
Delivering the annual Granada Lecture, Sir Leon outlined a programme for achieving a prosperous and non-bureaucratic European Community, but its main thrust amounted to a rebuttal of her highly-personalised terms for further progress towards economic and monetary union.
It is likely to intensify pressure for flexibility in the summit run-up.
‘Sovereignty is not something that you either have or do not have, like a family heirloom which you take out and dust every now and then to make sure that it is still in your possession and still intact,’ Sir Leon said.
‘Sovereignty, rather, is in today's world a severely practical concept…the ability to have the maximum possible say in determining one's own future, in circumstances that actually exist.’
The former Home Secretary took common ground with Mrs Thatcher in opposing a Brussels-dominated and economically illiberal ‘Fortress Europe’ and went much further than Mr Lawson or the pro-European cabinet majority in calling for a central bank on the looser American rather than Bundesbank model.
But in even-handedly denouncing ardent Europhiles and Europhobes as ‘superannuated Sumo wrestlers’ he was, in effect, accusing Downing Street of being out of date— even on worker participation in industry and the Social Charter.
On both issues, he suggested, reality had long outstripped British rhetoric and Whitehall would do better bargaining on details than cold-shouldering the whole process.
Sir Leon's speech in London came as speculation bubbled away at Westminster about a possible challenge to Mrs Thatcher's leadership in the annual party election next month.
But the Conservative chairman, Mr Kenneth Baker, last night contrasted media talk of ‘a crisis of confidence’ with the ‘vote of confidence by the markets of the world’.
Government whips discounted talk of a cabal of dissidents meeting privately last night and likely attenders were similarly reticent.
‘Remember, it's like an occupied country for us,’ said one leftwing Conservative MP.
‘People meet in cells of two or three.’
Another backbencher, Sir Anthony Meyer, described himself as ‘a burnt offering’ who might stand against Mrs Thatcher if no one else would.
Unkind loyalists mocked him as ‘not so much of a stalking horse as a stalking donkey’ who would get only his own vote.
In the Commons Mr Neil Kinnock's demand that she tell the truth about Mr Lawson goaded Mrs Thatcher into saying: ‘If he had wanted to resign on a point of policy, I could have understood that…
But I find it totally incomprehensible that someone who has held the office of Chancellor with high standing for over six years should want to resign over a personality with such suddenness and haste.’
Despite her entreaties he had been ‘determined to go and go that day’.
The Prime Minister's hard-nosed stance to further challenges held the line with growls of loyalist support.
Sir Leon's was a more dangerous rebuttal.
Politics, page 7; Brittan on unification, page 10; Speech, page 14; Economics, page 15
Ministry knew of lead in milk ‘for weeks’.
By James Erlichman, Consumer Affairs Correspondent
AGRICULTURE ministry and Milk Marketing Board officials knew for weeks that milk contaminated with lead was on sale, Whitehall sources indicated yesterday.
Mr John Gummer, the Agriculture Minister, said yesterday that swift action was taken last weekend after the Dutch authorities informed him that tonnes of cattle feed contaminated with lead had been shipped to Britain.
But it later emerged that the first of three contaminated cargoes arrived on October 5.
Restriction orders banning cattle movement and sale of milk and meat have now been imposed on more than 300 farms, mostly in Cornwall and Devon but also in the Midlands.
More than 20 animals, mostly calves, have died from lead poisoning.
Tests on milk have revealed lead levels of 20 parts a billion, higher than normal but within government guidelines of 50 parts a billion.
The milk board insisted yesterday it was not aware of any problem until last Friday.
But routine screening of milk for contaminants should have disclosed higher lead levels by mid-October.
Sources say the lead contamination was first identified by ministry and board officials in ‘mid to late October’.
Rather than being thrown away, the contaminated milk was poured into tanks of clean milk to dilute the lead down to permissible levels.
The ministry said yesterday that it was first warned by the Dutch on November 1 that 550 tonnes of Indian rice bran contaminated with lead sulphate had come via Rotterdam to Teignmouth in Devon.
Fifty tonnes escaped a ministry ban and went to farms.
Dr David Clark, Labour's agriculture spokesman, said: ‘It was entirely irresponsible of the ministry to allow farmers for nearly a week to feed contaminated material to animals.
We suspect the problem is worse than Mr Gummer has admitted and we question why there was a delay in warning the public.’
He called on the Government to ensure that no more contaminated meat or milk is allowed to enter the food chain and demanded that all test results be published.
The ministry has faced criticism for permitting the sale of milk produced by cows injected with the experimental, genetically engineered drug BST as the identity of farms and dairies taking part in the experiments is kept secret.
UN peace force for Central America.
By Jane Rosen in New York
THE UN Security Council voted unanimously last night to send a peacekeeping force to Central America to cut off infiltration by contra rebels, monitor elections in Nicaragua and watch over developments in other sensitive areas — especially Honduras and El Salvador.
This is the first time the UN has dispatched a force so close to American borders.
The 625-strong observer force, which will have a six-month renewable mandate, is the first in the Western hemisphere.
The force is also intended to block weapons shipments sent from Honduras to Salvadorean rebels.
The initial call for UN action came from foreign ministers of the five Central American countries last spring.
They asked the Secretary General to set up a group to monitor compliance with Central American commitments to halt aid to rebel movements and to prevent the use of one state's territory for attacks on other states.
The US finally agreed to support the force after six months of negotiations.
However, the American ambassador, Mr Thomas Pickering, told the council yesterday that Washington's approval was based on the assumption that the force would take steps to halt aid for Salvadorean guerrillas.
The force's immediate task is to ensure free elections in Nicaragua, and the Nicaraguan delegates said they expected to play ‘a very positive role’.
The Nicaraguan ambassador said it should ‘contribute significantly to impeding the infiltration of contra forces into Nicaraguan territory’.
The force is known as Onuca — a Spanish acronym for US Observer Group For Central America.
It will be composed of observers from Spain, West Germany and Canada and is scheduled to be deployed in the area by the end of the month.
The Secretary-General, Mr Javier Perez de Cuellar, said he would cautiously deploy the peace force in stages.
‘The need for [the operation]is, if anything, greater now than before.’
MPs postpone decision on King's Cross.
By David Hencke Westminster Correspondent
THE King's Cross international railway terminal and property development was in the balance last night after MPs on the committee examining a private bill to approve the scheme decided to suspend a decision until December 5.
Their action comes three days after BR had to postpone for a year its bill to build a high-speed Channel tunnel rail link to central London.
The MPs had become increasingly sceptical of British Rail's demand that the bill go ahead before BR and Eurorail, the private-sector consortium, decide on the last section of the tunnel route.
Mr Bob Clay (Lab Sunderland N) asked what British Rail would do if it no longer ended in King's Cross and the terminal was not needed.
Mr Keith Welsby, a BR board member, argued that additional rail facilities would still be needed.
Labour filibuster move blocked Local Govt Bill.
Paul Nettleton.
THE GOVERNMENT moved last night to block a filibuster attempt by Labour MPs against the Local Government and Housing Bill which was threatening to extend Commons business into the small hours.
After lengthy backbench Opposition speeches had stretched out discussions, a government whip just after 11pm moved closure of debate, which Mr Bob Cryer (Lab.
Bradford S) condemned as ‘a deliberate act of censorship of the House of Commons.’
The first vote of the evening was taken just before 10pm on a Labour amendment to keep down rises in council rents, and was lost by 289 votes to 201 (Government majority 88).
It was preceded by lengthy backbench Opposition speeches which prompted Mr Christopher Chope, junior environment minister, to point out that he was the first government speaker for some four hours.
Mr Chope argued that Labour MPs had misunderstood the implications for council rents of changes to the way the Government provides subsidies.
For Labour, Mr Clive Soley said that there was a housing crisis, with people being squeezed between the collapse of the housing market under the weight of mortgage interest rates, and the Government's failure properly to maintain the council housing stock while forcing councils to increase rents.
Serb accuses ‘war culprit’.
LORD Aldington was yesterday pointed out in the high court as one of the ‘culprits’ guilty of sending thousands of Yugoslavs to their deaths in l945.
Dusan Zivkovic, aged 65, a Yugoslav Serb who was handed to the communists by the British but managed to escape, said he had come to court to find the culprits and ‘nail the bastards’ who had sent his fellow countrymen to their deaths.
Mr Charles Gray, QC, Lord Aldington's counsel, asked: ‘Have you come here to nail the bastards or to help to discover the truth?’
Mr Zivkovic replied: ‘Are you saying I was not sent to my death?’
Pointing at Lord Aldington across the courtroom, Mr Zivkovic said: ‘I don't know whether he is guilty.
Does he feel guilty?
I think he is guilty.
‘My daughters said I should come here to help clear this thing up, to find who really did this because unless it is cleared up then history will say that we were sent to our deaths by Britain, and that means the British people and the British army and they don't deserve that because it is out of character.’
Mr Gray said: ‘Don't poke your finger at Lord AldingtonDid you come here to nail him?’
Mr Zivkovic: ‘I think he is guilty.’
Mr Gray: ‘On what evidence?’
Mr Zivkovic, who was asked by the judge to be more polite, said: ‘I think he is guilty if he was chief of staff of V Corps at the time of the handing over.
Someone must have sent the papers and I can't see that the corporals did it.
I lost 28 men, simple peasants who had never heard of Karl Marx or Toby Low.’
Mr Zivkovic, a draughtsman who lived in Britain for 24 years after the war but now lives in Tasmania, Australia, was giving evidence for the defence in Lord Aldington's libel action over allegations by Mr Nikolai Tolstoy and Mr Nigel Watts that he is a war criminal responsible for the forced repatriation of 70,000 Cossacks and Yugoslavs.
Earlier, Mr Zivkovic, who was born in Croatia and witnessed the German and Italian invasions in 1941, said: ‘The Germans destroyed my country…they killed thousands of people.
The invasion was deadly, merciless and cruel.’
The Slovenes were a ‘small nation being squeezed between Italy and Germany.
But if you did not ‘love’ the Germans then you had had it.’
It made no sense for the British army to hand over Yugoslav royalists to Tito's communists, he said.
The hearing continues today.
War criminals kept from trial, page 8
Labour loses final bid to curb donations.
THE Government whipped its supporters into the Lords last night to defeat a final attempt by Labour to give shareholders the right to decide on company donations to political parties.
By 223 votes to 110 (Government majority 113) peers rejected an Opposition amendment to the Companies Bill, originally passed by the Lords but rejected later in the Commons.
This insisted that shareholders sanctioned such donations before they were made instead of only being able to discuss them afterwards.
Lord Williams of Elvel, Labour's trade and industry spokesman, said trade unionists could contract out of paying a political levy but shareholders could not contract out of paying a donation.
Lord Young, the deputy chairman of the Conservative Party, who piloted much of the bill through the Lords when he was Trade and Industry Secretary, said: ‘This amendment is only a mischievous attempt to gain party political advantage.’
It would make the conduct of business more difficult.
Lawson resignation ‘incomprehensible’ Question time.
Martin Linton.
THE Lawson affair rumbled on in the Commons yesterday with the Labour leader, Mr Neil Kinnock, asking the Prime Minister why she did not ‘tell the truth’ when she was asked why the former Chancellor of the Exchequer resigned by television interviewer Brian Walden.
The answer she gave was not that she didn't know Mr Lawson's stated reason for resigning, but that she found it incomprehensible.
‘If he had wanted to resign on a point of policy, I could have understood that.
Policy is a matter for ministers,’ she said at question time.
‘But I find it totally incomprehensible if someone has held the office of Chancellor with high standing for six years to want to resign over a personality — with such suddenness and haste.’
The clash came as Mr Kinnock exploited the apparent contradiction between Mrs Thatcher's claim that she did not know why Mr Lawson resigned and the former Chancellor's assertion in last Sunday's Walden interview that he had made it quite clear to the Prime Minister that Sir Alan Walter's continued presence as her economic adviser was the only issue.
Mr Kinnock said: ‘You appear to be the only person left in the country who does not understand why the Chancellor resigned.
‘Isn't the truth that the Chancellor said to you ‘either the adviser goes by the end of the year or I go now’?
Why can't you admit to that truth?’
Mrs Thatcher replied: ‘Policy is a matter for ministers — advice is not.’
She added, referring to the two meetings she held with Mr Lawson on the afternoon before he resigned: ‘I tried to persuade the Chancellor not to go.
It was quite clear he was determined to go and go that day.’
Mrs Thatcher later parried more questions when the Liberal Democrat Mr Charles Kennedy (Ross, Cromarty and Skye) asked her whether she felt her ‘diminishing credibility’ would be salvaged if she followed the advice of the former chairman of the Tory backbench 1922 Committee, Sir Edward du Cann, that a leadership challenge would clear the air.
‘In the event of such a development does she think her position would be unassailable?’ he asked — echoing the Prime Minister's earlier comment that Mr Lawson's position was ‘unassailable’.
But Mrs Thatcher retorted: ‘A party that can't even decide its name is hardly in a position to criticise anyone.’
The Prime Minister has again denied that there had been any direct British assistance to the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia.
In a letter to Mr Kinnock released last night, she said: ‘You ask about support for the Khmer Rouge.
The Government's repugnance for that organisation and everything it stands for has been made absolutely clear on repeated occasions.
No form of British assistance, military or otherwise, has been, or will be, given to the Khmer Rouge.’
But she did not reply directly to Labour's allegations that the Government had provided aid to others who were supporting the Pol Pot forces.
High cost of taking the strain Wednesday People.
Dennis Barker.
FIVE children lying bloody and broken in the road below a high tenement window in Glasgow helped substantially reinforce ambulanceman Jack Kirkland's belief that his colleagues should be treated as dedicated professionals and not as cab drivers.
Apolitical and never the holder of any union office, Kirkland had 36 years as a Glasgow ambulanceman before he retired last year.
He has sent to the Prime Minister and the Cabinet and Shadow Cabinet a copy of his book on his experiences.
Blue Lights and Bandages, just published at £5.95 by the non-profit-making community publisher Seanachaidh and funded by Strathclyde council, asks the Government to remedy the neglect of past governments by recognising ambulancemen's right to a professional salary.
Yesterday he backed their case with the story of those children lying in the street.
‘A woman had taken some children playing in the road up to a high room to ‘see her puppies.’
She locked the door and started throwing each out of the window.
There were five of them; the sixth escaped when a man broke the door down.
‘The five children were lying in the street.
Women were crying and some labourers were crying too.
But ambulancemen have to remain calm when everyone else is the opposite.
One little girl was squashed like a tomato, but we got the other four into an ambulance and they survived.
This is the emotional strain ambulancemen have day in, day out.’
Kirkland claimed that vehicles, equipment, and training had all improved since he started, but the attitude to ambulancemen had not.
He has family experience to back this claim.
His grandfather was in the service; so was his uncle and two younger brothers; a nephew is still serving.
‘After the Lockerbie disaster there were policemen who had to leave work.
But never a mention of the ambulancemen and women.’
What was the way out?—‘For the Government to relent to public opinion for once.
You are talking about 2 or 3 per cent, and the Government are putting people's lives in jeopardy.’
Greenhouse gas freeze blocked.
By Paul Brown Environment Correspondent
BRITAIN was yesterday accused of undermining international efforts to combat the greenhouse effect, as Mrs Thatcher flew to New York to declare to the United Nations her concern about the environment and reveal a number of British initiatives.
Mrs Thatcher will today announce that she is to double the British contribution of £3 million to the UN Environment Project in Nairobi and give new money to tropical rain forest schemes.
She is expected to place great emphasis on Britain's contribution to controlling the hole in the ozone layer and global warming.
But at a 72-nation conference in the Netherlands yesterday, Britain, the United States, Japan and the Soviet Union, which between them emit 50 per cent of the world's carbon dioxide, blocked a proposed freeze on emissions of the gas by the year 2000 and a 20 per cent reduction by 2005.
Instead, Mr David Trippier, the environment minister, insisted the target dates should be dropped as unrealistic and the words ‘as soon as possible’ substituted.
He said a number of large economies found it difficult to commit themselves to targets which had not been properly explored and before the International Panel on Climate Change reports scientific evidence next year.
This panel, with three committees chaired by Britain, the US and Soviet Union, is examining the evidence for the UN before recommending how to reduce gas emissions.
Environmental groups believe that because the big industrial nations control these committees and are anxious to avoid curbs on industry and car use, they are using this scientific research as an excuse for taking no action.
Mr Steve Elsworth, Greenpeace air pollution campaigner, said: ‘Britain's contribution at the Dutch conference was to undermine efforts to set any date or make any real targets to deal with global warming.
Mr Trippier then claims the conference as a success, which clearly it is not.
Britain is all talk and no action.
It is an internationally co-ordinated public relations exercise with no solid content in it.’
Mrs Thatcher will today emphasise the central role of the UN in global environmental issues.
She will attack the Hague declaration, a French initiative signed on March 12, this year, where 24 heads of state proposed a UN agency empowered to impose sanctions on governments that did not reduce emissions of greenhouse gases.
Britain and the US ignored the conference.
Mrs Thatcher argues that sanctions are not the right course and only consensus will work.
This week, at the International Timber Trade Organisation's conference in Japan, Britain was supported by green groups when it suggested a labelling scheme for tropical hardwood so consumers could choose products manufactured from sustainable timber reserves.
But the initiative was rejected by the countries where tropical forests are being indiscriminately felled for quick cash profits.
Mrs Thatcher has now rejected the ITTO as the international forum to save the tropical forests, instead throwing her support behind the UN's Tropical Forest Action Plan being run from Rome.
This project gives advice to Third World countries on how to manage their farming, forestry and agricultural needs.
Mrs Thatcher has been convinced by her Environment Secretary, Mr Chris Patten, from his days at overseas development that there is an important role for Britain to play in helping countries like Brazil to manage its forests correctly.
‘Millions lost’ by DTI in Rover sale.
By David Hencke Westminster Correspondent
ALLEGATIONS that the Department of Trade and Industry may have lost the taxpayer millions of pounds over the sale of the Rover Group to British Aerospace are to be made by the National Audit Office, Parliament's financial watchdog.
A report to be published later this month is understood to detail a series of shortcomings in the rushed sale of the motor company to the group which was approved by Lord Young, the former Trade Secretary.
The company, with plants in the West Midlands, Oxford, Glasgow and Llanelli in south Wales, was sold for £150 million which British Aerospace later recouped by floating its half share of DAF-Leyland on the stock market.
The report — which examines the civil servants' handling of the sale — is understood to question why British Aerospace was the only main bidder where detailed and full inquiries were made.
It also looks at the potential profits which British Aerospace may be able to make by selling redundant sites in Llanelli, Bathgate in Glasgow and the Cowley plant in Oxford which is due to close in the 1990s.
Whitehall sources indicated last night that the scale of the criticism in the report dwarfs the recent furore following the National Audit Office's investigation into the sale of land in Enfield, north London — owned by the Royal Ordnance Factories — to British Aerospace.
In this case, a row started over land worth £3.5 million being possibly resold for more than £30 million once the development potential of the closed factory sites had been realised.
Mr Terry Davis, Labour MP for Birmingham Hodge Hill, told the Guardian last night: ‘As a former employee of British Leyland and now a member of the Commons public accounts committee, I pressed for an inquiry into the sale.
‘Although I have not seen the report, it does not surprise me that the Rover Group was sold for a song.
I believe the company was sacrificed.
‘I shall be demanding that we have a full explanation from Department of Trade and Industry officials when they appear before the public accounts committee to be cross-examined on this report on December 4.’
British Aerospace has already admitted that Rover's assets were undervalued by £350 million at the time of the takeover.
The Government wiped out all Rover's debts as part of the deal, despite the company's annual profits of £100 million.
Why Nigel just had to go Points of Order.
By Ian Aitken
POINTS of Order couldn't help visualising the scene in Number 10 Downing Street a week last Thursday, when the lad from next door burst in to say his piece.
If all the subsequent television and newspaper interviews are to be believed, the boy Lawson told Mrs Thatcher that he jolly well wasn't going to stay on as Chancellor unless she fired that rotter Walters as her ‘adviser’.
The lad's message was quite clear.
It was: ‘Either he goes or I go’.
And it is now equally clear that Mrs Thatcher's response to this ultimatum was similarly direct.
It could be summarised as: ‘In that case, Nigel, why don't you **** off.
And while you're at it, take your 7.6 per cent inflation rate with you.’
There have been horrified reactions to this event.
Many people say that it demonstrates Mrs Thatcher's deplorable indifference to the relative importance of a senior Cabinet colleague and a mere half-cock academic adviser.
It shows, they claim, that she prefers personal favourites to ministers.
BUT suppose she'd reacted differently.
Suppose she hadn't invited Mr Lawson to **** off.
Suppose she'd said: ‘Dear Nigel, of course you must have your way.
Sir Alan will be fired before the goose gets fat.
You, and your 7.6 per cent inflation rate, and your 15 per cent interest rate, and your £20 billion trade deficit, have my fullest confidence.
You must remain my Chancellor.’
Would Mr Lawson then have resisted the temptation to trundle round his Cabinet colleagues, showing off his muscles and boasting that he alone had faced up to the Iron Lady and won?
And if he had made that boast, would it have remained privy to the colleagues?
And once it was out, where would Mrs Thatcher's authority have been?
BUT there are two further aspects to this affair.
For a start, didn't Mrs Thatcher have some justification for concluding that Mr Lawson had deliberately chosen the Walters row as an excuse for abandoning ship?
Certainly his resignation ensures that he will be in the clear when the economic roof falls in — an event which many people now regard as virtually inevitable.
The second aspect is the extent to which recent events prove that politicians should avoid expressing the obvious, because it always leads to trouble.
Take, for instance, the brouhaha which has followed Mrs Thatcher's hint that she will probably retire sometime between the next general election and the one after that.
This was made the payoff in the Sunday Correspondent's interview with the PM, though it has since emerged that the sequence of the conversation was altered.
But the weird thing about this supposedly ‘shock admission’ is that everyone made the most dreadful fuss when she said she intended to ‘go on and on and on’.
Now she says that she won't go on for ever.
Result: an even more dreadful fuss.
Yet by normal standards her cautious words — she's 64, after all — were no more than simple common sense.
Just think what the reaction might have been if she's responded by saying she had no plans to quit.
Ever.
The same applies to poor Mr Peter Brooke's weekend remarks about the possibility of talking to Sinn Fein, if and when the IRA renounces the armed struggle.
Is there anyone who believes in a military victory over the IRA?
Yet the purest common sense proves, in the hypocritical world of Westminster, to be highly damaging.
KENNETH Clarke appears to have dropped out of the smart betting for the succession to Mrs T, no doubt because he has been landed with the mucky end of the Cabinet stick.
There aren't many votes in biffing the BMA, let alone ambulancemen.
But no news is good news, and Mr Clarke has been drawing some comfort from the fact that he hasn't heard from his own local family doctor.
Being in rude good health, he hasn't actually met the GP in question.
But he reckons he must be sympathetic, because he hasn't sent one of the BMA's pro-forma protest letters.
Yet.
FINGS ain't wot they used to be department: The recent ministerial reshuffle has stripped the rather snobby Home Office of three Old Etonians — Hurd, Renton and Hogg.
In return, it has acquired two lawyers — Waddington and Mellor — plus a Wykehamist peer, Lord Ferrers.
Is this a fair swap?
Army to take emergency calls.
By Keith Harper, David Brindle and Patrick Wintour
TROOPS will be used to provide emergency cover in London from 2pm today in what the unions yesterday described as a ‘political’ attempt by the Government to escalate the ambulance dispute.
The decision to use the army, even though ambulance crews are not on strike but still offering to provide an emergency service, was taken by Mr Kenneth Clarke, the Health Secretary, as Mr Duncan Nichol, the National Health Service chief executive, told the Guardian that the Government's negotiating position included a desire to offer extra pay to paramedical crews.
Mr Clarke's decision followed the suspension of 2,500 ambulance crew members at 71 London stations for refusing to work normally.
The crews want an increase on a 6.5 per cent pay offer.
Mr Nichol said that the Government wants to settle the dispute with a deal that would allow local managers to top up the pay of crews with paramedical skills in a move towards the separation of the 999 service from routine ambulance work.
It would give designated emergency crews the chance to achieve their goal of pay parity with firefighters.
According to Mr Nichol, such a deal could increase pay rates in London by 30 per cent and elsewhere by 20 per cent, and would be a step toward a ‘likely’ decision to put non-emergency services out to contract.
This has already begun in some parts of the country, including Wiltshire.
The idea was immediately rejected by the main health service union, Nupe, which said last night that the Government was trying to split the ambulance staff.
‘We want a pay deal now to solve all our problems and a formula which would prevent us from taking action in future.’
The Government's formal negotiating stance on pay was set out by Mr Clarke, who said there was no question of increasing the general 6.5 per cent offer.
Mr Clarke said: ‘I see no reason why the NHS management should give a higher offer in response to industrial action and then have to close beds and reduce patient services to pay for it.’
Mr Nichol, however, said there was ‘plenty to talk about’ including the idea of a local flexibility deal, which was put at the conciliation service Acas two weeks ago.
The idea would be modelled on a settlement this year for 130,000 NHS administrative and clerical staff.
Mr Nichol said ambulance staff could receive pay premiums worth more than £3,000, in recognition of extra training, local recruitment problems and other factors such as meritorious or long service.
Only 10 per cent of the 20 million annual ambulance journeys are emergencies.
At present, crews typically rotate between 999 and routine work making it difficult to designate crews for higher pay.
Today will be the first time troops have been brought in during an industrial dispute since 1978.
Mr Clarke told the House of Commons that he was doing it with the great reluctance.
The House was called to order at one stage by the Speaker, Mr Bernard Weatherhill, after Mr Clarke accused crews of waiting at stations ‘pretending’ to be ready for work.
Mr Robin Cook, the shadow Health Secretary, who advised the Government to call in the arbitrators rather than the army, said that Mr Clarke had given no good explanation for his precipitate action.
The troops will join the police, who were reluctantly involved yesterday after the London Ambulance Service said that it could not cope.
The employers admitted the troops would provide an inferior service.
Mr Chris Spry, for the London Ambulance Service, said the army's help was sought because crews were not using their radios to answer emergency calls.
Mr Roger Poole, the unions' chief negotiator, said the Government was putting Londoners' lives at risk.
All ambulance crews would continue to stand by at their stations for 999 calls.
‘This is a crass decision by Mr Clarke and the Government is playing a dangerous game.’
The action taken in London had an immediate affect elsewhere as ambulance crews began to protest at the Government's intervention.
Greater Manchester union officials agreed to halt all routine work in protest against suspensions, and Welsh crews promised to stage work-ins if suspensions went ahead.
Soldiers in front line, page 3; Leader comment, page 22; Duncan Nichol interview, page 23
Runcie plea pushes synod to back women priests.
By Walter Schwarz, Religious Affairs Correspondent
ALAST-MINUTE call for courage by the Archbishop of Canterbury yesterday pushed a tense and hesitant General Synod into a vote that clears the way for ordination of women priests.
The proposal will be debated in dioceses before being returned to the synod for final approval in 1991.
The vote, which excludes ordination of women as bishops, needed only a simple majority.
But final approval in 1991 will require a two-thirds majority in all three houses — bishops, clergy and laity.
Yesterday's majority, 323-170, failed to achieve that in any.
A split was avoided when the synod rejected proposals to allow a separate church of those who refused to accept women priests.
Nerves were calmed when Dr Robert Runcie said ordaining women was ‘development rather than revolution’.
Another sharp prod came from the Bishop of Durham, Dr David Jenkins, who said women should not be the victims of ‘political voting’ by members who cared more about church divisions than justice for women.
He said such voting ‘makes women bear the burden of a political judgment.
I believe this to be indecent and to add to the already indecent burden women are having to bear.’
The role of Dr Runcie, who has wavered in the past, was crucial.
Supporters of women priests feared his recent talks in Rome might have swung him into opposition.
But he said Roman Catholics and Anglicans ‘have to accept, for the moment, our different ways of reaching decisions’.
The vote came five years after the synod called for draft legislation to introduce women priests.
A first draft, giving the clergy powers to block women priests, frightened members — including Dr Runcie — and risked a split.
Dr Runcie then proposed a committee of bishops modify the rules.
Dr Runcie said the new rules ‘tried to steer a course between what I described as legislative schism and a measure which would reduce to second class membership those who find themselves unable to recognise women priests’.
Opponents kept a low profile and their leader, Dr Graham Leonard, Bishop of London, remained silent.
The opponents included Mr John Gummer, a synod member, who said: ‘For many of us this is a matter of life and death.
If this is passed some of us will no longer be active.’
The Venerable David Silk, Archdeacon of Leicester, summing up the theological opposition, said that in ordaining women the Church of England would ‘cease to be part of the Catholic, apostolic church and would be behaving as if it were the whole of Christianity, or a mere sect’.
Some opponents said later that since none of the houses managed a two-thirds majority, prospects for success in 1991 were thin.
But supporters were confident that decisive endorsement in the dioceses would create a new climate.
Vote paves way, page 2
News in brief: Ferries held up by gas leak.
Shipping, including Isle of Wight ferry and hydrofoil crossings, was halted on Southampton Water last night after inert gas leaked from the tanker Mobil Petrel as it discharged crude oil at the Fawley Esso oil refinery.
Firemen dealt with the leak, and there were no casualties.
The gas, from the ship's boilers, is used to fill the tanks as crude oil is pumped out.
£21,000 in birth case.
Mrs Margaret Ashton, aged 30, who woke during a caesarean operation in 1980 at Billinge hospital, near Wigan, was awarded £21,000 agreed damages at the High Court in Manchester.
Cell death ruling soon.
A High Court judge reserved judgment until later this week on a damages claim by the family of Paul Worrell, aged 21, who hanged himself at Brixton Prison, London, in 1982.
Banks' appeal date set.
An appeal by banks against last week's High Court ruling that Hammersmith and Fulham borough council's speculations with rates cash were illegal will be heard from January 15.
Panther alert.
Police are searching Ollersett Moor in the Derbyshire Peak District after a farmer reported seeing a panther in his field.
Overtime and pay concern prompts call for urgent talks.
By Simon Beavis Labour Correspondent
BRITISH Rail has called on four rail unions to agree plans to limit excessive overtime worked by signals and telecommunications engineers as part of a radical review of pay and working conditions following the disaster.
The unions were invited to urgent talks in a letter yesterday.
Mr Nick Mitchell, the head of personnel for the signals and telecommunications section, said the board had come to certain conclusions about pay and conditions for its 7,000 S&T engineers after a review of manpower and reward systems.
‘
The point has now been reached where we need to finalise this work.’
A crippling recruitment and retention crisis has seen BR lose vital engineering staff to better paid jobs for example in British Telecom and Mercury, where senior technicians' rates are up to £60 a week more.
BR has had to rely on staff working excessive overtime to carry out maintenance and repair work.
Pay rates, overtime — central issues in this summer's pay dispute — and repeated restructuring of the S&T division, are attacked in Sir Anthony Hidden's report.
BR accepts that measures imposed in mid-1988 to ease staff retention problems have failed.
Grading was simplified then and S&T staff were offered an extra £1,200 a year in skills allowances subject to satisfactory attendance and working, but skills shortages continue.
Mr Jimmy Knapp, general secretary of the National Union of Railwaymen, said yesterday that BR had since moved to stem excessive overtime by ordering a maximum working week of 72 hours.
The basic week is 39 hours.
He went on: ‘BR have not talked to us about limiting overtime, but it says a lot about the industry when limiting shifts to 12 hours a day is considered progress.’
The consequence of the reduction had been to put resignalling work around Waterloo — which led to the Clapham disaster — two months behind schedule.
BR said it had taken steps to control overtime and to ensure engineers were taking breaks in the hard pressed Southern Region, where skills shortages are most acute.
On pay the Clapham report said it was ‘abundantly clear’ that pay levels had failed to provide BR with the ‘overall size, structure and quality of workforce’it needed.
‘Constraints on recruiting are constraints on safety and have to be removed.’
The report also criticises the rail unions for ‘entrenched resistance to change’.
Evidence, particularly Mr Knapp's, proved ‘how deep was the mistrust and suspicion employer had for union and union had for employer’.
The BR chairman Sir Robert Reid told a press conference in London yesterday: ‘I accept all the inquiry's recommendations here and now.
We have taken steps to ensure that the circumstances that led to this tragedy can never be repeated.’
British Rail is investigating the role of temporary hand-signalling in a head-on crash between two trains at Huddersfield which injured 17 people on Monday night.
No one was badly hurt in the accident between a trans-Pennine service and a local commuter train on track where modernised signalling is being installed.
Two newspapers appeal against Spycatcher book convictions for contempt.
TWO national newspapers, the Independent and the Sunday Times, yesterday asked the Court of Appeal to quash their convictions last May for contempt of court in publishing extracts from the Spycatcher book while a ban was in force against two other papers.
The contempt proceedings began in 1987 when the Attorney-General, Sir Patrick Mayhew, alleged that the newspapers' conduct in publishing material from Spycatcher, the memoirs of former MI5 officer Peter Wright, was intended, or was likely to, thwart the publication ban obtained by the Government in July 1986 against the Guardian and the Observer.
Mr Richard Aikens, QC, for the Independent, said that ironically the subject matter had now been held by the House of Lords not to have been confidential, in the sense that in October last year the Law Lords refused to grant permanent injunctions against the Observer and the Guardian, ruling in favour of freedom of speech.
Mr Aikens said that to prove contempt the Attorney-General had to establish that the published information was confidential.
It had to be proved that the papers had put into the public domain information which was not already there and which, in the context of the present case, it was in the public interest should not be there.
That was the test applied in October 1988.
The Attorney-General also had to establish that the information complained of was the subject matter of the pending action against the Guardian and the Observer.
Further, he had to show that the publication had the effect of destroying the subject matter and so depriving him of his rights in advance of trial.
The ‘touchstone’ would be if the Attorney-General was less able, by virtue of the actions of the Independent, to obtain or continue an injunction against the Guardian and the Observer.
Mr Aikens submitted that the Attorney- General did not attempt to establish any of those requirements.
The striking fact was that his ability to obtain or retain interlocutory injunctions against the Guardian and the Observer was ‘wholly unaffected’ by the Independent's publication of Spycatcher material in April 1987.
The proof the pudding was in the eating.
The Lords had initially upheld the interlocutory injunctions although the House subsequently refused to make the injunctions permanent.
The hearing continues.
Coleridge biography in the running for £20,250 prize.
By Tim Radford Literary Editor
ANEW study of the poet of Xanadu and The Ancient Mariner has won the Whitbread Biography of the Year prize, earning its author £1,750 and leaving him in the field for the Book of the Year £20,250 prize, to be announced on January 24.
He is Richard Holmes, biographer also of Shelley, whose Coleridge: Early Visions has just been published by Hodder and Stoughton (£16.95).
He took the award from a field dominated by studies of early 19th century poets.
Other contenders were Stephen Gill, for Wordsworth: A Life (Oxford), and William St Clair for The Godwins and the Shelleys (Faber).
The only non-literary life was One of Us, a ‘an elegant, shrewd, and wry analysis’ of Mrs Thatcher by the Guardian's Hugo Young.
In 1988 the Whitbread Novel of the Year was Salman Rushdie's The Satanic Verses.
This year, having described Martin Amis's novel London Fields — at first widely expected to win the Booker Prize —‘as a fizzy, spiky, savagely satirical book’ which was ‘sometimes so horrible it makes you gag, so funny it makes you fall off your chair’, the judges instead gave the prize to Lindsay Clarke for The Chymical Wedding.
This is a novel set in the 1840s and 1980s, published by Jonathan Cape (£12.95): ‘a long, intelligent book about passion, poetry, pagan impulses, and the soul striving to escape its mortal fetters.’
Other contenders were The Flint Bed, by Christopher Burns (Secker); My Chocolate Redeemer, by Christopher Hope (Heinemann), and The War Zone, by Alexander Stuart (Hamish Hamilton).
Prize for the Best First Novel went to James Hamilton-Paterson for Gerontius (Macmillan, £12.95); and for the Best Children's Novel to Hugh Scott for Why Weeps the Brogan?
(Walker Books, £7.95).
Poet of the Year is Michael Donaghy, an Irish-American now settled in Britain.
His first collection of verse, Shibboleth, is published by Oxford (£5.95).
The chairman of the judges, Peter Porter, described him as being one of the ‘witty, but at the same time highly passionate, informed, moral, well-crafted poets.
America produces more of these than we do.’
The category winners were chosen from a field of 400.
For the Book of the Year prize, the bookmakers William Hill have named Lindsay Clarke as 2-1 favourite.
Previous winners have been the poet Douglas Dunn, this year's Booker winner Kazuo Ishiguro, the handicapped writer Christopher Nolan, and the novelist Paul Sayer.
DPP to decide on manslaughter charge for BR within weeks.
By Clare Dyer Legal Correspondent
THE Director of Public Prosecutions, Mr Allan Green, QC, is expected to decide within a few weeks whether to press corporate manslaughter charges against British Rail, the Crown Prosecution Service said yesterday.
A senior QC is studying the British Transport police report and will recommend if any charges should be laid.
He will be sent a copy of Sir Anthony Hidden's report but will base his recommendations on the criminal investigation by British Transport Police, a CPS spokesman said.
But lawyers expressed doubts.
‘They were very negligent but they were not criminally negligent,’ said one barrister.
A manslaughter conviction would require proof of recklessness or, possibly, gross negligence.
Corporate manslaughter charges were almost unknown in English law before the DPP decided last June to issue manslaughter summonses against P&O European Ferries after the Zeebrugge disaster and there are still no firm judicial rulings on whether corporate manslaughter exists as a crime.
In Glamorgan in 1965 a company responsible for the collapse of a bridge was acquitted of manslaughter but the defence apparently never questioned whether a company can be guilty of manslaughter.
In 1972 the Law Commission concluded that the crime of corporate manslaughter ‘probably’ exists.
When the Zeebrugge families challenged the coroner in the High Court Lord Justice Bingham ‘tentatively’ accepted that a company could be guilty.
In September the DPP decided not to bring corporate manslaughter charges against British Rail after four people died in October 1987 when a river bridge at Glanrhyd, Dyfed, Wales, over which a train was travelling despite a red flood alert, collapsed.
Technicians' wiring mistake caused disaster Dangerous practices and communication failures contributed to 35 deaths BR's slipshod style ‘led to crash errors’.
By David Sharrock.
AFAILURE of the signalling system — which occurred when a signal box wire that should have been removed was not, thus preventing the signal from turning to red — caused the Clapham rail disaster in which 35 people died last December 12, according to the report of the inquiry chaired by Sir Anthony Hidden, QC.
The 56-day public inquiry heard 122 witnesses.
The report lists ‘many faults’ inherent in the way the railway had been run for several years.
Noted as relevant to the Clapham accident were the factors that: Working practices were permitted to slip to dangerous standards and quality of supervision was permitted to slip to an equivalent degree; quality of testing did not meet BR standards; no proper system of training of installation and testing staff was in use, and there was no vetting of weekend staff to prevent excessive overtime; and there was failure to communicate both up and down lines of management.
The fault which caused the Clapham crash is traced to the final installation of a new signal, number WF138, on November 27, 1988, by Mr Brian Hemingway, a senior technician.
There was nothing new in signal WF138's concept or installation, the report says.
Mr Hemingway's task on the weekend of November 26-27 was to connect the circuit's new wires and disconnect the old wire at both its relay end and its fuse end.
‘In fact, no disconnection was made at the fuse end, and although at the other relay end the old wire was disconnected, it was not cut back as it should have been, nor was it secured out of the way of its previous contact.’
If the wrong circumstances arose, it was physically possible for the old wire to return to its old position.
‘Those circumstances did arise.’
Two weeks later, the day before the accident, Mr Hemingway was working on the signal again.
His efforts disturbed the positions of the wires.
‘The consequences were not only unintended, they were disastrous.
‘As long as there was a large enough interval between trains running into London, no train would be close enough to the one in front to be affected by the faulty signal.’
Shortly before 8.10am on December 12, Mr Alex McClymont, driving the Basingstoke to Waterloo train, noted that the signal was at red.
He had ‘unwillingly become involved in an incident known in railway jargon as a SPAD (Signal Passed At Danger).’
BR rules stipulated he must stop immediately and notify the signalman.
‘When he did so, he would have been holding to an instinctive belief that the signal behind him would inevitably have gone to red.
That belief would have been tragically wrong.
‘The direct cause of the Clapham Junction accident was undoubtedly the wiring errors made by Mr Hemingway,’ the report says, adding: ‘He has never sought to evade his reponsibility for the appalling consequences of his errors…not one word of excuse came from Mr Hemingway.’
The blame for his ‘characteristic errors, since they were…his normal working practice’, must be a shared one.
It is a collective liability which lies on British Rail.’
The cause of Mr Hemingway's ‘uncharacteristic errors’— failing to see that the old wire was detached at the fuse end and insulated at the relay end — is attributed to the long hours he worked.
‘In the three months before the accident, he had one sole day off.
I find this totally unacceptable.’
Bad wiring practices were compounded by a workforce which was adequate neither in size nor in skills.
The unions had to bear their share of responsibility for ‘attitudes of entrenched resistance to change’.
Failure of arrangements for proper payment had also failed to provide BR with the overall size, structure and quality of workforce needed.
The inquiry said the deferment of projects involving large capital expenditure, frequency of reorganisation within BR, and lack of control of projects did not stem from any individual's decision, but ‘from the way in which the railway has come to do things.’
Colony lionises royal couple.
By John Ezard in Hong Kong
FOR the 2,000-year-old art of lion jigging, ‘extraordinary strength is a prerequisite’— but it must be combined with great delicacy of step, according to the Society for the Advancement of Chinese Folklore.
The same, as is increasingly being said by the colony's elder statesmen, is true of Hong Kong's present relations with China.
And so a thrilling, virtuoso display of the art was the first spectacle the Prince and Princess of Wales saw when they stepped ashore here last night to be greeted by a modest but affectionate crowd of 4,000.
Their trip from the airport in a launch (one of the perks of the Governor, Sir David Wilson) took them as close as they will be allowed to get this week to a Vietnamese boat people's detention centre — at Argyle Street, Kowloon — as well as past the harbour's backdrop of skyscrapers, mammoth neon advertisements, and mountains.
They disembarked at Queen's Pier, next to the town hall and the British garrison headquarters, for the 25-minute welcome ceremony.
Lion jigging, or dancing, originated in a vision of peace and prosperity dreamt by Emperor Qian Long, by casting lions in varying regional costumes.
Prince Charles, honoured by being momentarily cast a Chinese emperor, dabbed ink on the lion's eyes for luck.
The princess, whose casting was unclear, placed flowers on its head.
The ceremony was followed by a series of precise mimes, dances and songs by 400 children and kung fu gymnasts, merging traditional music and western beat.
Then the couple vanished to meet colony VIPs inside the steel maw of the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank skyscraper, a vision created with prefabricated bridge-building techniques by one of Charles's less favourite architects, Mr Norman Foster.
Buckingham Palace had promised his remarks would be discreet.
Brooke tries to repair talks damage.
By David Hearst in Belfast
MR PETER Brooke, the Northern Ireland Secretary, last night attempted to repair some of the damage done by his reference last week to the possibility of talking to Sinn Fein if the IRA laid down its arms.
In a speech to ex-servicemen and women, Mr Brooke said that the security forces had shown that terrorism could not and would not succeed.
He went on: ‘Our overriding aim is to bring terrorism to an end so that the people of Northern Ireland may live in peace and stability and be able to take decisions about their own future in accordance with the principle of democratic consent and without fear or coercion.’
Although he did not contradict what he said last week, except to apologise for his reference to Cyprus, the tenor of the remarks was clearly designed to redress the balance.
Last week he said it was impossible to defeat the IRA militarily, which left a policy of containment.
Family escapes, page 8
Army to take emergency calls.
By Keith Harper, David Brindle and Patrick Wintour
TROOPS will be used in London from 2pm today to take ambulance emergency calls in what the unions regarded last night as a ‘political’ attempt to escalate the dispute.
With the call-up of the troops by Mr Kenneth Clarke, the Health Secretary, came fresh revelations yesterday that the Government wants to settle the dispute with a deal that would allow local managers to top up the pay of crews with special paramedical skills.
The move would be a decisive step towards the separation of the 999 service from routine ambulance work.
It would give designated emergency crews the chance to achieve their goal of pay parity with firefighters.
Mr Duncan Nichol, the National Health Service chief executive, told the Guardian that division of the service and the putting out to contract of non-emergency work was ‘likely’.
According to Mr Nichol, such a deal could increase pay rates in London by 30 per cent and elsewhere by 20 per cent.
It is already operating in Wiltshire and other parts of the country.
The idea was rejected by the main health service union, Nupe, which said last night that the Government was trying to split the ambulance staff.
‘We want a pay deal now to solve all our problems and a formula which would prevent us from taking action in future.’
The Government's formal negotiating stance on pay was set out by Mr Clarke, who told a press conference there was no question of increasing the general 6.5 per cent offer to the ambulance crews in the face of disruptive action.
The troops will join the police, who were reluctantly involved yesterday in the capital after the London Ambulance Service said that it could not cope.
The employers admitted that there would be an inferior service.
It is the first time that troops have been brought in during an industrial dispute since the firemen's strike in 1978.
Mr Clarke told the House of Commons that he was doing it with great reluctance.
The difference between 1978 and now is that ambulance staff are not on strike but are working to rule, and answering all emergency calls.
Mr Robin Cook, the shadow Health Secretary, who advised the Government to call in arbitrators rather than the army, said that Mr Clarke had given no satisfactory explanation for his precipitate action.
Mr Roger Poole, the ambulance unions' chief negotiator, said that the Government was putting the lives of Londoners at risk.
All ambulance crews would continue to stand by at their stations for 999 calls.
‘This is a crass decision by Mr Clarke and the Government is playing dangerous game,’ he said.
Mr Chris Spry, for the London Ambulance Service, said that the South West Thames regional health authority had asked for the army's help.
About 50 military vehicles will supplement 53 from the police and voluntary organisations, such as the St John Ambulance.
The sickest patients will be carried by voluntary groups, the next by the army, with the least ill by the police.
The army will be based at police stations and will be allocated calls via the police.
The need to call in troops, according to Mr Spry, became apparent by mid-afternoon yesterday when the police could not meet the demand for accident services.
Mr Tom Crosby, chief ambulance officer for London, said the level of care would drop but insisted that the army crews had some medical training and were not basic infantry men.
Mr Chris Humphreys, London secretary of Nupe, said: ‘It is obvious that Kenneth Clarke intends to try and starve our members back to work.
The Government cannot pretend to be concerned with security at army barracks and then, without regard for the soldiers, put them on the streets of London as easy targets for the terrorists.’
Management yesterday began suspending ambulance staff in retaliation to the unions' work-to-rule tactics.
Mr Clarke said the armed forces would be withdrawn as soon as the unions agreed to provide a normal emergency service.
The action taken in London had an immediate affect elsewhere as ambulance crews began to protest at the Government's intervention.
Greater Manchester union officials agreed to halt all routine work in protest against suspensions, and Welsh crews promised to stage work-ins if suspensions went ahead.
Soldiers in front line, page 3; Leader comment, page 22; Duncan Nichol interview, page 23
Soldiers in the front line of industrial strife David Fairhall on the discreet arrangement that has brought in the troops.
THE troops' intervention in the ambulance strike is not being authorised under the Emergency Powers Act, but under a Whitehall arrangement which enables one department to request ‘military aid to the civil ministries’ from the Ministry of Defence and pay the bill afterwards.
This discreet arrangement means, among other things, that there was no need for Mrs Thatcher to consider declaring a state of emergency, as Mr Heath's government did during the 1973 miners' strike.
That would only have been necessary had the troops been requisitioning other people's equipment, rather than turning out with their own ambulances.
Troops have been used more than 30 times since the second world war to replace striking workers.
During the 1970s they were called out to clear hundreds of tons rubbish from the streets of Glasgow during the 1975 dustmen's strike.
Two years later dozens of Green Goddess military fire engines were brought out of storage to cover the firemen's strike.
In 1974 military engineers stood by to operate power stations in Northern Ireland during the protest strike by the Protestant Ulster Workers' Council, though they could have done nothing without the help of at least the power station managers.
During Mrs Thatcher's administration, troops have found themselves involved in five industrial disputes — to operate prisons in 1980/81, to drive ambulances in 1981 and 1982, to cover for civil servants during a dispute at the Coulport submarine base in 1981, and to help with car parking during the rail strike of 1982.
Soldiers never like being asked to do somebody else's dirty work, especially if they have been called off leave to do it, and are likely to be accused of strike breaking in the process.
On the other hand they will readily respond to civil emergencies such as floods.
In this case the request for help falls somewhere between the extremes of the Glasgow dustmen's strike and straight humanitarian operations such as rescuing people from snowdrifts.
In the latest situation troops are being drafted in to do jobs they normally do and for which they are trained.
The crews are mostly ‘medical assistants,’ which means possessing more than just a knowledge of first aid.
Richard Norton-Taylor adds: Contingency plans for the use of troops in ambulance disputes were drawn up shortly after the Government came to power in 1979, Whitehall documents show.
They were drafted by the Ministry of Defence and Department of Health.
Department of Health officials wrote to regional administrators in 1980 with details of a new plan — code-named Bittern — providing for ‘the use of service ambulances and drivers in the event of an industrial dispute’— the decision now taken yesterday by ministers.
Two other plans, not activated in the present dispute, were also drawn up.
One, code-named Concord, dealt with how the armed forces would drive NHS ambulances.
The other plan, code-named Lionel, related to limited service assistance in the event of a strike involving certain skilled and semi-skilled ancillary workers.
The circular makes clear that a decision to implement the contingency plans would be ‘subject to collective ministerial authority’.
The Department of Health warned that the number of troops allocated may not be all forthcoming because of commitments elsewhere.
Any disclosure of information contained in the plans, it said, would be ‘extremely damaging to the Government's industrial relations policy’.
Glasgoing to be the host of a £60 million year-long cultural extravaganza.
EUROPE'S next cultural capital, successor to Athens, Florence, Amsterdam, Paris and West Berlin, yesterday prepared for action in 1990, writes Peter Hetherington.
‘We have something to prove,’ said Bob Palmer, director of Britain's longest artistic extravaganza, a £60 million year-long Glaswegian spectacle of music, opera, dance, street parties and the world's biggest fireworks display.
‘Now we have to let people know our revival is real — that something is happening up here,’ said Mr Palmer.
The men from Saatchi and Saatchi have been doing their best in the glossy mags with the slogan ‘there's a lot of Glasgoing on in 1990’— but yesterday provided the taste of things to come in a city which has borne more than its fair share of music hall humour and Billy Connolly.
After meeting the Soviet culture minister, and the musical director of the Bolshoi opera, Mr Palmer set off for a cellar club-cum-recording studio and gallery to hear a folk singer break the musical mould and, hopefully, erase the memory of the song (‘I Belong To…’)
Glaswegians love to hate.
Standing barefoot on the club stage with acoustic guitar, Carol Laula presented the new, official Glasgow song — winner of a competition sponsored by Glasgow District Council, which is organising next year's celebrations.
To the outsider there was no hint of Glasgow in the verses — but the message was powerful nonetheless.
With a hint of Joni Mitchell and Joan Baez, Carol brought the house down: ‘He has a family/He has a home/He's wearing some new shoes that he doesn't quite own/He doesn't have work yet/He's trying hard to get/But he'll give you his fortune when he has one to give.’
Mr Palmer and the Labour council are doing their best to make next year a people's celebration.
Of course, the new £25 million concert hall, the visit of the Berlin Phil, the Bolshoi Opera, Jessye Norman, Pavarotti and the rest provide what Palmer calls the ‘high culture’.
But he is anxious to embrace the whole city, which is why the council is sponsoring a series of 40 commissions embracing artists, musicians and playwrights.
In one of the most lavish, Bill Bryden, the writer, will be presenting a theatrical and musical project called The Ship, a history of Clydeside shipbuilding, in a disused shipyard.
Synod vote paves way for women priests..
By Andrew Culf
LEGISLATION enabling the Church of England General Synod to provide by canon for women to be ordained was overwhelmingly approved yesterday.
Voting was 30 to 17 in favour in the House of Bishops, 149 to 85 in the House of Clergy and 144 to 78 in the House of Laity.
The matter will now be referred to dioceses for consultation.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Robert Runcie, told the synod it should receive the report in favour of the ordination of women with a ‘steady nerve’.
After two hours of debate the synod voted overwhelmingly to receive the report and moved on to detailed discussion of the legislation.
Dr Runcie said he put his trust in the resilience of the Church of England to handle the debate.
‘I remain of the conviction that the ordination of women to the priesthood ought to be construed as an enlargement and extension of the historic Christian ministry,’ he said.
‘It cannot be irrelevant to evangelism that so many unbelievers think the place we give to women in the Church is frankly absurd.’
He still feared polarisation and the creation of monochrome dioceses where clergy opposed to women priests would leave dioceses where they were ordained, and women ordinands and deacons would leave dioceses where they could not become priests.
The legislation would have most impact on the dioceses, and Dr Runcie was anxious the debate should be extended to the grassroots.
The motion was moved by the Rev Canon John Dale (Worcester) who said it was five years since the request for legislation on women priests was made.
‘The measure as revised by the committee tried as hard as possible to accommodate the views of those who object to women priests.
It creates space within the Church from which they can carry on their ministry for up to 20 years.’
Speaking against the motion, the Rev David Holloway (Newcastle) quoted a Canadian theologian.
‘If it should turn out to be true that God did intend males to exhibit strength in leadership roles and females to excel more as the guardians of society's emotional resources, why should this be viewed ipso facto as an evil arrangement?’
Mr Michael Oakley (York), supporting the motion, said it was vital the matter was put out to the dioceses.
‘If we do not send legislation down to the dioceses, it is almost analogous to a judge who fails to include a point of law in a summing up to the jury.’
Canon Frances Briscoe (York) said failure to pass the legislation to the grassroots would be a ‘betrayal of women out in the dioceses, waiting in the wings’.
Support for consulting dioceses came from the Bishop of Stepney, the Right Rev James Thompson, who said women priests would be an ‘enrichment to the Church’.
He was only disappointed that the legislation bent over backwards to accommodate those against.
The Bishop of Durham, the Right Rev David Jenkins, asked why good, caring and conscientious priests opposed to ordination of women should trouble collective consciences more than the women excluded from the ministry, who were being treated ‘more and more as pawns in a political game’.
However, the Right Rev Timothy Bavin, Bishop of Portsmouth, said there was no real agreement or consensus in the Church.
If the legislation was passed he would find it difficult to remain a diocesan bishop.
The Most Rev John Habgood, Archbishop of York, said the Church ‘must exercise patience and not use threats of walkouts and illegal actions’.
Judgment day…
Onlookers in the public gallery at Church House in London listening to the General Synod's debate on the ordination of women yesterdayPHOTOGRAPH: GRAHAM TURNER
Likely buyer for New Statesman.
THE New Statesman and Society could soon have a new owner if negotiations with Mr Robert Holmes a Court, the Australian entrepreneur, are successful, writes Georgina Henry.
Mr Holmes a Court has put in a formal offer for the magazine, believed to be between £2 and £3 million.
He has an option to complete the deal before November 30, but a decision on whether to go ahead could be made next week.
The magazine is controlled by a private trust.
New Statesman and New Society were merged into a single publication 18 months ago.
The magazine is selling around 35,000 a week but lost almost £200,000 in its last financial year.
It revealed in September that it was looking for either an outright buyer or a substantial injection of capital for a minority stake in order to expand the publication.
Nuclear safety cut costs £20m.
By David Hencke Westminster Correspondent
MORE than £20 million in research costs has been lost on an abandoned nuclear safety programme for Britain's advanced gas-cooled reactors (AGR), the National Audit Office disclosed yesterday.
Auditors checking Department of Energy accounts have discovered that the ministry wrote off £9.54 million spent on research which had to be cancelled following nuclear research cuts and plans for electricity privatisation.
An additional £12.94 million in supporting research was also lost.
The United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority said yesterday: ‘Government economies on nuclear research means we are having to close an experimental nuclear reactor called Pluto at Harwell next April.
The research commissioned by the Department of Energy was connected to the reactor and had to be abandoned.
We are holding an internal inquiry.’
The auditors say that the Treasury originally gave the go- ahead in 1982, authorising £1.95 million on research.
This was increased to £3.95 million to cover additional safety requirements.
Another £12.94 million was spent on back-up research.
The auditors say the department withdrew support for the project in March after ‘a series of delays in design, development, and preparation for installation’ of a loop to test the reactor.
By that time the ministry had already spent £9.54 million on the project.
The authority said yesterday that the delays arose because the research amounted to what scientists called a ‘blue skies’ project because it involved going beyond the present capacity of the reactor design.
This made construction of the project more difficult.
Appropriation Accounts 1988-89.
Volume 4; Classes V and VI Trade and Industry and Energy; HMSO £7.20
Bar embarrassed by cash row case.
By Clare Dyer Legal Correspondent
ADISPUTE over money split the barristers' chambers headed by Sir Ian Percival, QC, a former Conservative Solicitor-General, and forced members to choose between Sir Ian and another leading QC, the High Court heard yesterday.
In a case which is causing the Bar much embarrassment, Lord Justice Watkins and Mr Justice Garland were told that six barristers followed Sir Ian, while 11 decided to stay with Mr John Samuels, QC, who was in charge of chambers administration.
Sir Ian wants the court to order the Bar Council to bring charges of professional misconduct, which can lead to disbarment, against Mr Samuels.
He is applying for judicial review of a decision by the council's professional conduct committee to prefer the less serious charge of breach of proper professional standards, which leads to an admonition.
The court was told that Sir Ian complained to the Bar Council after discovering in 1987 that Mr Samuels had the year before put £10,000 of chambers' money into a building society account without Sir Ian's knowledge.
When confronted, Mr Samuels had agreed to close the account and transfer the money into the chambers' bank account.
But Sir Ian later learned that Mr Samuels had put another £15,000 of chambers' funds into the building society account in 1985.
When he closed the account, he transferred this to another account and used it to pay chambers' expenses.
Mr Michael Beloff, QC, representing Sir Ian, stressed that there was no suggestion Mr Samuels had sought personal gain.
At the heart of Sir Ian's complaint was Mr Samuel's alleged deliberate concealment of his activities after they had been partially unearthed.
Mr Beloff argued that a prima facie case of professional misconduct had been made out and should have been put before the barristers' disciplinary tribunal.
The hearing continues.
Brief encounter at despatch box sets Tory pulses racing Sketch.
By Andrew Rawnsley
ALMOST as soon as she got up, Tory backbenchers gave a big cheer for the blonde woman at the despatch box.
Mrs Thatcher?
No, they have gone a bit cool towards her.
It was Mrs Virginia Bottomley.
They are still in love with her.
Tory MPs have always had a crush on her.
It starts with her name.
Virginia, suggesting purity, appeals to the gents; Bottomley, suggesting something vaguely rude, appeals to the lads.
Occasionally flicking back a stray blonde hair, Mrs Bottomley comes to the despatch box as if she has just leapt out of a hair spray advert.
This was her debut as Health Minister.
‘Mr Speaker,’ swooned James Paice, a Tory backbencher from Cambridgeshire, ‘can I first welcome my Honourable Friend to her first question time?’
A huge cheer — somewhere between a wolf-whistle and a blown kiss — went up from the Tory backbenches.
Mr Paice asked for a date with the minister to discuss his concerns about a hospital in his constituency.
‘I shall be more than happy to meet him,’ replied Mrs Bottomley, winningly.
‘And discuss the matter in more detail.’
Green-eyed colleagues oozed envy at a smug Mr Paice.
Before anybody complains that all this is very sexist and demeaning — I entirely agree.
Grown men shouldn't humiliate themselves like this.
James Pawsey, the Tory member for Rugby, also appeared to be hopelessly in love.
He cooed total infatuation for the well-proportioned figure at the despatch box.
‘Can I give my Right Honourable Friend two big thank-yous!’, he cried, in a tone suggesting that he would like to accompany them with two big kisses.
But the strange thing had happened.
The well-proportioned figure at the despatch box to whom Mr Pawsey was swearing his love was now Kenneth Clarke.
Still, the Health Secretary blushed becomingly at Mr Pawsey's expression of adoration.
On to Prime Minister's Question Time.
It was Mrs Thatcher's first since she ended years of political and medical speculation by making the shock revelation in the Sunday Correspondent that she is, after all, human.
She did not expect to be Prime Minister into the next millenium.
MPs were no doubt grateful for that ruling.
There might have been considerable constitutional difficulties if it had turned out that, for the last 10 years, Britain had been ruled by a Martian, or a robot, or a vampire.
The Tories gazed at her in a new light.
Many now realised, for the first time, that she may not be with them for that much longer.
Others secretly hoped that they were right.
Neil Kinnock and others pressed her for a while about Nigel Lawson's resignation.
To the suggestion that she hadn't told the truth some Tory MPs yelled ‘Rubbish!’.
But only some.
On a distant Tory bench Cranley Onslow, the chairman of the backbench 1922 Committee, had been preparing to intervene.
His leader was in trouble.
So is he — his job threatened by a challenger.
An act of conspicuous valour, in the tradition of St George, might help both her and him.
Over a roar of jeering from the Opposition, Mr Onslow rushed to the rescue with a helpful question to the Prime Minister.
She smiled her thanks.
And valiant, it was.
Except that St George, according to the history books, rode to rescue the damsel, not the dragon.
.
SOCIAL Security Secretary Mr Tony Newton announced four steps to protect occupational pensions of people whose companies are involved in takeovers or mergers.
There will also be a pensions ombudsman and a tracing service to help people track down pensions held with previous employers, he told Mr Gerrard Neale (C. Cornwall N) in a written reply.
LABOUR'S health spokesman, Mr Robin Cook, claimed during health questions that eye tests were dropping so steeply since charges were imposed earlier this year that they were heading for a fall of three million, but health minister Mrs Virginia Bottomley said the Government had not yet reviewed the effect of charges.
MANY small businesses will no longer be required to send in detailed tax returns including accounts and balance sheets, the Treasury minister, Mr Peter Lilley, said in a written answer.
Total turnover, net profit and purchases will be accepted from traders with a turnover below £10,000 from next April, he said.
SALE room prices of impressionist paintings have risen by 974 per cent over the last ten years, modern paintings by 880 per cent and English furniture by 314 per cent, arts minister Mr Richard Luce told Mr Mark Fisher (Lab.
Stoke Central) in a written answer.
Old master paintings had risen by 266 per cent in the same period, 19th century paintings by 254, Chinese ceramics by 204, English silver by 188, continental furniture by 169.
MR Calum Macdonald (Lab.
Western Isles) asked for an assurance at question time that bursaries for Project 2000 nurses would not be turned into loans.
The Health Secretary, Mr Kenneth Clarke, said he had no intention of moving student nurses on to loans.
THE Fabian Society announced the appointment of Mr Simon Crine, 34, as its new general secretary.
Director for the past five years of the National Campaign for the Arts, he previously worked for the former Labour minister, Mr Albert Booth, and the Low Pay Unit.
Mr Crine lives in Islington, north London, and succeeds Mr John Willman.
TODAY'S BUSINESS House of Commons: Environment questions; Employment Bill, Lords amendments.
House of Lords: Children Bill, Commons amendments; Trade Union Act (Amendment) Bill, committee; Apple and Pear Councils orders; Passenger and Goods Vehicles (Recording Equipment) rules.
Eleven men found to be responsible.
By David Sharrock
THE report singles out 11 people for criticism under the heading, Where Responsibilty Lies.
However, Sir Anthony stresses that, almost without exception, those who gave their evidence to the investigation did so with ‘conscientiousness, care, dignity and with a measure of frankness wholly to be admired’.
Brian Hemingway: His wiring errors in the Clapham Junction ‘A’ relay room on Sunday November 27 ‘undoubtedly’direct cause of accident.
Excessive overtime ‘blunted his working edge, freshness and concentration’.
Derek Bumstead, supervisor: Failed ‘adequately or at all to monitor Mr Hemingway's working practices’, or to plan satisfactorily work on weekend when fatal errors made.
Peter Dray, testing and commissioning engineer: ‘Manifested all problems produced by BR reorganisation; less than happy’ with his job, as shown by performance in days up to and including November 27; despite having facilities, time and assistance for an independent wire count of Hemingway's work, did not do this — far from being ‘the last defence’, was no defence at all.
James Lippett, Bumstead's immediate superior: ‘Another of the casualties of reorganisation’; saw bad practices in the relay room, but took no action —‘believed it was their way of doing things’.
Gordon Callander: Much too junior to have responsibilty for planning, but it ‘came to rest on his desk’; nobody more senior ever reviewed plan he set out ‘in handwriting on a few sheets of paper’.
Geoffrey Bailey, head of Southern Region Testing Team: ‘utterly and completely failed’ to raise standards or curb excessive overtime.
John Deane: Knew how much overtime needed for resignalling programme, but failed to ask for it to be extended.
Roger Penny, Deane's immediate superior: Admitted ‘out of touch with what was going on’, and frankly accepted a degree of responsibility.
Robert Davies, signal works engineer: ‘failed completely to get on with the testing instruction’.
Graham Brown, signals engineer: ‘an example of management by inactivity and inertia’.
Clifford Hale, regional engineer: ‘Captain of the ship’ until day before the accident; his management ‘demonstrated the lack of communication which pervaded the department’.
Last night he resigned.
Brian Hemingway: overtime blunted concentration' Clifford Hale…‘lack of communication’
Health Secretary fends off Commons accusations over decision to mobilise the army in ambulance dispute Strike-break jibe at Clarke.
By Patrick Wintour
THE Health Secretary Mr Kenneth Clarke yesterday rejected claims that he was trying to break the ambulancemen's strike when he told MPs he had decided the army would be mobilised to help to answer emergency calls in London.
He said neither management nor the Government had any other option once the National Union of Public Employees had reimposed the ‘appalling and disgraceful conditions designed to disrupt the accident service’.
In a Commons statement, Mr Clarke said: ‘We would very much prefer to see a full accident and emergency service provided by trained ambulancemen, but that is impossible while the unions continue to insist on the 14 conditions which they have imposed.
‘I must stress that the involvement of armed forces, the police and the voluntary services will cease once the trades unions agree, as they did two weeks ago, to provide normal accident and emergency service’.
Mr Nigel Spearing (Lab.
Newham North East) shouted: ‘Disgraceful’, when Mr Clarke claimed: ‘The men, although doing no work, are at the moment still in the ambulance stations.
It is, in fact, the case that the men are pretending to be prepared to operate the accident and emergency service.
The claim that today's difficulties have been somehow caused by the management is a sick joke being perpetrated by the unions.’
He added: ‘The Government will only use policemen or military personnel to protect the life and limb of citizens at risk.
There's absolutely no question of our using either the police force or the army for the purpose of strike-breaking’.
Mr Robin Cook, Labour's health spokesman, said in every ambulance station in London there were staff ready and waiting to provide emergency cover.
‘In those stations it is the management that has now refused to put through the emergency calls.
Is it not clear that it is not ambulance staff which have withdrawn the emergency cover from London, but the management?’
He continued: ‘In eight weeks of this dispute he [Mr Clarke]has not once sat down with the staff side of the ambulancemen.
Would it not be better to talk to the ambulance staff before he talked to his colleages at the Ministry of Defence?
‘Can the Secretary of State answer the question which has remained unanswered since this dispute began and remains unanswered.
If he is so right in offering the ambulance staff 6.5 per cent, if the ambulance staff are so unreasonable in rejecting it, what has he got to be so afraid of in going to arbitration which would end this dispute this afternoon?
Instead of calling in the army why does he not call in the arbitrators and give back London a proper service?’.
Mr Charles Kennedy, the Liberal Democrat health spokesman, said public opinion was clearly behind the ambulancemen.
The offer ‘was seen everywhere but inside the Department of Health as an unjust offer in comparison with other emergency services.
It's a question of political will for him either to encourage arbitration or to make the funds available for a fair settlement.’
Mr Jerry Hayes (C. Harlow) warned that ‘due to the regrettable and irresponsible behaviour of the unions, one man's pay dispute could soon degenerate into another man's loss of life’.
However, he urged the Government to consider taking the ambulance staff's pay permanently outside the political arena by setting up a pay review body for ambulance staff Mr Clarke replied the NHS could not end up in a situation whereby group after group took industrial action and were rewarded by arbitration bodies.
‘The result would be that the NHS management would be responsible for the pay and conditions of a million people, but actually arbitrators would dispose of the resources.’
No cash limit on safety, says Parkinson.
By Paul Nettleton
MR CECIL Parkinson, the Transport Secretary, gave an assurance to the Commons yesterday that financial considerations would not stand in the way of implementing recommendations of the Clapham disaster report.
He was meeting the British Rail chairman, Sir Robert Reid, this morning to discuss prompt implementation of the 93 recommendations.
Mr Parkinson told MPs that he welcomed the report by Sir Anthony Hidden, QC.
‘The investigation has revealed major defects in the way in which British Rail's Southern Region signalling and telecommunications department organised resignalling work, and supervised and tested completed wiring.’
He was asking BR to report within three months on the recommendations.
He said BR would have to consider the spending required.
But he promised: ‘I can assure the House that finance will not stand in the way of the implementation of the report.’
The report had recommended that railway legislation should be reviewed, and the powers of the Railway Inspectorate widened and clarified.
‘We will introduce the necessary legislation as soon as a suitable opportunity arises.
Meanwhile, most of the changes can be implemented by administrative action.’
Mr Parkinson said the report asked the Government to allocate sufficient frequencies for BR to operate cab radios effectively.
‘We have now allocated five new frequencies to BR and given them access to two others.’
The Health Secretary had accepted recommendations addressed to his department, and had already introduced a review of the health service's response to major incidents.
Mr John Prescott, the shadow Transport Secretary, said the report showed clearly that safety had ‘suffered at the expense of commercial considerations’.
‘This report surely demands a rethink by both the Government and the senior management of BR of the policies that they have adopted over the last 10 years.’
Mr Prescott asked Mr Parkinson: ‘Will you adopt a new approach to management, investment and revenue support, so never again do we see tired, overworked, demoralised staff make a fatal error on a dark, cold Sunday evening as they rush to finish the work before the Monday morning rush hour?’
Hidden calls for cab radios, black box recorders, and research into overcrowding and stronger carriages.
SIR Anthony Hidden's report makes 93 recommendations to prevent another such accident and promote a better ‘safety culture’ in British Rail, writes David Sharrock.
Among them are:
Rigorous standards in wiring and installation.
Overtime should be monitored to prevent excessive levels.
The Department of Transport and BR should ensure that ‘the cost-effectiveness of safe operation of the railway occupies its proper place in a business-led operation’.
BR should prevent ‘commercial considerations of a business-led railway from compromising safety’.
Overcrowding should be tackled, with loading criteria established.
BR should give priority to installing cab radios to link driver and signalman.
Black box-style voice recorders should also be introduced.
Timetable for installation of Automatic Train Protection system should be accelerated.
Driver training should emphasise signal failures and their reporting.
More research into the ability of carriages to resist major damage in collisions.
Communications with emergency services should be improved.
Declaration of a major incident by any service could then be passed immediately to other services.
The BR board's Total Quality Management Initiative, adopted in January 1988 to improve working practices and standards, should be fully implemented with the greatest urgency.
The Government is called upon to ensure that the Railway Inspectorate is adequately staffed and resourced for the increased responsibilities in the wake of the report.
Independent marchers reign on Gorbachev's parade.
By John Rettie in Moscow
THOUSANDS of demonstrators marched through the Moscow streets yesterday calling for an end to the Communist Party's monopoly of power, in the first independent parade to be held on the anniversary of the Russian Revolution since Stalin imposed totalitarian conformity on the Soviet Union.
The greatest holiday in the Soviet calendar, November 7, is the day on which the country is supposed to celebrate its revolutionary leap into a higher form of society — socialism.
But early yesterday, several thousand people with different ideas assembled at the Dynamo Metro station, and began marching towards Red Square, where officials were putting the finishing touches to preparations for the usual annual parade.
At a crossroads three miles from the square that for centuries has represented the heart of imperial Russia, the independent marchers were told by police that Red Square was out of bounds.
A few hundred hotheads urged their comrades to break the police roadblock and march on the Kremlin, but were dissuaded by their leaders.
Instead, the demonstrators marched along a route agreed with the authorities to the Olympic Stadium, across the north of the city.
Representing a wide spectrum of radical reformers — some members of the Communist Party, some members of the Popular Front — as well as ecologists, dissident members of the armed forces and religious groups, they carried banners demanding democracy and a free press, a multi-party system and an end to the Communists' monopoly of power.
Meanwhile, in the Moldavian republic several people were hurt when nationalists battled with police as growing unrest in the country wrecked some regional celebrations of the Revolution.
Although there was no sign of him on the Moscow march, many of the demonstrators chanted support for Mr Boris Yeltsin, sacked as Moscow party chief but overwhelmingly elected last March as the city's representative on the new Congress of People's Deputies.
‘Down with the KGB’ and ‘Down with Ligachev’(Yegor Ligachev, the conservatives' leader on the party's politburo) were among the milder slogans carried by the demonstrators.
Others, reflecting popular frustration with empty shops and official bureaucracy after 72 years of socialism, were harsher.
‘72 years on the road to nowhere,’ declared one.
But perhaps the most bitter was another which read: ‘Proletariat of all countries — Sorry!’.
In Mr Gorbachev's Russia, all this is amazingly possible.
For his part, the President stood with the rest of the politburo on the mausoleum of the man who made it all happen — Lenin — and took the salute at the military and civilian parade through Red Square.
Unprecedentedly, he also gave a television interview from his vantage point as the workers filed by carrying red flags, banners and coloured balloons which they released into the cold, grey sky.
The leader of all the Russias admitted that the country's economic and social crisis amounted to a ‘sword of Damocles’ hanging over it.
But to go back to the old ways ‘would be a colossal mistake,’ he declared.
‘We have to advance faster and faster towards new thinking.’
The slogans on buildings round the square and carried by workers' groups reflected his new thinking.
Back to the idealism of Lenin and 1917, was their message.
Indeed, only Lenin's face appeared on the square this year; Marx and Engels were missing.
The party hardly got a look-in.
Of the very few banners that mentioned it, one from Moscow University called pointedly for ‘a faster rate of democratisation of the party’.
As for the military parade, it was even more modest than last year.
In an evident effort to convince the West once again that military might is not what the Soviet Union is all about, the imposing array of missiles, rocket-launchers, self-propelled guns, and armoured vehicles were all ‘long in the tooth,’ according to a Western diplomatic source.
All the same, the military parade was the best of the show, with thousands of troops goose-stepping past the mausoleum, massed bands marching and counter-marching as they played, but then drowned out by the roar of armoured hardware.
And when Red Square echoed and re-echoed to the boom of a 21-gun salute as 800 bandsmen played the national anthem, the ghosts of the Tsars in the Kremlin could have recognised the Russia they lost.
Whatever Mr Gorbachev's intentions, November 7 on Red Square is still the celebration of a great power.
To get the feel of the people, you have to go outside.
Commentary, page 23; Parade cancelled, page 10
.
MONDAY morning, December 12 1988, and another week's commuting was beginning for those heading into London's Waterloo Station from the south-west, writes David Sharrock.
About 300 yards from Clapham Junction, Britain's busiest junction, the 7.18 Basingstoke to Waterloo train, with more than 900 passengers, stopped.
Driver Mr Alex McClymont got out to report a faulty signal by telephone.
Moments later the 6.14 service from Poole, Dorset, to Waterloo via Bournemouth, carrying more than 460 people, ploughed into the back of the stationary Basingstoke train.
The impact reduced the front part of the Poole train to twisted metal.
Some passengers died instantly.
Seconds later an empty train travelling away from London ran into the wreckage.
Thirty five people were killed, 113 injured.
A thousand lay sprawled in the broken trains.
It was the worst train accident in more than 20 years.
‘Suddenly there was a big bang and a crash, and there was glass everywhere,’ said a survivor shortly afterwards.
‘People seemed to disappear under debris, and we came to a rest.
Then people started shouting and screaming.’
Within minutes of the crash rescue services were on the scene.
Some passers-by did not wait that long, leaping off buses and scrambling down the embankment to drag the injured out.
Nearby St George's Hospital, in Tooting, received the first call at 8.20.
By 8.30 the hospital was on red alert, with doctors ready in the accident and emergency receiving area and medical teams on the way to the scene.
In the following three hours the hospital took 123 victims.
Mr Roger Calvert, an orthopaedic consultant, described the scene of devastation, with severed limbs scattered and passengers still trapped: ‘Dispassionate is not the word one would use.
Obviously one would not want to see that scene again.’
Crash survivor shuns front coach.
By David Sharrock
ONE regular on the early London-bound service counts his survival in the Clapham crash as incredible.
The man, a publishing consultant, said: ‘I was in the front coach of the Bournemouth train which took the full impact of the crash and where most of the 35 died.’
Although he had been fortunate to have been sitting at the back of the coach he received a fractured spine.
‘I was tremendously lucky that I was not paralysed.’
He was in hospital for four weeks and had to wear a fibreglass jacket for 16.
Now he has two metal rods in his back.
He recalled: ‘There was an enormous hole rent in the top of the coach right above me, so in fact I was got out very quickly.
I have a very clear recollection of sitting there, not being able to move and hearing the approaching sirens.
‘My young next door neighbour was sitting directly opposite me and he was completely unharmed.
He was holding on to the hand of one of the passengers who was bleeding rather badly.
That particular guy was the first person out, then I was just about the second out.
‘It was desperately silent.
Just the odd cry for help.
There was a terrible stillness.
‘I have not got back to my normal working routine, quite honestly.
I didn't start getting back up to London by train until April and even now I am not working as I am used to.
‘But I am up on the train tomorrow.
I will never travel again in the front coach — that is my only superstitious qualm, or what ever you want to call it.
‘We all suffered from our hair being absolutely jet-black from the dirt in the carriage.
They could not even think of washing my hair until I had had this operation to put the two rods in my back.’
The counselling by social services had been an enormous help.
‘One cannot speak too highly of Dorset social services.
We have had a support group in Bournemouth ever since just after the crash.
‘Although fewer and fewer are now attending we still meet once a month and we find great strength from discussing problems and traumas.
My wife had individual counselling and that was tremendously helpful.’
But life would never be the same.
‘I think you do have a totally different approach to life than before.
When you have been so close to death and even closer to permanent serious injury then every day becomes a bonus.’
NUT ads aim to boost cash for education *..
By David Gow Education Editor
THE leadership of the National Union of Teachers yesterday launched a multi-million pound advertising campaign to win public backing for greater investment in education, emergency measures to reduce teacher shortages and to increase salaries in a significant shift of policy.
Supported by an opinion poll revealing extensive support among voters for extra resources for education, union leaders said the first phase of a prolonged press advertising campaign, launched in national newspapers today, would cost £500,000.
The campaign could last until the next general election and will spread to systematic lobbying of backbench MPs, poster hoardings and pressure on ministers and their advisers.
It draws on similar campaigns by the British Medical Association and the Royal College of Nursing and is aimed at people in the ABC1 social class.
The campaign has been denounced by some leftwing union activists as a diversion from the need for industrial action.
However, Mr Doug McAvoy, the NUT's general secretary, dismissed them as unrepresentative ‘noisy ones’.
The NOP poll, taken late last month on a sample of 1,000, including only 27 per cent of parents, showed 80 per cent of people already believe an effective education system is the key to economic success.
Mr McAvoy said the first phase was designed to raise that to 100 per cent.
Other findings were that 67 per cent think standards will decline in the next few years if things carry on as they are and that 77 per cent agree teachers do a good job in spite of everything.
Mr McAvoy said: ‘Ultimately, the campaign's purpose is to persuade the Government to change its existing policy on an issue which will become even more sensitive over the next 12 months.’
Mr Gordon Green, a senior executive member, said the recent educational changes were doomed to failure unless the Government recognised the true value of teachers implementing them by improving pay and conditions.
An eight-point plan to beat teacher shortages was unveiled yesterday by Mr Jack Straw, Labour's education spoksman, who accused ministers of being ‘trapped in a torpor induced by ignorance’ about the true nature of the crisis.
Without urgent action, he added, British education would fall behind Spain, Italy, and Greece.
Britain kept war criminals from trial..
By Richard Norton-Taylor
DETAILED evidence has been uncovered showing how Britain played a leading role in preventing hundreds of Italian war criminals standing trial in Yugoslavia, Greece, and Ethiopia at the end of the second world war.
Some 1,200 Italians — most of whom committed atrocities in Yugoslavia — were listed by the United Nations War Crimes Commission, but none was handed over.
Extradition from Britain was blocked for fear of unsettling the post-war anti-Communist government of Italy.
‘Justice requires the handing over of these people, but expediency, I fear, militates against it,’ wrote a Foreign Office official in a report.
Another recorded that some held high positions in the Ministry of War: their arrest, the report added, would be ‘a political embarrassment’.
Documents which disclose Britain's collusion have been found in UN, US and British archives by Dr Michael Palumbo, an American writer (who three years ago discovered the UN files on Mr Kurt Waldheim, the Austrian President).
His research forms the basis of a BBC 2 Timewatch programme, The Fascist Legacy, A Pledge Betrayed, to be broadcast tonight.
One of those named as a war criminal was Marshal Pietro Badoglio, wanted by Ethiopia for ordering the use of poison gas and the bombing of Red Cross hospitals after Italy invaded the country in 1936.
The FO noted that he had provided ‘valuable assistance’ to the allied cause as Prime Minister after Italy's surrender in 1943, and that it would be ‘inopportune’to hand him over to the Ethiopians.
Most of the 800 named by the commission were wanted by Yugoslavia, and the FO secretly acknowledged that it had an excellent case.
Churchill, in particular, was concerned not to weaken the Italian Government and strengthen the hand of Communists who had dominated the wartime resistance movement.
‘The longer we can procrastinate, the better for all concerned,’ wrote an FO official in 1946.
In 1947 Britain and the US said the matter should be left to the Italian courts.
One of those most wanted by Yugoslavia but allowed to go unpunished was General Mario Roatta.
An FO memo of 1943 noted ‘our information about Roatta confirms the information circulating about him’.
One Italian who was executed for war crimes — General Bellomo — was the only anti-fascist army officer at a senior level; he was found guilty after one of his men shot an escaping British prisoner of war at Bari.
Police family escapes bomb.
ASENIOR police officer and his wife and two children escaped injury yesterday after a bomb containing up to 10lb of high explosive exploded at the back of their bungalow in Drumbo, south of Belfast.
Assistant Chief Constable David Mellor, aged 52, who is shortly to take up a post as deputy chief constable of South Wales, had just gone to bed when a device planted below the window of a living room exploded at 1.20am.
His two children, aged 18 months and seven months, were sleeping eight feet from the explosion, but were saved from injury by the bomb-proofing and reinforced glass that all VIPs in the province get in their homes.
The victim of Monday night's shooting in Derriaghy, Co Antrim, was named by police yesterday as Mr Robert Colin Burns, who converted to Roman Catholicism after marrying.
No claim has yet been made by any paramilitary group about his killing and the Royal Ulster Constabulary said yesterday they were not aware of any reason why he should have been a target.
The living room of the Mellor home yesterday after the blast which knocked out a reinforced-glass window.
The family escaped injuryPHOTOGRAPH: PAUL FAITH