

Why Charlotte Du Cann hates the use of kids as accessories Hip families Fear and loathing..
YOU cannot look at anything these days without coming face to face with a picture of a blissful couple holding a baby.
The baby is the accessory of the moment, seen everywhere that is stylish: on the catwalk, on magazine covers, in major advertising campaigns (Next, above), in tough cop thrillers (Saracen).
Where once a Chanel handbag or bull terrier would have done, the fashionable woman now holds a smiling child.
This is said to be ‘getting real’, being ‘very Nineties’.
A baby says you care (read New Age), you are into the earth (misread green).
I have heard of some stupid fashion details in my time, but this is the pits.
A baby is not some final luxury item that consumers can afford (although this is obviously how the Government views it).
It does not guarantee you some privileged place on earth.
Nor, for that matter, can family life be a question of chic.
Yet this is how it is being sold.
Suddenly it is glamorous to appear nice and normal, and those who used to want to run the boardroom or run away to Paris now want to stay at home and watch programmes like Roseanne and Kate And Allie — new cult programmes that offer a cosy and entirely spurious view of family life.
The families themselves are presumed to be ordinary.
They are (even more trendily) mildly disadvantaged: the Cosby family are black, Kate and Allie are without husbands, Roseanne is neither rich nor thin.
Their lives revolve around the home, unlike in earlier cult shows like Dynasty (the office, the hotel lobby) or EastEnders (the community square).
Anything and everything happens around the kitchen table, and if anything nasty occurs, it is aired, talked about and solved.
If any among the new reality seekers had a slightly tougher memory, they would recall that there is no such thing as a happy family.
There are some good enough families, some fairly balanced families and a whole lot of families that resemble one of Mike Leigh's bleaker casts.
But a happy, ordinary family with an answer to every problem?
You show me someone who says they come from such a set-up and I will show you a very clever liar.
The most voiced reason for having a baby is that the parents can give what was not given in their own lives, to compensate for their own emptiness.
The child becomes their creation.
Of course this goes wrong.
A child is not born for reasons and it will not fit even the prettiest box assigned to it by its determined providers.
The child is itself.
Not only will it not be like its parents, it probably won't want to be.
Often the child doesn't even like them.
Nor they it.
None of this reality is dealt with in the happy family programmes, still less in the pictures of the beatific model parents and their angelic offspring.
These precedents for perfection are not only impossible to achieve, they also allow no place for rebellion.
Rebellion of child against adult.
And of adult against child.
A baby is neither a product nor an invention nor a necessary extension of one's wardrobe.
It is another human being.
Don't do it unless you mean it.
There are too many screwed-up, unloved babies already.
As there are rejected bull teriers and battered Chanel handbags.
Guardian Women is edited by Louise Chunn PAGE wom
Everyone's a capitalist The socialist councillor was intent on buying up Sheffield; and the YMCA, reports Geoffrey Beattie, is hoping to make a quick buck for Christmas.
HE WAS a socialist all right.
You could tell by his Scottish accent and his tie.
This may have been a conservative blue colour with an elegant stripe down the middle of it, but it was all skew-whiff.
And then there were his eyes, burning with a fervour, an intensity, as if he had his prey in his sights.
Hadn't he already described himself as ‘a political animal’—‘and with £19.50p attendance money a day as a Sheffield councillor, on which I'm dependent by the way, I'd need to be a political animal.’
And here he was with his eyes burning bright.
‘Tiger, tiger, burning bright.’
The lines stayed with me.
And as I looked at Jimmy Boyce, ex-industrial tiler, ex-foundry worker, ex-redundant foundry worker, I realised that it really was the law of the jungle here tonight.
The jungle of the night.
My eyes flitted around the table.
Here they all were — business, commerce, the big banks.
The political animal's eyes were burning again.
‘I want the Midland Bank.’
Nationalise the banks?
Outrageous!
But he didn't want to nationalise them, he just wanted them — for himself.
There was a long gap.
His neighbour cleared his throat.
His neighbour was the sales manager of the Midland Bank in Sheffield.
He looked at Jimmy Boyce, or rather he looked at his tie — all red and blue, almost patriotic, and yet the tie still hung at that curious angle.
It reminded him of shop stewards with their sleeves rolled up in those endless conferences when it was said that the country was being held to ransom.
It reminded him of the big shots in the trade union movement having sandwiches at Number 10 all those years ago.
‘Never!’ he said as his mind returned to the present.
He cleared his throat again.
This time it wasn't so much a reflex action, an attempt to remove something nasty somewhere down his windpipe, as a deliberate social signal.
It seemed to be saying: ‘You and who else?’, or ‘Do you think that you're really big enough?.’
It acted as both a challenge and a rebuff.
It did its job.
Jimmy paused momentarily.
‘But I don't want to overstretch myself.’
The man from the Midland Bank looked rather pleased with himself.
His throat had stopped tickling, but then again perhaps it never had.
Yet this was no place for the faint hearted, and Jimmy knew it.
‘What the hell.
It's for the people.
I'll go for it.
I've been through it all.
I was made redundant less than a year after I became a Sheffield city councillor, and I've never believed in those sorts of coincidences.
You have to fight and fight again.’
Now, it wasn't just the man from the Midland Bank who was clearing his throat.
Everyone in the board room was either clearing his throat, or shifting position in his seat, or doing both at the same time, which is actually rather difficult.
Except Jimmy Boyce, that is.
Jimmy's audacious move was making everyone feel uncomfortable, except himself.
He had finally settled to his fate: socialist entrepreneur of the grand scale.
‘It's early days yet,’ said Colin Appleby from the Midland, ‘early days’.
He seemed to be saying it as much to convince himself as to convince all the rest.
They were still busy with their ticklish coughs.
But it was now Colin Appleby's move.
Fate had got him as far as a leading Sheffield estate agents, Blundells.
Colin gave that smile of familiarity, that smile of superiority, that certain smile that says it all.
‘Ah, Mike's place.
Yes, I am interested in that.
I think I will purchase it.’
It was like a red rag to a big, black bull.
Or, given that we were in a quasi-political domain, a black flag to a red bull.
‘I want to buy up all of the city,’ said Jimmy.
The statement startled no one.
‘I'll be happy with Mike's place for the moment,’ said Colin, again rubbing in that he knew a thing or two about some of Sheffield's leading businesses, and that there is no substitute for that kind of detailed and expert and intimate knowledge.
But now it was time for some wheeling and dealing.
Shares in the Sheffield Development Corporation were up for sale.
Richard Holmes, the sales and marketing officer of the YMCA in Sheffield, had managed to get his hands on some.
He needed to raise capital fast.
The man from the Midland Bank said he hadn't the kind of money required.
He would have liked to help him out, but…
All eyes were now on Jimmy Boyce.
He had the capital, but did he have the inclination to buy into yet another business in order to help one of the managers out?
The minimum bid was established.
Richard assumed that it would be doubled.
‘It would be a bargain at twice that price.’
Nobody doubted him, or failed to recognise his temporary financial embarrassment.
It's just that they were not inclined to help him out.
‘If you can't stand the heat, Richard, old boy,’ an anonymous voice said.
Jimmy, however, did show some interest.
‘I'm always in search of a bargain, sonny — for the people, you understand,’ he added after yet another of those pauses that suggested it might have been an after-thought.
He eventually offered Richard £10 more than the asking price.
‘Typical Socialist,’ someone muttered.
Jimmy heard the jibe.
‘I'm a Scot, after all.
Never forget that, sonny.
And I'm not the one with all the money — just look at the pile that Colin Appleby's got.
A typical bloody banker, if you ask me.
Not a bit of wonder the country's in the state that it's in.’
For readers already familiar with the transmogrification of Sheffield from the Socialist Republic of South Yorkshire to something altogether more ‘pragmatic’, you could be forgiven for believing that the drama unfolding around the boardroom table was just one more step along this route, with committed socialists playing the stock market with the best of them.
But this was just a game, and before some one points out that the stock market is itself just a game (for somewhat privileged people), I should add that this was just a family game being marketed in Sheffield for Christmas.
It's called Sheffield Shares, a form of Monopoly for the late eighties.
Local companies are bought and sold, and the involvement and interest that the game generates, as I discovered, is quite intense.
Richard Holmes of the Sheffield YMCA told me about the background to the game.
The idea is that Sheffield companies pay real money for the privilege of being squares on the game — for the obvious advertising benefits.
The Midland Bank, as the major sponsor, is paying £20,000 for the privilege of being two corners in the game, and having its name and logo on all the notes used in the game.
The sponsorship money for the 30 squares amounted to £150,000 and paid all the production and advertising costs for the game.
All subsequent profits from sales of the game, which retails at £13.99, go directly to the YMCA for its work in the community in Sheffield.
Several other British towns and cities are already committed to developing their own version of this game, with all profits going to the local YMCA.
Keith Wells, general secretary of the Sheffield YMCA, and the fourth player that night, explained that the idea originated in Norway, where 95 towns had produced the game to finance their local YMCA.
In the United Kingdom, Derry/Londonderry was the first and their game was called The Maiden City, presumably in order not to alienate that half of the community which did not approve of either the name Derry or Londonderry.
Keith Wells pointed out that the title Sheffield Shares is deliberately ambiguous — it can be taken to mean Sheffield's shares, as in ‘shares’ which are up for grabs by keen or greedy speculators (my interpretation), but it can also mean Sheffield shares as in ‘shares its wealth’—‘and that's basically what we are trying to initiate here.
We're trying to get big, local companies to plough some of their profits back into the community through the work of the YMCA.’
So what kind of advertising do the companies get for their money?
On the share cards used in the game, not only the name of the company is printed, but also some succinct message about the firm.
Such messages could (at a push) be used by players to help them promote the value of the shares in that company in the interminable rounds of wheeling and dealing.
As in ‘How would you like to buy some shares in Stocksbridge Engineering Works —‘Manufacturers of high integrity alloy, stainless and re-melted steels for the aerospace, energy, bearing and automotive industries.
The Strength Behind Engineering Progress’.’
Or the more punchy ‘How would you like to buy some shares in Gibbs Building Contractors —‘Don't pick your contractor/ By throwing a dice/ Bring GIBBS into the game/ Ask us for a price’.’
Even if it is not read out in the endless rounds of buying and selling shares, then the message, passive though it might be, should still find its way into the living rooms of a high proportion of homes in the Sheffield region.
The plan is to sell 20,000 games in Sheffield over the Christmas period that is, 1 in 20 homes.
There are 4,000 advance orders.
A lot of families, it is hoped, are going to be hearing or reading about Stocksbridge Engineering Works, Gibbs Building Contractors, and a few other Sheffield firms this Christmas.
Colin Appleby, of the Midland Bank, is extremely pleased with the way the game has turned out.
He says that as well as being the major sponsor of the game, the Midland is the largest private sector employer in Sheffield, and the game provided another opportunity for the bank to demonstrate that it is prepared to invest in the city.
But what sort of person will make a good player at Sheffield Shares?
I'd already noted the very different methods of the four who had assembled.
It would have taken a blind man, or a very naive one, not to spot some connection between their style of play and the kinds of responsibilities and decisions they have to make in the outside world.
I asked Colin Appleby first.
‘I liked Jimmy Boyce's play for his quick decisions.
Richard Holmes was something of an expert at the game, but he ended up as a down-and-out by the end.
I think the main ingredient for success is that you have to have a good sense of timing.
There is nothing wrong with being a bit conservative and building up financial resources, and not just jumping straight in.
Jimmy had a lot of flair but it didn't help him win.’
Indeed it did not.
Colin's conservativism and steady timing had won him second place.
Richard Holmes thought that ‘the best man usually wins,’ despite the fact that he was last.
Jimmy Boyce put it down nearly all to luck —‘with negotiation skills being very important.’
Jimmy said he really enjoyed playing, but his slight worry about it was that at £13.99 it might prove expensive for the unemployed.
But what did the winner of the game actually think — Keith Wells, the man who had brought the game to England but had never actually played it before?
There was a long pause, the kind of pause that winners always display as they create a little time to savour their victory.
‘It's basically a fine balance between being a good steward of what you have already acquired, and being something of a visionary.
Rather like running the YMCA in fact, although I'd never thought of it like that before.
It was all jolly good fun as well, of course .’
© Geoffrey Beattie Richard Holmes, sales and marketing officer at the YMCA, watches the Sheffield Development Corporation change hands.PHOTOGRAPHS: GEOFFREY BEATTIE Jimmy Boyce: tie askew
Law Report.
Parliament urged to think again on housing issue:.
Queen's Bench Divisional Court Sandwell Metropolitan Borough Council v Bujok Before Lord Justice Watkins and Mr Justice Hutchison November 2 1989
IF a dwelling house is in such a state of disrepair as to be prejudicial to health or a nuisance, the tenant may lay an information against his landlord alleging the existence of a statutory nuisance under the Public Health Act 1936.
The tenant is not obliged to ensure that the landlord is aware of the defects in the premises or to give the landlord an opportunity to remedy the defects before commencing legal proceedings.
Although that is the position in law, the court emphasised that as a matter of commonsense a tenant should first complain to the landlord before exercising the right to prosecute.
The facts.
Mrs Bujok and her family occupied a house as council tenants.
In September 1988 Mrs Bujok laid an information against the council alleging the existence and continuance of a statutory nuisance under section 92(1) of the Public Health Act 1936.
It was alleged that the council, being the owners of the premises, were the persons by whose act, default or sufferance the nuisance arose.
Prior to laying the information Mrs Bujok had not served an abatement notice upon the council or informed them of the alleged defects in the premises.
The justices held Mrs Bujok was not required to ensure that the council were aware of the defective state of the property prior to laying the information.
The council appealed by case stated.
The legislation.
Section 92(1) of the 1936 Act defines ‘statutory nuisances’ as ‘any premises in such a state as to be prejudicial to health or a nuisance’.
The decision.
Mr Justice Hutchison said the 1936 Act primarily envisages a system where the local authority has a power and a duty to try to secure that premises are not in a state which constitutes a statutory nuisance.
Action is initiated by the service of an abatement notice requiring remedial work.
If the person in default fails to comply with an abatement notice the local authority is obliged to make a complaint to the magistrates.
If the complaint is proved, a nuisance order is made requiring the defendant to get the necessary work done.
Effectively the sequence is that the person in default is told what is wrong and is required to put it right.
He is given an opportunity to do so, and if he does not, he is subject to sanctions by the court to compel him to do so.
The problem arises in connection with section 99 which adapts or applies the provisions to cases where an individual rather than the local authority wishes to make the complaint.
Need he serve an abatement notice?
The authorities plainly establish that he need not and cannot do so.
Does that mean he may lay an information and bring the matter before the magistrates without first putting the person alleged to be in default on notice of what is alleged?
The council argued that a landlord, particularly one such as a local authority, cannot realistically be expected to have a system of inspection of all its premises and in practice is entitled to depend upon notification by its tenants.
For Mrs Bujok it was argued that the 1936 Act was designed to secure in the interests of the community at large that statutory nuisances did not exist.
It was submitted that an owner cannot turn his back on his property because when he purchases and takes on the responsibility of letting, he knows the property will in the course of time deteriorate.
He must therefore satisfy himself on a regular basis that it does not constitute a statutory nuisance.
In Warner v Lambeth London Borough Council (1985) 15 HLR 45, 50, Lord Justice Glidewell said a private person could lay an information alleging the failure to abate a statutory nuisance without first giving notice requiring abatement.
Therefore in the present case the justices came to the correct conclusion.
His Lordship reached that decision without enthusiasm because it seemed that as a matter of common sense, notice should be given in such circumstances before criminal proceedings were launched.
Lord Justice Watkins said he agreed with reluctance.
It was surely repugnant to commonsense that in this area of legal activity a local authority should be prosecuted by one of its tenants without first being given the opportunity by that tenant to remedy the consequences of a neglect to repair the dwelling that the tenant occupied.
In law there was no doubt that Mrs Bujok was entitled to commence proceedings without giving notice of the state of the dwelling to the council.
But in every other conceivable way that action was entirely wrong.
Endless trouble to many people in courts and council offices and much money could be saved by the giving of notice of disrepair.
If the council did not react to that notice, then would be the time for the tenant to exercise the right to prosecute.
Parliament should give fresh thought to enacting a provision placing an obligation upon a council tenant to give notice to the council before being permitted to commence proceedings.
Appearances: John Cherryman QC instructed by Sherwood & Co for the council; Elizabeth Norman instructed by Michael Arnold & Co, Oldbury, for Mrs Bujok.
Shiranikha Herbert barrister
Input/Tim Radford We come to hit hypocrites with a brick, not to praise them.
PERHAPS there should be more hypocrisy in the world.
There's plenty in Britain.
The British go to night classes in it, and particularly savour high-class hypocrites.
They tend to admire people for how they hold themselves and what they say and then blame them more for being found out than for what they do.
After a while you get tainted with hypocrisy even if you try not to.
You begin to see that it's just another language.
You begin to enjoy the way people can say ‘The National Health Service is safe in our hands’ or ‘Nobody deplores apartheid more than we do’or even ‘We do not have a shoot-to-kill policy’and you know that another hospital is going to close and that there will be another stitch-up with Pretoria and that another shooting is going to be quietly forgotten.
It is, admittedly, refreshing to meet the occasional non-slippery politician.
‘Frankly, Tim, we cocked that one up,’ an Antipodean politico said to me once.
‘We made a real dog's breakfast of it.’
It was quite a clever move on his part.
Suddenly I didn't have anything else to ask him.
Actually, politicians are never that frank, and never honest: the game isn't played that way.
And anyway, if somebody is too forthright and says what he really thinks you might feel impelled to hit him with a brick.
But then hypocrisy has grades, like judo.
In Britain they are all black belts.
The British murmur ‘You must come and stay with us some time,’ and when they part they say ‘Let's keep in touch’and they certainly don't mean it, but it greases the wheels of intercourse.
And it stops you having to hit them with a brick.
There have been grade-A hypocrites all through history.
The Roman Emperors were much more slippery than anyone gives them credit for.
One of them once issued an edict against promiscuous kissing on New Year's Day.
He complained about the absurd cost of mullet and in a wild bid to introduce good housekeeping to Imperial Rome he served for dinner what was leftover from the banquet before.
He showed ‘excessive’ courtesy to the House of the Senate, saying once ‘You will, I hope, forgive me if I trespass on my rights as a senator by speaking rather more plainly than I should.’
It was the Emperor Tiberius, one of history's unspeakable bounders.
Since this is a family newspaper, one shrinks from recounting the things he bounded round doing on Capri.
But they had nothing to do with cheap mullet.
Tiberius was one of those men you are warned to flee from and report to the police when they arrive offering sweets.
He was one of those men of whom the historian Edward Gibbon, who wrote the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, reported their disgusting activities ‘in the decent obscurity of a learned language.’
That meant he could say it in Latin, which, when you think about it, was another fundamental hypocrisy.
But fundamentalists are not usually hypocrites.
They are a different problem.
They believe in the truth and they aren't frightened of telling you about it.
Their truth of course, but they recognise no other.
Furthermore they don't know about ‘good form’ and ‘bad form’and saying one thing and doing another.
But fundamentalists are also really dangerous, at least for a while, because hypocrites think that everybody is talking double talk, like them, and awful misunderstandings occur.
They don't have to be religious fundamentalists.
They can just be people who believe they ought to reshape society from top to bottom.
But they are just as difficult to read if you are used to political hypocrisy.
But then the British — or perhaps more properly the English — deal best with their own.
To them, hypocrisy is aggravated assault by other means.
They can execrate someone whom they decide is a useless clown and they do this by making him a Lord, giving him the chairmanship of a quango and telling the chaps at the Athenaeum to hand him non-executive directorships in 15 companies and a merchant bank.
It's the same as knee-capping, and everybody knows it, but much kinder.
Fundamentalists execrate someone for writing a book that they haven't read, and a famous novelist has to go into hiding for fear of his life.
Well, at least he knew, right there and then, that he had to go into hiding.
There is one thing in favour of total non-hypocrisy: at least you know where you stand, for as long as you are allowed to stand, and, of course, as long as you can be sure they aren't being a tiny bit hypocritical too.
Can the call of the wild stop a highway?.
Tom Shakeshaft, who is 15, reveals his dismay at plans to drive a dual carriageway right through the beautiful piece of countryside where he lives.
OUR family lives in a cottage in Scarisbrick (pronounced Scazebrick) that is more than 100 years old.
All the windows look out on fields.
It is a magic place, and safe.
There are skylarks and foxes and an owl sits in the apple tree staring at us by the fire in winter.
Scarisbrick is the largest parish in Lancashire with more than 8,000 acres of Grade 1 agricultural land and flat, with copses and woods.
The soil is rich, fertile and dark brown.
We were very upset when we found out that a dual carriageway might be built in the fields past the wild duck pond behind our home.
My sister Lucy is 18.
We've lived here since she was a baby.
There is also Laura, 17, me, 15, and William is 12.
William and I decided to write to Prince Charles because we know he loves the countryside.
Mrs Thatcher cares about the environment so we sent her a letter too.
A reply came thanking us for our letter and saying it is receiving attention.
We think a bypass would rip the heart out of Scarisbrick, the village where we live and some farmers would be ruined.
People all over the country eat vegetables grown in Scarisbrick.
The air smells lovely, of leeks and straw and the breeze from the sea five miles away.
Our MP Mr Ken Hind (Conservative, West Lancs) wrote to people in Scarisbrick saying that he has pushed the Department of Transport into accepting the need for a bypass between Ormskirk and Southport.
Now it is in the government's white paper.
Hundreds of residents had a public meeting in the village hall to hear Ken Hind explain about the bypass.
It will cost £10 million and could be 13 years before it's built.
But it's in the white paper for road building throughout the country.
We know the main A570 is a busy road and accidents happen and people who live there think a bypass is a good idea.
It must be horrible for them when cars crash outside their homes.
But not everyone here thinks the answer is to dig up the fields and destroy the character of the community.
But the farmer down the lane is worried because he wanted his little lad, who is six, to be the fifth generation of the family to farm the moss land.
He says it is some of the best land in the country, if not the world.
William helps the farmer next to us and he is disappointed because he grows really good wheat and spuds and cabbages.
He was saving the farm for his grandchildren.
Our dad loves walking over the fields when he comes home tired from working in the city.
It helps him relax.
We go with him, and our sisters too, and sometimes a hare jumps out in front of us or a pheasant flies up from the ditch.
We love it here because it is unspoiled and old fashioned.
An old man called Mr Leatherbarrow used to grow prize-winning onions on the moss.
He had a patch of land he ploughed with a hand plough and he told us stories about coming home across the fields in snowdrifts with carthorses.
He had to carry a clothes prop to feel where the ditches where.
Once a horse drowned on the moss.
We bought our cottage from him.
There's a well in the garden.
If a dual carriageway is built the fields will be just concrete and we'll lie awake listening to cars zooming past and seeing flashing lights.
We'd like the people who want to build the bypass to visit the moss.
If they were lucky enough to find a skylark's nest they might not want to spoil the countryside for all of us.
What future for Britain's handicapped youth?
Michele Hanson examines the problems imposed by budget cuts and staff shortages, and looks at the need for long-term strategies.
And in the light of the recent Beverley Lewis tragedy, Adrienne Baker puts the case for self-help groups to relieve the isolation and enormous pressure felt by the mothers of handicapped children A special kind of need
THE 1970 Education Act opened a new world of opportunity for children with mental and physical handicaps.
It declared them educable, took them out of their own homes and hospitals and brought them into full-time schooling.
Bright new facilities and therapies were provided, plus enlightened teaching and special care.
In 1970 in one London borough alone, Islington, nine severely or profoundly handicapped children were born.
They have had the benefit of such an education and now it is over or about to end, together with almost all paramedical help.
At 19 these young people — and hundreds like them all over the country — are likely to be going home and staying there.
It means, as one parent said, ‘19 years of hard work down the drain’.
Education is statutory, but once it is over such youngsters are legally entitled to nothing.
The Disabled Persons Act 1986 recommends, but does not legislate, that local authorities should define need and provide for it.
Adequate provision will probably not be made for Jonathan Rixon, one of the Islington children.
He has Seckels Syndrome, a rare disease that stunts growth.
He is microcephalic, blind, has severe curvature of the spine, scoliosis, no speech, cannot walk and weighs 3 ½ stone.
His knees frequently dislocate and he has a painful hiatus hernia which makes him scream.
His mother Stephanie holds him, rubs him, talks to him, kisses him, stretches his body out over her knee — anything to relieve his discomfort.
She must also change, bathe, feed, exercise, occupy, entertain and shave him.
‘It's not hard work,’ she says, ‘just constant.’
When Jonathan leaves school next year, this will be the pattern of their life.
Stephanie cannot duplicate the essential therapies and stimulation the school provides.
‘What will happen to his small world when it all stops?’ she asks.
‘He'll just have me.’
Doctors say Jonathan will have a normal life-span and she is worried for the future and what will happen to him after her death.
There are community therapists, but not enough to go around.
They are poorly paid, mainly young and female, have little chance of career progression and no incentive to remain in the profession.
Those available will be busy rehabilitating stroke patients, who take priority.
Fears that handicapped youngsters will deteriorate are well founded.
Ian Squires, severely autistic, returned to Islington in 1986 from a residential school where he'd been happy.
He waited months for a day centre place; when he got one it was unsuitable and he refused to go.
He became very fearful of cars, buses and stairs, eventually shutting himself in his room, with the curtains drawn, for 14 months.
He began banging his head against the wall, vomiting up his food, lost a great deal of weight and was eventually taken to hospital.
Islington's provision is better than most, yet the Director of Social Services, John Rea Price, feels Islington has been penalised for attempting to carry out the Government's own directives on community care.
Rate capping has meant that for every ‘profligate’ pound spent on such provision, £6 has been taken away.
Islington cannot even benefit from the ‘dowry’ system (money paid by a health authority to a local authority for each patient returning to the community from hospital) because their people never went to hospital.
Many local authorities have had their budgets cut by reductions in central government They've been given better education and higher expectations, but no future.
grants and now have a far greater shortfall of places than Islington.
A white paper is expected at the end of this month in response to the Griffiths Report, which recommended that authorities be given greater responsibility for the mentally handicapped.
‘Unless Griffiths funding comes quickly to the rescue,’ says Rea Price, ‘there is no hope of extra resources.’
A recent (and the first) report by the Social Services Inspectorate on day services for the mentally handicapped finds much to criticise.
It admits that funds are needed for training and basic equipment, and finds that the principles of community care have often not been fully understood.
Few middle management have direct experience of the service, need has not been quantified nor fed through to planners, very few local authorities have involved parents, let alone clients.
Staff feel undervalued and lack any sense of direction, joint philosophies between health and local authorities are rare, there are no long-term strategies to solve the problems and many centres are overcrowded, offering only shared, part-time places.
Centres for the physically handicapped have traditionally taken the elderly, and youngsters finding themselves there after leaving school may feel their adult lives have ended rather than just begun.
Mencap's Day Services campaign indicates that the most desperate need is for the severely handicapped and those with behavioural difficulties.
For those with more moderate disabilities there are YTS schemes, but these are generalised, not geared to individual needs.
The handicapped may be a minority group but it's a vast one — the last count, 10 years ago, totalled six million people with identified disabilities.
A hidden and forgotten problem rather than a small one.
‘We're fighting a losing battle,’ says Richard Tomlinson, headmaster of the Thomas Delarue School for young people with cerebral palsy.
‘It's not a cohesive group and has no political edge.
To get money you've got to present an image of disability that reinforces rather than changes the stereotype — flaxen-haired moppets in callipers.
If you actually show people in much greater need, young adults, they're not so attractive.
They might dribble.
We're articulate enough to fool ourselves that we're nice people, but there's a strong undercurrent to our thinking that encourages us to view people with a disability as lesser, and until we come to terms with that, we will never have a proper support system.
At present the whole thing is on guilt money: ‘I'm glad it's not my kids.
Here's a fiver.’'
The present situation reinforces his ideas.
‘No social services or Government department will deny that everyone is of equal value,’ says Mencap, ‘but the services don't support that.
Even if people are unattractive, aggressive, distorted, vomit and bite, they still have rights.’
Things are, of course, better than they were.
In a few areas great progress is being made.
In Herefordshire, education, health, social services and voluntary groups are working together on a Lifestyles Project which enables students leaving college to have a life of their own within the community.
The Spastics Society has begun Alternative Lifestyles courses for disabled school leavers, ‘providing positive alternatives to paid employment and giving them the confidence to take charge of their own lives’.
The Open University has begun a new course for people with learning difficulties.
Hopefully such ideas will spread to the rest of the community, but for the majority of this year's school leavers it will be too late.
They've been given a better education, a longer and healthier life and higher expectations, but no future.
LACK of communication is one of the saddest aspects of having a mentally handicapped child.
As a social worker, I met family after family and the isolation that having a ‘special’ child brings was a common theme.
The burden inevitably fell mainly on the mothers and it seemed that their loneliness could at least be lessened if they had a regular opportunity to share their experiences.
The group began with mothers responding to my invitation and deciding tentatively whether there was ‘anything in it’ for them.
Several women felt too vulnerable or exposed to remain; another left dramatically, announcing that her anger would destroy the group.
The beginning was also a time when I was asked if I, too, would soon let them down ‘like all the others’ and when being there was expressed for all by Janet: ‘I'm only here because my daughter is the way she is.
I'd rather not be here.’
Or by Shirley, who cried soundlessly and then protested: ‘I'm not crying for myself; I'm crying for the others.’
Gradually trust developed and themes emerged: sadness, ‘A grief with no end’; anger, ‘Why did it happen to me?’; and frustration with the professionals who could not fully understand their plight.
The subjective experiences of these mothers became the maintheme; for example, how rejected they felt by friends or neighbours who crossed the street, not knowing what to say.
They talked of their husbands' preoccupation with work, of their normal children's too-early maturing, of integrated and special schools, and of eating — the hoped-for miracle diet for their child or, often, the consolation they found in food.
These mothers had built a cocoon around themselves and their handicapped child which, while keeping away the hurtful comments, wrapped them in with their pain.
Then, one week, the quietest woman in the group said: ‘This is the only place where I can afford to be honest,’ and somehow it seemed the healing process had begun.
Leora personified the courage: I remember her trying to calm her screaming autistic son, taking him in her arms, rocking him, comforting him, until at last he became tranquil and quiet and she was left with his violence in her.
THEY were brave women and often poetic.
Zena, a sculptress, took on the responsibility of caring for her Down's Syndrome grand-daughter when the mother ‘upped and offed’.
She described how she walked around for months ‘with a pain, almost a physical pain, in my heart’; of how she avoided friends and pulled her hat over her face if she met them in the street; of how, at last, she knew she must express her thousand emotions about her little grandchild in the way she knew best, in clay.
And when she took this most precious creation to art school, the teacher said: ‘Zena, why didn't you tell us?’
Then she could cry and let people comfort her.
Jean described a trip to the park.
While she queued for coffee, her friend held the handicapped child and Jean ‘made believe she wasn't mine.’
The sadness came out week by week and we confronted it.
Incredibly, there was laughter, too, and companionship.
We gained energy from each other and I determined that this strength must be used creatively.
Their frustration that they would always remain only a mummy could be challenged.
We considered how much we, ourselves, hold on to an eternally-caring-for-others role.
Stirrings of feminist vitality.
I wanted to help these women to ‘find a voice’ and no longer to place their needs at the bottom of the list of priorities.
Gradually we re-evaluated ourselves as women and looked at the way we had always put ourselves down.
One member had described the work she does as ‘just a little job’.
The rabbi's wife had insisted it was her role to attend to their epileptic daughter several times each night; her husband must sleep to be strong for the community.
But there was change in the air: one woman began to study and others took their cue from her.
I encouraged them to write.
Together we compiled an article for publication.
It was raw, frank and eventually it appeared in print.
By now the time had come for me to hand back to these women responsibility to go it alone.
I knew that telling them would be hard but nothing prepared me for their anger and grief during our final month together.
‘Was our sadness too much for you to bear?’ asked an Iranian woman.
‘I too, would like the luxury of resigning,’ asserted another.
My leaving them was similar to their having to let go of their children.
My task had been to help these women to realise their own strengths and to speak out for themselves with courage and dignity.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE wom
Lunchtime sessions that pay dividends London's local authorities are enjoying a thaw in relations with the Commissioner.
EVERY six months, the Labour council leaders represented in the Association of London Authorities get together for beer and sandwiches with Sir Peter Imbert.
Alternately, the Commissioner and his most senior colleagues invite them to Scotland Yard, or visit them at the ALA building nearby.
According to Walter Easey, the ALA police policy advisor, ‘under Sir Kenneth Newman, this would have been quite impossible.
We don't make a big public fuss but he answers our questions, and we answer his.
We try to keep it low temperature.
It's a very good regular basis for discussing things.’
The meetings are only the most visible signs of a thaw in the relationship — previously something close to undeclared war — between the Yard and the Labour authorities since Sir Peter's accession in 1987.
It affects relations at all levels.
Sir Kenneth, for example, set up multi-agency panels to deal with the cautioning of juveniles, designed to keep as many as possible out of the courts.
But in many boroughs, Mr Easey said, ‘we began to find that whatever we said, they'd go ahead and charge them anyway’.
Several boroughs withdrew as a result.
The police attitude now, many councils have found, is more receptive, and the panels have been reconstituted.
Authorities have begun to find that multi-agency cooperation in other fields — notably racial violence — need not be a mask for police interference.
The recent attempt by Clive Pearman, the chief superintendent in charge of Notting Hill, to persuade the two local councils to cut off funds to voluntary orgnanisations which he considered inimical was an example of an approach whose shortcomings have come to be appreciated at the Yard.
The ALA has had a major influence in redesigning the police recruitment forms, which have gone through three drafts since the Met tried to interest Labour councils in their campaign to attract more ethnic minority officers.
The concept of indirect discrimination was, according to the councils, at first unfamiliar to police, who also saw no reason why black candidates might be put off by the former question three — which asked the country of origin of spouse or lover's parents.
These difficulties having been resolved, several former so-called ‘loony-left’ councils have mounted police recruitment exhibitions and meetings.
In part, the emerging entente must be attributed to the authorities' move to the right, towards the Kinnockite orthodoxy favoured by Margaret Hodge, the Islington and ALA leader.
But the Met has shown itself increasingly willing to respond to overtures, for example instituting procedures to check criminal records of applicant child-care workers and foster parents for sex offences.
Camden and Islington councils, meanwhile, have given the Met a free copy of LAFIS — a computer programme which they developed at a cost of £15 million, and sold to other authorities for about £2 million a throw.
It is now being adapted to give the Met its first method for running cost accounting in 150 years.
Five of the 13 Labour authorities still refuse to participate in local consultative groups, although Brent is about to reverse its policy and in Ealing the matter is under discussion.
But as the Labour parliamentary front bench scents the thaw, and surveys the possibility of government for the first time in a decade, the party pressures running in favour of detente are increasing.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE soc
An astonishing shift of power A crucial speech by Sir Peter Imbert underlines the extent of the differences between him and his predecessors.
THE EXTENT of the philosophical shift taking place at the top of the Metropolitan Police was illustrated in a speech delivered by Sir Peter Imbert to the International Police Exhibition and Conference in London at the end of September.
The brief reports which have appeared of this remarkable address dealt with Sir Peter's appeal for glasnost within the force.
‘Openness must be central to the policing of a democratic and pluralist society,’ he said: all too often, the police had retreated behind ‘one of many walls of silence,’giving one of a series of stock excuses to the press and public for refusing to disclose information.
But the depth of the speech's radicalism has not reached a wider public.
Sir Peter justified his call for openness in terms which would have been unthinkable from his immediate predecessor, Sir Kenneth Newman, and indeed from any predecessor: ‘Professions, including police, tend by definition to be monopolists of knowledge and through that knowledge, power.
Yet to set ourselves up in such a manner contradicts our cherished notion of being part of the community.’
Key parts of the speech signalled a conscious, almost revolutionary departure from some of Sir Kenneth's most cherished notions.
Its full title was Preparing Police to Deal with a Multicultured Society, and it was on the subject of policing black communities — still the most vexatious and controversial for both police and their critics — that Sir Peter made his thoughts most plain.
The doctrines and policy of Sir Kenneth Newman were set out candidly in an unpublished, private lecture to the European Atlantic Group in 1983, entitled Public Order in Free Societies.
The text has achieved great influence, disseminated widely among senior officers, and taught formally at the Bramshill Police College.
Its terms and implications are unmistakably authoritarian.
All democratic societies, Sir Kenneth said, must strike a balance between order and freedom, and in ‘multi-ethnic societies,’ this posed an acute dilemma.
In Britain, as in Germany, the first generation of immigrants had been ‘relatively law-abiding,’ but discussion on ethnic minorities now centred on ‘crime and crime control’.
As Lord Scarman, reporting after the 1981 riots, had pointed out, the underlying crisis was social and economic.
But this was outside the police remit, and meanwhile, they had to be careful not to jeopardise public tranquillity.
A permanent state of war with the community was untenable, but the law must be enforced.
In multi-ethnic areas, with their ‘symbolic locations’ like All Saints Road and Broadwater Farm, used for the sale of drugs and stolen goods, police could not act alone.
Sir Kenneth said: ‘It is not sufficient to think only in terms of crime control.
We need to lift the problem to a higher level of generality, encompassed by the expression ‘social control,’ in a benign sense, in order to provide a unifying concept within which the activities of police and other agencies can be co-ordinated.’
Sir Kenneth's agent in this project was ‘multi-agency’ cooperation, a buzzword throughout the 1980s in police and Home Office circles.
But in his vision, the police would be giving the lead, laying down a ‘clear social policy’.
It was crucial that the police maintain ‘operational independence’.
Party political interference, he said, rejecting the possibility of a London police authority, was especially to be abhorred.
He was trying, he said, to avoid a shift in the balance between freedom and order.
But nevertheless: ‘We should not forget that an over-regard for individual liberties can put at risk that sense of order and security without which no community can be truly free.’
Sir Kenneth concluded with a sideswipe at his critics.
It was in these very multi-ethnic areas with their myriad problems that ‘political agitators exploit civil liberties issues, and play down the issue of communal security…individual liberties are important, but we must not become so obsessed with them that we overlook the importance of communal freedom.’
Like Sir Kenneth, Sir Peter Imbert recalled the riots of 1981 and 1985, and the conflict between police and ethnic minorities.
But the intellectual foundation of his proposed solution was diametrically opposed to that of his predecessor.
There were some ‘basic principles’ to be adopted in police/community relations, Sir Peter said.
But in seeking to broaden this perspective, there were ‘a number of propositions which police officers need to understand.’
First, he said, ‘the community itself should be the primary focus, not the police.’
The community was not homogenous, but made up of a multitude of different groups with different attitudes and beliefs, while ‘relations within the community, between different groups, are significantly outside the control of the police’.
Sir Peter then tackled the Newman concept of an interventionist, social controlling police force directly.
‘Members of the community are themselves in the course of events engaged in a great deal of informal social control,’ he said.
‘It is the community who should, in the main, determine whether police are to be involved in resolving community conflicts.’
As police, he went on, ‘we sometimes quite wrongly assume the monopoly of good ideas on good community relations and good policing…the public have a right to be actively involved in determining how policing is developed’.
Sir Kenneth Newman's retreat behind ‘operational independence’ was cast out.
The major precepts of his philosophy Sir Peter declared to be: ‘Openness, access, power sharing and the sharing of responsibility.’
Such precepts, according to one senior officer, were in the context of the previous 150 years of the Metropolitan Police, ‘simply astonishing’.
Again, developing the idea of power sharing, Sir Peter implicitly criticised his predecessor and his vision of the multi-agency approach.
‘If openness and access are problematic, power sharing is likely to be even more problematic.
Early efforts to become involved in multi-agency approaches to crime and associated topics were painful experiences…we wanted to maintain the lead in every forum, to be the gatekeepers of power and have the right of veto if decisons were made which did not suit us.’
Those attitudes, Sir Peter said, still lingered.
Power sharing was not an easy path to tread.
But it ‘does not mean a surrender of power; rather it involves sharing of the knowledge which allows different interpretations and constructions to be placed on that information and which in turn can lead to a different conclusion and different solutions’.
Police must ‘find out from our consumers what it is they require from us, how sensitive we are being to their needs and how satisfied they are with the service’.
Polls of Asians, for example, had shown that they felt particularly vulnerable and dissatisfied: it was essential to ‘have the will to act’ on this information when allocating scarce resources.
The police, he concluded, must possess ‘an unswerving commitment to communication and consultation within which police and the community are equal partners.’
Well-founded criticism could only be met with ‘a willingness to change’.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE soc
An opening at the Met Despite resistance by its more conservative elements, the Metropolitan Police has begun a process of reform that should lead to improvements in the way it operates and encourage better relations with the public.
THROUGH the corridors of Scotland Yard, a wind of change is blowing.
The small faction of senior officers who believe that the police must undertake radical reform in order to remain viable has gained an increasingly confidentially in the shape of the Metropolitan Commissioner, Sir Peter Imbert.
Implicitly, they have accepted many of the criticisms made for more than a decade by Labour councils and civil libertarians: that a force which has dug itself in behind ramparts of elitist isolationism must begin to respond to demands of the public it serves and their political representatives.
Sir Peter speaks frequently of ‘power sharing,’ a notion which goes well beyond mere participation in the local consultative groups established by the Police and Criminal Evidence Act.
It is no coincidence that since Sir Peter became Commissioner in 1987, the relationship between Scotland Yard and London's 13 Labour authorities has seen a new detente.
With the new Home Secretary, David Waddington, displaying a marked lack of enthusiasm for Sir Peter's other pet project, the creation of a national detection agency, senior officers are beginning to consider the prospect of a Labour Home Office with equanimity.
They find themselves, for the first time, able to contemplate the two main features of Labour policy, greater independence in the investigation of complaints and a London police authority, with something less than total horror.
The signs of reform were stirring before the advent of Sir Peter.
The anonymous authors of the 1986 annual Met internal appraisal, for example, wrote in deeply critical terms of the effects of government economic policy on the inner city, and the consequences for policing.
But the seminal event was Sir Peter's decison to publish A Force for Change, the survey carried out last year by the Wolff Olins consultancy.
The report said that the Met was scruffy, rude, and operating from shabby police stations.
These important barriers in the fostering of a good realtionship with the public were bad enough: but the force was also undertrained, riven with internal struggle, and isolated from society — in a ‘state of siege’.
Most policemen felt beleaguered and misunderstood, their isolation further deepened by criticism from politicians and the media.
Reforming and reactionary police officers are not unaware that public confidence in the police has meanwhile ebbed away.
Causes celebres like the Guildford Four are bad enough: ‘Frankly, we all know the criminal justice system is in tatters,’ one superintendent said last week.
But as demonstrated by a variety of research — including both internal police studies and external work like the 1985 Islington Crime Survey — more damaging still is the accumulation of the public's direct and disappointing contacts with police.
The publication of A Force for Change was crucial because it represented an important internal victory for the reformers, and established glasnost as the principle by which the Met was to be put right.
The conservatives at the Yard, who include the considerable figure of the Deputy Commissioner, John Dellow, believe that the Met has been reorganised quite enough recently and has been unsettled by a succession of commissioners, all with strong and mutually conflicting ideas.
In their opinion, the calling in of Wolff Olins was more of a symptom of this malaise than any kind of cure.
The Wolff Olins authors commented that the publication of their work represented a ‘profound cultural change’.
This, they said, should accompany the ‘profound managerial change’ which must be next on the agenda, somehow to tackle Londoners' personal and local dissatisfaction with the police.
THE main public response to A Force for Change is the Plus Programme, a continuing series of measures drawn up by Deputy Assistant Commissioner Charles Pollard and Commander Alec Marnoch.
Reports of the programme have concentrated on its cosmetic aspects.
But its greater underlying significance is demonstrated by the fact that it, too, has been strongly opposed by Yard conservatives.
According to members of the reforming faction, some officers have attempted to use Sir Peter Imbert's apparent discomfiture over his role in the Guildford Four case to discredit the Plus Programme, with which he is closely identified.
At the heart of the strategy is a change of balance in the police's own perception of their role.
For 150 years, police have regarded their job as the control of crime and criminals, of coping with social deviancy.
Under the programme, what internal documents describe as the ‘public service tradition’ of the Met is to be emphasised as never before.
Aggressive behaviour is to be not only discouraged but monitored and disciplined: the public regarded as consumers, customers and paymasters of policing, not potential villains or troublemakers.
Accompanying the programme is To Serve and Protect, 10 commandments for everyday policing issued to every officer, after consultation over its text with MPs and community organisations.
The first ‘value of every member of the organisation’ is ‘to uphold the law fairly and firmly’.
But some of the others are less familiar.
Stressing the need ‘to behave in a manner which is neither racist nor sexist,’‘to uphold individual rights,’ and ‘to cooperate and consult with the community and other agencies in pursuing our purpose’has not gone down well with conservative officers.
It would be possible to dismiss the Plus Programme as merely an expression of a different style, without substance or commitment to institutional change.
Evidence that it is not is provided by a confidential, internal report on CID work circulated to senior officers earlier this year, the Crime Investigation Priority Project (CIPP).
Its authors, significantly, were not an outside firm but police officers.
Identifying many of the same failings as Wolff Olins, CIPP's first core recommendation was ‘that crime investigation should be made victim-focussed,’ and that CID departments give ‘higher priority to the victims of crime and witnesses’.
The needs of victims, it continued, ‘can be clearly stated, are feasible and are not being met.
An orientation towards customers’ needs and rights is becoming a prevailing ethos in society which the police cannot ignore.’
But, CIPP said, ‘a number of officers we interviewed do not understand these needs.’
The report went on: ‘Victim satisfaction is not directly linked to the outcome of individual investigations.
It is much more closely concerned with how closely the police adhere to the kind of standards the public expects from any large organisation, including promptness, a sympathetic attitude which indicates individual attention, some conspicuous activity and clear information about what will happen next.’
It was CIPP which first recommended the abolition — announced earlier this week — of the controversial system of crime screening, by which many offences were not investigated because of a lack of evidence.
It was ‘discouraging officers from investigating crimes fully’, even those which could be cleared up.
The report made a series of recommendations on increasing CID strength, which has fallen sharply from 10 per cent of the force in 1973 to 7.4 per cent, despite an overall large increase in numbers and a recommendation by Her Majesty's Inspectorate that provincial CIDs should make up 12.4 per cent of police.
These are now being implemented.
But the most significant part of CIPP dealt with institutional change: the perestroika to follow Sir Peter Imbert's glasnost which, if implemented, would represent exactly the ‘profound managerial change’ recommended by Wolff Olins.
The height and extent of the inbuilt hurdles in the way of reforming a police force are not commonly appreciated.
The incoming chairman of a public company can swiftly dispose of dead wood, to arrange a board in sympathy with new policies.
But police officers can be dismissed only if severe disciplinary charges are proven against them.
It is possible to arrange retirements on spurious ‘medical’ grounds, but this practice was heavily criticised by the Commons Home Affairs select committee earlier this year.
The ensuing problems for a reforming commissioner begin at the top, with the Scotland Yard policy committee — the deputy, assistant and deputy assistant commissioners, by whom all major changes have, effectively, to be ratified.
The reformer, like a US president with a recalcitrant supreme court, can secure a majority in his favour only as they retire, die or move on to better things.
BROUGHT about by lifetime tenure The lack of accountability is analagous at divisional level.
Conservative CIDs, for example, have all sorts of tricks to frustrate an incoming radical chief superintendent, by which they can legally send clear-up rates into a tailspin — so leading to the rapid transfer of the reforming senior officer.
Incredibly, it is almost impossible even to return a detective to uniform simply on the grounds that he isn't very good.
CIPP grasped this nettle.
Supervision of subordinates ‘is focussed on bureaucratic procedures and not on the quality of service at the point of delivery to the public.’
All supervising officers, including senior divisional managers — chief superintendents —‘should not only hold themselves accountable, but be actively held accountable for the overall level of their subordinates’.
To achieve these goals, senior police officers needed a weapon: what the CIPP report delicately called ‘deselection’.
This might, it said, mean the removal of CID officers to uniform.
However, ‘many officers interviewed were in favour of administrative dismissal, not currently available under police regulations.’
An overwhelming majority of those who still baulked at actual sacking favoured return to uniform, with the view that ‘CID officers who are lazy and incompetent were so primarily because of the absence of the eventual sanction of removal from specialist duty.’
Sir Peter Imbert and the Yard reformers have important allies in the regional forces: Geoffrey Dear, the West Midlands chief constable, whose boldness at disbanding his serious crimes squad cannot be discounted, whatever his eventual career ambitions; and Paul Condon, the new Kent chief, formerly in charge of Met training and personnel.
But circumstances, and the perceived depth of public alienation, are driving even natural conservatives into their camp.
Presently underway is a huge opinion survey of police and their customers, covering policing priorities, the quality of service provided, screening and the image of the force.
Its co-sponsor is none other than the Police Federation, the junior officers' staff association, traditionally the organisation most wary of reform.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE soc