

Stock Exchange rallies strongly in response to open border.
By Alex Brummer Financial Editor
THE Frankfurt Stock Exchange yesterday greeted the opening of the borders between the two Germanys with a strong and jubilant rally, despite fears on the foreign exchange markets that rapid political developments could weaken the Bundesbank's fight against inflation.
The DAX index of West Germany's 30 leading shares surged 33.73 points, or 2.3 per cent, to 1,496.69 in one of the strongest daily peformances in recent months.
Investors were elated by the prospect of a more buoyant West German economy as Bonn provides houses and jobs for arrivals from the East.
‘The mood is super,’ a senior dealer said.
But the prospect of economic growth rising by a further half-point during the next six months raised fears on the international currency markets of an uncontrolled expansion and increased concern about inflation throughout Europe.
The Bundesbank has been seen until now as Europe's guardian against rapid price increases.
On the foreign exchanges, the mark fell more than a pfennig against the dollar and dropped against the currencies of West Germany's partners in the EMS exchange-rate mechanism.
With the West German economy growing fast already, the impetus from the East German migration and closer links across the border could hasten a rise in European-wide interest rates.
The West German Finance Minister, Mr Theo Waigel, ruled out a common German currency until economic reforms had been carried out in the East.
‘A currency union can only be reached if there is convertibility, if the East German mark is brought into a sensible relationship with the West German mark, and if East Germany has undergone decisive monetary, financial and economic reform,’ he said.
Ashkenazy at ease in land of his birth.
By John Rettie in Moscow
VLADIMIR Ashkenazy, one of the world's greatest pianists, said yesterday he felt far more at home in the Soviet Union now than when he departed under a cloud half a lifetime ago.
Returning to Moscow at the age of 52, for the first time since he left to live in London 26 years ago, Ashkenazy said: ‘In my modest way, I thought I could endorse what's happening in my country.’
Although he was never a political defector, he said he probably would not have come back before President Gorbachev launched his perestroika policy.
In 1963 ‘there were some very unpleasant moments’, he told journalists at the Soviet Culture Foundation.
‘For many years in Moscow, I felt I couldn't leave the country.’
But now, he said, ‘I see open faces.
People aren't frightened.
I feel at ease — much better than I did then.’
The immediate reason for his return is to give two charity concerts with the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra this weekend for the victims of last year's Armenian earthquake.
The Soviet world of culture is not alone in regarding Ashkenazy as an immensely welcome guest.
His endorsement of perestroika will be music as sweet in the ears of Mr Gorbachev and his supporters, as the brilliant notes everyone confidently expects to hear from him.
To the media, he was engagingly modest and direct, with a warmth of personality that immediately won their hearts.
In his opening remarks in Russian, he said: ‘I don't like being the centre of a sensation, but I know I can't avoid it this time.’
Asked why it had taken him 26 years to return, he said: ‘I wasn't invited till last year — though if I had been before perestroika, I would have thought not twice but 10 times about it, and I'm not sure I would have come.’
Asked what he hoped for Soviet art and culture after long years of political oppression, he said there would be an enormous spiritual benefit, not least because of easier travel and contacts with the rest of the world.
‘But then there's the counter-argument.
If Shostakovich was writing now, he wouldn't have had the same material.
Many of his symphonies dealt with desolation — no light at the end of the tunnel.
We wouldn't have had Symphonies eight and ten.
So who knows?
Some of the greatest works of art have been produced at the most difficult times.’
And then a pause — and a thought for perestroika.
‘But give me this any time,’ he laughed.
Court hears of plot to kill Zia.
By Kathy Evans in Lahore
ACOURT in the small Massachusetts town of Springfield heard an extraordinary tale last week of a $1 million plot to kill the late President of Pakistan, General Zia ul-Haq.
Mushtaq Malik, who is on trial in Springfield on heroin smuggling charges, claimed that he organised a plot on behalf of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) which now rules Pakistan.
Zia was killed on August 7 last year along with 29 of his top generals and senior US officials in a plane crash in a remote part of Punjab.
An official inquiry by the Pakistan military and US army experts determined that sabotage had caused the crash and that Zia's pilots had been knocked out by a poisonous gas.
No one has been arrested.
Last week the Springfield court heard that Malik, known in Pakistan as the ‘Black Prince’, had plotted to kill Zia together with a Jordanian drug associate, Sanir Hashemi.
Malik told the court he had paid Hashemi $1 million for preliminary expenses and to buy the necessary equipment for the assassination.
After several months of stalling, he believed Hashemi had tricked him and he went to the United States to retrieve his money — and save his face with his ‘superiors’ in the PPP.
Malik's claim took his defence lawyer, Stephen Ferrarone by surprise: ‘Not my idea of the best defence, believe me.
I would prefer not to have my guy stand up and say I may have been involved in an assassination.’
Malik is being tried on charges of conspiracy to smuggle $10 million of heroin into the US.
Hashemi, who was found carrying two kilos of heroin, agreed to co-operate with US officials to entrap Malik.
In Islamabad, officials of the PPP government have vehemently denied any suggestion of involvement in the death of Zia.
An aide to the Prime Minister said Malik's statement was ‘another attempt by the drug mafia to discredit the government because of Benazir Bhutto's campaign against the drug trade’.
However, relatives of the victims who died along with Zia have now demanded that Pakistan ask the US to extradite Malik for questioning.
At a press conference in Lahore yesterday, Zia's son, Mr Ijaz ul-Haq accused the PPP of being involved in ‘narco-terrorism’ and he claimed that he had evidence that the Al Zulfiqar group had been involved in the assassination.
The Al Zulfiqar group is believed to be based in Damascus and is said to be headed by Mr Murtaza Bhutto, the Prime Minister's brother.
Malik once served a short term in jail in Karachi where he was filmed by Dutch television living in the height ofluxury.
He claimed in court that he met Hashemi in jail.
Communists next in line if former Prime Minister fails Papandreou chance to form government.
By Helena Smith in Athens
MR Andreas Papandreou, the former Greek prime minister, was yesterday handed an exploratory mandate from President Christos Sartzetakis to form a government within three days.
The Socialist leader took charge of the mandate after the conservative New Democracy Party, which fell three seats short of an overall majority in the general elections last weekend, failed to drum up the extra support it needed to create a minority administration.
Mr Papandreou, aged 70, is under increasing pressure to reach a compromise solution with his political opponents as Greek voters have no desire to go to the polls again for a third time in less than six months.
Greece embarked on a fortnight of party negotiations following the failure of the two main parties to secure a clear majority in national balloting for the second time this year.
The worsening state of the economy — Greece's overall debt is expected to exceed the nation's gross domestic product for 1989 — has made the need for government even more acute.
In a last ditch effort to keep the public sector buoyant, bank credits to the private sector were yesterday frozen by the Governor of the Bank of Crete who ordered private enterprises to pay back state loans as soon as possible.
The measure was taken after the Governor, Mr Dimitris Chalkias, received an SOS from the National Economy Ministry saying the public sector had run out of money to pay civil servants — around 22 percent of Greece's entire work force are employed by the state.
Mr Papandreou, whose standing has risen steadily since his scandal-hit Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK) increased its vote by almost two percent over the inconclusive election last June, said he will do his utmost to coax the Communist-led left coalition into forming a government of ‘democratic and progressive forces’.
However, the Communists, who emerged for a second time as power broker despite their loss of seven seats in parliament, has made it clear that they will not collaborate with the Pasok leader whom they indicted for alleged wrongdoing during the interim left-right coalition government of Mr Tzannis Tzannetakis.
If, as expected, Mr Papandreou also fails to form a government, the mandate will automatically pass on to the Communists.
The Left Coalition has so far ruled out linking up with the conservatives again — the improbable alliance of last June has been blamed for much of their drop in support — but has already hinted that it would be willing to support a national unity government as proposed by the New Democrat leader Mr Constantine Mitsotakis.
The final say in such an administration would rest with the President who is obliged, within the framework of a fourth mandate, to call upon all three party leaders to sink their differences and create a tri-party administration.
Although a national unity government would not necessarily be the answer to some of Greece's problems it is the only way out of the current political impasse if the weary Greek voter is to be saved from going to the polls again.
PAGE
‘A monument to inhumanity’.
By David Gow
THE young man filmed in the early hours of yesterday delightedly taking a pick-axe to the top of the Berlin Wall was a potent symbol of the destruction of 28 years of affront to freedom and of the potential dismantling of the system presided over until only a few weeks ago by its architect, Mr Erich Honecker.
Just over three years ago Dr Helmut Kohl, federal chancellor, declaimed in the remains of the Reichstag that the Wall, stretching beyond the former capital of a united Germany around 100 miles in length, was ‘a monument to inhumanity which tears families apart and prevents human contact.’
Yesterday they played on it with delirious joy.
The Wall had been hastily assembled.
First largely as an enormous roll of barbed wire held together by posts and only later as the ugly concrete brick barrier denounced by a spate of visiting Western leaders in the early hours of Sunday, August 13, 1961.
Its official purpose was not to keep East Germans in but ‘revanchist’ West Germans out.
Its erection came a month after the then 12-year-old state — in the face of a grave economic crisis — had been forced to reorganise its ministries and faced an outflow of its citizens to the West on a scale (200,000 in 1960 alone) mirroring this year's flood of refugees.
Watched by a demonstration of 5000 jeering westerners at the Brandenburg Gate, and by Mr Willi Brandt, the then Mayor of West Berlin who referred to ‘the vacant eyes of uniformed compatriots doing their duty on the other side’, the soldiers completed the first barrier in only a few hours.
Armed guards told thousands of people with jobs in the western sector they should not report for work ‘for the time being’, while a few were said to have turned a blind eye as scores of their fellow citizens ran for freedom.
Individuals were seen jumping from the windows of the buildings straggling the French and Soviet sectors of the city before they could be bricked up.
Soon, Mr Peter Fechter, aged 18, the first of nearly 200 East Germans killed in the last 28 years while trying to escape, was shot as he climbed over the Wall near Checkpoint Charlie.
In the intervening years it is estimated that 111 died while trying to escape and a further 77 lost their lives on the Berlin Wall itself, with most of these deaths occurring in the 1960s.
The shoot-to-kill policy was briefly suspended before and after Mr Honecker's visit to the Federal Republic two years ago and again this year.
The estimated number of people who fled through Mr Honecker's ‘anti-fascist defence barrier’ from 1961 until this year's sudden flood vary between 40,000 and 200,000.
Television showman taken off the air in Brazil election race.
By Jan Rocha in Brasilia
THE prospect that Brazil's next President could be a television showman with dyed hair and an ear-to-ear grin sewn in shape by plastic surgery has been firmly quashed by the seven wise men of the Supreme Electoral Tribunal.
Mr Silvio Santos's late entry into the race, hoping to bank on his huge popularity among the poor, was solemnly considered by the toga-clad judges in a courtroom drama followed by most Brazilians.
The judges decided 7-0 against Mr Santos on the grounds that the party he had joined at the last minute in order to stand, the little-known Brazilian Municipalist Party which was founded by Pentecostal preachers, had failed to register in time.
They also found the entertainer ineligible because it is ‘public and notorious’ that he is also the owner and controller of a television channel and could abuse that power.
Mr Santos replied that he was only a shareholder — with 98 per cent of the shares.
The elimination of Mr Santos, who had the support of President Jose Sarney has reduced the November 14 poll to a contest between the Workers' Party candidate, Mr Luis Inacio da Silva, and Mr Leonel Brizola of the Democratic Labour Party for a place in the second round.
The centre-right candidate, Mr Fernando Collor now seems assured of the other place.
Mixed feelings on the frontier.
By Anna Tomforde in East Berlin
BERLIN was a city of tears and champagne yesterday, of joy and of sadness.
The unbelievable began to happen just after 1am, as East and West Berliners passed through the Brandenburg Gate, symbol of the divided city.
Some stormed across in jubilation, others in a mood closer to melancholy.
At the Invalidenstrasse crossing, an older man wept as he explained: ‘I'm going across for the first time since August 12, 1961.
I'm going to see my daughter, I'll come back,’ he said trembling.
‘I can't believe this,’ said an East Berlin woman as she walked towards the arch of the Brandenberg Gate, the East German flag flying above.
‘We have waited for this moment for 28 years.
This city has suddenly come alive,’ said her husband, an off-duty border guard.
Hundreds of young men and women, singing, shouting and beating pots and pans, scaled the eight-foot Wall from the Western side, dancing, letting off champagne corks and chanting: ‘The Wall has come down.’
It had, for four short ecstatic hours at the Brandenburg Gate, before calm East German border guards sealed it off by forming solid lines.
‘Citizens of the GDR, please use the regular crossing points of our capital,’ sounded the police megaphone.
A young girl from West Berlin had her bicycle lifted across the Wall.
As she cycled across the Pariser Platz on the Eastern side, her shrieks of joy echoed in the huge Doric columns of the Brandenburg Gate.
East German border guards stood aside in small groups, talking to jubilant and excited citizens.
Drawing nervously on his cigarette, a uniformed guard said: ‘What shall I say?
Nobody could foresee this.’
‘Thank you for this wonderful night,’ an emotional West Berliner said to him.
At the Invalidenstrasse crossing point, East German ‘Trabbi’ cars queued for a quick sightseeing trip West.
East and West met in a festive mood and border guards gave up checking documents.
‘I cried today.
For 11 years they stopped me from coming back here.
My parents and my sister are still here,’ said a man in his forties.
‘My daughter called me, Mummy, come across quickly,’ said a woman in a Trabbi.
‘We shall celebrate through the night.
I have to be back here at work at 11 in the morning.’
Most of the East Germans surging across said they just wanted to have a look at West Berlin, have a beer in a bar, or see a friend.
But a young couple with a seven-year-old daughter said they were leaving for good.
‘We are all packed.’
As night fell on East Berlin yesterday, the packed row of people squatting on top of the Wall in the West was growing bigger by the hour.
From the East, Berliners looked across.
A policeman, already working overtime, said calmly: ‘I hope there'll be no trouble tonight so that I can go home early.
Unified state more longing than reality David Gow on Germany's history of division, tribal wars and migrations.
THROUGHOUT history, Germany has been an idea or, more accurately, a longing (Sehnsucht) rather than a reality as a unified state.
Through conquest and defeat its borders have changed more dramatically and more often than those of any country in the past 100 years.
In the current, probably mistaken assumption that reunification is only a matter of weeks or months away it is often forgotten that a united Germany as such existed for only around 75 years, between 1870 and 1945, from Bismarck's ascendancy to Hitler's descent into suicide and defeat.
Its early history, before the rise of the Carolingian Empire around 800 under Charlemagne, is one of division, of tribal wars and migrations.
Even the Holy Roman Empire was a relatively loose structure of nations and warring princedoms.
The Reich ended in the Thirty Years War of the early seventeenth century.
The 1648 Treaty of Westphalia saw its dismemberment and division into more than 300 individual and sovereign states and principalities.
In subsequent decades the Prussians and Austrians struggled for supremacy over the German soul.
The Napoleonic wars and the 1815 Congress of Vienna saw Prussia's collapse and resurgence.
More importantly, they led to the establishment of a German confederation of 39 states which retained the bulk of sovereign power.
Finally, after the defeat of the Austrians in 1866, Bismarck's Prussia imposed national unity and, in January 1871, the Second Reich was proclaimed under Kaiser Wilhelm I.
The defeat of Wilhelmine Germany in the first world war led to the setting up of the Weimar Republic in 1919, a constitutional settlement many believe was doomed.
The Treaty of Versailles, imposing the loss of 27,000 square miles of territory and seven million inhabitants, was to be seized upon by Hitler as a national humiliation to be avenged.
The Nazis seized control early in 1933.
The Anschluss of Austria, the occupation of the Bohemian part of Czechoslovakia and, following the Molotov-Von Ribbentrop pact of August 1939, the invasion of Poland eight days later led to the second world war, the death of scores of millions and, on May 7, 1945, unconditional German surrender to the Allies.
Germany now no longer existed and its remaining people were governed by the four victorious powers — the US, Soviet Union, Britain and France.
The Yalta agreement of February 1945 had already enshrined the right of the Soviets to retain their forward positions in Eastern Europe and the Potsdam conference later that year further divided up the former Third Reich.
After the lifting of the Berlin blockade imposed by the Soviets in 1948 despite the Four Power agreement, the two Germanys were formally established as separate republics.
The Big Four retained, and still possess, the power to decide the German Question, eventual reunification, and exercise joint supreme authority over Berlin.
During the past 40 years the two Germanys have gradually come closer together economically while bolstering each other 's separateness at the same time.
The two formally recognised each other in May 1970 while Britain and France granted recognition to East Germany in February 1973 and the US in September 1974.
Two years ago, Mr Erich Honecker, who succeeded Walter Ulbricht as East German leader in 1971, thought he had crowned the post-war settlement and division of Germany with the first official visit to the Federal Republic.
Polisario makes biggest attack.
The West reacted ecstatically on Friday to East Germany's opening of the Berlin Wall while the East bloc was noticeably muted.
New Ethiopian PM.
A top advisory body to China's communist party met on Friday, one day after senior leader Deng Xiaoping resigned from the party military commission, defying speculation of a further shake-up in the leadership.
Foreign diplomats said the lack of a further reshuffle after a meeting of the central advisory commission meant Deng had been unable to persuade other party elders to retire to smooth the transfer of power to his heir.
Smith order spurned.
West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl broke off his visit to Poland on Friday and flew home to deal with a dramatic political situation after East Germany opened its borders to the West.
Poland's official news agency PAP said Kohl flew home in the early afternoon.
Officials earlier said he had cancelled a lunch with Polish President Wojciech Jaruzelski.
cancelled a lunch with Polish President Wojciech Jaruzelski.
Coalition efforts fail.
Todd Bridges, a star of the television series ‘Diff'rent Strokes’, has been released from jail after a court commissioner declared a mistrial on a charge that he attacked a man with a gun in a cocaine dealing house.
Test for Noll Scott
Euphoria poses problems for US.
By Martin Walker in Washington
AFTER the euphoria of the day when the Wall came tumbling down, comes the hangover as the Bush Administration tries to work out what to do next in eastern Europe.
It is not a pretty sight.
This is not a government which likes to ask fundamental questions, nor does it like thinking on its feet and making strategic policy decisions almost overnight.
So far, policy is being made on the fly.
The first reaction is to reassure Mr Gorbachev that there was no bold US ambition to take strategic advantage of the collapse of Moscow's empire.
Without really thinking what the words mean in policy terms, the US has been parroting the ‘need for stability’.
The second US reaction was to reassure the West Germans that Washington was happy to leave the details about what we might now call the eastern provinces in Bonn's hands.
While this spared the Bush Administration from the perils of thinking for itself, or heaven forbid, taking a policy decision for which it might get criticised, it naively ignored the danger that Bonn might have a large axe of its own to grind.
Having succeeded to Britain's traditional role as the maritime power, the US this century has inherited Britain's commitment to the balance of power in Europe.
Twice this century the US has joined our European tribal wars to ensure that our continent should not be dominated by any single power.
Having helped break the ambition of Nazi Germany, the US maintained a vast standing army on European soil for 40 years to thwart the ambition of Russia.
At this juncture, two crucially fundamental questions now emerge.
Are the ambitions of Russia truly finished, or simply in abeyance?
And if the Russian bear is back in his cave for good, is the renewal of German ambition, given the country's economic dominance of the EC, to be feared?
The problem is that the second question cannot be answered until Washington comes up with a consensus on the first.
But this is not an Administration which thinks as one, as we learned during the ongoing arguments about the Soviet Union.
The Pentagon and the National Security Council are openly sceptical of Mr Gorbachev's chances, and of his ambitions, while the Secretary of State, Mr Jim Baker, and probably Mr Bush, believe that there are trustworthy deals to be done.
Next month's summit-at-sea may see a resolution of the Bush Administration's schizophrenia over Moscow.
Only then can the US begin to think seriously about what kind of future security system and political structure it would like to see in Europe.
Kremlin rules republics have acted unconstitutionally Baltic states told to drop election laws.
By Peter Conradi in Moscow
THE Kremlin ordered four restive Soviet republics last night to drop a series of controversial new laws which it said contravened the constitution, Tass reported.
The announcement appeared a clear signal that Moscow was not prepared to extend to its 15 republics the free hand on domestic issues enjoyed by its Eastern European allies.
In a move likely to anger the independent-minded leaders of the three Baltic republics, the Kremlin told Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania that several laws ‘strengthening their economic and political independence’ would have to go.
The same order was given to Azerbaijan, whose leaders have also moved, under pressure from local nationalists, to assert the republic's independence from Moscow.
The laws were believed to include Lithuania's announcement last week of separate Lithuanian citizenship as well as new residence requirements for those standing for elected office in Estonia and Latvia.
The announcment appeared timed for sessions of the Estonian and the Latvian parliaments which began in their respective capitals, Tallinn and Riga, yesterday.
However, with parts of the new Soviet constitution not yet in place, it was not immediately clear how — if at all— the Soviet leadership could enforce such a ruling if the republics refused to toe the line.
Tass said the Praesidium of the Supreme Soviet noted at its meeting yesterday a ‘considerable activisation of legislative activity’ by republican parliaments in recent times.
The Praesidium, headed by President Gorbachev, said many of these laws were aimed at strengthening the ‘economic and political independence and ensuring the rights and freedoms of citizens’.
‘But, at the same time, some legislative acts of Azerbaijan, Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia contain norms which do not correspond to the constitution of the Soviet Union and contravene its international agreements,’ Tass said.
‘On the basis of the…
Soviet constitution, it is proposed to the Praesidiums of the Supreme Soviets of these republics…to bring their republican laws into line with the Soviet constitution.’
A spokesman for the radical parliamentary organisation, the Inter-Regional Group (MRG), said that Mr Gorbachev had also wanted the Praesidium to approve separate proposals curbing the republics' economic rights.
However, the spokesman, Mr Vladimir Mestensev, said Mr Gorbachev had been outvoted by several Praesidium members led by the former Moscow Party Chief, Mr Boris Yeltsin.
Yesterday, the Latvian parliament confirmed it would stick to a plan to introduce minimum five and 10-year residence requirements for candidates wishing to stand in local and republican elections.
The law, similar to one already introduced in Estonia, has angered many thousands of Russians who have moved into the republic in recent years.
The Estonian parliament agreed to postpone discussion of provisions of its election law amid disagreement over demands by Russians for a second chamber to represent local minorities.
-Reuter.
By Peter Conradi in Moscow
THE Kremlin ordered four restive Soviet republics last night to drop a series of controversial new laws which it said contravened the constitution, Tass reported.
The announcement appeared a clear signal that Moscow was not prepared to extend to its 15 republics the free hand on domestic issues enjoyed by its Eastern European allies.
In a move likely to anger the independent-minded leaders of the three Baltic republics, the Kremlin told Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania that several laws ‘strengthening their economic and political independence’ would have to go.
The same order was given to Azerbaijan, whose leaders have also moved, under pressure from local nationalists, to assert the republic's independence from Moscow.
The laws were believed to include Lithuania's announcement last week of separate Lithuanian citizenship as well as new residence requirements for those standing for elected office in Estonia and Latvia.
The announcment appeared timed for sessions of the Estonian and the Latvian parliaments which began in their respective capitals, Tallinn and Riga, yesterday.
But, with parts of the new Soviet constitution not yet in place, it was not immediately clear how, if at all, the Soviet leadership could enforce such a ruling if the republics refused to toe the line.
Tass said the Praesidium of the Supreme Soviet noted at its meeting yesterday a ‘considerable activisation of legislative activity’ by republican parliaments in recent times.
The Praesidium, headed by President Gorbachev, said many of these laws were aimed at strengthening the ‘economic and political independence and ensuring the rights and freedoms of citizens’.
‘But, at the same time, some legislative acts of Azerbaijan, Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia contain norms which do not correspond to the constitution of the Soviet Union and contravene its international agreements,’ Tass said.
A spokesman for the radical parliamentary organisation, the Inter-Regional Group (MRG), said that Mr Gorbachev had also wanted the Praesidium to approve separate proposals curbing the republics' economic rights.
However, the spokesman, Mr Vladimir Mestensev, said Mr Gorbachev had been outvoted by several Praesidium members led by the former Moscow Party Chief, Mr Boris Yeltsin.
Yesterday, the Latvian parliament confirmed it would stick to a plan to introduce minimum five and 10-year residence requirements for candidates wishing to stand in local and republican elections.
The Estonian parliament agreed to postpone discussion of provisions of its election law amid disagreement over demands by Russians for a second chamber to represent local minorities.
-Reuter.
Nationalists in Moldavia fought police and troops late yesterday and unofficial reports said dozens of people were injured, some seriously.
Witnesses said clashes erupted after several thousand ringed the Interior Ministry headquarters in Kishinyov, protesting against the detention of about 20 fellow nationalists who disrupted a 1917 anniversary parade on Tuesday.
Search for Britain's political vision William Wallace calls for an imaginative response from Westminster to the events which are changing Europe's landscape.
FUKUYAMA was wrong.
This is not the end of history: it is the return to history, after the long freeze imposed on European political development by the Cold War.
Old issues are re-emerging from our history books on to the political agenda: the status of Germany, the problems of the Balkans, the ambiguous relations of peripheral countries like Britain and Russia to the politics of Central Europe.
New issues crowd in to join them: environmental management, repairing the damage which socialist concentration on heavy industry has inflicted on Eastern Europe, technological competition in a world where the struggle for economic supremacy is replacing the struggle for military security, migration and refugee flows on an vast scale.
As Western governments struggle from decision to decision, making up instant policies as they react, the need is for vision and imagination: a willingness to think the previously unthinkable, to sort out in their minds what sort of Europe they would like to have created in 10 years' time.
Today's reactions to events in Hungary and the GDR, tomorrow's response to Austria's already-submitted application for EC membership or to Turkey's determined membership claims, can all too easily foreclose long-term options.
We need a different set of priorities for British foreign policy.
The pre-occupations which have dominated debates at Westminster for so long no longer make sense.
The magnetic attraction of the European Community for all of its neighbours — to the north and south as well as to the east — itself calls for some agonising reappraisal of the conventional wisdom of British foreign policy.
Hungarians, Poles, Yugoslavs, and in time Czechs, are not drawn to the EC in the hope that it may become wider and looser.
Nor could a looser grouping of sovereign states cope with the awkward trade-offs which the Western response to Eastern Europe will involve.
Financial support for East European economies will have to be allocated among Western countries: budgetary politics on a scale which will dwarf the arguments over existing Community expenditure.
Add to that arguments over which defence budget benefits most from conventional troop reductions, if as seems likely these are agreed in Vienna in the course of 1990, and we will find ourselves having to bargain over most of the central issues of foreign policy and public expenditure with our West European partners within the same political and institutional framework.
The European Community grew up in the shadow of the Atlantic alliance.
As the Western and Eastern alliances fade — as now looks increasingly likely over the next few years — the European Community will become the dominant focus for European foreign policy and security.
The politics of the European Community will revolve around those countries with the strongest economies, currencies, industrial and technological capacities: Germany above all, followed by France, Italy, Spain, and perhaps Britain.
The idea that Britain can insist on a European construction of its own design was fanciful even before Eastern Europe entered the equation.
Now that we are playing on an increasingly crowded stage, with 24 Western countries concerting economic assistance to Eastern Europe, and 35 countries negotiating over Europe's future security, we have to recognise that we are only one voice among many.
The logic of a tighter European Community, with a more explicit security dimension, a larger budget, and a huge and complicated foreign policy agenda, clashes with the insistent pressures from others to join.
Acceptance of Austria would provide a precedent which Sweden might well wish to follow.
More imaginatively, it might also provide a precedent for associating the DDR with its German-speaking neighbours within an EC without recreating a sovereign unified Germany.
Against that must be weighed the costs of absorbing new members into a Community already weighed down by the process of bargaining over policy among 12 member states.
The EC President, Mr Jacques Delors's preferred model, it appears, is of a Europe of concentric circles.
Its core would be those states which are committed to making European co-operation work across the board from security to social policy: Germany and its immediate neighbours.
Those within the existing Community who hesitate over future commitments would form the next circle.
The EFTA countries, the richest countries in Europe as a group, would be granted a privileged relationship in return for a full share in the burden of supporting the economic development of Eastern and Southern Europe.
The former socialist states of East Central Europe, and the ‘Mediterranean orphans’— to use Mr Delors' sad phrase — would form the outer tier, politically associated but economically dependent.
Where will we draw the outer boundaries of this Europe?
Each imploring applicant wants to draw the line behind them: the Hungarians to exclude the Orthodox countries from a recreated Western Christendom, the Serbs to exclude Muslim Albania, the Turks to include all secular and modernising countries within the region.
The further east the boundaries are drawn, the more Britain will find itself on the Western periphery of a Germany-centred Europe.
But what do British politicians want to see?
It's sadly typical of the unreality of the British debate on foreign policy that Labour frontbenchers are declaring their continued commitment to high defence spending as the Vienna negotiations move towards major cuts, while Conservative ministers still use the language of an Atlantic world.
Where is Labour's vision of Europe in the year 2000, weaving together political, security, economic and industrial issues?
William Wallace is deputy director of the Royal Institute of International Affairs.
Parties join Thatcher in welcoming change.
By Michael White, Chief Political Correspondent
IN a rare display of harmony the British political Establishment last night united behind Mrs Thatcher in combining a euphoric welcome for the fall of the Berlin Wall with a note of caution about its profound implications for both Germany and the rest of the Continent.
But there was concern at British isolation from events.
Among politicians who have spent their lives working within the seemingly fixed assumptions of the Cold War came a sobering recognition of the speed and scale of events, which even prompted Mrs Thatcher to stress that talk of a reunited Germany was ‘going much too fast.
You have to take these things step by step.’
The Defence Secretary, Mr Tom King, felt obliged to say that Nato must maintain its vigilance.
But the larger questions of how to anchor Germany to the West or watch it turn towards Central Europe, went unanswered.
With renewed talk of winding down both military alliances some ministers believe Nato must avoid stating the obvious: that the Warsaw Pact could cease to exist as a viable alliance.
While the Prime Minister immediately offered the use of British military camps in West Germany to help cope with the current surge of refugees, her Foreign Secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, promised East Germany the kind of practical help in creating a more market-orientated economy which Britain has given Poland — some £25 million of ‘Know How’ funds over 25 years and is pledged to give to ex-Communist Hungary.
Mrs Thatcher granted a brief photo-opportunity to the cameras in the rain outside Number 10 before lunch to proclaim ‘a great day for freedom, a great day for liberty’ and noted ‘the joy on people's faces’as proof of the futility of attempts to stiffle freedom since 1945.
But in Whitehall officials were also frustrated at the marginalisation of the British role and lack of clear political direction — a far cry from the post-war reconstruction of West German institutions.
Speaking in Brussels, where the Community dimension of the drama is becoming a major debate, the Labour leader, Mr Neil Kinnock, said: ‘Freedom is magnetic and it is natural that the people of Eastern Europe should lunge for it at their first chance.’
But simultaneously he warned against ‘mass movements of people which will create pressures and can bring instability’.
Labour wants the ‘closest possible consultations’ with Eastern bloc governments on their plans, a point the Liberal Democrats echoed with a motion critical of Mrs Thatcher's hostility to what Mr Paddy Ashdown called ‘closer integration with Europe’that would expand Britain's ability to influence events.
Ministers actually grappling with policy are wary of Sir Leon Brittan's suggestion this week that East Germany be integrated into the EC, not as a new member, but as an extension of an existing member, West Germany, which already provides the Krenz regime with special access to the West.
‘We are a bit of a way from that.
But I certainly believe, first of all, we have to give what help we can,’ said Mr Hurd.
Mrs Thatcher suggested that ‘had America stayed in Europe after the first world war and we had a Nato then, I do not believe we would have had a second world war.
Let us learn that lesson.’
Mr Ashdown envisaged a ‘Europe on the march to reform, east and west.’
Ortega rival meets Bush and Quayle.
By Simon Tisdall in Washington
THE leader of the Nicaraguan opposition coalition, Mrs Violeta Chamorro, will hold a series of meetings with West European leaders and financial backers next week to rally international support for her campaign to topple the Sandinista President, Mr Daniel Ortega, in elections planned for February 25.
Mrs Chamorro, who heads the recently formed 14-party National Opposition Union (UNO), held talks with the US Vice-President, Mr Dan Quayle, in Washington yesterday after meeting President Bush and other Administration officials, who have already pledged $9 million to the election process.
The Administration has publicly backed Mrs Chamorro's candidacy, prompting Sandinista protests about continuing US ‘meddling’.
During her European tour, which includes a meeting with Mrs Thatcher on Monday and visits to Paris, Madrid, and Bonn, Mrs Chamorro will outline UNO's poll strategy and seek $6 million in campaign donations, according to her spokesman, Mr Antonio Lacayo.
Mr Lacayo said UNO would receive $2 million of the US aid.
He stressed the difficulties facing the coalition which according to one opinion poll, has the support of 42 per cent of Nicaraguans.
The coalition lacked campaign offices and vehicles, Mr Lacayo said, and faced intimidation, and restricted media access, from the Nicaraguan Government.
‘We are absolutely confident we will win if the elections are fair,’ Mr Lacayo said.
‘But we are not 100 per cent sure they will be clean and fair.’
President Ortega had made his commitment to the February poll before UNO existed, Mr Lacayo said.
‘The opposition was divided and he thought his would be the strongest party.
The reaction to Mrs Chamorro has been very strong and it's beginning to worry Ortega.’
During her Washington visit, Mrs Chamorro attended the launch of a Committee for Free and Fair Elections in Nicaragua, sponsored by several members of Congress.
But Mr Lacayo rejected suggestions that American financial support would encourage Sandinista claims that the US ‘bought the election’.
‘This country is in ruins,’ Mr Lacayo said, claiming that most Nicaraguans recognised the need for external financial assistance.
Mrs Chamorro declined to give interviews while in Washington but in an article published this week, she wrote: ‘Ten years of living dangerously has brought civil war, an exodus of a fifth of our countrymen, an annual inflation of 30,000 per cent, 40 per cent unemployment and for the first time in our history, mass hunger.
Our industry and agriculture are paralysed.
We have gone from being the bread basket of Central America to being its basket case; an international beggar with the largest per capita foreign debt in Latin America.
‘Even a government-commissioned survey has found consumption to have fallen by 70 per cent since the revolution.
Of course the Sandinista media shout that all this is due to Mr Reagan and now to Mr Bush.
But we Nicaraguans know full well that the shortages and the repression came before the war and the (US trade) embargo.’
Mrs Chamorro appealed for close international scrutiny and support for the electoral process, and for observers to be sent to Nicaragua from unions and professional groups, as well as the UN and the OAS.
Concern about a possible cancellation of the parliamentary and presidential polls grew after Mr Ortega ended the ceasefire with the contra rebels on November 1.
In New York yesterday, talks between the two sides continued.
The contras are seeking a new ceasefire, a general amnesty and guarantees of safe conduct if they return to Nicaragua.
The Sandinistas point out that many thousands of rebels are already back inside the country, and that their alleged attacks necessitated the ending of the ceasefire.
The UNO coalition has distanced itself from the contras, as has the US Administration by ending military aid.
‘We never left the country, we never embraced the armed struggle.
We are only interested in a democratic solution to the crisis,’ Mr Lacayo said.
Military plans awry as blocs fall apart.
By David Fairhall
EVERYTHING that happens within Nato's military machine, from routine field manoeuvres to nuclear strategy is predicated on the existence of an inner German border — the Iron Curtain dividing East from West.
The decision to open that border, and the prospect of German reunification, will virtually paralyse the military side of the alliance.
Even the Nato arms controllers meeting in Vienna, whose job it is to negotiate East-West reductions in conventional armed forces, can only pursue their objectives on the basis of confrontation between their alliance and the Warsaw Pact.
Although the proposed treaty will be signed individually by the 23 states in the two blocs, the reductions will be expressed as collective ceilings, to be enforced by the two integrated military commands.
Until now, this paradox was merely an awkward problem for the lawyers.
How do you arrange for sovereign democratic nations to constrain their defence programmes?
But now there is the further possibility that the two watertight military compartments will be breached.
Several members of the Warsaw Pact — particularly Hungary — are already trying to loosen military ties with the Soviet Union.
They will not want to be inhibited by arms control treaty commitments.
The pace of change that arms control has to match in Eastern Europe cannot be predicted, but it shows every sign of moving far faster than Nato can respond.
The crucial factor is likely to be how much Moscow continues to value the Warsaw Pact as a military buffer.
On this, there may be diffences betwen Mr Gorbachev's political reformers and the old guard of the Soviet general staff.
Mrs Thatcher is anxious to apply the brakes.
Before reunification was discussed, she said in a BBC radio interview, genuine democracy must be established in East Germany.
However, Nato's Secretary-General, Mr Manfred Woerner said that the promise of ‘an end to a divided Europe, and with it an end to the division of Germany, has never been brighter’.
He felt it was ‘an inevitable process’.
Unless the Soviet military intervenes, self-determination must surely lead to reunification.
To measure the paralysing effect of such a prospect on military planners, one has only to visualise the British and American tank divisions manoeuvring along the inner German border, while East Germans whose invasion they are supposedly repelling stream past westwards in their overloaded Ladas and Brabants.
Last week, the Supreme Allied Commanders staff officers were worrying about how to allocate Nato force cuts of 10 or 15 per cent; today the whole future of the 330,000 US troops in West Germany seems in question.
As for Mrs Thatcher's loudly voiced determination to force through a replacement of the Lance nuclear missile, nobody is listening.
It has been clear for some time that the demands of the arms control process would increasingly dominate military planning.
As Germany slides towards reunification, arms control will become even more central to military preoccupations, as the only way of matching armed forces to Europe's rapidly changing political structure.
40 years on: One nation or two?.
Young Germans may have less in common than is thought, writes Michael Simmons
SUDDENLY more Germans than ever are talking about the feasibility of reunification.
They are very audible.
Others, less audible, have sentiments that are not too fashionable in the current euphoria and can be summarised in one question: Just how compatible are we?
More than half the population of West Germany (60 million) and of East Germany (16 million) were born since the division was formalised in 1949.
A whole generation has grown up since the Wall was built in 1961.
Some may have visited the other side, but most have stayed at home living with political, economic and cultural systems that have very little in common except the original reason that they came into being — the biggest war the world had yet seen.
Both Germanys have been run in the name of the people — the GDR as a ‘socialist democracy’, governed by the dictatorship of the proletariat, and the Federal Republic on the stated principle that ‘all authority emanates from the people’.
In the GDR, the ruling Socialist Unity Party's politburo makes policies, and decisions of higher bodies are binding on lower ones.
In the Federal Republic, the parties participate in forming the will of the people.
The press in the GDR, not counting local periodicals and special interest magazines, is largely controlled by the party, though this matters little because almost all East Germans live on a diet of information provided by West German television and radio.
Defence is provided in West Germany by armed forces whose number totals close to half a million men and women.
The East German total, proportionately much larger, is more than 160,000.
West German soldiers swear ‘to defend the rights and freedom of the German people’ while their East German counterparts swear to defend their ‘fatherland’against all enemies’.
Both countries have managed to become the most visibly successful economies in what used to be called their respective ‘blocs’.
But their principles of ownership and management could not be more different: private enterprise prevails in the West, while it represents only a tiny proportion in the East.
Management in the West tends to be on a collective basis; in the East by individuals appointed by the party or the central government.
Living is easier, but more expensive, for the West German family than for its Eastern counterpart.
Foreign exchange is hard to come by for imports into the GDR, and shortages and waiting periods, not so frequent in the West, are normal.
Wages in West Germany, for hard currency marks, are much higher than in East Germany (for soft marks).
Hours of work required to pay for everyday items, based on average wages, vary enormously: a pair of men's leather shoes means nearly six hours work in West Germany, and 28 hours in the East; a comparable colour television set, about 100 hours against 850.
Most basic foods (sugar, butter, milk, eggs) are cheaper, in man-hours, in West Germany, while rents, public transport and entertainment tends to be much more expensive.
More children (90 per cent) have pre-school education in the GDR than in the Federal Republic (about 80 per cent ), but overall about the same proportion go to school.
In one field, the East Germans tend to sweep the West Germans out of sight.
That field is sport, where the East Germans think of themselves as a ‘world power’, second only to the Soviet Union and the US.
UK faces choice between old fears and ‘reunification’.
By Hella Pick Diplomatic Editor
BRITAIN, in the post-Iron Curtain era, will be confronted with tough and politically controversial options.
Viscerally, political leaders in all parties recognise that Germany is moving towards reunification, however uncomfortable that prospect may be for one of Germany's wartime adversaries.
The only realistic question that poses itself is whether Britain can help to determine the how and the when of reunification.
Mrs Thatcher could seize the high ground, providing strong leadership for a radical reassessment of Nato's role in the emerging new Europe.
But the Prime Minister may be more concerned to ward off the various demons she perceives on the horizon.
All her instincts are to keep up Britain's and Nato's defences.
The British Army on the Rhine, she will argue, should be cut back only in the context of an East-West agreement on Conventional Force Cuts in Europe.
She would be opposed to a wholesale withdrawal from West Germany.
Britain will have to decide with its wartime allies whether Berlin's status as an enclave under notional military government needs to be reviewed.
Some experts believe that Germany would be required to sign a treaty with Britain, France and the Soviet Union before they withdraw from Berlin.
King Hussein's liberal pledge.
King Hussein of Jordan yesterday promised a referendum on a plan to liberalise political life following a parliamentary election in which Islamic groups made striking gains.
The King described the election, the first for 22 years, as the start of a new phase in Jordan's life.
-Reuter.
Chinese confessions.
More than 36,000 Chinese people have turned themselves in for economic crimes during a 10-week grace period that ended last week.
-AP.
Norway's own goal.
Norway hit one of its own submarines with a dummy torpedo during a military exercise, the defence command said yesterday.
The torpedoes, which carry no explosives, are supposed to stop before hitting the target but this one kept straight on.
-Reuter.
Saudi beheadings.
Two Pakistani drug traffickers were beheaded yesterday in the eastern city of Dammam, Saudi Arabia, for smuggling heroin into the kingdom, the Interior Ministry announced.
-AP.
Iranian rampage.
About 20 Iranians burst into the Dutch embassy in Tehran and smashed furniture and equipment, causing considerable damage, the Dutch Foreign Ministry said yesterday.
-AP.
Businessman freed.
Derek Smith, the British businessman imprisoned last month after he tried to sell five and half pounds of uranium to Greece's Nuclear Research Centre, was yesterday set free on bail, writes Helena Smith from Athens.
The uranium ore he was carrying had not proved to be radioactive, his lawyer said.
Whaling expedition.
The mother ship of Japan's four-vessel whaling fleet left yesterday for the Antarctic, where officials say it will catch 300 whales in the third year of a controversial research programme.
-Reuter.
SA white hanged.
Pieter Coetzee, aged 62, on Thursday became the first white to be hanged in the South African tribal homeland of Bophuthatswana, for a double murder in 1987. -Reuter.
Europeans seek path out of divisive ideological camps.
By Hella Pick Diplomatic Editor
EVER since Mikhail Gorbachev launched his concept of a Common European Home, a good two years ago, there has been discussion about the shape and content of such a dwelling.
President Bush preferred to talk about a Commonwealth of European Nations.
Everywhere it has been high fashion to emphasise the importance of ‘managing change’.
But until very recently, even though the politicians have actively participated, the debate has been largely academic.
Western leaders were content to rest on their laurels, convinced that Nato's ‘steadfastness’ had been crucial in bringing the Communist bloc in from the cold, that Western prosperity had been enough to convince the East of the hollowness of Marxism.
This will no longer do.
With the developments in East Germany and the prospect of German re-unification, the future organisation of Europe has become a live issue.
Nobody wants a return to the instability of the inter-war period.
For much of the post-war era, Nato and the Warsaw Pact provided the military and political framework for East-West relations.
The 1975 Helsinki Declaration gave neutral and nonaligned countries a more active role, but did not radically alter Europe's division into two ideological camps.
As recently as last July, when President Gorbachev addressed the Council of Europe, the Soviet leader assumed that socialism could be preserved throughout Eastern Europe.
He warned the West then that ‘overcoming the division of Europe must not be confused with overcoming socialism’.
And in the German-Soviet Bonn declaration, signed this summer, Mr Gorbachev agreed that the Nato and the Warsaw Pact would be maintained and that the transatlantic members of the Western Alliance — the US and Canada — would play a vital role in the Common European Home.
Now, with the division of Germany almost at an end, there are uncomfortable questions about the future of the two alliances, and how, if at all, they can be fitted into a Europe that includes a re-unified Germany.
An interim ‘solution’, already widely canvassed, would be the establishment of a German confederation, with East and West Germany sharing key parliamentary and political institutions.
But while the present Federal Republic would remain firmly anchored in Nato, East Germany would remain within the Warsaw Pact.
Although Nato and Warsaw Pact forces would be cut back under the terms of the Conventional Force Agreement now under negotiation in Vienna, each alliance would retain a military presence in its part of the German confederation.
This ‘one nation/two alliances’ model, it is argued, would buy time for the world to become adjusted to a re-unified Germany, and to decide whether Nato and the Warsaw Pact still served any useful purposes.
It would show whether the US and the Soviet Union really had a role to play in Europe and it would be up to Germans themselves to work out their international posture.
Most pundits, so far at least, rule out the prospect of a neutral unified Germany, if only because the Federal Republic is too deeply rooted in the West to distance itself from its allies.
A united Germany would be more likely to remain incorporated in the West's institutions.
Although Germany is central to any new European political framework, it must also sustain the other emerging democracies of Eastern Europe.
The Council of Europe will undoubtedly have a role in assimilating these countries into the new Europe.
Institutionalised co-operation between the countries of Central Europe —‘Mittel-Europa’— is a live prospect.
Italy has initiated another grouping with Hungary, Austria and Yugoslavia.
The European Free Trade Area, Efta, may be a pole of attraction.
But inevitably, the biggest magnet will be the European Community.
Will it remain a rich man's club, keeping Eastern Europe on the outer perimeter, linked by mere trade agreements, or, one step up, association agreements.
Or will it broaden its base and agree to enlargement?
No amount of crystal-gazing can show the outcome of this debate.
But already it is certain that the challenges ahead are at least as daunting as anything the Cold War produced.
Sikh gunmen open fire on students.
By Ajoy Bose in New Delhi
SUSPECTED Sikh terrorists yesterday shot dead 19 students and seriously wounded several others in Patiala, Punjab, raising fears of a fresh extremist offensive in the north Indian state before this month's parliamentary polls.
The students, all Hindus from colleges of the neighbouring states of Uttar Pradesh and Haryana, had come to Patiala for a students' festival and were sleeping in a dormitory when they were attacked yesterday.
The assailants, armed with automatic rifles, burst into the dormitory and opened fire on the students.
‘Just a few hours ago we were dancing and enjoying ourselves but suddenly it had become a dance of death,’ said a survivor.
The killings are seen as an attempt by Sikh extremists to provoke Hindu-Sikh riots which could disrupt parliamentary polls in the state scheduled within a fortnight.
Groups demanding an autonomous Sikh state have already called for a boycott of the elections.
The Hindu rightwing Bharatiya Janata party yesterday condemned the massacre and called for a strike in Patiala today in protest against what a party spokesman in New Delhi described as ‘criminal neglect by the administration to protect innocent people’.
The killings may deal a severe blow to the electoral prospects of the Congress Party of the Prime Minister, Mr Rajiv Gandhi, which is contesting all 10 parliamentary seats in Punjab.
They cast a shadow over his meeting yesterday in the state capital, Chandigarh.
The Punjab governor, Mr S.S.Ray, said yesterday: ‘Every time the Prime Minister comes to the state, such killings are organised but we will not succumb to such terror tactics.’
An alert has been sounded in Punjab and neighbouring north Indian states to counter any terrorist offensive.
The Congress Party fears that a fresh outbreak of violence against Hindus may turn the community against it.
Sikhs in the state are already angry with the government for the storming of the Golden Temple and anti-Sikh riots after Mrs Indira Gandhi's assassination and are unlikely to vote for the Congress.
Meanwhile, the influential head priest of the Jama Masjid in New Delhi, Imam Abdullah Bukhari, yesterday charged Mr Gandhi with being in league with Hindu militants who laid the foundation stone of a temple next to a mosque in the north Indian state of Uttar Pradesh on Thursday.
Democracy welcomed to wilds of Damaraland.
By David Beresford in Sesfontein, Namibia
DEMOCRACY finally arrived in this remote corner of Namibia yesterday, to be greeted with determined enthusiasm.
Northern Damaraland is Africa as lovers of this continent picture it.
Abutting the Skeleton Coast, that legendary graveyard of mariners and ships, it is here that the last of the world's black rhino range free, while galloping hyenas and lunging kudu buck comprise the main traffic hazards.
It is also the Africa of poverty, deprivation, thirst and the memories of recent war.
In the roadside village of Waremquelle, on the way north to Sesfontein, the men wile away the days under the stinkwood trees, pools of shade and conversation amid the heat blazing off the surrounding sands.
‘Life here is very hard,’ said Joshua Kangombe, the local headman who was sporting mirror sunglasses, a trilby hat and a leather tie.
‘Most cattle are dead.
We have had no good rain since…’
He paused, reflectively.
‘Since 1983.’
Under a nearby tree, a group of children were having their school lunch, feverishly jostling each other as they scraped the bottom of a three-legged pot with scraps of bread.
A dog snatched fallen morsels from the burning embers of the fire.
‘I just don't want an apartheid government in Namibia,’ said Naftali Herunga, who confided that he had been a soldier, serving in 102 Battalion — an ethnic Herero unit — under the South Africans.
‘I want a government where there is no difference between a black man and a white man.’
Above us in the branches, dangled the flag of the National Patriotic Front, an alliance led by an ex-Maoist, Moses Katjiuongua, and a former white MP, Eben van Zyl.
‘If Swapo becomes the government it is the same as death,’ said Mr Kangombe.
‘They are almost Communists and I don't want a Communist ruling over me.’
A few miles down the road, at the village of Sesfontein, a political rally was under way.
About 150 Damaras and Hereros watched a dozen young village girls dancing in skirts and T-shirts bearing the colours of Namibia's United Democratic Front, a broad alliance of eight political parties.
Chief Jeremiah Gaobaeb, resplendent in a blue kaftan with gold thread, took the megaphone to launch a fierce attack on Swapo.
‘I thought they were the only party that could rule Namibia.
The Damaras were shocked awake.
Swapo thought they could still depend on the Damara vote.
But they took people in Angola and Zambia and they murdered and they raped them.
The Damara Council took their own path and said: ‘Goodbye Swapo, we want no part of you’.’
Then it was time for practical advice.
‘Behave yourselves,’ he admonished.
‘Put on the clothes you put on to go to church on Sunday.
You must look your best.’
The mobile UN election team arrived in the evening, with their cardboard polling booths, to service the 435 registered voters of Sesfontein.
The number, of course, was appropriate.
They may not have much impact on the result of Namibia's election.
But the people will be well dressed, in tribute to the arrival of democracy in the wilds of northern Damaraland.
French fears not really assuaged.
By Paul Webster in Paris
ALTHOUGH only the Communist Party came out strongly against a possible reunification of Germany yesterday, the prospect will cause an upheaval in French international thinking particularly over France's role as the motor of the European Community.
The Gaullist RPR, which has played the leading historical role in helping German postwar political recovery — while opposing any military revival — has given the most unequivocal welcome to the idea that Germany could again be one nation.
The Party leader, Mr Jacques Chirac, said he regretted that reaction in France to events in East Germany were often cool because of the fear of difficult consequences for France, but the priority should be to support a victory of democracy over communism.
Forty years ago, one of De Gaulle's greatest admirers, the writer, Franois Mauriac, summed up typical French distrust after nearly a century of conflict by saying that he loved Germany so much that he was glad there were two of them.
The lesson since Bismarck has been that France cannot compete politically, militarily or economically with a united Germany.
Today the dominant question is whether a country that can draw on the manpower and technology of two advanced industrial countries could become too powerful to be accommodated inside the European Community where the leading nations, Britain, France and Italy, would have populations only half the size of a new Germany.
In recent years, former President Valery Giscard d'Estaing and President Franois Mitterrand were able to establish French leadership in the European Community because the separation of East and West had restricted German initiatives and recalled German guilt.
The French have tended to exploit a philosophical idea of reconciliation as the only way of restoring German acceptability inside Western Europe.
The Germans have had to accept some unpleasant facts such as French posession of nuclear weapons that are stationed on German frontiers as if their main purpose was to prevent a repeat of 1870, 1914, and 1940.
Mr Mitterrand has rarely missed an occasion to underline Germany's obligation to make amends by arranging joint ceremonies on Franco-German battlefields.
France is also obsessed by the German economic example and has modelled its own planning on achieving parity.
In the past fifteen years, the French inflation rate has been brought into line with Germany's, a trade imbalance has been reduced, and successive devaluations of the franc, that stressed German supremacy, have been halted.
The urgency to establish the EMS is, in part, a need to contain German domination of monetary policies.
PAGE
America loses one of its favourite hate symbols.
By Simon Tisdall in Washington
FOR a generation of Americans, schooled and nurtured on the doctrines of the Cold War, the Berlin Wall was the supreme symbol of Communism and all its evil works.
For the common people, as much as their political representatives, it was also the ultimate affirmation of the rightness of the American way, of the moral ascendancy of the United States.
As such a symbol, it will be sorely missed.
Every President since John Kennedy has used the Wall to dramatise the global Communist threat, to assert American leadership of the Western world, and to underpin fundamental foreign and security policy directions.
When President Reagan went to West Berlin and declared before the Brandenburg Gate, ‘Mr Gorbachev, tear down that Wall!’, a number of familiar factors were in play.
First, Mr Reagan was returning, albeit obliquely, to his earlier Evil Empire theme.
Second, he was speaking as much to the American people as to the citizens of the divided Germanys.
It was an exercise in self-congratulation from the leader of the self-proclaimed Land of Liberty as much as an expression of solidarity with the oppressed.
Third, of course, Mr Reagan (like other presidents before him) had not the slightest thought that Mr Gorbachev might actually do what he asked.
It was rhetoric as familiar in American politics as apple pie.
Since the second world war, US foreign policy has rested largely on the identification of ‘goodies’ and ‘baddies’, in the context of global superpower.
American presidential campaigns, above all, have reflected those simplistic assessments.
It is all getting much more complicated.