

Party offers free polls 100,000 cross Berlin's border Army punches holes in Wall Kohl: We are one nation.
By Anna Tomforde and Michael Farr in Berlin
THE West German Chancellor, Dr Helmut Kohl, declared in Berlin yesterday: ‘Long live a free German fatherland, a free united Europe.’
‘We are and will remain one nation.
Step by small step we will find our way to a common solution,’ he told a crowd of some 20,000 Berliners outside the Schoneberg Rathaus, the seat of West Berlin's government.
This morning in Bonn, Dr Kohl will preside at an emergency cabinet meeting to discuss how West Germany should respond to the events of recent days.
His forthright emphasis on unity yesterday came as East Germany's bewildered and beleaguered leaders announced new reforms and a fresh round of sackings from the ruling politburo yesterday, coupled with a public promise of free elections.
During a day of extraordinary jubilation, more than 100,000 people poured through the increasingly open border to the West.
Most of them returned after a brief and long-awaited glimpse at the West.
In East Berlin, as the Communist Party's central committee continued in crisis session, the East German President, Mr Egon Krenz, declared: ‘We have a great task ahead of us…to carry through a revolution on German soil that will bring a socialism which is economically effective, politically democratic, and morally clean.’
He and Dr Kohl are expected to meet next week following the swearing in of a new East German government on Monday.
Last night, Mr Krenz told a Communist Party rally that the new travel regulations, allowing East Germans to go to the West whenever they wish, should be taken as proof that the government was ‘serious about the policy of renewal’.
His interior minister, Mr Friedrich Dickel, said the freedom to travel was ‘permanent and will be the foundation of a new travel law’.
Last night, as amazed East Berliners looked on, East German soldiers and building workers began knocking down sections of the Wall.
Heavy mechanical equipment was being used to punch holes in the structure that has divided the city for 28 years.
Five new openings were the first of 18 new crossing points announced yesterday by the East German authorities.
Elsewhere along the frontier, another 40,000 East Germans crossed into West Germany, but only 2,500 decided to stay in the West, according to Bonn.The flight westwards is expected to rise significantly over the weekend.
The relatively small number of East Germans who have so far actually left their country permanently suggests that the leadership's decision on free travel was a shrewd move.
After a three-day crisis meeting, the Communist Party Central Committee revealed an ‘action programme for renewal’ which holds out the prospect of free elections, a democratic coalition government and parliamentary investigations into malpractices and abuses of power.
Four members and candidate members were sacked from the ruling politburo, elected only on Wednesday.
Two had been voted out of their top party positions by their district branches and the other two stepped down after pressure from the Central Committee.
A party control commission will begin investigation into ‘misconduct’ by two former politburo members, Mr Gunter Mittag and Mr Joachim Hermann, responsible for the economy and the media in the politburo.
East Germany's prosecutor general has suggested that a parliamentary committee should investigate charges of corruption and power abuse by state and party officials.
Mr Gunter Wendland said top party members had enjoyed unjustified privileges, enriched themselves, taken advantage of their positions and ‘squandered national wealth’.
In view of the great significance and the extent of these malpractices the investigations should be tackled by parliament, the public prosecutor said.
The Volkskammer will meet in emergency session on Monday at which the Prime Minister-designate, Mr Hans Modrow, and the new East German government will be confirmed.
It is clear it was the reform-minded Mr Modrow and his supporters in the Central Committee who urged the leadership to press ahead swiftly with fundamental change, including the decision to allow free travel.
Mr Modrow told the Central Committee that the future government not only needed new faces.
It had to be ‘a real government which at a later point could even become a coalition’.
The relationship between the party and the government had to be completely overhauled, Mr Modrow urged.
‘We shall have to conduct parliamentary debates in a style the Communist Party has not yet seen in its entire history,’ Mr Modrow said.
Deputies had to become genuine representatives of the people.
The party newspaper, Neues Deutschland, in an outspoken editorial yesterday, conceded that Communist Party members were among those who had begun to question the party's leading role.
‘Significant errors’ had been committed by the party ‘to the detriment of our country’.
In West Berlin the huge crowd at the Rathaus, some of whom had crossed from the East to listen to the speeches, reserved their greatest enthusiasm for the former Social Democrat leader, Chancellor and Mayor of West Berlin, Mr Willy Brandt, who told them, to wild cheers: ‘Berlin will live and the Berlin Wall will come down.’
Mr Brandt, who was mayor of West Berlin 28 years ago when East Berlin put up the Wall and who stood next to Mr Kennedy during his famous speech, said the barbed wire and wall were ‘against the flow of history’, but added that it should remain as an ‘an historical monstrosity’.
He said part of it should be kept as a monument.
‘This is a beautiful day at the end of a long way, but we are not yet at the end of that way, a whole lot remains to be done,’ Mr Brandt said.
He said he was sure Presidents Bush and Gorbachev would approve of what was happening in Germany, and believed France and Britain, who had given such support during the long and difficult years as well as‘our East European neighbours’ would understand.
The present Mayor of West Berlin, Mr Walter Momper, told the crowd: ‘We are now the happiest people in the world, but in this hour of happiness we should remember the many dead and injured and the pain caused by this wall.
‘In East Germany a fascinating chapter of history is being written by the people.
We congratulate you on your peaceful and democratic revolution.’
But Mr Momper, faced with accommodating those coming from the East, said that while everyone was welcome, the question should also be asked whether people were not needed ‘to create a better society in East Germany’.
Coe selected for Cornish seat.
Olympic gold medallist Sebastian Coe, aged 32, was last night selected as the Conservative candidate for Falmouth and Camborne, in Cornwall.
The selection still has to be approved by the next full meeting of the constituency association but the chairwomen, Ms Anne Peck, said last night that this appeared to be a formality.
IRA two refused appeal.
Two Belfast men serving sentences of 17 and 20 years for plotting an IRA bomb campaign in Britain were yesterday refused leave to appeal.
The Appeal Court ruled there was nothing ‘unsafe or unsatisfactory’ in the convictions of Liam McCotter and Patrick McLaughlin.
Egg collector fined.
A car worker was yesterday ordered to pay almost £10,000 in fines and costs for having the world's largest known illegal collection of birds' eggs.
John Hemmings, aged 54, was found guilty by magistrates at Dartford, Kent, of illegally possessing for sale 22,902 eggs.
Petrol price cut.
The petrol chain, Jet, will cut the price of a gallon by up to 6p from midnight tomorrow.
The top price for leaded four-star will be 179.6p.
Shell is to make a statement on prices next week.
RUC man dies.
Constable Ian Johnston, aged 31, a member of an elite Royal Ulster Constabulary unit trained in SAS tactics, died in hospital yesterday after being shot accidentally by one of his own team when they raided a Belfast house on Thursday.
Judgment reserved.
The Court of Appeal reserved judgment yesterday on appeals by the Independent and the Sunday Times against contempt convictions stemming from the Spycatcher ban.
£1m for policing Tories.
The cost of policing the Labour and Conservative party conferences this year were £4,000 and £1 million.
THE END OF THE WALL.
Soviet Union welcomes change Jonathan Steele, page 24
The future shape of Europe Hella Pick, page 2
What the world is saying Former Bonn ambassador writes What it means for arms control All to hail, and all to play for WSLeader Comment, page 22
Not the time to talk of reunification, says Gerasimov Moscow welcomes collapse of the Wall.
By Jonathan Steele
THE Berlin Wall has long been more than the ugliest symbol of Europe's division.
It marked the western border of the Soviet empire.
But yesterday, in a reaction as unpredictable as everything that has happened during this tumultuous week, the Soviet Union welcomed its collapse.
As though he had always known the Wall should disappear, the Soviet Foreign Minister, Mr Eduard Shevarnadze, described as ‘wise and sensible’ the East German decision to open it up.
‘It's a historic moment.
We hope it's for the best,’ said Mr Gennady Gerasimov, the chief spokesman, in pithy words which encapsulate the bold leap towards the Common European Home that Mr Egon Krenz, with Moscow's backing, has made.
President Gorbachev is as uncertain as everyone about what the future of the two — perhaps one — German states will be, but there is no doubt that the Gorbachev vision of a new Europe had to encompass the Wall's disappearance.
But instead of going at the end of the process of building the new Europe, the Wall has gone at the beginning.
Its opening is the key which must unlock the door to rapid decisions on ending 45 years of East-West confrontation, formally as well as in fact.
The future of the two alliances is in the balance, and the Soviet side is already eager to restructure the Warsaw Pact into something which may look more like the Commonwealth than the Moscow-dominated monolith of the still recent past.
But the Soviet Union is anxious for matching changes on the Nato side.
Nor does it want the German tail to wag the European dog.
German reunification should be part of a wider process of bringing a new peace order in Europe.
Mr Gerasimov stressed yesterday that the end of the Wall does not automatically remove the border between the two German states.
‘The Federal Republic should take into account that policies aimed at changing borders would not suit any Government in Europe.’
He added: ‘Politically it is not the time to talk about re-unification.
The two Germanys belong to different military blocs.’
One Soviet official commented yesterday on this summer's changes in Poland, Hungary, and now East Germany: ‘It's an ideological humiliation, but a political and strategic advantage.’
That describes the measure of the Gorbachev revolution.
He realised that the Communist parties had lost touch with their peoples and that he could not logically denounce Stalinist terror and neo-Stalinist stagnation in his own country without accepting the same for the countries which Stalin forcibly incorporated into the Soviet empire.
No state has found it easy to give up an empire with dignity, but Mr Gorbachev is doing it now with extraordinary openness.
With hindsight, one can see how Mr Gorbachev has been preparing the ground for this week's changes.
He said this summer that the Warsaw Pact had to become a political rather than a military alliance.
He talked of each country's right to ‘freedom of choice’.
He has called for the removal of all foreign troops and bases in Europe.
In East Berlin in October, in his speech marking the German Democratic Republic's 40th anniversary, Mr Gorbachev reminded the world that the Soviet Union had advocated the preservation of German unity after the second world war.
The end of the Wall gives a powerful impetus for new security thinking, which the West would be foolish to ignore.
The trick must be to allow the Soviet Union's ideological humiliation not to be turned into a strategic one.
The end of the Wall is no one 's defeat.
The Kremlin has told four Soviet republics to drop controversial new laws on elections.
Baltic states censured, page 8
Lead alert hits 1,500 farms.
By James Erlichman, Consumer Affairs correspondent
ABOUT 1,500 farms have had their milk and beef sales halted since lead was discovered to have contaminated feedstuffs imported from Holland.
Another 117 were cleared for normal production after their milk samples showed levels of less than 50 parts of lead per billion for three successive days.
A check by officials on feed company records uncovered an extra 266 which had received contaminated fodder.
It came only hours after the Agriculture Minister, Mr John Gummer, said he was confident that most farms receiving lead-tainted animal feed had been tracked down.
Some of the farms put under restrictions yesterday have already supplied milk for public consumption, but officials were confident there had been no threat to health.
Farmers suffering losses from lead contamination were told yesterday their best hope of redress lay in court action against suppliers.
The advice came from the president of the National Farmers' Union, Mr Simon Gourlay, who discussed the matter with ministers.
About one million litres of milk, worth £200,000, is being withdrawn from the market daily.
Fresh tests on milk samples released last night showed 70 per cent of 238 dairy farms analysed were producing milk with lead levels above the Department of Health's recommended safety limit, although 72 farms were within the limit of less than 0.05 milligrams of lead per litre.
The Ministry of Agriculture said yesterday it was hoped that next week would see the first dairy farms released from the restriction orders.
The ministry said it had only begun to take meat samples.
The first results would be ready next week.
Judgment was reserved yesterday on the first legal moves to pin the blame for the contamination.
A court in Rotterdam which heard submissions from two Dutch fodder companies is to announce preliminary findings on Monday.
Mother seeks leave to sue over girl's murder 11 years ago.
THE mother of a 16-year-old girl murdered 11 years ago sought a High Court ruling yesterday that would let her bring a civil damages action against two men she alleges were responsible.
No one was convicted of killing Lynn Siddons, whose mutilated body, with 40 stab wounds, was found near a canal at Barrow upon Trent, in April 1978.
But her mother, Mrs Gail Halford, of Derby, claims that Michael Brookes and his stepson, Fitzroy Brookes, killed her.
She was not advised she had a reasonable civil case until 1985.
Fitzroy, aged 15 at the time of the killing, was tried and acquitted.
His stepfather, then aged 33, gave evidence as a prosecution witness.
Yesterday's hearing before Mr Justice Schiemann was on the issue of whether the claim fell within the legal time limit.
Judgment was reserved, and will be given in Manchester.
Germans seize their moment of national opportunity Commentary.
By Martin Woollacott
THIS has been Germany's year.
From the crisis over Nato modernisation in March to the casting down of the Wall in November stretch an astonishing nine months in which Germans on both sides have reached out with increasing boldness to take their destiny into their own hands.
The rest of Europe has watched in fascination and sometimes in fear.
The international landscape with which we began 1989 — the old, familiar structures of the two alliances, the Anglo-American special relationship, the European Community's halting progress toward greater unity, and the newer but also beginning to be familiar element of reform in the Soviet Union — is being transformed, and it is Germany which is leading that transformation.
Insofar as the old remains, it is like an empty chrysalis, preserving the shape but not the substance of what existed before.
How distant now seem the quarrels of the spring over the introduction of new short-range missiles.
West Europeans and Americans were arguing angrily about whether the Soviet Union was conspiratorially seeking to gain military advantage by negotiating away the West's remaining tactical nuclear weapons and then stalling on conventional reductions.
Strange to recall, we were still thinking in terms of East bloc tank armies and fighter squadrons, still counting divisions on the map of central Europe, and still, some of us, acting as if the USSR remained a dangerous antagonist.
The revolt of the Bonn government against this antique thinking can be seen as the starting point for the great burst of German national assertion which culminated yesterday in the streets of Berlin.
Although Chancellor Kohl later agreed to an apparent compromise it was clear even then — how much more so now — that West Germany had killed the programme, and it had done so because it sensed far better than any of its Nato partners how completely President Gorbachev had changed the situation in Europe.
The West Germans had cast an unprecedented veto against new nuclear weapons.
They had done so after a period of co-operation and consultation with East Germany which looks in retrospect like a laying of the groundwork for what was to come in both Germanys.
The Federal Republic became the strongest advocate of arms control within Nato and the German Democratic Republic played the same role in the Warsaw Pact.
Here was the partial and still nuanced defiance of their respective Alliance masters that indicated both a German refusal of the role of victims in the superpower struggle and a sense in both German states that the room for manoeuvre was growing.
If the March crisis over missile modernisation now seems something from another era, so too do the fears of the summer.
Germans on both sides realised that the Soviet Union had made not one but two fundamental international decisions.
The first, of course, was to seek peace with the West.
The second was that force could not and should not be used to maintain Communist authority in Eastern Europe.
For East Germans, watching Poland and Hungary, the message was there: things were moving toward the point where you could leave the country without real risk, and you could criticise the party without real risk.
Out of that realisation came the explosive mixture of a massive emigration from East Germany and an overwhelming popular challenge to the party inside it.
The reaction of Americans and other Europeans to the summer exodus was, however, still embedded in the old thinking.
The Soviet Union would only permit a united Germany if that state was to be neutral, the argument went, and that way lay the old nightmare of a Germany swinging between East and West.
But the whole idea of neutralisation presupposes the continued existence of a world polarised between East and West, a world which is literally disappearing before our eyes.
It must now be clear that whatever form of unification or quasi-unification is eventually arrived at will not involve the neutralisation of West Germany in any meaningful sense.
Instead what we have before us is a German triumph that could not have happened without Gorbachev and Walesa, a triumph that was not planned and which is in many ways an accident, but which nevertheless has come about because both West and East Germans have seized the moment of national opportunity.
In doing so they have pointed the way to a European future in which Germany will be the single biggest power, economically, politically, and perhaps militarily, so far as that still matters.
For the rest of Europe this assertion of German nationhood has its unavoidably bitter dimension.
Britain has spent the last 100 years fighting against the facts of German power: indeed our modern national identity has to a great extent been forged in the fires of the great conflict with Germany while our sense of our moral worth rests in part on our role in the defeat of Nazism.
Even in the post-war period Britain's understanding of itself has continued to be fashioned by our taking a leading part in the containment of Germany that was the unspoken second function of the Nato Alliance.
For the French, too, the trauma must be a serious one.
Their recent history is also
Turn to page 24, col 8
Seizing their national moment continued from page one centred on conflict with Germany, but their solution has been a different one from that of the British.
Their post-war policy has been based on the effort to create an enduring Franco-German axis that would maintain French power in Europe.
Who can say now that this solution can survive in a larger Europe in which a unified or confederated Germany is the strongest element?
There are darker problems than these for all Europeans, problems that have a special anguish for Slavs and for Jews.
Can we entrust the future of Europe to a Germany which has still not wholly rid itself of a nationalism that hankers, whatever is said officially, over the ‘lost’ territories in the East, that still sees Germans as superior to other nations and races, that still relishes power over others?
The historian Golo Mann wrote 20 years ago that Germany's post-war recovery took place against ‘a historical background of which Germans had reason to be profoundly ashamed.
‘Many were honestly ashamed; others said they were within limits; many were not.’
The temptation for Germans now, even though the generation of which Mann was writing has largely passed away, is to see in the great breakthrough of the last few months simply a kind of vindication of Germany's efforts to achieve hegemony in Europe, to see the first and second world wars and what is happening now as three chapters of the same story.
There is no denying a basic sense in which this may be true, and yet the last chapter will surely be different.
Europe is a different place, Germany is a different country.
The international order the British presided over had no proper place for Germany, but that which the United States brought into being after 1945 has given the Federal Republic a privileged if somewhat constrained position.
And the closed cultural and political world of the old Germany has gone.
Germans now are Europeans in a way they were not before, and indeed the demand of East Germans that they be allowed to be Europeans, with the same wide-ranging and unquestioned rights to travel, study, and residence as the rest of us was both a catalyst and an indication of how much things have changed.
It is also true that the phenomenon of German power is not so recognisable inside Germany itself, where on both sides there is a sense of vulnerability and of continuing risk that militates against any revival of chest-beating nationalism.
We may have our worries about the different future we see opening up before us — it would be odd if we did not — but surely we must see what is happening at the Brandenburg Gate as a European as well as a German triumph.
Labour urges consumer watchdog for rail users.
By Michael Smith Transport Editor
ASHAKE-UP of the management and finances of British Rail is proposed by Labour's transport spokesman, Mr John Prescott, in the wake of the report into the Clapham Junction rail crash.
Labour would establish a new Railway Act, encourage a more dynamic style of management, increase government funding and make the railways more accountable through a consumer regulatory framework.
‘It is clear from the Hidden Report that BR is in desperate need not just of a new financial climate but a new managerial approach as well,’ Mr Prescott said yesterday.
BR management was ‘incompetent and unimaginative,’ he said If the chairman, Sir Robert Reid, were not due to retire in April, he should be sacked.
Mr Prescott also warned that simply pumping public money into the railways was not the sole answer.
‘It would be naive to think that all a Labour government has to do is increase revenue support, encourage greater investment and Britain's railway system would automatically catch up with the best in Europe,’ he said.
‘Labour will introduce a new Railway Act that will lay down in law the broad policy objectives that we expect BR to meet,’ he told the Centre for Local Economic Strategies in Sheffield.
‘These will include tough quality of service targets to improve safety, reliability and passenger comfort.’
The financial framework and policy objectives would be set by a Labour government.
An independent national regulatory body would monitor BR's performance, examine investment schemes, fare policies and management practices.
‘There will be a consumer watchdog to deal with the whole range of consumer rights and needs,’ he promised.
Bus usage in leading English cities has fallen by a sixth since 1985/86 because of the Government's deregulation of bus operations, says a study for the Association of Metropolitan Authorities.
About 336 million fewer journeys are being taken in Greater Manchester, West Midlands, Merseyside, South Yorkshire, Tyne and Wear, West Yorkshire and Strathclyde.
The study by the transport economist Mr Bill Tyson also shows that fares have risen, and the overall savings to the tax-payer have been a modest £23 million.
Mr Jack Meredith, chairman of the AMA's public transport committee, said that while bus patronage was declining prior to deregulation, the Tyson report showed that the fall in journeys was between 100 and 200 million more than would have been expected.
Mr Tyson says deregulation prompted fares to rise by 23 per cent in real terms in 1986/87, followed by a 3.7 per cent real increase in 1987/88.
Last year, fares rose slightly higher than inflation in most areas.
True fax revealed about Hockney art Martin Wainwright at a long-distance ‘happening’ of artistic technology.
DAVID Hockney's latest work of art arrived in his home city of Bradford last night in a welter of spray-on glue and sheets of fax paper, and to the sound of Wagner's Ride of the Valkyries.
Sheet by acid-sprayed sheet, 144 pieces of a huge jigsaw of tubes and angles beeped and fluttered from four laser facsimile machines in Sir Titus Salt's former alpaca mill, while at his home in California Hockney — already master of computer, photocopy, and snipped-photograph art — was feeding the composite picture into his own fax.
The sun was shining in Los Angeles, according to a Yorkshire TV crew out there filming the US end of the link-up.
Bradford, for all the Italian wine and canapes at the mill's art gallery, looked like a dank study by Hockney's northern predecessor L.S.Lowry.
The wet cobbles in the mill-yard only needed huddled operatives arriving for an 18-hour shift in their shawls, but instead it got art critics.
They took their places beside local worthies and the artist's mother, Mrs Laura Hockney, who watched her daughter Margaret join in the pasting up.
Another son, Paul, was at the other end of the link in Los Angeles.
Seven o'clock struck.
The fax peeped and began to flutter out the jigsaw sheets.
‘We are starting now, love David’, said the first sheet, which was promptly glued to the T of the great, gold SALT'S sign hijacked from the mill offices and hoisted above the 15 by 9 ½ft frame divided into 144 sections for the fax picture.
Then the picture itself began to arrive.
Each slice was glue-sprayed and bundled up a pair of stepladders to be stuck into place.
Bent over the light-flashing, peeping fax machines, the mill and gallery's owner, Jonathan Silver, checked detailed assembly instructions previously faxed by the artist.
The picture turned out to be an abstract on a sporting theme, called Tennis, with nets and balls littered around but no sign of the swimming pools and rippling water favoured by Hockney.
Silver, a schoolmate of Hockney at Bradford grammar, sold the young artist's paintings through the chain of clothes shops he established in the North after taking his A levels.
Hockney has repaid the debt with numerous studies of Silver, two of which looked on among the gallery's 100 Hockneys, ranging from a teenage pencil sketch to oils done last Christmas.
While the fax winked and peeped on its artistic way, following in the steps of the great etchers and lithographers, tributes to fax from Hockney were passed round.
In a (faxed) letter to his old Bradford primary, he tells the pupils: ‘It seems to me fax will spread everywhere, as it is such a useful instrument and a wonderful way to communicate with each other.’
In a (faxed) interview with a magazine in Brazil he argues: ‘Its first victim seems to be the totalitarian world.
You cannot buy an office copier in Eastern Europe because if you could you would have a free press.’
Victims of modern faxitis, drowning in paper and worrying that the writing will disappear by 2000 AD had one reassurance.
Fax art is not valuable.
Each copy is a copy which anyone else can copy again, says Hockney.
‘You can frame them, or you can throw them away.’
Seizing the national moment continued from page one centred on conflict with Germany, but their solution has been a different one from that of the British.
Their post-war policy has been based on the effort to create an enduring Franco-German axis that would maintain French power in Europe.
Who can say now that this solution can survive in a larger Europe in which a unified or confederated Germany is the strongest element?
There are darker problems than these for all Europeans, problems that have a special anguish for Slavs and for Jews.
Can we entrust the future of Europe to a Germany which has still not wholly rid itself of a nationalism that hankers, whatever is said officially, over the ‘lost’ territories in the East, that still sees Germans as superior to other nations and races, that still relishes power over others?
The historian Golo Mann wrote 20 years ago that Germany's post-war recovery took place against ‘a historical background of which Germans had reason to be profoundly ashamed.
‘Many were honestly ashamed; others said they were within limits; many were not.’
The temptation for Germans now, even though the generation of which Mann was writing has largely passed away, is to see in the great breakthrough of the last few months simply a kind of vindication of Germany's efforts to achieve hegemony in Europe, to see the first and second world wars and what is happening now as three chapters of the same story.
There is no denying a basic sense in which this may be true, and yet the last chapter will surely be different.
Europe is a different place, Germany is a different country.
The international order the British presided over had no proper place for Germany, but that which the United States brought into being after 1945 has given the Federal Republic a privileged if somewhat constrained position.
And the closed cultural and political world of the old Germany has gone.
Germans now are Europeans in a way they were not before, and indeed the demand of East Germans that they be allowed to be Europeans, with the same wide-ranging and unquestioned rights to travel, study, and residence as the rest of us was both a catalyst and an indication of how much things have changed.
It is also true that the phenomenon of German power is not so recognisable inside Germany itself, where on both sides there is a sense of vulnerability and of continuing risk that militates against any revival of chest-beating nationalism.
We may have our worries about the different future we see opening up before us — it would be odd if we did not — but surely we must see what is happening at the Brandenburg Gate as a European as well as a German triumph.
PAGE
Firm offers to cut engineers' hours.
By Keith Harper Labour Editor
ATWO-HOUR reduction in the working week, from 39 to 37 hours, has been negotiated for 3,000 North-east workers in the most significant break in the engineering strike since it began a fortnight ago.
The deal, at Northern Engineering Industries, Newcastle upon Tyne, will be put to a mass meeting of workers today.
According to the unions, however, it contains a few minor strings, but nothing like the substantial changes in working practices being asked for nationally by the employers.
The engineering unions have been pressing for a 35-hour working week, but the deal at NEI — a subsidiary of Rolls-Royce — would satisfy their claim for a two-hour reduction in the working week.
Unions sources said last night that they think the move could have a knock-on effect at other firms, and could be seized on by unions at Ford — where the company has so far resisted demands to reduce the 39-hour working week, and whose workers at Southampton walked out yesterday in protest at the company's pay offer.
Ford unions have rejected a 9.5 per cent increase this year, and lightning walk-outs are likely to continue before the unions decide on their next step on November 20.
This is expected to be a ballot calling for industrial action.
A similar ballot at eight Lucas plants is to be held on November 22.
Miners' leaders attending a special conference of the National Union of Mineworkers in Sheffield yesterday backed away from a strike over the imposition of a 7.6 per cent pay rise by British Coal, when they realised there would be little support from members.
British Coal yesterday announced the loss of 450 white-collar jobs in Yorkshire.
A similar announcement was made in Nottinghamshire, but no figures were given.
Citizens of united city overcome their disbelief.
By Michael Farr in Berlin
YESTERDAY Berlin ceased to be a divided city.
Tens of thousands of East Berliners streamed to the West, unhindered for the first time since the Wall was put up 28 years ago.
Most crossed just for the experience of a freedom they had been denied so long.
They simply looked at shop windows, stopped at cafes on the fashionable Kudamm Street or visited friends.
As they came off the S-Bahn trains, drove their battered Trabants across the border crossing, or just walked through, they pinched themselves in disbelief.
Not one of the many East Berliners I spoke to at several crossing points said they meant to stay in the West.
They came with their spouses, friends and children for a historic stroll and perhaps some shopping.
Many more are expected to cross today, which for most is not a working day.
A group of East German workers still in their blue overalls in West Berlin's equivalent of Oxford Street, the Wilmersdorferstrasse, bought doughnuts and Western newspapers ‘to prove we've been here’.
Getting off a packed S-Bahn carriage at the Zoo station, a woman pointed out to her husband the Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church: ‘Look!
I never thought we could see it like this.’
An East Berlin policeman was on the platform to offer directions and give advice.
At the Invalidenstrasse crossing, West Berliners greeted those from the East with flowers and cheers.
Among the vehicles at the Bornholmerstrasse crossing, I saw two East German taxis with passengers.
One East Berliner was driven from the crossing to Charlottenburg, three miles away in the British sector, at the concessionary rate of 1 East Mark to 1 DeutscheMark, compared with the market rate of 10-1, highlighting the fact that the only constraint on East Germans is now financial.
East Berliners have been offered free tickets for a football match today in West Berlin as well as to a number of concerts and the opera.
Flying over the Bornholmerstrasse yesterday, I saw a scrum of East Berliners massing to cross its bridge.
Royal Military Police, responsible for the Wall along the British sector, maintained their patrols and Army Air Corps helicopters hovered overhead, monitoring the remarkable proceedings.
Huge crowds built up on the Western side of the Wall as West Berliners witnessed the historic developments, some even crossing over into the East for a walk.
In front of the Brandenburg Gate and elsewhere, they perched precariously on top of the Wall, clapping and calling for it to go.
It was unclear last night how many East Berliners planned to stay in the West, where facilities are increasingly being overstretched.
But as the West German cities of Bremen and Hanover said they could take no more refugees, Berlin was still offering a warm welcome.
‘After all we are not just one people, we are also one city,’ said one West Berliner, who described the last 24 hours as ‘simply unbelievable’.
Another added: ‘Now what the politicians have always called for has happened, we must rise to the occasion.’
Bulgaria celebrates Zhivkov's fall.
By Mike Power and Denise Searle in Sofia
ON the day the Berlin Wall finally crumbled, one of East Europe's last bastions of conservatism faced upheaval with the resignation of Bulgaria's Todor Zhivkov.
East Europe's longest-serving leader, Mr Zhivkov was forced to quit by growing dissident activity and rumblings among senior party figures over his unbending hardline policies.
In a cleverly manoeuvred Central Committee coup, the Foreign Minister, Mr Petar Mladenov, gave Mr Zhivkov no alternative but to step down from his post as General Secretary of the Bulgarian Communist Party, politburo member and President of the State Council.
Mr Mladenov, the youngest member of the politburo at 53 and regarded as its most liberal figure, takes over as General Secretary.
Mr Zhivkov's resignation, which was announced at a meeting of the Bulgarian Communist Party's Central Committee, took Bulgarians and the diplomatic community by surprise.
It was greeted emotionally in the capital, Sofia, where a 150-strong rally of human rights activists in a rainy park erupted into cheers.
‘It's pure joy,’ one dissident journalist said.
‘Everyone is telephoning friends and family.
Maybe we'll really see some change now.’
‘Mladenov is certainly the best of a bad bunch,’ said a respected biologist, Mr Petar Beron, a leading member of the dissident environment group Ecoglasnost.
‘We'll now wait and see what democratic changes he comes up with.’
Mr Zhivkov, aged 78, came to power in 1954.
He kept Bulgaria close to the Soviet Union, particularly during Brezhnev's time, but has been unable to cope with President Gorbachev's move towards democracy and openness.
Even some of the Bulgarian old guard became impatient with Mr Zhivkov's inability to dig Bulgaria out of its economic and political crisis and an important factor in yesterday's coup was that one of this group, the Defence Minister, Mr Dobri Dzhurov, sided with Mr Mladenov.
Mr Mladenov, who became Foreign Minister in 1971, had grown increasingly tired of facing criticism of Bulgaria at international meetings.
He resigned as Foreign Minister in late October, and secretarial staff got as far as clearing out his offices.
He was then persuaded to stay only by a last-minute promise of personnel changes at the top, but even senior Communist Party advisers had no idea how high-level these changes had been.
An important manoeuvre was a stop-off by Mr Mladenov in Moscow early this month on his way to an official visit to China.
Observers in Sofia are convinced that the Kremlin gave his proposed leadership bid its blessing.
The final straw, according to inside sources, was when Mr Zhivkov tried to bring his widely disliked son, Vladimir, who has a reputation as a drunkard and a womaniser, on to the politburo.
Mr Mladenov followed his appointment as Communist Party General Secretary with a speech clearly aimed at the country's dissident movement, which has been growing.
His biggest headache is likely to be the economy.
There is a $7billion (£4.5million) foreign debt and there are increasing shortages even of staple goods such as cheese and sausage.
Mother bailed because of baby's illness.
By Owen Bowcott
THE Court of Appeal yesterday granted bail to a mother separated from her 13-week-old son because of the shortage of places in mother and baby units in prisons in England and Wales.
Ms Yvonne Mitchell, of Hackney, east London, was allowed bail with sureties totalling £12,000 after medical evidence showed that continued breastfeeding was vital for the baby's safety.
The family had a history of cot deaths, and the baby had a heart condition.
Friends were trying to raise the bail money last night.
Ms Mitchell was jailed for three years on Wednesday at Cambridge crown court for possessing and supplying cocaine.
She was granted bail pending an appeal against the sentence.
The Home Office confirmed on Thursday that there was a waiting list for the 39 places in mother and baby units.
Ms Mitchell's solicitor, Mr Julian Lee, said: ‘It was a life or death situation for the child.’
The baby had rejected milk given by the foster mother.
Ambulance unions pare down claim.
By Simon Beavis Labour Correspondent
THE Government was under pressure last night to re-enter negotiations over the ambulance dispute as unions stripped away all but three elements of their pay and conditions claim in an attempt to force talks at the conciliation service, Acas.
Picking through the Health Secretary Mr Kenneth Clarke's references in Thursday's acrimonious emergency debate in the Commons, where he said the claim amounted to 20 per cent, union leaders publicly pared down their demands.
Mr Roger Poole, the chief union negotiator, said they would now be seeking an increase in the offer of 6.5 per cent on basic rates, an automatic pay formula for future years and the return of overtime payments.
The unions claim that 25 ambulance services around the country are now answering only emergency calls.
Mr Poole said national leaders would meet on Thursday to discuss ways to intensify pressure on health service managers to re-open talks.
‘The Government should be under no illusion about our preparedness to see this dispute through,’ he said, adding there would be no threat to emergency services.
The unions have dropped from their claim the demand for increased annual leave, extra holiday and pay for long service, and reductions in working hours.
Adding these to the other elements of the claim and demands for extra London weighting, Mr Clarke had said in the Commons that ambulance workers were looking for ‘rather a lot more money’.
The unions' move leaves unchanged the central issues of basic pay and a pay formula.
Two earlier attempts to find a solution at Acas failed.
The Department of Health said it would not comment until it received details of the proposals.
The move came amid calls from London Ambulance Service chiefs for staff to operate radios in line with procedures so that full 999 services, which have been almost paralysed, could be restored.
Mr Poole urged doctors, hospitals and the public to continue approaching suspended London crews directly for emergency services instead of relying on the police, the army and the voluntary services.
Staff in the West Midlands agreed yesterday to restrict radio use — the central issue in London — from Wednesday as part of an intensification of action around the country.
Letters, page 22
Veterans' memories cloud the good news from Berlin.
By Maev Kennedy
THE Arnhem veteran standing at the Cenotaph in Whitehall yesterday saw no good news, only a threat to everything he had fought for, in the torrent of people flowing through the remains of the Berlin Wall.
‘Half of them are KGB, and I wouldn't trust the other half,’ he said bitterly.
‘There'll be another Hitler,’ another veteran warned.
Young Londoners showed either indifference or elation yesterday to the extraordinary scenes in Berlin.
‘Looks like a brilliant street party,’ said one young man.
Many of their elders wearing poppies, and most of those selling the poppies, found that reaction naive and worrying.
‘I was in the war,’ the poppy-seller at Charing Cross said, to explain why he could not go along with the media insistence that this was a good news story.
The Arnhem veteran had come from Salisbury for a memorial service.
He was showing his wife, a Wren in the war, around London landmarks, and they had reached the Cenotaph, where the flagstaffs were being touched up with gold paint for Armistice Day.
‘I have some experience of the Russians and you can't trust them,’ he said.
‘I'm against a united Germany.
I think we should watch out.’
The poppy-seller, ‘one of the boys in the 8th Army’, came out of the war with a bit of shrapnel in the back of his neck — and a more permanent suspicion of German reunification.
‘I can see it's wonderful for the East Germans, and if it doesn't lead to reunification I've no objection to it.
But if it does, I'm against it.
It's too dangerous.’
A man inspecting the crosses around the regimental emblems outside Westminster Abbey lived in the East End during the Blitz.
He remembered sitting on a wall with a cousin, watching the first German bombers fly over.
By the end of the war, he was in the RAF, and his cousin had died in Italy.
‘The Germans started two world wars, didn't they?’ he said.
‘If there's a united Germany today, there'll be another Hitler, and they'll start another war.
‘They all look nice and happy on the television, and I've nothing against them as individuals.
It was the same with the German prisoners-of-war, they were just like you or me.
But a united Germany would get militaristic.
You can't forget if you've been through it, you can't.’
There were other views.
Mrs Mona Spink, a former national standard-bearer for the British Legion, was selling poppies opposite the RAF chapel, St Clement's, in the Strand.
She worked in munitions in the war, and has since visited Berlin many times.
A friend there got an annual permit to visit her mother in East Berlin for one hour.
‘The wall was a frightening sight, and a pathetic one,’ she said.
‘This is a fantastic day.’
The war veteran selling memorial crosses at the Abbey beamed at the memory of the scenes on television.
‘There are plenty of British Legion people about here today, and you'll find those who will tell you this is bad,’ he said.
‘But they're wrong.
Freedom was what it was all about, freedom for as many countries as possible.
I think it's wonderful news.’
Left-wing MPs bear the brunt of constituency challenges.
By Patrick Wintour
LABOUR has begun its most intensive period for reselection.
So far the party executive has endorsed 71 candidates, of whom 57 are sitting MPs.
Eighteen of the 57 have faced challenges.
Only Mr Gerry Bermingham, MP for St Helens South and a member of the leftwing Campaign group, has been deselected.
Other MPs who came close to defeat were the Militant supporter Mr Pat Wall (Bradford North), and Mr Ron Brown (Leith), the left-winger who had the whip withdrawn for a month for dropping the Mace.
Most MPs who faced a challenge sailed through.
Ironically it has been the left, the architects of reselection, who have been under greatest threat.
The two remaining Militant supporters, Mr Dave Nellist (Coventry South-west), and Mr Terry Fields (Liverpool Broadgreen), are both in danger.
Mr Nellist is being pursued by Mr Ken Cure, the former engineering union official.
The result will be known on November 17.
Dr John Gilbert (Dudley East), scourge of CND, is trailing badly in nominations to Mr David Sparks, a former chairman of West Midlands county council.
The result will be known on December 7.
‘Realist’ faces battle to hold sway over divided loyalties.
By Alan Dunn
FRANK Field's loyalty vote was holding up well yesterday along Park Road, Claughton, at the Labour heart of his Birkenhead parliamentary constituency.
But if, as expected, he fails to gain reselection by his local party next month and carries out his threat to resign and stand against the official Labour candidate in a byelection, he will have to work hard to swing the hearts and minds of many Labour voters.
A spot-check of voters walking alongside Birkenhead Park yesterday found Labour voters roughly divided.
Mr William Gleeson said: ‘I hope he doesn't lose reselection, but if he does I will still vote for him.
He did well for the likes of Cammell Laird and other plant closures, and has done well for the people at Rock Ferry.’
But Mr Sam Hatton said: ‘I wouldn't vote for him, to be honest.
We never see him round here, nor any of the Labour councillors, if it comes to that.
I can't understand him.
One minute he is all for Labour policy, the next he is knocking it.
I'd vote for the party candidate.’
Mr Robert Mayor wasn't too sure how he would vote in a council election, because of concern over reports of overspending by the hung Wirral authority and the effect on the poll tax.
But he would vote for the official Labour candidate in a parliamentary election.
His friend, Mr Derek Harrod, said: ‘I would vote for the official candidate.
We are all working class around here.’
Mrs Catherine Eaton said: ‘I would hope Frank Field can stay as MP.
There is no one to replace him.
He is proven.
I am sorry if it means opposing the official candidate, but I would vote for Frank Field.’
Mr Frank Leech said he hoped Mr Field would stand as an independent Labour candidate.
‘I would vote for him.
He is a good MP, a Tam Dalyell-type, who is always there and has good views, many on things the Militants don't like him for.
He's a realist.’
Among the ‘don't knows’ were Mr Paul Dean and Mr Andrew Bingham, who will be eligible to vote for the first time.
‘I'm a solid Labour man.
But I haven't given much thought to it at the moment.
I'd want to vote for the official candidate, but Frank's not done too bad,’ said Mr Dean.
‘I'm not all that interested in voting, but if I do I think I'll vote for Mr Field, but I'm not sure,’ said Mr Bingham.
Only one person, a young mother with her baby in a pram, refused political opinion.
‘We are Jehovah's Witnesses and we don't vote — only for God's Kingdom.
I have some leaflets which might help you…‘
10 years for acid party general.
AFORMER council youth leader known as the general was jailed for 10 years yesterday after organising three acid house parties at which hard drugs were openly available.
Robert Darby, 26, of the Isle of Dogs, east London, is the first person in Britain to be imprisoned in connection with the organistion of the parties.
Darby's conviction, after a six-week trial, was the first of its kind and Mr David Mellor, the Home Office Minister, said last night: ‘I am glad it has been demonstrated so clearly that luring youngsters into the crime of drug pushing carries with it a severe penalty.
‘The party invitation offered these youngsters a ‘good trip’ rather than a good time.
Most people will welcome the good long trip he has had in return.’
Mr Jeffrey Bayes, a solicitor, specialising in criminal law, commented: ‘It is obvious that the judge has it in mind to stamp out acid house parties right now.’
Darby was convicted, along with his assistant Leslie Thomas, 26, also of the Isle of Dogs, at an earlier hearing on two counts of conspiracy to manage premises where drugs were known to be available.
Thomas, who was also due to be sentenced yesterday, jumped bail last October.
Judge Geoffrey Rivlin QC, sitting at Southwark Crown Court, said the case had disclosed a disturbing picture of the use of ‘a wide range of dangerous drugs’ by customers at Darby's parties.
The court was told of two warehouse parties — the first in Commercial Street, east London and the second in Cuba Street, Isle of Dogs, both in September last year.
The third was for about 200 people paying £15 each on a Thames pleasure cruiser, the Viscountess, in the November.
Judge Rivlin, sentencing Darby, said: ‘I have no doubt that you were a leading light in the organisation of the first party and that you were the leading light in the second and third parties.’
There was no question that Darby, a former part-time youth leader at George Green Youth Centre, Tower Hamlets, had merely turned ‘a blind eye’ to the drug-taking, he said.
The parties catered for such large numbers that ‘it made it virtually impossible to police these events and it gave drug users and drug pushers maximum protection from the police — and all of that was quite deliberate.
In organising these parties, you were targeting young people, among the most vulnerable in our society’.
Police raiding the riverboat party had found cocaine, ecstacy tablets, amphetamines and cannabis resin.
Other drugs were thrown overboard.
Judges rule out jail for incest father.
By Clare Dyer Legal Correspondent
THE Court of Appeal yesterday quashed a suspended sentence received by a man convicted of indecent assault and incest with his 15-year-old daughter, despite submissions by the Attorney-General, Sir Patrick Mayhew, QC, that the sentence was too lenient.
The man, who pleaded guilty, received an 18-month suspended jail term at Truro crown court in July.
Rather than increasing the sentence, three appeal court judges substituted a three-year probation order requiring him to undergo treatment or counselling.
The case, referred under powers to challenge unduly lenient sentences introduced in February, is the first in which the Appeal Court has refused to substitute a stiffer sentence.
The court's decision signals its endorsement of Lord Justice Butler-Sloss's suggestion — made in the report into child abuse in Cleveland — that in some circumstances, abusers who admit their guilt and agree to treatment should escape prison.
Lord Lane, the Lord Chief Justice, said a bare recitation of the facts would seem to support the contention the sentence was too lenient.
The man had started indecently assaulting his daughter when she was 13, and progressed to intercourse shortly after her 15th birthday.
But Lord Lane said there were factors making the case wholly exceptional, and in all the circumstances the sentence could not be considered unduly lenient.
The trial judge's decision to suspend the sentence was taken in the interests of the victim and the family as a whole.
‘Leniency is not in itself a vice,’ he added.
‘That mercy should season justice is a proposition as soundly based in law as it is in literature.’
Lord Lane said there was a risk of the girl suffering further and perhaps more serious damage if her father went to prison, and of the family suffering hardship if he could work.
The girl, who was with foster parents, wanted her family re-united.
Her mother blamed her for what had happened, and the threatened break-up of the family.
There was a fear that a custodial sentence would hamper the counselling that social workers were giving the family.
There were also mitigating factors, Lord Lane said.
The man admitted the offences as soon as he was accused, and pleaded guilty.
A carpenter, he had a long record of hard work, and his family were dependent on his income.
It was also accepted that repetition of the offences was unlikely.
Lord Lane said that in its guidelines last July, the Appeal Court had fixed two to four years as the normal sentence for incest with girls aged 13-16.
However, circumstances varied infinitely, and sentencing should not involve ‘a rigid arithmetical approach.’
Closed courts challenge fails.
By Clare Dyer Legal Correspondent
THE FIRST challenge under powers to appeal against judges' decisions to ban the press and public from court failed in the Appeal Court yesterday.
The Lord Chief Justice, Lord Lane, Mr Justice Macpherson, and Mr Justice Pill dismissed applications under the 1988 Criminal Justice Act by Mr Tim Crook, a freelance journalist, to reverse decisions by two Old Bailey judges to close their courts.
The National Council for Civil Liberties, which is backing Mr Crook's campaign for open justice, pledged to take the case to the European Commission of Human Rights.
Mr Crook called the decision ‘a very dangerous judgment which will only generate more secret justice and undermine the public's respect for the administration of justice.’
He had asked the court for a ruling after Judge Robert Lymbery and Judge Kenneth Machin excluded the public from pre-trial hearings in September.
He accepted the point was now academic.
Lord Lane said it was clear the public could be excluded from court only if it was strictly necessary.
It was not sufficient that a public hearing would cause embarrassment to some or all of those involved.
He dismissed Mr Crook's argument that the judges should have made orders postponing publication until after the jury's verdict, instead of excluding the press and public.
Neither judge could be faulted for acting as he did, Lord Lane added.
In each case, the situation involved a procedural matter, not evidence in the trial.
They could not have known whether it would be prejudicial to the administration of justice if the facts were made public.
It was ‘wholly appropriate’ that information in these circumstances should in the first instance be given in the absence of the public.
Mr Crook's argument that the press should be allowed in court, even if the public was excluded, was rejected.
Officer ‘came close to disobeying Cossack order’.
THE SON of a British Army officer yesterday described to the Aldington libel jury in the High Court how his late father told him of his ‘horror’ when he received the order to repatriate Cossacks at the end of the second world war.
Dr Francis Odling-Smee, a lecturer at Brunel University, Middlesex, said his father, when in his late 70s, told him he had never come closer to disobeying an order in his life.
Colonel Odling-Smee was the officer commanding the Fifth Buffs which were part of V Corps in southern Austria.
Dr Odling-Smee told the jury that in 1983 he read about his father's role in the repatriation of the Cossacks in Mr Nikolai Tolstoy's book Victims of Yalta.
After this they had conversations about it over three or four weekends, at his father's home in Devon.
‘He had never been able to bring himself to talk about it before,’ he said.
His father told him he had never come closer to disobeying an order in his life, but he was finally persuaded to do so because it was pointed out to him that if the British Army did not send back the Cossacks, the Soviets would not send back British POWs.
‘It was a kind of choice between saving his own and saving the Cossacks.
That's what it boiled down to.’
The judge had earlier given leave for Dr Odling-Smee to be called to give evidence for the defence in Lord Aldington's libel action over allegations in a pamphlet that he is a war criminal responsible for the forced repatriation of 70,000 Cossacks and Yugoslavs who surrendered to the British in southern Austria in May 1945.
Mr Tolstoy, 54, who wrote the pamphlet, and Mr Nigel Watts, 51, who printed and distributed it, deny libel.
The hearing continues on Monday.
Water helps Tory HQ grow.
By Michael White
THE Conservative Party has doubled its headquarters' office space at a stroke by buying a lease from Thames Water next door.
But the five-figure sum paid for No 34 Smith Square, Westminster, will not reduce customers' water bills under privatisation rules laid down by the Government itself.
Though Tory Party chairman, Mr Kenneth Baker, announced the acquisition of the former London offices of Thames Water only yesterday, the soon-to-be-privatised company revealed the deal was struck before September 1 when new rules came into effect.
They provide that at least half the proceeds of surplus asset sales must go to reduce consumer bills and would affect the so-called ‘K-factor’ on which price rises are calculated.
The rules were imposed on privatised companies in the wake of political trouble over the lucrative sale of undervalued assets like British Aerospace's disposal of Royal Ordnance factories which had been in the public sector for centuries.
In this instance, Thames Water said the amount involved was ‘peanuts’ since the lease has fewer than 10 years to run — but the five-storey building is worth closer to £99,000 than £10,000.
Last night Conservative Central Office could provide no details on the lease it had bought, other than to say the freehold is owned by the Vauxhall Pension Fund.
Mr Baker plans to link numbers 32 and 34 Smith Square to provide conference and meetings facilities and room for staff housed outside Central Office.
The Prime Minister's press conferences have become increasingly crowded over the years in what has been dubbed The Blue Hole of Calcutta.
Police praised over bridge demo.
By Owen Bowcott
MOUNTED police were yesterday commended by the Police Complaints Authority for clearing student protesters from Westminster Bridge last November.
But the National Union of Students rejected the authority's report and called for an independent inquiry.
The clashes, on November 24 last year, followed marches organised by the National Union of Students in central London to protest against Government plans to replace maintenance grants with top-up loans.
At least 16 students were injured after mounted police cleared Westminster Bridge, the report says.
More than 90 officers were hurt by flying missiles.
About 4,000 students took part in the protest.
The report exonerates the NUS organisers and stewards who attempted to stop students crossing Westminster Bridge and approaching Parliament as prohibited by the Palace of Westminster's Sessional Order.
‘The evidence of student organisers and the police is that among the marchers there were 2,000 or more members of militant groups who played a significant role in encouraging demonstrators to march towards Parliament and show aggression,’ the report says.
‘The police have been criticised for acting prematurely.
In the authority's view that proposition is naive.
The police commander judged the cordon could not be relied upon to withstand the increasingly aggressive crowd.
The evidence of video films is that the police advanced at a trot and that at all times they were controlled.
No officer drew his baton.
‘The decision to deploy horses and the way that they were used was perfectly proper.
We believe the police in general should be commended for the professional way they conducted themselves in the face of provocation.’
Maeve Sherlock, the NUS president, said yesterday: ‘We are unhappy at the outcome of the PCA investigation and remain convinced there should have been a full independent inquiry.
We are pleased the NUS organisers have been exonerated.
The PCA may believe the use of horses was ‘perfectly proper’.
We believe it endangered lives and should be condemned.
Those present from the NUS were unaware of any warnings given by the police prior to any charges.
‘This result will not satisfy students, MPs, those injured, and the many arrested and subsequently acquitted.’
The NUS is considering taking the matter further.
The investigation was carried out by Cambridgeshire Chief Constable, Mr Ian Kane.
Pressure mounts against government funding rethink of higher education Summit tries to rescue student loans plan.
By David Gow and Celia Weston
THE Prime Minister's senior advisers will meet this weekend to try to rescue the Government's student top-up loans scheme, as the clearing banks — which would run it on the Treasury's behalf — stiffen their opposition.
With only 10 days to finalise the proposals before they must be announced in the Queen's Speech, Mrs Thatcher's policy unit, chaired by her senior adviser, Professor Brian Griffiths, is also understood to be considering plans to make sharply increased tuition fees, rather than the block grant, the main means of distributing public money to higher education.
The fees would be paid direct to institutions on students' behalf by local education authorities.
However, the Treasury is known to be resisting this plan, because without a strict cash limit its control over public spending and manpower planning would be weakened.
This weekend's meeting is the latest in a series of conferences over the past two weeks during which ministers, their advisers, vice-chancellors, polytechnic directors and senior officials have been thrashing out strategies for expanding the higher education system.
Banking and Tory party sources say that ministerial proposals to charge students a proportion of their tuition fees and other more radical ideas have been abandoned in the face of tough Treasury opposition, the perceived weakening of Mrs Thatcher's position following Mr Nigel Lawson's resignation, and her declared intention not to serve a full fourth term if re-elected.
However, bigger special access funds to encourage poorer students, and a scholarship scheme for bright youngsters have not been ruled out.
The clearing banks, which are deeply sceptical about the commercial value to them of the loans scheme, have used the changed political climate to demand a higher price for their participation.
This is thought to include demanding a substantial fee for each transaction, indemnities against any change of government or government policy, and for the Government — not the banks — to be unequivocally identified as responsible for its introduction.
Labour has said it will scrap the system.
Legislation on the scheme is due to be unveiled in the Queen's Speech on November 21.
The scheme, to be introduced next autumn, would give every student an interest-free loan of up to £420 a year, repayable over 10 or more years.
The policy unit will also discuss an alternative London School of Economics private sector scheme under which the financial institutions, rather than the Treasury, would lend students money, with repayments collected through National Insurance contributions.
This proposal has gathered significant support in recent weeks from higher education chiefs and Tory think-tanks such as the Centre for Policy Studies.
Conservative sources believe the Government's scheme will survive any backbench revolt in the Commons, but run into severe problems in the Lords.
However, they do not expect any radical revision to emerge in the run-up to legislation.
But one insider said yesterday that the banks could deal the scheme a mortal blow if they continued to up the price.
‘There's a real chance that if the banks really push the price high, public spending becomes such that it would allow Mr John MacGregor, the education secretary, to reopen the whole argument.’
In addition, vice-chancellors and students groups have warned the banks they would move their accounts to non-participating institutions.
Dr Nick Barr, senior lecturer in economics at the LSE and co-author of the alternative scheme, said: ‘It's very fragile, and there could be a repeat of the New Zealand situation where the banks simply changed their minds, refused to take part, and scuppered the scheme there.’
Arsonist jailed for killing couple.
AMAN who hired two youths to firebomb his neighbours after they complained about his loud music was jailed for 12 years yesterday for manslaughter.
Mark Allen, aged 23, of Stockwell, south London, had been acquitted at the Old Bailey on Thursday of murdering Victor Johnson, 57, and his wife Audrey, 54, but convicted of manslaughter, incitement to arson and attempting to pervert the course of justice.
Mr Justice Jowitt told him: ‘You like to play your music regardless of your infliction of it on your neighbours.
They protested and you wanted rid of them so you decided to have their house set on fire.
‘One of the appalling things is the way you joined your co-accused in your wickedness.
You obviously knew they were not the brightest of fellows.’
The judge ordered that Paul Spencer, 17, and Alwyn Stephenson, 16, both of Stockwell, be detained for 4 ½ years.
They admitted manslaughter and gave evidence against Allen.
The judge told them: ‘You don't have to be bright to have a conscience.’
He accepted they had thought the flat was empty and had been put under pressure by Allen to start the fire by squirting petrol through the letterbox.
Mr John Bevan, prosecuting, had said that the Johnsons had lived in the house for many years but feared fire and burglars.
They fitted smoke alarms to their home, put steel bars across the front door and screwed brackets across the fire escape which had disastrous consequences.
They died because security screens stopped firemen reaching their 17th floor flat quickly enough when the fire broke out in January.
Mr Bevan said Allen hired the two youths by promising them £100 and giving them an extra £10 to buy petrol.
Two days after the fire in which the Johnsons choked to death from fumes he held a party.
Dillons threat to book agreement.
By Andrew Culf
ALEADING chain of booksellers is about to launch a price-cutting war, which could spell an end to the trade's controversial Net Book Agreement.
The move by Dillons will not be officially announced until next week.
But it will deal a blow to the agreement, which allows publishers to set a minimum price for most books.
Last night other booksellers reacted with anger, saying it would damage small independent book shops and destroy a system which they believe had served the trade and book-buying public well.
Mr Terry Maher, chairman of Pentos, which owns Dillons, was yesterday unwilling to pre-empt the announcement.
But he said it ‘concerns a Christmas price promotion’ and would be seen as a ‘very important initiative’in the book trade.
It is thought that the discounts could start next Saturday.
Dillons has more than 50 shops in the United Kingdom.
Mr Maher said he had received assurances from the Government that new legislation on increasing competition would apply to the book agreement.
His company was ‘simply giving a push in the same direction.’
‘Our mission at Dillons is to widen the market for books and break away from the elitism that has dominated the book trade and held back sales.’
Pentos has about 6 per cent of the market, selling £60 million worth of books a year.
W.H. Smith, which has a 20 per cent share of the market, said it would be watching Dillon's announcement carefully.
The group's chairman, Sir Simon Hornby, promised not to break the agreement first, but pledged a strong response if someone else did so.
He said that ending the agreement would jeopardise the future of small or family-run shops, lead to fewer books being published and increase prices of all but a few best sellers.
There was some scepticism at the Publishers Association about the likely extent of the breach.
A spokesman, Mr Ian Taylor, said Dillons may have struck a deal with one or more publishers to sell discounted books outside the NBA.
‘If that happens it will be trumped up as the end of the NBA, but in fact it will only be a breach if Mr Maher discounts without the permission of the publisher,’ Mr Taylor added.
But he warned that, if discounting took place without publishers' permission, it would take out an injunction to prevent it.
Mr Tim Godfray, director of the Booksellers Association, said: ‘If you have a complete free-for-all, supermarkets will just cream off the top 30 bestsellers.’
Mersey MP says he will force byelection if ousted by left Reselection tussle threatens Labour rift.
By Patrick Wintour Political Correspondent
THE Labour leadership is monitoring the imminent reselection procedure in Birkenhead, Merseyside, where Mr Frank Field, the independent-minded chairman of the Commons social services committee is under threat from a local leftwing trade union official.
Mr Field has said he will resign and cause a byelection if he is not reselected, a move which could divide the party nationally.
In the Commons Mr Field is widely regarded as one of the most thoughtful and persuasive MPs.
When he speaks on social issues MPs from all sides listen, but in Birkenhead, Labour left-wingers, including some former supporters, believe his free thinking has gone too far.
Few party members challenge his diligence as an MP, but they claim he has lost touch with the party and treats all critics as extremists.
Mr Field accepts there is tension between him and some Birkenhead activists about the role of an MP.
A supporter said yesterday: ‘What they want is to have somebody they can control,’ but Mr Field found it impossible to operate on that basis.
He has set himself the task of trying to discuss the agenda Labour needs to develop over the next two decades on issues such as training, education and poverty.
The ideas have come thick and fast — a basic tax at 12p in the pound with the abolition of all income tax allowances, a flexible school-leaving age between 14 and 18 so 14-year-olds would have the option of leaving for a job in which training is guaranteed, and the reintroduction of child tax allowances.
His chief challenger is Mr Paul Davies, a Transport and General Workers' Union district official.
Mr Davies has worked hard to affiliate 15 TGWU branches, and has written a pamphlet attacking Mr Field's views on social policy.
The reselection result will be announced on December 8.
Mr Field has acknowledged he might lose, but a good turn-out could save him.
If he is defeated and forces a byelection, the party would probably be obliged to expel him.
Mr Field believes he would win easily, and once returned to the Commons would ask the parliamentary party to give him back the Labour whip.
If he does cause a byelection, he will face the charge that he is not prepared to play by the rules laid down by the party conference.
‘No one wants a byelection,’ said Mr Peter Roberts, the former local party chairman and a supporter of Mr Field.
‘But if there is one the people of Birkenhead will support him.’
Prince slips away as colony begins to accept destiny.
PRINCE Charles slipped out of Victoria Harbour on the royal yacht Britannia yesterday, watched only by office workers eating fast food lunches in the sunshine of Queen's Pier.
It was the end of his second, probably last, official visit.
For once, the optical illusion experienced by sailors leaving port seemed apt.
Not only was the boat moving away from land, but this 147-year-old colony is also beginning to move away from the Prince of Wales and the country he represents.
For the next couple of days, the Britannia will be anchored up the coast, where Prince Charles will work on a BBC film about the environment and talk to government radicals with whom it was considered impolitic for him to spend time during his official itinerary.
Among them will be Mr Martin Lee, expelled last week from the post-1997 Basic Law drafting committee because of Beijing's wrath over his joint leadership of the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of the Democratic Patriot Movement in China.
Last night political groupings which had been silent during the Prince's official visit resumed activity.
British Citizens for Hong Kong renewed its campaign for a last resort right-of-British abode for all.
At a separate gathering of councillors, a woman asked why Mrs Thatcher could not dismantle her Eastern equivalent of the Berlin Wall.
Mass reaction to the royals has been muted and distracted.
The Chinese author, Mr Han Suyin, described Hong Kong as ‘squeezed between giant antagonists crunching huge bones of contention.’
The colony is now reluctantly but conclusively coming to accept its destiny under the nearer giant, China.
The royal couple's individual humanity, rather than their status, has made most impact; Charles's unflagging curiosity, reports of Diana shaking hands with a leper in Indonesia, her instinctive picking up of an old woman's dropped walking-stick.
Yesterday Charles visited a ginseng shop in the trading district of Nam Pak Hong.
He was shown a potion guaranteeing virility and many children, based on deer's horn.
‘How does it work?,’ he asked for the sake of British tabloid papers.
He was cheered by 3,000 people, almost none of whom would qualify for abode or refuge under the current package.
That was one of the biggest crowds of a visit which has, at times, been discussed as a traffic nuisance.
Things would have kindled if they could have demonstrated, or if Prince Charles could have uttered a single sentence of political substance.
But neither course was considered prudent by Bejing and Downing Street.
Under the glitz, this is an ugly time in Hong Kong, with serious although scarcely reported unrest in the sealed-off boat people's detention centres throughout the week, and it could get worse.
Along the staircase of the Legislative Council building are old paintings of water buffalo and bamboo paddies.
The animals can now only be seen in the dwindling open fields of the new territories.
A woman at last night's councillors' gathering lamented that her nephew reached the age of three before seeing one.
The next few years look likely to take him closer to that kind of life, the life of his ancestors.
Governor to urge wide entry terms.
THE Governor of Hong Kong, Sir David Wilson, is likely to make a last-ditch attempt to influence the Government's package for giving the right of abode to the colony's British passport holders when he arrives in London on Tuesday.
He will also discuss plans for the mandatory repatriation of Vietnamese boat people.
The governor is to see the Foreign Secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, and the minister responsible for Hong Kong affairs, Mr Francis Maude.
Sources in Hong Kong say the British Government is finalising its package giving key Hong Kong people the right of settlement in Britain as a form of insurance in anticipation of the consequences of the Chinese takeover in 1997.
The Hong Kong Government has been trying to persuade Britain to make the package as wide as possible.
Sir David is likely to stress that proposals which are viewed in the colony as ungenerous would create difficulties for his administration's attempts to ensure a smooth transition to Chinese rule.
Sir David will be briefed about Mrs Thatcher's talks with President Bush concerning the mandatory repatriation of up to 44,000 Vietnamese boat people from Hong Kong.
The colony's preparations for the deportations are well advanced, but its government requires the go-ahead from London before it can send the first planeload to Vietnam.
The governor will probably be told to wait until later in the month, after a meeting organised by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
The Hong Kong Government has defended its decision to deny entry to two well known Chinese pro-democracy activists, Mr Chen Jun and Mr Wang Min, who were to take part in a seminar organised by students on the democracy movement in China.
Yesterday the Chief Secretary, Sir David Ford, denied that the colony had imposed a blanket ban on the entry of Chinese pro-democracy activists.
However, the government reserved the right to act within the law in respect of individual cases.
In a telephone interview with the government-run radio station, Mr Chen Jun claimed he had become a victim of political games between the Chinese and Hong Kong Governments.
There is little doubt that the colony's government is trying to improve relations with China, which have steadily deteriorated since the suppression of the democracy movement in June.
The ban on the Chinese dissidents appears to be part of this process.