

Superplonk.
By Malcolm Gluck YOU CAN date your descent (or, if you prefer, ascent) into louche living from the moment champagne ceases to be merely sparkling wine of uniform effervescence and taste and becomes individual bottles of wine to be judged against others of like manufacture.
Your alloted space in purgatory is reserved the moment you decide, for whatever reason, that a bottle of excellent but inexpensive champagne (Safeway £7.49) must make way for a grander counterpart like Bollinger ‘83 (Sainsbury's £20.45) or, if the devil has really got to you, Dom Perignon ‘82 (£44.99 at Tesco).
This latter is the most expensive champagne on any supermarket shelf.
It is not, of course, the only champagne at Tesco; this particular store has gone quite delightfully dotty this year and now has nearly 50 various champagnes from its own-label bottle (£8.75) to the Dom Perignon.
I can, as yet, rate only the cheaper of these because I have yet to summon up the chutzpah to ask Tesco to send me all their other examples to sample.
I can only say that on the evidence of Tesco's cheapest, the rest will have a hard job keeping up.
It rates 15 points for its fullness and freshness.
Sainsbury's champagne at £8.75 is also a fine example of decently mature fullness and ripeness yet freshness and fruit but scores a point more for greater elegance at no greater cost.
Even these unpretentious, non-vintage champagnes benefit from keeping for a time; the great champagnes repay keeping for years and years.
Sainsbury's own-label champagne I bought two years ago tastes even better now, developing greater fullness and depth of flavour without losing its keen edge or sparkling personality.
The very finest champagnes have a greater potential to age more interestingly since they start off with more.
One example my coal hole accommodated for nigh on ten years was a case of Krug I bought after a successful poker evening.
Marks & Spencer and Waitrose both have champagnes which you could usefully treat in the same way if you have to cool dark hole to bung them in.
Each is, however, perfect for drinking now.
The M & S example is a blanc de noirs.
It is well-balanced and full-nosed yet with a cleanness to tickle the most fastidious palate.
It costs £9.99 and rates 16 points.
The Waitrose champagne is of the ‘83 vintage; it has a glorious style of its own, light yet biscuity, classy with the muted perfume of hollyhocks and it makes a superb apertif.
It whacks up a massive 17 points for all this.
It costs £10.50.
At this sort of price, supermarket champagnes like that knock the famous marques with their absurd prices into every style of cocked hat you can imagine.
PAGE t18
Weekend special.
IT'S EARLY afternoon and the heat of the day hangs heavy in Rafiq's humble mud-floored shop.
On the walls, pictures of Mecca and General Zia mingle with gaudy Alpine scenes.
The only sound that breaks the afternoon stupor is the gentle pounding of the pastry roller as Rafiq lazily rolls out the hashish into six-inch strips for his local customers.
Stacked around the walls are sheepskins filled with hashish for the wholesale trade.
Rafiq says that storing hashish inside the skin of a freshly-slaughtered sheep is the only way to keep it from going stale.
He has about 200 kilos in his shop.
Rafiq sells mostly to Karachi businessmen who come to the village looking for wholesale quantities.
But he spends most of the day dreaming about getting just two kilos into London.
‘I would be a rich man if I could.
Can you help me?’ he asks.
In the village of Dara, Rafiq is a legal businessman, one of 50 or so hashish traders operating side by side with the gun dealers.
His trademark is a sheepskin hanging outside the shop.
Pakistan and Afghanistan together produce something like 1,200 tons of hashish a year.
That's just an estimate — nobody really knows what the figure is because nobody bothers to calculate it.
The police say they haven't the time or resources to worry about hashish.
It is Pakistan's other export businesses — heroin and opium — which preoccupy them.
This is the opium-planting season for hundreds of thousands of farmers and peasants in north-west Pakistan and Afghanistan.
From here comes 80per cent of Britain's heroin and a quarter of the American supply.
(In the US, heroin is undergoing a resurgence in demand.
It is now mixed with crack to form ‘crank’, which has a less devastating downside effect than unadulterated crack.)
Yet here in the Golden Crescent, as it is known, there are no Colombia-style confrontations.
Opium is grown and processed into heroin virtually unmolested by police or government.
For historical and political reasons, these border areas are among the most lawless regions in the world.
Trafficking is easy, lucrative — and thriving.
In Afghanistan the stalemate between the superpowers has ensured that no single authority rules.
In the opium areas the mujahedin fight the traffickers — and each other— for control of the business.
Much to the alarm of narcotics agents, cultivation is spreading as farmers seek cash to protect themselves from the hardships of war.
In Pakistan an old system dating from the British occupation has ensured that large parts of the North-West Frontier Province remain out of bounds to government officials.
The tribal areas retain their status — which means that to this day there is no law and no democracy.
In the last century the British deemed the wild mountainous regions of the Pashtuns too costly and too difficult to conquer.
British strategists decided the tribes were better left to themselves in ‘human nature reserves’, to use the words of one military diarist of the time.
These regions, known as tribal agencies, are where Afghan and Pakistani opium is made into heroin, often in laboratories no bigger than the average bathroom.
However, no Pakistani official ever talks about the apparent hypocrisy of the government's claim to be fighting narcotics when it refuses to change the special status of these tribal areas.
Western drug enforcement agents are trying to persuade the Bhutto government to enter, but such a move threatens to spill the first blood of Benazir's fledgling democracy.
The pressure is discreet — after all, the survival of a key Western ally and a new democracy is at stake.
In Pakistan, political sensitivities take priority, for despite Prime Minister Bhutto's public commitment to a crusade against the drug barons, everybody knows that the new democracy is not strong enough to take them on.
Besides, eradication efforts in Pakistan have merely pushed the opium higher up in the hills and over the border into Afghanistan.
The Afghan crop is now four or five times that of Pakistan, and rising rapidly.
Estimates vary from 1,200 tons to 2,000 tons — few foreigners can enter, and satellite pictures cannot detect yield or winter crops.
The agricultural experts pushing crop substitution programmes may congratulate themselves on Pakistan's declining opium output, but the truth is that the country is now specialising more in processing and marketing.
Afghanistan's opium is cheaper and more plentiful.
Such is the abundance of heroin that prices are falling in Pakistan, with alarming implications for the West.
The changing role of Pakistan in the business has been devastating.
One million Pakistani heroin addicts consume 42 tons of the purest heroin a year.
In some villages on the drug route to the West, 5per cent of the population are addicts.
Then there is the effect of narco-politics.
Drug money has financed ministers and members of parliament and co-opted thousands of policemen and border guards.
Because both sides of the political divide are benefiting from the traffic, the issue is brushed under the carpet.
The tribal areas include some of the most wild and beautiful parts of Pakistan.
Rugged mountains, clear icy streams, and in springtime carpets of pink and blue opium poppies bending in the wind.
By the roadside stand the regimental outposts of British colonial history — the Khyber Rifles, the Baluchistan Scouts, the Frontier Corps.
In the Khyber agency bordering Afghanistan, there are Beau Geste-style forts belonging to the drug barons, all of them legally untouchable.
In the tribal agencies, government authority frequently ends a few feet from the road.
In Bajaur agency, the top opium and heroin producer in Pakistan, the government controls less than 36per cent of the district, leaving traffickers to go about their business peacefully and unimpeded.
This feels and looks like mafia-land, where men wear machine guns like jewellery.
In some towns there are more hashish and gun shops than grocery stores.
Just an hour from the capital, Peshawar, gun shops will sell you anything from a Chinese automatic machine gun to a rocket launcher.
There is no law, only Pakhtunwali, the code of the Pashtuns.
Fugitives from justice come here, kidnapped people are hidden here, and stolen cars are stored here before resale.
Some 7,000 wanted criminals live in the tribal areas, protected by a code of honour which requires a Pashtun to give protection to anyone who seeks it.
ASHINWARI or Afridi tribesman in Afghanistan grows the poppies and sends them by donkey or truck to his cousin a few miles away in Pakistan for processing.
For tribesmen and traffickers, there are no borders.
In the south, in Baluchistan, opium convoys are protected by rockets, guns and missiles — most of them supplied by the West to fight the holy jihad in Afghanistan.
So far, government efforts to eradicate poppy cultivation have been restricted largely to the ‘settled’ areas where government law exists, but actual control is minimal.
Even in the ‘settled’ areas, where the US and the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control (UNFDAC) have been active, efforts to eradicate opium by crop substitution have run into trouble for one simple reason: in 30 years, no one has been able to come up with a product as lucrative and easy to market as opium.
The arithmetic is simple.
One acre of wheat equals $40, one acre of opium equals $400.
Such figures cause narcotics agents to wring their hands.
The North-West Frontier Province has only two businesses — guns and drugs — both of which Western pressure is now trying to curb.
One highly-paid aid official admitted: ‘We are forcing poor people at gunpoint to grow a crop which they know they cannot survive on.
How can that be right?’
The last time foreign aid officials requested the Pakistan army to burn the fields, in 1985, the result was 13 dead.
In the Khyber agency, where 100 heroin labs are thought to operate, the mood is angry.
A tribal chieftain, Haji Ghulam, argues that with little or no government development, and rising unemployment, it is the right of tribals to grow opium and process it.
‘Without heroin, there would be real hardship in this area.’
Tribal members of parliament agree.
‘All we have is dry hills.
No schools, hospitals, no work,’ says one.
All resent Western efforts to curtail the traffic.
A common response is: ‘You send us wine, why shouldn't we send you heroin?’
Until now, efforts to stop the trade have depended on development programmes, but government reports readily concede that little has been achieved to create alternative employment.
Many farmers believe it is their right to have schools, hospitals and roads anyway, that such improvements are normal and unrelated to the way they make their living.
Until investment — private or state — can be lured to these remote poverty-striken areas, farmers will continue to view the government and its foreign advisors as aggressive forces who want to take away their only livelihood.
The Pakistan government is hampered by lack of resources in launching any large-scale projects, and in the last 13 years less than $120 million has been ploughed into crop substitution programmes by foreign aid organisations.
This year there are fears that, because of the prime minister's public commitment against narcotics, next spring will see a heavy toll in lives in the settled areas during the opium harvest season.
‘Pakistan can no longer afford to continue this British romantic tradition of the tribal areas.
The threat to internal security, the judicial system, police and even its democracy is just too great,’ argues a US narcotics official.
‘The very future of the country is at stake.’
Officials in Pakistan recognise the validity of that argument, but the prospect of a military move on the tribal areas makes everyone's hair stand on end.
No government in the country's history has had the strength to make such a move and Benazir Bhutto's shaky administration can ill afford to rock the boat.
Even narcotics officials do not relish the idea of killing farmers.
Politically, the eight members of Parliament who represent the tribal areas are a key component to the PPP's Parliamentary coalition.
Ms Bhutto has only just survived a vote of no confidence by the opposition, when her slim and wavering majority was cut by half, partially because of the defection of four of the tribal members to opposition benches.
Any heavyhanded action by the frontier armed forces could place her remaining supporters in a sensitive position.
A move on the tribal areas could also unify the tribes against the Pakistan People's Party coalition government in the North-West Frontier Province.
The provincial coalition government is already shaky, with opposition members bought off with ministerial posts.
Any further strain and the provincial government could fall.
This would leave Ms Bhutto controlling only one of Pakistan's four provinces, and general elections would have to be held.
AMILITARY move could also risk a tribal war against government forces.
Police shudder at the prospect of facing a population which has anti-aircraft guns and rocket launchers at its disposal.
There are also foreign policy considerations, for the loyalty of the Pashtuns has proved flexible throughout history.
If any move is made by the army in the tribal areas, the result could be an alarm call to Kabul.
Khan Abdul Wali Khan, the most prominent Pashtun political leader, is known for his close ties with the Soviet-backed government in Afghanistan.
He also chairs the powerful Poppy Growers Association, which seeks to protect the interests of tribal people whose only living is opium and heroin.
Any move by the army in the region would only serve to strengthen Kabul's hand in the region and reinforce Wali Khan's position as an opposition leader.
In Baluchistan, the route for a major portion of Afghanistan's opium, the government is in the hands of the opposition.
The Bhutto government has little or no access and influence.
Federal interior minister Aitzaz Ahsan, whose portfolio includes narcotics control, believes that an armed intervention is not a panacea to end the traffic.
‘We have to weigh the advantages and disadvantages of such an action, as well as our own interests.
We cannot rush into it.’
The minister is confident that Pakistan could deflect Western pressure.
‘We don't have to prove ourselves on our commitment to fight drugs,’ he says.
Ahsan claims that since coming to power the PPP has knocked out 12 of the 24 known heroin laboratories in Pakistan.
Narcotics agents believe a conservative estimate of the number of laboratories is between 200 and 300.
The most prolific refining and distribution areas is Ribat, which lies at the crossroads of three countries — Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran.
Heroin labs are said by Afghans to be in the Chagool mountains, operated by fundamentalist mujahedin commanders belonging to the Hizbe Islami.
Just south, across the border, lies Gerdi Jangel, another major distribution and processing town.
Those few foreigners who have been there describe it as one of the most remote and desolate spots in the world.
These two heroin refining towns serve the most prolific of all the Afghan poppy areas, Helmund province, currently held by the mujahedin.
Traditionally the province has functioned as the country's breadbasket.
In the Seventies the US government initiated large farming projects to boost food production, but today those fields are growing mainly opium.
People who have seen the Helmund poppy fields speak of their beauty — mile after mile of even poppies, like the tulip fields of Holland.
Given the role of Helmund as a provider of food, the province is of key military importance.
Its mujahedin commander, Maulvi Nassim Akhundzadeh, is rated by drug enforcement experts as the ‘Mr Big’ of the Golden Crescent, responsible for at least one fifth of the country's narcotics traffic.
The fight to control the business has been deadly, as Akundzadeh has had continually fight off rival contenders.
Two weeks ago the battle spread to Gerdi Jangel in Pakistan, as his rivals attempted to bomb his processing network.
Akundzadeh has recently attempted to make political use of his opium business.
He is said by reliable sources to be negotiating with both the US and Iran for compensation to give up the business, playing one nation off against the other.
His current price is $2 million a month, funding for his own mujahedin forces, weapons, and a massive development programme for Helmund province.
Few foreign aid workers have dared to venture into Helmund province.
But in other poppy growing areas of Afghanistan such as Nangarhar and Badakhshan the first sounds of a debate on crop substitution projects have been heard.
Until now, foreign aid agencies have chosen to ignore the opium growing around them, or chosen to operate in areas where it is not cultivated.
The net result, say some officials, is that foreign money has frequently ended up fertilising or irrigating opium fields.
THE PACE of the debate has been forced by the UN's anti-drug organisation UNFDAC.
In the summer UNFDAC managed to secure agreement from aid agencies operating in mujahedin areas to agree to support an anti-poppy clause in all future aid projects.
The clause is relatively mild, requiring international agencies to commit themselves to support eradication efforts.
Aid agencies still fear that crop substitution projects will endanger the lives of their staff.
The experience to date has not been encouraging.
One leading international charity attempted a crop substitution project just across the border in Nangrahar province.
A few weeks after the first officials went into the remote poppy valley, the charity began receiving visits from Pakistani and Afghan tribesmen and landlords demanding large sums in ‘compensation’.
Their visits were threatening and long, and eventually the agency gave up hope of substituting mulberry trees for opium.
Undeterred, the British charity Afghanaid is intending to try a crop substitution project in a nearby valley producing $50 million worth of opium a year.
Abdul Haq, a mujahedin commander, has recently been given the task of bringing peace and security in the areas liberated from government control.
He has the grand title of Head of the Gendarmes.
Fighting drug traffickers comes way down on his list of priorities.
First he has to create a neutral police force.
Then he has to seek agreement from all groups that the force can actually operate.
Before that can happen there has to be peace in Afghanistan, and that prospect looks as remote as the end to the drug traffic.
It would help, he says, if the United States cut military supplies to those commanders making money out of heroin.
But with Washington still committed to military victory in Afghanistan, cutting weapons supplies is a sensitive proposition.
Besides, aid workers argue that cutting any aid will only result in more poppies.
‘We can try shaming them out of the drugs business and say how un-Islamic it is’ suggested Abdul Haq.
‘But the problem about heroin is that the money is so good that even the good people do it’.
Weekend Sport by Howard Donaldson: ATTITUDE: mental view or disposition, esp.
as it indicates opinion or allegiance.
(Collins).
Also a buzzword now, as in: ‘Man, you've gotta have attitude.’
The original meaning, as defined by Collins, has certainly taken a mean whipping before re-release into this streetwise prose but we're talking the same thing here, aren't we?
In sport, attitude counts for everything.
Some have it, some don't — and it often makes the difference between success and failure.
May I submit that the Aussie cricketers of this year had it and our lot didn't.
These All Blacks have it.
Frank wishes he had a bit of Tyson's.
John McEnroe tried to take out a copyright on it, Becker's got more than a bit and Lendl's goes missing when he most needs it.
You get the drift.
Now I'm not saying Ian Rush missed the boat entirely, but he might find it pretty interesting when Gullitt and Van Basten discuss their life and work in Italy on Grandstand (BBC1, Saturday).
Rushie picked up a few lira and an Armani suit but it's probably fair to say our golden boy from St Asaph didn't exactly win the freedom of Turin.
Now these two Dutchmen have captured every Milanese heart and soul with their easy-going charm, their willingness to speak, eat and play Italian and have thrown in the odd spectacular goal or two too.
You get the impression Ruud and Marco could have taken their skills anywhere in the world, found success and made a few friends as well.
That's attitude.
Fergie would probably spend a few pounds on it — if he could find it.
Pallister, Ince, Wallace…lots of legs, a modicum of skill, but attitude?
I'll leave it to you.
Cloughie probably gets closest to it — not he himself but the No. 9 seems to have his head screwed on.
And he can play a bit, although he's missing the support of Webb these days.
Sheridan might have made a difference given the chance — but then we'll never know quite what sent the skilful midfielder packing to Sheffield Wednesday after hardly a sniff of the City Ground.
Any guesses?
No prizes.
Anyway, with the topsy-turvy results this season has thrown up, it's anybody's guess what we'll end up with after Man U v Forest has run its course on The Match on Sunday (ITV, 3.25pm).
PAGE t43
Jekyll by Hyde: Michael Hyde on the life of one of Britain's greatest gardeners, Gertrude Jekyll.
Living canvas by Bumps Gardening.
ACHINESE proverb has it that if you want to be happy for a week, get married; for a month, kill a pig; for a lifetime, plant a garden.
Though not piggishly chauvinistic enough to echo the first pronouncement, I heartily endorse the last.
And now that I am inclined to hear time's winged chariot hovering near, and see deserts of vast eternity not too far ahead, I am determined to make the most of my remaining years both in my secluded garden and on my open-space allotment.
Thanks to a very favourable, sometimes glorious, October, my 10-rod plot is now reasonably ship-shape — the grass paths trimmed for their winter sleep; the rubbish cleared; the gooseberry and currant bushes pruned; weeds cleared from overwintering onions, brassicas, and Swiss chard; and some digging done.
We oldies can find digging soothing and satisfying, even enjoyable — particularly if we take it in small doses and choose good weather and soil conditions.
We need to be well clad, of course, well shod, and equipped with spades of good balance to suit our size.
Thus occupied on this repetitive job, the mind is free to wander and daydream.
The other day, for instance, it was the portrait of Miss Jekyll, the lady gardener, that flashed before my inner eye.
She helped with the spadework in the early days of the Wisley garden, I had learned.
And then it was the charming picture of her Gardening Boots that I saw.
That picture I surmised, would look well if paired with Van Gogh's Chair.
Gertrude Jekyll (1843-1932)— G.J. for short and called Bumps by her friends — was fat, friendly and fearless.
Born of gentlefolk, she lived near Godalming in west Surrey.
As a child she roamed freely along the country lanes, knew the wild flowers by name and smell and the birds in dialect.
The green woodpecker was Yaffles, the wren Puggy, and the dragonflies skimming the pond Adder Spears.
She mixed with the villagers, admired their cottage gardens, learned their crafts, and made some of her own gardening tools at the blacksmith's forge.
And she appears to have been completely classless.
For instance, she helped by letter a Lancashire mill lad seeking advice on the use of his few square feet of soil (it seems to have been an attic window box in Rochdale) and followed this up with a postal package of plants, bulbs, and pebbles to complete his project.
Her ambition to be a painter was thwarted by acute shortness of sight which made her turn to gardening, ‘making pictures with living plants’ to use her own words; and she became famous for the gardens she created and the books she wrote.
Eminent Victorians and gardeners who visited her by now famous Munstead Wood home found her wearing two pairs of spectacles.
Far from moping about her painful and progessive myopia, she declared it to be an advantage because, having to peer so closely, she could detect objects that the well-sighted passed without noticing.
And her other senses were accentuated.
She could hear a hedgehog moving ‘noiselessly’ in the undergrowth, distinguish trees by the rustle of their leaves in the wind and the feel of their bark, and know of the nearness of flowers by their scents.
Lupins for her had a peppery smell, bracken a smell of the sea.
KNOWING this, I am stirred to re-educate my own neglected senses by moving about the allotment with eyes almost closed when no one is looking.
(Miss Jekyll used to jump five-bar gates when no one was looking.)
I can then learn by its tic-tic that the robin is at my feet, judge by smell that I have trodden on thyme or bumped into a rosemary bush, and tell by touch that the leaf in my hand is comfrey and not common dock.
Miss Jekyll's books are pleasantly readable and as uncluttered as their titles — Home and Garden; Wood and Garden; Children and Gardens; Old West Surrey…this last with 300 photographs to record early Victorian life in those parts.
Her articles too, written for magazines and journals (including the Guardian) are always readable and informative.
Some of these were reprinted in book form after her death — A Gardener's Testament, published by Country Life and Scribner, New York, in 1937.
Her books are still available in reference and some lending libraries, and there is a more recent biography, Miss Jekyll — Portrait of a Great Gardener, by Bessy Massingham, David and Charles, 1966.
The later years of her long and successful life were troubled, alas, by an excess of curious and unannounced visitors in addition to the genuine and eminent gardeners whom she welcomed.
‘Many Americans, Germans and journalists,’ she noted sadly.
It would not be surprising if Japanese tourists now go in search of gardens she created, or of the grave into which her coffin was gently lowered by gardeners in 1932.
PAGE t25
A secret deep in the soil Oddjobbing.
By Hilary Applegate IF YOUR garden suffers from slow-draining surface water, slow plant growth or shallow rooting, it could pay dividends to find out whether a soil profile could provide you with a diagnosis.
This involves an area of about one square yard of currently uncultivated land, together with a sturdy spade and lots of energy, for you are seeking evidence of an impermeable layer, or hard pan, down below the ground.
You should dig a pit a yard deep; for comfort while digging, this will need to be about a square yard in area.
While excavating, take care to keep the different soil layers separate from each other, because each should be replaced at its original depth.
Having completed the pit, look for signs of compaction: vertical roots turning 90 degrees to the horizontal at a particular level, or a layer which just looks hard and compacted, or a wet, grey or blue band between one and six inches deep.
Such a pan usually arises at a depth of about six to ten inches, caused by digging (or more frequently rotovating) always to the same depth.
Repeated insertion of a fork to its full length is all that is needed to break up shallow pans.
Deeper hard pans require more drastic operations such as double digging; in established gardens you may prefer to delay the upheaval until each area affected is due for renewal and replanting.
PAGE t25
Chess.
By Leonard Barden THE EASY Soviet victory in this week's world team championship at Lucerne recalled the palmy days of the 1950s when the generation of Botvinnik and Smyslov, Bronstein and Keres, outclassed opponents.
The USSR won decisively against all their serious rivals, Yugoslavia, the US and England, in the first five rounds and only slackened at the end when the gold medals were assured.
It was an impressive performance with Kasparov and Yusopov absent and Karpov arriving late.
Russian chess has gained from glasnost.
Participation in the strong Western Europe and US opens has widened their pool of talent and brought closer contact with new ideas.
Final scores were USSR 27 ½ out of 36, Yugoslavia 22 ½, England 21 ½, Hungary 18 ½, US and Switzerland 17, Cuba 16 ½, China 15 ½, Netherlands 12 ½, Africa 11 ½.
England recovered well from a slow start and their 3 ½-½ victory over the United States was their widest margin ever in matches between the two countries.
But in the final round England only drew 2-2 with China and Yugoslavia won the silver.
England have now won silver or bronze medals behind Russian gold five times out of five in the most recent world and Olympic team events, sufficient to establish Britain as world No. 2 chess nation.
There is still a basic problem which will not become any easier.
After the Dubai 1986 Olympics when England were unlucky not to win against a full-strength USSR, it seemed that gold would be there once the Russians had another off day.
But at Lucerne that happy event looked more distant than before, and meanwhile several of our grandmasters who have chased Soviet supremacy for a decade are now aged 30-35, a critical period for any Western professional.
It is difficult to improve further, younger rivals are appearing, contemporaries in other fields are in settled careers.
Nigel Short has realistic prospects of an individual world title match; Michael Adams may be the player of the 1990s, but for others our runner-up medals behind Soviet gold could trigger a motivation crisis.
GM Nigel Short (England —
GM Yasser Seirawan (US)
Modern Defence (Lucerne 1989)
1 e4||d6||2 d4||g6|| 3 Be3||Bg7||4 NC3||a6|| 5 h4||Nf6||6 f3||b5|| 7 g4||h5||8 e5||Nfd7|| Such a direct barnstorming attack against the strategic Modern Defence is rarely seen, and if successful threatens the viability of the opening.
Black has to consider 4.. c6 instead of a6, even 2..
Nf6 instead of g6.
9 gxh5||Rxh5||10 e6! ||fxe6|| Black now becomes very passive — maybe 10..
Nf8!?
11 Bd3||Nf8||12 f4||Rh8|| 13 Qg4||Bb7||14 Rh3||Bf6|| 15 0-0-0||b4||16 Ne4||Bd5|| 17 Nf3||Nc6||18 Ne5! ||dxe5|| An attractive sacrifice, based on the BK's lack of flight squares.
19 fxe5||Bxe5|||||| Or Bg7 20 Nc5 Kf7 21 h5 and the attack should win.
20 Nc5! ||Qc8||21 Bxg6+||Kd8|| 22 dxe5||Nxe5||23 Nxe6+||Qxe6|| 24 Qxe6||Nxe6||25 Rxd5+||Nd7|| 26 Bf5||Nf8||27 Bg5||c6|| 28 Rd1||Ke8||29 Re3||e5|| Black has survived with level material, but his king remains terribly exposed to White's rampaging rooks and bishops.
30 Rd6||c5||31 Rf3||Ra7|| 32 Re6+||Kf7||33 Re7+||Kg8|| 34 Rg3||Resigns Mate by Bh6+ can be delayed only at ruinous cost.
One of Short's most brilliant games.
Problem No. 20884
Black (15 men)
Take in board
White (14 men)
I. Sokolov (Yugoslavia) v. V. Tseshchovsky (USSR), Wijk 1989.
Black (to move) has sacrificed a bishop for two pawns, and to some effect.
The white army is in scattered retreat from the incursion of Black's queen and knights.
How can Black force a win?
No. 2087: WK at d3, Q at a8, Rs at c5 and e5, Ps at a5, b3, d5, f2 and h6.
BK at d1, R at d6, P at a6.
Mate in three.
1 Qh8 (threat 2 Rc1+ Kxc1 3 Re1) Rc6 2 Qe3 (threat 3 Re1) Re6 3 Qh5.
If Re6 2 Qc8 Rc6 3 Qg4.
If Rf6 2 Re3 and 3 Qa1.
If Rxd5+ 2 Rcxd5 Kc1 3 Re1.
Eating in.
By Richard Ehrlich LIKE MOST parents of young children, I regularly face the dilemma of what to do with leftovers.
There are two sensible solutions to the problem.
One is to wrap them in clingfilm and put them in the fridge until the next meal.
The other is to throw them away.
I usually steer a middle course which avoids both waste and effort.
I eat the leftovers myself.
Recently however, something extraordinary happened.
Our older daughter Rebecca had left an unlikely farrago of peas, cottage cheese, baked beans and pasta in a tomato sauce.
I scoffed it down and found to my astonishment that it was delicious.
The incident set me thinking.
Did that commingling of unrelated flavours remind me of another dish, or had it produced a breakthrough in gastronomy?
A quick flip through my cookery books turned up some Italian and Middle Eastern dishes that bore a passing resemblance to what had happened on Rebecca's plate.
But nothing matched it precisely.
Thus does one get an idea for a new dish.
After a few experiments, I came up with a reasonable facsimile of Rebecca's accidental assemblage.
Cannelini beans replaced tinned and a bechamel mixed with Pecorino Romano from Lina Stores, Brewer Street, London W1, stood in for the cottage cheese, It was every bit as good as the original, if somewhat more sophisticated.
Now the question arises: have my taste-buds been ruined by the muck I've plucked from the mouths of babes?
See what you think.
The dish doesn't look like much, so it's for family meals rather than dinner parties.
But it's easy and cheap.
What's more, Rebecca ate every mouthful of leftovers and that's high praise indeed.
I look forward to receiving further cooking lessons from her.
Fusilli al Forno alla Rebecca 6 ounces cannelini beans 12 ounces fusilli 8 ounces frozen peas 500ml good tomato sauce 500ml thinnish bechamel 3 ounces Pecorino or mature cheddar, grated Soak the beans and cook them in water or chicken stock until just soft; drain them and heat gently in the tomato sauce, Preheat the oven to 400 (gas mark 6) and butter a shallow casserole or gratin dish.
Cook the peas and the pasta in the usual way.
Pour the pasta into the baking dish and scatter the peas on top, then mix the bean mixture with two ounces of the cheese and spread it over the peas.
Ladle on the bechamel, sprinkle the remaining cheese on top, and bake in the oven for 30 minutes or so, until piping hot.
If the top isn't browned, finish the dish under the grill and serve immediately with a green salad.
FORGET the million dollar man.
These are the million dollar models.
Only just out of their teens, they can — and do — earn millions of dollars a year, mostly with exclusive contracts to international cosmetic and fashion houses.
In New York this week they strutted the catwalks for major American designers like Calvin Klein, Ralph Lauren and Donna Karan.
This is the final leg of the fashion industry's month-long show of clothes, previewing what will be in shops next spring.
The experts claim it's not a vintage year, so the spotlight has shone firmly on the models.
Speculation on their colourful lives and enormous bank balances have provided much needed excitement in a sea of bland, beige tailoring.
Paulina Porizkova — a Czech who emigrated to the United States — is the biggest earner.
Her contract with with cosmetic company Estee Lauder is worth a total of $6million.
Like many mega-models, she's not content with just posing for pictures.
She's already made two films, one starring Tom ‘Magnum’ Selleck.
And — fulfilling another model cliche — she has a rock star boyfriend, Ric Ocasek of seventies pop group The Cars.
Linda Evangelista is, for the real fashion fiend, The Model of 1989.
Her unconventional face, with slightly hooked nose, has graced nearly every magazine cover.
The drastic boyish crop — first thought a disaster — is now a trend in itself, and Evangelista earns around $10,000 a day.
Christy Turlington, discovered as a Californian teenager, was signed to an exclusive contract for Calvin Klein's perfume, Eternity.
Reportedly worth $3million, it meant Turlington could only be photographed in Klein's clothes.
But over the past month she has graced the catwalks in Milan, London, Paris and New York, wearing the work of dozens of different designers, and fuelling rumours of a rift between her and Klein.
When the rates of pay are this high, the fighting can get very dirty indeed.
Turlington is one of two models being sued for $11million, over their switch to another agency.
As they say, it gets tough at the top.
PAGE f3
Sweeping the board by book or by rook The Polgar sisters, who this weekend are competing at the Barbican, are the most remarkable phenomenon in the history of chess.
They have rewritten the record books, stormed the male bastion of Grandmaster chess, and defied the laws of probability.
How can a family produce three geniuses?.
Peter Lennon went to Budapest to find out.
WHEN Laszlo Polgar, a Hungarian vocational school teacher, married his Ukrainian wife, Klara, in 1965 he carefully studied a number of books on ‘fathering’.
Stepson of a rabbi and product of a broken home, Laszlo was brought up in an orphanage, and it is clear that from a very early age this intense, obstinate man sought not only to bring order to his own life but to control to an unprecedented degree the environment of his future family.
The result was the greatest phenomenon in the history of chess: three sisters, Zsuzsa, Zsofia and Judit Polgar, all of whom have achieved Grandmaster results in their teens.
Zsuzsa, who had been playing chess since the age of four, won her Master title in 1982 at the age of 13 (Karpov did not reach that standard until 15); she was an International Master at 18.
The two other Polgar girls were, by then, already astonishing the world.
Zsofia achieved International Master and Grandmaster results in l988, aged 14.
But it is Judit to whom the chess world most readily gives the title of genius: last year, aged 13, she achieved a Grandmaster norm and became the world's top-ranking woman player.
This beats even the great Bobby Fischer by a wide margin.
The mathematical probability of any family producing a chess Grandmaster was thought to be relatively low; the mathematical probability of producing three in a row goes off the chart.
A good chess player can be a bad contestant, but all three Polgar sisters are superb contestants.
Their stamina is remarkable.
In 1986 all three girls took part in a 24-hour chess marathon in Dresden.
The rules demanded that a hundred games had to be played within 24 hours; there was no time for sleep and only 20- minute breaks were allowed for snacks.
Moreover, they were playing after a 16-hour train journey.
The tournament was won by Zsuzsa, and the two younger girls also finished in the leading group.
Judit performed even better in the second half than the first.
The astounding point about the Polgar phenomenon is that Laszlo Polgar planned such results before the children were born.
The story of the Polgars is therefore much more one of educational techniques, a unique and deliberate experiment in environmental conditioning, than it is of chess.
Until recently, public interest in the West has centred largely on the performances of the girls, as it would in any competitive sport.
But now questions are being asked about the conditions in which the girls have been obliged to live to produce such results.
For years Polgar was the object of intense hostility from the Hungarian public because of his unorthodox and highly suspect educational methods.
Defying the authorities, he never allowed his children to go to school.
He, his ex-teacher wife and chess coaches provided their education at home.
The President of the Hungarian Chess Federation, Sandor Szerenyi (also a former Party Secretary) called him ‘a scoundrel and an anarchist.’
Another of Polgar's battles is his refusal to allow his girls to play in women's tournaments, with the exception of the Olympics, where Zsuzsa triumphed.
To challenge male players they are obliged to play in teams.
Tomorrow and on Monday the Polgar sisters will be at the Barbican competing in an exhibition ‘rapid’(all moves have to be completed within 30 minutes) against three of England's leading young male players, Michael Adams, David Norwood and Stuart Conquest.
The question many ask is: has Polgar turned his children into robots and marionettes?
THE POLGARS live on the eighth floor of a block of flats on Semmelweis Street, a workers' area in Budapest.
You walk along a narrow balcony over-looking a courtyard, much in the style of a British council estate, although in good repair.
With their recently acquired wealth from the girls' success, the Polgars have been able to buy an adjoining apartment to make one multi-roomed home.
The main rooms are box style and low-ceilinged, giving on to alcove-like bedrooms.
Judit's cassette-filled bedroom is no bigger than a standard bathroom.
The original apartment leads into an open-plan affair of bright yellow and red cut-price, Habitat-style furnishings and tubular partitions.
This is all a huge improvement on 10 years ago when the children practised their chess in a two-roomed flat with one wall reeking with damp.
Copiously furnished with crammed bookcases, shelves stacked with cassettes and 19th century lithographs tastefully dispersed across the walls, it seems at first glance to be a richly cultured environment.
But it is soon revealed to have a peculiar character.
Every single book is about chess; every cassette features chess games; most of the ornaments are chess trophies; even the framed prints depict chess scenes.
Occasional tables bear computer chess sets.
There is an encyclopaedia, but it is an encyclopaedia of endgames.
A card index of chess openings covers an entire wall from floor to ceiling; there is a computerised data bank of opening variations and middle game types.
There is a name index used to prepare against certain adversaries.
The entire home is a shrine to chess.
The only apparent relief from chess were two dolls and a golliwog on Judit's bunk bed.
Laszlo Polgar, who is 43, is a small, stocky man with a biblical beard.
At first his manner is reserved and defensive; there is an attitude that suggests he expects rebuke and is ready to fight.
Throughout there was a joyless kind of determination never to be proved wrong.
We spoke through an interpreter.
He produced the unpublished manuscript of a book he has written about his experiment, which he had just had translated into English.
From the outset it becomes apparent that the achievements in chess are incidental to Laszlo Polgar's obsessive theories of ‘genius rearing’.
Chess was simply the most convenient route for demonstrating those theories.
Its attraction was that it has the advantage of any competitive sport, that measurable results can be easily obtained.
The cold-bloodedness of this experiment becomes apparent when we discover that chess was not one of Polgar's great interests; even now he is only a mediocre player.
So this was not the equivalent of a father wanting to pass on the passionate love of his hobby to his children.
Polgar told me that in the early days of his marriage he examined the childhood of many famous persons and saw that geniuses all specialised in a field very early.
He read that Yehudi Menuhin's father gave up his career as a teacher so that the family could live together and organise Yehudi's concerts.
Polgar resolved to do the same, although for years it resulted in severe poverty.
His wife, Klara, declared: ‘When I first met Laci [Laszlo]in 1965, I just listened and listened.
Sometimes I had the feeling that he was a man of fantasies, that it would be too much to believe even half of them.
Now it is Laci who initiates the great ideas, but I am always part of the realisation.
The thread follows the needle.
I am the thread.’
Klara is a plump, good- natured woman who shares the duties of travelling with the girls and enjoying their endless tourist trips, although friends doubt if she has yet learned the moves in chess.
A school teacher, she speaks half a dozen languages moderately well.
She also gave up her profession to educate the girls.
There is no visible sign of rancour at the curious lifestyle imposed on her; she appears placidly resigned to her fate.
But she told me she would have been perfectly content if they had not taken this course.
Polgar met Klara in the traditional Jewish way.
His mother came home one day and said: ‘I have met a very nice young lady teacher.
Why don't you get acquainted with that nice lady teacher!’
The influence in the home is very orthodox Jewish.
Laszlo once wanted to be a rabbi.
He said: ‘The Jewish religion prescribes for parents to teach their children from an early age.
The Talmud provides that the Jewish parents must be the first teachers.’
Polgar is a Jew in a country with a foul history of anti- semitism.
The Hungarians deported 600,000 Jews during the war.
He attributes some of his difficulties with the Communist Establishment to anti-semitism.
Polgar is against conventional schooling, he says, because ‘it did not make learning a beloved activity.’
Although he still speaks bitterly of the pressure put on him by the authorities, in fact they never succeeded in obliging him to send the children to school; he was not even fined as he would have been in Britain.
The children sit for normal exams at the local school and have so far maintained a necessary standard.
IN HIS unorthodox pilgrimage there has been more than a normal share of ill-will, resentment and litigation.
Polgar has sued four Hungarian newspapers and the national radio for real or imagined persecution.
Polgar's approach to teaching is, he says, that ‘the pleasure of the accomplishment must be several times as much as the experience of failure.’
He claims to reject blind discipline.
‘I achieve discipline’, he says, ‘by kindling interest in, and love for, the subject.
I believe that early childhood is not at all early in respect of learning, not even of specialisation.
‘In my opinion the period from three to six is the most important and should be utilised much better than it is today.
Children like to solve problems.
The richer the content of the problem solved the happier the child.
Learning was a greater pleasure for my children than sterile play for play's sake.’
He accepts that his children play less than other children, but considers this is normal for children of high ability who demand more absorbing tasks.
He had thought of experimenting with three different subjects — maths, foreign languages and chess — but his financial circumstances in those days did not make it possible.
The three children would have needed three different teacher-trainers.
‘True psychologists do not recommend siblings competing directly because they could become jealous and envious, and might even come to hate each other,’ says Polgar.
‘This, however, cannot take place if they are brought up properly.’
Mrs Polgar had offered some refreshments; saucissons, gherkins, and bread and coffee.
At the end of the collation the objects of this relentless pedagogical experiment were suddenly in the drawing room.
Polgar rations their appearances in a natural wish to protect them from the media.
They stood there in the room together, but at an angle to each other, half-smiling, the classical demeanour of shy youth being introduced to a stranger in their home.
Zsuzsa, the eldest, is effortlessly fluent in English; although her words are outgoing there is a certain watchfulness in her manner.
Her chess, too, is said to be more positional.
Zsofia, 15, has the air of a girl experimenting happily with young womanhood, enjoying her own attractiveness.
When I remarked that Karl Marx is reputed to have said: ‘Chess has one great quality — it teaches you to play chess,’ Zsofia laughed merrily.
But her father, in whom a sense of humour is not a very apparent virtue, remained reserved.
Judit, at 13 tall for her age, with russet hair, has that capacity of early teenage of one minute seeming like a woman and the next like a small child.
She has a tendency to hug herself tightly when grappling with a question, and at one point, when I asked her how she saw herself in the future, grown up and faced with decisions about her own children, she panicked for an instant and had to be consoled by the female interpreter.
I asked her if she did not feel deprived, having never experienced school life.
She told the interpreter that ‘although she had never been to school she liked the life she lived.’
Hungarian chess players say that Judit is the most aggressive and inspirational of the three, and the most like her father, with a will of iron.
The girls admitted they did not go to discos, but said they had friends.
Zsuzsa swims with a friend at 7 every morning.
They all play ping-pong; Zsofia has reached competition standards.
The girls give the impression of children of a particularly sheltered family.
Polite, friendly, neither intense nor passionate in their responses, they do not appear to have strong opinions either about chess or about their own future.
They would just like to keep on playing, they claim, and if they have children they would probably use educational methods similar to their father's.
But it was clear that they had not given the subject much thought, nor did they feel there was any need to.
They have seen a lot of world now — Rome, London, New York and Paris — and like most girls of their age are not yet discontented with this necessarily tourist oriented relationship with the outside world.
If the girls do not appear to have an even average awareness of culture — a friend said that a couple of years ago Zsuzsa had never heard of
Beethoven's Fifth Symphony — neither do they appear to be in any way neurotic.
I asked Zsuzsa if she had a boy-friend.
She was very hesitant in her response.
‘She is not sure,’ said her mother.
After a short while they retired to the back room and sat in a kind of play-pen atmosphere analysing Judit's most recent game with a young American visitor.
The Polgars are still a united and, in a quite humane way, isolated family.
The intransigence of the Communist
Government in not allowing them passports until 1985 might have protected the children at a crucial time in their development.
What will happen when other individuals lay claim to the girls' affection and loyalty is another question.
Polgar claimed that nothing would change; when the girls married, their husbands would become part of an extended family.
‘He won't divide up the chess books,’ Mrs Polgar said.
‘So they will always come back.’
Has Laszlo Polgar really created geniuses?
It is possible he has unwittingly done something more subversive: totally demystified chess.
He has demonstrated that any obedient, healthy child, fed on an almost exclusive diet of chess, can become a Grandmaster.
Laszlo Polgar…he has constructed a shrine to chess and a laboratory for his obsessive theories of genius rearing PHOTOGRAPHS: TAMAS REVESZ Judit…inspirational Zsofia…experimenting Zsuzsa…watchful
Endpiece.
By Roy Hattersley
THE CATHEDRAL at Lyon stands back from the bank of the Saone, and, from the other side of the river, is half hidden by bland blocks of flats.
Even the two towers, which peer over the roofs that block their view, are camouflaged by scaffolding.
Walking across the Bonaparte Bridge, I looked in vain for what was marked by a giant cross on the tourist map.
But I looked for only a moment.
Then, my eyes were lifted up to the hill which overshadows the old city.
On its highest point is built another church.
It is a contender for the title of the Worst Building in the World.
From the bridge the church looked no worse than bizarre — a giant Christmas cake which, having risen too high in the oven, has been covered in over-decorated icing in order to obscure its deformity.
What seem to be four candlesticks — designed in the same sugary style — stand guard around it and a fifth, a little distance from the main confectionary, is crowned with a gilded figure.
Despite its pagan appearance the figure was put there in an act of Christian piety.
The thing on the hill is the basilica of Notre Dame, Fourviere.
Like Sacre Coeur in Paris, Notre Dame, Fourviere was built to commemorate the end of the Franco-Prussian war — a conflict in which France was conclusively defeated.
It would be easy to believe that both churches were imposed on the French as a punishment.
But, according to the guide book, Notre Dame was regarded by contemporary opinion as a masterpiece of 19th-century gothic architecture.
It took 20 years to build.
And anyone who is brave enough to venture inside will realise how the time was spent.
For Notre Dame, Fourviere is Sacre Coeur's vulgar sister — the member of the family who uses the most make-up and wears the gaudiest clothes.
In south Yorkshire during the forties, we were particularly disapproving of the sort of woman who ‘puts on every bit of cheap jewellery that she's got’.
That woman is the real patron saint of Notre Dame, Fourviere.
It is for that reason that I include it on the shortlist for the Worst Building in the World title.
Far more wicked deeds are done under less decorated roofs and there is much greater misery behind less colourful windows.
I regularly see huge grey towers of concrete and steel which brutalise the landscape and recent ruins which have been shoddily built have slipped into early dereliction.
But I have never witnessed anything so triumphantly awful as Notre Dame, Fourviere.
It is appalling with malice aforethought.
A hundred years ago an architect took pride in designing every ghastly detail.
Consider the psychological condition of the man who conceived the pillars.
At ground level there are haloed birds with spread wings.
The columns which they carry on their backs have more fluting than a respectable column would accept and the Corinthian capitals have swirls and squiggles that would have been prohibited in Corinth.
But that is only the beginning.
More birds — wings folded, but halos identical to their restless kin below — perch upon them.
And standing on the resting birds are massive caryatids — each one as grim and unsmiling as might be expected of a lady who is balancing an arch on her head.
The pillars are no exception to the general style.
Mosaic pictures cover every inch of wall.
At the Council of Ephesus the Virgin is pronounced divine by priests with square Byzantine beards.
Louis proves himself to be saint as well as king.
Pio Nono insecure in a litter, above the crowd in St Peter's Square announces the Bodily Assumption.
Don John of Austria wins the battle of Lepanto with a bravura which far exceeds the brio described in G.K. Chesterton's poem.
It was the altar — stuffed with as much clutter as a belle epoque boudoir — that really made me think.
I was not worried by the griffins and sphinxes, though it is a strange church that features pagan allegories beyond its sanctuary steps.
It was the usual lamp, burning away to remind celebrants and sightseers that He is always here that perturbed me.
Could He, I wondered, possibly feel at home amongst all that ostentation.
The theological answer is that He feels at home anywhere because He is at home everywhere.
But another important question is less easily answered.
What sort of men (women, I suspect, having nothing to do with it) sought to worship God with such a display of blatant vulgarity?
And what sort of God did they believe was best worshipped in a basilica that leaves no lily ungilded?
Clearly they thought that Solomon in all his glory looked far better than anything which was likely to be found growing in a field.
Solomon spent money on his appearance and, to them, spending money was proof that a subject was being taken seriously.
I can hear them telling the architect not to spare a single sou.
Order the terrazzo by the square metre.
Buy whole treefuls of gold leaf.
Give every lion wings and make every caryatid an Amazon capable of carrying the whole world on her skull.
Nothing is too good (that is to say, too expensive) for God.
I hope that God does not look at life in quite that way.
If I am right, Notre Dame is really a temple to Mammon.
When in early Christian Rome they converted pagan temples into churches, they removed all the symbols of the old religion which could be torn out without endangering the structure.
It will be a hard task to perform in Notre Dame, Fourviere.
But the good people of Lyon should try.
La Manga golf clinic.
THERE WERE eight of us who had voluntarily submitted ourselves for treatment at the clinic: two lawyers, two Italian businessmen, two bankers, a fashion designer and me.
We were all in need of help.
With some it was the hands.
With some the feet.
With some the shoulders.
We were all, it is fair to say, hypochondriacs.
Most golfers are.
There is some bit of their game that is always sick.
There is always some magic remedy that will cure it, or some whizz-kid quack with a patent method.
And Vincente Ballesteros has a reputation as one of the finest surgeons in the business.
You may have heard of his kid brother.
They started off together hitting stones around the beaches of northern Spain with old sticks.
The kid brother went on to make a moderate fortune doing the same with golf balls and golf clubs.
Vincente caddied for him for a while but it was an awkward role for a big brother.
So Vincente ended up teaching most of the year at La Manga, a complex of world-class golf courses, villas and hotels on the Costa Blanca.
So it was that the eight of us ended up, kit gleaming in the spring sunshine, awaiting the arrival of the man who would diagnose our ills, administer a local anaesthetic and set us on the road to perfect health.
Between us we had even hired a video so that we could record this minor miracle of medical history for posterity.
None of us had reckoned on open-heart surgery.
None of us had predicted that the videos would end up like director David Cronenberg nasties.
None of us had foretold that our games would end up on life-support systems in intensive care.
BUT this is rushing ahead.
Vincente seemed a pleasant enough bloke when he turned up on that first morning.
He spoke in a pleasing linguistic mixture that seemed to acknowledge no boundaries between Spanish and English.
One soon picked up the basics.
There was el grip, el backthwing, el bunkershot, el drive and el putt.
Or, in my case, el airshot, el thlice, el hook, el shank, el cetera.
We lined up, dispatching practice balls into the shimmering blue yonder with ill-disguised pride and waited for the Master to work his way along, one of us on video duty all the while.
At last he reached me and asked me to demonstrate el thwing.
I thwung.
The ball soared away in a graceful arc.
I smiled.
Vincente frowned.
First of all he picked up my clubs, pronounced them useless and advised me to sell them forthwith.
He then grabbed my hands and, in the manner of a demented macrame expert, rearranged them around my condemned four iron.
‘El grip,’ he said severely.
I whimpered and pathetically tried to move the little finger of my left hand, currently being squeezed bloodless by the lattice work of fingers he had somehow contrived along the handle.
‘No, no, no,’ he said impatiently.
‘This el grip.
You want to play with your grip, you go and have coffee.
Now hit it.’
I swung the club and missed it.
‘Hit it,’ he said, seizing el grip with a painful vice and swinging it from side to side.
I swung the club again and the ball shot off much as one had always imagined bats flee hell.
That was one of the problems.
While Vincente was there, glowering over you, radiating fitness and willpower, the ball seemed to behave in a dramatic way, as though fitted with miniature jet rockets.
But the moment Vincente's back was turned the ball tended to squirt off at eccentric angles — or, worse, refuse to move at all.
The other problem was the blisters.
Huge puffy ones started springing up all over the hands at the friction points in Vincente's system of finger knots.
Each night I soothed my hands with ice cubes from the mini-bar.
Each morning I swaddled them in cotton wool and boxes of Band-Aids.
Each day they grew larger.
The first night we went out to a restaurant along the coast.
It was a shell-shocked gathering.
Our golf had been perfectly OK until now, we all agreed.
Did this man know that he had ruined our game, our happiness, everything we held dear?
One by one we seized the cutlery to demonstrate to each other the blatant ludicrousness of el grip.
It flew in the face of the laws of physics, said the Irish banker, a learned man with a considerable library of golfing books.
The City lawyer nodded sagely and ordered another bottle of Rioja.
The second day Vincente announced that el thwing was wrong.
The clear fact was that he was having serious trouble knowing where to start.
He was plainly a kind man but his meaning was quite apparent.
If he played golf as badly as that he'd pack it in.
By now my mind was working along similar lines.
Coupling el grip with el thwing was like attempting the appendix to the Canadian Air Force Exercise Manual.
The results were pitiful.
Which was a shame, since each afternoon we sauntered round the beautifully manicured, palm-fringed courses at La Manga.
It is not quite the setting the founders of the game envisaged but it has something to be said for it.
Except when you are hobbling around dispatching shot after shot into the beautifully manicured lakes thoughtfully scattered around the landscape, leaving a trail of Band-Aids in your wake.
DINNER the second night was a bleak affair until one of the lawyers, emboldened by more than one aperitif, announced that he intended to junk the entire method — el grip, el backthwing, the lot — and return to his old ways.
There were gasps of shock and admiration.
The City lawyer nodded sagely and ordered another bottle of Rioja.
And another.
Much more of that and we'd have been making a block transfer to the Betty Ford clinic.
We all cheered up a bit after that.
We continued to contort our limbs into improbable postures when Vincente was directly overseeing us.
But whenever he wandered off el grip would loosen, el thwing would revert and the comfortable old mongrel ways would return.
I AM writing this some six months later.
For some time after the trip I have to report that my game remained on the critical list.
It was touch and go.
Then gradually twitches of life manifested themselves and it is now as well as can be expected.
El grip has been discarded, along with the last of the Band-Aids.
But I would not say I learned nothing from Vincente.
There are occasions, when the sun is shining and all is well with the world, when I fancy he might recognise the rudiments of el thwing.
And he was quite right about the clubs.
They turned out to be ladies'.
But I never have been able to bring myself to watch the video.
Marrakech.
IF I HAD to design a retreat for winter-weary travellers who want familiar hotels but in a different civilisation, I'd invent Marrakech.
I stayed there for a week in January and for once I found myself in the overworked brochure cliche: Marrakech is a city of contrasts and a fascinating blend of the old and new.
Well, not a blend exactly.
There are definite demarcation lines.
Inside the top hotels all is First World ordered calm: state-of-the-art swimming pools, satellite television and chocolates on the pillow at night.
The smell is Chanel and money.
The sound is international muzak and ‘would you care for ice with your martini, madame?’
A step outside and I'm conscious of my bare head and arms.
Most Moroccan women show only their eyes.
The men are trying to catch mine and hook themselves on to me as ‘guides’.
In the five minutes spent walking fast enough to shake them off, I'm in the crowds in the main square, Djemaa el Fna.
Here are acrobats, storytellers, letter writers, snake charmers and teeth pullers.
The smell is of woodsmoke and amber, stables and drains, grilling meats and spices.
The noise is drums and violins, mopeds and horses and: ‘Madame, you want to buy?
I give best prices.
Venez, s'il vous plait.
Very good prices.
Come.’
It is possible to ‘do’ Marrakech in less than two days.
Many tour groups do and I timed their sightseeing.
It's four minutes per museum floor, half an hour in Djemaa el Fna (less for those scared of pickpockets and dirt), one hour round the city walls in a carriage at trotting pace and as much time in the souks as it takes to buy a rug, a leather coat and some fake Berber jewellery.
With a week to loaf around the town I had the luxury of time to get lost — not difficult in the souks, a vast hugger-mugger of alleys.
I drank mint tea in the carpet shops (and found Stefan Grappelli, Bryan Ferry and Ben Kingsley listed in one shop's order book).
I tried on buttersoft leather jackets and tried out ‘designer’ bags.
If Louis Vuitton were paid for every LV logo in the souks, he could surely buy Marrakech.
I fingered heavy silver and amber necklaces with starting prices of £200 but I did not have the patience or the energy to haggle down to the real price.
Sometimes at night I'd find myself beyond the souks in narrow lanes between windowless houses.
Here the pestering to buy stops.
Veiled women carrying home shopping didn't give me a second glance.
Neither did the men gliding by in long jellabas and pointed hoods.
We'd squeeze to the dusty walls to let the horse-drawn carriages past.
Only mopeds and lads swapping cigarette cards stop the scenes being Sunday school posters.
It seems to my tourist eyes that Marrakech has survived French occupation pretty well.
French influence was limited.
They left alone the old town with its souks, square, palaces and its impressive Koutoubia minaret.
Instead they built their handsome new town with its wide tree-lined boulevards, outside the city walls.
One policy still enforced means that all but Moslems are banned from entering the mosques.
The most noticeable French legacies are their language and their food.
Breakfast at a pavement table in the new town is a leisurely Gallic affair.
A croissant warm from the oven, a cup of good coffee and a tumbler of just-squeezed orange juice costs under £1.
An a la carte three-course supper for two with a bottle of very drinkable Moroccan red at, say, Le Petit Poucet comes to £10 all in.
It's the sort of shabby restaurant you can still find in France: radishes and butter and spiced olives for nibbles, enormous roses plonked on the table and football on the TV in a back room are the setting for the very best pommes frites and memorable dishes of brains a beurre blanc and kidneys in garlic.
Moroccan food turned out to be an equally good treat.
The Moroccan restaurants that I tried were obviously set up for tourists.
Either that or the better-heeled locals enjoy female singers wailing purposefully at their table and moving away only when handed money.
Anyone like us who, after two hand-outs, tries pretending she's not there is eventually offered what sounds like a horrible curse.
Still the food is interesting and delicious.
Pastilla, for example, is a crisply baked cake of cooked pigeon — bones and all — layered between paper-thin pastry and sweetened with almonds and sugar.
Tajine is a stew of meats and vegetables, poulet au citron is nearly as you'd imagine but with sweet spices and lemon peel pickled in brine.
Two of us spent £45 wallowing in the glorious splendour of Marrakech's best Moroccan restaurant at the Mamounia Hotel.
Another night at some scruffy place full of hooded locals, we spent £15 on similar dishes.
The food there didn't taste too different and we were spared a cabaret but I reckon £30 isn't too high a price for eating in a beautiful, traditional-style Moroccan room with the well heeled jet set, being served by obsequious waiters in costumes that would put to shame Aladdin's chorus at the Palladium.
On the way out, I swear I bumped into Barry Manilow.
That fancy feast at the Mamounia was a fitting end to a week spent loitering in hushed palace courtyards and lush palm-tree gardens, staring at the marble mosaic walls and the carved cedarwood ceilings in the palaces and in the Museum of Moroccan Art.
Each room is worth a 40-minute visit — not four.
Marrakech is worth not two days of a tourist's time but at least seven.
BRIEFCASE Travelscene sells four, five and seven-night holidays in Marrakech using Royal Air Maroc day flights direct from Heathrow.
Accommodation is in the five-star Meridien or the four-star Tichka, both in the new town (a five-minute cab ride or an interesting 40-minute walk to the old city centre) or in the truly de luxe Mamounia within the city walls.
(The recently-renovated 1930s Mamounia gets my vote for most beautiful rooms anywhere).
Mid-April prices for a four-night stay start from £369.
High season prices (mid-July to mid-September) start from £409 and low season (November and December) from £339.
Flying time is three and a half hours and there is no time change.
The local currency is the dirham, currently 14.65 to the pound.
Importing or exporting dirham is not allowed.
Entry fees to palaces and museums are 3 dirham (20p).
Travel News.
By Trader Horn THE INTERNATIONAL Foundation of Airline Passengers Associations is demanding index-linked compensation for air crash victims and their families.
Payments were set by the Warsaw Convention, which, executive director Geoffrey Lipman complains, is 60 years out of date, although the protection guidelines are still valid.
‘Inflation has reduced their value dramatically.
Most passengers do not realise their rights are limited — it takes a law graduate to understand the notice on the ticket.’
The foundation which is based in Switzerland but also represents consumer groups in the UK, is also proposing a relieffund for victims of terrorist attacks on civil aircraft.
IFAPA, PO Box 462, 1215 Geneva 15 Airport, Switzerland.
Enabling act.
SOME 900 hotels in Scotland fall short of Scottish Tourist Board standards set to assess facilities provided for disabled guests, says STB's Tom Bland.
Over the last three years the board has contributed £581,275 towards improving such facilities at tourist attractions, in hotels and self-catering apartments.
Open season.
FANS OF THE open-top jeep as a means of safari travel will have a wider choice in Zambia from next year, when the national airline's subsidiary, Africa Bound, will start regular game drives through South Luangwa and Kafue national parks — £1,233 for a 10-day tour.
The company also operates beach holidays in other parts of Africa, with seven nights at the Mombasa Beach hotel in Kenya from £794.
Details: 01-493 4388.
Cool in a crisis.
REVERSING the usual policy of hiring young, husky and single people for the strenuous job of courier, Carefree Camping, whose tents are mainly in France, says that these types need not apply for 30 such posts for next summer.
Instead they are looking for to recruit people between 45 and 65, who they feel are more likely to remain cool in the crises which plague, that kind of holiday.
Details: 09277-61311.
Speke speaks out.
THAT HORRIBLE gap at the weekend when the world's financial markets close and the investor suffers withdrawal symptoms, is to be filled by a gilt-edged scheme from stockbrokers Wise Speke.
At two Best Western hotels, the Ivy House at Marlborough and the Spa at Tunbridge Wells, they propose to bide time with theme weekends on structuring a portfolio and sorting out options and warrants.
Details: 0892-20331 (Spa) or 0672-55333 (Ivy).
Bullet proof.
IF EVER there was a country where budget ideas are welcomed it is Japan, and a useful one now emerges: those unable to afford the bullet train — shinkansen — should look to long-distance buses, which can produce a saving ofas much as 40per cent.
In the last year the number of scheduled routes has tripled to 55.
There is a further tactic: by using the night buses travellers are able to save on accommodation: the buses are well equipped with blankets and pillows and high-tech stereo headphones and telephones.
Just the ticket to see the sun rise.
Cool in a crisis.
REVERSING the usual policy of hiring young, husky and single people for the strenuous job of courier, Carefree Camping, whose tents are mainly in France, says that these types need not apply for 30 such posts for next summer.
Instead they are looking for to recruit people between 45 and 65, who they feel are more likely to remain cool in the crises which plague, that kind of holiday.
Details: 09277-61311.
UK Travel.
PRESTATYN seemed a dismal town.
Its grey buildings, mainly guest houses displaying ‘Vacancies’ at netted windows, looked bad enough but with a leaden sky and a seafront virtually devoid of life, apart from one or two hopefuls trying to find shelter from driving rain, it was almost guaranteed to sink one's spirits.
I just wanted to move on.
My reason for being there was that this particular bit of coast happens to be the northern end of the Offa's Dyke footpath, which winds for 168 miles along the English/Welsh border to Chepstow.
My plan was not to walk its length but to ride my mountain bike along minor roads as close as possible to the dyke.
As I rode out of town, past the railway station and its ‘Welcome to Prestatyn’ message, to alighting holidaymakers, I could not help thinking that they certainly were.
The Clwydian Hills, rising to the south and cloaked in cloud, looked wonderfully alluring: so I threw myself into the long climb with far more vigour than I might have done normally.
As I climbed, so the cloud lifted and I was soon able to shed my waterproofs.
Traffic was practically non-existent.
For much of the time the only sounds were the chatter of birds and the humming of my bike's knobbly tyres, but the wide panoramas changed constantly as the countryside unfolded around me.
I idled through tiny villages, little more than hamlets, with ever more unpronounceable names, like Llandyrnog and Llangynhafal and Llan-beder-Dyffryn-Clwyd.
It is the kind of area where keeping a close eye on the map is almost essential for peace of mind — asking the way could prove difficult, to say the least.
On the second day, I geared up for the Horseshoe Pass, three miles up followed by a long down to Llangollen.
But this was an A-road and I wanted to keep mainly to the minor routes, so half-way up I turned off behind the Ponderosa Cafe and joined the Old Horseshoe Pass.
Another rarely used road, hardly wider than a car, it has the merit of going down, while the new road goes up.
It emerges at the foot of Eglwyseg Mountain, a wild-looking spot described by my host of the previous night as ‘Injun country’.
I knew what he meant.
It was quiet.
Much too quiet.
I hurried on, keeping an anxious, watchful eye on the skyline.
AT TREVOR, I crossed the Dee by Thomas Telford's Pontcysyllte Aqueduct, built nearly 200 years ago to carry barges on the Shropshire Union Canal across the deep valley; then cycled up past the church on steep Methodist Hill, built surely as a penance for sinning churchgoers.
Chirk, trying to retain a hint of character despite the volume of traffic that passes through it on the A5, came and went, then, across the River Ceiriog and out of Wales into England.
Until now, Offa's Dyke had not been much in evidence but from Chirk Castle beyond Oswestry's old racecourse there is a sizeable stretch.
A high bank with a ditch on one side, it was built between the estuaries of the Dee and Severn in the late eighth century by Offa, king of Mercia, not as a defence against the Welsh but to control trade across the border.
About 81 miles of dyke are still visible.
For a while, my route flirted with the border and after some easy going across the Severn Valley, I took to the hills again, following a roman road over Long Mountain.
At one point, a painted sign on the tarmac invited me to take a break.
‘This way to the wedding party,’ it read, arrows pointing to a distant farmhouse.
But I resisted the temptation and pushed on to Montgomery and Knighton instead.
The road here crosses from England into Wales and back with increasing regularity.
Over Stonewall Hill, near Presteigne, it actually forms the border.
England fell to the left of me, Wales to the right.
Knighton provided a busy interlude, the bustle contrasting strongly with the tranquility of my journey.
I stopped long enough to recharge, then pedalled up the Arrow Valley, crossed a ridge of hills and then freewheeled all the way down to the largest second hand bookshop in the world at Hay-on-Wye.
Richard Booth opened his first bookshop there in 1961.
Pleasant to browse but unwise to buy as I could do without the extra weight of heavy tomes for the long haul after the town up past Hay Bluff to the Gospel Pass — a climb to more than 1,750 ft.
Not that I could see anything when I arrived — it was covered in cloud.
The only way I knew I had reached the summit was when I started downhill again.
THIS is a long descent — roughly 13 miles down a beautiful valley past the little church at Capel-y-ffyn and the ruins of Llanthony Priory to Llanfihangel Crucorney.
I freewheeled virtually all the way.
From there on, the topography is less demanding, the road undulating gently all the way to Monmouth.
There, I crossed the ancient Monnow Bridge and rode up the broad main street to Agincourt Square, where colourful umbrellas set before the inns give the place a continental air.
The last leg took me down through the fringes of the Forest of Dean along a narrowing spur.
To my right the Wye was there again, winding like a snake; to my left were the broad muddy reaches of the Severn.
Ahead, I could see the twin towers of the Severn Bridge, beneath which the two rivers meet before completing their journey to the sea.
The journey ended, six days on and a world of difference at Chepstow Bridge, just below the walls of the castle.