

COMMENT THE GUARDIAN Thursday November 23 1989 A great bet in a big bucket.
YESTERDAY's water privatisation is the taxpayer's bequest to the share punter.
And generous to a fault.
The Government is offering shares to investors at 240p each, which values the industry at £5.24 billion.
But since it has already written off £5 billion worth of debts and thrown in an extra £1.6 billion ‘green dowry’, that means that the entire industry — with thousands of miles of pipework, reservoirs, leisure land, sewage works and so forth— is being given away for minus £1.4 billion.
The shares are extremely good value for investors, short of a stock market apocalypse.
They offer (for a safe monopoly) a very attractive average yield of 8.5 per cent, with scope for capital appreciation and perks (one free share for 10) for those investing in their local company.
Since only a part of the purchase price has to be put down now, this represents a likely return on capital of over 20 per cent in the first year.
This is not the proverbial free lunch.
It is a massive redistribution of wealth from one owner (the Government, on behalf of everyone in the country) to a much narrower segment of the population (the 4 to 5 million likely to take up the offer) who will be able to buy the assets at a discount.
The losers are those who, for reasons of poverty or principle, decline to partake.
In financial terms the sale will be justified if private sector ownership improves efficiency by more than the huge point-of-sale loss to the Government plus the £175 million or so privatisation costs.
That will be an uphill battle, and difficult to prove anyway, because the industry under private ownership needs to earn a higher return on capital — by several percentage points — than in public ownership to attract shareholders.
So it has to improve its efficiency by a considerable amount just to stand still.
And in any case the main gains to efficiency will come not from privatisation, but from the legal necessity imposed by the EC (which would have happened anyway) to invest £25 billion over 10 years to bring water up to drinkable standards.
Anyone who can separate the gains from the ‘dynamics’ of privatisation from those arising from capital investment or the companies' success in manipulating the pricing formula will deserve free water for life.
However, whether necessary or not, privatisation must be made to work.
Water is a precious commodity too long taken for granted in the West.
All the fresh water in the world's lakes and streams represents barely 0.01 per cent of the earth's total store of water, which is mainly saline.
It is a shrinking resource badly distributed around the earth's crust, as yesterday's warning of a continuing severe shortage in the south of England reminds us.
As well as generators of rising dividends, the new water companies are custodians of one of the most vital resources on earth.
They must never be allowed to forget that..
Prague promises.
THERE WILL be no massacre; there will be no martial law.
Yesterday the Czech demonstrators were anxiously weighing Tuesday's assurance from Prime Minister Vladislav Adamec against the indications of an unresolved struggle within the leadership.
The Beijing massacre, after all, was preceded by just such a struggle.
For entirely practical reasons, Mr Adamec's view ought to prevail.
Most of the Czech Politburo consists of people who were ‘voted in by tanks’ in 1968.
A few days ago they were handed the Moscow black spot in the form of an invitation to reconsider history.
An island of Czech reaction cannot survive among its metamorphosed neighbours for more than a geopolitical instant.
The struggle has been between the Czech people and the security apparatus behind the Communist party.
If the army could not do the job unaided twenty years ago, it is even less likely to get involved now.
The Brezhnev Doctrine is dead: long live the Gorbachev Doctrine of the Soviet Union as just another European power, only bigger, which lets its neighbours go their own way.
It is all happening too fast for us to take anything quite for granted, neither becoming blase about the sight of ossified regimes crumbling at the knees, nor entirely ruling out the thought of some treacherous counter-current.
But we are very close now to the critical turning-point after which the political scene in Prague could be as rapidly transformed as among its neighbours.
If the leading dissident Mr Vaclev Havel is right, the current power struggle is not whether to resist change but who should succeed Mr Milos Jakes.
And with the force of example elsewhere, can the party will maintain its primacy for long?
The lingering conventional truths — that the Czech economy would be strong enough to cushion dissent, that the opposition does not have a sufficiently coherent voice — already look thin.
Mr Havel's Civic Forum may be some way behind East Germany's New Forum, but it can draw upon a reservoir of informally networked dissent which dates back more than a decade.
And if the miners of northern Bavaria do respond to the strike call for next Monday, the regime's social contract with them will be shattered.
As the tide sweeps on, the sight of President Ceausescu being applauded 67 times at his party congress — while Mrs Ceausescu sat in grim solitude — only highlights the increasingly anachronistic character of this European North Korea.
In Bucharest as in Pyongyang, it may well be that severe repression can in the first instance only be challenged by a well-aimed bullet.
But once the West no longer needed Mr Ceausescu's anti-Soviet services, his policy of deliberate isolation narrowed his options and led earlier this year to the first signs of internal party dissent.
Retracing the route from Berlin to Beijing — for let us not forget where people's power first flourished this year -we find a even more isolated regime with yet fewer options.
How long can it remain immune as the voices echo back from Eastern Europe?.
One loan clause.
MR CEAUCESCU, meanwhile, may have changed address.
He seems to be living in the Department of Education.
Yesterday the Department issued its student loans bill.
And how long was this measure, designed to embrace the principles of 48 pages of white paper and some 68 pages of analysis in two specially-commissioned Price Waterhouse reports?
Just four clauses.
Even that is a fourfold exaggeration of length.
There is only a solitary enabling clause.
As Jack Straw, the Labour Education spokesman, noted yesterday, this would be a constitutional outrage even in Romania.
How on earth does Parliament scrutinise an Act with only one clause?
No way.
What is the Government up to?
Alas, it is flying by the seat of its pants.
This student loans scheme has degenerated into open shambles.
That it would be unpopular with students or colleges was obvious.
But HMG totally underestimated the coolness of the banks.
From the beginning, they have been collectively unconvinced of the commercial value of the plan.
Three have already refused to take part.
With students threatening to run a Barclays-style boycott against any that participate, stand by for more to pull out.
Students are regarded by the banks as the ripest harvest of all: the people who will be earning the highest balances in the future and who are likely to stay loyal for life once signed up.
Why start on the wrong foot as collaborators in unpopular and spatchcock loans?
The best thing that could happen now would be for the scheme to be killed by another backbench Tory revolt, like the rebellion which quashed Sir Keith Joseph's 1985 effort to make student fees income-related.
There is the same motivation.
The new scheme will certainly hurt middle-income parents, with the present level of grant frozen until loans (or a combination of loans and parental contributions) make up 50 per cent of student finance.
But it will cause even more damage to low income parents, the very homes from which ministers had hoped to attract more students to achieve their target of doubling the proportion of children going to college by 2014.
This is simply perverse.
Only eight per cent of children from low income families (in the Registrar General's social classes four and five) go to university, even though they are guaranteed a free education through a full grant plus social security.
Now they are to lose their income support and housing benefit and allowed to borrow £420 a year at inflation-rate interest.
Some incentive.
It can only reduce student numbers and make our education system more unequal.
It should shrivel in ineptitude..
Prime target.
ONE Stalkinghorse cantered to the starting gate yesterday; though, in the most congenial of mixed metaphors, Sir Anthony Meyer prefers to call himself a ‘burnt offering.’
He'll stand against Mrs Thatcher for the Tory leadership next month unless somebody else (Stalkinghorse 2; a medium rare slice of rump) slips out of the deep freeze paddock.
And that should now happen.
Sir Anthony is a disenchanted maverick of a wet and is not best placed to present a fair test of backbench opinion.
No chance of a Stalkinghorse winning, but a nag from the heart of the party, who manifests — in votes and abstentions — the coronary palpitations of the 1922 Committee, is called for.
The unease is not secret.
The issues are mostly in the open.
The fears of a dominant personality, away from the core of traditional values, driving the enterprise on to the electoral rocks, are manifest in speeches and in countless polls of public opinion.
And there is an obvious point of principle.
The Conservative Party has a fixed framework for the election of leaders.
The Party, and its current Leader, firmly believe in such elections.
(If they didn't, Mr Edward Heath would be a much happier man.)
Further, the Leader herself has spent many toiling hours of late calling on the peoples of Eastern Europe to hold elections and thereby demonstrate their attachment to the fundamentals of democracy.
What is sauce for Egon Krenz is just as much sauce for Mrs Margaret Thatcher.
Of course, a vote is all very tedious, and will be ritually accompanied by the most ferocious pressures upon this beleaguered electoral college.
Conservative MPs who know what a party election is like do not relish the sheer nastiness that accompanies it.
But the fury and the knife-work should be constrained.
Sir Anthony, boldly, with little to lose, is willing to provide a focal point for discussion and decision on absolutely legitimate matters of political concern.
He modestly and realistically hopes a better candidate can be found.
But he thinks, in present circumstances, that a straightforward test provides the best way of clearing the air.
That is the democratic way; and an embarrassed Conservative hierarchy should never forget it.
A bloc the West can do business with Eastern Europe has been something of a wasteland for EC investment but as Julian Bullard reports, all that is changing.
WHO would have thought that Eastern Europe could ever become so fashionable?
Since the war, or at least since the post-war pattern settled into what looked like immobility round about 1950, this had been a stony field to work in.
There seemed to be so little mutual interest, so little to build on.
The still small voice of the Great Britain-East Europe Centre at 31 Knightsbridge was a minority taste, like 14th century motets.
For the British at large, Czechoslovakia, compared with some of the others, was a not too far-off country of which we did know something: that distinctive spelling, those operas.
It was much the same story at the Foreign Office.
‘Remind me why I am going,’ the minister would say on the outward aeroplane, and sometimes ‘Remind me why I went’on the way back.
It took application and imagination to see the point of Eastern Europe, to see through the glacier to the contours underneath.
What with one thing and another, it was left to Sir Geoffrey Howe to become the first British Foreign Secretary to visit all the countries of Eastern Europe.
One of the problems was a certain sense of doubt about British and indeed Western objectives.
The watchword was always ‘differentiation’ which was plain enough up to a point: policy would not be made en bloc, but country by country, depending.
But depending on what?
At one time the answer was ‘independence of Moscow’.
Those were the years when Romania carried off the prizes.
And earned them too: look at the Romanian record during the sixties and seventies, from the Sino-Soviet split through the invasion of Czechoslovakia to the Helsinki Conference.
The prize pupil, however, turned out to have another side to his character, and others took his place on the platform on prize day.
The test by this time was no longer‘independence of Moscow’ but ‘Human Rights’.
Ironically enough it was Helsinki which introduced the change.
After contributing so much to the proceedings in the Finnish capital, and to the 30,000 words of the final act, Romania became one of its victims.
For in one follow-up meeting after another, in Belgrade and Madrid and finally Vienna, the human rights standards laid down at Helsinki were refined and tightened, while Romanian internal policies either stood still or moved in the other direction, that is to say downhill.
This year, by refusing to negotiate with Bucharest on a new agreement, the European Community has shown that ‘differentiation’ can be applied negatively, too.
Does it count for nothing that Romania, according to her own claims, has repaid her entire hard currency debt and made future borrowing from the West illegal?
Evidently not.
Just at the moment, indeed, the chief beneficiaries of the EC's bounty are the two largest borrowers in Eastern Europe, Poland and Hungary, with gross debts of $41 billion and $17 billion and populations of 37 million and 10.5 million respectively.
It seems that ‘differentiation’ is being redefined once again, so as to include democratic institutions and a market economy.
There is talk of a billion dollar stabilisation fund for Poland and a large bridging loan for Hungary, to be organised jointly by Western banks, the EC and the IMF, together with aid of other kinds — all this on top of the billion dollar package inaugurated at the economic summit in Paris in July.
East Berlin, Sofia and Prague will draw their conclusions.
Obviously it is right for the West to be supporting any movement towards democracy in Eastern Europe, and obviously the EC should play its part.
Whether any amount of Western help can rescue the economies of Eastern Europe, much less the Soviet Union, is another question.
Their faults seem so deeply ingrained, from quantitative measures and bogus statistics to valueless currencies and not caring about the environment.
Even East Germany is believed to be two if not three electronic generations behind the Far East.
As to foreign trade in Eastern Europe, two thirds of it is within the Comecon area, and the absolute levels are low.
The whole of East-West trade is at present only a small piece of a small slice of a rather small cake.
Yet this is the sector which is supposed to invigorate the rest.
Will joint ventures succeed where counter-purchase and ‘economic co-operation’ failed?
Past experience is not encouraging.
What else ought the Community to do?
Aristotle wrote that the function of anything is what it alone can do or does best.
On this definition, the task of the EC is to continue to serve as the chief engine of economic growth in Europe, an engine characterised by high performance, high output, high quality and (agriculture excepted) low running costs.
If in the year 2000 the EC is able to pass these tests as well as it does today, but on the altogether higher plane which 1992 implies, the rest of Europe, like the rest of the world, will have cause to be grateful.
Meanwhile, as to Eastern Europe, there is one more sense in which ‘differentiation’ is relevant.
There was seldom if ever a time when all Western governments, or even all those within the EC, were equally active in relations with the East.
A kind of auto-differentiation was the normal pattern.
For some years after her exit from the integrated military structure of Nato, France was the pioneer in East-West relations.
The United States would dive in from time to time with a huge splash which, however, would soon subside.
Britain's innings began in 1984, when Gorbachev made his name as a man the West could do business with.
Now it looks as if nothing could stop West Germany taking the lead with her unbeatable combination of credentials: guilt, enthusiasm, material interest and money.
But there is no reason for Britain to differentiate herself into the sidelines.
Sir Julian Bullard was British ambassador in Bonn, 1984-88.
Results.
THE LATEST financial results from US computer companies are awash in red ink, due to a slowdown in US sales, restructuring and, in some cases, the devaluation of stock as component prices fell.
An Atari spokesman summed it up thus: ‘We did our best to take our lumps as we saw them.’
Everyone expects better results in the next quarter.
Hewlett-Packard increased annual sales by 21 per cent to $11.9 billion.
Profits rose only two per cent to $829 million, but would have increased by 12 per cent without the purchase of Apollo earlier this year.
Fourth quarter sales jumped from $2.7 billion to $3.8 billion, including sales of Apollo equipment.
A $9 million charge was included for the costs of the October 17 earthquake.
Tandem's annual revenues grew by 24 per cent to $1.6 billion.
Profits rose by 25 per cent to $118 million.
Data General's annual revenues dipped from $1.36 billion to $1.31 billion, and net losses deteriorated from $15.5 million to $120 million, reflecting a restructuring charge of $80 million.
In the last quarter, however, sales increased from $341.5 million to $357 million.
Prime's third quarter revenues dropped from $391 million to $358 million, while a profit of $12 million turned into a $105 million loss.
Prime wrote off $130 million in a pre-tax restructuring charge.
Commodore's sales for the quarter fell by 17 per cent from $200 million to $165 million, and profits of $9.6 million turned into a $6.5 million loss.
Atari's quarterly sales also fell by 17 per cent from $99 million to $81 million, while profits of $7 million turned into a $5 million loss.
The company took a charge of $10 million against inventory, devaluing stocks of chips and disc drives.
Pyramid's annual revenues rose 30 per cent to $104 million.
Profits were fractionally down at $8 million.
OVERNIGHT FILE