

Mailbox.
JACK SCHOFIELD's article (November 23) guesses that there are only 20 X Window products available.
We have had six products on the market for over a year.
All try to use the power of the workstation in general, and X in particular , to present information in a more effective way.
Perhaps the most dramatic example is our vdiff product which simply compares two files.
The House of Lords, who do a lot of comparing of information as Bills go through, bought a Sun workstation just to use it.
Peter Brown, Professor of Computer Science, University of Kent, Canterbury CT2 7NF.
AS PER normal on Thursday I bought the Guardian in order to read your computer pages.
I was pleased to come across an item in Microfile (November 30) about the launch of Teesside Poly's course on computerised communications using CMCS (computer-mediated communication systems) delivery.
I was slightly taken aback, however, to read that this was the ‘UK's first’ such course.
CECOMM (the Centre for Electronic Communications and Open Support Systems in Education) has been delivering courses in computerised communications via CMCS since 1987.
CECOMM is the UK's leading value-added provider in the application of CMCS to education and training, and has developed a set of formal communications-based methodologies, ‘Social Network Design’, which allow organisations to evaluate and access this delivery mechanism both at LAN and WAN (local and wide area network) level.
Rather than reinventing the ‘virtual classroom’, may I suggest the staff at Teesside Poly could have contacted CECOMM and availed themselves of our tutor-moderated training programme, and in the process saved themselves considerable time and angst.
Still, they are about to discover the very real difficulties of using this medium during the delivery of their first course.
Dick Davies, Coordinator HIT/CECOMM, Southampton Institute of Higher Education, Southampton SO9 4WW.
IREAD with interest the article on the introduction of information technology into the NHS (Kicking and screaming, November 23).
Our group is researching prototypes for an intelligent computerised information environment for use in general practice.
Two projects, Practitioners Enter Notes (Pen) and Practioners Access Data (Pad), funded by the Department of Health and the Medical Research Council respectively, are applying user-centred design strategies in the development of a human-computer environment for use within the GP's consulting room.
Bernard Horen, University of Manchester Medical Informatics Group, Dept of Computer Science, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL.
OVERNIGHT FILE
Prototyping is crucial to systems development, argues Ian Richards Tailored to fit.
IN SYSTEMS development nothing is more fundamental than assessing user requirements.
If you don't know what the system is required to do; you don't know anything.
But many system developers are unable to assess requirements properly.
They seem to think that you can ask a businessman what his requirements are and get an answer that amounts to a draft system specification.
A doctor doesn't ask his patient what treatment to prescribe.
The patient can explain only what the problem is.
It is the doctor that provides the remedy.
If you ask a user what sort of system he wants you will be met with a blank look.
A user may have a deep knowledge of business problems, but knowing little about computers, has no idea how they should be tackled.
Yet, analysts are heard asking time and again, ‘Tell me what you want.
We've gone away from the days of systems imposed by the data processing department, this is going to be a system for the users.’
But of course the users don't know what they want, so they end up getting another duff system.
An effective analyst provides the same service to the business as the doctor provides to the patient.
He finds out what the needs of the business are, and prescribes the cure.
The user tells the analyst what the problems are, and the analyst decides, at least in broad terms, what the user requires.
But the analyst has one great advantage over the doctor.
Once the user becomes familiar with the proposed system, helpful comments come thick and fast.
‘Oh, this will be of great help in ordering raw materials, but sometimes we get part deliveries, could we have an extra facility to deal with those?
And sometimes non-standard discount is given, a pig to deal with on the old system, but if you could add one extra input box on that screen there…
And what about orders not delivered on time?
If we could list those we'd have advance warning of shortage problems on the assembly lines two months before they occur.
Now that would be a great leap forward.’
Unfortunately you cannot reach this stage until you have developed a prototype system.
And you can't develop a prototype system because the users haven't got a clue what they want.
Most of them are probably muttering, ‘I'm too busy to get involved in this sort of thing.
What's wrong with the old system anyway?’
The only way to develop a prototype is for the analyst to get inside the head of the user and, thinking like a user, decide what sort of system is required.
Of course, the initial system will not be perfect.
The analyst cannot hope to understand the business as well in a few weeks as the user does after many years.
But once the user sees the system, channels of communication will open.
Instead of persuading the user to specify requirements, the analyst will be driven by the user to meet key needs.
Good system development goes through two distinct phases.
Initially the analyst does all the work, leading the user towards a system he thinks is right for the business.
But once the user sees the potential of the system, a change in attitude takes place.
The process becomes demand driven by the user.
The analyst is then forced on the defensive, explaining why new features cannot be included because they are technically difficult or prohibitively expensive.
Traditionally, systems were validated by users agreeing functional specifications.
In theory, validation meant that the user had read the specification, imagined how the system would work in practice, and agreed the design.
It was only when using a ‘test’ version of the system (available just before the planned implementation date) that difficulties would come to light, and a host of change requests be issued.
The advent of fourth generation languages (4GLs) has made system development much easier.
With a 4GL an initial prototype can be put together quickly.
This means feedback is obtained early in the development process, and the system can grow around the user's requirements.
Crucial to the development process is the relationship built up between the analyst and the user.
The best systems arise when both have a deep understanding of each other 's jobs.
Many developers use business analysts to ensure that the development team maintain a proper focus on business requirements.
But this can be counter-productive, as it cuts off communication between the systems analyst and the user.
Too much specialisation is bad for systems development; it feeds the temptation to get engrossed in technical difficulties and forget about the underlying business needs.
If you should stroll into a pub and meet an analyst and a user talking about work, and you cannot tell one from the other, they have probably developed a successful system together.
Ian Richards' book, How to Use a Computer to Improve Your Business, has just been published by Graham & Trotman (£8.95 paperback; £16 hardback).
Tel: 01-821 1123.
OVERNIGHT FILE
Microfile.
By Jack Schofield Computer editor
ALPHA is a new master operating system designed to interconnect disparate and widely distributed systems to act as a single cohesive whole.
It is being financed largely by the US Department of Defense, and made available free.
Alpha is being developed for systems like the US Advanced Tactical Fighter, which has about 20 real-time computer systems on board, the NASA space station, and possibly the Strategic Defense Initiative.
The project is being led by Doug Jensen at the Concurrent Computer Corp., Massachusetts.
He originally developed Alpha as a research project at Carnegie-Mellon University.
Then General Dynamics used it to demonstrate a ground-based air defense application.
Alpha is written in C++ and will run initially on Concurrent's Mips-based multi-processor mini-supercomputers, which will be launched next month.
It co-exists with Concurrent's RTU (Real-Time Unix), and has an object-orientated user interface designed for the production of large, complex, real-time applications.
Alpha assumes the computing system is distributed, and it includes replication mechanisms to provide distributed programming and ‘survivability’.
It manages tasks by setting deadlines for their completion, instead of using interrupts simply to start them going.
When deadlines can't be met, Alpha ‘gracefully degrades’ by meeting as many as possible of the most important ones.
Although the defence applications are obvious, Alpha could become important in ‘mission critical’ commercial systems.
Examples include factory automation and large on-line financial networks.
A ‘Baby Alpha’ will be developed, using VRTX, for smaller integrated systems.
The beta-test version of Alpha is due for release at the end of 1990, with the first commercial release in 1993.
Concurrent says the ultimate aim is to produce a supplier-independent, open operating system that will rank alongside Unix, and be complementary to it.
Concurrent is seeking European partners for the Alpha project via its UK office in Maidenhead (tel: 0753 77777).
More Mips.
NIXDORF and Tandem are developing a fault-tolerant mini based on Risc (Reduced instruction set computer) chips from Mips Computer Systems and the Unix operating system.
The new machine will be marketed by both firms next year.
Nixdorf is also co-operating with Pyramid Technology, whose technology is used in Nixdorf's Targon/35.
(Pyramid is yet another Mips reseller.)
Meanwhile, Control Data has signed an agreement to sell Mips' cheap Unix-based RC6280 mini/mainframe.
With a Risc processor rated at 55 mips (million instructions per second), this is the industry's fastest general-purpose computer.
Wizard.
IBM has announced the Wizard adaptor, which puts a 33MHz Intel i860 Risc 64-bit processor on an expansion card for 386-based PCs with MCA (Micro Channel Architecture) buses and the OS/2 operating system.
It will be used for oil industry and financial modelling and similar supercomputing tasks.
The card delivers about 27 mips and costs £5,568 plus VAT, with the memory expansion at £2,915.
Applications development tools, originating from Intel, cost an extra £1,168.
Not super.
THE US and Japan have fallen out over supercomputer sales.
The Americans are complaining that the Japanese market is closed to them.
The Japanese are replying that the US market is closed to them.
To prove it, Fujitsu (which owns 46 per cent of Amdahl) has announced that Amdahl is to stop selling Fujitsu supercomputers in the US.
It has sold only two in the last four years.
XVision.
VISIONWARE has launched XVision, a standalone X server which allows X client programs to be displayed in MicroSoft Windows.
A PC can work as an X terminal on a network or connected to a minicomputer host, without sacrificing access to DOS programs.
SQL-Connect, a companion program, can link Windows applications with Unix databases to load data from Informix, Oracle or Uniplex into, say, MicroSoft's Excel spread-sheet.
VisionWare, based in Leeds, was formed recently as a management buy-out from Systime (tel.: 0532 529292).
16Mbits.
NEC IS starting up the world's first production line for 16 megabit chips in its Sagamihara factory, reports Ken Takahashi of Newsbytes.
Experimental operation should lead to samples of 16Mbit chips being delivered in 1991.
Each chip will be able to hold roughly 336,000 words or 80 pages of the Guardian.
Scroll on.
ADVENTURE software house Magnetic Scrolls — known for The Pawn and other popular games — has signed with Virgin Mastertronic, part of the Branson empire.
Scrolls' previous games were published on the Rainbird label before British Telecomsoft sold out to the US giant, Microprose.
Microprose is continuing to issue games on both the ex-BT Rainbird and Firebird labels.
But the latest Rainbird game being played here — First Contact, just out on the Atari ST — is packed in a green box instead of the blue ones loved by BT.
It doesn't seem quite right for a game where, for the first time, you meet intelligent alien life forms, and kill them.
The winner.
THE winner of Computer Guardian's Compaq Competition is Allan Kelly of Slough, Bucks, whose card was first out of the hat.
Answers: Adam Osborne was first to launch a portable (1b), but Compaq was first with an IBM PC-compatible model (2b).
These were mains-powered luggables, which led to smaller, battery-powered machines being called laptops (3c).
‘Notebook’ PCs are even smaller, and several are available, but the Compaq LTE is the only one with a standard 3.5 inch disc drive (4c).
So far portables have about 10 per cent of the PC market (5b), and sales are growing for all the reasons given in the last question (6d), including ‘yuppies love them.’
Allan's prize is a Compaq LTE/286 with 20 megabyte hard disc, worth £2,850 plus VAT.
OVERNIGHT FILE
Jack Schofield provides a user-friendly guide to the home computers on offer this Christmas and picks the best-value buys Avoiding turkeys.
CHRISTMAS is coming, and the home computer companies are hoping to get fat.
Lots of machines have been nicely packaged for the market, but there are no bargains to be had.
Anyone who just wants to play arcade-type games might as well buy a games console.
These are relatively cheap, the games come on easy-to-load cartridges and are, on average, better than the home computer versions.
Atari invented the console, and its old 2600 is the cheapest on the market at £40 or less.
But in the US and Japan, Nintendo has become the standard, with NEC and Sega being the main challengers.
However, with NEC's PC Engine not officially available in the UK, and the Nintendo system overpriced at around £100, the Sega Master (£80 or less) is the best choice.
It has good colours and, although it uses a Zilog Z-80 processor, like the Spectrum, the games are fast.
There are three points to bear in mind about 8-bit consoles.
First, all the suppliers are preparing superior but incompatible 16-bit versions, including the Nintendo Super Famicom and the Sega Megadrive (the latter having already arrived as an unofficial import, at £200).
Second, games cost much more than those for 8-bit home micros.
Third, you can get a real computer for less.
Indeed, the cheapest ‘real computer’ has a dual nature.
The Atari XE is an £80 games console which comes with dedicated cassette recorder and an add-on keyboard which can be used for word processing or, say, adventure games.
It is also available as the Atari 65XE home micro for about £10 more.
The XE is a good machine, barely changed from the Atari 800 from 1979.
It has 64K of memory, an 8-bit 6502 processor and a poor Basic.
It is rather faster than a Commodore 64, and has similar graphics and sound, which makes the hardware good value.
You can add disc drives and printers for serious use.
However, the XE is not well supported by software houses, and although it still has a lot of games, most of these are very old.
Top 20 games are now almost never converted to run on it, which purchasers would find very frustrating.
Today's 8-bit standards are the Commodore 64, Spectrum +2 and +3, and Amstrad CPC-464 and 6128.
Of these, only the Commodore 64C is now worth buying, and only then if you never plan to add a disc drive.
The Commodore 64 also has a 6502-type processor, 64K, very good graphics and sound, and the worst Basic still fitted to a home micro.
But it is very well supported for games, since it is a standard in both the US and in Europe, whereas the Amstrad and Sinclair Z-80-based machines failed in the US.
The drawback with the C64 is that it is expensive at about £150.
The price includes a dedicated cassette recorder, the C2N, which doesn't work particularly well, if at all, with today's fast-loading games.
It is much better to buy a naked C64 and one of the superior independent cassette players such as Mills Associates' Load-It.
Further, the price means it isn't worth upgrading a C64 by adding Commodore's slow disc drive.
You might as well buy an Atari ST, with its better built-in disc drive, to start with.
Nevertheless, the C64 is far superior to the Amstrad-made Spectrum, which is on sale at the same price.
The Spectrum +2, with its built-in cassette recorder, simply isn't worth £150.
The +3 is better value at £200, since this includes a built-in disc drive.
However, this is the 3-inch drive peculiar to Amstrad products, and you would be better off paying the extra £35 for a discount Atari ST.
The Amstrad CPC, although quite a good micro, is also poor value now.
The CPC-464 comes with cassette recorder and mono monitor for £200, which makes the C64 a better buy.
The CPC-6128 comes with a built-in 3-inch disc drive and colour monitor for £400, which again makes an Atari ST a better buy, and the Commodore Amiga a tempting alternative.
Amstrad has held its CPC prices constant for over five years now, apart from throwing a few extra baubles (joystick, games) into the mix.
They used to be extremely good value; now they are eminently ignorable.
Is Alan Sugar happy to watch this range decline?
Of course, Atari has not cut the price of its ST micro for two years, but at least the raw 520ST-FM has a powerful 16/32-bit Motorola 68000 processor, 512K of memory, upgraded 720K disc drive and a mouse.
Also this £300 machine is often sold for much less, and old models (which have a single-sided 360K drive) are available for as little as £175.
The Atari ST has dominated the 16-bit market over the last couple of years as a ‘dual purpose’ machine.
It can be used for serious computing, as a ‘poor man's Apple Macintosh’, with Atari's high-quality monochrome screen, and plugged into a TV set for games.
Recently, the Atari ST has been selling bundled with £400-£500 worth of games for £399.
At this price it has come under increasing pressure from the Commodore Amiga, which starts at the same price and attracts similar discounts.
The Amiga also has a Motorola 68000, 512K, a built-in 3.5 inch disc drive and a mouse, but it has much better colour graphics and sound.
The Amiga's technical superiority counted for little when there were hardly any games for it, and hardly any of them used its facilities.
But after Commodore cut the price by £100, and threw in the £25 add-on TV adaptor, the Amiga took off as a games machine.
Now it is at least as well supported as the ST, and its advantages are finally starting to count.
Atari has announced an enhanced STE range with graphics and sound facilities more like the Amiga's, but at no extra cost.
However, the new facilities have yet to win any support from software houses, and you would be surprised to find an STE actually on sale.
The Amiga does not have as much serious software as the ST, nor does it have the equivalent of the ST's mono monitor.
However, it now has a reasonable range of productivity software (word processors, databases, etc), and in specialised areas — colour graphics, desktop video — it is well ahead.
At the lowest level, the 520ST still looks slightly better value than an Amiga, which has an operating system not everyone likes.
But for those willing to upgrade the A500 to one megabyte, and add an A590 hard disc and a colour monitor, it becomes a very attractive system.
Finally, there's the Acorn Archimedes A3000, which is by far the most powerful home micro available.
Instead of being made in Taiwan (Atari) or Hong Kong (Commodore) this is even made in the UK.
Unfortunately, it does not have a lot of software support, and the price — about £750 — puts it beyond most people's reach.
In value-for-money terms, the Sega looks the best buy among the games machines, the Commodore 64 for a tape-based home micro, and then either the Atari ST or Amiga A500 — both disc-based systems — depending on specific needs and disposable income.
Boots: Nintendo.
Comet: Sega Master; Spectrum; Amstrad CPC; Commodore 64C and Amiga.
Dixons: Sega; Atari 2600, XE, 65XE and ST; Spectrum; Commodore 64C and Amiga.
Menzies: Sega; Spectrum; Atari ST; Commodore 64C and Amiga.
Tandy: Spectrum +2; Commodore 64C; Atari ST.
Toys R Us: Nintendo; Sega; Atari VCS, XE and ST; Spectrum; Amstrad CPC.
Woolworth: Sega; Spectrum; Atari VCS, XE and ST.
The Archimedes is stocked by selected branches of Dixons, Allders and John Lewis.
OVERNIGHT FILE
Why the M-word is baloney American columnist John C.Dvorak argues that multimedia is a sham — the old, failed teaching machine dressed up in new clothes.
ITHINK if we are ever to see grand hokum in the Mac marketplace we'll see it in the months ahead, as the M-word — multimedia — becomes the in thing to discuss in the 1990s.
Multimedia used to be defined as a fancy slide show that you sat and watched.
They were the ones with the bank of 40 computer-controlled projectors — popular at expositions and amusement parks.
I remember a multimedia show in the Iran pavilion at the world's fair in Spokane, Washington, in the early 1970s.
It was about the Shah and the glories of the country.
It seems that while the definition of the word multimedia has changed, the baloney factor hasn't.
Nowadays, multimedia means a computer using different media, such as a laser disc, a CD-ROM, cable TV and who knows what else.
The most-talked-about end use is as a grandiose teaching machine.
You remember teaching machines, don't you?
They were one of the biggest flops in educational history.
Not that they didn't work; it just seems that teaching machines have no charisma or charm.
I remember back when I was a college student.
One summer I went to California State University at Hayward and discovered that the school had a basement laboratory with about a dozen expensive teaching machines.
You could sign up for a series of courses, which you could take at your own pace.
The machine tested, paced and graduated you.
For the life of me I can't remember what courses I took — it was so boring.
Soon afterwards the famed Plato computerised teaching system was marketed by Control Data.
It included special terminals and was the be-all, end-all teaching machine.
I haven't heard about it for years.
The hot, hot multimedia system out there right now was developed by Robert Abel, the noted Hollywood middleman and go-getter extraordinaire.
Abel has put together a demonstration system called Guernica, which is a multimedia approach to learning about the famed Picasso painting that depicts the Nazi destruction of a peaceful Basque village by air attack during the Spanish Civil War.
Based mostly on using a laser-disc player controlled by a Mac II, the system allows a user to explore — as the developers like to say — the painting and its history.
Fronted by a HyperCard-like interface — SuperCard, actually — the system lets users click and move from point to point on the painting and get lectures and comments from old bores, ex-mistresses, ‘people who were there’, dopey ex-Nazi pilots, Picasso mavens and all sorts of experts.
You can jump from the history of the town to a backgrounder on Spanish dance.
You can jump from that to something else.
The system is supposed to exemplify the potential of multimedia.
Bob Abel and his pals, when they show this system, make the mistake of using the word empower when describing the value of this approach to learning.
With me that rings a warning bell, since it's one of those suspicious New Age buzzwords that always portend a scam or screwball notion such as crystal therapy or out-of-body travel.
This system, he says, ‘empowers the individual.’
This is presumably because it allows you to explore the knowledge contained therein.
The promoters tell us that it's not like a book in which someone is telling you something.
This new multimedia thingamajig allows you to discover things on your own through the wondrous use of the hypermedia approach to education.
Linearity is dead.
By the time the demo was over I was nearly nauseous at the presumptuousness of these notions and despondent over the lack of scepticism in the room.
In fact, nobody anywhere — as far as I can tell — has questioned any aspect of this nonsense.
Let's make some quick points that need to be made.
Multimedia education is nothing more than a new version of a teaching machine, albeit with real-time video, and teaching machines don't work.
Just try to learn French on your computer.
This multi- media concept is to education what a demo program is to software.
Teachers teach.
Computers compute.
With multimedia, people do not really explore and are not empowered.
The information provided on such a system is predistilled by the producers.
It's not a base of knowledge but a subset that can be easily manipulated.
Abel, for example, is obviously a Democrat, as he slipped more than a few anti-Reagan barbs into his presentation.
Video media, with its powerful images used interactively for teaching, will find its niche as a propaganda tool.
I get a bad feeling when I see this thing in action.
Especially when I look around at the bug-eyed gawkers staring, almost hypnotised, at the images.
Multimedia is, simply put, a sham.
A fancy sham, but a sham nonetheless.
It's promoted by the natural-born hucksters within Apple because it has all the earmarks of something trendy and fashionable.
It keeps people talking.
It keeps the excitement level high.
It generates interest in Apple and it sells hardware.
I'm not going to say that some of these projects, such as Guernica, won't be fun to play around with, assuming that you can afford to buy all the necessary -and expensive — hardware to add to your already expensive system.
Institutions, of course, will be the suckers conned into spending the big money for all this equipment.
It will all end up in those grim audio-visual departments where it will eventually be auctioned off for peanuts during a cost-saving period.
And for those of you who want to learn about Picasso, try the library or go to a museum.
© Ziff Communications Company.
Reprinted from Mac Magazine, December 1989.
OVERNIGHT FILE
Tata for now India could become to software in the 1990s what Taiwan and South Korea are to electronics today.
Radhakrishna Rao reports.
IN THE popular Western imagination, India continues to be a country steeped in backwardness and poverty with very little to show by way of scientific innovation or technological achievement.
It has hardly been recognised that India is among the few countries in the world that has a proven capability to undertake orbital missions or detonate a nuclear device.
Indeed, with some 2.5 million fully qualified scientific and technical personnel, and several million more high school science graduates, India possesses the world's third largest pool of scientific and technical skill, after the US and the Soviet Union.
Its influence is felt as far away as the London Underground, which is having its new, networked, interactive time-tabling system, Cart, programmed by a Delhi firm, CMC.
The fluency of Indians in English, a legacy of British rule, has made India a lucrative hunting ground for US computer firms on the lookout for qualified computer manpower.
Areas in which Indian software professionals are particularly strong are systems software, CAD/CAM, expert systems, microcomputer software, telecommunications and applications software development.
This year at Cebit 1989, the huge electronics fair held in Hanover, the head of the government's electronics commision, P.S. Deodhar, ‘launched India into the European Information market.’
The West German software industry, handicapped by an acute manpower shortage, responded by switching labour-intensive software engineering work to India.
West Germany needs about 4,000 electronic data processing specialists, and can fill this gap by using India's skilled and relatively inexpensive manpower.
The Indian software industry is growing at an average rate of 35 per cent a year.
Of the total 2,550 million rupees (£100 million) earned by Indian software firms in 1988-89, exports accounted for almost a third.
More than 60 per cent of Indian exports are accounted for by the two Tata outfits, Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) and Tata Unisys Ltd, which employ around 1,500 professionals in Bombay and Bangalore.
Tata Unisys has a collaborative arrangement with MicroSoft.
Both the government and the industry are committed to boost its software exports, specialising in systems that overcome the problem of early obsolescence.
Thus India could become for the software scene in 90s what Taiwan and South Korea are to electronics today.
In July 1988, a new organisation, the National Association of Software and Services Company (Nasscom) was set up to serve the interests of software sector.
According to Nasscom Chief Executive, Prem Shivdasani, there are about 300 Indian firms devoted to computer software engineering.
The government has already set up technology parks in Bangalore and Pune, with two more expected in Chandigarh and Bubaneshwar, to boost software exports.
One feature of these parks is the facility for real-time transmission of software code through dedicated satellite channels to clients in the US and elsewhere.
Under a policy announced in 1986, a 50 per cent rebate is provided on customs duty payable for import of hardware used for software development.
Another feature of the new approach is that the software industry has been exempted from the licensing provision of the Industries Act: there are no constraints on the setting up of software houses, and programming is not treated as an industrial activity.
About 90 per cent of exports are to the US, where Indian software systems cost half as much as American ones.
Two American companies with an eye on available and inexpensive manpower have set up software export units in the southern hill city of Bangalore, India's own Silicon Valley.
The $5 million Texas Instruments facility has a staff of 35 US-trained Indian engineers and exports software through a dedicated satellite link to its clients in the US.
DEC, in association with Hinitroan of India, exports its software via a Bangalore-Madras-Hong Kong satellite link.
At Bombay's Santacruz Free Trade Zone, Citicorp Overseas Software is generating software for the bank's worldwide use.
Hewlett-Packard is also planning to set up a software export unit in India.
Recently, TCS entered into an agreement with Lotus Development Corporation that gave them exclusive distribution rights for the whole range of Recently there was uproar in India following ‘body shopping’ by American software firms.
Recruitment of 40 top staff was the last straw.
Lotus PC software, while Thapar is planning a tie-up with Hitachi of Japan for setting up software units with 100 per cent buy-back arrangements.
Nearly 50 Indian software producers belong to the Engineering Export Promotion Council which is making vigorous efforts to find new markets, particularly in East Asia and Europe.
The Bombay-based Larsen and Toubro (L&T), which has already exported software services to a number of countries, is negotiating with European countries for the supply of software engineering.
It is also contemplating tie-ups with software houses or large user organisations abroad.
However, only a few large companies — 25 of them — have been registered as software exporters with branch offices abroad.
Small local software firms, which can ill afford overheads like publicity and advertising, are worried that the increasing preference for tie-ups will stunt their growth.
Also, industry observers say Indian companies must put more money into research and development to ensure that quality remains uncompromised.
Indian companies tend to allocate at most two per cent of turnover to R&D as against 15 per cent by US firms.
The Indian Department of Electronics says overseas computer firms can take advantage of the trained manpower available in India due to liberal economic policies and incentives provided by the government.
But India is itself likely to face an acute manpower shortage in the immediate future.
Courses aimed at training computer professionals have been started at nearly 250 institutions in the country.
But right now, about 3,000 professionals are available against the projected need for over 10,000 by the end of the decade.
Recently there was uproar in India following ‘body shopping’ by American software firms.
The recruitment of 40 top staff from Indian companies, including some from Bangalore-based Wipro Information Systems, proved to be the last straw.
The Indian government put severe restrictions on the flight of ‘talented brains’ to the US.
In a leader, the Economic Times, Bangalore, noted that at best, body-shopping by foreign firms ‘may be substituted by sub-contracting, and that too, to their own subsidiaries rather than Indian companies.’
Thus Indian software houses, ‘will have to develop their own products based on indigenous R&D.
But for this to happen…the government should come down heavily on piracy, which militates against domestic development.
A rapid growth of the home market must also be ensured.
In software particularly, exports will have to be led by the domestic market.’
OVERNIGHT FILE
In search of presents without a future Rob Ainsley pinpoints those eminently disposable stocking fillers for the computer buff who has everything.
COMPUTERS are ideal for boring, repetitive and mind-numbing tasks — which makes you wonder why there isn't any artificial intelligence Christmas list-making software on the market.
However hard you think, you always end up buying something useless, so it's best to save time and decide on something useless straight off.
And you can always tell if something is useless because it will be described as for the person ‘with everything’.
There are, unfortunately, few pieces of software that can be called useless.
Even obscura such as The Houseplant Disc (a database to help you pick the right ones for the right situations) or Bon Appetit(which suggests recipes based on your input of what you happen to have in the fridge) are, in the right situation, useful.
And however tasteless you may think a gift is, it doesn't automatically make it useless.
A case in point might be the Unabashed History of Pornography from InCat Systems of Milan, available on well illustrated CD-ROM.
In the US, there was once a blank disc marketed as Invisicalc, but that now seems to have vanished….
So you're left with hardware.
Unkind critics of the Amstrad, er, Sinclair PC200 have suggested it would make the ideal present for someone with everything, as you wouldn't give it to someone who actually needed a PC.
Fortunately, however, there are plenty of cheaper options.
The computer catalogues are full of little hardware trinkets, no doubt all perfectly well intentioned and thoughtfully designed, but all excellent solutions in search of a problem.
And unlike software, they are not limited to one particular type of computer or disc format.
They are equally useless on all machines.
How often have you wanted to peer into your disc drive to see what's inside, for example?
This common urge can be fulfilled with a special torch boasting a fibre optic thread you can poke inside the drive to illuminate it.
Streamside Research sells them for £2 (available in red, green or black).
Now perhaps they should produce an Apple Macintosh version, which would be exactly the same but cost twice as much.
Disc boxes and mouse mats are good stocking fillers, but what about something with a bit of class?
A wooden disc box from Supplier Action: not a greenhouse gas producer and not made from tropical hardwood.
The only layer it might put a hole through will be in your back pocket — it costs £45.
For the mouse owner, what about a Mouse Cleaning Kit from Accodata for £15.95, or a cover made in imitation fur in the shape of a mouse — Terra's Furry Mouse House?
(Sadly there are no imitation droppings available to complete the set.)
Owners of an Atari ST will no doubt be delighted to receive ISM's keyboard enhancer.
For just £15 you can give them a set of springs that take just an hour or two to fit under each key and make the keyboard so much bouncier.
And much more fun than those puzzles you get in crackers.
However, for the DIY enthusiast who prefers a real challenge, ESL's No Noise is a better bet.
The £75 unit fits in the back of a PC and runs the fan down to its ideal operating speed for the ambient temperature.
It's not suitable for owners of Amstrad PC-1512s and 1640s which have no fans — much like the company itself, apparently.
The Thingi, and The Thingi 2, are not another dreadful horror movie and its sequel, but more examples of plastic widgets for the person with everything.
The Thingi is a £7.49 plastic arm that Velcros itself on to the top of your monitor and hangs over the side.
On to this you can clip an A4-sized object — such as a sheet of paper.
It's not actually useless, but as you can knock up an equivalent device with a ruler, bulldog clip and blob of Blu-Tack, it deserves a mention.
Of course, not all presents for the person-with-everything even require a computer.
You might try getting the games player a packet of Nintendo Breakfast Cereal from America.
It contains little edible figures from Nintendo games.
Or, for the games freak, how about a video?
Hot Shot's monthly releases gave you 45 minutes of video excerpts of the latest computer games for only £5.
There's no player input at all, of course , and it's useless without a VCR, but ideal for someone with everything.
But there's no doubt as to the best stocking filler this Christmas — at least, for Apple Macintosh users.
Smack-a-Mac!, from the prosaically entitled Computer Accessories That Make Fun, San Diego, is a miniature smiling toy Mac filled with soft padding.
When the real Mac crashes and trashes your hard disc, you can take it out on the Smack-a-Mac!
Throw it around to your heart's content.
Of course, it doesn't recover any data, but it does wonders for your temper.
The UK supplier, Ambrit Ltd (tel: 0442 866294) ships it complete with 12-page User's Guide and Limited Unwarranty: ‘We do offer a 90-minute warranty.
If you can return it to us within 90 minutes, we will not only give you a new one, but we will give you two new ones.’
Smack-a-Mac! is an idea with lots of potential.
One can imagine toys in the shape of Commodore Amigas, Amstrad keyboards, cassette datacorders, laptop LCD displays.…
Tempered aggression…how to use the Smack-a-Mac!
OVERNIGHT FILE