

Blue Peter makes NHS insomnia pill Sketch.
By Andrew Rawnsley
IT IS a revealing commentary about the state of the National Health Service that this year's Blue Peter charity appeal asks its viewers to collect tin cans for intensive care units for children.
Presumably the viewers' discarded baked bean cans are not for actually building the intensive care units, but are to be recycled for money to fund them.
Yet this added the one element of excitement to yesterday's speech by the Health Secretary, introducing the second reading of the NHS Bill.
In Blue Peter tradition, Mr Kenneth Clarke might demonstrate how to further help your local hospital using items to be found around the home.
Make your own kidney dialysis machine using an old cereal packet, some Sellotape and a used toilet roll.
Find a plastic straw and a squeezy bottle — there, you have a saline drip.
Keep those milk bottle tops: with a bit of ingenuity, and an empty egg box, you can fashion them into a pacemaker for granny.
Unfortunately, Mr Clarke only delivered another speech lauding the Government's plans for the NHS.
The speech was all too unexciting, having travelled the country for the past year, and not noticeably improving with age.
Nor was the speech by his Labour opposite number, Mr Robin Cook, that much more uplifting.
This is not meant to be ungenerous toward the two, who, on their day, can be a couple of the finest debaters in the Commons.
It is just that they have both been at it too often recently.
As Mr Cook reminded us: ‘The Secretary of State and I have frequently jousted with each other.’
They are running out of rude things to say about each other, or new things to say about the NHS.
So Mr Clarke routinely hailed his bill as giving the NHS ‘a new lease of life’.
And Mr Cook routinely railed that it would ‘destroy the NHS.’
Both speeches were a bit tired.
Both men were betraying one of the most feared occupational hazards amongst MPs — debater's droop.
But both Mr Cook and Mr Clarke also seemed determined to make up in duration what they lacked in originality.
Mr Cook's speech alone was the length of a short story.
Mr Clarke's speech was the length of a novel.
The Health Secretary began with the now-familiar defence of his proposals.
‘I've been accused of wanting to send people 60 miles down the road to hospitals they don't want to go to…of doctors not having enough money to pay for drugs…of going to close down vital wards…
’ This part of the Health Secretary's speech would have been better set to some wailing violins.
After half-an-hour of this sort of thing, it suddenly began to dawn on everybody that Mr Clarke had only got to clause one of the actual legislation.
It did not take a mathematical genius to work out that — with 59 clauses still to go — this was not brilliant progress.
Labour MPs began to protest.
Dennis Skinner gave an ostentatious yawn.
‘Wind him down,’ yelled his deputy heckler, Brian Sedgemore.
But Mr Clarke showed no signs of winding down.
If anything, he had only just got wound up.
Another 30 minutes passed.
‘Come on — an hour's enough,’ shouted Mr Sedgemore, to no avail.
So he and Mr Skinner started pointing at Tory MPs, appearing to be arguing about precisely how many of them had fallen asleep during the Health Secretary's speech.
I would like to give a definite answer.
But I must have nodded off at the time.
Patten warning on council rents.
By Alan Travis Political Correspondent
PUBLIC sector rents should go up to reflect the higher value of houses or flats in desirable areas, Mr Chris Patten, the Environment Secretary, said yesterday.
Mr Patten hinted that extra cash for public sector housebuilding will go where shortages are greatest.
However, Labour's housing spokesman, Mr Clive Soley, claimed that local authorities faced a 24 per cent cut in their housing investment programmes next year because of financial restrictions coming into force in April.
He said a survey had disclosed a gloomy picture of growing waiting lists, homelessness, and repair problems.
Mr Patten told the National House Building Council in London that his aim in the public rental sector was not to move to market-level rents or to end rent subsidies for the less well off.
‘But we do want to create a pattern of rent differentials that will reflect rather better the relative values of different houses and flats.
‘It cannot be right that a tenant in Middlesbrough, where housing is cheap, pays more than a tenant in Camden, where costs are very much higher, where well-paid jobs are much easier to come by, and there is such a concentration of commercial facilities.’
He said better-off council tenants living in better properties in desirable and expensive areas would pay higher rents, while tenants in poor properties in cheap areas would face only modest rent rises.
Mr Patten said the best way to tackle housing shortages and homelessness was to build more homes, but the extra money, to be channelled through housing associations rather than councils, had to be concentrated in areas of most acute shortage.
‘That may mean some shift in the regional balance of expenditure.
But we should be able to achieve that without cutting back in those regions where needs, though still real enough, are rather less acute.’
Victory for war widows.
By Alan Travis Political Correspondent
THE Government is to produce a scheme before Christmas to improve the position of pre-1973 war widows the Prime Minister indicated yesterday.
Mrs Thatcher confirmed in the Commons that ministers were reconsidering their opposition to a sustained campaign by an all-party group of MPs.
The group regards the treatment of war widows before 1973, as an injustice when compared with the benefits paid to those widowed after that date.
There appears to be disagreements within Whitehall about whose budget should finance the estimated £200 million for a scheme now under discussion.
This would raise the weekly pension of a widow of a second world war private from £57 to more than £100.
They would still not have equal treatment with Falklands war widows, who receive about £124 a week.
The Prime Minister is expected to chair a cabinet sub-committee to settle which department should pay the bill.
She said the Government hoped to make a further statement ‘before Christmas’.
How welfare net could not save Christopher..
By Sarah Boseley
THE SHORT, tragic life of Christopher Palmer illustrates the difficulty of devising a welfare net that would catch all babies at risk of serious harm from their parents.
For the first five months of his life, Christopher was happy, well-adjusted and a trifle fat.
Two months later, he died of terrible injuries.
There were warning signals in between, and as a result he was placed on an at-risk register three weeks before he died.
But the parental attacks which led to the baby's death were unpredictably ferocious and sudden.
Social workers say they never had enough evidence of maltreatment to go to court for a care order.
An internal inquiry has been carried out by Ealing social services, in whose area Christopher lived for most of the last weeks of his life, but no serious professional errors were found.
An independent review, to be funded by Ealing council and Ealing health authority, has been commissioned.
Celia Palmer was 16 ½ when she gave birth to Christopher.
For five months, the two of them lived with her mother in Brighton.
In October, she and the baby moved to London to join her former boyfriend, Danny Palmer, also then 16, who may have thought he was the father.
Blood tests later proved he was not.
Danny was living in a children's home.
He left and found a squalid flat in Brentford, which they shared with another couple and their children.
Within two weeks, the Palmers brought Christopher to Ealing hospital, saying he had gone blue, stopped breathing and had blood round his nose.
Doctors could find nothing wrong, and sent them home.
They moved to Celia's father's house in Southall.
On November 8, James Ball, Celia's father, and his fiancee heard a loud thump upstairs.
Celia came down holding the baby, who had gone blue and stopped breathing.
She said that the baby had suffered a fit, and she had fallen on top of him.
A paediatric registrar at Ealing Hospital suspected the baby's injuries could be non-accidental.
Ealing social services department was alerted on November 9.
A second registrar examined Christopher, but decided it was possible Celia and Danny were telling the truth.
The baby was put through extensive tests during a 10-day stay but they failed to find any signs of the fits complained of.
Celia and Danny visited the hospital infrequently.
On November 17, the two registrars, nursing staff, social workers and the police decided there were insufficient grounds to start care proceedings, but put Christopher's name on the Child Protection Register.
Celia took the baby home next day.
Social workers visited Celia and Danny to arrange sessions at a family centre, but the couple announced they were going to spend two weeks in Hackney with Danny's mother.
A health visitor went to the house and the family GP called twice before they left.
None saw further cause for concern.
Ealing social services informed Hackney social workers and the health visitor that the family would be temporarily in the borough.
Within days of their arrival in Finsbury Park, Christopher had been brutally attacked.
He died in hospital on December 6.
Setting the scene for radical change.
FIVE years of debate culminated yesterday in a bill which sets the scene for the most dramatic transformation of British broadcasting since the launch of ITV in 1955, writes Georgina Henry, Media Correspondent.
A new commercial television channel, up to three new national commercial radio stations and numerous local TV and radio stations are among the proposals.
Their driving force is the government's determination to open up the market; to increase choice for viewers and listeners; to allow new entrepreneurs access to a highly regulated system; and to appease the advertisers, whose protests about the cost of TV advertising have reached a crescendo.
For television, what began with the appointment in March 1985 of Professor Alan Peacock to chair a committee looking at the financing of the BBC, has turned into a radical shake-up of commercial TV which, for the moment, leaves the BBC largely unscathed.
Since the white paper on broadcasting was published in November 1988, the debate has raged over whether the proposals will mean real choice for the public, or simply undermine what is best about the present system.
Opposition to the proposals has centred on plans to sell ITV franchises to the highest bidder, and the reduction in programme obligations for commercial TV.
Critics also argue that little account has been taken of changes already forced on commercial broadcasting before legislation.
Technological change has introduced commercial competition in the form of satellite TV.
ITV — condemned by the Prime Minister as the ‘last bastion of restrictive practices’— has undergone a revolution in industrial relations, with tough new working practices imposed throughout the network in the last year.
Independent producers, whose dogged campaign to get into the BBC and ITV as well as Channel 4 has bitten deep into the old structures of the companies, now form an established and vibrant third force in television.
New ideas and working methods are beginning, for the most part, to revitalise the system — introducing competition for talent, and forcing broadcasters towards greater efficiency and realistic accounting.
Illness of 20 army cadets highlights algae problem Pollution risk to life hits leisure waters.
By Paul Brown Environment Correspondent
LAKES and reservoirs used for public recreation may have to be shut during peak demand in the summer as increasing pollution causes toxic algae blooms.
An unreported incident in which 20 army officer cadets were taken to hospital during the summer after canoeing in a lake at Leek, Staffordshire, has convinced the National Rivers Authority that Britain faces a serious algae problem.
Many businesses based on inland waters for yachting and other recreation now face an uncertain future as the water they depend on for their livelihood is likely to be closed during peak demand.
Partly because of water privatisation the problem has been played down because it will cost millions of pounds to solve.
The blue-green algae blooms of last summer were blamed on sunshine and drought but the underlying cause is the phosphates and nitrogen from sewage and farming.
Rutland Water, one of the country's largest reservoirs, where sheep and dogs died after drinking water close to the blue-green algae, is a classic case.
Water contaminated by nutrients from intensive farming is drawn from the river Nene into Rutland Water and sewage containing phosphates is pumped in from Oakham town.
The Anglian Water Authority, which said it had been constrained from discussing the problems because it might affect the price of shares during privatisation, refused last night to attend a meeting of local people worried about the problem.
Mr Nick Cox, a marina owner and yacht chandler, is one of a number of businessmen who has issued a writ against the authority for damages.
He said: ‘We have met with a wall of silence over this business.
We are very worried about our future.
We do not know whether the lake is safe for our customers to fall into.’
Mr Michael Latham, Conservative MP for Rutland and Melton, went to see Mr Michael Howard, the minister responsible for water, on behalf of his constituents.
‘I am very dissatisfied with everything I have seen and heard so far.
There is no satisfactory explanation of what happened, no co-ordination between the NRA, the Department of Environment and the water authority.’
He said he was given explanations in the summer of the cause of the problem which were clearly wrong.
Man-made pollution appeared to be to blame.
‘We need proper compensation for those who have lost sheep and beloved dogs and face financial difficulties because of their business losses.
Most of all we need action to find a long term solution.
I have written to Mr Howard demanding action.’
Mrs Shelley Howard, senior biologist for the Severn Trent Authority, said there were 21 sites affected in her area.
The authority had not found out about the incident involving the cadets at Leek until they were in hospital, but tests on the water taken about the same time showed toxics from algae present.
The lake was closed by the British Waterways Board.
Professor Geoffrey Codd, a microbiologist from Dundee University and expert on blue-green algae said two cadets had been seriously ill and were detained in hospital for a week.
There case would be written up in medical journals ‘because we have eliminated every other possible cause.’
The problem of toxics and blue-green algae had been known for a century in countries like Australia and the US where it occurred naturally.
The problem had hit Britain now because we were feeding the algae with phosphates and nitrates and causing blooms.
Environment Guardian, Page 27
News in brief: Sardinia to host England.
England have been seeded for next summer's World Cup and will play their three first-phase games in Sardinia, soccer's governing body, Fifa, announced.
Mr Bert Millichip, FA chairman, said the decision was made on the grounds of footballing ability, but the island was ideal for isolating the hooligans among England's travelling fans.
David Lacey, page 20; Trattoria talk, page 24.
Reservoirs fear.
Lakes and reservoirs may have to be shut during the summer as increasing pollution causes toxic algae blooms.
Page 2; Environment, page 27.
Scene of change.
Five years of debate has culminated in a bill which sets the scene for the most dramatic transformation of British broadcasting since the launch of ITV in 1955.
Page 10; Reaction, page 24; Leader comment, page 22.
Legal monopoly to go.
The bill to reform the legal profession and abolish barristers' monopoly rights in the higher courts will pave the way for solicitors to appear in any court, up to the House of Lords.
Page 9; Split widens, page 24; Leader comment, page 22.
Embryo fears ‘mistaken’.
The Archbishop of York said in the Lords that opposition to human embryo research was based on biological, theological and philosophical mistakes.
Page 6; Letters, page 22.
BBC libel payout.
The reputation of one of the last of the Hi-de-Hi style holiday camps was vindicated when the BBC agreed to pay £250,000 compensation for a libellous item on Esther Rantzen's That's Life programme.
Page 2.
Kidney donor ‘misled’.
A Turkish print worker alleged a Harley Street doctor paid £2,500 for him to donate a kidney to a patient he believed was a fellow countryman.
Page 3.
Water oversubscribed.
The £5.3 billion water privatisation issue is 1.7 times oversubscribed so far, forcing financial advisers to ‘claw back’ shares promised overseas to meet public demand.
Page 16
News in brief: Five face leak charges.
Five people arrested in connection with alleged leaks of information to Loyalists have been charged with terrorist-related offences.
Three men will appear before Belfast magistrates today on charges of intimidation.
A fourth will be charged with having information likely to be of use to terrorists.
The fifth, a woman, was remanded on the same charge yesterday..
Sardinia to host England.
England have been seeded for next summer's World Cup and will play their three first-phase games in Sardinia, soccer's governing body, Fifa, announced.
David Lacey, page 20.
Reservoirs fear.
Lakes and reservoirs may have to be shut during the summer as increasing pollution causes toxic algae blooms.
Page 2; Environment, page 27.
Scene of change.
Five years of debate has culminated in a bill which sets the scene for the most dramatic transformation of British broadcasting since the launch of ITV in 1955.
Page 10; Reaction, page 24; Leader comment, page 22.
Legal monopoly to go.
The bill to reform the legal profession and abolish barristers' monopoly rights in the higher courts will pave the way for solicitors to appear in any court, up to the House of Lords.
Page 9; Split widens, page 24; Leader comment, page 22.
Embryo fears ‘mistaken’.
The Archbishop of York said in the Lords that opposition to human embryo research was based on biological, theological and philosophical mistakes.
Page 6; Letters, page 22.
BBC libel payout.
The reputation of one of the last of the Hi-de-Hi style holiday camps was vindicated yesterday when the BBC agreed to pay £250,000 compensation for a libellous item on Esther Rantzen's That's Life programme.
Page 2.
Water oversubscribed.
The £5.3 billion water privatisation issue is 1.7 times oversubscribed so far, forcing financial advisers to ‘claw back’ shares promised overseas to meet public demand.
Page 16
Spillage from nuclear sub.
Thirty gallons of contaminated cooling liquid from a nuclear submarine has been spilt into the VSEL shipyard in Barrow in Furness, Cumbria, it was disclosed yesterday.
The spillage occurred on Monday, when a hose connecting HMS Talent to a facility barge burst.
Punishment shootings.
The Royal Ulster Constabulary said that punishment shootings by republican and loyalist paramilitaries in Northern Ireland more than doubled to 155 this year, compared with 66 in 1988..
Driving ban on MP.
Mr Michael Knowles, aged 47, Conservative MP for Nottingham East, was at South Western magistrates court in London yesterday fined £200 and banned for 12 months after he admitted a drink driving offence.
Rape sentence cut.
Lee Anthony Roberts, aged 20, the sex offender scarred for life when his five-year-old victim's mother poured boiling water over his trousers, had his nine-year youth custody sentence for rape, imposed at Exeter Crown Court in November last year, cut to six years yesterday by the Court of Appeal.
Life for axe killer.
Leroy Pearson, aged 52, of Mitcham, Surrey, who axed his 30-year-old wife Leigh to death, was jailed for life at the Old Bailey yesterday..
Girl, 11, murdered.
Police said yesterday that they could find no motive for the murder of 11-year-old Tasleen Akhtar, whose body was found in an alley near her home in Sparkhill, Birmingham.
Soldiers drown.
Two soldiers of the Queen's Own Hussars drowned and two escaped when their Chieftan tank rolled over into a canal at Hohne in West Germany on November 27.
Corporal Paul Moreton, 28, of Nuneaton, and Trooper Denis Brownhill, 20, of Birmingham were named after relatives had been located.
Heralding another TV channel, competitive tendering, and a boom in radio, yesterday's bill sets a new agenda for British broadcasting The sound and vision of market forces.
*.
By Joanna Coles
THE MAIN proposals contained in the 167 clauses of the Broadcasting Bill include:
A new Independent Television Commission to replace the Independent Broadcasting Authority and Cable Authority as a ‘light touch’ regulatory body without the IBA's detailed involvement in scheduling but with wider powers to enforce licence conditions and ownership rules.
Replacement of the present ITV system by a regional based Channel 3; and the issuing of 10-year franchises by the ITC to the highest bidder who passed a quality threshold unless ‘exceptional circumstances’ prevail.
The Home Secretary may, however, refuse to grant a franchise if he suspects the funding arrangements, or feels ‘it would not be in the public interest’.
Channel 4 will be allowed to continue its current remit, ensuring a range of minority-interest programmes.
Appointments to the ruling body will be made by the ITC, and will require government approval.
Channel 4 will also sell its own advertising, but will have a financial safety net from Channel 3 if its revenue falls below 14 per cent of independent terrestrial TV revenue.
A new channel, Channel 5, will also be allocated by competitive tender reaching about 70 per cent of the UK.
High quality news coverage on Channels 3 and 5, by one or more news providers nominated by the ITC.
Safeguards for quality programming.
Licensees must provide a diverse programme service appealing to a wide variety of taste and interest, high quality news and current affairs and a reasonable proportion of other programmes of high quality.
Channel 3 has a statutory duty to provide regional programmes.
At least 25 per cent of original programmes will now come from independent companieswith a proper proportion of European origin.
Failure to meet programme promises could mean losing all or part of a substantial performance bond.
The creation of a new Radio Authority, which willallocate three new national radio licences by competitive tender, subject to a diversity requirement.
In the next three years, 300 more local radio stations could be set up, catering for local tastes, to ‘broaden the range of programmes available’.
Rules ensuring media ownership is not concentrated in a few hands, with restrictions on cross media holdings.
The Broadcasting Standards Council is placed on a statutory footing, and will draw up a code ‘giving guidance’ on violence, sex and ‘standards of taste and decency’.
The code will not be binding, but broadcasters will be asked to ‘reflect the general effect’ relevant to the programmes in question.
As well as being responsible for all viewers' and listeners' complaints, the council will also monitor programmes from outside Britain but received here.
The bill extends to other bidders the traditional competition between the BBC and ITV for screening certain events; while party political broadcasts will have to be shown on Channels 3,4, and 5.
Commenting on the proposals, Mr Alan Sapper, general secretary of the Association of Cinematograph, Television and Allied Technicians, said: ‘The bill spells a disastrous future.
We will get muck instead of public service broadcasting on our screens.’
Mr Tony Hearn, general secretary of the Broadcasting and Entertaining Trades Alliance, warned that the introduction of greater competition and less regulation would lead to a ‘terminal decline in programme quality and diversity’.
The Campaign for Press and Broadcasting Freedom claimed that the franchise auctions would drain cash from programme production into Treasury coffers.
Mr Steve Byron, of the Community Radio Association, said the bill would not deliver the diversity on the airwaves that the government had promised.
Manchester High School for Girls.
MANCHESTER High School for Girls, an independent institution, was not the subject of a photograph on page 3 of yesterday's Guardian which showed buckets being used to collect water from a leaking roof.
The accompanying caption should have identified the school as the North Manchester Girls' High School.
The Guardian apologises for the inadvertent omission of the word ‘North’ and for any impression that the premises of Manchester High School for Girls were not in good repair and in an appropriate condition for the education of its pupils.
Christians are not required to believe that humanness is created in an instant, Dr Habgood tells House of Lords debate Opposition to embryo research mistaken, says archbishop Embryology Bill.
Paul Nettleton.
THE ARCHBISHOP of York said yesterday that opposition to human embryo research was based on biological, theological and philosophical mistakes.
Dr John Habgood, speaking in the Lords during the second reading debate on the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Bill, said: ‘Christians are no more required to believe that humanness is created in an instant than we are required to believe in the historical existence of Adam and Eve.’
He drew an analogy with the theory of evolution to argue that life was created by a cumulative process.
He said the alternative view was to take the standpoint of a fully-developed person looking back to some point marking the moment of creation.
He said: ‘If we are to give full moral worth to such persons, runs the argument, then we have to give full moral worth to the whole history from its very first moment.
This is a fine ideal but it seems to me to rest on biological, theological and philosophical mistakes.
‘Despite the views of some, it does not in my view represent a view which is necessarily and unquestionably Christian.’
Peers, and later MPs, will be offered in committee stage a free vote either to permit licensing of research for up to 14 days after creation of an embryo in vitro, or an absolute ban.
This was described by the Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay, as a ‘drafting innovation’ as he outlined the arguments on both sides.
He said many scientists and doctors argued that further research could lead to improved treatment of infertility, find the causes and prevent the passing on of genetic diseases, improve contraception, and establish the causes of miscarriage.
But for opponents, embryo research was quite simply repugnant.
‘Significant sections of religious opinions in this country take this view…because an embryo has the potential to become a child.’
Lord Mackay, who like other party spokesman said he was speaking personally, added he would determine his own position after hearing the full debate.
He said: ‘We need to balance conflicting interests of those most closely concerned: the childless couple desperate for children, those who stand to gain from new scientific research, the human embryo with its potential for development.
To achieve the right balance we each of us need deep thought and inner quietness.’
Lord Ennals, Labour health spokesman, said it was wrong for people not directly concerned to deny others ‘on the basis of a doctrine’ the benefits of carefuly controlled research.
But he feared the bill could be lost because the Government, by including the words ‘any subsequent development of such embryos’ in the bill's long title, was permitting debate on abortion time limits.
He urged the Government to make time for Lord Houghton of Sowerby's Abortion (Amendment) Bill, which peers debate next Thursday, to permit a separation of the issues.
The former Lord Chancellor, Lord Hailsham, said he believed the scientific community to be a responsible one.
‘I would seriously ask the question of those who would impose an absolute prohibition, what kind of right in a free and liberal democracy do they think they have to say no to that group of people?
I can only say that I see no right whatsoever.’
The Social Democrat, Lord Kennet, the first opponent of research to speak, said: ‘Those who say that this full-stop-sized mini-blob is not a human being must answer which part of the question they object to: human or being?
It's being.
It's also alive and and its made from human cells.
If it were not human you would not want it for research and if it was not human no one would deny you having it for research.’
He was supported by the Duke of Norfolk, a Conservative and leading Roman Catholic, who said the white paper had offered a clear choice, while the bill would allow a choice between experiments up to 33 hours or up to 14 days and should be amended.
‘My position is that an embryo should only be created for insertion into a specified woman and should receive the maximum protection from the moment of its creation and no non-therapeutic research should be allowed,’ he said.
‘I consider that ethically a human person is created when the sperm of a male fertilises the ovum of a woman, thus creating an embryo…either in the fallopian tubes or in vitro.
‘A proper regard for human dignity leads to proper respect for human life from its origin, which IVF itself demonstrates is at fertilisation.
The only safe course is to protect human life from the beginning.’
Baronness Warnock (Ind), whose 1986 report forms the basis of the bill, said it would be a paradox if ‘we democratic and increasingly educated people should…put ourselves back into the 17th century, when the question of whether or not Galileo and indeed Descartes might pursue and publish their scientific findings was regulated not by scientific considerations, but by religious considerations.’
We were now in the 20th century irrevocably, ‘part of an age where we must be allowed to take the possible risks of our own knowledge.’
Legal split widens over bill to end monopoly.
By Clare Dyer Legal Correspondent
THE two branches of the legal profession last night remained split over the abolition of the barristers' monopoly in the higher courts as the Government published its Courts and Legal Services Bill, overturning centuries of lawyers' traditions.
The Law Society, representing solicitors, hailed the bill as ‘a modern statutory foundation for the legal profession of the future, in which outdated restrictions will have no part’.
Mr David Ward, the society's president, said it would mean ‘an end to unnecessary double-manning’.
But Mr Desmond Fennell, QC, chairman of the Bar, claimed there was a danger that many people needing legal help would have access only to a ‘more expensive Jack of all trades,’ while specialist skills were reserved for the privileged few.
Rules to be drawn up by the Law Society for solicitor advocates will need approval by four senior judges, all former barristers.
But the bill sets out a tight framework which will limit the judges' scope for blocking extra advocacy rights for solicitors.
The judges, heads of the High Court's four divisions, will have to take account of advice from a lay-dominated advisory committee.
Each will have to notify the Lord Chancellor in writing if he fails to approve the rules, giving reasons.
Approval can only be refused if the judge believes the rules are incompatible with a statutory objective and a general principle spelled out in the bill.
The statutory objective is that there should be new ways of providing legal services and a wider choice of providers.
The general principle is that advocates' rights should be determined only by whether they are properly trained and members of a professional body whose rules of conduct are ‘appropriate in the interests of justice in relation to the court or proceedings concerned’.
The framework would allow the Law Society to seek judicial review in the High Court if a judge refused to approve the rules.
Introducing the bill yesterday, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay, said it was anomalous that solicitors could not appear before judges in the crown court who were former solicitors.
Under the bill, many cases now dealt with by the High Court will be moved down to the county courts, currently plagued by staff shortages and a backlog of work.
Court staffing levels would be increased by 400 in the next financial year and an extra £2 million had been allocated to the court service for this financial year.
Other changes include allowing banks, building societies and insurance companies to carry out conveyancing for home buyers; ‘no win, no fee’ agreements between lawyers and clients; and the creation of a legal services ombudsman.
Reports, page 9; Leader comment, page 22
Consumers group welcomes conveyancing competition.
By Clare Dyer Legal Correspondent
CONSUMERS should get a better deal as the Courts and Legal Services Bill opens up greater competition, Mr David Tench, legal officer of the Consumers' Association, said yesterday.
Giving banks and building societies the right to handle conveyancing might not make the service cheaper, but the competition should mean that it was done better.
The bill makes it a criminal offence, punishable by a £1,000 fine, for a lender to try to force a mortgage applicant to use the lender's own services.
Banks and building societies offering conveyancing will be subject to a strict code of conduct and will have to make it clear that they are not offering independent financial advice.
About 10 per cent of solicitors — around 6,000 — might want to conduct cases in the higher courts, Mr David Ward, president of the Law Society, has estimated.
This would double the number of advocates and could make fees more competitive.
Proposals to allow cases on a ‘no-win, no-fee’ basis are unlikely to increase access to justice.
Lawyers already informally take on certain winners on this basis, and the reward proposed — a small uplift on normal fees — will not induce them to accept chancy cases.
Litigants should benefit from changes recommended by the Civil Justice Review to speed up and simplify civil cases.
Czech PM goes after opposition demands.
By Ian Traynor in Prague
CIVIC Forum, the Czechoslovak opposition movement, reacted in fury last night to the resignation of the Prime Minister, Mr Ladislav Adamec, accusing him of being entirely to blame for a ‘political crisis’, and of citing ‘untrue facts’ in earlier threatening to resign.
The government and opposition traded invective and plunged the country's three week-old ‘peaceful revolution’ into uncertainty.
‘By resigning today he is trying to avoid responsibility for the political crisis,’ said Mr Jiri Dienstbier, Forum spokesman.
Mr Dienstbier said the new Prime Minister, Mr Marian Calfa, did not yet appear to be a ‘strong and flexible politician’, and indicated he would be acceptable in the post only on condition that President Gustav Husak step down, to be replaced by a non-Communist head of state.
Mr Vaclev Havel, Civic Forum leader, and Mr Alexander Dubcek, the former Communist leader, are two strong contenders for the presidency.
Mr Adamec cited pressure from the opposition in bargaining over the shape of a new government as his reason for stepping down.
The opposition rejected these claims entirely.
His resignation was followed by the expulsion from the Communist Party of its former leader, Mr Milos Jakes.
The politburo also expelled Mr Miroslav Stepan, former head of the party in Prague.
Both men were expelled ‘for gross political mistakes in tackling social tension, especially the events of November 17, 1989’, when police clamped down on a pro-democracy demonstration.
Last night, Mr Havel held talks with Defence Ministry officials on the crisis, as President Husak moved swiftly, authorising the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr Calfa, to form a new government.
A government spokesman said that Mr Adamec's decision to quit was taken because of‘unacceptable demands’ from Civic Forum, which earlier rejected the charge that it was putting undue pressure on the Prime Minister.
Mr Jan Urban, a leading activist of Forum, arguably the most potent political force in the country, indicated that a Communist prime minister was acceptable to the opposition but that the Forum would now demand a new non-Communist president to replace Mr Husak.
‘We now face an extremely complicated 24 hours,’ said Mr Urban.
He expected talks last night between Forum and the small non-Communist parties to see what were the possibilities.
Mr Calfa, aged 43, has taken part in this week's negotiations between the government and opposition on the new cabinet line-up.
He was promoted from Minister without Portfolio to Deputy Prime Minister in the government unveiled by Mr Adamec last Sunday.
That cabinet came as a huge disappointment to the public and opposition, contributing much to the present unstable atmosphere.
Mr Adamec held talks with the small Socialist Party yesterday, after which the Socialist leader, Mr Bohuslav Kucera, announced that the Prime Minister was quitting because he wanted someone younger to handle the ‘compromise’.
On Wednesday night, Mr Adamec went on national television to warn that he might quit because of intolerable ‘ultimatums, deadlines and strike threats’ from the opposition.
But yesterday Forum rejected the criticism and said it had put seven names to Mr Adamec for the cabinet posts.
Youth detained for murder of lover's baby.
By Susan Tirbutt
AYOUTH was sentenced to be detained at Her Majesty's pleasure at the Old Bailey yesterday for the murder of baby Christopher Palmer while the mother was convicted of cruelty but cleared of murder and manslaughter.
The jury also found Danny Palmer, aged 17, guilty of grievous bodily harm with intent and cruelty to the seven-month-old baby who died in Whittington Hospital, north London, last December from a fractured skull and other injuries.
He was also given concurrent youth custody sentences of five years, three years and one year.
Sentence was delayed on the mother, Celia Palmer, aged l8, who was remanded to stay in the hostel where she has been living during the trial while social and probation reports are prepared.
Mr Justice Ian Kennedy said he wanted to know about arrangements for her supervision over the next two years.
‘My main concern is that, when the process of grieving starts — as it must — she will have full support.’
He said that one would not expect a person found guilty of treating their own child cruelly to be allowed their liberty at once.
But Celia Palmer, who took her lover's name when she moved in with him, had been acquitted of all the gravest charges ‘hanging over her head this long time’.
When the judge heard Celia hoped to live with her mother in Birmingham, he asked probation officers to report to him.
‘I want to know what is going on in Birmingham, chapter and verse.’
Miss Ann Curnow, QC, for Danny Palmer, in mitigation asked the judge to bear in mind his desperately unhappy background.
His act was an unpremeditated matter and was the culmination of a weekend of some considerable frustration.
Palmer had spent most of his life in and out of children's homes and was in care himself when he became stepfather to the baby.
Counsel said that there was evidence that Palmer liked to cuddle and play with the baby and how proud he was to be the baby's father, as he thought.
The court had heard that the baby died from terrible injuries including three skull fractures measuring 10 inches in total, two broken wrists and multiple bruising.
He was battered on the head with something like a bannister rail or rounders bat and probably slammed against a wall, the prosecution alleged.
Both defendants maintained to police that the baby suffered fits and had done so during the weekend he died.
They said they tried to revive him and that all the injuries were inflicted accidentally.
Turk kidney donor ‘misled on recipient’ *.
By Gareth Parry
ATURKISH print worker alleged yesterday that a Harley Street doctor paid £2,500 for him to donate a kidney to a patient whom he believed was a fellow countryman.
Mr Ferhat Usta, a Muslim, said he realised minutes before the operation that his kidney was going to a Briton.
‘I suddenly got out of bed half naked.
I realised I was being deceived,’ he told the General Medical Council's professional conduct committee.
Mr Usta, aged 34, who lives with his wife, mother and three daughters in a shack in an Istanbul shanty town, described how he came to London last year, attracted by a newspaper advertisement offering money to kidney donors.
He wanted to raise £2,000 to treat one of his children who suffered from a tubercular hip infection.
Mr Usta was examined by Dr Raymond Crockett, a Harley Street physician specialising in kidney disease.
Dr Crockett, Mr Michael Bewick, a leading kidney transplant surgeon, and Mr Michael Joyce, a urologist at Guy's Hospital, deny professional misconduct over their involvement in transplanting kidneys from four living Turks, all of whom were paid for the organs.
Mr Usta recalled how two brothers, described as ‘kidney brokers’, handed him £2,500 in cash on the night before the operation in July 1988.
Speaking through an interpreter, Mr Usta said: ‘As far as I can figure it out, one day before the operation the cheque was given by Dr Crockett, it was changed and the money given to me that night.’
On Monday, the first day of the hearing, Mr Roger Henderson QC, for the GMC, said Dr Crockett's notes included a bill for £20,000 for a Mr B, described as a Briton living in Israel who was suffering from a disease affecting his kidneys.
Mr Usta said he had come to London under the impression that his kidney was to be donated to one of the ‘broker’ brothers, Ata Nur Kuntar.
He had said to Mr Kuntar: ‘You could have told me the truth from the very beginning.
Because I am a very poor man you made me accept a figure like six million lire (£2,500).
An Englishman, if he is going to have an operation in a hospital like that, I am sure he would have at least £5,000 in his pocket.
‘I told him that I wanted £5,000 from him.
He then accepted this and he told me he was going to pay me the other £2,500 in Turkey in Turkish money.’
He said he never received the extra money.
The hearing continues today.
Banks launder £1,800m drugs money, say MPs.
By John Carvel Home Affairs Editor
AN ESTIMATED £1,800 million of drugs money is circulating through the legitimate banking system in Britain, says a report yesterday by the Commons home affairs committee.
This could have a destabilising affect on smaller financial institutions.
The British money markets had become an international laundering centre for profits from illicit drug trafficking but the response of the Bank of England had been ‘passive.’
The Home Office is planning tougher powers against laundering by adding extra clauses to the Criminal Justice (International Co-operation) Bill after its second reading this month.
But it is not clear whether this will satisfy the committee.
The committee quotes evidence from the National Drugs Intelligence Co-ordinator, Mr Barry Price, that the US, Canada, and some other countries regarded the United Kingdom as ‘an offshore banking system.’
Britain continued to be ‘a major centre for money laundering’ in spite of tougher controls in the Drug Trafficking Offences Act 1986.
This legislation had been hailed as a powerful weapon with which to seize drug barons' fortunes but up to May last year police and Customs investigators had only been able to confiscate £11 million.
The committee is ‘extremely concerned’ that the Bank of England and Committee of London and Scottish Bankers seemed ‘passive…in responding to the significant threat facing financial institutions from money laundering.’
The bank should examine the scale of the problem and suggest remedies.
It recommends tighter controls against drug money, which is sometimes being carried in and out in suitcases and carrier bags.
US customs officials told the MPs this was a ‘significant loophole.’
Anyone importing or exporting large sums in cash should be obliged to declare it and Customs officers should have power to seize the money if they suspected it was derived from crime.
Dame Janet Fookes, Tory MP for Plymouth Drake, said sums over £5,000 should be declared.
The report recommends relaxation of the ban on police acting as agents provocateurs to permit US-style ‘sting’ operations to trap traffickers.
Officers should be allowed ‘to take part in conspiracies to import drugs so long as they withdrew prior to importation.’
Mr Wheeler said police already went to public lavatories to detect sex offenders.
It was time they transferred their attentions from ‘the municipal privy’ to suites at top hotels where those sort of drugs deals are carried out.
Officers would perform excellent service if they could put themselves in a position to receive information which could be translated into proceedings before a jury.
Home Affairs Committee 7th report 1988/9; Drug trafficking and serious crime; HMSO £7.40
Paris and Bonn seek to avert monetary split.
By John Palmer European Editor in Strasbourg
ON the eve of the most significant European Community summit of recent years, the French and West German governments moved quickly yesterday to avert a damaging split over plans to move to full European economic and monetary union.
Following some intense telephone diplomacy between Bonn and Paris, Chancellor Helmut Kohl and President Franois Mitterrand agreed that the Strasbourg EC summit, which opens here today, should after all agree a date for revising the Treaty of Rome and preparing for supra-national monetary union.
Earlier reports that Chancellor Kohl had suggested delaying fixing the date for a special EC conference on monetary union for a year had led to a stark and none too veiled warning from the President of the European Commission, Mr Jacques Delors, that this might plunge EC relations with West Germany ‘into a serious crisis’.
The displeasure of President Mitterrand, host here for the two-day summit, was also made known, and within hours the Bonn government had backed off any confrontation with its French allies.
At a press conference in Bonn, a senior official in the Chancellery said the West German and French governments had agreed that the inter-governmental conference on monetary union would begin at the end of next year — as Paris had originally insisted.
Mr Lutz Stavenhagen said that he expected 11 out of the 12 EC leaders in Strasbourg to endorse the proposal — a reference to the renewed isolation of Mrs Thatcher over the issue.
Bonn officials last night played down the extent of the last-minute rethink of their tactics at Strasbourg and one said that it had all been a ‘silly misunderstanding’.
But Chancellor Kohl appears to have been startled by suggestions that his letter to President Mitterrand last week implying an intention to go slow on EMU might have been inspired by a desire to play the German unity card in the West German general election next year.
President Mitterrand took the opportunity of his visit to President Gorbachev in Kiev this week to spell out his insistence on the inviolability of Germany's frontiers with its eastern neighbours and emphasise East German democratisation rather than German reunification.
All the signs are that President Mitterrand's approach is supported by Chancellor Kohl's foreign minister, Mr Hans-Dietrich Genscher.
Not all the differences in approach to economic and monetary union have been ironed out between the French and the West Germans but they concern the speed and extent of the shift to a supra-national system, for running the community's economy.
The West Germans want the revision of the Rome Treaty and national parliamentary endorsement of an EC central bank and other institutions to be in place by the time of the next European Parliament elections — in June 1994.
The French President and some other EC governments believe the new system should be ready for operation by the end of 1992 when the single barrier and frontier free European market is due to be completed.
While the French and West Germans believe a supra-national system for regulating the EC economies should be subject to democratic scrutiny by the European Parliament, Chancellor Kohl wants this agreed and in legal form before other changes are made to the Treaty of Rome to create the proposed EC central bank or to give the EC Council of Ministers powers to override national governments.
All of this is bad news for Mrs Thatcher.
The Prime Minister objects to a guillotine date for the treaty revision conference even more than to setting of an opening date for the inter-governmental conference where she is resigned to be outvoted.
And she made clear only last week the depth of her opposition to giving the European Parliament more power.
Hurd's test of beliefs, page 12; Leader comment, page 22; E German poll deadline, page 24
That's Life made to pay for cheap jibe against ‘last of the Hi-de-Hi camps’.
By Sarah Boseley
THE reputation of one of the last of the Hi-de-Hi style holiday camps was vindicated yesterday when the BBC agreed to pay record compensation of £250,000 for a libellous item on Esther Rantzen's That's Life programme.
After a programme broadcast in June attacking the inexpensive facilities offered at the Majestic Holiday Camp in Barry Island, Wales, nearly 10,000 people cancelled their bookings.
Mr Frederick Wright, chairman of Barry Island Resort Ltd, which bought the camp three years ago, said the BBC later received 30,000 postcards from holidaymakers who had enjoyed their stay.
The programme alleged that the living conditions and communal facilities at the resort, built by Billy Butlin in the 1960s to offer a week's holiday for a week's pay, were ‘so squalid and dangerous’ that no sensible person would spend time or money on a holiday there.
A week's accommodation costs between £15 in low season and £48 a person.
Mr Wright's solicitor, Mr Alasdair Pepper, yesterday told Mr Justice Michael Davies in the High Court that the programme gave a false impression of the resort, misrepresenting the quality and nature of the facilities.
There was no truth in any of the allegations, which Miss Rantzen and the BBC now recognised, he said.
The resort's advertisements were accurate and all the entertainment and leisure facilities described as free were indeed absolutely free.
About 25,000 people — over a third of the holidaymakers who stayed at the holiday camp this year — had rebooked for next year, he said.
The BBC's solicitor, Mr Sean McTernan, said they accepted that the allegations were false and should not have been broadcast.
He explained that the programme makers had relied on a handful of people whose experience and view of the holiday camp were not representative of the resort as a whole or the experience of the vast majority of holidaymakers.
In a statement afterwards, the BBC said it had ‘apologised to Mr Wright and his family and expressed their regret for the damage and distress caused’.
A retraction would be broadcast when a new series of the programme begins in January.
The corporation will pay the estimated £250,000 costs of the action, which had been due for trial in January.
The settlement is believed to be the largest compensation payment the BBC has ever made, topping the £75,000 paid in April 1982 to Dr Sydney Gee, who ran a Harley Street slimming clinic.
The costs in that case, which went to trial, came to £1.2 million.
Although Dr Gee was also libelled by That's Life, the BBC said yesterday no inquiry into the programme would take place.
Mr Wright said after the settlement that not only his resort, which he described as ‘the last of the Hi-de-Hi holiday camps in Great Britain’ but also Barry Island, which had some of the finest beaches in the UK, had been vindicated.
‘The BBC received 30,000 postcards from happy holidaymakers telling them they had got it wrong.
That kind of people power has brought about the result today.’
He added: ‘I think Esther Rantzen does a tremendous amount of good work, but she is a media star and I would hope that she will realise that people accept what she says as gospel truth.
‘The BBC has always been classified as the station which tells the truth and they should make sure their research has been properly done before they publish anything else.’
Heralding another TV channel, competitive tendering, and a boom in radio, yesterday's bill sets a new agenda for British broadcasting The sound and vision of market forces.
*.
By Joanna Coles
THE MAIN proposals contained in the 167 clauses of the Broadcasting Bill include the formation of a new Independent Television Commission to replace the Independent Broadcasting Authority; the replacement of the present ITV system by Channel 3; and the issuing of 10-year franchises by the ITC to the highest bidder unless ‘exceptional circumstances’ prevail.
However, although the ITC will allocate licences to all TV channels, it is intended as a ‘light touch’ body, not involved in detailed programming, but with wider powers to enforce ownership rules than the IBA.
In the event of two or more applicants for the same franchise, both parties will be able to submit higher bids.
The Home Secretary may, however, refuse to grant a franchise if he suspects the funding arrangements, or feels ‘it would not be in the public interest for the licence to be awarded’.
Channel 4 will be allowed to continue its current remit, ensuring a range of minority-interest programmes and keeping its ‘distinctive character.’
Appointments to the ruling body will be made by the ITC, and will require government approval.
Channel 4 will also sell its own advertising, but will have a financial safety net under Channel 3 if its revenue falls below 14 per cent of independent terrestrial TV revenue.
The bill also refers to a new channel, to be known as channel 5.
Again it says licences will be allocated by competitive tender, as for Channel 3, but as yet it is unlikely Channel 5 will be broadcast nationwide.
The bill also lays down provision for detailed news coverage by both Channels 3 and 5.
It says ‘the commission shall, in the case of any nominated news provider, review the performance of that body as a nominated news provider’, and says that if the commission is not satisfied with the news coverage other suppliers should be found.
This is likely to mean ITN will face competition for the first time.
The bill also provides safeguards for quality programming.
Not only will this be considered in the initial bids for franchises, but there will be statutory duties to show both educational and regional programmes.
At least 25 per cent of original programmes will now come from independent companies according to statute, with a certain proportion of European origin.
Part three of the bill examines major changes to radio services, first outlined in the 1986 green paper.
Most significant of these is the creation of a new Radio Authority of Independent Radio Services, which will be able to allocate three new national radio licences by competitive tender.
In the next three years, 300 more local radio stations will be able to set up — but franchise applicants must cater for local tastes and ‘broaden the range of programmes available’.
National stations will also be encouraged to cater to local tastes where ‘practicable’, and radio broadcasters failing to answer the remit will be liable to fines by the Radio Authority.
Both the ITC and the Radio Authority are to enforce rules ensuring media ownership is not concentrated in a few hands.
No organsisation outside Europe will be able to bid.
The bill also says the Broadcasting Standards Council will draw up a code ‘giving guidance’ on violence, sex and ‘standards of taste and decency’.
The code will not be binding, but broadcasters will be asked to ‘reflect the general effect’ relevant to the programmes in question.
As well as being responsible for all viewers' and listeners' complaints, the council will also monitor programmes from outside the United Kingdom which can be received here, ‘to ascertain how violence and sexual conduct are portrayed’.
In addition, the bill also extends to other bidders the traditional competition between the BBC and ITV for screening certain events; while party political broadcasts will have to be shown on Channels 3,4, and 5.
ASMALL bronze statue entered for a sale of garden furniture because its elderly owners wanted to ‘clear up the garden’ fetched a record £6.8 million at Sotheby's yesterday, writes Joanna Coles.
The Dancing Faun (above), by the Dutch sculptor Adrien de Vries, lay at the bottom of the couple's garden in West Sussex for 35 years turning green.
Depicting a muscular young man, naked and balancing on his left leg, it is thought to be more than 370 years old and the most significant example of Renaissance sculpture to come up for auction.
It is the first time a sculpture from the period has fetched such a sum.
Inspired by the Uffizi faun in Florence, the statue was originally entered for auction in a sale of outdoor furniture in West Sussex.
It was spotted by Sotheby's head of European Arts Department, Miss Elizabeth Wilson (pictured with the auctioneer Mr George Hughes-Hartman).
Miss Wilson, who has worked for the auctioneers for 25 years, suspected it was worth more than its modest £1,200 estimate.
She removed the statue to London where it was identified.
‘We are absolutely thrilled,’ she said last night.
‘It is an absolute masterpiece and it is wonderful to do justice to an early master.
‘This is a once in a lifetime find.
I knew as soon as I saw it in the garden sale catalogue, it was unmistakeable.’
She added that the faun's condition was good although ‘it has been outside for 35 years and is a bit green.’
Last night, Mr Cyril Humphris, a dealer, who fought several last-minute telephone bids to secure the statue for an anonymous client, said he was delighted.
‘In my 35 years of dealing this is the greatest sculpture that has ever come on to the market,’ he said.
‘Adrien de Vries is now considered to be the greatest sculptor of his time and his work has a timeless quality.’
Standing a mere 30 inches, the faun amazed Sotheby's and dealers by far exceeding its £1-£1,500,000 estimate.
Its height suggests that it was unlikely to have been intended as a garden sculpture.
Indeed, highly finished details and the gentle lines of the face coupled with the oval base suggest it was designed as a cabinet piece.
The couple who sold the statue have asked to remain anonymous.
PHOTOGRAPH: GRAHAM TURNER
Wee Wee Free who started an almighty row.
By David Sharrock
THE Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay of Clashfern, has been strangely at odds with the law during this year.
Firstly, having broken the rules of the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland by attending Catholic mass, he found himself suspended and denied the sacraments.
For a man with many God-fearing years with the Wee Wee Frees, the decision to leave must have been difficult.
But it was perhaps nothing compared with the hostility he faced over his plans to reform the legal profession.
Scarcely known in the south until Mrs Thatcher appointed him Lord Chancellor in 1987, he was the outsider with a brief to sweep away restrictive practices.
The roasting he received during a marathon debate in the House of Lords in April, with the criticism emanating from all quarters, reached epic proportions.
The late Lord Elwyn Jones remembered the days of Nazi Germany.
According to Lord Lane, the Lord Chief Justice: ‘Oppression doesn't stand on the doorstep with a toothbrush moustache and swastika armband, it creeps in insidiously.’
As well as facing overt pressure from the Bar and prominent judges, Lord Mackay was opposed in the initial stages by leading Tory backbenchers, and the Attorney-General, Sir Patrick Mayhew.
But the white paper, published in July after five months of lobbying, still amounted to the most radical shake-up of the legal profession this century.
In May, more than 100 senior judges castigated his plans as a serious threat to the quality of justice.
Their response to the Lord Chancellor's green papers, sent to him by the Judges' Council, broke a long-standing convention that the judges made no comment as a group on proposed changes in the law.
Lord Mackay accused critics of ‘throwing down their own stones’ in their anxiety to find concealed horrors under them.
Changes to make civil litigation cheaper and quicker Barristers' rights go in strategic reform.
By Clare Dyer Legal Correspondent
THE BILL to reform the legal profession and abolish barristers' monopoly rights in the higher courts will pave the way for solicitors to appear in any court, up to the House of Lords.
Lord Mackay, the Lord Chancellor, described the Courts and Legal Services Bill, which was published yesterday, as a ‘vital part of the government's overall strategy to improve the administration of justice’.
The bill also incorporates proposals from the Lord Chancellor's Civil Justice Review, which recommended an overhaul of civil court procedure to speed up and simplify cases and make litigation cheaper.
The central plank of the proposals is to give the county court the power to deal with a substantial numbers of cases, particularly injury cases, reserving the High Court for complex and specialist cases.
The county court will be able to grant all the remedies now available in the High Court.
The bill's most contentious provision, which has polarised the profession's two branches, sets up a framework for solicitors to appear in the higher courts, now the barrister's preserve.
Rules are to be drawn up by the Law Society, subject to approval by the Lord Chancellor and four senior judges.
Lord Mackay conceded that the judges should have a say in approving the rules for solicitors advocates after his original, more radical, green paper proposals drew unprecedented public criticism from the judiciary.
Solicitors feared the judges' veto might result in rules limiting their new rights, but the bill lays down a tight framework which will restrict the room for manoeuvre.
In approving the rules, the Lord Chancellor and the judges will have to take advice from a new lay-dominated Advisory Committee on Legal Education and Conduct, chaired by a senior judge.
The other members will be: two barristers, two solicitors, two law teachers and eight lay members.
Solicitors who gain rights to appear in the High Court will be eligible for High Court judgeships, as will circuit judges who were formerly solicitors.
The bill will also remove the statutory ban which prevents lawyers taking cases on a ‘no-win, no-fee’ basis.
Lawyers will not be able to take an American-style slice of the damages if successful, but they will be able to ask for an extra percentage on top of their normal costs, with a maximum to be fixed by the Lord Chancellor.
Banks, building societies, and insurance companies will be allowed to offer homebuyers a ‘one-stop’ service including conveyancing, subject to safeguards against unfair competition and conflicts of interest.
The Lord Chancellor originally intended that lenders should be self-regulating, but since publishing the white paper he has decided to set up a new Authorised Conveyancing Practitioners' Board, with consumer representatives, to police lenders offering conveyancing services.
A conveyancing appeals tribunal will be set up to hear appeals against the decisions of the board.
Also new is the provision for a Conveyancing Ombudsman to investigate complaints against lenders doing conveyancing.
The bill also creates a Legal Services Ombudsman to oversee complaints procedures against solicitors and barristers.
The ombudsman will have power to recommend that a lawyer or professional body pay compensation, but not to compel payment.
The Law Society will have powers to suspend a solicitor convicted of a serious crime from practice before taking disciplinary proceedings, and to intervene in the practices of solicitors who are incapacitated or have abandoned their practices.
Solicitors will lose their monopoly on applying for grants of probate to deal with wills.
Banks, building societies and insurance companies will be able to apply for probate if they have a proper complaints handling scheme.
The bill envisages that non-lawyers belonging to professional bodies may be given rights in future to appear in court and conduct litigation in some types of cases.
Magistrates will be given the same immunity from claims for costs or damages over their actions in court as judges now enjoy.
Solicitors will have the same immunity as barristers from legal actions over the way they conduct cases in court.
Judges will have powers to fine litigants for failing to turn up at court hearings.
The Lord Chancellor will be given power to make rules allowing magistrates to disallow a solicitor's costs or order him to pay costs if he fails to act reasonably competently or expeditiously.
The bill also allows the Lord Chancellor to make rules restricting the present automatic right of appeal to the Court of Appeal in some types of case.
Lord Donaldson, Master of the Rolls, has suggested that family cases should require leave of the court before an appeal could be launched.
A spokesman for the Lord Chancellor's Department said there would be wide consultation before any restrictions on the right of appeal.
The statutory ban on solicitors entering into partnership with other professionals, such as accountants, is to be lifted.
But the Law Society and the Bar are free to retain professional rules which prevent barristers and solicitors from practising in partnership with each other or with other professionals.
Banned video ‘imagines desire in St Theresa's subconscious’.
By Nicholas de Jongh Arts Correspondent
VISIONS of Ecstasy, the 20-minute video in which St Theresa of Avila imagines herself touching Christ, neither reviled Jesus nor cast aspersions on him, the Board of Film Censors heard yesterday.
Mr Geoffrey Robertson, QC, submitted that the scenes which had caused the board to ban the video were to be seen as ‘manifestations of a woman's subconsciousness’.
Mr Robertson told the second and final day of a hearing by the board's video appeal committee that St Theresa was portrayed in mystical ecstasy — using pain to place herself at the mercy of her subconscious and thereby contemplate Jesus on the Cross.
A second, ‘more menacing’ image rendered in black symbolised her carnal instincts in the guise of another woman.
The scene dealing with her adoration of Christ went no further than ‘a few motions of the lips’— St Theresa's moment of ecstasy was rendered by the image of Christ's hand closing over hers.
Earlier, Mr Richard du Cann, QC, for the British Board of Film Classification, defined blasphemy as an intention to outrage ‘because of the contemptuous tone, style and spirit of the material’.
The committee's judgment will be given later.
Women face ‘three times’ HIV sex risk.
By Nigel Williams
WOMEN are three times more likely than men to contract HIV through sex with an infected partner, a study claimed yesterday.
Men having intercourse once a day with an infected woman would become HIV-positive after an average of 33 months.
But women having sex once a day with an HIV-infected man would on average become infected within a year, the study found.
The study, based on thousands of cases in Britain and the US, was carried out by the Aids-prevention charity, Lifeshield Foundation.
But the charity stresses that infection can occur on first contact with an infected partner or needle.
The results also show that for couples with one infected partner and having sex three times daily, the woman is on average likely to become infected within four months, and the man within a year.
However, receptive anal intercourse is shown to be the riskiest sexual behaviour.
Once-a-day activity with an infected person leads to infection on average within six weeks.
Drug-users sharing needles contaminated with HIV are likely to be infected within less than five years if they inject once a week, and within three months if injecting 20 times a week.
Ms Jenny Wilson, a trustee of the charity, said research has shown that men have modified their sexual behaviour towards each other, but few towards women.
‘Women should not be complacent,’ she said.
The study also warns: ‘If you are starting a new sexual relationship, we estimate the chances that your partner is HIV-positive at 1-in-300.
‘If you share a needle when you inject drugs, the chances of the needle being infected are 1-in-eight.
‘If you are a health-care professional who gives injections, your chances of injecting an infected person are about 1-in-500.’
British firm buys rights to sell pictures from Russian spy satellites.
By Nigel Williams Science Correspondent
WARNINGS about traffic jams building up on Britain's motorways may soon come courtesy of Soviet spy satellites, following a deal struck yesterday.
For at a conference in London, Russian space scientists awarded a British company the first foreign franchise to sell pictures from their most powerful orbiting cameras.
The conference, Earth Mission 2000, reflects a shift in emphasis in Russian space policy back to Earth; and the deal with the British company Sigma Products is the latest attempt to capitalise on their space programme — the world's biggest.
‘The space station Mir is available to rent,’ said a Soviet embassy spokesman.
Potential British users of the satellite photographs are port authorities, offshore oil and gas operators, mining concerns, agriculturists and transport authorities.
Dr David Baker, managing director of Sigma Projects, said the Russian pictures are the best available, with resolution down to 5-10 metres, or better with computer enhancement.
He added: ‘The best pictures…from the US Landsat system have an average resolution of 30 metres, while those from the competitive French system called Spot have a resolution of 10-20 metres.’
Nowadays, the Russians will also take commissions.
‘Satellites can be programmed to take pictures at the customer's request,’ Dr Baker explained.
But ‘photographs of the Soviet Union will not be for sale,’ he said.
Lithuania defiantly votes to cut the party down to size.
By John Rettie in Moscow
THE parliament of Lithuania yesterday followed eastern Europe in abandoning the political supremacy of the Communist Party in favour of a multi-party system in what conservative Russian Communists will see as a brazen act of defiance.
By 243 votes to one, the Lithuanian Supreme Soviet deleted a clause in Article 6 of the Baltic republic's constitution describing the party as the ‘leading and guiding force of Soviet society’.
This was substituted by a new clause which stated that ‘parties, mass organisations and mass movements are set up under a procedure established by legislation, and function within the framework of the constitution and law’ of the republic.
Along this trail, blazed by Lithuania, others will also tread.
The next is almost certain to be its fellow Baltic republic of Estonia, whose Communist Party is determined to follow suit, according to its ideology secretary, Mr Mikk Titma.
In an interview with the Tallinn weekly Maaleht, he said the Estonian Party would do this even though it ‘will obviously find itself in conflict with certain forces in the Soviet Communist Party’.
Reports from Tallinn yesterday said that the local party's central committee had approved the measure, which will be brought before the Estonian parliament.
There is also strong pressure for the same action in Armenia, where thousands of angry demonstrators surrounded the Supreme Soviet in Yerevan all night on Monday, because they had refused to abolish the party's leading role in the republic.
However, in Lithuania the principle has been established.
According to Audrjus Siaurusevicius, a journalist in the capital, Vilnius, the entire party leadership voted for the change.
Many of the 39 abstentions were representatives of the Russian and Polish minorities.
Parliament will soon put flesh on the bones of the principle by drafting a law on such practical matters as the registration of parties and the conditions under which they operate.
In fact, a number of political parties and movements have been operating in Lithuania for some time, as in Estonia and Latvia; the constitutional change merely recognises the existing situation.
But, as Mr Titma told Maaleht in Estonia, ‘the political weight of this question is immense, and it will make a radical difference in legal terms’.
It could also radically affect relations with Moscow, where the question of the party's leading role is also a hot potato.
A month ago, the all-Union Supreme Soviet voted against discussing the issue by only the narrowest of margins.
Dr Andrei Sakharov and other leading radicals have called for a two-hour general strike on Monday to put pressure on the Congress of People's Deputies, the country's supreme legislative body.
The strike demand has been totally ignored by the Soviet media, although posters and leaflets about it have been widely distributed through voters' clubs and associations, and other informal groups.
The abrogation of article 6 was also a key demand of striking miners in the Arctic coalfields.
The Lithuanians are to make an even more serious challenge to Moscow at a special republican party congress later this month, which is expected to restore its pre-war independence from the Soviet Communist Party.
Mr Siaurusevicius said that this might split the Lithuanian Party, with the majority approving the proposal, and a minority remaining members of the All-Union Party.
‘But if the Lithuanian Party doesn't move with public opinion, it will soon cease to exist here.’
Can Father keep the family together, page 23
Transplants from animals ‘near’.
By Angella Johnson
DOCTORS hope to announce an experiment next month that could lead to the use of animal organs for human transplants within the next five years.
Dr Tim Higenbottam, a chest consultant at Papworth hospital, Cambridge, said yesterday it might soon be possible to transplant heart, kidney, liver, and lungs from one animal species to another.
Research groups in Europe and the US have been concentrating on altering the genetic structure of certain animals to make their organs more acceptable to the human body.
Dr Higenbottam, who is attending a two-day symposium of the British Thoracic Society in London, said: ‘There is only a finite number of human organs available because we have to wait for someone to die.
At least one-third of patients on the waiting list die each year because of this shortage.
‘However, it is recognised that, even with a totally effective referral system for donation of organs following death, there will not be sufficient organs for the people needing life-saving transplants.
So we will have to start preparing people for the day when animals will be widely used.’
Scientist were considering five different methods of research.
Dr Higenbottam suggested that because of their size pigs and cows would be ideal.
There were no plans to take organs from primates but it was likely that certain species would be genetically engineered to be used specifically for human transplant.
Mechanisms already existed to oversee ethical questions.
‘All I am trying to do now is prepare people for the breakthrough by introducing the concept and start discussions on how we address any problems which may result.’
Cows and pigs are already widely used for valve replacement in heart operations and in the production of insulin for diabetic conditions.
Weekend Guardian Tomorrow With events in Eastern Europe throwing much of contemporary political ideology into turmoil, the French philosopher Andre Gorz — whom Le Monde calls ‘one of the most important thinkers of our time’— blends the ideas of the Greens and of the uprisings in East Germany and Czechoslovakia to map out a ‘third way’ politics for the 21st century, in defiance of socialism and capitalism.
Plus…the security operation behind the Christmas shopfronts on Oxford Street, Prue Leith on Christmas turkeys, new evidence on the massacre of six Jesuit priests in San Salvador and rock ‘n’ roll East German style..
Wets squabble in wake of Meyer Points of Order.
By Ian Aitken
IT is difficult to tell whether Tuesday's leadership ballot in the Conservative Party has caused bad blood among the Thatcherites; the Downing Street bunker is too well insulated for any sounds of strife to be audible outside.
Not so among the Tory wets, however, who are now falling out noisily with each other over their role in the Meyer saga.
To the visible delight of Tory rightwingers, those who refused to vote for Mrs T are loudly accusing those who didn't of cowardice, or sycophancy, or both.
Those who didn't are responding by pointing out that some of those who did ought to have stood as candidates if they wanted a real revolt.
At least one exceedingly wet Old Etonian baronet (oh, all right then: Sir George Young) has received a rude note from another even wetter Old Etonian baronet (yes, you're right: Sir Ian Gilmour) deploring his decision to vote for Mrs Thatcher.
Sir Ian was one of those who considered putting himself forward as a candidate, but didn't when Sir Anthony Meyer declared himself.
Sir George didn't vote for Sir Anthony because he couldn't take him seriously.
Others followed, but for different reasons.
Among them was Jonathan (no relation) Aitken, who is hostile to the European Community and may well have preferred Mrs Thatcher's approach to Sir Anthony's Euro-fanaticism.
Other's have considerably more convoluted explanations for voting for Mrs Thatcher.
Some take the profoundly defeatist view that the kicking and screaming which would accompany a successful revolt would do even more damage than sticking with the lady.
Others claim they want to fine-tune the timing the real challenge, so as to enhance the prospects of Chris Patten as an eventual leader.
It is all deeply confusing to those accustomed to reporting leadership contests in the Labour Party.
Socialists stab each other in the chest in broad daylight.
IAN Gow, the Conservative member for Eastbourne, is famed for three things: a doglike devotion to the Prime Minister, a deadpan sense of humour, and his quixotic resignation as housing minister because he disapproved of the Anglo-Irish Agreement.
He has not hitherto displayed an compendious knowledge of 19th Century philosophy.
Not until Wednesday, that is, when his speech on the privatisation of government property services was interrupted by Labour's Tam Dalyell, another Old Etonian baronet.
Black Tam delphicly reminded Mr Gow that John Stuart Mill had coined the phrase ‘the deep slumber of a decided opinion’.
Scarcely pausing for breath, Mr Gow declared that he would quote some Mill back at Mr Dalyell.
And he proceeded to do so, off the top of his head at considerable length, to the admiration of all present.
The passage, however, included a bit about small men being unable to accomplish great things.
This caused Sir Giles Shaw, the diminutive member for Pudsey, to rise indignantly to his full five feet or so.
Mr Gow made it clear that he was not referring to small men in any literal sense.
THE Yorkshire Post, which should know, says Glenda Jackson is seriously considering the offer of a nomination to stand for selection as Labour candidate in Leeds East in succession to Denis Healey.
The Oscar-winning actress told the YP: ‘To follow Denis Healey's act you would need to be a genius.’
Unabashed by this thought, she adds that she is thinking seriously about it, and is prepared to meet party officials to discuss it.
Andrew Faulds may have a co-star yet.
Certainly the advent of MP-TV provides a strong argument for choosing actors as members of Parliament.
The only difficulty is that thespians are not, on the whole, accustomed to making up their own lines.
Mr Faulds is better known for the way he says things (ie very loudly indeed) than for what he says.
FURTHER intelligence about the amazing Mr Humphrey Berkeley, who left the Conservative Party after bequeathing it an elective system for choosing its leaders, joined Labour, then moved on to the SDP, only to resign from it, too.
He is now thought to have rejoined the Labour Party, and to have composed an ‘open letter’ to Neil Kinnock hinting that he should be helped to find a suitable constituency.
Conservative Party next stop?
More choice for viewers — at a price.
By Georgina Henry
WALL to wall Dallas?
Or something, at last, to watch on Saturday nights?
Around such alternatives have views polarised in the heated debate over what the bill means for viewers.
There now is, and will be more, choice of channels for those investing in satellite dishes: already four channels of Sky TV, plus MTV, Screensport, Lifestyle and the Children's Channel.
In March, those prepared to buy a second dish will be able to receive five channels of British Satellite Broadcasting.
Satellite TV has been able to offer dedicated viewing which the existing channels cannot: 24-hour news from Sky News, for example, two sports channels, and now comprehensive coverage of the House of Commons.
But as a Which? report this week revealed, those with satellite TV still mostly watch BBC and ITV.
They tune into satellite for the extra choice, not the quality of programmes.
The effect of the bill on the existing channels is therefore of greatest concern.
The Government argues there will still be three channels — BBC1, BBC2 and Channel 4 — carrying on as before, and charged with providing public service broadcasting.
Change in ITV will not come overnight: ITV franchises still have three more years to run under contracts requiring them to offer factual programmes in peak hours, and a host of other public service obligations.
But ITV is already reshaping its schedules to build its peak-time ratings: investment in children's programmes and single documentaries has been cut.
After 1993, when these obligations and constraints are lifted, and competition from a new commercial channel, Channel 5, begins, the trend will be accelerated.
Auctioning franchises will mean less money for programmes, and programmes that are expensive but attract lower audiences will be squeezed; more light entertainment, sport and bought-in programmes are likely.
This is why the Campaign for Quality Television is calling for the money bid in the auction to go into programmes, rather than to the Treasury.
A key question is which of the existing ITV companies will win back their contracts — and what happens to their programmes if they don't?
By then, all the companies will have divided their businesses into separate profit centres.
So if, for example, Granada loses its franchise, it could fall back on its programme-making and its library to provide a business.
Coronation Street's 20 million viewers would, for instance, be unlikely to be deprived — but they may need a satellite dish if Granada sold the show to BSB.
Current affairs programmes will have a tougher time: if Thames wins back its franchise, it will probably continue to make This Week.
But without the obligation to show current affairs in peak time, it may be pushed into a less attractive slot.
Sports fans will notice a difference too.
The government's decision to scrap the ‘listed events’ provision, which gave the BBC and ITV the right to match the highest bid for events like Wimbledon or the FA cup final, will mean a scramble to obtain the rights.
Satellite TV will almost certainly be prepared to outbid the others in order to boost audiences.
Broadcast shake-up ‘threatens standards’.
By Georgina Henry Media Correspondent
THE Broadcasting Bill, which will radically reshape the face of commercial television and radio, was published yesterday amid criticism that standards would be threatened.
The Government said it would widen choice for viewers and listeners, safeguard quality programming and bring greater competition and efficiency.
The most disputed proposals in the bill — to cut the public service obligations of ITV and to auction ITV franchises to the highest bidder — were attacked by Mr Roy Hattersley, Labour's deputy leader, who said: ‘Television franchises are to be sold like second-hand motor cars.
Companies with cash to offer will be able to control television stations as long as they pay lip-service to the observance of minimum standards — standards which are wholly inadequate.’
Mr Richard Dunn, managing director of Thames Television and chairman of the ITV Association, said the auction was the ‘fatal flaw’ in the bill.
It should be amended ‘to allow the Independent Television Commission [the new regulatory body]to judge the quality of programmes and the size of the cash bid in tandem’.
Broadcasting unions and consumer groups said the bill spelt the end of public service broadcasting and promised pressure to get key points amended.
Advertisers said they were delighted to see many of their proposals reflected in the Government's approach.
Among the new provisions in the 167-clause bill is a government power of veto of members of the new Channel 4 Corporation, to be appointed by the Independent Television Commission.
Channel 4 last night declared its ‘unequivocal opposition’ to the proposal.
Sir Richard Attenborough, chairman of Channel 4, said it was ‘utterly improper that any government should have direct control over the appointment of who will run Channel 4’.
The bill includes proposals for a new television channel, three new national commercial radio channels and numerous local services.
The Government faces opposition from its backbenches on the question of quality.
Almost 60 Tories have signed two early day motions calling for quality to be as important as money in franchise allocation.
Mr David Mellor, the Home Office minister who will pilot the bill through Parliament, yesterday dismissed criticism.
‘It is the most absurd caricature to suggest that those with the biggest cheque book will get over the strengthened quality threshold,’ he said.
He defended the Government's decision that its rules on cross-media ownership should not apply to Mr Rupert Murdoch's Sky Television.
It was not for the Government to pull the plug on a venture which was running and had cost Mr Murdoch ‘vast amounts of money’.
Broadcasting market, page 10 Leader comment, page 22
Forum ups the ante as Czech PM quits.
By Ian Traynor in Prague
THE Czechoslovak opposition raised the stakes in the battle for power in the country last night after the resignation of the Prime Minister, Mr Ladislav Adamec.
Blaming Mr Adamec for sparking a ‘political crisis’ by his act, the Civic Forum opposition movement said the ruling but discredited Communist Party had to forfeit the prime ministership or the presidency.
The Forum reacted furiously to Mr Adamec's resignation, virtually accusing him of lying to the public.
A day of drama that also saw the expulsion from the Communist Party of Mr Milos Jakes, the former leader, and Mr Miroslav Stepan, until recently the Prague party chief, plunged the country's three-week old ‘peaceful revolution’ into great uncertainty.
Mr Jiri Dienstbier, the Forum spokesman, responded coolly to the appointment of the new Prime Minister, Mr Marian Calfa, and said that were the Communist Mr Calfa to remain in office the president would have to be a non-Communist.
‘At this moment he [Calfa]does not have the support of the Civic Forum,’ said Mr Dienstbier.
‘So far he has not had the opportunity to appear to us a flexible and strong politician.’
The opposition leader, Mr Vaclav Havel, made much the same point about the new Prime Minister by stating that he had failed to attract much attention over two years in government office.
Mr Calfa, aged 43, is a Slovak, as is President Gustav Husak, whose imminent departure is all but certain given his association with the Warsaw Pact invasion of the country in 1968.
With the existing ethnic balance between Czechs and Slovaks in senior positions, the new president has to be a Czech, thus ruling out Mr Alexander Dubcek, the leader of the Prague Spring of 1968, who is also a Slovak.
The obvious contender is Mr Havel, the Forum leader and the most popular man in the country.
Pressed last night on the issue, Mr Havel conceded that in the last resort he would accept the post as head of state.
‘If, God help us, the situation develops in such a way that the only service I could render my country would be to do it [accept the presidency], then I would do it,’ Mr Havel said.
As the country found itself on the brink of a constitutional crisis, Mr Havel said the best way to avert such a crisis would be for President Husak to quit and for a strong prime minister to assume his authority temporarily, as the constitution permits.
The Forum also revealed it was proposing Mr Jan Czarnogursky, the prominent Slovak lawyer and human rights activist who only last month under the old regime was put on trial, for the post of prime minister or first deputy prime minister.
In addition, the opposition demanded the foreign ministry and five other cabinet posts.
In tendering his resignation, Mr Adamec cited undue pressure from the opposition in the haggling this week over a new cabinet as the main reason.
The Forum rigorously denied this.
A government spokesman said that Mr Adamec's decision to quit was taken because of‘unacceptable demands’ from the Forum.
Mr Dienstbier retorted that this was nonsense.
Mr Adamec had asked the Forum for its proposals concerning the new government.
After receiving the proposals and before responding, Mr Adamec had gone on national television on Wednesday night to threaten to quit.
Mr Dienstbier accused Mr Adamec of stating untruths on television.
Concessions ease advocacy fears.
THE BILL'S concessions to the concerns of barristers and judges about extended rights of audience in the higher courts were welcomed yesterday by Mr Desmond FennellQC, chairman of the Bar.
He said on BBC Radio's The World at One that the Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay, ‘has listened to our comments, and he has recognised our expertise by giving the Bar the fast track’ on rights of advocacy.
On the same programme, Lord Mackay said he believed the bill was a full response to the protests he had received since he announced the proposed changes.
A key change was to ‘remove that part which the Bar told me implied undue interference by the Lord Chancellor, as a minister of the Crown, with the processes of justice.
‘Instead, I have given the Law Society the power to grant rights of audience in the higher courts, but subject to regulations relating to competence and conduct, which will require the approval of senior judges as well as myself.’
Mr Fennell did not believe the change would lead to people being represented in courts by a solicitor only.
‘It's rather fanciful to think you will be able to walk into a solicitor's office in Carlisle, engage one lawyer, then argue your case up to the highest court in the land.
It simply doesn't happen.’
The debate should not be distracted from the main issue of giving ordinary people easier access to the courts and making legal aid available to the 10 million people no longer eligible for it, he said.
The Law Society, representing 50,000 solicitors in England and Wales, saw the bill as an improvement on the original proposals.
Its president, Mr David Ward, said: ‘We have secured, first, a modern framework giving solicitors rights of audience and, second, stronger controls to protect home buyers if estate agents and big financial institutions provide conveyancing.’
Referring to barristers' opposition to the extension of rights of audience, he said Lord Mackay had withstood enormous pressures.
The Law Society would support his aim to ensure, by public demand, an end to unnecessary double-manning.
On conveyancing, Mr Ward said the Government had recognised the need for proper consumer protection, and had provided safeguards against conflicts of interest.
The Association of Independent Conveyancing Advisers said the bill's publication put the decision on the future of its members into Parliament's hands.
The state-funded National Consumer Council said: ‘If these legal reforms go through, ordinary people in England and Wales will stand a much better chance of getting real justice.’
Faulty roads catch out the taxpayer.
By David Hencke Westminster Correspondent
THE Department of Transport was severely criticised yesterday for failing to apply proper sanctions against contractors who have cost taxpayers £70 million through poor workmanship and inadequate supervision of nearly 130 roads and bridges built since 1970.
The National Audit Office, Parliament's financial watchdog, in a report published yesterday estimates that another £330 million has had to be paid out to cover ‘premature maintenance.’
This includes the cost of traffic congestions and inconvenience and delay for millions of motorists.
The auditors also discovered delays and large variations in the department's reporting procedures which are supposed to alert the ministry to problems.
Delays varied between six months and two years.
‘Widespread problems with concrete bridges had also not been identified through the defect reporting procedures.’
The auditors find fault with every stage of the ministry's work and call for a review of site research for road improvements after the cost of improving the A6 at Chapel-en-le-Frith, Derbyshire, had jumped from £17 million to £36 million when an embankment and retaining wall collapsed.
Widespread faults have also been found in the wet mix and concrete materials for roads.
Some £16 million was lost through cracks, rutting, and slippage on the A38 between Exeter and Plymouth, Devon, the A64 Malton, Yorkshire, by-pass, the A49 at Callow Hill, and the A17 Heckington, Lincolnshire, by-pass.
On concrete roads the abandonment of ministry research on water leaks coincided with substantial problems after water seeped into the joints.
Heavier traffic flows caused by lorries on bridges and roads also added to the ministry's problems.
Design difficulties, problems, chloride contamination, and inadequate waterproofing of materials have caused major problems for bridges — leaving the ministry with an £800 million repair bill over the next 15 years.
Chloride contamination — caused when de-icing salts seep into concrete coverings — has cut the notional life of bridges from 120 to 20 years.
The worst example is the A465 Taf Fawr bridge in south Wales, replaced after 18 years at a cost of £3 million.
The auditors save their most stringent criticism for poor workmanship and inadequate supervision by the ministry.
They call for a review of the procedures, noting no proper guidance on sanctions against contractors and that the ministry, the Scottish Office and the Welsh Office have all had problems ‘recovering any significant proportion of the costs of remedial work.’
In nine cases costing some £7 million the Department of Transport recovered only £200,000.
Out of 72 cases only 20 resulted in the ministry obtaining compensation or remedial work at no cost to themselves.
The report noted that over the past few years the government departments had introduced competitive fee bidding for the appointment of consulting engineers leading to lower fee rates.
MPs on the Commons Public Accounts Committee who will be examining the criticisms are to question the ministries on the report on January 24.
Quality Control of Road and Bridge Construction; Report by the Comptroller and Auditor General; HMSO £4.60.
Traffic congestion caused by ‘premature maintenance’ can cost millions but does not always get reported in time PHOTOGRAPH: MARTIN ARGLES
Bungles blamed for £400m bill.
By Michael Smith Transport Editor
POOR workmanship, inadequate supervision and slipshod design standards have led to the £400 million bill for extra repair and maintenance on roads and bridges.
The National Audit Office says that poor workmanship led to remedial work on 20 roads and 62 bridges while inadequate supervision accounted for problems on 14 roads and 33 bridges at a total cost of £70 million.
Some 7,800 cracks on the Leatherhead to Reigate section of the M25 were caused by poor workmanship, materials and specification.
But only 20 of the 72 cases of compensation claims outstanding against contractors and consulting engineers in 1988 resulted in payment to the Department of Transport.
The cost of essential repair work on the Severn Bridge has increased to around £70 million after cracks and faults were uncovered in the 23-year-old construction.
Inadequacies in the design contributed to a £10 million bill for replacement of bearings on the A19 Tees Viaduct and annual maintenance costs of £5 million are expected because of design defects on the M5/M6 link at Spaghetti Junction.
Routine checks by department inspectors also found 165 confirmed and a further 300 potential cases of alkali-silica reaction, commonly known as concrete cancer.
They estimate this will require work costing £3.9 million up to 1992.
Several bridges on the A38 Exeter to Plymouth road have been affected, including the Marsh Mills viaduct where the bill for replacement was estimated at £5 million in 1983.
Chloride contamination, which stems from de-icing salts seeping into concrete coverings, was discovered in 144 of 200 bridges selected at random by department inspectors and more than half of the difficulties stemmed from poor workmanship.
At the Angel Road rail bridge on the A406 the cost of remedial work is put at £1.2 million, partly because the department did not install water-proofing until 1983, about 15 years after the problems were identified.
The office warns that up to 4,250 of the 5,900 concrete bridges could be contaminated, which would require £800 million to be spent over the next 15 years.
It catalogues 17 roads with defective concrete, requiring £43 million of repair work, including a £3.7 million bill on the M25 for narrow joints between junctions 24 and 25.
The office also identified four cases where difficulties with the now banned wet mix will cost £16 million, including £11 million for parts of the A38.
Prince's plea fails to save statue.
THE Government yesterday refused to take action to prevent the loss to the nation of a statue said to be worth £7.6 million.
The Prince of Wales signed a petition this week on the back of a menu to keep the Three Graces, by the 19th century Italian sculptor Antonia Canova, in Britain.
Formerly at Woburn Abbey, it is due to be sold to the Getty Museum in California.
A six-month ban on its export expires on Tuesday.
The impromptu petition was apparently drawn up at a dinner given by the Society of Dilettanti and sent to the Arts Minister, Mr Richard Luce.
Yesterday Mr David Trippier, the Environment Minister, announced in a Commons written reply to Mr Neil Hamilton (C. Tatton) that Mr Chris Patten, the Environment Secretary, had ‘considered the question of the Three Graces very carefully following a request from the Office of Arts and Libraries for a view as to whether the statue was included in the listing of Woburn Abbey’.
On the evidence before him Mr Patten had decided not to take the listed building enforcement action needed.
Critics fear money will oust quality Georgina Henry reports on doubts over programme standards, public service obligations and controls on ownership.
THE main points of contention are: Franchise allocation for ITV (Channel 3) and Channel 5 ‘There must be a better way.’
The remark by Lord Thomson of Monifieth, then chairman-designate of the Independent Broadcasting Authority, as he emerged from the exacting process of awarding the franchises in the 1980/81 round, has come back to haunt ITV.
The Government argues that the old system, whereby Southern Television, to take the most dramatic example, was summarily axed in favour of the newcomer TVS, was arbitrary.
It says it wants a fairer system of awarding contracts and also seeks to ensure that the taxpayer, via the Treasury, gets a proper return for the use of a scarce resource.
But its better way, whereby once bidders pass a quality threshold franchises are awarded to the highest bid, has been almost universally condemned for putting money before quality of service, and as a ludicrous attempt to avoid exercising judgment over a vital decision.
ITV has accepted that competitive tendering is a proper way of allocating franchises, but argues that in no other area of business are judgments made without trade-offs between quality and price.
It is feared that the process will lead to overbidding by outsiders hungry to get into television, which will oust existing contractors intending to invest more money in a wider range of programmes and with a more realistic view of the cost of running a service.
It will favour companies with the deepest pockets, rather than those with television experience, the argument runs.
Advertisers agree with the ITV companies that an auction will take too much money out of programme making.
The concession that the proposed Independent Television Commission can reject the highest bid in ‘exceptional circumstances’ is seen as a recipe for protracted court challenges.
Regulatory authorities and programme requirements Bringing all commercial television services — ITV, Channel 5, cable and British Satellite Broadcasting — under a single authority has been welcomed, as has the establishment of a separate authority for radio.
The crucial difference between new and old is that publishing responsibility passes to the television and radio operators: the ITC and Radio Authority will not have the power to preview programmes or vet schedules.
Given the criticism directed at the often heavy-handed and discretionary approach of the IBA, most have supported the new ‘light touch’ regulatory structure.
There is concern, however, over the removal of many of the public service programming obligations formerly imposed on ITV.
The bill requires franchise holders to provide a reasonable proportion of high quality programmes and a diverse service to appeal to a wide variety of interests, and sets a performance bond to guarantee promises are kept.
It specifies regional programmes and high quality news and current affairs.
But there is no specific protection for religious, children's, documentaries, science or other minority programmes.
The commission will not be responsible for promoting a network: the extent to which companies form a network, particularly one that as at present subsidises the smaller contractors, is a matter for them.
Channel 4 Relief greeted the Government decision, announced in the spring, that Channel 4 had escaped privatisation after a battle fought on its behalf by Mr Douglas Hurd against the more vigorous free-marketeers in the cabinet committee on broadcasting.
It was inevitable that Channel 4 would be split from ITV, after sustained pressure from the advertising lobby anxious to see competition in the sale of air time.
But its remit to be distinctive has been endorsed, and its funding guaranteed by a financial safety-net set at 14 per cent of the net advertising revenue of all commercial terrestrial channels.
The decision to turn it into an independent corporation has been welcomed, although the government's power to veto members less so.
The main concern now is whether it can generate enough advertising revenue in a more competitive market to stave off programming and scheduling compromises to make it more popular and to build its audience.
It is hard to see how Channel 4 Daily, for example, the morning show at present heavily subsidised by TV-am, could ever pay its way.
Ownership Tough restrictions on cross-media ownership will prevent national newspaper owners holding more than a 20 per cent stake in television companies, with a similar limitation on cross interests between commercial televison, satellite television and national radio channels.
This does nothing, however, to restrict Mr Rupert Murdoch's ownership of five national newspapers and four channels of Sky Television since Sky is transmitted on a non-UK satellite frequency: a loophole the Government will come under pressure to close.
There is also opposition to the principle that companies can bid for more than one commercial television licence: the IBA has warned the government this will make management of the network between now and 1993 very difficult.
Companies in other EC countries can own franchises, if they pass the quality threshold, and takeovers will be allowed.
Channel 5 Everyone wants more choice, and Channel 5 has been driven by technological developments.
The Government's view is that the market will decide if it is viable.
But to begin with it will cover only 70 per cent of the country, excluding large chunks of the south coast where the cost of air time is highest and the pressure for competition greatest.
Little thought has gone into what kind of service it should provide.
For example, will start-up costs mean a diet of bought-in popular programming, or is it an opportunity to offer something entirely different?
Radio Deregulation will mean a dramatic increase in choice for listeners: the Government's view is that the market will decide if it is sustainable.
It points to the 540 ‘expressions of interest’ in the recently awarded incremental contracts as evidence of the desire for change.
BBC radio will face national competition for the first time with the establishment of up to three national channels.
Between 200 and 300 new commercial stations could come on air in the 1990s and intense competition for advertising revenue is inevitable.
Broadcasting Standards Council Broadcasters accept they have to live with the new watchdog.
But unease continues over the powers it will have to enforce its code.
Police threaten crackdown at start of round-table talks East Germans set deadline for poll.
By Anna Tomforde in East Berlin
EAST Germany last night took a big step towards early free elections against the background of growing instability and fresh appeals for calm.
A joint declaration by opposition groups and government parties issued after the country's first round-table talks said that free elections should be held by next May 6 at the latest.
The recommendation is subject to approval by parliament which is, however, likely to accept the proposal although only it can set the final date.
Free elections, which could result in the Communist Party being reduced to playing a junior role, are seen as the only realistic way forward to end East Germany's political and economic crisis.
A new electoral law is to be passed by the end of January.
Meanwhile, East Germans, outraged by disclosures of corruption among their former Communist leaders, continued their drive to uncover the scale of offences while the government called for a ‘security partnership’ between the people and state institutions to expose the extent of abuse.
‘If there is chaos, the process of renewal cannot be continued,’ Mr Wolfgang Meyer, the government spokesman, said.
It was yet another desperate appeal aimed at stopping East Germany from sliding into anarchy, reinforced yesterday by an ominous warning from the secret police that they could intervene: ‘The threshold to escalation is now only very low.’
Lieutenant-General Wolfgang Schwanitz, the head of the Stasi political police and secret service, renamed the Office for National Security, warned that attacks on his organisation could no longer be tolerated, and that order would be restored if necessary.
Asked whether a state of emergency was an option, he said: ‘That question has not yet arisen.’
Gen Schwanitz said that national security offices in Cottbus, Dresden, Suhl, and Rostock had to be closed after his staff were attacked by angry crowds.
Several of his staff had been injured in clashes with ‘justly indignant’ citizens and in Dresden 100 people stormed the local office of the security police on Monday night.
Reports from the provinces said that former members of the Stasi are playing an active part in the crusade for revenge.
‘It reminds me of the worst period in German history when members of certain institutions are held collectively responsible for what we now know was a misguided security doctrine,’ Gen Schwanitz said.
He had instructed his staff to stay calm and repel intruders with ‘physical force’.
They were under orders ‘not to fire aimed shots’, implying that warning shots would be permissible.
‘In the present situation, it would be enough if one individual lost his cool,’ Gen Schwanitz added.
The Stasi remains one of the most hated institutions in East Germany.
It employed an army of staff and volunteers who spied on their fellow citizens.
Gen Schwanitz's appeal, however, is unlikely to work because he was one of the deputies of Mr Erich Mielke, the now disgraced former minister for state security.
Gen Schwanitz conceded that he had made a ‘psychological mistake’ by ordering the shredding of Stasi files, which had prompted the attacks on police offices.
The appeal for calm, linked with the threat of a crackdown, followed similar warnings on Wednesday by the armed forces and the government.
‘We want transparency, but current developments could lead to unpredictable consequences for our people and this country,’ Gen Schwanitz said.
Meanwhile, at the round-table talks, chaired by the Protestant and Catholic churches, the seven opposition groups, including New Forum, yesterday demanded the immediate abolition of the Office for National Security.
The Communist SED, represented at the talks by Mr Wolfgang Berghofer, the mayor of Dresden, and Mr Gregor Gysi, a respected lawyer, has presented a position paper for today's emergency party congress in which the party accepts ‘full responsibility’ for the crisis in East Germany.
Kremlin agrees to German confederation, page 11
Labour says that bill will destroy public sector ethos of the health service Critics ‘trying to scare life out of patients'-Clarke Health bill.
Martin Linton.
THE Health Secretary, Mr Kenneth Clarke, denied in the Commons yesterday that his new NHS and Community Care Bill was a first step towards privatisation and accused his critics of trying to ‘scare the life’ out of patients.
Introducing a two-day debate on the bill, he said it was firmly based on the principle of the NHS as a great public service, free for the patients, regardless of means, and financed out of taxation.
The bill would give the service a ‘new lease of life’ and put it in good shape to provide an even better service by setting up a new system of financial management and creating new incentives to efficiency.
It would deal with wasteful prescribing and wide variations in performance to be found between one hospital and another, which could not be put down simply to lack of resources, he said.
In the best 10 per cent of hospitals only one operating theatre session in 77 had to be cancelled, but in the worst 10 per cent the figure was one in six, he said.
In the best hospitals they dealt with five patients per operating session, in the worst just over three.
Mr Clarke said that at present no one in the service had any particular incentive to reduce waiting lists.
For some consultants, a waiting list was a badge of status and district health authorities weren't too anxious to get rid of them because they were used by MPs to reinforce claims for more resources.
He said that ‘everybody accepts the need for better resources management in the health service.’
‘In the public service you must expect the clock to go somewhat slower than in any other organisation.
But sometimes in the health service people want to make the clock crawl round and contemplate years of discussion before implementing such obvious improvements as a new system of financial management.’
‘Most people in the health service suffer from the feeling there are far too many layers of authority above them and far too many constraints about what people can do when it comes to running their own unit better.
This bill will give much more autonomy to those people who are delivering the care to patients on the ground,’ he said.
The shadow Health Secretary, Mr Robin Cook, said Labour was fundamentally opposed to the principle of the bill and would vote against it because it would destroy the public sector ethos of the NHS and was designed to do so.
The bill claimed to be ‘putting the patient in the driving seat’, but it did not even allow patients to be consulted if a hospital decided to opt out of regional health authority control, he said.
It claimed it would ensure that money in the health service ‘followed the patient’, which Labour was not opposed to, but in fact the bill meant the patient would have to follow the money and the contracts.
It claimed patients would have more choice over which hospital they went to, but in fact they would have less because they would have to go to the hospital with which their district health authority had placed a contract, he said.
‘I do not want a health service of spot markets and predatory hospitals and product lines.
I want a health service run as a public service to meet the need for health care, not to cater for market demand.
The Liberal Democrat spokesman, Mr Charles Kennedy, quoted a letter from the Department of Health which admitted patients were in a weak position to make meaningful comparisons or to shop around, so the NHS could not always rely on competition to make sure that its internal and external markets worked effectively.
MPs knew the Health Secretary did not listen to the patients or the nurses and doctors, he said, but ‘at least we can seek reassurance in the fact that he doesn't pay a blind bit of notice to what his own department is saying either’.
Mr Nicholas Winterton (C. Macclesfield) announced that he would not be supporting the bill in Monday's vote because it was ‘severely flawed’.
The aim of making the NHS more cost-effective was laudable but the other reforms ‘may undermine the NHS as we know it’.
‘Nothing in way of bombing inquiry’.
By Alan Travis and Martin Linton
HOME Office minister John Patten yesterday opened the way to a possible full-scale official examination of the conviction of the Birmingham pub bombers.
Mr Patten, speaking at question time in the Commons, told Mr Anthony Beaumont-Dark (C. Selly Oak) that there was nothing to prevent the current investigation into the West Midlands Serious Crimes Squad looking into ‘any other matter…if there are grounds for suspicion’.
The MP had asked him whether the inquiry under the Assistant Chief Constable of West Yorkshire could be extended to the four members of the Serious Crimes Squad who were involved in preparing the case of the Birmingham pub bombing in 1974.
The inquiry is limited to events after 1986, but Mr Patten appeared to be saying that it was up to the head of the inquiry, under the oversight of the Police Complaints Authority, to decide whether to extend it.
DR John Gilbert, the rightwing Labour MP for Dudley East, was reselected by his constituency party last night, despite a strong challenge from a local councillor, Mr David Sparks, writes Paul Hoyland.
Announcing the result of the ballot after a general management committee meeting, the constituency secretary, Mrs Mary Whitehouse, said Dr Gilbert, who is 62 and a former defence minister, had polled 62 per cent of the votes cast.
Mr Sparks received 27 per cent and another councillor Mr Phil Wall, polled eight per cent.
THE Prime Minister told Mrs Ann Clwyd (Lab.
Cynon Valley) in a written reply yesterday that she has received 6,900 letters on Cambodia over the last month.
In a reply to Mr Keith Vaz (Lab.
Leicester E) she said there were no direct telephone line between 10 Downing Street and the head of government of any other country.
THE Commons rises for the Christmas recess on Thursday, December 21, the Leader of the Commons, Sir Geoffrey Howe, announced yesterday.
MPs will return on Monday, January 8.
The House of Lords also rises on December 21 but does not return until a week later, on January 15.
NEXT WEEK'S BUSINESS House of Commons — Monday: Welsh questions; National Health Service and Community Care Bill, second reading; debate on the 1990 EC Budget and on EC research and development.
Tuesday: Health questions; questions to the Prime Minister; debate on war crimes; Electricity Supply (Amendment)(Northern Ireland) Order; Ministerial and other salaries Order; opposed private business (still to be announced).
Wednesday: Environment questions; debates on mortgage costs and housing and on the Ethiopian famine; Education Reform (Northern Ireland) Order.
Thursday: Northern Ireland questions; questions to the Prime Minister; Debate on EC fisheries arrangements; Landlord and Tenant (Licensed Premises) Bill, second reading; Supply of Beer (Tied Estate) and (Loan Ties, Licensed Premises and Wholesale Prices) Orders; Friday: Backbench debates: Future of Socialism — Neil Hamilton (C. Tatton) House of Lords — Monday: Debates on EC transport infrastructure and on aid to Poland.
Tuesday: Criminal Justice (International Co-operation) Bill, second reading; Contracts (Applicable Law) Bill, second reading; Teachers' Pay and Conditions Act 1987 (Continuation) Order; Medicines (Intermediate Medicated Feeding Stuffs) Order; debate on the disbandment of the COI's photographic library.
Wednesday: Debates on changes in rural and suburban communities, on the state of museums and art galleries and on Chinese behaviour towards the Tibetans.
Thursday: Greenwich Hospital Bill, second reading; Northern Ireland Orders — Appropriation and Education Reform; Abortion (Amendment) Bill, second reading.
Friday: Not sitting.
TODAY House of Commons: Debate on misuse of drugs.
House of Lords: Not sitting.
Sunday trade counter attack.
By Martin Linton
LABOUR'S deputy leader, Mr Roy Hattersley, accused Government ministers of ‘palpable ambivalence’ about the enforcement of the Sunday trading laws since the European Court ruling against the DIY chain B&Q.
He asked Office minister David Mellor whether he still wished or instructed local authorities to enforce the law as it now stands.
But Mr Mellor replied said that ‘thank goodness in this free society’ it was not part of his job to decide whether prosecuting authorities should prosecute.
In this case it was a matter for local authorities.
Mr Paul Murphy (Lab Torfaen) asked the minister whether he would condemn B&Q for flouting the law and whether he welcomed the action of Torfaen district council in prosecuting them.
But Mr Mellor said he must leave it to the people of Torfaen to judge whether that was a proper matter.
‘All I can say is that the law is the law and its enforcement requires no commendation from me.’
Mr Ivor Stanbrook (C Orpington) said it was imperative the law should be applied and those encouraging breaches ought to be prosecuted for the common law offence of incitement to commit a crime.
But Mr Mellor said many local authorities found the restrictions imposed by the 1950 Shops Act outmoded and ‘rightly or wrongly have refused to enforce it.’
Programme obligations for independent television services.
SOURCE: Home Office.
Ulster van bomb wrecks shops near army HQ.
By David Hearst in Belfast
AT LEAST 20 people were injured, none seriously, when an IRA van bomb containing 500lb of explosives devastated a busy shopping street in the centre of Lisburn, Co Down yesterday.
Christmas shoppers were given 25 minutes to evacuate the area before the van exploded in Market Street only half a mile away from the headquarters of the British Army in Northern Ireland.
The town has always been a primary IRA target but this is the first time in many years that it has singled out the commercial centre.
The bomb exploded as police were trying to clear the area and most injuries were due to shock or cuts.
The IRA said later that businessmen could not escape ‘the reality of oppression in nationalist areas of Belfast’ and they called the Lisburn street a prestige economic target.
It was outside a clothing shop but the damage extended 400 yards either side.
Court bill ‘vital part of plan to improve justice’: Barristers' rights go in strategic reform.
By Clare Dyer Legal Correspondent
THE BILL to reform the legal profession and abolish barristers' monopoly rights in the higher courts will pave the way for solicitors to appear in any court, up to the House of Lords.
The Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay, described the Courts and Legal Services Bill, which was published yesterday, as a vital part of the Government's overall strategy to improve the administration of justice.
The bill also incorporates proposals from the Lord Chancellor's Civil Justice Review, which recommended an overhaul of civil court procedure to speed up and simplify cases and make litigation cheaper.
The central plank of the proposals is to give the county courts the power to deal with a substantial numbers of cases, particularly injury cases, reserving the High Court for complex and specialist cases.
The bill's most contentious provision, which has polarised the profession's two branches, sets up a framework for solicitors to appear in the higher courts, now the preserve of barristers.
Rules are to be drawn up by the Law Society, subject to approval by the Lord Chancellor and four senior judges.
Lord Mackay conceded that the judges should have a say after his original, more radical, green paper proposals drew unprecedented criticism.
Solicitors had feared the veto might limit their new rights, but the framework restricts the judges' room for manoeuvre.
In approving the rules, the Lord Chancellor and the judges will have to take advice from a new lay-dominated Advisory Committee on Legal Education and Conduct, chaired by a senior judge.
The other members will be two barristers, two solicitors, two law teachers and eight lay members.
Solicitors who gain rights to appear in the High Court will be eligible for High Court judgeships, as will circuit judges who were formerly solicitors.
The bill will also remove the statutory ban on lawyers taking cases on a ‘no-win, no-fee’ basis.
They will not be able to take an American-style percentage of the damages if successful, but will be able to ask for a slightly larger than normal fee.
Banks, building societies and insurance companies will be allowed to offer homebuyers a ‘one-stop’ service including conveyancing, subject to safeguards against unfair competition and conflicts of interest.
The Lord Chancellor originally intended that lenders should be self-regulating, but has now decided to set up a policing Authorised Conveyancing Practitioners' Board.
Also new is the provision for a Conveyancing Ombudsman to investigate complaints against lenders doing conveyancing.
The bill creates a Legal Services Ombudsman to oversee complaints against solicitors and barristers.
The ombudsman will have power to recommend that a lawyer or professional body pay compensation, but not to compel payment.
Solicitors will lose their monopoly on applying for grants of probate to deal with wills.
Banks, building societies and insurance companies will be able to apply for probate if they have a proper complaints handling scheme.
The bill envisages that non-lawyers belonging to professional bodies may be given rights to conduct litigation in some types of cases.
Magistrates will be given the same immunity over their actions in court as judges now enjoy.
The bill also allows the Lord Chancellor to restrict the automatic right of appeal to the Court of Appeal.
Lord Donaldson, the Master of the Rolls, has suggested that family cases should require leave of the court before an appeal.
IRA ‘exploit link’ to Birmingham 6.
By Paul Hoyland
SPECULATION linking the Birmingham Six and the inquiry into the West Midlands serious crime squad is being used as propaganda for the IRA, the force's Chief Constable, Mr Geoffrey Dear, claimed yesterday.
At a press conference confirming his promotion to regional inspector of constabulary from April 1, Mr Dear denied he was leaving at an inappropriate time.
The inquiry begun by him was now being conducted by West Yorkshire Police.
But as inspector of constabulary he would be responsible for its proper conduct.
The squad was disbanded in June after trials collapsed amid allegations that officers fabricated evidence.
Fifty-two were transferred to other duties.
Three have since been charged.
‘The implications of the serious crime squad problem are great, but are well under control,’ Mr Dear said.
Preoccupation with the squad was being used as a propaganda ramp for the IRA.
Reporters should distinguish between publicity and ‘hard news which clearly needs exploring vis-a-vis the Birmingham Six’.
He went on: ‘Every gratutitous headline that you put out is money into Noraid's collecting boxes in pubs here and on the east coast of America.
There is a lack of balance in some quarters.’
Mr Dear repeated that, although the six were interviewed by the squad, there was no link he could see, although he understood the well-placed concern —‘which must be highly confused now, given the way in which the pro-Provisional propaganda machine is running, fogging the issue’.
The inquiry into the squad's practices went back to 1984, but Mr Dear was confident that the events of 1974, when the Birmingham bombings took place, would be re-examined if new evidence was found: ‘If it was there…
I would be one of the first to say re-open it.’
The Birmingham case differed from the Guildford one, he said, with evidence over and above uncorroborated statements.
Beating of maid by princesses not as bad as painted, jury told.
ABARRISTER for two Arab princesses yesterday agreed that they had beaten their maid with a horse whip.
But ‘things were not as bad as they were painted’ in Mrs Laxmi Swami's damages action.
Mr Alistair MacDuff told a High Court jury that Princesses Faria and Simiya Al Sabah had meted out dreadful treatment to her on a 1983 visit to their Bayswater home in London.
Though they admitted a whole series of assaults over the previous three years, they disputed their frequency, he said in his closing speech.
Mrs Swami, who is in her 40s and lives in Kingsbury, north-west London, claims she was beaten almost daily by the two sisters of the Emir of Kuwait.
Mr MacDuff agreed that the jury should award fair damages to compensate her for what she had gone through.
But the two defendants (who were not in court) had in 1985 pleaded guilty to assault and received suspended sentences, fines and an order to pay compensation.
‘To that extent they have already been punished.’
Mr MacDuff asked jurors to ignore what they felt about the princesses' awful behaviour, and think about fair compensation.
He said he was not suggesting that Mrs Swami had tried deliberately to mislead the jury about the number of beatings.
She must have gone through a terrible period in her life; looking back, she genuinely believed it to be worse than it really was.
The hearing continues today.
Tactical talk in the trattoria After 4,000 years of turbulent rule, the prospect of a fortnight's foraging by English fans is barely worth a shrug to the Sardinians, says Erlend Clouston of the World Cup qualifying match preparations.
THE Bar Marius, on the corner of Viale Trento, is the magical delicatessen-cum-drinking den run by Mario Mariosardara, the 65-year-old president of the Cagliari supporters' club.
Walls are covered with grainy blow-ups of sleek-jawed Latin athletes.
The shelves bristle with Sardinian champagne, Ferrero Rocher chocolates, boxes of luxury Huntley and Palmer biscuits.
Beer is dispensed by a man with a bow tie.
How much of Bar Marius, and probably the man with the bow tie, will remain at the end of June is open to speculation.
Yesterday's announcement that England are to play their three World Cup qualifying round matches in Sardinia will take some time to sink in, but Mario marches towards his apotheosis with touching geniality.
‘Ropson good!
Linker good!’ he chuckles after the routine mentions of Albertosi and Domengini and introducing the life-size statue of Riva (43 caps, 35 goals,) which he keeps behind the cake counter.
‘Ooligans very drink.
But no violenza here!’
Mario's secret plan for a carefree summer seems to involve an extremely large banner saying English Supporters Welcome.
Despite the British media's gleeful acceptance of its role as Prophet of Destruction (there are two television crews and several war correspondents here), the average Cagliari businessman appears very relaxed about it all.
This is partly thanks to the free insurance provided by one of the World Cup sponsors and partly historical perspective.
Yes, all the trattoria owners in the Via Roma will be irritated by however many broken windows and cracked heads come their way.
But when you have a 4,000-year history of being ruled by Phoenicians, Carthaginians, Romans, Goths, Spaniards and British (1718), a fortnight's foraging by the bleached denim wing of the industrial proletariat is barely worth a shrug.
The man charged with keeping the foragers in check is Mr Carlo Porceddu, security chief for the local World Cup Organisation.
A lawyer, he lives in one of the swish apartment blocks which sprang out of the rubble left by the last act of licensed hooliganism to hit Cagliari, namely the second world war.
On his desk sits a soap packet-sized book labelled Il Nuove Codice Procedura Penale.
‘That,’ he says, tapping the blue hard-backed cover, ‘contains everything we need to handle the English.’
Basically, Mr Porceddu intends to jail every troublemaker in sight — a minimum of two days for offensive drunkenness, automatic detention until at least the first round is over for anything more serious.
Scotland Yard is lending Mr Porceddu 10 officers to help him to keep tabs on the 100 ooligans whose names have flashed up on Fifa's ticket computer.
Was the Heysel catastrophe an element in the security equation?
Mr Porceddu flexed his moustache.
‘Italians don't forget, but they don't seek revenge.
Anyway, Sardinian people aren't interested in this problem!’
The local World Cup representative is Andrea Arrica.
It has been his job to knock on the head any mutterings about this summer's circus, notably those emanating from the Partito Sardo D'Azione, the Sardinian nationalist party, which proclaims sarcastically that it thought Sardinia's days as a penal colony were long past.
Mr Arrica rubbishes this view because he comprehends the essential decency of all things English, a truth revealed to him in the form of a Burberry raincoat bought from George Best's Manchester boutique circa 1965.
‘Still magnifico,’ he sang, herding a squad of Fifa inspectors through the disconcertingly tall grass in the Sant' Elia stadium, ‘So warm, so dry, so English!’
Mr Arrica's proselytising has been impeccable.
The walls of Cagliari are bare of anti-English graffiti.
At the top end of the Via XXIV Maggio, a blue aerosol script waltzes along an adobi terrace: ‘We are Kaos — Ultras.’
Ultras is the menacing brand name adopted by all fractious Italian fans, but exactly who is getting at whom in this lazy Mediterranean alleyway remains unclear.
There are rumoured to be some hard men in town.
Their signature crops up here and there —‘Sconvols,’ meaning, roughly, head-cases.
But no one is too worried about them.
Sconvols are Sardinian and Sardinians are a calmer model of Italian, less fiery than Neapolitans, less classy than the Milanese.
‘They have a certain aloofness and reserve,’ D.H.
Lawrence wrote when in Cagliari 70 years ago.
This is one explanation for why there are still many tickets available for the matches in England's group.
Another is the Great Orange Riot of 1971 when an Italian team, playing Spain in Cagliari, but tactlessly, without any Cagliarian representatives, was chased off the pitch by Outspan-wielding Sconvols.
Result: no more internationals for the Sant' Elia and a frigidity on footballing relations between Ireland and the continent that lingers to this day.
The insult was particularly deep because the year before, Cagliari had won its first and only Italian championship.
Even today, it is impossible to debate the weather or the honey crop with the average Cagliaritano without the conversation drifting round to the campioni del settanta.
‘Ah!
Domengini!
Albertosi!
Riva!’
Lawrence put his money on the islanders: ‘In the end, the strange, sinister spirit of the place…will smash our mechanical oneness into smithereens.’
But he was writing from a world in which Riva only meant coastline and Best was something worn on Sundays.
David Lacey, page 20
Young ‘deception’ over Rover.
By David Hencke Westminster Correspondent
LORD Young, the former Trade Secretary, wrote to British Aerospace asking it to choose how to hide the £38 million ‘sweeteners’ from Parliament and the European Commission 48 hours before he announced the sale of Rover, confidential letters revealed yesterday.
The latest disclosures, a week after the Guardian published the National Audit Office's memorandum to MPs revealing the existence of the sweeteners, led to a third clash between Labour and the Prime Minister on the Government's involvement in what Labour called the ‘calculated deception of Parliament and the European Commission’.
Mrs Thatcher stonewalled her way through Question Time, repeatedly arguing that the Rover deal had been in the best interests of the taxpayer.
The correspondence, leaked to Labour's Trade spokesman, Mr Gordon Brown, discloses for the first time that Lord Young appeared to plan with Professor Roland Smith, chairman of British Aerospace, to hide the figures rather than simply leaving the information to be ‘scattered’ in obscure documents in the hope that Parliament would not notice it.
The letters reveal there is a private letter attached to the British Aerospace deal allowing the company to sell Rover without penalty within five years — although the published terms say the company would have to pay back £650 million.
The letters show Professor Smith wanted the Government to increase the ceiling on foreign holdings in BAe to 30 per cent— to boost the value of the company — and that Lord Young knew then tax concessions still to be agreed with the Inland Revenue on the deal could amount to nearer £65 million than the £25 million suggested to the commission.
Mr Brown last night wrote to Mrs Thatcher demanding she publish the final agreement on cash, assets and tax signed between the Government and BAe.
He asked that all the correspondence between the company and Lord Young during July 1988 be made available.
Mr Robert Sheldon, chairman of the Commons Public Accounts Committee, said yesterday he was seeking more documents from the Department of Trade after Monday's hearing when he cross-examined Sir Peter Gregson, the permanent secretary at the ministry.
Details of Lord Young's involvement emerge in an exchange of letters between him and Professor Smith on July 12, 1988 — two days before he made his announcement to the House of Lords of the Rover sale.
It shows Professor Smith's anger at Lord Young's apparent refusal then to agree to what later became known as the £38 million sweeteners — accusing him of altering terms to ‘British Aerospace's disadvantage’ and of putting forward points ‘which neither I nor my advisers can understand’.
Lord Young replies the same day, discussing in detail how to avoid parliamentary and commission scrutiny.
On the secret deal deferring payment for Rover until next March, Lord Young writes: ‘I can offer three possibilities, in ascending order of risk that the deferment will be picked up by the commission, in which case they might require repayment of the notional interest saved.
‘The possibilities are: Payment on 31 December 1988.
The payment would appear in your 1988 accounts, and in the Government's accounts for 1988/89, just as if it had been made in August.
‘Payment on 31 March 1989: The payment would still appear in the Government's accounts for 1988/89 but would appear in your 1989 accounts.
‘Payment on 31 August 1989.
The deferment would be apparent from both the Government's accounts and your own.
In addition, to avoid seriously misleading Parliament, when we table the revised estimate for the cash injection on the day of the statement, we cannot include the £150 million as a receipt due this year.
The omission is likely to be spotted by at least some members.’
He concludes: ‘I am content to take whichever of these options you prefer.’
In the event Lord Young backed down further and agreed to March 30, 1990.
The next paragraph says that not only did Lord Young cut the published penalty clause for BAe from £650 million to £400 million as disclosed in the National Audit Office memorandum, but offered ‘a private side-letter’ waiving the penalty ‘the text of which would be agreed with BAe in advance’.
On the £15 million acquisition costs to buy out the private Rover shareholders, Lord Young writes: ‘I have had further discussions with Commissioner Sutherland [Sir Leon Brittan's predecessor in charge of competition policy].
The latter has said that he could not necessarily turn a blind eye to this…especially if there were complaints from other parties; as you are well aware the commission have the power to seek repayment.
This underlines the need to avoid unnecessarily raising the profile of the issue.’
He goes on: ‘Since these costs…would have to be paid by a grant…and since a grant of above £10 million requires affirmative resolution [and thus debate]in the House, it seems there are two choices: to cap the BAe grant at £9.5 million; or set the ceiling at £13.5 million and for you to accept the greater risk of challenge and thus repayment being required.’
In the event £11 million was paid out — split into two payments to avoid Parliamentary scrutiny.
Lord Young felt less able to help increase foreign shareholding limits since the commission was investigating Rolls Royce's foreign shareholding arrangements.