

Benn learning fast at new school.
By John Rodda in Las Vegas
THE maturing of Nigel Benn is an appropriate tale for the season of the transformation scene.
Before he was knocked down and beaten — for the first time — by Michael Watson, he was a brash product of black anger, a ghetto-blaster of the ring whose pantomime craftsmanship was redeemed by the crunching power of both fists.
But Watson did both Benn and British boxing a service.
Reassessment followed that defeat and brought a new direction with new people and a contract of $2 million for four fights over the next two years.
Benn was eager to get the taste of American boxing before he met Watson and the urge to find new experience brought the break, sad but needed, from the trainer who had brought him through from his amateur days, Brian Lynch.
While Lynch had developed his punching power, Benn needed boxing lessons and the time-honoured way of getting them is in sparring.
Under Lynch that was not part of the regime, which is regarded as a curious omission in most gyms, and it did not work for Benn.
Since moving into a gymnasium in Florida and working with Vic Andreetti, a former British champion from the East End of London, Benn has taken on a new mantle.
Now he is just flattered by the label —‘the British Marvin Hagler’— which Bob Arum, the American promoter investing that $2 million, has tagged on him; previously he would have been angry that he himself had not invented it.
‘After a few days in the gym here I would wake up and hope that the sparring partners would not turn up.
It was hard and they hurt, but you soon learn to accept it and respect them as they do you.
All that tap, tap work in England was no good; there I was always the governor, now I'm learning all the time, nicking moves from everyone,’ he said.
Last weekend he despatched Jose Quinones, a shot fighter, in one round.
Next month he faces another man who has seen better days, Michael Olajade, a Nigerian born in Britain.
Olajade was going places until he was badly beaten by Michael Nunn, but he will provide Benn with fighting experience.
‘From now on my home is in England, but the business of boxing will be here,’ he said.
The Arum plan is for him to fight Iran Barkley in London in April, but that is dependent upon his dealing competently with Olajade and Barkley defeating Doug de Witt in Atlantic City the night Benn's contest takes place there.
Dutch plan for sitting room only.
THE Dutch plan to do away with standing room at national league grounds within the next 10 years.
As part of their attempt to rid themselves of a growing hooligan problem, the clubs agreed on Wednesday to begin converting their grounds into all-seat stadiums and to petition the government for grant aid.
‘We're going to do away with standing places, with a 10 per cent cut in the number each year over the next decade,’ a Dutch association official said yesterday.
There is only one all-seat stadium in the Netherlands — at Utrecht — and many grounds have extensive standing areas.
PSV Eindhoven's stadium, for example, has standing room for 12,000 supporters out of a capacity of 28,000.
Dutch football has been increasingly dogged by hooliganism over the past few years.
This season Ajax Amsterdam were banned from European competition for a year after fans hurled iron stakes on to the pitch and forced the abandonment of a Uefa Cup tie in September.
The following month 14 fans were injured when Feyenoord fans threw fragmentation bombs at Ajax supporters at a game in Amsterdam.
Japan wants to stage the World Cup in 2002.
The Japanese FA is to initiate a programme of stadium-building before the choice is made in seven years' time.
World Cup amnesty.
WORLD Cup organisers have granted an amnesty to players who received yellow cards for fouls and other offences during qualifying matches.
Hermann Neuberger, the chairman of the International Football Federation World Cup organising committee, said players who had been shown the yellow card once during qualifying games would not have to carry it over to the finals.
Players with two yellow cards would be able to sit out the subsequent one-match suspension during an international friendly before the 24-nation tournament, Neuberger added.
But he said that the amnesty would not cover players who had been shown the red card and sent off for serious offences during qualifying games.
They will have to sit out remaining match suspensions when the finals begin on June 8.
Fifa officials could not immediately say how many players would benefit from the yellow-card amnesty, but confirmed that at least three players would be suspended for one World Cup match after receiving red cards.
They were named as Romario of Brazil, Stanislav Griga of Czechoslovakia and Gheorghe Hagi of Romania.
Two other players, Abdul Razaq Ibrahim Albalooshi, of the United Arab Emirates, and Mehmed Bazdarevic, of Yugoslavia — who has a year's ban — could also be suspended for red-card offences if appeals were unsuccessful, the Fifa officials added.
Beardsley, Pearce and Adams are the three England players who received yellow cards during qualifying matches.
Ireland had six offenders: Whelan, Townsend, Aldridge, Stapleton, McCarthy and Houghton (two).
The amnesty is particularly good news for Houghton, who picked up his second yellow card of the qualifying tournament in Malta last month and feared that he could miss the opening game in Italy.
Now it seems likely that he will instead miss Ireland's next match, against England in Dublin on March 28.
Rickett rises from depths.
KATIE RICKETT, the surprise selection in Britain's team to play the United States in the Maureen Connolly Trophy match at Cardiff, was beaten 1-6, 7-6, 5-7 by Elly Hakami yesterday.
At one time Hakami was ranked 32nd in the world, and her 21-year-old opponent from Birmingham often looked out of her depth, especially in a 27-minute first set.
Rickett, to the surprise of the gallery, turned the match round by winning a marathon second set after leading 3-1 and trailing 3-4 before Hakami served for the match at 5-4.
She failed, only for Rickett to miss five set points in the 12th game.
PAGE
Japan doubles Van Rensburg's troubles.
By Martin James
CHRISTO VAN RENSBURG, one of the world's leading doubles players, went on court at the Albert Hall yesterday believing he would be competing for the last time in the official season-ending doubles championship.
But not of his own volition.
Next year the Nabisco Masters doubles changes its name to the ATP doubles finals.
It also changes venues, and that is where Van Rensburg thinks his problems could lie.
The event has been staged at the Royal Albert Hall for four years.
Next year it will move to either Japan or Australia.
‘As a South African I am not allowed to play in Japan,’ said Van Rensburg, who partners Paul Annacone.
‘I understand it's hard for the organisers because they have to go where they can find the biggest sponsor.
But South Africa is not going to change because of me.’
Van Rensburg and other South Africans on the tour are barred from playing in more than 20 countries.
However, late last night the organisers were still considering the Australian bid.
The South African-American pair are virtually out of contention for this year's title.
Yesterday they lost for the second time when they fell 6-7, 7-6, 6-3, 6-4 to Todd Witsken of the United States and Jorge Lozano of Mexico.
They now have only one round-robin group match left to make amends.
It was not a good day for the more established pairings.
The defending champions Jim Pugh and Rick Leach also lost their second successive round-robin group encounter and were left to play off for the minor placings.
In the early hours of yesterday morning they were beaten in four sets by Patrick McEnroe and Jim Grabb, and then some 13 hours later they fell 6-3, 7-6, 7-6 to the Australians Darren Cahill and Mark Kratzman, who as a result qualified for the semi-finals.
The Australians' red group counterparts, McEnroe and Grabb, also reached the last four when they brushed aside their fellow Americans Jim Courier and Pete Sampras 6-2, 6-3, 6-3.
Snooker Mountjoy deepens Thorne's gloom.
By Clive Everton
THE Everest World Matchplay Championship, restricted to the 12 players who earned most ranking points last season, began at the Brentwood International Centre yesterday with Doug Mountjoy trouncing Willie Thorne 9-2.
Thorne, the world No.9, admitted after a lacklustre display last night: ‘This has been the worst year of my life.’
Terry Griffiths beat Clive Thorburn 9-5, the first time he had beaten the Canadian in nine attempts.
The televised phase of the competition begins tomorrow with Steve Davis opening the defence of his title against the winner of today's match between Dean Reynolds and Tony Meo.
A repeat of the Stormseal UK final between Davis and Stephen Hendry is on the cards.
Gavin Lightman QC, the World Professional Billiards and Snooker Association's one-man disciplinary tribunal, announces his findings today on two charges of bringing the game into disrepute.
Alex Higgins brought a complaint against his former manager, Howard Kruger, and Higgins himself is the defendant in a charge arising from recent incidents at Stoke and Reading.
Rusch de Farges will take his chance on fast ground.
By Chris Hawkins
IF MARTIN Pipe has a Gold Cup horse in his yard this season it is probably Rusch de Farges and there will be plenty of interest in this exciting young horse when he reappears in tomorrow's A.F. Budge Gold Cup at Cheltenham.
Despite worries expressed by connections last weekend about the fast ground, a stable spokesperson confirmed yesterday that Rusch de Farges will run under top weight of 11st 10lb.
This means an all round rise of 4lb, with the original top weights, Barnbrook Again and Golden Freeze, coming out, both on account of the ground.
Rusch de Farges, an ex-French gelding, won two of his six races last season both in soft ground and put up his best effort when beaten three lengths by Barnbrook Again at levels in the Arlington Chase Final over two and a half miles at Cheltenham last January.
He has some improving to do if he is to develop into a genuine Gold Cup hope but being only a six-year-old and trained by the man who has turned the joke ‘the impossible we do at once, miracles take a little longer.’
into reality, he is quite likely to make the grade.
The dry weather continues to affect racing and Oliver Sherwood will not run Tonights The Night in the A.F. Budge Chase.
A decision on Cruising Altitude's participation in the Bula Hurdle will be made after the trainer has spoken to the jockeys at today's meeting.
Cruising Altitude was so impressive in beating Morley Street at Newbury that he has been backed down to 8-1 for the Champion.
A race betweeen him, Beech Road and Floyd in the Bula would have been particularly informative but of that trio only Floyd is a certain runner now.
At Cheltenham this afternoon the big race is the Final of the BMW Chase series.
Once again the ground has ruined what promised to be a good contest and only four of the 15 entries go to post.
Nicky Henderson's Wont Be Gone Long (2.20) has top weight but is not badly treated considering he beat Lockwood Prince by 15 lengths at Chepstow last May and meets him here on the same terms.
As he showed all his form on fast ground last season he will not be bothered by the going but he has to give 15lb to Bonnie Artist.
It is dangerous to oppose any of Arthur Stephenson's runners at the moment but Bonnie Artist, although he has won four in a row, has not beaten anything of real ability.
Stephenson also sends Durham Edition down for the Food Brokers Ferrero Rocher Handicap Chase but due to defections the weights go up 14lb and he is topweight with 11st 10lb.
Durham Edition ran a fair race to finish just under eight lengths fourth to Ghofar in the Hennessy and he must come into the reckoning, although the weight rise seems to give an advantage to Royal Cedar (2.55), who was originally 8lb out of the handicap.
Royal Cedar, trained by John McConnochie, who has taken him over from the now retired Mercy Rimell, is another who is perfectly at home on fast ground, winning here over three and a half miles and at Newbury this season.
On his reappearance run when ooking backward, he led until falling seven out in the race won by Seagram, who meets him on 2lb better terms now and is thus entitled to start favourite.
Doncaster has been similarly decimated and only seven go to the post in three races worth a total of £11,246.
Croghan Star (2.00) and On Tap (2.30) should prove too good for their solitary opponents, while Wigtown Boy (3.05) has only two to beat in the Red Alligator Handicap Chase.
Devon is always a happy hunting ground for Pipe, who has saddled twice as many winners as any other trainer in the last five years here.
He should score with Blake's Progress (12.45), Maintown (1.15) and North Lane (2.45) today.
After three winners yesterday, he is only seven short of his century, while Jonothan Lower maintained his strike rate on the Pipe horses with a Taunton double on The Leggett and Ambassador, giving him 21 winners from just 34 rides.
Worthless words from mumbling shamateurs The Keating Column.
By Frank Keating
SAVING the punchline till last, just about the best joke of a pretty unfunny decade comes in its dying days.
A suited smart alec, riding shotgun on rugby union's suddenly careering shamateur bandwagon, this week told a group of British international players that they should soon be able to charge £1,500 for a solitary interview.
The mind boggles.
I cannot remember us jabber of journos enjoying a joke more.
Press interviews with the rugger-buggers are almost a contradiction in terms — even the official, collective, post-match post-mortems after home internationals, down in the bowels of Twickenham or Cardiff, say.
These occasions are only for humorists who enjoy the captains' and coaches' mumbled no-comments, and pusillanimous platitudes from grown men.
OK, it might be a trifle unfair to cite such post-game bunfights.
But what about the one-on-one interview?
Any journalist will tell you that British rugby union players, with two or three beguiling exceptions, are hardest to get anything out of worth printing.
Few seem to have anything remotely interesting to offer on the philosophy, flavours, fads or fancies of their game.
Yet now they are told they can expect to pocket £1,500.
They'd better get their act together first.
Perhaps they are thinking of the soaraway end of the market?
Even more of a no-go area, I'm afraid.
Very few of those who write the terrible tabloids, let alone those who read them, are likely to have heard of these ‘internationally famous’ sportsmen, so I doubt if they'd make half of £1,500 even for such tales as Flanker Star Ate My Goolie During Scrum, by England's Ugliest Prop; or Sexy Secrets in the Showers, by Welsh Tea Lady.
What, anyway, makes British rugby players plan to price themselves at such a princely paypacket?
Just for one interview, dammit.
Like other fellow scribblers whose squiggles seriously abuse the very title ‘shorthand notebook’, I have nevertheless been generously given hours, sometimes even days, by sportsmen happy enough to rabbit on without so much as a penny piece being mentioned.
Start with the beginning of this decade if you like, when the one and only Muhammad Ali personally escorted me round every nook and cranny of his Deer Lake log-cabin home.
Not the slightest mention of money, either, for an interview in depth from, offhand, Gavaskar, Richards, Botham, Willis, Marshall, McEnroe, Connors or Borg — though the latter, I must admit, was expecting me to stay the day, yet by elevenses we agreed there was not much more to say to each other except ‘My game's in pretty good shape’.
Did Nicklaus ask for £1,500 for a chat?
No, he asks you to please stay for supper and we'll go on in the morning.
Did Lee Trevino say ‘How much?’
Of course not.
Nor anyone — not one — down the years, when I've approached such luminaries of the lore as, well, Ashe, Stewart, Prost, Platini, Charlton, Best (he even cooked me breakfast), Coe, Thompson, Cauthen, Francome…
This year alone — the sad one in which British rugby players are apparently rubbing their hands in greedy but pitful expectation — I've relished long, doubtless tedious (for them) but totally gratis and generous interviews with the likes of Scudamore (on his most precious mid-season afternoon off), Offiah, Gower, Gooch, Border, Simpson, Jacklin, Robson, the teenage millionaire Chang; and even Mansell took a day off to drive me round and round Silverstone.
So why is this international superstar of the scrummage, who I agree is a household name and all that (although he is known even in the next village as either Whatsit? or Thingymabob), suddenly being advised he has the (to coin a phrase) clout and muscle to alter the long-established formulas and ethics of sports journalism?
In other words, just who do these jokers and the jerks pulling their purse-strings think they are?
Oh dear, even before they open it, poor Twickenham's can of beans is beginning to pong something rotten.
The hilarity induced, however, should run and run.
Mason cuts a battered but defiant figure.
GARY MASON, booed, bruised and bloodied from his encounter with a ‘hand-picked’ opponent, will allow Terry Lawless to choose his next bout.
But he says he would welcome another Mark Wills or a match with Derek Williams.
Mason needed an X-ray on his right hand and repairs around both eyes after being taken the full distance by Wills on Wednesday night, but his heart and ambition remain undamaged.
He still wants to fight Mike Tyson in about 18 months.
And he was encouraged by the way he came through the first 10-round contest of his 33-fight unbeaten career.
‘People didn't believe I could go beyond seven or eight rounds without blowing out,’ said Mason.
‘I wasn't 100 per cent sure myself.
But I have now, and it has enhanced my confidence.’
The X-ray showed nothing more than bruising.
And the video recording he watched yesterday morning revealed to him rather fewer weaknesses than his critics had discerned.
‘I'm disappointed with the criticism I got, stuff like I looked light years away from Tyson,’ he said.
‘It was a battle, but I wanted a battle and I want more of them.’
His hand, the same one he injured in April last year, needs at least two weeks' rest, but he should be back in the ring in February.
Jarvis Astaire, the Wembley director and promoter, is hoping for an opponent like Trevor Berbick or James ‘Bonecrusher’ Smith, both former world champions.
Williams, who beat Trevor Currie on Tuesday night to add the European championship to his Commonwealth title, may have to wait for his shot at the British champion, though Mason rises to his former sparring partner's rhetoric.
‘I would like to beat him because of what he has been saying about me,’ Mason said.
‘All I'll say is that only a foolish dog barks at a flying bird.’
Even at his fittest the 17 ½-stone Mason would have difficulty passing as a flying bird.
If he ever goes in with Tyson, he could be taken for a foolish dog.
Hockey Lahore XI 1, England XI 1.
Cotton fumes as England are suffocated by umpires
ENGLAND's visit to Pakistan may well be remembered mostly for the umpiring.
England felt they suffered again yesterday.
Bernard Cotton, the England manager, forcefully expressed the view that England failed to beat the Lahore XI because the Pakistani umpires did not award them the penalty corners and strokes they had earned.
‘We created enough opportunities to have won handsomely,’ he said.
England rested Potter and Clift and played Soma Singh at centre-half against largely unknown opponents.
The team played better but failed to profit from their many spells of domination.
Rob Hill, one of England's relative newcomers, gave them the lead, following up at a 10th-minute penalty corner, but the team allowed themselves to become rattled by the umpiring and Lahore equalised after 50 minutes.
Cherzeel scored with a close copy of England's goal.
The coach, Norman Hughes, said he was pleased with the play of Soma and much of England's build-up play and felt the second-half changes made a significant impact.
Garcia and Potter came on for Leman and Halls in the 45th minute and Welch replaced Williams seven minutes later.
England play Pakistan again today in the final match of the tour, writes Pat Rowley.
England players involved in the postponed fourth-round cup ties on Sunday will have about 30 hours to recover from their overnight journey home.
It will be interesting to see how that affects the players of the First Division clubs East Grinstead, Havant and Hounslow.
Nearly half the Havant team are in Pakistan.
Their home tie with Barford Tigers, a team who have had excellent results in the Midlands League in recent weeks, may require them to recover quickly from their overseas exertions.
Hounslow, the holders, who will welcome back Jon Potter and Martyn Grimley, face a first meeting with another Middlesex club, the new Second Division side, Lyons.
Lyons' cause cannot have been helped by the red card received by one of their skilful full-backs, Jasminder Matharu, in the league last Saturday.
Matharu is likely to incur a suspension of two or three months.
The other cup tie on Sunday pits Eastcote of the South League against East Grinstead at Feltham School.
The fitness of Clift and Leman, who has had influenza in Pakistan, is important for Grinstead.
Eastcote, who have just acquired an Australian coach, Mark McCrea, have a team who are almost entirely the product of their successful colts scheme.
The other outstanding cup tie, between Old Loughtonians and Broxbourne, has been arranged for Sunday week because Broxbourne are involved in the last of the East qualifiers for the Royal Bank English Indoor Championship.
Hull put Proctor on list at £15,000.
HULL yesterday placed their forward Wayne Proctor, who toured with Great Britain in 1984 and was substitute against Papua New Guinea, on the transfer list for £15,000, writes Paul Fitzpatrick.
Also on offer, at the same price, are Neil Puckering, who played four times for the Great Britain Under-24 side, and Alan Tomlinson.
Swinton have reduced the asking price on six players, including the winger Derek Bate, who has had his price cut from £45,000 to £35,000.
Castleford have placed their winger Chris Chapman on the transfer list at £45,000.
Squash Absent Cumings faces disciplinary action.
By Richard Jago in Newcastle
ALISON CUMINGS, a former British title-holder, faces disciplinary action from the Squash Rackets Association for withdrawing from this year's national championships at Newcastle yesterday ‘because of an unfavourable draw which might have meant me losing money on the week.’
Her action has again raised the issues of lack of sponsorship and reduced prize money which have preoccupied many leading players.
Geoff Williams, another former holder, and Phil Whitlock, an England international, have both declined to play because they are disappointed with the marketing of the championships and by the fact that the prize fund has descended from £16,780 to £9,000 despite the presence of television.
Another international, who preferred to remain anonymous, claimed that two thirds of the top 24 would have gone on strike had they been asked, and that a players' union will soon be formed to help deal with matters such as prize money, rankings, training and selection.
Four years ago seven leading men threatened to boycott the event because they considered the prize money too low.
If a union creates a better understanding, so much the better.
The SRA has put several thousands of pounds into this year's event and believes that the failure to acquire a sponsor is related to an adverse market.
‘Over the years the players have done incredibly well from the national championships and have had higher prize money than a lot of international events,’ said the SRA's squash manager, Andrew Shelley.
‘We are mystified at Alison's action because she had already entered.
I'm afraid I don't regard being unable to make money from the event as a reasonable excuse.’
One of the North of England's leading women players, Julie Woodcock, 23, the Cheshire champion, from Northwich, has been killed in a car accident near Buxton, Derbyshire.
Jones searches for chinks of light in a dark age for women's tennis David Foot on a former champion and her bright sparks aiming high in Cardiff.
WOMEN's tennis in this country is apt to be seen as a jokey disaster area, lost cause and eternal outlet for false and flimsy dreams.
Amid these cliches, sly slanders and unavoidable realities, Ann Jones sits at the net and ponders.
She has watched and sighed at the conveyor belt of busted rackets and aspirations — as successive decades of dewy-eyed schoolgirls have emerged from the manicured suburban court retreats in the romantic search for more than strawberries at Wimbledon.
The National Sports Centre for Wales, Sophia Gardens, Cardiff is temporarily deserted between matches in the Maureen Connolly Trophy.
Ann Jones is the Great Britain captain, soon we imagine to succeed Sue Mappin as national women's team manager.
She is both martinet and mother hen.
And she is engagingly old-fashioned in her concepts.
‘I'm afraid we've gone a bit too soft,’ she says with almost Blimpish fervour.
‘Girls come up against an obstacle or two, maybe on tour, and they tend to give way instead of trying to overcome them.’
She contemplates a surprisingly bellicose analogy: ‘sport in its own way is another war — somehow we must regenerate the old fighting spirit.’
She is privately perturbed, though not entirely unsympathetic one suspects, with recent words of disenchantment from Valda Lake, the 21-year-old Devonian who feels there may in future be more joy, if less money, in being an art student.
Lake's sentiments looked pretty damning in print.
But in the artificial, unrelenting competitive world of perpetual travel and token nods across the net, there isn't too much time — or inclination — left over for real friendship.
Who can see Martina sharing a dinner party with Steffi?
Jones, Wimbledon winner, respected referee and, just as significantly, mother of three, confines herself to: ‘It's very tough, not helped in our girls’ case by the computer.
Those in the States may have to travel long distances for tournaments but it's still in their own country.’
On the broader issue of Britain's minimal success — despite two successive triumphs against the rankings in the Maureen Connolly Trophy, at the Queen's Club, London, and at Dallas — the captain spreads her hands, searching one empty base-line and then the other for the elusive answer.
‘If only we knew why, we'd do something about it.
Whatever some think, we don't sit back.
People criticise the LTA but we've really tried.
It's been very gratifying to win these last two trophies — yet disappointing that there hasn't been improvement in the general standard of our girls’ tennis afterwards.’
The captain has the kind of severe, rather schoolmarmy face that readily softens.
‘Just like Sue, she doesn't mince words,’ someone says under her breath.
But she's refreshingly strong on psychology.
‘In a team event like this, the difficulty from my point of view is the varying personalities of the girls as they go into the consecutive matches.
Val, for instance, needs chatting up…
Sarah needs concentration…
Clare is well motivated, one of those who takes advice quite well.’
Off court, handling the obligatory press conference, these still young competitors are almost without exception pleasant and self-possessed.
The same goes for Americans like 16-year-old Kim Kessaris.
Sarah Loosemore is Britain's youngest at 18, just back from her three A levels and injury, eager to prove she has never really been away.
Her home is 10 minutes away, here in Cardiff.
Her parents, dad a solicitor and mum a former Welsh international, are watching with her brother as she beats Jennifer Santrock.
Lake, who is getting out, has taken a bit of a battering and feels that her spontaneous outpourings the other day were probably misconstrued.
‘The trouble is that there is such a high level of expectancy,’ she says.
This was compounded in her case when she jumped 20 places on the world computer in 1987 after reaching the third round at Edgbaston.
Today Great Britain's No.1 for the Trophy, Clare Wood, a vicar's daughter from Sussex, takes on Amy Frazier, who is 140 places above her in the rankings.
She's heartened by her win over the Americans' No.2 Audra Keller, who also outranks her, on Wednesday.
‘I desperately wanted to go on the circuit — I still find the life terrifically exciting.
It's difficult to keep in touch with friends and I know I can't go wild socially.
But as long as I go on improving and enjoying myself I'll play.
‘I've noticed the difference in the mental approach of the foreigners.
They seem much more secure, happier with themselves.
They don't worry like we seem to but don't ask me why.
I was a bit surprised at what Valda said.
Relationships are often shallow but that's inevitable, especially between the countries.
There has got to be rivalry and life can be very frustrating.’
Women's tennis has always had its administrative uncertainties.
This week the future structure of the Wightman Cup is being discussed.
But here at Sophia Gardens, a nap hand of British girls have in their different ways been doing their best to tell us something about the game they play…and offering a few hints of hope for the future.
Dave Whelan, 53, who played for Blackburn Rovers and broke a leg in the 1960 FA Cup final, has offered £100,000 to any youngster born within 10 miles of Wigan parish church who wins the junior Wimbledon title in the next 10 years.
Whelan, now a millionaire businessman, said: ‘A town that can produce world class rugby league and swimming stars should also be able to produce a tennis legend of the future.’
Soccer Sardinia ceded to England's record.
By David Lacey in Rome
ENGLAND made their expected landfall in the 1990 World Cup yesterday, leaving Scotland and the Republic of Ireland to drift towards whatever fate the draw has in store for them in Rome tomorrow.
Bobby Robson's team, having been seeded at the head of Group F, will play their three first-round matches in Cagliari on the island of Sardinia.
Andy Roxburgh's Scots have been placed in the second-draw section, along with Spain, the Soviet Union, Austria, Yugoslavia and Holland.
Jack Charlton's Irish, in the finals for the first time, join Colombia, Uruguay, Czechoslovakia, Romania and Sweden in the third pool.
In the end, and in spite of prolonged speculation to the contrary, there was never much doubt either that England would be seeded or that they would begin the World Cup in Cagliari.
Turning Sardinia into a Mediterranean Alcatraz to prevent hooliganism would have looked a little silly if Belgium had gone there instead.
Bert Millichip, the FA chairman, claimed that the decision to seed England in Cagliari had been made purely for footballing reasons.
‘It had nothing to do with security,’ he said.
‘There was never any doubt that England would be seeded…[it]was based on our record in the last two World Cups.
‘With all our problems, we have to be happy with the situation.
Sardinia is a lovely island.
Let's hope it's still a pleasant place when we leave it.’
Spanish attempts to get themselves seeded ahead of England came to nothing.
‘If Spain were upset,’ said Millichip, ‘they didn't say anything.
In fact on the basis worked out for the seedings, we came fifth out of six.’
In spite of what Millichip believes, the need to minimise the possibility of trouble from England's fans has everything to do with their playing in Sardinia.
The Italian interior minister had already stipulated that this was the only way he could guarantee the security of the World Cup.
However, if England do progress beyond the opening round — and with the first two from each group plus the four best third-placed teams going through, it is going to take some wretched performances to fail — they will then travel to Bologna, Genoa or Turin for the second phase, with the prospect of visits to Naples, Rome or Florence in the quarter-finals.
The semi-finals will be in Naples and Turin with the final in Rome on July 8, so the further England go the more complex the security problem will be.
No England team have ever gone beyond the last eight in a World Cup played abroad, and the significance of their seeding this time will only become clear after tomorrow's draw.
However, they do know that winning Group F might give them an easier game in the second round (against the runners-up in Belgium's group) than they would earn by finishing second, when they would face the second-placed side in Argentina's group.
If they finish third they might have to play Brazil.
‘There has been no manipulation of the seeding,’ Millichip insisted, sounding like a character from a Bateman cartoon (‘The Man Who Thought The Draw Was Straight’).
Maybe yesterday's groupings were not aually bent, just massaged to satisfy World Cup convention.
For example, Uruguay were put in the third pool to avoid a possible conflict of South American interests with Colombia.
Nobody will want Uruguay as third team in a group, least of all Scotland after their Mexican experience against them.
The Republic of Ireland could be in England's group, as they were in last year's European Championship.
Robson may prefer Colombians, Czechs or Romanians, and at least with the Swedes you can be reasonably sure of a goalless draw.
All the top seeds will want to avoid Holland, the European champions, and the Soviet Union, who finished runners-up.
But nobody will complain if they get Austria or Scotland, and Spain would be preferred to Yugoslavia.
Cameroun and South Korea are the teams to avoid from the fourth pool.
Certainly England will not complain if they are confronted with Costa Rica, and 1950 is a sufficiently dim memory now not to have bad vibes about the United States.
Yesterday's proceedings were not entirely cut and dried.
The organising committee took four hours to announce the seedings and draw order, much of the time being taken up trying to persuade West Germany, who had assumed they were going to Verona, to switch to Milan at the last moment.
The problem stemmed from Turin's — and therefore Fiat's — demand for an attractive seed to grace the city's new stadium.
Belgium did not fit the bill so it was decided to move Brazil (who were to have played in Milan) to Turin, bring West Germany to the rebuilt San Siro Stadium and send the Belgians to Verona.
The West Germans objected strongly but it was all smoothed over and so they will have a trio of Internazionale players — Matthaus, Klinsmann and Brehme — starting the World Cup on their home ground while Belgium, who at one stage were being threatened with Sicily, are at least promised the occasional cooling breeze in Verona.
Golf Hare coursing for a 66.
Rob Bonnet on the ordeal of qualifying school at La Manga
AT THE La Manga club in Spain this week there is not a hacking holidaymaker in sight.
Two hundred and eight golf professionals — some reigning champions, others young rookies — have been competing for 50 places on next season's full European Tour.
By Wednesday the 208 had been reduced by 100 after four rounds, the cut having come at four over par.
Later this morning, after two more rounds, a further 58 will be excluded.
Some of the 50 who win their cards are likely to have done so by surviving a sudden-death play-off: careers are launched, and sometimes sunk, on the accuracy of a three-foot putt on the 109th green.
Bad weather has prolonged the tension by half an extra day.
Among those already out of their misery is Richard Fish.
He is used to it, though; this is his 11th failure in 12 years of trying.
He missed the four-round cut by two strokes, but he left the course with a cheery ‘See you next year’.
Jackie Nicklaus carries the burden of his father's name and knows it does not hit golf balls for him.
He too will have to try again.
Failure has driven some in the past to tears, but for the moment the 22-year-old Andrew Hare, from Sleaford, Lincolnshire, is quietly showing the bright-eyed optimism of the first-timer.
He made the cut by three strokes, and in qualifying for the final two rounds he has already guaranteed himself a place on next season's growing satellite tour, Europe's golfing second division.
That is already progress.
He only turned professional 12 weeks ago after helping to beat the United States in the Walker Cup this summer.
His amateur career started at the age of 12 with a father's encouragement and a set of women's irons.
Two and a half years later he was a four-handicapper, but then he broke his leg in two places playing football and missed a whole season.
His handicap went up to six.
He has not turned out for the village team since.
Hare's sights are set high, but he thinks it best not to listen to those who predict a bright future for him.
‘I had a bonus at this year's Open, a practice round with my hero Bernhard Langer.
You expect fire to come out of the back of his ball when he hits it, but his ball's flight is no different to mine.
So it brings you on level terms.’
Hare did admit to Ian Wright, who caddied for Seve Ballesteros, that he would feel intimidated if Wright carried for him at La Manga.
Wright told him: ‘Don't be so silly; it's immaterial.’
His caddie instead is ‘Baldrick’, Richard Owens from Sleaford who got his nickname from Hare's request on the practice ground for more ammunition.
Owens may not know the course intimately, but he knows Hare's game, which relies on consistent direction off the tee and accuracy on the green.
Here the latter has been wanting: ‘I know it sounds daft.
I've putted well but haven't holed anything.’
Today's final cut for the last 50 seems likely to fall at one under par.
Hare will need a three-under in his final round to make it, but is aiming for a six-under 66.
As for the game itself, Hare has a philosophy which might make the rest of us win.
‘No disrespect to a 20-handicapper.
When you watch them you think it almost looks pointless.
But it isn't; it's the good rounds that bring you back.
My lowest ever is a 62; my aim now is a 61.
The better you get, the more you want to play.
I love the game.’
After yesterday's fifth round, four players shared first place.
Heinz Peter Thuel of West Germany, Steven Bowman of the United States and England's David Ray and Christopher Williams were 15 under par on 345.
Rob Bonnet is the BBC TV News sports correspondent.
South Africa's David Frost and the Americans Scott Hoch and Tim Simpson scored five-under-par 67s yesterday to share the lead after the first round of the Million Dollar Challenge at Sun City, Bophuthatswana.
Frost scored five birdies on the back nine to catch Hoch and Simpson.
They each had 32s on the front nine, including eagles at the par-five 9th, and 35s coming in.
No one else in the field broke par.
Wembley cuts ticket prices.
WEMBLEY has cut some of its ticket prices by half in an attempt to ensure a respectable crowd for England's friendly against Yugoslavia next Wednesday.
Seats in the new Olympic Gallery, which cost £40 each for last month's game against Italy, have now been reduced to £20.
The maximum price for other seats is £15, with the cheapest at £5.
Richard Gough will make his comeback for Rangers tomorrow only six weeks after shattering his jaw in four places.
The defender, hurt in a collision with Hibernian's Pat McGinlay, will be in the Scottish champions' line-up against Motherwell at Ibrox.
Boxing White Hopes like Cooney do not have a prayer of toppling Tyson.
John Rodda meets Max Schmeling, 85, and ponders: Where are his peers today?
THE oldest fight story of them all, the Great White Heavyweight Hope, has turned up here again.
Max Schmeling, who became the darling of the Nazi Party by being the first man to defeat Joe Louis, was feted in one of those boxing nostalgias which try, on the side, to thumb the nose at the American Medical Association and other such clinical societies concerned about brain damage.
Schmeling, a sprightly, dignified 85-year-old, is certainly an argument that some fighters come to no harm, even those who suffer the sort of beating Louis meted out when the pair met again.
Among those at the party was Muhammad Ali, who unlike Louis has, so far, not sunk to being doorman at Caesars Palace; he just stands in the Mirage Hotel at the head of a never diminishing human snake, signing his autograph.
Parkinson's Disease seems to be marking time at the moment.
With Ali at the honouring of Schmeling was Mike Tyson, a reminder that these days there is not much hope for any White Hope.
But a mile off The Strip, on a trading estate, the Top Rank gym bubbles with fighting action and gossip and, with a bit of a strain, the White Hope theory is being nurtured.
At 33, Gerry Cooney is cranking up to beat another golden oldie, George Foreman, who is 41, in Atlantic City next month under the promotion banner The Preacher and The Puncher.
Foreman, winner of three world heavyweight title fights in the early Seventies, is best remembered for his part in the one he lost: ‘The rumble in the jungle’ in Kinshasa, Zaire, when Ali knocked him out.
Now he is a minister of a church in Houston, where among the prayers he offers is one to be allowed to fight Tyson for the world title.
There are thousands, not of his flock, who are praying that he will not.
Cooney can fulfil their wish by cutting him down in their Atlantic City conflict, without inflicting the harm of which Tyson is capable.
Cooney always seemed a reluctant fighter, a man more pushed into the business by parental desire and promoters who saw the advantage of his size — 6ft 7in — rather than his personal predicament.
It is 2 ½ years since he lost in a world title match to Michael Spinks and just as he did after a similar fight, with Larry Holmes, he brooded for a long time, finally overcame problems with drugs, and went into business, part of which was as a fight promoter.
He put on one of the Foreman return contests — though even he would admit now that the word contest is stretching credibility.
For this latest return to the ring he has linked with Foreman's former trainer, Gil Clancy, who admits it is going to be hard getting Cooney back into shape.
He is using middleweight and light-heavyweight sparring partners in an attempt to make Cooney work faster, but in the session I watched he was not quick enough.
‘It was one of those rough days,’ Cooney admitted with a bruise under his left eye and a shining, tight patch of skin on his very large nose.
His monotone drawl made one feel he is not yet convinced that he has the mental application to match his great physical ability.
Cooney cuts out talk about Tyson with: ‘I'll take one fight at a time.’
But toppling Foreman will start a bandwagon at a time when, with one exception, the heavyweight division is bereft of talent and ability.
Territorial encroached on all fronts.
THE end may be in sight for the annual Territorial Championship, whose post-Christmas slot is the least acceptable in the women's fixture list.
The once eagerly awaited tournament, a highlight because of its purpose as England trials, is suffering the effects of progress, writes Janet Ruff.
No longer used for England selection purposes, the event has been trimmed, condensed and diminished, and apart from upholding a vestige of regional pride is now becoming lost in the mists of tradition.
The England training squad, with the World Cup on their minds, have been barred, and other players are pursuing alternative attractions during a well earned Christmas break.
The venue, Silksworth, near Sunderland, is as usual for this championship neither central nor convenient for the majority.
This year there is one further change, the backing of a sponsor, and the NatWest Cup to play for.
The tournament, which starts on December 28, is run concurrently with the Under-21 Territorial Championships, an event that has rather more significance as an England trials showcase.
The East, who have won the title for the past two years, are the defending champions and they select their squad this weekend, as do the South.
With their squads already chosen, the North, Midlands and West get down to concentrated coaching.
Rugby League Bettinson dismissal leaves doubt over Reilly.
By Paul Fitzpatrick
THE management team which has built the most successful Great Britain side since the Seventies was broken up yesterday with the dismissal of the 54-year-old Les Bettinson, team manager since 1985.
Malcolm Reilly, reported to be ‘shocked’ by Bettinson's dismissal, has been offered an up-graded title of coach/ manager while Maurice Lindsay, the Wigan chairman, replaces Bettinson and assumes the title of tour director and business manager.
Bettinson, a director of education in Stockport, had booked an appointment with his superior yesterday to ask for the unpaid leave he would have needed to complete the tour of Papua New Guinea and New Zealand next summer.
He was under the impression that the renewal of his contract was a formality.
Bettinson is a man of considerable dignity, diplomatic and not given to emotional language.
But he was a hurt and disillusioned man yesterday.
‘Now I know how Julius Caesar felt on the steps of the Senate before he was stabbed in the back,’ Bettinson said.
There will be no shortage of sympathy for him.
Bob Ashby, the chairman, said that Bettinson's contract had expired ‘and we wanted the best man for the job…and that is Maurice.
His position on the board of directors is immaterial.
Maurice has a proven track record with Wigan’.
Lindsay, who said that he had no idea he would be offered the job, pledged his support to Reilly, saying that he was ‘firmly behind the decision to ask Malcolm to continue as he is obviously the best man for the job’.
Lindsay said that Reilly could rely on his ‘unswerving support as he is a man I have the highest respect for’.
But will Reilly now accept the post?
What seemed a formality on Wednesday looked less certain 24 hours later, and he himself hinted at a possible obstacle when he said he would have to get the permission of his employers, the brewers John Smith.
If that permission were not forthcoming, he said, he would have to reject the job.
Then there is Phil Larder, the third member of the management team which led Great Britain to victory over Australia in Sydney last year and to a 2-1 series win over New Zealand recently.
It is not now certain that he will be invited to join the tour next summer, nor is it certain that he would accept if he were.
Rugby Union Harriman coughs, Smith wings in.
THE England and Wasps wing Simon Smith has been called up by London for their divisional match against the South-West at Imber Court tomorrow.
He replaces Andrew Harriman, of Harlequins, who became another flu victim.
Smith should have been on the bench for London's game against the Midlands last Saturday but had to drop out with the same complaint.
Midlands have also made a late change.
Tim Buttimore replaces Gary Hartley in the centre against the North at Moseley.
Hartley has infected vocal cords.
Buttimore has only recently returned to top rugby in England after two summers in Australia.
While there he was called up by the England squad when the touring team ran into injury trouble last summer.
Nigel Heslop of Orrell replaces Tony Underwood, who broke his jaw against the South-West last weekend.
The Neath lock Mike Whitson has been given an eight-week ban after being sent off in a Schweppes Cup tie against South Glamorgan Institute.
He was dismissed by the Brecon referee David Cherry for punching.
Whitson, who was also sent off while playing for Newbridge three years ago, will miss the next tie against Ystrad Rhondda and seven Merit Table club games.
Cricket Sky and BSB are at home.
By Mike Selvey
THE tentacles of satellite television are spreading even wider, even unto the English domestic scene.
Yesterday at Lord's the Test and County Cricket Board announced separate deals involving both Sky TV and British Satellite Broadcasting for the transmission of a large segment of the domestic game for the next three years.
In what can only be considered a plan of Baldrickian cunning, not only will the Board's coffers be groaning with the weight of money but — and here is the really clever part — fewer people than ever will now be able to observe what a mess the game is really in.
The deals are in fact important in the way the game is to be projected in the future in this country.
Already Sky TV is exclusively showing the winter series live from West Indies (with Geoff Boycott the newest recruit to the broadcasting team).
Now both Sky and BSB have extended their interests to include the 1990 and 1991 domestic seasons as well.
Perhaps the more significant of the deals is that involving BSB, which launches five new channels in the spring.
In a two-year deal, believed to be worth more than £1 million, they will enjoy, if that is the right word, exclusive live coverage of the Benson and Hedges Cup as well as a highlights package including all England's home Tests, one-day internationals and the NatWest competition.
The latter package is designed to be broadcast during the peak viewing hours of 8pm and 10pm when the BBC has traditionally been unable to do it.
Andrew Croker, head of BSB's sports channel, sees this as a bonus for cricket fans.
‘With the highlights package, now at last they will be able to see the best cricket at the time they will want to watch it.’
Peter Lush, who handled the TV negotiations on behalf of the TCCB, added his support.
‘The deal will benefit both the cricketing public and the Benson and Hedges competition, with more matches covered live and viewers enjoying a wider choice during peak hours.’
The BBC still has its live coverage of the international matches and the NatWest Trophy, and it will also be screening highlights of the other matches but of necessity these will appear at the usual anti-social hours.
It is debatable whether Sky for its part has bought a pig in a poke.
It will be reviving memories of summers past by transmitting ball-by-ball coverage of the Refuge Assurance Sunday League.
In previous years this was how the BBC treated the competition, but gradually, with its revamped Sunday Grandstand, cricket took a back seat to free-fall dominoes and the like.
This appeared to please neither public nor sponsor.
Now Sky, with promised aggressive coverage, can put it back on an equal footing with the other competitions, although a more compelling argument for reviving the Sunday afternoon walk in the country it is hard to imagine.
Testing baptism for Chamberlain.
IF Frank Chamberlain, chairman elect of the Test and County Cricket Board, had any qualms about taking on the job next October, they will have been magnified by his introduction to the massed press at Lord's yesterday, writes Mike Selvey.
The first question he was asked was how he intended to overturn the ‘deceit and deception’ rife in the TCCB.
This turned out to be a reference to the secrecy surrounding the use of Ossie Wheatley's power of veto as chairman of the cricket committee to block the reappointment of Mike Gatting rather than David Gower as England captain last summer.
Chamberlain coughed politely and said he was sure it would be cleared up by the time he took over.
He said he would be trying to bridge the gap between the board and the counties, who he thought ‘perhaps felt they weren't having enough say.’
Not least, it had been surmised, with the veto.
However the board's chief executive, Alan Smith, was able to say that unlike yesterday's press conference the issue at the board meeting did not occupy a major part of the time.
‘They fully endorsed the right of Wheatley to use the veto at his discretion.’
Smith added that the board did not subscribe to the view that the authority of Ted Dexter, chairman of the England Committee, and Micky Stewart, the team manager, had been undermined by the veto.
The nub of the meeting had been a lengthy discussion on the merits or otherwise of four-day cricket, while matters decided on were the 25-point penalty for producing inferior pitches, retained with wider definition to include over-grassed pitches; overseas players (counties may register up to two for next season only); a return to 15-yard run-ups in the Sunday League; and the making up of lost time in Tests to a maximum one hour.
Sport in brief Athletics.
Steve Jones will run for the first time in the Morpeth-Newcastle, Britain's oldest road race, on New Year's Day..
Skiing.
Vreni Schneider, Switzerland's defending World Cup overall champion, could be out for two weeks after suffering a knee injury during downhill training in Colorado..
Golf.
Britain's Chris Moody is joint second after yesterday's first round of the Australian Classic in Melbourne, where Peter Senior extended his remarkable run with eight birdies to lead with a seven-under-par 65.
Senior has won the Australian Open and Australian PGA title in the past month.
PAGE
Birdman Reed will not duck the issue David Hopps on the Aylesbury ‘Rambo’ who is set to ruffle Northampton's feathers.
THE only Aylesbury Ducks likely to be found at The County Ground tomorrow will be an increasingly celebrated strain decked in green and white hoops.
Aylesbury's footballers have progressed to the second round of the FA Cup — and an away tie at Northampton Town — without a flutter of recognition from the whiter-than-white duck which provides their nickname.
‘Duckie’ Weston, a renowned local breeder, was an Aylesbury follower in his time, and one confused bird did waddle aimlessly around the ground a few seasons ago, but according to the club's chief executive, Tony Graham, ‘they are a devil of a mascot to parade about.’
Could there be, though, a more sinister reason for tomorrow's absence of the Aylesbury duck?
Prepare for a far-fetched tale of a prospective bird-breeder called ‘Rambo’, a burly former Yorkshire miner who admits he prefers his ducks buried under a mountain of cranberry sauce.
It was the fate of countless unfortunates a few seasons ago to become the terraces' substitute for Sylvester Stallone.
One jolting tackle and the link was made with the big screen's violent he-man.
Northampton Town's followers bestowed the well-meant, if dubious, honour on Graham Reed, a vigorous and gritty right-back.
Reed disarmingly describes himself as ‘nearly six feet tall and 13 stones when I'm at my best’, but the banners appeared in force all the same.
Northampton romped away with the Fourth Division championship in 1986-87 and whenever Reed had an off-day his manager, Graham Carr, loved to scoff: ‘Rambo?
More like Bimbo.’
Reed proved not indestructible.
His League career ended prematurely last season when he lost three pieces of bone in an operation on his right ankle.
Daily training became too demanding but non-League football offered an alternative outlet for a player approaching his 28th birthday and, in June he moved to Aylesbury.
With too much spare time suddenly on his hands, he reverted to a hobby enjoyed in his early non-League days with Frickley Athletic.
In Brixworth village, just outside Northampton, he has built an aviary at the bottom of the garden.
He keeps canaries, diamond doves and a pair of quails.
Aylesbury were taking stock of a cheerless season when Reed was signed by Trevor Gould, the elder brother of Wimbledon's manager, Bobby.
The club's first experience of the Vauxhall Conference had brought immediate relegation.
Traditionally members of the Southern (now Beazer Homes) League, they were allotted a place in the Vauxhall League, which they head by two points, and Gould takes a healthy smattering of former Northampton players back tomorrow.
The manager played more than 100 matches for the Cobblers in the early Seventies and, living three miles from the ground, he remains conveniently placed to keep tabs on potential signings.
Two months ago he paid Northampton a club record fee of £15,000 for Glenville Donegal, and the striker's winning goal against Southend United in the FA Cup first round ensured an immediate homecoming.
Donegal was hardly overcome by romantic notions.
‘My friends all say what a great draw it is, but I'm not sure,’ he said.
‘I quite fancied going somewhere different.’
Under Gould's guidance, Aylesbury's FA Cup record could hardly be more consistent.
They have reached the first round for the fifth successive year, although once admitted they initially quailed like nervous party-goers.
Watford drew a crowd of 7,500 to Turnfurlong Lane in 1951 and, by the time Gould broke a 34-year abstinence, plans were being formulated to turn the evocatively named ground into a housing estate.
Aylesbury lost a home replay to Slough in 85-86, fell at Bath the following year, then made a respectable 1-0 exit at Ashton Gate against Third Division Bristol City.
Last year they went one better, overcoming Waterlooville before losing 1-0 at home to Sutton in the second round.
Gould, a self-employed builder, put his craft to good use when Aylesbury transferred four years ago to waste ground off Buckingham Road, on the outskirts of the town.
The manager built both dugouts.
He must be a fair-minded fellow.
Rival managers have been relieved to confirm that the away dugout does actually face the pitch.
Crowds hover a touch above 1,000 this season but up to twice that number will make the trip to Northampton.
At least one banner will proclaim: ‘Rambo rules.’
It will be carried by one of Reed's neighbours, a Northampton supporter.
He is still a child, but old enough to understand about old times' sake.