

Appreciation: Goran Jarvefelt: Operatic fabulist.
GORAN Jarvefelt's opera productions were essentially naive — like Ingmar Bergman's Magic Flute film, shot at the Drottingholm court theatre built by Gustav III.
For Jarvefelt, opera needed to be illustrated like a children's story-book of fables.
He was decidedly not a deconstructionist.
His gentle, conservative aim was to support the singers and make the story clear.
This did not mean a lack of thought about the philosophical agenda behind.
His Magic Flute for the Welsh National Opera, which introduced him to British audiences in 1979, avoided the sort of in-jokes that Mozart's pop entertainment often elicits (authentically enough, as Schikaneder was a Rowan Atkinson figure).
Instead he treated the story as an emotionally credible tale of initiation, involving real people in real situations.
It achieved ‘affectionate laughter and spiritual joy’.
His Parsifal for the 1981 Holland Festival was similarly touching.
The difference between Jarvefelt and, say, Peter Hall — who also likes to keep to the basic narrative — was that Jarvefelt was innocent, cool and sober.
He remained a Scandinavian puritan, less humourous than Bergman, certainly more covert about sexuality generally.
This approach, putting the music first, explains why Jarvefelt's career blossomed at Santa Fe and in Sydney and also his appeal for the New York Met: operatic naturalism and story-telling are still the predominant aesthetic in all these places.
Jarvefelt was an actor in Stockholm for five years before he got into opera, and — like many theatre people — he was disinclined to challenge the presumed limitations of opera singers as actors.
He assisted Bergman on The Dance of Death in 1976, and periodically still did plays: Lysistrata and The Tempest in Stockholm, The Dream Play very successfully in Adelaide.
But the bulk of his work, normally in collaboration with the German designer Carl Friedrich Oberle, was operatic.
Like the conductor Arnold Ostman, he started at the Vadstena Academy.
They worked together frequently, starting with a Swedish television recording of Stradella's Salome.
In Gelsenkirchen, where Jarvefelt became principal stage director in 1977, he tackled mainstream operatic classics: Don Carlos, Falstaff, Ariadne auf Naxos, Hansel and Gretel.
Falstaff was a favourite subject.
He even produced a Salieri version.
There was also a lot of Richard Strauss, which his Rosenkavalier at Cardiff in February would have capped.
Jarvefelt showed an early interest in Monteverdi and the baroque repertoire, though the constraints of ‘authenticity’ dulled him.
His Gluck Iphigenie this summer, first of a planned Drottningholm cycle, was self-consciously unobtrusive, almost rough in its stage manners — and as unexciting as his Don Giovanni from the same stable seen in Brighton.
Of his modest Welsh Ring cycle he said, ‘I aimed to strip away all the burdens that philosophers have put on everybody's shoulders about the Ring, and take a very fresh, sensuous look at it.’
By sensuous, Jarvefelt meant working closely with the cast to make reactions and relationships on stage seem natural and believable.
He was against ‘a very static kind of Wagner where the set is the concept’, to the neglect of intellectual excitement and engagement.
Perhaps his best production in this country was the WNO Ballo in Maschera, a scrupulously organised and visually attractive treatment that benefited from the by now traditional repatriation of Verdi's subject to its Swedish origin.
Tom Sutcliffe Goran Jarvefelt born August 3, 1947; died November 29, 1989.
Sheppard sets the night alight John Fordham on the UK Jazz Awards at the Queen Elizabeth Hall.
THE flashiest UK Jazz Awards proceedings yet, this time co-sponsored by your favourite newspaper, saw few surprises from the poll winners but some of the best live music ever to support this four-year-old event.
It was appropriate to the spirit of jazz (and a useful antidote to the inevitable toe-curling staginess of awards ceremonies in general) to present two bands of joint American-British instrumentalists who had not worked together before to see what would happen.
The first, featuring the American adolescent altoist, Christopher Hollyday, was uneven — Hollyday's famous virtuosity sounding faintly stiff and cramped by comparison with the local prodigy, Jason Rebello's.
But the headlining act — a quartet splicing the former Miles Davis guitarist John Scofield with the British saxophonist Andy Sheppard — struck fireworks that went a long way towards helping the audience breathe out after some dodgy moments during the presentations.
Those musical orbits described by the fertile planets of Loose Tubes and the Jazz Warriors dominated the polls, with Andy Sheppard continuing to make his individual mark as he has in the past two years.
Loose Tubes won the Best Band category, and the Jazz Warriors alumni, Cleveland Watkiss and the vibra harpist, Orphy Robinson, won the Best Vocalist and Best Newcomer awards.
Best New Band was the smooth and highly wrought funk ensemble, Roadside Picnic (it would be nice to think that the more raw-boned but full-blooded Pinski Zoo had run them close), Andy Sheppard walked off with both Best Instrumentalist and Best Album prizes (the latter for Introductions In The Dark), and Stan Tracey picked up Best Composer.
The Guardian's own Milestones Award for long-term creative commitment to the music went to the veteran George Russell, whose greeting from the crowd was as affectionate as it should have been and a services-to-jazz prize sponsored jointly by Wire and Carlsberg/Elephant lager went to John Surman, one of the most gifted members of that talented and ill-rewarded generation of musicians that came between Stan Tracey's and the new young heroes.
The show ended with John Scofield and Andy Sheppard's memorable first live meeting.
The guitarist's taste and absence of flamboyance and Sheppard's alternating quirkiness and abrasiveness were perfect foils and the drummer, Mark Mondesir — the most improved percussionist on the British scene by light-years — was nothing short of sensational.
Andy Sheppard: quirkiness
Obituary: Professor Norman Davis.
Scholar worth his dinars:.
PROFESSOR Norman Davis was one of the finest English historical philologists of this century.
A New Zealander, born in Dunedin and a graduate of Otago University, he went to Merton College, Oxford, in 1934 as a Rhodes Scholar, where he took a First in English.
There followed a period of university teaching abroad: first in Lithuania, then in Bulgaria.
After the War, he returned to teach in London and Oxford.
In 1949 he became Professor of English Language in Glasgow, and in 1959 succeeded J. R. R. Tolkien as Merton Professor of English Language of Literature at Oxford.
The honours that came to him were richly deserved.
His scholarly achievement was remarkable.
The great edition of the Paston Letters is his most obvious monument, but beside this there stand an edition of the non-cycle plays, a series of influential articles (notably one which unobtrusively undermined the theory of R. W. Chambers on the ‘continuity of English prose’), and two modestly entitled ‘revisions’(really new editions) of Sweet's Anglo-Saxon Primer and of Tolkien and Gordon's Sir Gawain and the Green Knight.
His mentor, Tolkien, had brought a touch of genius to the art of the glossary, and Norman Davis followed him with distinction in the glossary to Bennett and Smithers, Early Middle English Verse and Prose and in the Chaucer Glossary, for which he enlisted the help of three Oxford colleagues.
He excelled in a kind of ‘collabortive’ scholarship, ranging from the Oxford History of English Literature through the Early English Text Society volumes produced while he was Director, articles for the Review of English Studies, and the offerings of his devoted students.
He kept up an unrelenting gentle moral pressure on his authors or collaborators, and as a commentator, like Tolkien he selflessly put much of himself into the work of others.
But a list of his achievements does not do full justice to Norman Davis as scholar and person.
He had a wide and humane range of interests, and, as one of his old New Zealand friends once wrote, ‘a natural sense of what scholarship is’.
He was a excellent linguist, and took an intense delight in linguistic minutiae — his friends remember many entertaining dinner-table disquisitions on etymologies, sometimes punctuated by visits to the OED.
He was also a superb phonetician, and a master of mimicry, a technique which he used to the full as a raconteur.
He was not unusual (at least in Oxford) in being a New Zealand philologist, but unlike his countrymen who are alleged to mark dates by rugby Test matches, he marked them by exactly remembered dinners and the wines which had accompanied them.
He was also unusual among philologists in having had a price on his head.
In his Who's Who entry there is a characteristically discreet phrase ‘Government service mainly abroad, 1939-46’.
Unlikely though it seemed to students and friends of the scholarly and bespectacled professor, he had at this period worked for what became SOE (a kind of work for which his precision of mind, excellent memory and linguistic ability pre-eminently qualified him: he contrived among other exploits to smuggle the leader of the Bulgarian Peasant Party out of the country into Turkey in a truck).
Hostile Bulgars (it seems) placed a bomb on the train carrying the rest of the British Legation to Istanbul.
With further lack of efficiency, he was fond of recalling, it had not exploded until the party's luggage had reached the hotel, where it ‘made as fearful mess and damaged the odd Turk’.
He was rewarded for this and more with a Bulgarian sentence of death and a British MBE.
But this, as he would say, is a long story, and happened a long time ago.
Norman Davis will be remembered by many with affection not only as a very great scholar but also as a most delightful and faithful friend.
D.G. Norman Davis: born May 16, 1913; died December 2, 1989.
Princely power It's complex, inventive and rich.
And if first-night reaction is any indicator, Prince Of The Pagodas will also prove to be successful.
Mary Clarke was at Covent Garden.
IT IS difficult, almost impossible, to judge a new, full evening ballet on the evidence of a first-night gala performance.
But if the cheering at the end on Thursday evening — and I mean the cheering from upstairs, which is what matters — is a portent, then Kenneth MacMillan's Prince Of The Pagodas is a success.
He and Colin Thubron have devised a new scenario which remains true to the basic premise of Cranko's original story and Britten's score — namely that redemption comes through compassion — while giving a more cohesive dramatic shape to the work.
Aided by the fresh designs of Nicholas Georgiadis, they place the action in an Elizabethan fantasy setting — and how cleverly Georgiadis adapts period dress to the needs of ballet.
The story, basically, is about an aged emperor who divides his kingdom equally between his elder, nasty, daughter, Princess Epine, and her young, innocent half-sister, Princess Rose, thus incurring the wrath of Epine and requiring Rose to journey through a twilit world to find, with the help of the court Fool, her Prince who has been transformed into a salamander.
It is when she feels compassion, rather than revulsion, for the salamander and kisses him that the spell breaks.
It's another telling of Beauty And The Beast.
An innovation has been to introduce four kings, representing the four corners of the earth, who come to woo Epine and win the kingdom she has seized, are entranced by Rose but rejected by her because the North is uncouth, the East too vain, the West too cynical and the South too violent.
This gives MacMillan the opportunity in the first act, which is brilliant, to introduce his characters in solos of vivid personality while Rose's vision of her lost Prince provides a poetic pas de deux.
Thereafter we witness Rose being guided by the Fool towards Pagoda-land, where she finds the salamander, then back to the court where her kindness to both the salamander and her persecuted old father is rewarded by the transformation of the Prince to his real shape and his victory over all contenders to win Rose, rescue her father and banish Epine.
MacMillan has said from the first announcements that it would be a big company ballet, involving a large cast, and he has provided just that.
He seems anxious to re-affirm the dramatic and classical potential of the troupe by giving all the dancers choreography of the utmost complexity, requiring from them performances of total physical and emotional commitment.
In Darcey Bussell and Jonathan Cope he has ideal interpreters for the principal roles — the writing for the salamander is some of his most inventive — while Fiona Chadwick blazes as Epine, Anthony Dowell dodders as the emperor, the four kings seek to outshine each other, and Tetsuyu Kumakawa as the Fool seems even more at ease in the air than on the ground.
First impressions, therefore, are of a fascinating and challenging work, so full of choreographic riches that it will take more viewings fully to savour them.
And wonderful to hear the score in the Opera House again, its beauties safe in Ashley Lawrence's conducting.
The Prince Of The Pagodas will be danced at Covent Garden on Monday and then on December 13, 14, 15, 19 and 20.
Princess Rose (Darcey Bussell) resists unwanted advances in Kenneth MacMillan's Prince Of The Pagodas
When Thomas met Sally Television.
By Hugh Hebert
COMEDY-thrillers could have a hard time without small black books that disappear containing the clue to mysterious fortunes.
Effete southern alternatives-fat Filofaxes or electronic Psions-lack dramatic resonance and spoil the line of the jacket.
Happily for Geoff McQueen's Stay Lucky (Yorkshire) small black notebooks containing solid gold clues are still common currency in Leeds.
Stephen's book has disappeared after he died in bed with his accountant's wife, engaged in urgent cash flow analysis.
This at least showed some foresight, since the number of beds in which Stephen might have missed a heartbeat and a vital document were legion.
Stephen's feisty Yorkshire wife Sally (Jan Francis) thereafter is harried by the accountant's heavies, while the accountant (James Grout) is being hounded by a second set of heavies on the track of a very expensive painting.
Sally's unlikely and unwanted ally in the battle of North v.
South wits is Thomas (Dennis Waterman), a Cockney wide-boy on the run from the third set of heavies, Triads.
They caught him in delicto with Mr Big's oriental treasure.
Given McQueen's London track record-Big Deal, The Bill-Waterman would get the more complex lines, mostly aimed at Francis's nutcracker verbal style.
(‘Bet your gums are relieved when the rest of you goes to sleep.’)
She contents herself with short, heartfelt abuse of the dickhead kind.
Directed by David Reynolds it's an amiable addition to ITV's moribund Friday night; but no need to stay home.
Thomas and Sally meet on a drenched A1 as he is trying to hitch northwards.
Miles Kington found that most of the Burma Road (Great Journeys, BBC-2) is even wetter.
It is not a continuous road but a route, and a lot of it is the wide, slow Irrawaddy River.
The film was made in 1987 and turned out to be the last chance for outsiders to trace the old route to China before Burma's political blow-up of 1988.
It was the route by which Buddhism reached China, and down which Kubla Khan swept south.
In the Second World War it was Chiang Kai-shek's lifeline.
The famous China convoys brought supplies from the storehouses of Burma to Kunming, the centre of Chinese resistance to the Japanese invaders.
Kington's river trip was eight days on a slow boat in the company of U Thien San, who guided the writer on matters like whether it is customary to talk while eating with the Burmese, and whether the monk sharing their cabin was really a spy.
This is not as wild a question as you might suppose in a country where every Buddhist is a monk some time in their lives, and can slip into the habit again at any time.
Kington comes across as a natural traveller, just as Colin Thubron did in the Silk Road programme in David Wallace's series.
His Burmese isn't as good as Thubron's Chinese, but he gets on terms with the locals without patronage, and his wit gets us through the potentially boring bits.
In Mandalay, Kington drove round with an Australian who took a detached interest while overtaking a pair of cyclists in line abreast, pedalling hand-in-hand all over the road.
Oncoming bikers seemed intent on taking the short cut up and over the Aussie's Nissan.
His laconic comment was ‘Nearly got that one,’ while the petrified Kington giggled nervously.
After the river, he took a train as far as the Burmese would allow foreigners to go, about a hundred miles short of their guerrilla war, and after that there was a vintage plane over mountains to the real Burma Road; the road whose legend occupies an odd corner of the memory, like Hannibal's Alpine venture.
Chiang Kai-shek built it with forced labour, and dusty antique-model lorries still ply it, driven by young men in white gloves.
Somewhere here, Kington found a village of the ancient China, with story-tellers reciting to an audience of old men, with chess players in the street, among the chickens and the black piglets and the heavy feeling of lost centuries.