

BAe-Thomson weapons merger nears as UK picks Euro missile.
By David Fairhall and Mark Milner
PLANS by British Aerospace and France's Thomson-CSF to merge their guided weapons businesses moved a step closer yesterday after the United Kingdom's Ministry of Defence opted for a European missile for the new generation of anti-aircraft frigates.
The choice of the European Family of Anti-Air Missiles (Fams), rather than a rival American system, is likely to influence the French Government's views about the BAe-Thomson link.
Thomson is state-owned and though there has been no overt policy statement from the French Government, it is widely accepted that its attitude towards the merger will be at least coloured by the MoD's decision.
BAe said yesterday it welcomed the decision as a major opportunity for future business and an important step in European industrial co-operation.
‘In addition, the decision should now enable BAe Dynamics and Thomson-CSF to progress their detailed negotiations.’
On the stock market, BAe shares responded to the news — and reports that a consortium of international banks were about to provide some kind of support package to help to finance the massive Saudi Arabian defence order — with a 27p jump to 553p on brisk turnover.
Announcing the MoD's decision to the House of Commons yesterday, the Under Secretary for Defence Procurement, Michael Neubert, said: ‘The choice between these two programmes has been an extremely difficult one because both offer the prospect of a highly capable ship defence system.
‘On balance, it has been concluded that, of the two projects, Fams offers the better prospect of providing an affordable and capable system within the timescale.’
Gloomy prospects for retail trade.
By Ben Laurance
BRITAIN'S shopkeepers are gloomier than at any time since the early 1980s, according to a survey published yesterday.
Retailers, wholesalers and motor traders all expect their businesses to become worse over the next three months.
Higher mortgage rates have already had an impact on spending, according to the latest survey of distributive trades from the Confederation of British Industry.
Many borrowers whose mortgage repayments change only annually will feel the impact of higher interest rates only next month.
Those sectors closest to the housing market, including builders' merchants and retailers of furniture, carpets and household goods were the most pessimistic.
Among DIY and hardware retailers, only one in a hundred expects business to get better in the next three months.
Figures from Grand Metropolitan yesterday also show that higher interest rates have had a big impact on people's willingness to eat out.
The company said that the number of people eating in its Chef & Brewer and Berni restaurants had fallen by about 10 per cent.
The CBI survey revealed that the majority of distributors feel that their stock levels are at an uncomfortably high level.
As they try to cut stocks, this is likely to make a big dent in orders to manufacturing industry and importers.
Few retailers expect their orders with suppliers this month to be higher than in December 1988.
For the first time since the survey was started six years ago, retailers, wholesalers and companies in the motor trade expect to cut investment in the coming year.
Only confectioners, tobacconists and newsagents remain optimistic: every other retailing sector identified in the CBI survey expects business to get tougher over the next three months.
Boeing in $4bn project to rival Airbus jetliner.
By Andrew Cornelius in London and Mary Brasier in New York Industrial Editor
BOEING, the world's biggest aircraft maker, last night gave the go-ahead for a $4billion development of a new wide-bodied 350-seater jet, to be called the 777.
The new jet, which will be ready for launch in 1995 to compete head-on with the European Airbus A330, where British Aerospace has a 20 per cent stake, and the McDonnell Douglas MD-11 trijet, will be the last major new passenger jet to be launched this century.
It will be offered at a price of $70million-plus into a booming sector of the market for civil aircraft, which is expected to generate $110billion of sales by the year 2005.
Boeing said the new plane, which is derived from the 767X project, would have a wider body than the existing 767 plane used by British airlines and new wings.
Decisions on whether Rolls-Royce engines are fitted to the jets will probably be left until customers decide to place orders.
Boeing said that no planes would be built until the first firm orders were placed by customers, signalling the start of a bitter fight with the Airbus consortium for orders.
However, the Boeing commercial airlines president, Dean Thornton, said in Seattle yesterday that eight airlines had expressed strong interest in the new jet and that 12 more might consider placing orders.
The project faces up to eight months of discussions between Boeing and its customers to finalise design details of the plane.
One of the first battles between the giants of the world aerospace industry will be for a $2billion order from British Airways for either the 777 or the A330 to replace its ageing fleet of Tristars.
BA's chairman, Lord King, admires the airline's relationship with Boeing.
However, during the summer Lord King warned that Boeing had ‘better get going’ if it was to beat Airbus to the order.
Other airlines regarded as potential launch customers for the new plane are United Airlines, American Airlines and Japan Airlines.
Boeing is in discussions with European and Japanese companies about bringing in a 25 per cent equity partner into the development.
Suggestions that Boeing might collaborate with the Japanese on another jet development project have raised protests in Washington about the transfer of technology in an industry where the US maintains a strong lead over the Japanese.
A Boeing spokesman, Craig Martin, said that finding an equity partner for the 777 project was not a prerequisite to launching the new plane, and that the company might fund development costs from its own cash resources.
Attempts to revive the buyout of United Airlines are meeting with little enthusiasm on Wall Street and a new bid — possibly with the support of Jay Pritzker, the Chicago financier — is unlikely to get off the ground before early 1990.
Representatives from developers Olympia&York and high street retailer Marks&.
Spencer yesterday inspecting progress in the construction of the main shopping block at the £4billion Canary Wharf development, which will include a new 13,000-square foot M&S food hall.
M&S is the first big retailer to move to Canary Wharf and its announcement yesterday to take space in the building is a boost of confidence for the 71-acre London Docklands project.
Once complete, it will provide 10 million square feet of office space and 250 shops within 500,000 square feet of retail area by 1997.
So far, a third of the office space in the first phase of eight buildings has been booked.
M&S will join Texaco as one of the big-name occupiers of Canary Wharf, and Olympia&York says it expects to announce several other tenants shortly.
However, the development has attracted criticism in the past months as a possible white elephant following the effect of the steep rise in interest rates on the economy.
Critics have also pointed to the lack of transport links to the development, but Olympia&York denies that there will be a problem given the proposed extension of the Jubilee Line, increased capacity of the Light Docklands Railway, and the building of new roads.
Photograph: Martin Argles
As the season of goodwill gets into full swing, Jill Papworth looks at some presents which will still be appreciated on Boxing Day.
Counting the cost of mailing money
THE problem with sending Christmas gifts to children living overseas is that postage can double the price of the presents.
If you opt instead to send relatives and friends money to spend as they wish on their children, it's worth shopping around as costs differ considerably for the various methods.
All the banks and the Post Office strongly advise against sending cash.
route.
Likewise, sending British or Eurocheques can cause problems, delay and heavy charges for the recipient when he or she tries to cash them at a foreign bank.
The cheapest way is to buy and send postal orders in various denominations which are acceptable in around 60 countries.
Bought over the Post Office counter, postal orders are both traceable and give you a counterfoil to prove they have been sent.
A £20 order, for example, will cost 62p.
International money orders, available in sterling or US dollars from Barclays, or dollars only from Lloyds and the Royal Bank of Scotland, are the next best bet.
The Royal Bank's new American Express-backed orders, valued up to $1,000, cost just £3 each and can be cashed by the recipient at any Amex travel office.
The drawback is that both the sender and the recipient, if living outside the US, are at the mercy of prevailing exchange rates and foreign banks may charge a commission.
Banker's drafts come a little more expensive but can be bought in any currency.
Girobank charges a flat fee of £5 per draft and Barclays £9.
NatWest, Lloyds and RBS all charge 0.25 per cent of the value but with varying minimum fees.
Midland, the only bank to restrict its sending cash abroad service to existing customers, charges £6 on drafts of up to £100 and 0.5 per cent of the sterling value with a minimum charge of £9 over that amount.
The above three methods, while allowing you to send a tangible piece of paper as a gift, do mean you incur postal costs and are reliant on UK and foreign postal systems.
Barclays, RBS and Midland all offer guaranteed methods of transferring money direct to a foreign recipient's bank through their own mailing systems, costing a minimum of £7.50, £6 and £9.
But you have already missed the last postal dates for some countries, including Australia and New Zealand.
Monday is your last chance to send things by post to the US, Italy and Spain and Wednesday for the rest of Europe.
Your only option when sending money at the last minute to arrive by Christmas is to use the banks' electronic money transfer services which take from 24 hours to around five days depending on the bank and whether you use an express transfer.
Charges and services offered vary among the main high street banks, though using the example of sending £50 abroad NatWest and RBS work out the cheapest at £6 for a standard transfer taking around 48 hours.
Girobank charges a flat fee of £5 whatever the transfer value, but only to specific foreign banks and taking up to 10 working days.
Counting the cost of mailing money.
THE problem with sending Christmas gifts to children living overseas is that postage can double the price of the presents.
If you opt instead to send relatives and friends money to spend as they wish on their children, it's worth shopping around as costs differ considerably for the various methods.
All the banks and the Post Office strongly advise against sending cash.
route.
Likewise, sending British or Eurocheques can cause problems, delay and heavy charges for the recipient when he or she tries to cash them at a foreign bank.
The cheapest way is to buy and send postal orders in various denominations which are acceptable in around 60 countries.
Bought over the Post Office counter, postal orders are both traceable and give you a counterfoil to prove they have been sent.
A £20 order, for example, will cost 62p.
International money orders, available in sterling or US dollars from Barclays, or dollars only from Lloyds and the Royal Bank of Scotland, are the next best bet.
The Royal Bank's new American Express-backed orders, valued up to $1,000, cost just £3 each and can be cashed by the recipient at any Amex travel office.
The drawback is that both the sender and the recipient, if living outside the US, are at the mercy of prevailing exchange rates and foreign banks may charge a commission.
Banker's drafts come a little more expensive but can be bought in any currency.
Girobank charges a flat fee of £5 per draft and Barclays £9.
NatWest, Lloyds and RBS all charge 0.25 per cent of the value but with varying minimum fees.
Midland, the only bank to restrict its sending cash abroad service to existing customers, charges £6 on drafts of up to £100 and 0.5 per cent of the sterling value with a minimum charge of £9 over that amount.
The above three methods, while allowing you to send a tangible piece of paper as a gift, do mean you incur postal costs and are reliant on UK and foreign postal systems.
Barclays, RBS and Midland all offer guaranteed methods of transferring money direct to a foreign recipient's bank through their own mailing systems, costing a minimum of £7.50, £6 and £9.
But you have already missed the last postal dates for some countries, including Australia and New Zealand.
Monday is your last chance to send things by post to the US, Italy and Spain and Wednesday for the rest of Europe.
Your only option when sending money at the last minute to arrive by Christmas is to use the banks' electronic money transfer services which take from 24 hours to around five days depending on the bank and whether you use an express transfer.
Charges and services offered vary among the main high street banks, though using the example of sending £50 abroad NatWest and RBS work out the cheapest at £6 for a standard transfer taking around 48 hours.
Girobank charges a flat fee of £5 whatever the transfer value, but only to specific foreign banks and taking up to 10 working days.
PAGE
Johnson Matthey hit by second departure.
By Financial Staff
JOHNSON MATTHEY, the precious metals to chemicals group, was given a respite from takeover speculation yesterday after its biggest shareholder, Charter Consolidated, said it had no plans to change its 38 per cent stake.
The news came as Johnson Matthey announced a second top-level boardroom departure within 24 hours.
On Wednesday night, the group announced that its chief executive, Mr Eugene Anderson, had resigned and yesterday Johnson Matthey said its chairman, Mr Neil Clark, would be retiring from the board at the end of the year.
A Johnson Matthey spokesman dismissed any suggestion of a boardoom rift and said that the two departures were ‘not particularly connected’.
Mr Clark will be succeeded by Mr David Davies, who is currently deputy chairman of Charter Consolidated and a former chief executive of merchant bank Hill Samuel, now owned by TSB.
The role of chief executive has gone to executive director, Mr Joe Stevenson.
Mr Anderson, who joined the group in 1985, will remain a consultant.
Yesterday Johnson Matthey — which announced pre-tax profits of £33.5million — said it ‘has been authorised by Charter to say that Charter has no present intention of either buying or selling shares in the company.’
Chevron readies its defences against potential predator.
By Mary Brasier in New York
ALEGAL and financial fight erupted between two of the world's largest oil companies yesterday as Chevron rushed to raise its defences against a potential bid from smaller rivals Pennzoil.
Chevron's swift counter-attack came a day after Pennzoil announced it had spent $2.1 billion to build up a nine per cent share stake in Chevron and said it planned to continue investing in the oil giant as a passive shareholder.
Casting aside Pennzoil's claims that it had no intention of launching a bid, Chevron moved into top gear to protect itself against a takeover which could be worth $35billion and would revive memories of some of the biggest corporate battles of the 1970's and 80's.
Deploying all of the ritual tactics of a US bid battle, Chevron, founded by the Rockefeller family, filed a lawsuit to remove Pennzoil as a shareholder claiming it had violated anti-trust laws with its share purchases.
Chevron also introduced new measures — popularly known as shark repellants — to prevent an unwanted takeover, introduced a new rule which would prevent Pennzoil from calling a shareholders' meeting and asked the courts to approve its actions.
In a further move, Chevron said it had set up a $5billion agreement with international banks to provide a fighting fund to fend off its rival.
Profits climb at GUS.
Great Universal Stores, the biggest of the mail order firms, raised pre-tax profit by £8million to £171million in the six months to September, although catalogue sales and retail earnings slumped by £8million.
A £7million rise in trading profit came from the financial services division and from investment income, both lumped together in the accounts.
Financial services rose on the back of increased consumer spending on cars, according to the group, and was ‘almost buoyant’ in the half year although it has dropped back since September.
GUS has an unspecified cash pile and no borrowing, so is a beneficiary of high interest rates.
Mail order is suffering from the public's current reluctance to part with cash for non-essential goods.
‘People seem prepared to buy food and cars but not clothes’, says GUS's Trevor Spittle.
Property profits, £4.8million in the six months against £4.9 million last year, reflect the group's continued wish to weed out unwanted retail premises which are not on prime town centre sites..
GWR issues warning.
Independent radio group, GWR, which joined the USM in March and recently merged with Consolidated Radio Holdings, has warned the media sector not to talk down the buoyancy of the industry.
The company, whose profits for the year to September rose by 16 per cent to £1.66 million, said commercial opportunities, particularly for radio, were about to be expanded significantly.
The group's turnover rose from £8.1 million to £9.66 million and a final dividend of 9p a share was declared.
Setback for Archer.
The slump in insurance rates in the shipping and aviation market has hit the financial results of Lloyd's underwriting group, A J Archer, for the second year running.
Thanks to higher interest income, the group managed to nudge pre-tax profits £227,000 ahead to £6.3 million, but both turnover at £7.5 million and operating profits were lower.
Archer, whose earnings per share in the year to September climbed from 15.6p to 17.1p, raised its final dividend from 4.25p to 5p.
Lovell advance.
YJ Lovell, which is currently bidding £137million for fellow builder Higgs & Hill says it is too soon to comment on current trading but its profits for the year to September 30, rose from £24.4million to £33.3million.
Chairman Andrew Wassell, who has been asked by the Takeover Panel to clarify his comments to the Guardian on Wednesday about the level of acceptances, said: ‘It is much too soon to know but I am encouraged by the efforts we are making in winning support for our bid.’.
De La Rue retreats.
De La Rue's sale of the Crosfield Electronics printing equipment business did not relieve it of other losses in advanced security equipment and in spite of the new cash surplus, the interim results are grisly.
The main printing and payment systems activities are performing strongly and the new chief executive, Mr Jeremy Marshall, ex-BAA, needs time to show his worth.
Sales were no problem as the reduction in turnover to £161 million, from £247million in the corresponding half to September 30 translates wih the help of currency gains into a rise of 18 per cent in the businesses retained.
Pre-tax profit skidded to £16.6 million, from £23.4million.
There was more difficulty over the high tax charge and ACT relief and the interim dividend stays at 3.25p covered less than twice by almost halved earnings..
In short…
UK PAPER, which is recommending a £263million takeover bid from the Finnish Metsa-Serla group, has forecast that its profits for 1989 will be up from £13.9million to £15million and that its surplus land has been revalued at £16.9million, which is equal to 17.4p a share.
PHOENIX TIMBER'S profit fell from £995,000 to £479,000 in the half year to September 30 after some pressure on margins.
BUNZL is raising £55.6million from the sale of its US electrical products distributor EESCO.
The markets.
The market paused for breath yesterday with the FTSE index dipping seven points to 2346.7.
Trading statements and bid situations continued to provide plenty of work for analysts and recent buoyant sectors like properties, insurances, and stores ran into profit-taking.
Alphameric was the day's major casualty with its shares plunging 32 per cent to 23p as hopes for its profit recovery faded.
On results, Grand Metropolitan rose 19p to 581p but De la Rue lost 26p at 311p.
Hong Kong: Firmer.
Hang Seng index: 2,770.00 (2756.39).
Tokyo: Record highs.
Nikkei index: 37,858.11 (37,654.29).
Frankfurt: Slightly higher.
FAZ index: 714.00 (695.74).
Paris: Mostly higher.
CAC index: 547.8 (542.6).
BICC acquires Sterling.
BICC, the Balfour Beatty construction to electrical equipment combine, yesterday continued the build up of its cable making business with a £38million acquisition.
The purchase of Sterling Greengate, from the US group, Raytheon, is the latest in a series of cable companies bought by BICC.
Last year, for example, it bought Italy's biggest cable maker Ceat Cavi for £90million and followed that with the purchase of a stake in the Spanish company, Grupo Espagnol General Cables.
Earlier this year BICC paid £106million for BRIntec in the US.
Sterling Greengate, which makes power, armoured, elastomeric, electronic and control cables, has plants in Warrington in Cheshire and Aldermaston in Berkshire.
In the year to the end of November, Sterling Greengate made a pre-tax profit of £1.6 million on sales of £42million.
Net assets are put at £32.7 million..
Burns profit edges ahead.
Burns-Anderson, which can boast Sir John Harvey- Jones as its chairman until he retires next June, nudged its profit up from £4.2million to £4.6million in the year to September 30.
Unlike other recruitment companies, Burns has not found trading becoming more difficult.
Turnover on a like-for-like basis is currently ahead of last year.
However the board has no doubt that 1990 will prove a more difficult year for the UK economy as a whole.
Banking services and finance companies continued to trade profitably in spite of higher interest rates and the group's network of independent financial advisers, has made good progress, although slower than envisaged.
Sir John is confident that the group has never been stronger and has sound businesses and a management with the determination to achieve further success.
Red ink at Ross.
Ross Group turned a half-year profit of £150,000 into a loss of £220,000, underlining the task which faces the new management.
It aims to turn the headphones radios and television group into a mini-conglomerate and says that in the five weeks since new board was appointed, ‘considerable progress has already been made.’
The management has been restructured and refocused with responsibilities clearly defined, the annual cost base of the business has been reduced by some £280,000, and marketing plans are currently being put in place for next year.
Cash generation has assumed its full priority and Roger Shute, the chairman, reports that the first benefits of this policy have already been seen with bank borrowings reduced from £5.6million to £3.6million.
He is confident that a further cut in borrowings will be reported in the next report to shareholders.
In short…
HICKING PENTECOST's profit fell back to £153,000 from £415,000 as pressures on the textile industry intensified in the six months to September 30.
The interim dividend stays at 0.5p.
Its major shareholders, J Lister and J Carlson, are taking over management control of the Nottingham knitter and dyer, whose turnover rose to £11.1million from £10.5million.
The markets.
Buying for the new account, took the FTSE 100 index up 16.8 points to 1,363.5.
Volume levels held well above 400million.
Oils continued their rise in the wake of the firm crude price.
Enterprise was particularly favoured at 679p, up 23p, excited by revived speculation of a possible bid from Elf Aquitaine.
Properties and insurances gave back some of the sharp gains of the past two weeks, but building stocks were supported.
A grim report from the CBI put paid to excitement in the stores sector.
In breweries, Scottish and Newcastle was nervous ahead of Monday's interim results, easing 3p to 349p.
Tokyo: Shares retreated as investors took profits.
Nikkei index: 37,724.06 (37,858.11).
Hong Kong: Prices closed lower in sluggish trading.
Hang Seng index: 2,754.11 (2,770.00).
Frankfurt: Prices closed broadly lower in moderately active trading.
FAZ index: 691.26 (714.00).
Paris: Prices rallied to end the week broadly higher in moderate trading.
CAC index: 547.6 (547.8).
Cashpoints
Growth.
Clive Woodcock.
THE ABILITY of small firms to continue the past decade's rapid growth into the 1990s could suffer from increasing problems with what is now being called the ‘people gap’.
But the problem can take different forms, one of which is now receiving political attention, while the other — the demographic shift — is probably neither fully recognised nor understood by small and medium enterprises.
The importance of the ‘people factor’ in bringing the small business sector's share of the UK's economic activity up to that of other advanced countries is a theme which the new Small Firms Minister, Tim Eggar, intends to pursue.
The reason behind the emphasis is an admission that not enough has been done to help the small, growing company and a belief that a key element in the failure of many growing enterprises to expand beyond a certain size is the lack of links with the right people to provide help in the major decisions faced at that stage.
The encouragement of the growth of such networks, encompassing larger businesses, the education sector and other institutions ‘tapping the many skills in the community’, is seen as a priority rather than introducing new measures or rationalising existing ones.
The message of the need for more small business counselling, which is now being promoted, is aimed particularly at improving the performance of businesses in the 20-50 employee size range, which are seen to have problems.
The aim was expressed at the launch of a new report reviewing the role and prospects of the small firms sector in the economy, Small Firms in Britain, a publication which in some ways is the government's answer to pressure for a regular ‘report on small business’, similar to the weighty volume published annually in the United States.
The difficulties faced by firms are highlighted by figures in a report to be published next year.
That study, by Prof Colin Gallagher of Newcastle University, looked at the job creation performance of firms during 1985-87.
It showed that the bulk of job gains came from enterprises employing five to 19 people — some 290,000 compared with only 20,000 from firms with more than 20 people.
The big problem arose with the substantial net job losses recorded in the size range 20-49 employees, because those in the 50-1,000 range all showed increases.
The blip in the graph occurs at a crucial stage of development in firms which until that point were among the fast growers, sharply reducing the number which move on to become medium and larger firms.
Some of the cause may lie in technological changes or takeovers of small firms with growth prospects.
It can, of course, reflect managerial or technical shortcomings, the ‘people gap’ which is now being targeted.
The kind of problem to which this leads is illustrated by research by Colin Barrow, of the school of management at Cranfield Institute of Technology, among relatively young and mostly successful companies.
They are around 10 years old, employing about 25 people, with sales of £2million a year.
Their plans for growth are threatened by their apparent inability to find, retain and manage key staff — in fact, they rate the problem higher than the level of interest rates.
Unfortunately, the research revealed a high tendency for them to recruit the wrong people.
Three out of five key appointments failed to work — two-thirds of them within a year.
Such problems can quickly develop into the situation revealed among the 20-50 employee size range in the job generation study — and perhaps could be improved by the development of support networks.
A failure to recognise the implications of demographic change for the labour market as a whole is a further factor which could seriously affect the competitive position of smaller businesses.
A study by the West Midlands Regional Management Centre found employers were generally unaware of the impact of demographic changes, particularly its effect on young people entering the employment market, and were failing to look beyond traditional sources of labour.
Suggestions that small and medium enterprises are going to find life particularly difficult in the labour market of the next few years are also made in a study of recruitment problems by the Local Economy Research Unit at Hatfield Polytechnic.
It found employers ‘hopelessly ill-prepared’ for the future, with ‘knee-jerk reactions rather than strategic planning being the order of the day’, and small and medium-sized firms facing a wage spiral and a lack of education links.
Smaller firms in the past have tended to recruit younger people, especially those not continuing in full-time education.
The fall in the number of young people entering the labour market because of the drop in the birth rate, combined with a rise in those going into further and higher education, will contract that source significantly.
It has been suggested that the move to a loans-based higher educational system will provide small firms with a supply of labour, as in the US, but this is unlikely to have a major effect other than on the demand for temporary workers.
The Hatfield study found an uncritical expectation that returning women workers — women already make up a substantial part of small firm employment — would fill the gap left by young people.
But the recruitment policies of larger firms, and their strategies for retaining staff, could well diminish this source.
In fact the corporate sector is already developing policies to meet potential labour shortages, such as career break and return-to-work schemes for women as well as creche facilities, attractions with which smaller firms find it difficult to compete.
Another alternative is for the smaller firm to tap into the growth of the older population — those over 55 — arising from early retirement and redundancy policies of large firms in recent years and other factors.
But retirement and redundancy could be replaced by retention and recruitment by larger firms in the future as the labour market tightens, leaving the smaller firm out in the cold.
The trend seems likely to force small firms to compete with the large corporate sector on pay, training and fringe benefits, putting further pressure on their ability to cope with the strains of growth.
The extent to which the sector as a whole has grown dramatically in recent years is underlined in new figures produced for the government's report by the research group, Graham Bannock and Partners.
These show an accelerating rate of growth, not only in the rate of increase in VAT registered businesses, to a net average of 1,200 a week in the past year — 50 per cent up on the previous year — but also in the self-employed, who rose from just under two million to more than three million.
Mr Bannock estimates that these increases have led to substantial gains in employment, with three million more people working in businesses with fewer than 1,000 staff.
Self-employment contributed only a quarter of these jobs, contrary to widely held views that they dominate.
But the pressures on the growing small firms from the different elements of the ‘people gap’ could make it difficult to maintain the recent rate of expansion.
It just doesn't pay to lag behind the hitech revolution Technology.
AILING firms most in need of technological investment in order to compete more effectively are the least likely to innovate, and many small businesses are lagging behind in the technological revolution, writes Clive Woodcock.
These gloomy conclusions are reached in a study of small businesses and their use of new technology by Christine Edwards of Kingston Polytechnic, who interviewed small business owner-managers on the process of adopting and implementing new technology and the benefits and difficulties experienced.
Even though industrial sectors where there was little or no potential for technological innovation were not included in the study, one-quarter of firms had not bought any kind of new technology in the five previous years.
The average spending on new equipment was generally very modest but the majority of firms reported major benefits in terms of increased efficiency, quality, output, and in the range of products or services they could offer.
The uses to which equipment was put, however, were very limited with few realising the full potential of the investment.
Most computers were used either for word processing or simple information storage tasks; very few were used for analysing business trends or problems.
There were, in spite of that, some quite complex applications, such as monitoring and scheduling the progress of orders and jobs, warehouse and stock control and networking.
Most of the high technology services firms were working at the frontier of computer usage, developing new software packages or sophisticated interactive training models for business.
No firms mentioned reducing their dependence on skilled labour as a reason for introducing new technology — though a significant minority saw it as a way of reducing labour costs.
In fact, nearly half found their dependence on skilled labour had actually increased, suggesting that the ‘deskilling’ effect of new technology may have been exaggerated.
One of the major costs of implementing new technology was the need to train for new skills, but Ms Edwards found that once new technology was adopted it was often under-used or misapplied because of the lack of expertise and investment.
Three out of five firms had spent nothing on training associated with new technology in the past five years.
‘The consequence of the combined decision not to recruit expert staff or to invest in extensive training could be considerable.
Firstly, there could be a tendency to go for the ‘lowest skill’ option in the selection of new technology, in order to reduce training costs and to ensure that existing employees can cope.
‘Often, operatives who are self-taught or who have minimal instruction will use the equipment for a very limited range of tasks, never realising its full potential.
In this way, the firms will be unlikely to reap the full benefits of their equipment.’
The main reason given for restricting investment in new technology was cost.
Most owner-managers expected to finance all or part of their purchases from within the firm.
But the study was carried out at a time of economic expansion and three out of four of the firms had experienced growth in the year prior to the study.
Despite the positive benefits that most had derived from their investment, few were willing to borrow in order to expand their use.
Yet they also said that they had managed to increase output without increasing the workforce and had been able to grow more effectively.
New Business is edited by Clive Woodcock
Dixons set to seek bid probe.
By Ben Laurance
DIXONS, the electrical retailing giant, looks certain to launch a vigorous campaign for a Monopolies Commission investigation of the £461million bid for the company by Kingfisher.
In mounting his assault on Wednesday, Kingfisher chief executive Geoffrey Mulcahy claimed a successful takeover would give the group 22 per cent of the British retail electrical market.
Kingfisher already owns 307 Comet electrical stores.
But Kingfisher's claim contradicts figures from independent market researchers Verdict.
They show that in 1988, Dixons had almost 18 per cent of the electrical market, Comet 7.6 per cent and Lasky — whose 58 outlets are now owned by Kingfisher — 1.2 per cent.
That suggests a successful Dixons takeover would give Kingfisher more than 26 per cent of the market — above the 25 per cent threshold which normally triggers a monopolies inquiry.
It emerged yesterday that Kingfisher's 22 per cent was derived by counting the rental of new televisions, video recorders and other hired electrical equipment in the market total.
‘Buying, renting and various options in between are simply different ways of obtaining a piece of electrical equipment,’ said Mr Nigel Whittaker of Kingfisher.
‘They are all part of the same market.’
Mr Robert Schrager of Dixons said last night: ‘We would treat the Kingfisher figures with some scepticism.
It is up to the authorities to decide.’
Dixons chairman Mr Stanley Kalms formally rejected the Kingfisher bid saying ‘it is making an opportunist bid during a downturn in the economic cycle.’
Kingfisher yesterday tried to counter the view that its 120p-a-share bid for Dixons is only a sighting shot.
‘They are blaming their current woes on the state of the market, when in truth, we would do a better job than the Dixons management in restructuring and repositioning the business,’ said a Kingfisher executive.
More misery for Dumenil holders.
By Mihir Bose
THE back office problems that lead to last month's supension of Dumenil unit trusts were identified six months ago in a document that put the group up for sale.
The near 50-page document told prospective buyers that there were certain administrative problems but that they were being sorted out by a consultant.
Although the document did not mention him, this was believed to be Chris Burrows, previously with Henderson Adminstration.
The document — widely touted around unit trust groups — raises serious questions about the role of the managers and the trustees in informing the unit holders of the problems.
The 12,000 investors whose right to deal in the units were further suspended this week until February 5 did not hear from the managers until two weeks after the funds were first suspended on November 6.
Even that letter was written after pressure from the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) whose chief executive John Morgan is critical of the way the managers have reacted.
He says: ‘Dumenil was at fault in not communicating.
They should have written as soon as the suspension was announced.
Unit holders would have felt a sense of reassurance if the management and the trustees had written promptly to tell them that their units had been suspended.
It is communication that is necessary.’
This week's extension of the suspension has lead to a further letter to unit trust holders.
But it gives no indication that the pricing problems may have had a long history.
In October 1988 the administration of the funds was transferred from the Manchester Unit Trust Administration to an in-house system.
However the in-house system had not been properly tested and by early this year problems had started.
It was only in late October this year that it was discovered there were discrepancies between the cash the trustees were holding and the cash the managers thought the trustees were holding.
It was this that suggested that there had been pricing errors which lead to the suspension of the trusts.
Unit trust experts are mystified why this discrepancy should have taken so long to identify and the role of the trustees, Midland Bank and Coutts, who are supposed to hold the assets and keep a check on the sales and purchases.
The latest letter from Dumenil managers refers to their ‘intention’ of putting forward a ‘proposal’to allow unit holders to realise their units.
But John Morgan says: ‘Dumenil may have put forward some thoughts that might help unit holders, but it needs a lot of thought before it turns into a proposal.
At this stage they are talking of a concept.
When back office problems lead to a suspension they cannot be sorted out in short order.’
This leaves unit holders with vague promises of release from investments they have already been locked into for over a month — and may well be for a further two months or more.
Investors appear to have been effectively abandoned by both the fund managers, with whom they entrusted their investments, and also by the trustees whose main role is to safeguard these investments.
They may have to turn to the courts for satisfaction.
More misery for Dumenil holders.
By Mihir Bose
THE back office problems that led to last month's suspension of Dumenil unit trusts were identified six months ago in a document that put the group up for sale.
The near 50-page document told prospective buyers that there were certain administrative problems but that they were being sorted out by a consultant.
Although the document did not mention him, this was believed to be Chris Burrows, previously with Henderson Administration.
The document — widely touted around unit trust groups — raises serious questions about the role of the managers and the trustees in informing the unit holders of the problems.
The 12,000 investors whose right to deal in the units were further suspended this week until February 5 did not hear from the managers until two weeks after the funds were first suspended on November 6.
Even that letter was written after pressure from the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (IMRO) whose chief executive John Morgan is critical of the way the managers have reacted.
He says: ‘Dumenil was at fault in not communicating.
They should have written as soon as the suspension was announced.
Unit holders would have felt a sense of reassurance if the management and the trustees had written promptly to tell them that their units had been suspended.
It is communication that is necessary.’
This week's extension of the suspension has lead to a further letter to unit trust holders.But it gives no indication that the pricing problems may have had a long history.
In October 1988 the administration of the funds was transferred from the Manchester Unit Trust Administration to an in-house system.
However the in-house system had not been properly tested and by early this year problems had started.
It was only in late October this year that it was discovered there were discrepancies between the cash the trustees were holding and the cash the managers thought the trustees were holding.
It was this that suggested that there had been pricing errors which led to the suspension of the trusts.
Unit trust experts are mystified why this discrepancy should have taken so long to identify and the role of the trustees, Midland Bank and Coutts, who are supposed to hold the assets and keep a check on the sales and purchases.
The latest letter from Dumenil managers refers to their ‘intention’ of putting forward a ‘proposal’to allow unit holders to realise their units.
But John Morgan says: ‘Dumenil may have put forward some thoughts that might help unit holders, but it needs a lot of thought before it turns into a proposal.
At this stage they are talking of a concept.
When back office problems lead to a suspension they cannot be sorted out in short order.’
This leaves unit holders with vague promises of release from investments they have already been locked into for over a month — and may well be for a further two months or more.
Investors appear to have been effectively abandoned by both the fund managers, with whom they entrusted their investments, and also by the trustees whose main role is to safeguard these investments.
They may have to turn to the courts for satisfaction.
Money page 14 EARLY PRICES.
Grey market price (p) Yield (p) P/E ratio Anglia124-1298.515.8 Northumbrian127-1328.913.4 North West121-1268.735.6 Severn Trent125-1308.254.5 Southern125-1308.355.4 South West121-1269.683.9 Thames127-1328.105.8 Welsh123-1289.314.1 Wessex125-1308.455.0 Yorkshire123-1288.575.4 Grey market price: unofficial trading of shares ahead of issue.
Yield: dividend income relative to price paid.
P/E ratio: the price of shares relative to their current earnings.
PAGE
Foreigners eye British TV.
By Lisa Buckingham
FOREIGN media groups are expected to mount a major assault on Britain's television industry following the publication of proposed broadcasting legislation which removes constraints on European takeovers and investments.
According to media analysts at the large accounting and management consultancy group, Deloitte Haskins & Sells, ‘a major influx’ of foreign investment is likely.
George Eccles, of Deloitte, predicted that major groups such as Germany's Bertelsmann and interests controlled by magnates such as Silvio Berlusconi and Carlo de Benedetti would bid for television franchises.
The British media market is considered attractive to European groups whose own domestic expansion is hampered by national cross-ownership rules.
UK television advertising is also regarded as more sophisticated and predictable than elsewhere in Europe, making it an appealing source of revenue.
The Broadcasting Bill removes constraints on European companies wanting to own television companies or bid on their own for a Channel 3 franchise.
And Deloitte says it is unlikely that British companies will be favoured over European rivals in the franchise round which will be open to public scrutiny.
Mr Eccles says non-EC groups are also looking at the new regulations to identify ‘schemes that overcome the more onerous ownership restrictions’.
American firms, for instance, may set up EC subsidiaries.
Already major US media groups have carved an impressive stake in the peripheral broadcasting sector of independent production companies, cable and satellite channels.
And TVS, for instance, has 20 per cent of its shares in French hands.
It has been estimated that around 70 consortia in all are arranging finance to participate in the auction for major independent television franchises, with the most attractive regions such as Thames, LWT, Granada, Central, TVS and Anglia likely to draw the toughest competition.
Deloitte predicts that European groups — many of which have far greater financial fire-power than the relatively small British television contractors — will be ready to pay substantial premiums to gain a foothold in the UK market.
The independent radio sector is also thought likely to attract foreign interest.
UK groups, such as Crown Communications — parent of LBC which yesterday sold its 12 per cent stake in Chiltern — are already forging Continental links.
EMS ‘could spell mass unemployment’.
By Mark Milner
BRITAIN could face a decade of high unemployment if it became a full member of the European Monetary System without a sharp fall in the pound, according to a pressure group, the Campaign for Work.
In a robust assessment of the relative merits of joining the exchange rate mechanism, it argues the ERM will not provide a ‘soft option’ compared with other methods of slowing down the economy.
Though the group believes Britain should join, it warns that it should only do so at an exchange rate of around DM2.40 to the pound — involving a 15 per cent devaluation from the current DM2.79.
‘A high exchange rate and the monetary policy which underpins it is just as tough an instrument as domestic credit controls, tax increases or cuts in public expenditure.’
The campaign argues that the use of high exchange rates to squeeze inflation — by hitting corporate profits and therefore companies abilities to award inflationary pay increases — is ‘not a subtle process’ but is simply the ‘brutal and old fashioned one of deflation.’
It claims there is no evidence that ERM membership offers a less painful way of suppressing the spiral of wages and prices chasing each other higher.
The campaign also argues that Britain's trade deficit is unsustainable.
But though high interest rates will achieve an economic slowdown, they will also ensure that the inevitable devaluation of the pound will be more severe.
British companies are divided over timing of EMS entry, survey shows.
By Mark Milner
ALMOST nine out of ten British businesses believe Britain should become a full member of the European Monetary System, but they are deeply divided about the timing, according to a survey published yesterday.
Only one in four favours the idea of Britain joining the exchange rate mechanism immediately, compared with more than 40 per cent who believe entry should be delayed until inflation has ‘substantially dropped’.
The survey, which covered 93 of the UK's top 500 companies and 21 financial services groups, was carried out for accountants Ernst & Young last month because of concern about level of understanding among business leaders of the issues involved in ERM membership.
According to Clive Williams, the managing partner of Ernst & Young's management consultancy group, the conclusions have reinforced that concern.
‘The survey demonstrates that the debate over membership of the ERM has become clouded by issues of personalities and politics.
‘What has not been recognised is the difficulty of maintaining a stable exchange rate within the ERM unless British industry's costs rise no faster than those of our EC competitors.’
Official figures are hard to credit as families fail to claim benefit.
By Mike George
ASTAGGERING number of the hard-up are failing to claim benefit under the Family Credit Scheme — despite a recent change in government calculations.
Families struggling on low incomes can get help from the scheme provided at least one adult is working at least 24 hours a week.
When it was introduced in place of the old family income supplement scheme last year, just 38 per cent of those entitled claimed family credit.
The government subsequently altered its estimate of those able to claim and came up with a 50 per cent take-up rate.
And now Tony Newton's social security department is hoping a recent £7 million advertising campaign will boost that to 60 per cent.
Family credit is a means tested benefit paid on top of wages, or earnings from self employment.
It is almost always paid to a woman.
To qualify you must be responsible for one or more children aged under 16, or under 19 if they are still in full-time non-advanced education.
Your savings must total less than £6,000 though £1 of ‘notional income’ is added in when working out your income level for every £250 (or part thereof) of savings over £3,000.
Any children's savings are ignored, unless one of them has over £3,000, in which case you can't get family credit for that child.
The scheme is based on a so-called ‘applicable amount’, currently £54.80 a week.
Anybody whose income is less than this will get full family credit.
The payments are based on set amounts: £33.60 for a lone parent or a couple: £23.30 for each child aged 18: £16.35 for each child aged 16 or 17: £12.90 for each child aged 11 to 15, and £7.30 for each one up to 10 years of age.
If your income is above £54.80 a week, 70 per cent of the additional amount is cut from the set payments.
Sheila is a lone parent with two children, aged 13 and 15.
She works part-time, averaging 28 hours a week.
After paying tax and national insurance she gets £75 a week take home pay.
This is £20.20 above the £54.80 applicable amount, and 70 per cent of this is £14.14.
Her set amounts are £33.60 as a lone parent, plus £25.80 for the children.
That totals £59.40, but £14.14 is deducted, leaving her total family credit at £45.26 a week.
Child benefit payments, one parent benefit, housing benefit, income support and mobility and attendance allowances are all ignored as incomes for the purposes of family credit.
So Sheila's actual income is £75 from earnings, plus £14.50 child benefit (£7.25 each), £5.20 one parent benefit and £45.26 from Family Credit.
Earnings are always taken net of tax and national insurance.
For those who are weekly paid, normal earnings are estimated by looking at the last five weeks pay, or the last two months for the monthly paid.
For the self-employed it is either the last 26 weeks or the last year's set of accounts which are used.
Self-employed child minders only have one third of their net earnings taken into account as income, the rest is ignored.
Family credit is also available on unemployment benefit, although this is counted as income.
Pam and Errol have two children, aged 13 and 16.
Errol is on unemployment benefit of £34.70 a week, while Pam is bringing home £75 a week.
This adds up to £109.70, some £54.90 above the applicable amount, and 70 per cent of that is £38.43.
Their set amount for family credit is £62.85, from which £38.43 is deducted, leaving a final payment of £24.42.
With child benefit included their income has been increased from £124.20 to £148.62 a week.
If one partner has been getting statutory sick or maternity pay for a continuous period of 13 weeks or more, this is counted as income.
Otherwise these payments are ignored.
Family credit lasts for 26 weeks at a time, then you will have to reapply.
However, it will end sooner if someone else claims income support or family credit in respect of a child who was included in your family credit award.
If you feel that your award is wrong in some way you can ask for the decision to be reviewed or make an appeal — details of how to do this are available from social security benefit offices.
If you're getting housing benefit this will be affected if you claim a family credit award, as your income will increase.
In some cases this may make the prospect of an award less attractive.
Some local authorities also assume you're getting family credit, even if you haven't claimed it, and so reduce your housing benefit.
Ferranti and Germans ‘reach deal’.
By Mark Milner
TROUBLED defence electronics group Ferranti International Signal is reported to have reached a compromise with West Germany's Telefunken Systems Teknik over their rival bids to supply the radar for the European Fighter Aircraft.
However there were indications yesterday that it may be limited to proposals as to how the two would cooperate if they were ordered to combine their efforts by the NATO European Fighter Management Agency, which is responsible for purchasing the system.
There were also suggestions that Telefunken is already going cool on the terms of the compromise because they would not allow the West German group a large enough share of work on what is regarded as one of the key military avionics technologies.
The two firms are said to have indicated to NEFMA they would be able to work on the basis of Ferranti using a Telefunken-made data processor in its ECR-90 radar, he said.
The EFA radar contract is thought to be worth around £1.5billion to the consortium which wins the contract.
Of the four partners in the EFA project, Britain, Italy and Spain are thought to favour the Ferranti consortium — which also includes West Germany's Siemens — but the West German government prefers the Telefunken option.
The deadlock has meant the award of the contract is now well behind the original schedule.
The outcome is crucial to the future of Ferranti in the wake of the discovery of bogus contracts at its ISC Technologies subsidiary which forced the group to write off more than £200million.
Not only would winning the order mean around some £60 million worth of work a year for the next decade for Ferranti, but it would give a successful bidder or partner for Ferranti access to crucial next-generation radar technology.
Analysts do not expect any move for Ferranti until the radar contract is awarded, though one possible bidder — British Aerospace — has already ruled itself out.
Industry sources however suggest that the contract is extremely important to Telefunken, which is now part of the giant Daimler-Benz industrial combine.
Daimler has increasingly concentrated its defence activities on aerospace and the loss of the EFA radar contract would be a severe blow.
Reports of the compromise emerged on the same day the contract for the EFA's main electrical generator was awarded to a consortium including Ferranti and Telefunken.
Bass sells off luxury hotel.
Bass, poised to become the world's biggest hotelier with the takeover of Holiday Inns in North America, is selling its Villa Magna luxury hotel in Madrid to Shirayama of Japan for £50million.
Moody reviews debt.
Moody's, the influential US credit-rating agency, is reviewing its opinion of $248million worth (£157million) of Dixons debt in the wake of this week's bid for the electronics retailer by Kingfisher.
Wall Street.
On Wall Street, the Dow Jones index closed 10 points up at 2,731.23.
Defence firms must take different tack in the new Europe Notebook.
By Edited by Alex Brummer
AFTER the string of contract calamities, which has sent the Serious Fraud Office globetrotting, Sir Derek Alun-Jones and his beleaguered Ferranti team must now see a small chink of light.
Instead of prolonging the dogfight with West Germany's Telefunken over their rival bids for the radar contract for the European Fighter Aircraft, the two hi-tech defence manufacturers have decided to do the really European thing and co-operate; Ferranti would use the Telefunken data-processor in its ECR-90 radar.
If this outline deal is approved by the authorities, it may put into question British Aerospace's abrupt decision to pull out of its Ferranti offer — or at least seek to renegotiate the deal.
But while the ups and downs of Ferranti's future remain of keen interest, not least to its management, workers and shareholders, there are wider questions to be addressed as the Nato European Fighter Management Agency plunges into its final decisions on the European Fighter Project.
What appeared an important strand in forward-looking European defence planning only a few years ago — when the new Europe sought a measure of independence from the US defence umbrella — looks more questionable now.
Who exactly is the Euro-fighter meant to defend Britannia and our European allies against now that the Berlin Wall is down, the Soviet Union is rushing towards disarmament and the Warsaw Pact has suddenly become the best investment opportunity since the post-war Marshall Plan?
Before embarking on what will inevitably be a huge investment, would it not be better to wait and see just how the next round of arms negotiations comes out.
If the after-Malta optimism is anything to go by, Europe may end up selling its costly fighter to Middle Eastern potentates.
This would almost certainly be at a loss.
Far better, perhaps, to concentrate on civil aviation.
US carriers and Lufthansa, among others, are champing at the bit for new Berlin and East German air routes now that the air corridors, carved out in 1948, are becoming obsolete.
The East German airline Interflug and even Aeroflot have placed modest orders for the Airbus, which could quickly become vast were air corridors and airports to be opened and hard currency loans to become more freely available as Western economic assistance begins to flow.
Far better to build more advanced Airbuses for a new market than a Euro-fighter to take on a non-existent enemy which is increasingly an economic partner.
We must not let our defences down, Mrs Thatcher and other cautious voices would argue.
They are right.
There may well be new instabilities.
Even so, it would still be far cheaper to do what Europe had planned, before an upsurge of Euro-nationlism, and buy US
F-15s and F-16s off the shelf rather than waste vast development costs which could be better deployed in the commercial sector.
It may not be what Ferranti wants to hear.
But for others in civil aviation, from BAA (which has been looking at airport facilities in Budapest) to carriers such as KLM and Interflug, which are anxious for the markets, it would be just the thing.
Running risks.
THE Lloyd's of London insurance market has an unhappy knack of slipping on banana skins.
That probably accounts for some of the scepticism after the decision to ape stock market precedent and end business barriers between underwriters.
Few would question Lloyd's determination to win business which now walks past its door and into rivals such as Commercial Union.
No one would doubt the market's need to deploy its £11billion capacity more effectively — some marine syndicates work at less than half strength while syndicates in different businesses are pushing their limits.
Lloyd's needs to get a grip on more ‘safe’ business to offset its increasing tendency to be at the wrong end of big disasters such as Piper Alpha.
And the market needs to establish its credentials in Europe unless it wants to risk being a perpetual also-ran to the likes of Generali, Allianz or Swiss Re.
But occasional forays by underwriters into unknown territory have thrown up some of the market's most spectacular disasters — the 1,600 investors facing £305million of losses on Dick Outhwaite's syndicate bear eloquent testimony to that.
Professional qualifications in the market are few, although basic examinations are being introduced.
Lloyd's is insisting underwriters must join the market association for the class of business they undertake, but quality policing will fall on the shoulders of managing agents.
In practice, the hoped-for package business will probably be handled by composite syndicates formed from the merger of existing specialists, so the quality of underwriting judgment should not deteriorate.
But it is unlikely — despite disclosure of business rules — that the less aware will not find themselves on a spectacularly high-risk syndicate which had in the past played safe.
Abolition of the business class regulations is a potentially liberating move.
The market must hope, however, that its business units do not emulate the mistakes which occurred after the City's Big Bang and that the risky business of being a Lloyd's investor becomes no more precarious.
Taking heart.
INFLATION causes havoc, we all know that.
But there is havoc and havoc.
First, there is the kind that keeps the UK out of the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary System.
Then there is the South American strain.
Glass maker Pilkington yesterday bit the bullet over the Latin variety yesterday, taking a £4.4million write down against its Argentinian assets.
The reason?
A burst of hyperinflation that Pilkington's mathematicians reckon hit 73 million per cent per annum.
However, they are taking heart that it is now back to a comfortable 250 per cent.
Erm…!
Graduates in engineering shun profession Frontiers of work.
Andrew Cornelius Industrial Editor.
THE recruitment and image crisis facing British industry was cruelly exposed yesterday by a report which revealed that two out of three university engineering students graduating this year decided against a career in engineering.
A huge proportion of students, many sponsored by companies, were actually ‘turned off’ an engineering career by their experience of working in engineering firms.
According to the survey, 44 per cent of the sponsored students among the 14,000 engineers graduating in 1989 claimed that their work experience, averaging 13 months, has discouraged them from a career in engineering.
Further questioning showed that 58 per cent said they ‘knew nothing’ about the average engineering company and only 8 per cent felt ‘well informed.’
According to students, company recruitment presentations were often ‘downright boring’, made either by people who do not understand engineering, or engineers who are ‘past it’.
Around 60 per cent accused companies of issuing ‘untruthful’ recruitment brochures.
The survey arose because two final year students at Imperial College gambled with £6,000 of savings to establish a research company to plug the information gap between engineering industry and the students they wish to recruit.
Introducing the report, which was eventually sponsored by 12 top companies, including BP, Hewlett Packard and ICI, Lord Caldecote said that the study was the first ‘to present a student's eye view of the ills and problems surrounding a career in engineering’.
He said it had to be seen in the context of the UK's £25billion a year deficit on trade in manufactured goods, a 22 per cent fall in enrolment for engineering courses since 1985 and the forecast decrease in the number of 16- to 24-year-olds by the mid-1990's.
Mr Bruce Hepburn, the 24-year-old former student who helped found the Imperial Ventures company which commissioned the survey, said if companies did not improve their image ‘they will go out of business’.
He said some of Britain's top engineering companies were among those criticised by students.
The best-received firms were in the information technology and electronics sectors; the worst in traditional engineering sectors and construction.
The IVL report was based on a sample of 1,854 students, or one in 14 of the 14,000 who graduated this year.
It showed that only 35 per cent of the survey sample intended to pursue careers as engineers in industry.
A similar percentage opted for management careers, with a further 12 per cent opting for careers in commerce, management consultancy, accountancy or the City.
Sexual discrimination is also seen to be an important factor in turning female graduates away from engineering.
The survey showed that there was ‘unofficial’ discrimination against them in industry and 59 per cent said the engineering career structure worked against women succeeding.
Boesky back in town.
By Mary Brasier in New York
IVAN Boesky, the former Wall Street takeover speculator sentenced to three years in prison for insider trading, has been released from his California jail and is living within commuting distance of Wall Street, looking for a new job.
Mr Boesky's return to his old haunts comes with four months of his sentence still to run.
The once powerful arbitrageur, who dominated the takeover scene on Wall Street until his arrest in November 1986, is living in a Federal centre in the suburbs of Brooklyn, known as a halfway house between prison and the outside world.
The centre boasts fewer sporting facilities than the Lompoc prison camp in California, which offered inmates the chance to improve their tennis and basketmaking skills.
The Brooklyn house provides a gym, a library and television.
Mr Boesky is free to leave the centre during the day to look for work or meet his lawyers, but has to report back by 6pm.
Speculation that he had turned his back on the fast world of Wall Street finance was fuelled by reports that he has spent his time in prison studying the Jewish religion.
The financial community was also shocked by a recent photograph showing him looking like a down and out with flowing locks and a long white beard and wearing dirty jeans and trainers.
When Mr Boesky arrived at the Brooklyn centre earlier this week, he was seen wearing a suit, carrying a duffel bag and with his hair short and his face shaven, although the sleek look of his heyday in the early eighties was gone.
If he finds a job, it is not likely to be on Wall Street and he would have to hand a quarter of his earnings back to the Brooklyn centre.
The fallen arbitrageur has already paid $100million in fines for his offences and faces further costs from angry investors who are suing him, claiming they were cheated by his insider dealing.
Now Outhwaite strikes a deal.
By Lisa Buckingham
BELEAGUERED Lloyd's underwriter, Dick Outhwaite, has struck a $62million deal with the syndicate run by market chairman Murray Lawrence which settles the largest disputed claim against him.
Murray Lawrence & Partners, which stressed that Mr Lawrence had not been involved in recent negotiations, said it would receive $20 million next January, another $20.8million in July and $22 million in January 1996.
Representatives of the 1,600 investors on Mr Outhwaite's syndicate, who face losses of £305 million, welcomed the settlement, although spokesman Peter Nutting feared it would increase total losses.
‘The fact that this is being paid up to 1996 is not good news,’ said Mr Nutting.
‘I wouldn't have expected claims to become due before 2005 or 2010, so the payment has been accelerated.’
The investors suspect that accelerated payments are the price Mr Outhwaite has had to pay to settle the disputes with other syndicates.
By paying claims in advance, they fear Mr Outhwaite could pay more in the long term.
Investors were also warned recently that the falling value of the pound might affect syndicate performance.
They fear the deterioration of the value of the pound against the dollar may mean Mr Outhwaite is poised to demand another £60 million in cash from them — cash calls totalling £168 million have already been paid.
Three major contracts and another 19 minor ones are outstanding, but Mr Outhwaite yesterday declined to say whether he would have to increase the £305 million reserves he has set aside.
Under the latest settlement, which follows large payments to other syndicates, Mr Outhwaite will be entitled to reimbursement from Murray Lawrence & Partners if the eventual claims level falls below $62million.
New blow for Bond's crumbling empire.
By Lisa Buckingham
THE KEY company in Australian tycoon Alan Bond's crumbling empire was yesterday threatened with receivership by a rival entrepreneur, John Spalvins, who heads the Adelaide Steamship group.
Mr Spalvins holds a crucial 20 per cent stake in Bell Resources and asked Australia's High Court to appoint a receiver to the company.
He also threatened to call in the receiver to Mr Bond's master corporation and to his private family company, Dallhold Investments — the firm which sits at the top of the whole debt-laden business structure.
‘The assets of Bell Resources are in serious jeopardy if a receiver is not appointed in the very near future,’ said Adelaide Steamship's lawyer, George Palmer.
The move came as the Bond group disclosed that the fifth deadline for its A$2.5billion brewing deal with New Zealand's Lion Nathan had passed without agreement, and that the basis of talks was to change.
Bell Resources is a crucial element in the deal, since Mr Bond planned to sell it his Australian brewing interests — including Castlemaine XXXX — and then launch a bid for the enlarged group with the backing of Lion Nathan.
The shuffling of Mr Bond's brewing assets is considered pivotal to the Bond Corporation's ability to resolve its A$8billion debt crisis and to the survival of his brewing, property and media empire.
But his group also faces the threat of liquidation proceedings over a A$150million disputed indemnity agreement.
Mr Spalvins — one of the few Australian entrepreneurs still to hold his head high — declared his intention of imposing five directors on Bell Resources.
Initially Mr Bond gave his approval, but it is understood that sanction has subsequently been withdrawn.
Mr Bond's attempts to use the cash in Bell Resources — acquired from the toppled Australian raider, Robert Holmes a Court, last year — have been hampered from the start by Mr Spalvins.
The Bond organisation, however, succeeded in securing a ‘deposit’ of A$1.2billion from Bell Resources for the brewery business, which Mr Spalvins has insisted must be repaid if the Lion Nathan deal does not go through.
The original agreement with Lion Nathan was disclosed on September 19 and has subsequently been postponed five times.
Tourist Board faces probe.
The Welsh Tourist Board's system of recommending self-catering holiday accommodation is to be investigated by the Office of Fair Trading for ‘possible anti-competitive practices’.
The board only markets accommodation which has passed an inspection for which it charges a fee.
Chairman, Prys Edwards, said the scheme aimed to protect holidaymakers.
Cable&Wireless boost.
The contract to operate a mobile telephone service in West Germany has been awarded to the Mannesmann-led consortium, which includes Britain's Cable & Wireless.
Macarthy bows out.
Pharmacy chain Macarthy has dropped attempts to have a sales promotion scheme by drugs retailer UniChem declared illegal.
Eagle Trust move.
Eagle Trust, the beleaguered mini-conglomerate being investigated by the Serious Fraud Office, obtained High Court approval to remove the vote from a further 80,000 shares to add to the 67,420,000 already disenfranchised.
PowerGen deal.
PowerGen, one of the two CEGB successor generating companies, has struck the first direct sale power contract before privatisation.
The £50 million deal involves supplies to Toyota's new factory in Derbyshire.
Casino talks off.
Stanley Leisure has broken off talks with Leisure Investments — now at the centre of a bid from Bear Brand — over the planned purchase of Aspinall's Casino in London.
Short and sweet.
Short Brothers has won two orders worth £40 million for its Javelin close-air defence weapon system from the Ministry of Defence and an unnamed country.
Going Down Under.
A sharp rise in the number of Australian companies appointing receivers and liquidators has been reported by the National Companies and Securities Commission.
Wall Street falls.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed down 15.99 points at 2,720.78.
UAL in new bid talks.
By Mary Brasier in New York
NEW ATTEMPTS are underway to revive Wall Street's most celebrated failed deal — the buyout of United Airlines which collapsed spreading chaos on the stock market two months ago — with little enthusiasm for a revised offer for the company before next year.
UAL chairman Stephen Wolf, who is under pressure from the rest of his board to deliver the company from its limbo state since the original $6.75billion buyout plan was dropped, began another round of talks this week with the airline's employees and union leaders to raise support for a bid likely to be worth as little as $4.5billion.
Wall Street is not holding its breath waiting for a new deal.
The latest talks, which began with a meeting planned between the flight attendants union and management on Wednesday to discuss a new labour contract are not expected to produce firm proposals and the next bid for United Airlines may not get off the ground until well into 1990.
Mr Wolf is involved in negotiations with Chicago financier Jay Pritzker, whose interests include the Hyatt hotel chain and who has considered bids for other US airlines such as Eastern and NWA in the past year.
But financing for a fresh bid remains the main hurdle.
Wall Street is sceptical that a link with Mr Pritzker will materialise, leaving UAL to find an equity partner to replace British Airways, which had agreed to put up $750million for a 15 per cent stake in the buyout consortium.
BA is keeping its distance from attempts by Stephen Wolf and Jay Pritzker to revive the bidding consortium, but there are still hopes in the US that it could be persuaded to step in at the last minute to add weight to a new bid.
BA still has a marketing agreement with United, which it is keen to preserve and the appointment last week of Sir Gordon White of Hanson Industries to the BA board is seen as improving the airline's negotiating skills in the US.
PAGE
Overseas comfort for Pilkington.
By Mark Milner
AS CLOUDS gather over the UK economy, glass maker Pilkington yesterday drew comfort from the international spread of its windows and windscreens to contact lenses operations.
Chairman Antony Pilkington acknowledged concern that high interest rates were beginning to hit some UK customers.
But he added that, with three-quarters of the company's business now overseas, foreign exchange rates were moving in the right direction.
At the interim stage, Pilkington turned in pre-tax profits up 6per cent to £147 million and a 10per cent increase in the dividend to 2.93p a share.
‘We regard it as a very satisfactory half year, bearing in mind that the world's economies are not quite as clear cut as they were a year ago.
We think this is a solid performance.’
The core flat and safety glass business ground out another steady improvement, with Pilkington seeking to add value with products such as its ‘K’ glass.
Though the outlook for the UK is not as bright as it might be and the US is likely to take a knock from an end of price discounting in the car market, Europe looks set to turn in another strong performance.
The visioncare business, which Pilkington has been nurturing for three years and where it now ranks in the world's top three, increased its operating profits by £4.4 million to £18.8 million.
Though Mr Pilkington cautions against over-optimistic expectations, he is confident that the visioncare business is firmly on track.
There have been hiccups — the UK government decision to introduce eye tests, for example, brought a bulge in demand which has been followed with a corresponding flat patch — but the group reckons the long term is promising as ageing populations and greater access to markets such as India and China boost demand.
However, the defence related optronics business hit a sticky patch and lost £4.8 million — though Pilkington said the bulk of that stemmed from redundancy costs.
The group is still looking for possible partners for its optronics operations, though it insists that so far there have only been talks, not negotiations.
The group's jointly-owned South African business produced another strong performance and Mr Pilkington is dismissive of suggestions that his group might consider disinvestment.
Better for the employees and pensioners, he said yesterday, for Pilkington to stay and run the business as it runs its UK operations.
Going crackers over Christmas?
Then give your gift ideas a financial flavour.
FINANCIAL gifts could be the answer for friends and relatives who've got everything this Christmas.
Telephone savings stamps at £1 each, TV licence stamps in 50p denominations, or water bill savings stamps, at £1 and £2 each are a good idea for elderly hard-pressed relatives.
The post office is also the place to buy Premium Bonds; minimum £10 for those aged under 16 or £100 for those aged 16 or over.
The Royal Mint sells modern coins from a keepsake set of all seven uncirculated 1989 coins at £5.75 to expensive commemorative sovereigns.
Old and antique coins can be bought from specialist dealers like Spink and Son in London (Tel: 01-930 7888).
A famous Bun penny in mint condition or a King Henry II penny sell for around £50.
A 2,000-year-old Roman coin or and Elizabeth I sixpence go for just under £100, while a William the Conqueror silver penny is a little more.
Spinks also sell old English banknotes, which are more likely to rise steadily in value.
A black and white £5 note, printed between 1920 and 1956, costs from £20.
Those in mint condition have doubled in value over the last two years to around £50.
More plentiful are Second World War £1 notes going for £4 to £5, while the rarer 10 shilling notes cost around £10.
Tim Robson of auctioneers Sotheby's says that Latin American railways bonds depicting trains and elaborately coloured Chinese bonds are some of the prettiest notes around.
Both are available for under £20 from dealers such as Westcombe Investments (P.O.Box 84, Leatherhead, Surrey KT22 ODC).
You can find out more from the Bond and Share Society (secretary Peter Duppa-Miller on 0305-262697) or through the largest UK dealer Michael Veissid (06944-268).
Presents that will help with financial planning include two books from the Consumers' Association: Which?
Way to Save and Invest (£10.95) and Getting the Best Deal for Your Money (£6.95), both published by Hodder & Stoughton.
Money gifts for children include cash deposited in special children's building society and bank accounts which usually have free gifts when new accounts are open.
But do not be dazzled by the free pens, badges, money boxes and radios.
Gross-paying accounts are best for most children as long as their gross annual income does not exceed their personal tax-free allowance; £2,785 for the tax year 1989/90.
While tax deducted at source from certain investment income, such as UK share dividends, is reclaimable by non-taxpayers, the composite-rate tax deducted at source from interest paid by banks and building society accounts is not.
Therefore, for a child, compare the net interest rate paid out by the banks and building societies with the gross rate paid by others, notably National Savings products.
Parents, however, should remember that if they give their child an investment that produces over £5 annual income, it will usually be taxed as their own unless the child is over 18 or married.
Although no incentive frills are attached to a National Savings Investment Account, the variable interest rate paid gross (currently 11.75 per cent) tends to be around 3 per cent higher than the best net rates offered by the major competitors.
An account can be opened at any post office with a minimum of £5.
As with most child accounts, children cannot make withdrawals until they are seven.
This is the best deal, although it differs from the bank and building society accounts in requiring one month's notice for withdrawals.
Parents opening accounts will find that The Royal Bank of Scotland's Rainbow Savings account comes out top of the major high street banks, paying 8.25 per cent net, followed by the Bank of Scotland's Supersaver at 7.82 per cent.
Both require a minimum investment of £1, give instant access and include gifts.
Of the larger building societies, Chelsea is offering 10.25 per cent net and Britannia 8.5 per cent.
It is also worth looking at the smaller, regional building societies.
Some offer comparable, even higher, net rates than the Investment Account's gross rate, though there can be a small catch.
The Sheffield, for example, currently offers the best rate at 12.36 net, but only children whose parents or grandparents are existing savers may open an account and there is a maximum investment of £500.
The latest survey by Which? magazine rates accounts from Leek United & Midland, and Harpenden, paying net rates of 11.44 and 11.41 respectively, as the next best deals.
For longer-term investments, a good guaranteed rate for non-taxpaying children is offered by National Savings Capital Bonds.
Left untouched for five years, a minimum investment of £100 in the Series A bond is guaranteed to grow to £176.24; a compound rate of 12 per cent gross per year.
Leaflets on all National Savings products are available at post offices.
To compare the latest rates and conditions on children's accounts, look at Blay's Money Master monthly tables at your local reference library.
An alternative could be high coupon gilts as the tax can be reclaimed.
But with the present high interest rates they do not form a great investment.
Curiously, the unit trust industry — usually quick to hype its products — has been rather slow to attract children.
This may be because nobody under 18 can own unit trusts in their own names.
Parents could buy units for their children but there is only one group that has tried to target children — the MIM Rupert Trust.
Even so, all that can be done here is designate a unit holder under 18, the child is only a beneficial owner.
However to attract parents and others to invest on behalf of the child the initial investment is £50, with additional payments of £25 or a monthly savings plan of £10.
The charges of a 5 per cent initial fee, 1.25 per cent annual, are standard.
The plan can be attractive to anybody other than a parent making a gift to a child.
In that case the tax deducted on the dividends can be reclaimed provided it is meant for a non tax paying child.
But if parents buy it for the child the dividend is considered part of the parents income.
As for direct exposure to the stock market, the advice of Malcolm Roberts of Montague Fleming is: ‘It would not be advisable to buy shares in the name of a child under 16.
You get all sorts of practical problems like can they sign transfer forms and many Registrars would refuse to accept them.
What parents can do is buy in both their names with an account designation of up to three letters which would be the child's initial.
They should not mark it as trustee because Registrars would not accept it.’
Money Guardian is edited by Personal Finance Editor Margaret Hughes
Going crackers over Christmas?
Then give your gift ideas a financial flavour.
FINANCIAL gifts could be the answer for friends and relatives who've got everything this Christmas.
Telephone savings stamps at £1 each, TV licence stamps in 50p denominations, or water bill savings stamps, at £1 and £2 each are a good idea for elderly hard-pressed relatives.
The post office is also the place to buy Premium Bonds; minimum £10 for those aged under 16 or £100 for those aged 16 or over.
The Royal Mint sells modern coins from a keepsake set of all seven uncirculated 1989 coins at £5.75 to expensive commemorative sovereigns.
Old and antique coins can be bought from specialist dealers like Spink and Son in London (Tel: 01-930 7888).
A famous Bun penny in mint condition or a King Henry II penny sell for around £50.
A 2,000-year-old Roman coin or and Elizabeth I sixpence go for just under £100, while a William the Conqueror silver penny is a little more.
Spinks also sell old English banknotes, which are more likely to rise steadily in value.
A black and white £5 note, printed between 1920 and 1956, costs from £20.
Those in mint condition have doubled in value over the last two years to around £50.
More plentiful are Second World War £1 notes going for £4 to £5, while the rarer 10 shilling notes cost around £10.
Tim Robson of auctioneers Sotheby's says that Latin American railways bonds depicting trains and elaborately coloured Chinese bonds are some of the prettiest notes around.
Both are available for under £20 from dealers such as Westcombe Investments (P.O.Box 84, Leatherhead, Surrey KT22 ODC).
You can find out more from the Bond and Share Society (secretary Peter Duppa-Miller on 0305-262697) or through the largest UK dealer Michael Veissid (06944-268).
Presents that will help with financial planning include two books from the Consumers' Association: Which?
Way to Save and Invest (£10.95) and Getting the Best Deal for Your Money (£6.95), both published by Hodder & Stoughton.
Money gifts for children include cash deposited in special children's building society and bank accounts which usually have free gifts when new accounts are open.
But do not be dazzled by the free pens, badges, money boxes and radios.
Gross-paying accounts are best for most children as long as their gross annual income does not exceed their personal tax-free allowance; £2,785 for the tax year 1989/90.
While tax deducted at source from certain investment income, such as UK share dividends, is reclaimable by non-taxpayers, the composite-rate tax deducted at source from interest paid by banks and building society accounts is not.
Therefore, for a child, compare the net interest rate paid out by the banks and building societies with the gross rate paid by others, notably National Savings products.
Parents, however, should remember that if they give their child an investment that produces over £5 annual income, it will usually be taxed as their own unless the child is over 18 or married.
Although no incentive frills are attached to a National Savings Investment Account, the variable interest rate paid gross (currently 11.75 per cent) tends to be around 3 per cent higher than the best net rates offered by the major competitors.
An account can be opened at any post office with a minimum of £5.
As with most child accounts, children cannot make withdrawals until they are seven.
This is the best deal, although it differs from the bank and building society accounts in requiring one month's notice for withdrawals.
Parents opening accounts will find that The Royal Bank of Scotland's Rainbow Savings account comes out top of the major high street banks, paying 8.25 per cent net, followed by the Bank of Scotland's Supersaver at 7.82 per cent.
Both require a minimum investment of £1, give instant access and include gifts.
Of the larger building societies, Chelsea is offering 10.25 per cent net and Britannia 8.5 per cent.
It is also worth looking at the smaller, regional building societies.
Some offer comparable, even higher, net rates than the Investment Account's gross rate, though there can be a small catch.
The Sheffield, for example, currently offers the best rate at 12.36 net, but only children whose parents or grandparents are existing savers may open an account and there is a maximum investment of £500.
The latest survey by Which? magazine rates accounts from Leek United & Midland, and Harpenden, paying net rates of 11.44 and 11.41 respectively, as the next best deals.
For longer-term investments, a good guaranteed rate for non-taxpaying children is offered by National Savings Capital Bonds.
Left untouched for five years, a minimum investment of £100 in the Series A bond is guaranteed to grow to £176.24; a compound rate of 12 per cent gross per year.
Leaflets on all National Savings products are available at post offices.
To compare the latest rates and conditions on children's accounts, look at Blay's Money Master monthly tables at your local reference library.
An alternative could be high coupon gilts as the tax can be reclaimed.
But with the present high interest rates they do not form a great investment.
Curiously, the unit trust industry — usually quick to hype its products — has been rather slow to attract children.
This may be because nobody under 18 can own unit trusts in their own names.
Parents could buy units for their children but there is only one group that has tried to target children — the MIM Rupert Trust.
Even so, all that can be done here is designate a unit holder under 18, the child is only a beneficial owner.
However to attract parents and others to invest on behalf of the child the initial investment is £50, with additional payments of £25 or a monthly savings plan of £10.
The charges of a 5 per cent initial fee, 1.25 per cent annual, are standard.
The plan can be attractive to anybody other than a parent making a gift to a child.
In that case the tax deducted on the dividends can be reclaimed provided it is meant for a non tax paying child.
But if parents buy it for the child the dividend is considered part of the parents income.
As for direct exposure to the stock market, the advice of Malcolm Roberts of Montague Fleming is: ‘It would not be advisable to buy shares in the name of a child under 16.
You get all sorts of practical problems like can they sign transfer forms and many Registrars would refuse to accept them.
What parents can do is buy in both their names with an account designation of up to three letters which would be the child's initial.
They should not mark it as trustee because Registrars would not accept it.’
Money Guardian is edited by Personal Finance Editor Margaret Hughes PAGE
Costs of sending £50 abroad by various methods BarclaysLloydsMidland|ONatWestRBS International Money Order£5 £4-- £3 Banker's Draft£9 £8 £6 £7 £6 Electronic Transfer standard £12.50 £8£15 £6 £6 express £12.50£15£15 £7£10 Note (1): Services offered only to existing customers.
Us generation will be on the lookout for Our Shop Saturday notebook.
By Ben Laurance
WATCH OUT for another public display of City myopia.
Over the next two months, we will be subjected to a barrage of argument, statistics and plain propaganda from Woolworths (yes, call it Kingfisher if you want, but most people will still think of it as Woolies) and from Dixons.
From Dixons, we will hear that the company should retain its independence because its current trading woes are a product of a consumer squeeze over which it has no control and because it will make lots of money when times get better and we have more spare cash with which to buy new tellies, video recorders, fridges etc.
From Woolworths, we will hear that the Dixons management have brought their troubles on themselves, that their attempts to cope with the downturn have been lamentable and that only a new team — with a more analytical approach than the pile-it-high philosophy which did Dixons so proud when times were good — can engineer the necessary closure of small high street outlets in favour of a move to larger ones on the edge of town.
This is how the argument will be fought.
And it is on these grounds that the City will make up its mind about whether to give Dixons' Stanley Kalms a chance or to pocket the £460million on offer from Woolworths' Geoff Mulcahy.
The City will bang a few numbers into its computers, mutter something about sector relative p/e ratios and come up with an answer: yes or no.
It will fail to ask the rather broader and much more important question about retailing: how is the great British public likely to be doing its shopping in five or 10 years' time?
Will every British high street look the same, with the same familiar handful of names dominating the shopfronts from Penzance to Perth?
Extrapolate the trends of the last 40 years and such a depressing scenario looks like a dead cert.
(Mind you, if you had extrapolated the trend of Dixons sales in the mid-80s, you would have concluded that by the year 2020 we would be spending every penny of our income on consumer electronics.)
But wait.
Look at what Geoff Mulcahy was saying earlier this year: that within electronics retailing as a whole, the big national chains were losing market share to independent, one-person operations.
So although he was able to boast that his own Comet (which, with Woolies, B&Q and Superdrug, makes the four retailing legs of the Kingfisher group) was taking market share from other national chains, its share of the total electrical market was actually falling.
And that raises the first crucial question: in which branches of retailing do economies of scale give a real benefit to the big players?
In supermarkets, the evidence is all one way.
We apparently like large stores with lots of choice and a car park.
(The idea that supermarkets win customers because their goods are cheaper is passe; the battle for trade is now won or lost on range and convenience.)
And the Sainsburys, Tescos and Safeways of the world are the people with the financial clout and organisational know-how to spend the £15million or so which it takes to buy the land, negotiate the planning hurdles, employ a builder and stock the shelves to open a new superstore on a good site.
Hence, Britain's five biggest supermarket groups now account for more than 60 per cent of all grocery sales.
In food retailing, bigger is better.
But with non-food shops, the picture is far less clear.
Electrical retailing provides one example where the one-person shop with its promise of good advice and after-sales service can score over the anonymity of a Dixons or a Comet.
With clothes, most of us like to believe that our tastes are idiosyncratic, which suggests that we will often go out of our way — and pay through the nose — to buy something a bit different.
Of course, there will always be room for a reassuring and reliable M&S, Boots or WHSmith as a shop of last resort.
But as we move into the gentler, more thoughtful 1990s, Britain's big retailers — and the people who invest money in them — should bear three things in mind.
First, there always has been and always will be room for a small shopkeeper with a bright idea.
Big companies are vulnerable to such upstarts.
National chains rarely dream up new, successful and really different ventures themselves; they only ape — doubtless quite efficiently — the ideas of small innovative entrepreneurs.
Boots didn't think of Body Shop; it just copied the packaging.
WHSmith didn't create Our Price; it just took over the business.
Second, shoppers are a fickle lot.
Look at the high street favourites of five years ago and ask how well they're doing now: in the nineties we could be saying bye-bye Next and cheerio Habitat.
And third, if — and admittedly, this is a huge if — the next decade sees a retreat from the brash consumerism of the mid-1980s, one cannot resist the thought that it is small, local businesses which will better cope with, pander to and profit from the change in mood.
Big organisations are terribly bad at making a customer feel he or she is the most important person in the world.
In the nervous nineties, when the Me generation has grown into the Us generation, we will be looking for Our Shop rather than just an emporium where they stock personal stereos by the thousand.
And where will that leave Dixons — whoever owns it?
Mint turns the clock back to a time when sovereign was king of coins.
By Morag Campbell
FIVE hundred years ago King Henry VII instructed the officers of his Royal Mint, then in the Tower of London, to produce ‘a new money of gold.’
Partly a public relations exercise to enhance the king's status, the coin was intended to convey the majesty of the throne and the dignity of the monarch — hence the name sovereign.
The present Royal Mint, now in Wales, has issued a set of commemorative coins to celebrate that 500th anniversary.
The original sovereign continued to be struck until 1603, when James I ascended the throne, but was revived in 1817.
Although this sovereign was half the weight and half the diameter of the original one, such was the international respect it enjoyed that people could travel through Europe confident that the coins would be welcomed wherever they went.
‘Originally worth 20 shillings,’ the Royal Mint says, ‘the sovereign was the country's first pound coin.’
Today, the price of a sovereign is £149.95p, including VAT.
For that price, you get 7.98 grammes of 22 carat gold.
However, you would not get £149.95p each if you fell on hard times and wanted to sell your sovereigns.
Rarity, the quality of the design, historical associations and, particularly, melt value all determine the maket value of gold coins.
In popular mythology, gold is regarded as a good investment.
In our collective folk memory — or possibly as a result of seeing too many old Hollywood movies — we think of gold in the form of coins as eminently portable in times of national emergency.
National emergencies, however, may not necessarily coincide with times of personal emergency and gold is an erratic investment.
In February 1980, for instance, 24 carat peaked at $850 an ounce.
Currently it stands just above $400 an ounce having tumbled in May this year to its lowest level since August 1986.
The popularity of South Africa's kruggerrand was due largely to the fact that collectors were buying a precise quantity of gold at only a fraction over the actual cost of the precious metal.
The imposition of VAT on the kruggerrand and other gold coins meant that gold had to rise by at least 20 per cent on their initial investment before a private collector could show a profit.
In similar fashion the bottom fell out of the illustrious 1817 sovereign market in the mid-1970s when investors realised that they were paying 50 per cent over the melt price for a coin minted in millions.
The three-coin set of Quincentenary commemorative gold coins — double-sovereign, sovereign and half-sovereign struck in 22 carat gold — is limited to an issue of 10,000 and costs £499.95 including VAT.
Individual sovereign coins can also be bought separately.
While a collector may be happy to pay over the odds for such interesting issues, an investor would have to be confident of rising gold prices to show a profit on resale.
If you don't feel bold or rich enough to take a gamble on sovereigns, for only £7.25, you can buy a presentation folder containing one each of the £2 coins issued to commemorate the 300th anniversary of the Bill of Rights and the Scottish Claim of Rights.
And for £9.95 you can purchase a Baby Pack — colour co-ordinated in pink or blue to the sex of the recipient — which not only includes a set of brilliant uncirculated 1989 coins but space to record baby's important details.
All coins issued by the Royal Mint can be viewed at 7 Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1.
Mail order is available through the Royal Mint Coin Club, Freepost, P.O.Box 500, Cardiff CF1 1YY.
Telephone 0443-223880.
Mint turns the clock back to a time when sovereigns were king coins.
By Morag Campbell
FIVE hundred years ago King Henry VII instructed the officers of his Royal Mint, then in the Tower of London, to produce ‘a new money of gold.’
Partly a public relations exercise to enhance the king's status, the coin was intended to convey the majesty of the throne and the dignity of the monarch — hence the name sovereign.
The present Royal Mint, now in Wales, has issued a set of commemorative coins to celebrate that 500th anniversary.
The original sovereign continued to be struck until 1603, when James I ascended the throne, but was revived in 1817.
Although this sovereign was half the weight and half the diameter of the original one, such was the international respect it enjoyed that people could travel through Europe confident that the coins would be welcomed wherever they went.
‘Originally worth 20 shillings,’ the Royal Mint says, ‘the sovereign was the country's first pound coin.’
Today, the price of a sovereign is £149.95p, including VAT.
For that price, you get 7.98 grammes of 22 carat gold.
However, you would not get £149.95p each if you fell on hard times and wanted to sell your sovereigns.
Rarity, the quality of the design, historical associations and, particularly, melt value all determine the maket value of gold coins.
In popular mythology, gold is regarded as a good investment.
In our collective folk memory — or possibly as a result of seeing too many old Hollywood movies — we think of gold in the form of coins as eminently portable in times of national emergency.
National emergencies, however, may not necessarily coincide with times of personal emergency and gold is an erratic investment.
In February 1980, for instance, 24 carat peaked at $850 an ounce.
Currently it stands just above $400 an ounce having tumbled in May this year to its lowest level since August 1986.
The popularity of South Africa's kruggerrand was due largely to the fact that collectors were buying a precise quantity of gold at only a fraction over the actual cost of the precious metal.
The imposition of VAT on the kruggerrand and other gold coins meant that gold had to rise by at least 20 per cent on their initial investment before a private collector could show a profit.
In similar fashion the bottom fell out of the illustrious 1817 sovereign market in the mid-1970s when investors realised that they were paying 50 per cent over the melt price for a coin minted in millions.
The three-coin set of Quincentenary commemorative gold coins — double-sovereign, sovereign and half-sovereign struck in 22 carat gold — is limited to an issue of 10,000 and costs £499.95 including VAT.
Individual sovereign coins can also be bought separately.
While a collector may be happy to pay over the odds for such interesting issues, an investor would have to be confident of rising gold prices to show a profit on resale.
If you don't feel bold or rich enough to take a gamble on sovereigns, for only £7.25, you can buy a presentation folder containing one each of the £2 coins issued to commemorate the 300th anniversary of the Bill of Rights and the Scottish Claim of Rights.
And for £9.95 you can purchase a Baby Pack — colour co-ordinated in pink or blue to the sex of the recipient — which not only includes a set of brilliant uncirculated 1989 coins but space to record baby's important details.
All coins issued by the Royal Mint can be viewed at 7 Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1.
Mail order is available through the Royal Mint Coin Club, Freepost, P.O.Box 500, Cardiff CF1 1YY.
Telephone 0443-223880.
PAGE
Standard Chartered City HQ sold for £145m.
By Lisa Buckingham
STANDARD Chartered Bank, the group with an uncomfortable level of exposure to the troubled Australian entrepreneur, Alan Bond, has sold its prestige headquarters building for £145million as part of efforts to shore up its capital ratios.
The glitzy building — boasting an address on Bishopsgate, now one of the City's favoured streets — was opened just three years ago but became an obvious target once the bank needed to put the family silver up for auction to improve its financial standing.
The eight-storey office is being sold to the Japanese group, Kumagai, for a price which appears to belie the downturn in London's commercial property market.
Known for its gleaming and airy entrance lobby, bedecked with trees and tropical plants which became a night-time illumination, the building was regarded as one of the more tasteful and less controversial of the City's recently constructed edifices.
Dubbed by some as ‘the imperial palace’, Standard's Bishopsgate offices were opened by the Queen and it is understood there was no shortage of potential bidders.
The bank, which paid £70million to have its headquarters constructed, said it was ‘delighted’, although it declined to say exactly what book profit it had made on the deal.
The transaction compares with other headline City property deals, such as the £143million sale of the listed Financial Times building to Obhayashi and the £140million sale of the River Plate building at Finsbury Circus.
The building group, Taylor Woodrow, has launched a joint venture with the major Japanese contractor, Mitsui Kensetsu, to develop top of the market UK residential and commercial property.
New blow for Bond, page 13
Move to scupper James Sherwood's defence plan.
By Daniel John
THE Anglo-Swedish consortium bidding for Sea Containers, the Sealink ferries-to-Orient Express group, yesterday raised its hostile offer to $1.036billion (£659 million) in a move to scupper James Sherwood's defence plan which involves selling the Isle of Wight service and the port of Harwich.
Temple Holdings — the bidding vehicle being used by UK container company Tiphook and ferry operator Stena — moved to equal the share buy-back offer put together by SeaCo president Mr Sherwood after the Bermuda courts blocked its latest attempt to overturn the rescue terms.
The addition of another $7 a share to Temple's bid levels out the fight and gives SeaCo shareholders a straight choice between the existing management and the ambitious consortium who plan to split the assets between them.
The new offer was accompanied by a call for SeaCo to put Mr Sherwood's proposal to sell several assets to a vote of shareholders whose support is crucial to the ‘poison pill’ defence plan going ahead.
Deals have already been struck to dispose of $641million worth of businesses to American and UK buyers and any decision by shareholders to block them would be a fatal blow to the recapitalisation of the SeaCo group.
Mr Sherwood has offered to raise $1.1billion from the sell-offs, and would use at least half the proceeds to buy back stock from shareholders at $70 a share.
Attempts by Temple to have the plan and purchases of SeaCo shares by the group's subsidiaries ruled illegal have so far failed in the Bermudan courts.
By increasing its offer, Temple has taken the fight directly to SeaCo's shareholders.
It also put pressure on Mr Sherwood to call the company's long-delayed annual meeting to consider the bid by saying it would demand an extraordinary meeting in an attempt to vote in a new board of directors.
In a joint statement, Robert Montague, Tiphook's chairman, and Dan Olsson, chief executive of Stena, said Mr Sherwood should allow shareholders to decide SeaCo's future.
‘We are confident that they will prefer our immediate all cash offer to the SeaCo board's highly conditional alternative to purchase half the shares at some unspecified future date.’
Most of the cash top-up for the Temple bid is being provided by Stena which would end up with Sealink's lucrative cross-channel ferry business if the offer succeeds.
Tiphook, which has chipped in $14.8million towards the $103million ‘sweetener’, will get the container operations.
Mr Sherwood reacted by saying that the new terms from Temple had once again delayed SeaCo's intention to set a date for the shareholder meeting.
Its board had planned to do that yesterday but this had now been postponed — a move the SeaCo president regretted.
Temple's decision to increase its offer had not come as a surprise, he said, and the SeaCo board would meet next week to consider its response.
However, it seems almost certain that Mr Sherwood and his team will reject the bid, which he has described as ‘inadequate’.
SeaCo itself may come back with a slightly better offer as the sale of assets agreed so far is thought to have raised more money than was planned.
The biggest deals have involved the purchase of its cargo container business by the US giant, Genstar, for nearly $400million and the disposal of the IoW ferries to a company formed by the Cazyer and Iliffe families in Britain for £107million.
A buyer has yet to be announced for Harwich, where SeaCo recently announced proposals for a £200million industrial, leisure and residential development.
Midland to swap debt for Argentina equity stakes.
By Mark Milner
MIDLAND Bank is planning to swap a chunk of its $1.3billion Argentinian debt for stakes in some of the country's most important infrastructure projects.
The Argentinian Government, under President Carlos Menem, has announced ambitious plans to privatise large sections of the country's public sector, including its telephone system, Entel; the national airline, Aerolineas Argentinas; as well as road, rail, port and petro-chemical facilities.
Midland is linking up with an affiliate of the World Bank, International Finance Corporation, Banco Rio de la Plata — Argentina's largest bank — and the Bank of Tokyo, to set up an initial $500million fund which would swap existing debt for stakes in newly privatised operations.
Midland is expected to put $100million of its debt portfolio into the scheme but it will not be putting up any new money.
The move is seen as a way of helping to get the Argentinian privatisation programme off the ground and to make some inroads into the country's foreign debt, which currently totals some $60billion.
Debt-for-equity swaps have been used before in a number of South American countries, including Argentina, as banks have sought different ways of tackling the region's chronic debt problem.
Midland has already swapped a substantial part of its Chilean debt exposure for equity and has also been involved in similar, private sector, schemes in Argentina.
However, this is the first scheme in Argentina which involves equity stakes in privatisations.
Though debt-for-equity swaps represent one way for banks to recover part of their developing country debt exposure, they still stand to lose money and look likely to have to wait for some years before they can cash in their equity stakes.
Midland has currently made provisions against just over 50 per cent of its South American debt exposure, in line with Bank of England guidelines.
However, loans to Argentina are said to change hands at between 12 and 15 per cent of their face value in the secondary debt market.
Midland estimates that it will be able to trade its debt for equity stakes at between 30 per cent and 40 per cent of the face value of the loans — getting equity stakes valued between $30million and $40million in exchange for an existing $100million loan.
It is likely to be up to 10 years before the banks would be able either to sell their stake on the local stock market or to pass on their holdings to other investors.
The likely swap rates are also below existing provision levels.
However, a Midland Bank spokesman said the group expected the dividend flow from the investments acquired to be preferable to the dividend flow from its Argentinian loan portfolio.
TCS helps to bridge the gap between gown and town.
By Martyn Halsall Northern Industrial Correspondent
STUART RILEY, a marketing specialist at the University of Lancaster, recognised his role in industrial change when he was asked to wear a suit for factory visits.
Staff at the BICC wiring division headquarters on Merseyside crossed their divide when Riley recommended casual clothing for a discussion day he had arranged in the Lune Valley.
Such details are hardly at the heart of ‘introducing major operational change’, which the Government's Teaching Company Scheme (TCS) proposes, but they form intriguing by-products.
They also illustrate the widening agenda of a project set for radical expansion before 1993.
The scheme was established by Labour in 1975 to harness the creativity of graduates, aged between 22 and 28, to companies seeking technological development.
It aims to echo in industry the teaching hospital experience available to young doctors.
After slow growth initially and reassessment under the Conservatives, the number of schemes expanded to around 350, employing 750 post-graduates today.
The target is 500 schemes by 1993, with a switch of emphasis towards small- and medium-sized companies.
Stuart Riley, at ease in Lancaster's academic village in a baggy woolly and corduroys, is part of the new wave.
He is helping to supervise three post-graduate associates in a marketing exercise for BICC, which marks a broadening of the scheme's primary role in manufacturing.
Mr Riley speaks highly of the BICC management team and the relationship between the company in gritty Prescott and the university on a rural hillside.
Any company involved in such a scheme has to be brave, Mr Riley says.
‘Maybe they buy it for the wrong reason; they can get a lot of research they would otherwise not carry out.
But they have got to be able to say: ‘We will open ourselves up to a change agent’…and change is painful.’
His colleague Peter Spillard — his suit trousers sharply creased for a trip to the industrial heartland — adds: ‘They have to answer questions they have not needed to answer before.’
Messrs Riley and Spillard — like another lecturer at Lancaster, Stuart Burge — stress the practical usefulness of their contact with TCS and its value in their teaching.
Companies profit from access to a network of university expertise far beyond individual scheme programmes and graduate associates mature rapidly, Dr Burge.
‘I am frequently amazed at the change in them.’
Experience from a two-year TC scheme could equal 10 or 15 years on the conventional industrial ladder.
Mal Gibb joined a Lancaster scheme after a degree in systems modelling at Sheffield Polytechnic and is now helping to develop computerised production at Nairn Kingfisher, a wallpaper plant on the Lancaster quayside.
He has appreciated the freedom to develop his work, the experience of dealing with everything from factory floor practicalities to board-room presentations, and the additional training which is 10 per cent of any scheme programme.
‘The main benefit is that I've enjoyed it; that's my yardstick.’
His supervisor engineering and operational research lecturer Jean Tunnicliffe-Wilson, says much of the satisfaction is not only in suggesting ideas but having them tested in practice.
‘I don't get the same satisfaction just publishing ideas — I like to see them happening.’
Yet publishing ideas could be a barrier to TCS expansion, says George Steele, head of technology with the Department of Industry in the North-west.
‘Academics get on by publishing papers and TCS by it's very nature isn't research; it's technology transfer and doesn't give the same opportunity for publishing…
So some academics fear they might fall behind in the promotion race if they get involved with TCS.’
Not all universities or academics agree.
Dr Burge has valued schemes as a source of research and some universities are now promoting both industrial contact and research experience.
The economic climate in higher education is also a constraint, says George Steele.
Higher education is very interested, ‘but they are strapped for resources and one of the problems of TCS is that it will cover all their costs, but it's not a way that a university or poly is going to make money.’
For all its popularity, TCS is essentially a shoe-string operation with an annual government input of £12million and an equal contribution from industry.
The goal for 1993 is that 60 per cent of participants will be companies with fewer than 500 employees.
People from European Community countries can be recruited on to British TC schemes but as yet the EC offers no equivalent.
Frontiers is edited by Peter Large
Insurance market's ‘momentous’ decision will spark head-on confrontation with leading corporate rivals Lloyd's of London rewrites its rules to take on the European competition.
By Lisa Buckingham
THE £11BILLION a year Lloyd's of London insurance market is abandoning rules forcing underwriters to specialise in particular types of business so as to compete more effectively in Europe and against the big insurance companies.
The decision, described by investor representatives as ‘momentous’, will bring Lloyd's into head-on competition with leading insurers such as Commercial Union, Prudential and Allianz.
In what is being seen as Lloyd's ‘Big Bang’, the change should allow the giant insurance operation to move in on a growing slice of business which it has found elusive.
The move was interpreted by some as a concession to Lloyd's brokers who supply the market with its business.
It will mean that wide-ranging corporate risks will be able to be placed with just one underwriter.
For Lloyd's entire 300-year history its underwriters have been forced to specialise in one of the four traditional classes — marine, non-marine, aviation and motor.
But from now on underwriters will be able to take on risks in any sector and brokers will no longer be forced to traipse around the market to place different strands of business with individual underwriters.
Lloyd's has become acutely aware that it is losing business to large companies, notably in Britain and Europe.
Many of its syndicates are operating at less than 50 per cent of their capacity.
It admitted being hit by the growing trend of big companies to place all their insurance business on a single policy.
Senior market official, David Coleridge, said recently that Lloyd's had lost out to Commercial Union on a multi-million-pound contract from Trafalgar House because it was unable to offer a ‘package deal’.
Bob Keville, chairman of the Lloyd's Insurance Brokers Committee, predicted the change was ‘bound to lead to more business coming Lloyd's way in future.’
Sturge, the largest underwriting group at Lloyd's, said the ability to drop barriers — which will not be compulsory — would lead to mergers between syndicates and an improved use of capacity.
Boutique syndicates are likely to remain, however.
But independent analysts in the market predicted disaster.
They pointed to cases in the past when underwriters had incurred huge losses by moving into an unfamiliar area of business.
And they forecast that profits could be reduced even if the overall income level rose because of new business.
Anthony Haynes, chairman of the Association of Lloyd's Members — which represents market investors — said, however, he felt underwriting standards and the disclosure of syndicate business would improve.
‘The barriers had ceased to be an effective protection for Names as those losing their shirts on marine syndicates are only too painfully aware,’ he said.
Lloyd's is keen not only to increase its market share but to broaden its spread of risks.
It wants to be less reliant on the depressed shipping industry but it also wants to shake off the tag of being the world's market of last resort and is determined to win safer contracts.
Apart from the big insrance companies around the world, Lloyd's already faces strong competition from the Institute of London Underwriters — a grouping of the marine underwriting departments of international companies — and is about to face further pressure with the establishment of the London Underwriting Centre, a similar company amalgam specialising in Lloyd's mainstream reinsurance business.
An executive in the London companies market dismissed the likely threat from Lloyd's.
‘We already operate in a competitive market and Lloyd's is unlikely to make that much more difficult.’
But we have been in this type of business for longer and will score on our expertise and we will also benefit from the ability we have through branch offices to handle claims.’
The changes will not come into force until 1991 and Lloyd's stressed that it was attempting to introduce safeguards to ensure the market's underwriting standards did not deteroriate.
Agents, who are responsible for the underwriting syndicates, will be compelled to inform investors specifically about the type of business being handled and underwriters will be obliged to join the market association responsible for any class of insurance written.
The agency companies will also be responsible for ensuring that syndicates are capable of handling the business they take on.
John Gordon, chairman of the Lloyd's Underwriting Agents Association said his members welcomed the move.
‘It will give the market extra flexibility and make it more attractive.
It also puts the responsibility for ensuring competence where it belongs — with the managing agent,’ Mr Gordon said.
New rules mean a set-back for army of casual workers.
By Linda Lennard
Unemployment benefit.
NEW rules to be introduced from tomorrow will hit many part-time workers receiving unemployment benefit.
Those who earn £43 a week or more will lose benefit for the whole of that week — even if they work only part of it and are unemployed for the remaining days.
Only people who earn £12 or less in any week will escape having their entitlement affected at all.
Anybody who earns between £12 and £43 in a given week may still be able to qualify for unemployment benefit on the days they are not working.
However, they will have to satisfy unemployment benefit officers that part-time work is not their usual pattern, and they are just doing it while looking for full-time employment.
In general, it has been accepted that people can take on part-time work in this way if it has not been their usual employment pattern.
But adjudication officers may eventually claim that part-time employment is your normal pattern, and that you should not be entitled to benefit on the days you don't work because you would not normally expect to be working anyway.
This so-called ‘full extent normal rule’ has come under considerable criticism from the Court of Appeal downwards.
The new rules coming in tomorrow effectively mean the end of the full extent normal rule for people earning £12 or less in a week.
The government says the changes are interim measures and it intends to reconsider the whole question of the treatment of earnings received by people on unemployment benefit.
If you do any part-time work while on unemployment benefit and your earnings do not affect your benefit entitlement, you will still have to meet the rest of the conditions for this benefit on the remaining days.
These include a new stringent ‘actively seeking work’ test which was introduced this October, as well as showing that you are available for work the rest of the week.
As well as earnings from part-time work, other income can affect your entitlement to unemployment benefit.
If you are aged 55 or over and have a personal or occupational pension which is more than £35 per week, the rest will be deducted from your benefit.
Money from a redundancy payment should not affect your right to this benefit.
Also note that if your partner earns more than £21.40 the adult dependants increase will not be payable for her or him.
Water shares: public dive in.
By Patrick Donovan Industrial Correspondent
THE public has applied for more than half of the £5.3billion water privatisation issue, with more than 1.4 million people signing cheques for an average of £2,000.
Although counting of applications continues, the issue is 1.75 times oversubscribed so far, forcing financial advisers last night to ‘claw back’ shares promised to overseas institutions so as to meet small investor demand.
This will increase the shares on offer to the public from 23.5 per cent to nearly 30 per cent of the issue.
With 500 share sorters working round the clock, however, small investors could see their allocation rise to a ceiling of nearly 50 per cent if the issue is 2.25 times oversubscribed.
Prospects for the highest-rated shares to open at a premium of up to 30 per cent continued to look good as the stock market held steady yesterday.
Thames Water was trading on a ‘grey market’ price of up to 132p.
Other companies attracted prices between the 122p to 129p opening price on the 100p partly-paid shares.
Flotation advisers declined to predict the total number of applications.
But only those applying for small amounts of shares are likely to see their allocation met in full.
‘It seems inevitable that almost everybody will only get some of the shares they wanted,’ one analyst said.
Analysts forecast an extra fillip to early water dealing with a wave of institutional buying from foreign buyers starved of stock.
The clawback mechanism has reduced the 18.5 per cent water holding intended for Japan, US, Canada and European institutions to around 12 per cent.
Any further ‘clawback’ will reduce shares allotted to institutions and brokers in the City.
All water companies have been ‘oversubscribed’ but advisers conceded that there were ‘regional buying differences’between them.
Analysts were increasingly optimistic about the prospect of share price premiums in early trading as it became clear that professional buyers will be starved of stock.
The main casualty of yesterday's ‘clawback’ will be the Japanese institution Daiwa, which is to take most of the overseas allocation.
‘We could see Japanese interest,’ said Mr Stephen Doe, of brokers Smith New Court.
‘It does look exciting for the aftermarket.’
But he conceded that Tokyo had held back in the aftermarket of British Gas.
In the US, buyers will have to hold back for 90 days after the issue because of Securities Exchange Commission restrictions on overseas dealings.
But heavy buying could be expected from Wood Gundy, which is handling the issue in Canada, and Credit Suisse First Boston, issue co-ordinator for the European markets.
A spokesman for Schroders, the Government's merchant bankers, said: ‘We have found that the average number of shares has increased as we have gone through the applications.’
But he said that it was too early to make firm forecasts about demand.
All forms are being checked by Price Waterhouse computer systems to weed out illegal multiple applications.
Sophisticated ‘fuzzy matching’ technolog is being used to spot attempts to disguise similar names and addresses.
Experts last night were unsure over whether any of the water companies would qualify for the FT-SE index, a crucial point in assessing their investment potential.
‘Latest indications are that they will miss out, but it isn't impossible,’ said a spokesman for Schroders.
Thames, North West and Severn Trent are the most likely candidates.
Premiums could be as high as 30p when dealings start on Tuesday.
Patrick Donovan explains why
2.2million in queue for shares as public gets water on brain.
By Andrew Cornelius Industrial Editor
NEARLY £5billion has been put up by 2.2million private investors chasing water shares, it was confirmed last night, making the sale one of the most popular privatisations.
Only the British Gas sale, which attracted 4.5million applications from small investors, and BAA with 2.5million applications, attracted more interest from members of the public.
British Telecom and Rolls-Royce each attracted only 2.1million applications.
Public response to the controversial share sale was so strong that virtually all the £5.3billion of shares could be sold without offering any to financial institutions or overseas investors.
Government advisers said the public element of the offer was four times subscribed, ensuring that shares allocated for foreign investors were ‘clawed back’ for private applicants, who will now be allocated virtually 30 per cent of the entire sale.
This meant that by last night individual investors had written cheques for at least £4.8billion, with counting still to finish.
If public applications reach 2.25million, a further clawback will be triggered to give individuals 50 per cent of the shares.
But those watching the count late last night believed that the final tally would fall just below this figure.
Final allocations will be announced on Monday morning.
On the grey market IG Index, the City firm which ‘bets’ on the opening value of new share issues was predicting healthy profits on the 100p partly-paid shares.
Predicted opening prices ranged from 128p for Northumbrian Water, 127p for Thames, 126p for Southern, 126p for Wessex, 125p for Severn Trent, 125p for Anglian, 124p for Yorkshire, 124p for Welsh, 123p for South West and 122p for North West.
All 10 water authorities have been oversubscribed, but interest has varied between regions.
IG Index has noticed a weakening of interest in Thames, with interest growing in South West.
A spokesman for IG Index said the indications were that all 10 water companies would ‘generate healthy profits’ when trading opened next Tuesday morning.
One of the main factors underpinning the share price was an anticipated shortage of water shares, because of the decision to scale down overseas allocations to increase the public offer from 23.5 to nearly 30 per cent of the offer.
Money Guardian looks in detail at the flotation and at what investors can expect in terms of allocation, yields and first-day prices — page 14.
Would-be sellers will have to wait.
By Teresa Hunter
MOST ordinary investors in water shares will have to wait for at least another week — and probably until after Christmas — before they can sell.
Stockbrokers, particularly those offering a cut-price service, will generally only deal with proof of ownership, such as letters of allocation.
These will not be sent out until December 20.
An exception is the Norwich and Peterborough building society which has a flat rate dealing fee of £8,(plus VAT) and allows up to four members of a family to trade their combined holdings in a single deal.
It is providing an early dealing service to society members, allowing them to deal on the first day the shares are traded.
Provided savers have £1 per share in any N&P account, they will be able to sell their shares after the allocation is announced on Monday, before letters of allocation arrive.
Non-members can take advantage of the low dealing costs by calling into one of the Norwich & Peterborough's 65 branches, but only once they have received their allotment letters.
But the best deal of all is available to Leeds Permanent customers with £2,000 in a Liquid Gold or Solid Gold savings account.
The society has linked with the Debenhams Investment Services stockbroking arm of the Burton Group to offer free dealing.
The first qualifying 10,000 customers who apply through one of the society's branches will get a voucher guaranteeing no stockbroking commission.
Any other Leeds customer can take advantage of the Debenhams special water rate of £10.
Shares can be sold through the Debenhams share shops.
Manchester stockbrokers Piling & Co are another good buy.They will sell water shares for £7 plus £1 extra for members of the family up to a maximum of four.
Independent Professional Advisors Services, of Shakespeare Road, London has fixed its bargain dealing costs at £9 plus VAT.
Barclayshare, Barclays Bank's retail stockbroking arm, has a nationwide share-dealing service which charges £12.50.
Sharelink, the telephone dealing service, is charging 1 per cent commission with a minimum of £12.50 and maximum of £50.
Its special water dealing line will open on December 18 and will run until January 30.
Shareholders should pre-register with ShareLink by telephoning 0922 744500.
NatWest's 275 instant dealing branches offer immediate settlement with a contract note and cheque on the spot from December 18.
But investors will need letters of allocation to deal.
Savers with Cheltenham & Gloucester, Eastbourne and Mornington building societies will be able to re-invest returned with no loss of interest.
Would-be sellers will have to wait.
By Teresa Hunter
DEALING in water company shares begins on Tuesday.
But most ordinary investors will have to wait for at least another week — and probably until after Christmas — before they can sell.
Most stockbrokers, will only deal with proof of ownership, such as letters of allocation.
These will not be sent out until December 20.
An exception is the Norwich and Peterborough building society which has a flat rate dealing fee of £8,(plus VAT) and allows up to four members of a family to trade their combined holdings in a single deal.
It is providing an early dealing service to society members, allowing them to deal on the first day the shares are traded on the stock market.
Provided savers have £1 per share in any N&P account, they will be able to sell their shares after the allocation is announced on Monday, before letters of allocation arrive.
Non-members can take advantage of the low dealing costs by calling into one of the Norwich & Peterborough's 65 branches, but only once they have received their allotment letters.
But the best deal of all is available to Leeds Permanent customers with £2,000 in a Liquid Gold or Solid Gold savings account.
The society has linked with the Debenhams Investment Services stockbroking arm of the Burton Group to offer free dealing.
The first qualifying 10,000 customers who apply through one of the society's branches will get a voucher guaranteeing no stockbroking commission.
Any other Leeds customer can take advantage of the Debenhams special water rate of £10.
Shares can be sold through the Debenhams share shops.
Manchester stockbrokers Piling & Co are another good buy.They will sell water shares for £7 plus £1 extra for members of the family up to a maximum of four.
Independent Professional Advisors Services, of Shakespeare Road, London has fixed its bargain dealing costs at £9 plus VAT.
Barclayshare, Barclays Bank's retail stockbroking arm, has a nationwide share-dealing service which charges £12.50.
Sharelink, the telephone dealing service, is charging 1 per cent commission with a minimum of £12.50 and maximum of £50.
Its special water dealing line will open on December 18 and will run until January 30.
Shareholders should pre-register with ShareLink by telephoning 0922 744500.
NatWest's 275 instant dealing branches offer immediate settlement with a contract note and cheque on the spot from December 18.
But investors will need letters of allocation to deal.
The Cheltenham & Gloucester Eastbourne and Mornington building societies will allow savers to re-invest returned water share cheques without loss of interest.
THE price of water shares is expected to leap by up to 30 per cent when dealings start at 9.00am on Tuesday.
But the last minute flood of applications may mean most small investors will probably be allocated fewer than 400 shares.
Analysts disagree about the precise size of any likely premium, and the speed with which this will be reached.
That premium will anyway differ from company to company depending on the level of regional oversubscription.
However the IG index of prices on the grey market — where shares are traded unofficially before issue — indicates that the more popular companies, such as Thames and Northumbrian, could open with at least a 30p premium, while the premium on the less popular North West and South West could be as low as 21p.
Investors may have to wait longer than they anticipate before enjoying maximum premiums.
Nigel Hawkins of Hoare Govett estimates initial dealings will see prices at between only 110p to 125p, while Robert Giles of Laing & Cruickshank believes the opening price could level around 105p to 110p.
He argues: ‘I have little doubt that on average we will see a premium of about a third, but it could take a few weeks to get there.
I know there is a public perception that everyone should sell their shares at the first opportunity, but I think this could be a big mistake.’
With counting incomplete, triumphant water minister Michael Howard has already announced that up to 1.4 million people have applied for water shares — and the figure could well top 2 million.
If demand reaches the 2.25 oversubscription level, and both the foreign and institutional clawbacks are triggered, UK personal investors would qualify for nearly 44 per cent of the entire float — around 1,000 million shares.
Some criterion must then be devised for dividing these shares between the potentially more than 2 million investor applications.
All this will effect the private investor in two ways.
The institutional shortage will inflate further the expected premium on first day's trading.
Most of the buying is likely to come from Japan.
On the negative side, the small shareholder may find himself scaled down to such a small stake that a sizeable portion of profits would be wiped off by share-dealing costs.
In either event, small shareholders should think carefully before selling any holding.
For the long term benefits of the ‘loyalty share bonus’ together with a first year's yield of around 20 per cent makes the investment an attractive income stock.
The first dividend is payable in March,— one third of the total dividend — while the second instalment is not due until July.
The stock market's recent steady performance in the run up to the water issue has helped ensure the success of the flotation.
However there are concerns that the market is rather high at present, which could see a fall in prices generally in the new year.
If prices rise as high as 135p to 140p Robert Giles recommends selling for non-priority shareholders.
But for priority shareholders — customers of companies who will qualify for the 10p discount on each of the subsequent 70p part-payments should only sell when the price has risen as high as 150p to 160p.
On fundamentals, the shares also look cheap.
The water companies' average prospective price earnings ratio is around five.
The p/e ratio measures the amount of money you have to spend on shares to have a given amount of earnings next year and is a key gauge used by te City in assessing the price of shares.
In broad terms, a high p/e ratio suggests a share is expensive; a low one means it is cheap — although the p/e will also reflect not only next year's likely performance but also the outlook for the company beyond that.
On a typical p/e of five, water shares look bargain-basement compared to oil companies which span the nine to 10 range.
British Gas is selling at eight times earnings while British Telecom commands a 9.5 rating.
Options in Thames Water are to be sold on the London Traded Options Market from Tuesday.
The vital dates are: December 11 — allocation of shares to be announced by 5pm.
December 12 — first dealings begin at 9am.
December 20 — certificates to be dispatched.
March 1990 — interim dividend, a third of total.
July 31, 1990 — payment of second instalment (70p).
October 1, 1990 — final dividend, two thirds of total.
July 30, 1991 — payment of final instalment (70p).
PAGE
Water, water everywhere with the shares set to soar Premiums could be as high as 30p when dealings start on Tuesday.
Patrick Donovan explains why.
PAGE