

Thatcher erect new barrier to monetary unity.
By Larry Elliott Economics Correspondent
THE chances of British entry into the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System before the next election were significantly reduced at the Strasbourg summit, as the Prime Minister maintained her hard-line opposition.
Despite the pressure which has been building up on the government in recent months, including growing dissent within her own party, she reiterated her old misgivings about the monetary system and added a new one for good measure.
Speaking at the end of the two days of talks, Mrs Thatcher said it had helped some countries combat inflation.
But she doubted whether it would work as well once the system, dominated by West Germany, was diluted by other countries less committed to the policy of bearing down on prices.
Its success had been that both the people of West Germany and its central bank, the Bundesbank, had a deep-seated fear of inflation.
They had known the effects of hyper-inflation and ‘were more fearful of it than anything else’.
There was a danger that the anti-inflation tendencies of the Bundesbank would be watered down by other European countries where control of prices was less of a priority.
‘The moment you go from the rigid and valuable discipline of German bank and people to mixing it up with other disciplines, other views, other ‘let's have a bit of inflation here and there’ economies, you lose the very thing which leads you to want to join.’
Observers saw Mrs Thatcher's comments as little more than the latest in a series of delaying tactics.
They pointed out that economies prepared to allow ‘a bit of inflation here and there’ would include Britain, where the inflation rate is already one of the highest in the European Community and set to rise from 7.3 per cent to around 8 per cent later this week.
Indeed, the other EC countries put little pressure on the British delegation to speed up the ERM process, concluding that the time for concessions to Mrs Thatcher's doubts was now over.
Solicitors' firms are caught out by the housing market collapse.
By Ben Laurance
SIGNS are beginning to emerge that the survival of some firms of solicitors is being threatened by the collapse of the housing market.
Many law firms have already laid off employees: a large Midlands firm has got rid of 35; a firm in East Anglia is about to shed some conveyancing staff; and the Law Society's Young Solicitors Group has set up a helpline to provide counselling and advice for young lawyers who have been made redundant.
One medium-sized firm of solicitors in East Anglia has written to its staff asking them to forgo their pay for December.
The firm says it simply cannot find the cash to meet its wage bill.
East Anglia has been particularly affected by the fall in the property market.
House prices there boomed in 1987 and the first-half of 1988 and have since fallen more sharply than in most other areas.
The Law Society says it is not aware of any firms, so far, which have gone under because of the property slump.
Recent figures for conveyancing are not available.
In 1986, about 1.78million properties worth £73billion changed hands.
In 1987, there were 1.96 million conveyances worth £103 billion.
Estimates suggest that since then, the number of house sales has fallen by about 40 per cent.
For a small firm of solicitors in a market town, conveyancing has accounted for about half of all fee income.
So the recent fall in house-moving business would have cut gross income by about a fifth and net income by much more.
The housing slump has also had a major impact on removal firms.
The British Association of Removers, which represents 750 removal companies across the country, believes housemoving business is down about 40 per cent.
‘There is a temporary blip in the market because some people are trying to press ahead with their moves before Christmas,’ said Mr Eric Bourne of the BAR.
‘But generally speaking, it has been difficult since September 1988.
‘Some firms have reduced their staffing levels substantially, but people in the industry are generally trying to hold on to experienced staff.’
Some one-person removal firms have disappeared, said Mr Bourne.
‘But within our association there has been no noticable number of bankruptcies.
‘It has gone on for 15 months and so far most firms have managed to survive, but they can't go on like this for ever.’