

Determined to write herself out of her poverty, Buchi Emecheta launched herself on the book world with an autobiographical account of life in London for a young Nigerian single parent.
Now, however, she's writing for her soul.
Drawing on life PAGE wom
A dead-eyed kick Bookshop.
By Stephanie Nettell
ROGER MILLS's Bad Fun (Lions Tracks, £2.50) takes a bitter look at the aftermath of a left-wing demonstration in which a teenager is killed.
What his mate, who has never bothered much with politics, discovers about our police on the one hand and lawyers on the other, forces him to take over the activist role in this tough political thriller.
I'd Rather Be Famous, by Pete Johnson (Methuen, £4.95) might seem like candy-floss in comparison but this book is sardonic in its view of romance and the dreams of telly fame that follow an appearance in a Blind Date type of show.
But Mick Gowar's funny, touching poems So Far So Good (Penguin Plus, £1.99), about school and work, families and first love, get right to the real heart of a teenager's life.
Brilliant.
Young Guardian is edited by Melanie McFadyean
Allay it with Flowers Critics' choice Visual art..
By Mary Clarke
ANGELA FLOWERS is celebrating her gallery's 25th birthday and her Print Show 1989, at the new premises in Hackney, is a genial round-up of her artists and — a festive hint for the harried — a good place to buy Christmas presents.
From a very large number of works, I recommend prints by Basil Beattie, Prunella Clough, Terry Frost, Patrick Hughes, Trevor Jones, Jane Joseph, John Loker, Bruce McLean, June Redfern and Michael Rothenstein.
The other interesting mixed show this week is the Bluecoat Christmas Annual, in which one may sense the up-and-coming nature of work in all media by Liverpool artists.
Look out for Phyllis Mahon, Clem McAleer, Richard Roberts and Gary Perkins.
This has been the year of Russian exhibitions, generally better the older the art.
We may weary of them soon, so finish 1989 with visits to the excellent survey of Aleksandr Rodchenko and Varvara Stepanova at the Serpentine Gallery and Transformation — The Legacy Of Authority at the Cleveland Gallery in Middlesbrough, which has a broad range of contemporary Soviet painters, from the socialist realist Nandalbayan to the Western-influenced would-be American superstar Sergei Shutov.
At the Ikon Gallery in Birmingham are plotted-out paintings by Pam Skelton and exuberant, over-the-top sculptures and drawings by Simon Moller.
Could each learn from the other?
We're supposed to learn a lot from Folly And Vice, which opens on Saturday at the Bolton Museum.
This South Bank touring show surveys the field of satire and social criticism from Hogarth to Grosz, in 135 prints and drawings.
I don't like artists who think they can scold the rest of the world, but this show will certainly include historic material.
In London, Silvia Ziranek has an installation of her zany feminist sculptures at the Watermans Arts Centre.
Karsten Schubert shows an interesting collection — with mega-interesting prices — of rare catalogues and books by artists of the last 20 years
Dance.
By Mary Clarke
SADLER'S WELLS Royal Ballet open their Christmas season at the Wells next Tuesday with a programme of ballets by Kenneth MacMillan which continue the celebrations of his 60th birthday.
The first programme consists of his first commissioned ballet, Danses Concertantes, the early whimsical Solitaire, and the powerful Las Hermanas made originally for the Stuttgart Ballet in 1963, remounted for SWRB in 1976 and not seen at the Wells since 1984.
Marion Tait and Joseph Cipolla dance the leading roles.
At Covent Garden, the Royal Ballet gives five more performances of The Prince Of The Pagodas — tonight, tomorrow and Friday and then next Tuesday and Wednesday.
Tonight a second cast will take over with Viviana Durante, Michael Cassidy and Deborah Bull in the three principal roles.
Tonight until December 16 The Scottish Ballet will be dancing the popular Peter Pan — The Ballet (with pretty flying effects) at the Theatre Royal, Glasgow.
Box office 041 331 1234.
Folly And Vice…1796 etching by Richard Newton; satirical South Bank touring show; Bolton Museum: see Critics' choice Home bleak home…
Silvia Ziranek with feminist sculpture; Watermans Art Centre: see Critics' choice Marion Tait; Sadler's Wells Royal Ballet; Critics' choice Joseph Cipolla; Sadler's Wells Royal Ballet: Critics' choice A scene from Solitaire; Royal Opera House: Critics' choice
What's going on.
By Stephanie Nettell
FAST-MOVING comic-strip spoof on US life and politics, Phoenix Beam's cult American Eagle lands at Willesden Green Library Centre, 95 High Road, London NW10 (tel: 01 451 0294), December 15-16, before zooming off to the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith (01 641 2311), with open workshops and signed performances for the deaf, Dec 19-Jan 13.
THE Witch And The Magic Mountain is a new musical play based on folk legends from around the world, performed by the Oxford Stage Company at the Arts Centre, University of Warwick (0203 417417), until Dec 16, then Dec 26-Jan 13 before national tour (details: 0865 723238).
THE 18-month-old Young Vic Youth Theatre has fought back from the threat of funds-starved closure to launch new season with Brecht and Weill's The Threepenny Opera.
Dec 21-Jan 13, 7.30pm, The Studio, 66 The Cut, London SE1 (01 928 6363).
THE Cannon Hill Puppet Theatre will use, for the first time in Britain, puppets hand-crafted in the Japanese style Bunraku, to present Andersen's The Snow Queen at the Midlands Arts Centre, Cannon Hill Park, Birmingham (021 440 3838), until Jan 3.
CAPTAIN Stirrick is at the Lilian Baylis Theatre, Sadler's Wells, London, until Jan 6.
The Captain's band of child criminals invite you to mingle with the 1807 action in Bartholomew Fair, Smithfield (box office: 01 278 6563).
THE Tricycle Youth Theatre puts a different slant on Christmas shows with The Cobweb, ‘a journey into the hidden underbelly of the human psyche’: 269 Kilburn High Road, London NW6 (01 328 1000), Dec 20-22, 8pm.
SHOULD young people speak out more for their rights?
On January 9 the Children's Legal Centre is holding a Young People's Congress for different interest groups (Young Guardian will be covering the event).
Two groups are still undersubscribed.
If you are trans-racially fostered or adopted, or feel the legal system mistreated you when your parents separated, phone 01 359 9392.
Or write to: Children's Legal Centre, 20 Compton Terrace, London N12 UN.
TWO DAYS left for Radio 1's Information Campaign on Housing and Leaving Home.
Free confidential helpline 8am-10pm: 0800 500 800.
Free booklet from Home And Dry, Radio 1, London W1A 4WW.
Obituary: Madalena Perdigao.
Promoting the arts:.
MADALENA Perdigao, a respected figure in the Portuguese art world and an administrator of the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation, has died aged 66.
Mrs Perdigao was born in northern Portugal.
She graduated in mathematics from Coimbra University with distinction in 1944, but opted for a musical career.
However, her future as a concert pianist was forestalled by an injury to her left hand and she then began her life's work of promoting musical appreciation.
In 1958 she was invited to work for the Gulbenkian Foundation where, as Director of Music she initiated an ambitious programme of activities, including the formation of the Gulbenkian orchestra, choir and ballet company.
At a time when Portugal was still living under a dictatorship in which homespun nationalist values were lauded, she was criticised for lavishing large budgets on a series of international music festivals.
She introduced the Portuguese public to figures such as Rostropovich and Penderecki and supported projects such as Peter Brook's international centre for theatre studies.
After the 1974 revolution the polemic about her musical activities continued.
This was a tumultuous time, when many public figures came under political scrutiny.
But, although the situation may have been exploited by the Communist party, it was a purely cultural debate in which her defenders claimed, with justification, that her contribution to the promotion of music was inestimable.
She had the majority support of her staff, but decided to leave, to ensure that the position of her husband Jose Azeredo Perdigao would not be jeopardised as the Foundation's director.
She returned after a ten year absence, this time as director of ACARTE, an arts education programme linked to the Gulbenkian's Centre of Modern Art, consolidating the respect she held as one of Portugal's cultural leaders.
In 1987 President Mario Soares awarded her the Order of the Sword of Santiago.
In 1988 she was involved in another controversy, in a row over nomination for Portugal's candidate as ‘European Woman of the Year’, a prize sponsored by the EC.
The presiding jury claimed they had not chosen her, as she alleged, but Elina Guimaraes, an 84-year-old former suffragette.
As the picture shows, Mrs Perdigao (right, with the wife of President Mario Soares, left, at the prize-winning ceremony) took the view that turning up is the key to victory.
On hearing of her death, Prime Minister Cavaco Silva described her as a person ‘of exceptional quality who contributed with vigour and impartiality to the appreciation of culture in Portugal and the presentation of Portuguese culture abroad.’
Jill Jolliffe Madalena Azerado Perdigao, born Figueira da Foz, April 28, 1923; died Lisbon, December 5, 1989.
Melanie McFadyean on a Lloyds Bank/Young Guardian fashion winner Divine little number, possum!.
THE LLOYDS Bank Fashion Challenge invited young people to design outfits for celebrities to wear to the shops, a nightclub or a visit to their bank manager.
About 500 schools sent in entries from people aged 14-18.
Competitors designed clobber for Di to wear to a nightclub, Joan Collins for a shopping spree and Kylie Minogue to see her bank manager.
One of the winners is 16-year-old Sally Peattie, who took the Young Guardian prize, part of the Lloyds competition.
Her entry was for a suit for Dame Edna Everidge to wear to visit her bank manager.
Dame Edna would probably think it a caring, sharing sort of suit, and would doubtless lob a backhanded compliment Sally's way, possums.
Sally explains: ‘I designed a cropped pin-stripe jacket which I thought I would sequin but it was too heavy, so I have put bright, luminous shiny pink and purple braiding on to a man's pin-stripe suit material.
It has large capels with a pound sign on one and a dollar sign on the other.
I should write to Barry Humphries and explain that the reason I chose him was because I find his style of dressing very amusing and loud, different from everything else.’
Sally wins trips to Paris and London to see the fashion shows, and £500.
‘I suppose I'll spend the £500 on having a nice time in Paris.
I've never had that much before.
I don't get pocket money, my parents just get me things I need.
I work at a hardware store on Saturdays and save the money.
‘I'm hoping to do textile design at art college and fashion design when I leave.’
Sally didn't choose to dress Princess Diana for a disco because she thinks Diana is ‘a bit boring really’.
Nor did she choose Kylie Minogue, because her clothes are also ‘a bit boring’.
Sally is into high street leisure wear and casual daytime things rather than glitzy disco gear.
Edna is hardly your obvious casual daytime high street dresser, lounging around in jeans or velour tracksuits though, is she?
‘I chose Dame Edna, because she takes the mickey out of fashion.
I thought it would be fun to do it, she's a man but her own person and very outrageous.’
But Sally's aim in life isn't to design outrageous clothes for outrageous people.
‘I'm very tall and have trouble finding clothes.
I'd like to design clothes for people who aren't ‘perfect’— tall people, short people, fat and thin people.
You dress to impress, the clothes you wear say a lot for you.’
Yet Sally's no slave to fashion: ‘I think fashion should be fun and you should wear what you feel comfortable in, not what people say you should wear.
You've got to have a price range the public can buy.
It's no good designing wonderful outfits only certain people can afford.
I'm interested in normal high street clothing which is fun and not expensive.’
Sally is studying for Art A-level and doing computer courses to take her into the high tech world of 1990s textile design.
But for today she is ‘over the moon’ about her prize.
Winning entries will go on display in the Lloyds Bank Fashion Challenge Regional Roadshow early in the New Year.
Angel Mae, The Big Concrete Lorry by Shirley Hughes (Walker, £5.95) The question is — can Shirley Hughes do no wrong?
Turning her attentions to a community, Trotter Street, her two new books are about the arrival of a real baby around the time of the Street's nativity play and the building of an extension on to the house of the boisterous Pattersons.
Hughes' cityscape is as exciting for the children in her books as the bluebell woods and dingle dells of 50 years ago, and this optimism may be the greatest gift a modern writer can give young readers.
Critics of the Hughes style fulminate against an imagined cosiness, a certainty about the nuclear family, the facility with which tenderness always binds childish wounds.
But attempts at social engineering usually lead to downfall.
The Hughes oeuvre, now increased by the invention of a new community, avoids that ghastly trap; her literary and illustrated world is one that children love.
Top three
Are You My Mother? by PDEastman
The Complete Grimms Fairy Tales (Routledge Kegan Paul)
The Mouse And His Cold by Russell Hoban LINDSAY MACKIE (mother of Isabella, 6, and Lizzy, 3) PAGE wom
Deaths: William Pedley: 80, formerly Regional Controller of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, put agricultural workers in his debt through his research into their working conditions, carried out under the supervision of Dr C.S.Orwin and published under the title of Labour on the Land (1942).
The book was influential in the abolition of the tied cottage in the years following the war.
He was educated at New College, Oxford, as one of a small band of mature students sponsored in 1937 by the Oxford Delegacy for Extra-mural Studies, got a soccer Blue, and became a lifelong worker for the WEA.
Lindsay Crosby: 51, youngest son of the singer Bing Crosby, found dead in his Los Angeles home after apparently shooting himself in the head with a smallbore rifle.
With his brothers Gary, Phil and Dennis, he was once part of a fresh-faced showbusiness act, the Crosby Boys, which lasted until 1959.
Young Vic..
By Frank Barker Michael Davis/Nelson Harper.
SATURDAY'S first pantomime was entitled Nightmare On The Northern Line and came courtesy of London Transport.
It featured a cast of hundreds in just one train carriage.
Not forgetting the tree which one crazed Christmas shopper had hauled aboard.
Anyway, we punters deserved our money back.
I was not, then, full of the joys of Christmas when, crushed, creased and cross, I bailed out at Waterloo.
I'd missed the World Cup draw on TV to boot.
All that said, A Christmas Carol was worth it.
Dickens' timeless story, now coming up to its 146th Christmas, has been adapted with affection by David Holman and directed with dash by Gwenda Hughes.
It has verve and vitality.
The star of the show, of course, was Ebenezer Scrooge, the greedy, grasping grouch with a heart as hard as left-over Christmas pud.
Colin Farrell's lovely performance had humour-inevitably the kids loved his ‘Humbugs!’— and not a little pathos as the old skinflint was made to see the error of his ways.
In this, of course, he was helped by Jacob Marley, his dead partner doomed to roam through eternity in chains.
A rattling good performance this from Will Tacey.
The entire cast were delightful but a special mention for Mark Jax as the faithful Bob Cratchit and Glen Kinch as the cheery cockney Tupper.
Two hours flew by before Justin Feltham's Tiny Tim brought down the curtain with his ‘and God bless us, every one.’
Then we were off home-by taxi.
At the Young Vic, The Cut, London SE1 until January 6.
Box office: 01-928-6363.
Wigmore Hall Michael Davis/Nelson Harper.
By Frank Barker
THE audience that turned up for the recital of British violin sonatas was scarcely more than a sprinkling, which made one despair of our unadventurous public.
Only the Franck and Kreutzer sonatas, it seems, can guarantee a reasonable house in our capital city with all its colleges of music; Walton and John Ireland, even played by such distinguished advocates as violinist Michael Davis and pianist Nelson Harper could draw no more than 40.
Happily, this band of devotees were generously rewarded with an evening of unusually imaginative and refined music-making.
Both players are individually most sensitive and accomplished, while as a duo they seem to play with single mind.
The warmth and elegance of Davis's style was made immediately apparent in the first movement of the Ireland Sonata No. 1, with its engagingly lyrical main tune which almost sits up and begs to be liked.
He coaxed it along with flawless control of line and colour as it was developed with equal measures of logic and charm.
With its equally seductive central Romance it is unaccountable that this sonata has not become as popular a success as the ubiquitous Franck.
Davis, a fastidious master, brought out all its natural sweetness without ever suggesting the saccharine or slipping into the over-sentimental.
Both players responded alertly to the capricious nature of the Wilfred Josephs Sonata No3, a work dedicated to them by the composer, displaying no lack of brilliance to meet its formidable technical demands.
Davis was admirable, too, in his interpretation of Walton's wayward Sonata, eloquent in its romantic melancholy and perticularly compelling in the variations movement with its difficult changes of mood.
He was convincing, too, in getting maximum mileage out of the ingenious variations on what seems at first a not very promising theme.
Bush Vark's First Day Out by Charles Fuge (MacMillan, £6.95) Winner of The Mother Goose Award and the MacMillan Prize 1988 Three pairs of creaturely eyes stare out from the deep black inside covers of Bush Vark's First Day Out, whetting young appetites for nocturnal mystery and the pleasurable horrors encountered by Charles Fuge's cheery little vark, with his slippery passivity and plain good fortune.
Things just keep happening to him.
Trotting confidently out of his burrow into a jungly, prehistoric world, he is rescued by bats from slimy, groping creatures, only to fall into cavernous waters and swim out to sea, from where he is plucked by a vulture-like bird whose hungry chicks he has ‘fun’ avoiding before tumbling safely home.
The text seems dully at variance with the fantasy of the illustrations and falls between two stools.
Its undemanding vocabulary and flat rhythms seem suited to the very young, for whom it is unnecessarily long, yet a five year old, who would still delight in the pictures, would be disappointed by its lack of wit and thin story.
Top three
Goodnight Moon by Margaret Wise Brown and Clement Hurd
The Monster Bed by Jeannie Willis and Susan Varley
Dangerous Journey: The Story of Pilgrim's Progress arranged by Oliver Hunkin and Yorkshire Television ANTONIA AMIS (mother of Louis, 5, and Jacob, 3 ½) PAGE wom
A Piece of Cake by Jill Murphy (Walker Books, £6.95) This is currently my four-year- old son Leo's favourite book, having overtaken Jill Murphy's two other illustrated books about the everyday life of the elephant family Large.
In A Piece of Cake Mrs Large, the hard-pressed mother, has decided to get the family slim and trim.
‘From now on, it's healthy eating,’ she announces to her underwhelmed offspring and insists that they and their father go jogging and serves up watercress soup for tea.
‘Perhaps elephants are meant to be fat,’ says her son Luke plaintively.
Leo and I sympathise.
Our responses to Five Minutes' Peace are more at odds.
Mrs Large's escape to the bathroom for ‘five minutes’ peace from you lot’is sabotaged by her children who gang up to disturb her.
I asked Leo if I could have five minutes' peace.
‘No,’ he said, ‘because you're not an elephant.’
All In One Piece finds Mrs Large in another situation which is not entirely unfamiliar as she tries to get ready to go to Mr Large's office dinner and dance.
‘Can't I have just one night in the whole year to myself?
One night when I am not covered in jam and poster-paint?’ she pleads.
Meanwhile her lads Lester and Luke are cramming her tights with toys and the baby is smearing lipstick all over himself.
He has, however, also latched on to granny elephant's words of approval to Mrs Large: ‘You look like a film star.’
That was the compliment I got for putting on red nail varnish.
As these books are supposed to be read by adults to children, I don't think it matters that some of the jokes are probably lost on four year olds.
They are not lost on mothers.
Top three
Pinocchio by Carlo Collodi, illustrator Roberto Innocenti
The Nursery Peter Pan by JMBarrie
Lulu and the Flying Babies by Posy Simmonds MARY ROBSON (mother of Leo, 4) Matilda by Roald Dahl (Puffin, £3.50; Cape, £8.50) Winner of Children's Book Of The Year award 1989 There's no mystery why Roald Dahl is a best-selling children's author.
He ignores grown-ups.
He cuts out the middle men and women — the dreaded parents — and goes straight for the hearts and minds of kids.
To say that he doesn't patronise them is a laughable understatement.
More than any other modern author, you can actually imagine Roald Dahl reading his stuff to children, holding them enthralled at his feet.
Matilda is another winner because it is a perfect parable of Good versus Evil, of a brilliant child triumphing over the cowardly and perverse world of grown-ups.
In Dahl's universe, the adults are bent on creating hell on earth.
The adults who occupy Matilda's world do their best to destroy her.
With the exception of just one — her teacher, Miss Honey.
There's always one.
An angel there to prove that not everyone over the age of 12 is totally screwed up.
My son, Ben, says I must not forget the illustrations by Quentin Blake — writer and illustrator are here a perfect match.
Ben also confirmed the view expressed at the beginning of this piece when he said, quite unprompted, that Roald Dahl's stories, like no other writer's, spoke directly to him.
What more could a child ask for?
Top three
Where's Wally by Martin Handford
Tog The Ribber by Paul Coltman, illustrated by Gillian McClure
The BFG by Roald Dahl NIGEL WIGMORE (father of Ben, 8) Can't You Sleep, Little Bear? by Martin Waddell and Barbara Firth (Walker Books, £6.95) Winner of the Kate Greenaway Medal A simple, poetic tale about fear of the dark, a subject that tends to hit the spot in even the toughest child.
Repetitive enough to appeal to Matthew, 4, who asked for it at bedtime four nights running, and with sophisticated touches appreciated by William, 6, normally a boy of the He Man persuasion.
Big Bear is reaching an interesting part in his book.
‘Hey, that's good — he's reading the same book that we are,’ noticed Matthew.
Little Bear, who is supposed to be asleep, keeps interrupting him — he's scared of the dark and not even the biggest lantern from the cupboard can light up the night looming beyond the cave.
Finally Big Bear takes Little Bear out to show that the darkness isn't as black as it seems — and he falls asleep in it, in Big Bear's arms.
‘It doesn't look very dark,’ said William.
‘Only about seven o'clock.’
Then Big Bear can read right to…
The End, and his book and ours finish together.
Top three
Charlie and the Chocolate Factory by Roald Dahl
The Amazing Adventures of Ulysses retold by Vivian Webb and Heather Amery
Where The Wild Things Are by Maurice Sendak MARKIE ROBSON-SCOTT (mother of William, 6, and Matthew, 4) PAGE wom
Once upon a time book-buying parents could rely on the classics to keep the kids quiet.
Now that there are hundreds of new children's titles published every year, it's increasingly difficult to tell the best from the rest.
There are 20-odd literary prizes for children's books, but is a gold medal stuck to the cover any more than a clever marketing ploy?
We asked a group of consumers — parents and their children — to assess 10 books chosen from both this year's prize-winning lists and the latest offerings from best-selling authors.
What they really want for Christmas PAGE wom
Journey's friends Television.
By Nancy Banks-Smith
AS THE bright, white, Scottish baronial of John o' Groats shone at the end of the road, Alan Holly (Joss Ackland) said, choking on a laugh or a sob or a pun, ‘There it is, the Holy City’.
In Michael Frayn's First and Last (BBCI) Holly walked from Land's End shedding, without really intending to, the paraphernalia of life.
Friends, family, money, medicine.
For all that, you felt he was not alone.
There was a host of shadowy companions around him.
Everyman, who also undertook a long journey.
Xenophon's 10,000 men who, with the dust of a 1,000 mile march in their throats, shouted ‘The sea!
The sea!’
Christian, who also sought the Holy City.
And everyone who ever lived and died.
As Holly, tired to death, stumbled along the last long stretch, a backpacked figure appeared in the distance which looked like his own image coming to meet him.
It was a much younger man taking the same journey in the opposite direction.
At John o' Groats there is a line across the road which says Finish.
On the other side it says Start.
Holly carries a great freight of metaphor in his rucksack.
Ray McAnally played him first.
Having got to Bristol, he went home for a short holiday and died.
This fine actor's last work will be pieced together for his family.
Joss Ackland took over the part of Holly, which is increasingly haunted by thoughts of mortality.
Ackland seems the sort of man who could hammer a nail in with his clenched teeth so he never begins to look like a tentative nonentity.
Of course, by the end of the road, he is not.
‘This world of ours is full of strange and wonderful people with strange and wonderful things to tell you.
Take me…’ says a chap with a cap in Cornwall, the one whose pal had a foot off.
‘Well, nice to talk,’ says Holly, legging it lithely away despite blisters.
Travellers hear such interesting tales, don't they?
Well, look at Chaucer.
But when you think about it, Holly hardly talks to anyone or, if he does, they do not answer.
A tramp of extravagant delapidation, who attaches himself like a dog, punctuates silences with spit then suddenly, on the crest of a belch, intones in an astonishingly cultivated voice, ‘Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis’.
He takes shelter at a Pennine farm where the man's daily conversational output is ‘Two more dead i’ beck’and the woman listens to Holly's soliloquy like a raggedy Miranda, astonished as the sound of a human voice.
The last man Holly meets is dead.
When his wife (Pat Heywood) meets him at John o' Groats, they do not speak at all or, if they do, we cannot hear them as if they were already far away.
The cast was exceptionally fine.
All have done well and all shall have prizes.
I was particularly taken by Patricia Routledge, unmistakeable even looking through a letter box, and by Lionel Jeffries for his affecting rendition of: The troops are ready to mutiny, The colonel is missing or dead, When up steps a bold, young lieutenant And places himself at the head.
Did I forget to mention, by the way, that First and Last is funny?
The aggressive style of mainland cabaret comedy is only now reaching Northern Ireland.
Jay Rayner finds out why….
Jokes on the firing line
DURING a gig in Coventry recently Irish comedian Sean Hughes was heckled.
Nothing unusual there; comedians are used to being shouted at by the audience.
It's part of the job.
What is unusual, in the defiantly liberal world of stand-up comedy, is that the heckler was attacking Hughes because he was Irish.
For his part the comedian says he understands why the man was so upset, though not his racism.
Hughes had reached the part of his act where he introduces the odd joke about the Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA.
At an Oscar type ceremony, an award winner decides to use his international platform for political purposes by asking a member of Sinn Fein to collect the award for him.
After a cursory ‘Ireland will be free,’ the politician then adds with glee ‘but what I really want to say is thank you mother, thank you father, thank you…’and heads off into the normal ‘thank you auntie Doreen’award winner's speech.
The heckler said his cousin had been killed by the IRA and that he hated all Irish.
It turned into a 15-minute rant.
‘I was trying to tell him that there are only 300 members of the IRA but he wouldn't listen,’ says Hughes.
‘But I think the audience were generally with me.
I finished my set on ‘Three members of the RUC were killed yesterday when their car crashed into a tree.
The IRA said they planted it’.
And I got a massive round and an encore.’
Hughes had been wounded on the cutting edge of stand-up comedy.
In recent years the defiantly right-on stance of the comedy circuit had been booted out by a brand of no-holds barred humour.
A few weeks, sometimes only a few days after a major disaster or tragedy — Hillsborough, Piper Alpha or Zeebrugge — there's bound to be a gag about it.
But Northern Ireland has remained untouched by all but a few Irish comedians.
Perhaps, it's the nature of the violence that puts people off.
The deaths in disasters like Hillsborough are certainly tragic but they also fall into the realms of normal human experience.
If you understand a death in a car crash — the product of accident and/or misadventure — you'll understand the concept of death in the sinking of a passenger ferry.
The sectarian violence of Northern Ireland is a different matter altogether.
It's dependent on the purposeful pulling of triggers and setting off of bombs.
It shouldn't happen.
Jokes about the subject suggest the punch-line might be followed by the odd shattered knee cap.
Northern Irish comedian Owen O'Neil has a simple maxim he includes in his act: ‘There's dangerous comedy, very dangerous comedy and jokes about the IRA.’
But O'Neil's line is more for effect than to express any real fears.
Terrorist organisations are usually too busy with other things to go around killing comedians.
Instead of comedy, Northern Ireland has almost exclusively become the subject of thrillers, a background for cops and robbers style drama created in London.
Northern Irish film-maker and writer Niall Leonard, fed up with the humourless stereotyping of his birthplace, has tried to break away from that image.
‘When I see things like the series Confessional on TV I feel like a black person must have felt watching the Black and White Minstrel show.
It's an insult to dramatists to portray terrorists as psychopaths.
Whether you agree or disagree with what they do, you have to accept that they've worked out a very complicated system of values.
There are tribal things going on there that you wouldn't know about unless you lived there.’
His TV play Rotten Apples, to be shown over Christmas, is a black comedy set within a Northern Irish police station.
Bigoted detective sergeant Robert Spallen sets out to bring a notorious IRA terrorist to book.
In his manic enthusiasm he arrests an innocent man, the bear-like Dan Maguire, and sets about framing him.
Northern Ireland is the context rather than cartoon style backdrop to Leonard's piece.
‘There's a strong seam of black humour running through the Northern Irish people and it's ignored.’
Owen O'Neil agrees: ‘There's no major comedy circuit in Northern Ireland in the way there is in London, but people have survived for a very long time on the strength of their own sense of humour.’
The reason for there being no circuit in Belfast is simple: it's too small.
Almost all the Northern Irish comedians have gone to London to find work.
At the recent Belfast Festival there were three Irish comedians on the bill.
All live in London.
For many years, old time Northern Irish comedian Jimmy Young did work there, cutting across the divide with a brand of comedy that hit at both sides.
But he died before the troubles began.
There is still that sense of humour on both front lines.
On a wall in the Shankhill Road in Protestant Belfast is a piece of graffiti which reads ‘We'll never forget you Jimmy Sands.’
On another wall in the Catholic part of the city is a second legend that reads, ‘Ulster says NO, but the man from Del Monte says YES — and he's an Orangeman.’
Similarly a new story is now doing the rounds in the wake of the release of the Guildford Four.
Irish Premier Charles Haughey was at the motor show where he was approached by a journalist.
‘What do you think of the Renault 5?’ the hack asked him.
‘They're innocent,’ the Irish premier replied.
‘What about the Audi 100?’
‘They can't all be guilty,’ said Haughey.
Skilled comedians will be walking a delicate line.
What's abhorrent one week will be funny the next.
It's all about testing the mood of the populace.
As Victoria Wood said, if it's in bad taste it's not funny but if it's funny it's not in bad taste.’
Rotten Apples is on Channel 4 at 10.15pm on Boxing Day.
women's page.
Bye Bye Baby by Janet and Allan Ahlberg (Heinemann, £5.95) Bye Bye Baby nearly sent me bye-byes.
Not that it's boring, just depressing.
The foreword says ‘A sad story with a happy ending’, and it's about a little baby who has no Mummy and so goes off to find one.
Having met a cat, a teddy, a hen and an uncle, he finally finds a Mummy without a child and they all live hapily together until the uncle reminds him that he has no Daddy…
It does have a happy ending, but what if the child reading had only one or no parents?
As for the iron test, my child sat holding on to Mummy while being read to.
Definitely not the book to read before bye-byes.
Top three
Peepo and
Each Peach Pear Plum, both by Janet and Allan Ahlberg
Winnie the Pooh by AA Milne ANGELO ABELA (father of Lucia, 2) Why Weeps the Brogan? by Hugh Scott (Walker Books, £7.95) A nuclear disaster leaves Saxon and Gilbert believing that a buried museum is their world and that beyond its great doors lies only dust and darkness.
Their ritualled life is interrupted only by Saxon's unclear memories of what used to be, along with the movement of the grotesque Brogan in the ‘upper world’.
Eventually they become frustrated with their limited existence and Saxon decides to venture outside…
Although the book was gripping, it was confusing at times and some events seemed detached from the story.
Perseverance is required to understand the story and one had to read between the lines to find the book's full meaning.
Top three
The Catcher in the Rye by JDSalinger
To Kill a Mockingbird by Harper Lee
The Dark is Rising Sequence by Susan Cooper BEN McCABE (15) PAGE wom
Bohemian rhapsody Everybody was having a good time on the Left Bank after the war, but the art was surprisingly thin, argues Tim Hilton.
Greco: voice of cafe society
THE abiding fascination of the existentialist years in post-war Paris may depend on myth.
But it's a myth that's still potent.
It's still not uncommon to meet people who declare that if one were seated in a Parisian cafe, rather than a British pub, then the conversation would be on a different level.
The talk would take in all the great political and aesthetic themes: Jean-Paul Sartre would join in, for he would be sitting at the next table: together, artists and intellectuals would conquer life's essential absurdity; and from such discussions tomorrow's painting would be born.
This sort of belief in French intellectual life, once so common in England, is interestingly tested by the exhibition St-Germain-des-Pres 1945-50 at the Pavillon des Arts in the Forum des Halles.
One visitor went there expecting obfuscation, for I have read Sartre on art and think that Sartre on cricket would be just as illuminating.
But in fact the show is rather jolly.
Rightly or wrongly, the Pavillon des Arts has decided to emphasise the festive spirit of the time.
The exhibition features not only the cafes that belonged to the intelligentsia but also the clubs: and the Tabou, the Lorientais and the Rose Rouge belonged to anyone who could get in.
There's a bande sonore in the show that endlessly plays the music of the day, by Sidney Bechet, Boris Vian, Tadd Dameron, the Miles Davis/Charlie Parker 1945 Savoy Sessions.
And above all there's Juliette Greco singing Si tu t'imagines, which is a Raymond Queneau poem, and Sartre's Rue des Blancs Manteaux, perhaps the worst pop lyric ever, which she just about manages to save.
There's lots of information in this exhibition, not much thought.
The intellectuals in the night clubs, we learn, can be spotted because they don't dance.
So much for them.
But their haunts and their comrades are carefully recorded.
In the sixth arrondissement, between the Boulevard Saint-Michel and the Rue des Saints-Peres, the Seine and the Luxembourg, about one hundred folk are traced, as they moved their operations from the Flore to the Deux Magots to the Brasserie Lipp or from the brothels of the Rue Gregoire de Tours to the cheap hotels, La Madison and La Lousiane but especially Le Montana.
It was considered bourgeois to own or rent an appartement, so the artistic community of St-Germain-des Pres lived in hotels, paying daily for their night's — or day's — rest, flitting from one to the next as circumstances demanded.
Obviously this is the reason why the people concerned were all so visible to each other.
Indeed, I think that the painters, just because they needed to work in studios, may have been the least prominent members of this society.
When has the manufacture of literature been so public?
The new post-Occupation magazines and publishing houses were run from bars.
Towards the end of the Occupation the upstairs room of the Flore resembled a classroom.
Sartre wrote Les Chemins de la Liberte at one table, de Beauvoir was busy at another.
Sartre and de Beauvoir had to go elsewhere after the Liberation.
They became so celebrated that they were disturbed by tourists.
It occurs to me that the St-Germain-des Pres scene was the first bohemia to have become an immediate media success.
Blown-up extracts from contemporary Paris newspapers, on panels larger than the works of art on display, suggest that the district's sudden fame was not so much to do with art or philosophy, but the novel phenomenon of la jeunesse.
They had been subdued in the Occupation years, but now went into the sixieme for a good time.
The proximity of the university quarter and the Ecole des Beaux Arts must also have had an effect, especially since the new lot of teachers were often not much older than their daytime pupils.
So what would be the prospects for a young artist who worked and had his friends and comrades in St-Germain-des Pres in 1945?
First of all, that young artist would generally be a painter, and male.
Secondly, any training he had received would have been conventional or vapid, as a result of German supervision of art education.
Thirdly, our young painter would not know of any other artistic centre beside Paris and would not imagine that such a place might exist.
Fourthly, he would pick up ideas from the avant-garde of poetry, or of jazz, rather than from the living old masters of the classic school of Paris.
There seem to have been a lot of people who took up painting for a while and then dropped it: often enough, like the young Roger Vadim, to become a cineaste or a designer in the lively world of small theatres (which are also extensively documented in the Pavillon des Arts.)
Edgar Gillet, who at that period was an interesting painter, recalls that he lost practically all of his friends to other, and easier, artistic disciplines.
He stuck with the difficult business of painting, and with a difficult set of non-rules to follow.
When he began to paint, during the Occupation, he had looked to Matisse and Bonnard.
In 1945 they seemed no longer relevant.
Gillet was influenced in the liberation years by the cafe conversation of Jean Fautrier, who had said that he wanted painting in which everything previously learnt would be discarded.
It would be badly drawn, badly composed, with gross textures and no subject at all: almost anyone could do it.
Though it does not mean to, the one thing this exhibition actually proves is that new Parisian painting after Hitler's war had no benefit (except commercial good fortune) from the surroundings of the new bohemia.
Whatever their wild ambitions, here was a generation of painters who look extraordinarily safe and tasteful.
The uncomposed art informel of Gillet and his friend Maurice Ronet (who left art for the theatre) has its moments, or rather its small passages, but this is not painting that makes one reconsider painting.
Wrong in purpose and direction, minor Parisian avant-grade art was a tributary trying to run uphill.
This said, one has some pleasure from two paintings by Jean-Michael Atlan.
He was a poet, a teacher of philosophy, and a man with a terrible recent history.
Arrested by the Germans in 1942, he had saved his life by pretending to be mad and had been interned in the Saint-Anne asylum until the liberation.
His paintings are gentle, as though painted under water.
Jacques Doucet has a pleasant collage from 1948 which depicts the Bal Negre in the rue Blomet.
Jean-Paul Riopelle's encrusted abstraction is — what can I say?— promising, and there are standard works by Poliakoff, Georges Mathieu, Hans Hartung (who died only last week) and Maria Elena Vieira da Silva.
St-Germain-des Pres took over from the previous Parisian art centres in Montmartre and Montparnasse, and brought much of the old guard to the new cafes.
Beside the surrealists, there were the groups known as the Bande a Prevert (poets, mainly), the Famille Sartre (which included Greco), the commmunists, the painters, the existentialists, and such minor gatherings as the lettristes, followers of the self-styled genius and concrete-poetry manufacturer, Isidore Isou.
Plenty of material for a party.
Why then the desperate or more generally pessimistic nature of the art they made?
Why is it all so thin and unachieved?
The most beautiful paintings in the show, and a more humane sadness, belong to Picasso.
He observed St-Germain-des Pres from a little distance, was distressed by its tendency towards abstraction, took his new mistress Francoise Gilot from its fringes, and so thought to teach a lesson in painting to both her and her contemporaries.
They didn't listen, or look.
Pavillon des Arts, Forum des Halles, Paris, until January 7.
Le Tabou…. hangout for the jeunesse doree in St-Germain-des Pres in the post-war years
ESSENTIAL BOOKS Lindsay Fraser from Heffers Children's Bookshop in Cambridge makes sure she always has these titles in stock:.
The Baby Catalogue by Janet and Allan Ahlberg (Viking Kestrel, £6.99)
The Very Hungry Caterpillar by Eric Carle (Hamish Hamilton, £1.99)
B.F.G. by Roald Dahl (Jonathan Cape, £7.95)
Flat Stanley by Jeff Brown (Methuen, £6.95)
Animals of Farthing Wood by Colin Dann (Pan, £2.99)
The Jolly Postman by Janet and Allan Ahlberg (Heinemann, £7.95)
The Tale of Peter Rabbit by Beatrix Potter (Frederick Warne, £3.99)
Revolting Rhymes by Roald Dahl (Jonathan Cape, £5.95)
The Lion, The Witch and The Wardrobe by CSLewis (Fontana Lion, £2.25)
Fairy Tales by Terry Jones (Puffin, £1.95) CHRISTMAS BEST-SELLERS Based on last week's sales in the children's department of Waterstone's in Edinburgh: 1 Rhyming Stew by Roald Dahl (Jonathan Cape, £7.95) 2 Oi Get Off Our Train by John Burningham (Jonathan Cape, £7.95) 3 Matilda by Roald Dahl 4 The Lion, The Witch and The Wardrobe by CSLewis (Fontana Lion, £2.25) 5 Prince Caspian by CSLewis (Fontana Lion, £2.25) 6 Almost Everything There Is To Know by Tim Hunkin (Pyramid Books, £4.95) 7 The Complete Tales of Beatrix Potter (Frederick Warne, £20) 8 Budgie The Helicopter by HRHDuchess of York (Simon & Schuster, £4.95) 9 The Way Things Work by David MacAuley (Dorling Kindersley, £14.95) 10 Peace At Last by Jill Murphy (Walker, £6.95) THE YEAR'S BEST-SELLERS Supplied by Jane Churchill at Children's Bookcentre in Kensington, London:
Where's Wally series by Martin Handford (Walker Books, from £2.99 paperback)
A Christmas Story by Brian Wildsmith (Oxford University Press, £6.95)
We're Going On A Bear Hunt by Michael Rosen and Helen Oxenbury
Bye Bye Baby by Janet and Allan Ahlberg
The Eleventh Hour by Graeme Base (MacMillan, £7.95)
Matilda by Roald Dahl
The Fantastic Dinosaur Adventure by Gerald Durrell (Conran Octopus, £7.99)
The Hodgeheg by Dick King-Smith (Puffin, £1.99)
Elmer The Elephant by David McKee (Andersen, £5.95)
A Piece of Cake by Jill Murphy ONE FOR ALL Sonia Benster of the Children's Bookshop in Huddersfield divided her choice into categories:
Best Christmas book: The Christmas Story by Brian Wildsmith (OUP, £6.95)
Best picture book: Paddiwak and Cosy by Berlie Doherty and Teresa O'Brien (Methuen, £5.95)
Best poetry: Heard in the Playground by Allan Ahlberg (Kestrel, £2.50)
Biggest phenomenon: Where's Wally: The Fantastic Journey by Martin Handford (Walker, £7.95)
Best teenage book: The True Confessions of Adrian Albert Mole by Sue Townsend (Methuen, £5.99)
Best-selling local author: Crafty Ideas From Nature by Myrna Daitz and Shirley Williams (Exley, £3.99) CHILDREN'S CHOICE This alphabetical list of Britain's best-selling children's authors was compiled from sales at school book clubs:
Allan and Janet Ahlberg
Judy Blume
Enid Blyton
Roald Dahl
Shirley Hughes
Dick King-Smith
CSLewis
Jill Murphy
Beatrix Potter
Jill Tomlinson WRITE ON Letterbox Library, a mail order book club offering non-sexist, multi-cultural books, lists its 10 most popular titles:
Picture Word Book by Jane Salt and Sarah Polley
Through My Window by Tony Bradman and Eileen Browne
Co-operative Sport and Games Book by Terry Orlick
An Early Start to Science by Roy Richards, Margaret Collis and Doug Kincaid
Paperbag Princess by Robert MMunch
I Don't Want To! by Bel Mooney
But Martin by June Counsel and Carolyn Dinan
Woman in the Moon and Other Forgotten Folk Tales by James Riordan and Angela Barrett
Planet of the Monsters by Stephan May
My Grandmother's Cookie Jar by Montzalee Miller and Katherine Potter
Thanks to the Children's Book Foundation for their help in putting together this report PAGE wom
We're Going on a Bear Hunt by Michael Rosen, illustrated by Helen Oxenbury (Walker Books, £9.95) Winner of the Smarties Award 1989 After one reading, Rosa gave this large format, handsome book her highest accolade; she briskly wrote her name in the front and asked if she could take it to school ‘to show Olga’, her favourite teacher.
Michael Rosen understands that rhythm makes language memorable for children, and what's remembered can be possessed and loved.
Bear Hunt is based on a traditional rhyme.
Four children and their father set off on a bear hunt in high spirits, but by the time they've forded a river, squelched through mud, survived a snowstorm and a wild wood to penetrate the bear's dark cave, all they are capable of is running home again, with bear in hot pursuit.
The final sequence is a familiar bad dream as the family dash in the house and upstairs in the nick of time, only to find they haven't shut the door behind them…
But everyone ends up hiding under the sheets, not too terrified, and a philosophical bear lollops back along the beach to his cave.
I did wish this book were longer, but it's a perfect short bedtime read which cheers tired eyes and ears.
Top three
Lulu and the Flying Babies by Posy Simmonds
This is the Bear by Sarah Hayes and Helen Craig
The Jolly Postman, or Other People's Letters, by Janet and Allan Ahlberg MAGGIE GEE (mother of Rosa, 2 years, 11 months) The Babar Books by Jean de Brunhoff (Methuen, £2.95 to £12.95; Magnet Paperbacks, £2.50) Get ready for the Babar revival.
In the Conran shop Thirtysomethings are snapping up bendy Babars at £10 a pop; Liberty stocks Babar children's wear; there's a film and TV series on the way.
But this isn't just another crass commercialisation of a fictional character.
This is the epic tale of the king of the beasts, the best-dressed elephant in the jungle.
The Babar books are not sentimental.
In fact, the series starts when Babar's mother is shot dead by a hunter.
He runs away to the city where he is taken in by The Old Lady.
She takes him to a tailor (hence the gorgeous green suit and bowler hat), hires a tutor and even buys him a car.
But Babar is homesick and succumbs to the call of the wild (and has loads more adventures).
Written in the Thirties, the six Babar stories have been available in English ever since, but Methuen now publish three sizes of Babar.
The facsimile editions are worth the £12.95 price tag for the Frenchified handwritten text and superb colour printing.
But avoid the pocket hardbacks (£2.95): ‘All the best bits are gone,’ said Charlie, sadly.
Top three
The Tale of Peter Rabbit by Beatrix Potter
Not Now Bernard by David McKee
Fred by Posy Simmonds LOUISE CHUNN (mother of Charlie, 3 ¾, and Alice, 1 ½) Bill's New Frock, by Ann Fine (Methuen, £6.95) Winner of Smarties Book Prize 89 (6-8 years category) Bill's an obliging little boy.
When his mother rigs him out in a pretty pink frock to wear to school (‘What's a frock?’ said my son.
‘A dress, you ignoramus’), all he does is look in the mirror and say, ‘This cannot be true!’
It's the start of a dreadful day.
Mean Malcolm whistles at him, an old lady helps him over the road, teacher expects his writing to be tidy and he has to read the part of the spineless Rapunzel.
At that point, I'm thinking this is going to turn into a junior Tootsie — you know, it takes a man to be a real feminist.
Little Bill in drag strikes a blow for the downtrodden girls.
In fact he doesn't.
Ann Fine is subtler and quirkier than that.
It's still a child's guide to sexism: children may be unconvinced, especially by the boys' latent gallantry (‘They'd kick her, I mean him’), and adults may find the story a touch contrived, but it's a good read.
‘I wouldn't be a girl for five trillion pounds.’
Aha, the message has got through.
‘Why not?’
‘You can't be a footballer when you grow up and the girls’ toilets are messy.’
Top three
The Never Ending Story by Michael Ende
Any Hardy Boys adventure by Franklin WDickson
The Secret Garden by Frances Hodgson Burnett HELEN OLDFIELD (mother of Jane, 9, and Richard, 8) PAGE wom