

Bond's rescue deal with rival is under threat.
By Lisa Buckingham
THE embattled Australian entrepreneur, Alan Bond, yesterday struck a deal with a rival businessman, John Spalvins, in an attempt to save his teetering business empire.
But immediately the plan to carve up the boardroom of Bell Resources ran into trouble with Australia's corporate watchdog, the National Companies and Securities Commission (NCSC).
Mr Spalvins, who heads the Adelaide Steamship group which holds a 20 per cent stake in Bell Resources, called off his legal action to appoint a receiver to the company.
Mr Bond is desperate for the deal to stand, since Bell Resources is crucial to his A$2.5billion brewery deal with New Zealand's Lion Nathan which may underpin a debt restructuring plan for his entire media, property and brewing group, currently labouring to reduce around A$8billion of debts.
But the national securities regulator said it was unhappy about the deal over boardroom seats, whereby Mr Spalvins nominates four of the six directors at Bell Resources.
The Bond camp, which owns 58 per cent of Bell Resources, has also agreed to appoint an independent chairman and not to vote off the Adsteam representatives until a A$1.2billion loan from Bell Resources to Mr Bond's master Bond Corporation is repaid.
The NCSC says the agreement may contravene the takeover code by effectively changing control of Bell without shareholder approval.
It said it would return to the Australian supreme court today to ensure the agreement was in the interest of shareholders.
Inquiry into coffee price.
The cost of coffee is being investigated by the Office of Fair Trading after claims that price falls on international markets have not been matched in the shops.
Nestle pledge.
Nestle Foods Corporation said it would not buy Salvadoran coffee for 30 days in response to a consumer group campaign against the war in El Salvador.
New bank chief.
Deutsche Bank has named Hilmar Kopper as chief executive, replacing Alfred Herrhausen, who was killed by a terrorist car bomb a fortnight ago..
Hilton auction.
Hilton Hotels, owner of the US Hilton chain and casinos in Las Vegas, could be sold to JMB Realty, a Chicago-based investments adviser, which bought the UK property company, Randsworth Trust, for $416million in July.
JMB is among more than six bidders in the $5billion-plus auction.
Green sells stake.
Michael Green, chairman of media group, Carlton Communications, yesterday sold about 20 per cent of his stake in the company for more than £10.5 million.
Shares in Carlton slumped by 20p to 832p on news of the sale which leaves Mr Green's private company with a holding of around 5.3million shares.
His stake was sold at 820p a share.
Pennzoil order.
US oil company, Pennzoil, has been ordered by the courts to produce documents before Christmas to prove it does not intend launching a takeover bid for its bigger rival, Chevron.
ICI in talks.
ICI is discussing the sale of its Savlon antiseptic over-the-counter business, Care Laboratories, to the Swiss pharmaceuticals group, Ciba-Geigy.
The Swiss company said it would guarantee the jobs of all but 24 administrative staff if the sale goes through.
Wall Street higher.
On Wall Street, across-the-board buying in the oil sector sparked a rally.
Traders said some futures-related buy programmes also added to the market's gain.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average climbed 23.89 points to 2752.13, with advancing issues leading declines by about eight to seven.
MMC to probe Civil Aviation Authority.
By Michael Smith Transport Editor
THE Monopolies and Mergers Commission is to launch an investigation into the Civil Aviation Authority.
The inquiry, the latest in a series of MMC investigations into public sector bodies, was announced by the Consumer Affairs Minister, Mr John Redwood.
He said the MMC, which last conducted an inquiry into the CAA in 1983, must report back within five months.
It is expected that the MMC investigators will be particularly interested in the CAA's air traffic control operations which have been the centre of a long-running controversy involving aircraft ‘near misses’, poor morale among controllers and equipment break-downs.
The inquiry will encompass the full range of the CAA's activities.
The MMC will want to assess the effectiveness of the CAA's management in implementing a planned £600million programme to modernise Britain's air traffic control system.
Granada brightens.
Demand for satellite television has been greatly exaggerated, the TV equipment rental and leisure group Granada said yesterday.
The company, which has a major share stake in Sky's rival British Satellite Broadcasting but which rents receiver equipment for Rupert Murdoch's operation, said around 30,000 dishes a month are being sold or rented.
In addition to that, direct Murdoch promotions are boosting sales, but Granada warned that estimates for total demand should be taken ‘with a certain pinch of salt.’
Granada has a £63million stake in BSB and said there had been several approaches for Alan Bond's major stake in the venture.
It was hoped that sale of the stake would benefit the consortium.
The company said its Manchester-based television firm was well placed to recapture its franchise in the coming auction and is seeking overseas TV opportunities.
Granada yesterday unveiled profits of £164million — up 15 per cent— for the year to September.
The downturn in television and electrical rental business appeared to be tailing off and, despite a substantial write-off, the sale of Lasky — where the group admitted its timing was wrong — was beneficial..
Strikes hit Dowty.
Dowty's three-pronged attack in areas of high technology where profit has often been elusive is proceeding better than the interim results suggest.
Turnover grew by a quarter and margins would have been maintained but for strikes and other special factors mainly affecting the aerospace business.
Defence equipment's share of sales, if not yet profit, is declining.
Excluding the mining machinery business that contributed £85million in the corresponding period, before disposal, turnover put on almost £70million to £337.5million.
This is a tiny fraction of order books and likely contracts of £2billion, although strikes at home lasting several days and the subsequent long stoppage at Boeing has limited the prospective gain above the £230million aerospace turnover achieved last year.
Information technology sales doubled to £92million as a result of the CASE takeover, though it is taking time to bring profitability up to the levels elsewhere in the group.
Polymer engineering, on the other hand made further strides, particularly in cost control.
Pre-tax profit was only 13.5 per cent ahead at £37million after the £2million estimated strike cost and £1.6million reduction in property gains to £1.6million.
Interest was that amount lower at £3.6million, offsetting most of the £2million mining and industrial hydraulics contribution in the six months to September last year.
The interim dividend is 3.5p, against 3.2p, while earnings stayed at 9.2p on the higher capital.
Only just over a third of sales were military and well over half were overseas, so steady progress is attainable for a prolonged period..
Solid gains at Triplex.
Triplex Lloyd, the steel fabrications and foundries group with enlarged motor and electrical distribution activities as a result of the Christy Hunt acquisition, made solid gains on most fronts in the latest six months.
Weak demand for windows for homes is being offset elsewhere and the West Midlands property developments and disposals are helping to keep the leap in interest charges within bounds.
The interim dividend is being boosted by nearly half although the final payment is weightier.
Including CH's Deritend subsidiaries the power and defence division took the lead in raising turnover to £85.6million, from £59.5million, before some further disposals.
It was still more prominent in the rise in pre-tax profit to £5.14million, from £2.83million.
Motor and engineering margins were hit by relocations, rather than any slackening in demand.
Interest charges nearly quadrupled to £1.7million, but the Wednesbury development, which will include an IKEA furniture superstore, promises to keep property revenues rising.
The interim dividend is 2.5p, against 1.75p and earnings were 0.5p higher at 8.2p after a slightly lower tax burden.
Trading continues quite strong in most areas, the chairman, Mr Lewis Robertson, reports..
In short…
BSS turnover soared to £8l.4million, from £61.8 million, while pre-tax profit climbed to £6.63million, from £5.62million.
Although interest charges were sharply up at £386,000, smaller acquisitions to enlarge the network can easily be financed by the high cash flow.
Earnings were 3.3p ahead at 22.6p a share.
The interim dividend is being raised by 15 per cent to 5.75p.
RICHARDS rationalised the Spence Bryson textiles acquisition and sold its Belfast head office for £1.6million after the year end.
Pre-tax profit rose to £2.76million, from £2.45million after exceptional outlays in the previous year to September 30.
The increased final dividend of 2.75p takes the total to 3.75p, from 3.5p, covered by earnings up in line to 9p.
TMD Advertising Holdings reported an 81 per cent rise in profits to £2.2million after including first results from TMD Manchester, together with Yershon Group, Horizons Media Outdoor, Harrison Salinson and Michael Jarvis which were all acquired during the year to August.
The markets.
The water issues accounted for more than half the business on the heaviest days trading since January.
Seaq volume at 5pm was 800.4million of which water accounted for 433million.
The FTSE Index was 18 points up at 10pm but this was later halved before a later rally saw it close 12.1 points up at 2363.5.
The firmer pound helped gilts gain a quarter, but most equities were down.
British Aerospace lost 12p later in the day at 561p on market rumours that the Rover 2000 production plant was closing early for Christmas because of low-level business.
Tokyo: Closed firmer in moderate trading.
Nikkei index: 37,803.53 (37,752.67).
Hong Kong: Surged in the strongest trading volume in over a month.
Hang Seng index: 2,809.58 (2,763.33).
Franfurt: Closed mixed in active trading.
FAZ index: 693.14 (693.97).
Paris: Closed narrowly mixed in quiet trading.
CAC index: 549.5 (551.3).
Buying spree for regional brewers.
By Tony May
THE regional brewers, Devenish and Vaux, unveiled ambitious expansion plans yesterday in the wake of the Monopolies Commission report into the industry.
Devenish is to spend up to £180million to more than double its pub chain.
Its chairman, Michael Cannon, said yesterday that he relished the challenge of buying between 400 and 600 pubs, mostly in the Midlands and North, from the big brewers for between £250,000 and £300,000, and expects this to take three months.
Mr Cannon is not the only regional brewer planning a big expansion.
The Sunderland-based Vaux wants to buy 100 or more pubs but is being choosy.
It expects its gearing to rise from 10 per cent to 20 per cent.
Vaux, which already receives most of its profit from hotels, yesterday announced the £27.3million purchase of the Gosforth Park Hotel, Newcastle from Mount Charlotte Hotels for shares.
To finance its ‘once in a lifetime’ opportunity, Devenish has unused borrowings and the £26million proceeds of the April rights issue.
Gearing will be pushed up from the present 13 per cent and the board will then seek some longer-term financing.
These expansion moves were announced yesterday alongside a 22 per cent rise in Devenish's profit to £14million for the year to September 30.
The Dorset, Devon and Cornwall holiday areas benefited from the good summer weather and from the upgrading of pubs carried out over the last few years.
Vaux's profits jumped 20.5 per cent to £31.5million in the same period.
Its Swallow Hotels have had a good year, helped by the first full year's trading at Peterborough and Waltham Abbey.
The current year's plans involve expenditure within the group of £70million, excluding acquisitions of which £43million will be on hotels and £6million on care homes.
East European changes are chance for historic bargain Economics.
By Christopher Huhne
THE ministerial meeting of the Group of 24 industrial market economies in Brussels today will provide the first test of whether the West is ready to rise to the occasion in Eastern Europe.
The Group itself has already been overtaken by events, since it was mandated by the Paris summit to co-ordinate measures to help Poland and Hungary.
Since then, both East Germany and Czechoslovakia have lined up with equally convincing claims.
Even Bulgaria is not far behind.
The scale of economic assistance which will be required if these economies are to be integrated into the world financial and trading system is without any recent parallel.
The nearest precedent is the extraordinarily generous Marshall Plan for the reconstruction of Western Europe after the second world war.
Some $12.8billion was funnelled through the plan between April 1948 and June 1952, but there was also US aid through other agencies and to other parts of the world, including a substantial slice for Japan.
‘During the period 1946 through 1953’, the Randall commission of the US Congress on foreign economic policy reported*, ‘the United States transferred through gifts and loans $33billion of goods and services, exclusive of military items.
This was equal to more than one-fourth of all American exports’.
Aid today in a similar proportion to American exports would amount to some $130billion, an unimaginably large figure.
That comparison is exagerrated by the enormous increase in world trade which has occurred in the post-war period, and which has largely by-passed the Eastern European countries.
It may thus be fairer to compare the Marshall programme with the scale of Eastern European imports rather than American exports.
For example, Britain received $3.2billion of the $12.8billion Marshall money — worth just over 7 per cent of all our imports of goods and services over the five years.
A similar boost to the imports of Eastern Europe (excluding the Soviet Union) would be worth some $7.5billion a year for five years.
If the Soviet Union were included, the total should be doubled to $15billion a year.
These are figures which dwarf those currently being discussed in the G24.
The International Monetary Fund letter of intent for Poland will release about $700million.
The once-off economic stabilisation fund for Poland is meant to be worth $1billion.
There will be money from the World Bank.
European Investment Bank loans guaranteed by the EC budget may amount over 1990-2 to $1.1billion for Poland and Hungary.
Bilateral credits pledged to Poland and Hungary amount to nearly $1.5billion.
The European Development Bank, agreed at the Strasbourg summit, will have a capital and lending power of 10billion ECUs, or some $8.7billion.
Not only will these flows take time to build up, but they will also be mainly loans rather than grants, unlike Marshall aid.
Moreover, they come on top of an unhappy experience with foreign currency borrowing for most of the Eastern European countries during the Seventies.
Eastern Europe's total convertible currency debt is estimated at $134billion, of which some $43billion is owed by the Soviet Union; $39billion by Poland; $17billion by Hungary; and $22billion by East Germany.
Unless the Paris Club, which manages official debt to Western governments, proves much more generous than its past record suggests, a considerable slice of the new money will go merely to service the old loans rather than provide fresh finance for imports and investment goods to support genuine reform.
You do not, of course, solve problems merely by throwing money at them.
So much is obvious from the record of the countries which received Marshall aid.
Contrary to popular misconception, Britain received more than any other Western European country, yet its subsequent economic record proved to be less impressive.
Yet it would be a grotesque misrepresentation to suggest that the Marshall plan consisted merely of cash handouts which enabled the recipients to fund a higher level of imports, and hence to run a higher pressure of domestic demand without serious inflationary problems.
General George C. Marshall, the US Secretary of State, was far from a League of Nations idealist.
He was out for long term gains.
His historic speech at Harvard University on June 5, 1947, came at a time when it was increasingly clear that there was a fundamental imbalance between the US economy, which had emerged bigger and stronger from the war, and the destitution of Europe.
He wanted to rebuild Western Europe, both as the commercial partner of the US and as a bulwark in a peaceful settlement of a continent.
It was self-consciously a reversal of the Versailles policy, after the first world war, of exacting war reparations from the defeated.
His words have a surprising resonance in today's Eastern Europe.
‘The town and city industries’, he said, ‘are not producing adequate goods to exchange with the food-producing farmer…people in the cities are short of food and fuel.
So the governments are forced to use their foreign money and credits to procure these necessities abroad…
It is logical that the United States should do whatever it is able to do to assist in the return of normal economic health in the world, without which there can be no political stability and no assured peace…there must be some agreement among the countries of Europe as to the requirements of the situation and the part those countries themselves will take in order to give proper effect to whatever action might be undertaken by this government.
This is the business of the Europeans.
The initiative, I think, must come from Europe.’
Ernest Bevin, then the Foreign Secretary, leapt at the opportunity to convene, with his French counterpart, a conference of European nations in Paris.
It was clear from the start that American aid would only take place in the context of commitments to economic reform within Europe.
The Europeans were encouraged to devalue, and to open up trade between themselves before freeing their exchanges with the US.
Some of the most effective parts of the Marshall plan were precisely those which concentrated on improving public policy, company management, the use of investment, and output per person.
But it was necessary, too, that the trade deficits run by Europe were properly financed.
The effects of the total programme — advice, reform and finance — in improving both output and productivity were dramatic.
In the participating countries, industrial production rose by 39 per cent between 1948 and 1952.
The access to American know-how and management techniques, including both advice from the US missions in each country and visits to plants in the US, helped to lift productivity growth to an altogether more rapid rhythm.
During the Fifties, output per person grew in the US by 2.4 per cent a year.
The growth was 4.1 per cent in Italy; 3.9 per cent in France; 6 per cent in West Germany.
Only in Britain, with 2 per cent, was the catch-up less effective.
Here there are important parallels and dissimilarities with Eastern Europe.
The greatest difference is that the Marshall plan was reviving economies which, even in the case of Germany, had experienced bureaucratic control for a relatively short period.
The instincts of the entrepreneur have been suppressed in Eastern Europe for 44 years, and in the Soviet Union for 72.
No one can say how quickly the taste for risk and reward, the essential motor of a free market economy, will come back.
Unlike many Third World countries, though, the Eastern European economies are industrial and have been capitalist.
Moreover, they have maintained relatively high standards of education.
One parallel with the Marshall period is the appetite for advice to both government and enterprises.
This is an area where the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, through its committees of member state experts, needs to give generously.
For example, the Soviet Union is committed to moving from its odd system of Net Material Product (which disregards services) to a standardised system of national accounting on United Nations lines.
It will need a lot of technical assistance.
Autonomous enterprises, for instance, will no longer yield their surplus automatically to the central government (one of the reasons for the collapse in the Soviet tax base and the widening budget deficit).
The government needs advice on constructing a tax system for a decentralised economy.
For example, the Eastern Europeans will need to construct, almost overnight, a whole system of company law, contract and accounts.
A final difference with the Marshall era is the lack of spare capacity in the developed world.
The expenditure of Marshall dollars on US exports did not create inflationary pressures within the US because of the wartime demobilisation and the ability of its plant and manpower to produce more.
If there were to be a programme of comparable generosity to the new democracies, it would be necessary to reduce some category of expenditure within the industrial countries.
The obvious candidate is defence spending.
The greater the economic success of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, the greater will be our security.
The elements of an historic bargain are there: our peace for their prosperity Quoted in Robert Solomon, The International Monetary System 1945-1981, New York, 1982.
The top job that no one wants.
By Teresa Hunter
FINANCIAL advisers converging on the Wembley Conference Centre today will be wondering who will take the job which no one wants and step into the shoes of Lord Elton at the head of Britain's most important investor protection body.
The public flogging anticipated at the annual general meeting of the City watchdog, Fimbra, may well fail to materialise.
In the way of the City, the old boys have done their deals behind the scenes.
Members' anger has been placated by the announcement that Lord Elton will retire early next year.
Fimbra's executive and members must now restore public confidence in the organisation responsible for policing advisers who tell investors where to invest their money.
That Fimbra has reached this impasse comes as no surprise to anyone with a knowledge of the chequered history of this organisation responsible for policing many of the black sheep of the financial world.
To its credit, Fimbra has done a good job weeding out some of the black sheep.
Membership was never granted to about a third of firms which originally applied.
Since 1987 a further 100 firms have been suspended.
Although it is perhaps a cause of some concern that of the 8,000 trading member firms, some 4,000 have not yet received a compliance visit.
But Fimbra's rigid policing style has alienated many of the firms which have passed the test of being responsible, well-conducted businesses.
Fimbra itself is now beginning to admit some of its rules and regulations may have been ‘too onerous’.
The problem is seen to have been exacerbated by appointing both a chairman, Lord Elton and a chief executive, Ray O'Brien, from outside the broking world.
Mounting discontent came to a head over a professional insurance scheme which Fimbra attempted to force on all its members.
But this was an excuse for confrontation rather than a cause.
Fimbra members are by their nature small businesses.
The Financial Services Act was putting pressure on them from all sides.
It prohibited them from accepting research and other support services traditionally provided by the life companies.
It also required them to disclose any commissions they earn to the client — guaranteeing a more difficult sale.
Then the Fimbra straitjacket of rules and regulations descended.
Against this the Barlow Clowes fiasco, in which small investors lost up to £100million, reflected most critically on Fimbra members, who had recommended the company.
Fimbra will today decide what sort of leader can forge a united path for all its members.
But if the rumour that Lord Elton was on a shortlist of one is true, that replacement may be hard to find.
Kingfisher chief says offer is fair as Dixons ‘is in serious decline’.
By Peter Rodgers City Editor
DIXONS, the electrical retailer, was yesterday accused of beefing up its results through £31million undisclosed profits from property sales, and of making more from insurance and credit deals than from selling goods.
Geoff Mulcahy, Kingfisher chief executive, detailing the Woolworth, Comet and B&Q group's £460million offer, said Dixons faced a ‘bleak future’ in its present form and he called the 120p a share he is bidding ‘very serious for a business in serious decline.’
City analysts have said the offer is too low.
Stanley Kalms, the Dixons chief whose own bid for what was then called Woolworths was repulsed three years ago, said the offer document did not disguise an attempt to acquire his company on the cheap.
‘Everyone knows that we, like Comet, have been suffering a temporary downturn.
Kingfisher's latest published interim statement showed that Comet has suffered a 60 per cent fall in profits,’ added Mr Kalms.
The Kingfisher offer document, says Dixons, has not disclosed the extent of property disposal profits, or where they have been taken.
The bidder's estimate is that at least £31million of the property profit has been taken above the line, and Kingfisher also questions whether Dixons made any profit at all in 1988-89 from selling electrical goods in the UK.
Mr Mulcahy said Dixons' claim that its results were due to the downturn in the electrical market was untrue.
They had begun to decline while the market was still growing.
Dixons' market capitalisation had also fallen £1billion, or 72 per cent, more than all bar one other non-food retailer.
He argued that Dixons' approach to electrical retailing was ‘fundamentally flawed.’
Mr Mulcahy, who has made a formal presentation to the Office of Fair Trading, was dismissive about suggestions that the bid would be referred.
Kingfisher claims the combined company would have a market share of 22 per cent, though other estimates are that it would be above the 25 per cent threshold for a reference.
With a stock exchange investigation under way into heavy trading in Dixons' options ahead of the announcement, it emerged that as many as 300 people would have known of the bid shortly beforehand, many of them on the credit committees of lending banks.
But Kingfisher director, Mr Archie Norman, said he had total confidence in brokers Phillips and Drew, despite the fact that much of the trading had been done through them.
‘We kept the details of our bid extremely tight.
Our brokers knew nothing until 4pm the day before our announcement.
By that time the trading had been done.’
Kingfisher denied that the borrowings classified the deal as highly leveraged.
The investors' watchdog may have had its day Notebook.
By Edited by Alex Brummer
THE investor protection system set up under the Financial Services Act is creaking under the strain, less than three years after it swung into operation.
The first rule books devised by the Securities and Investments Board (SIB) led to a torrent of complaints from the City and the replacement of the first chairman, Sir Kenneth Berrill by the Bank of England director, David Walker.
Sir Kenneth's rules were a bit daft in places and far too detailed to work without the risk of continual recourse to the courts.
So there was a case for revising them.
But what sticks in the mind is how easily the City was able to use the self-regulatory nature of the investor protection system —‘we pay for it, so get him off our backs’— to twist the arm of the government.
If Sir Kenneth had done a better piece of work, and been disliked by the City simply for being too tough in representing the interests of investors, would that have been enough to keep his job?
We will never know.
But the debacle at Fimbra, the watchdog responsible to SIB for regulating independent financial advisers, suggests that exactly the same tensions between self-regulation and investor protection continue.
With its large and unruly membership of mainly small firms, Fimbra has had problems since the beginning of the new system.
Ignoring the rights and wrongs of Lord Elton's disagreements with some of his members, the fact is that a body meant to protect investors has been overshadowed by policy rows with the investment firms which make up its membership.
There is now a serious possibility that this bastardised version of self-regulation will gradually crumble away, under the combined assault of Brussels, European preferences for statutory regulation and the sheer impossibility of resolving the underlying tension between practitioners and investors.
The great benefit to the government of the present system is that the City finances it and receives a large share of the blame when things go wrong.
A statutory system based on the SIB is beginning to look a distinct possibility for the 1990s.
It would be better for government, City and investors.
Ghastly sight.
THERE are some disasters that are so ghastly that even the voyeur averts the eyes.
Just such an episode has been playing itself out on the American financial stage.
The damage to the integrity of the US banking system caused by the feckless management of the savings and loans system — which before US financial deregulation did much the same job as our own building societies — has been so extensive that its impact often goes unstated.
President Bush was admirably fast in identifying the problem inherited from the laissez faire Administration of his predecessor, and was quick to put together a $164billion rescue package — by far the largest in the history of finance.
Less than a year later it appears even this will be inadequate.
The gloomiest analysts' estimates suggest that the eventual bill could be as much as $100billion higher.
The chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, who inherited supervisory responsibilities as part of the rescue plan, now admits the problem could costs tens of billions more than anticipated.
He is currently preparing a plan to unlock more working capital by the New Year.
Almost as dramatic as the financial scale of the mess is the growing political fallout.
The problems of one particularly sick savings and loan, Lincoln Federal, has already cost the head of the Federal Home Loans Bank, his job and could take some senior elected officials, including Democratic Senator Alan Cranston down, too.
It is also besmirching the reputation of the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, who was peripherally involved.
The savings and loan saga provides a startling illustration of how badly matters can go wrong when institutions are cut loose from regulation without proper supervision.
It can only be hoped that the newly aggressive financial players of the Thatcher era manage to avoid the same errors.
New strains.
FRANCE'S decision to sweep away exchange controls to mark the Euro decade of the 1990s is important enough to have caused even Mrs Thatcher to give some ground in her opposition to the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
Slowly, but surely, the panoply of conditions the Prime Minister erected is being swept away.
This, conveniently, is at a time when sterling has fallen far enough against the Deutschemark to make it potentially competitive within ERM.
But this did not prevent Mrs Thatcher from exposing another potential problem in her Financial Times interview: accommodating a trading and reserve currency such as sterling within a mechanism where the Deutschemark has no serious challenger.
Britain's entry could change that substant-ially.
The Bank of England's recent survey of the London foreign exchange market showed that trading in sterling for dollars, or greenbacks for German marks, amounts to almost half the daily turnover.
By contrast, dollars for lira and dollars for the French franc — the other main ERM currencies — total only 4 per cent.
Even allowing for the pound being on home ground that is a sizeable difference.
It does not take much to imagine a situation in which the world's foreign exchange markets are pushing the pound in one direction and the mark in the other.
Even a wider fluctuation band of, say, 6 per cent might (the same as Italy) be swept away in the hurricane.
Given the current differing economic performance of Britain and West Germany, putting sterling in the exchange rate mechanism could well subject it to new strains.
At worst, it could force ERM into a raft of destabilising realignments.
With her recognition of the unusual role of sterling and London in the international financial system, Mrs Thatcher makes a more credible argument against participation.
Cameron-Webb appeal fails.
By Financial Staff
PETER Cameron-Webb, one of the men at the centre of the largest Lloyd's scandal in history, yesterday failed in the Appeal Court to overturn a judgment against him for £5million.
Lord Justice Parker together with Lord Justice Bingham and Sir John Megaw, dismissed Mr Cameron-Webb's appeal against an earlier ruling.
Mr Cameron-Webb was the manager of the PCW Underwriting Agency whose business resulted in a £135million market-wide settlement at Lloyd's.
Although the PCW affair first came to light nearly nine years ago it remains the single largest City controversy on record.
In February Mr Justice Saville had ruled in favour of Lloyd's who had claimed £2.1 million plus $4.5million and 22,000 Swiss francs from Mr Cameron-Webb.
The former Lloyd's underwriter has lived in America since 1981 but faces charges over the affair if he ever returns to Britain.
Refusing leave to appeal to the House of Lords, Lord Justice Bingham said the sums claimed by Lloyd's represented money out of which Mr Cameron-Webb had tried to cheat syndicates for which he acted.
The court was told between 1968 and 1982 money had been syphoned out of syndicates as purported reinsurance premiums to overseas companies controlled by Mr Cameron-Webb.
Appearing in court for the Corporation of Lloyd's, Stephen Ruttle said: ‘Mr Cameron- Webb is marginally short on merits.
He would be unlikely to give the Archangel Gabriel a run for his money and he should not be allowed to run to the House of Lords.’
Mr Cameron-Webb, on whose syndicates investors such as tennis star Virginia Wade lost millions of pounds, can still appeal directly to the House of Lords for a fresh hearing.
Losses from the PCW case were eventually settled after contributions were made by Lloyd's, the syndicate investors, brokers and other agents in the London insurance market.
Peru ends IMF debt revolt.
By Mike Reid in Lima
PERU has reached a preliminary agreement with the International Monetary Fund that signals a softening of the country's four-year debt rebellion.
The agreement was accompanied by a $42.3million payment to the Fund by the Peruvians — the first since 1986 — to cover repayments due between September and December, according to an announcement in Washington on Monday.
Peru owes a further $760million in arrears on its repayments of past loans from the Fund.
The country has now committed itself to stay up to date with future payments.
In return, the IMF will send a mission to Lima to collaborate in drawing up a medium-term economic programme, and will seek financial support for Peru.
The four-point agreement follows more than a year of contacts with the Fund by Peru's foreign debt negotiator, Abel Salinas, and is an about-turn by President Alan Garcia.
He stopped payments to the Fund shortly after taking office in 1985, as part of a unilateral policy to restrict payments on Peru's $18billion foreign debt, which stands at 10 per cent of export earnings.
Mr Garcia has said the IMF has become more ‘flexible’, particularly in accepting that any economic programme for Peru would require ‘concessional’ financing in view of the country's depressed economy and political problems.
But the agreement has been interpreted here as a bid to stave off a likely request that Peru leave the Fund because of its violation of the rules.
Closer collaboration with the IMF, and fresh money, will almost certainly have to await a new government, due in March.
It will also require willingness by creditors to advance a bridge loan to enable Peru to clear its account with the Fund.
It has the largest arrears of 10 countries which have been declared ‘ineligible’ for further Fund loans.
The Racal twins: their share prices just do not add up Outlook.
By Roger Cowe
RACAL is the company which proves beyond a shadow of doubt that share prices say nothing about what a company is worth.
Just as you cannot add up all the prices in a shop to arrive at what it would cost to buy the shop, nor can you add up the price of all a company's shares to arrive at what the company is worth.
Racal proved this conclusively when it announced last spring that it was planning to sell off part of the Vodafone mobile telecoms operation.
Racal's share price suddenly shot up by almost a third, despite the fact that the partial flotation would have absolutely no effect on the already-excellent prospects for Vodafone.
Another way of looking at this conundrum is to compare the market value (the total value of all the shares) of the two companies.
The parent company, Racal Electronics, is currently valued at £3.1billion, as the table shows, while Racal telecom, the Vodafone company, is valued at £4billion.
Nothing wrong with that, you might think, even if it does represent more than 70 times last year's earnings — a price-earnings ratio of Japanese proportions.
But the parent owns 80 per cent of Telecom, which works out at £3.2billion.
In other words, it is not only cheaper to buy the parent company's shares, buying them gets you a share of the non-telecom activities for less than nothing.
That might seem fair enough considering the profitability of those businesses, but they are not quite so bad that people should be paid for taking them away.
The chart shows that in total the non-telecom activities made less profit in this half year than last time.
But there are some profitable and growing businesses among them.
Security, being mainly the results of the Chubb acquisition in 1984, is the largest division.
With the help of acquisitions, sales and profits grew substantially, despite the effect of the housing downturn on the Chubb locks business and of worries about Halon on the fire extinguisher operation.
Apart from Security, though, there was little good news in the figures for the non-telecom businesses.
Defence activities are suffering at Racal as everywhere, although the order book was boosted to £250million by two orders from West Germany announced yesterday.
The chairman, Sir Ernest Harrison, promised that the first half loss would be reversed in the second half, but pressure on margins is not going to go away.
Radio Communications is sufferring similar pressures, since its traditional customers are military.
Here Racal is compensating by cultivating paramilitary forces, and has become the Government's nominated supplier of secure mobile radios to UK police forces.
Data Communications, where Racal is investing heavily in various kinds of electronic networks, saw profits slip by £2 million to £11.6million.
This was partly the result of good news such as winning the contract for the government department data network and a voice network for the department of social security.
Start-up costs on these projects and a US satellite network soaked up £6.6 million.
This neatly demonstrates the Racal approach which has produced Vodafone: invest heavily in value-added services whose growth can compensate for difficulties in traditional product areas.
This strategy was invented seven years ago as Mr Harrison, as he then was, saw Racal's difficulties in competing with the defence industry giants even after the takeover of Decca.
It is easy to say now that the potential for cellular telephones made it easy to focus on that business.
But how many people even knew what a cellular phone was seven years ago.
The uncertainty is illustrated by the fact that even five years ago Vodafone profits were forecast at around £40million by the end of the decade.
In fact Racal Telecom has made £73million in just six months.
Even allowing for inflation, that is probably beyond the wildest dreams even of Sir Ernest.
And it is that uncertainty which limits the value the City can put on Sir Ernest's other risky ventures, and explains why the share prices do not add up.
Volvo in huge asset swap deal.
By Patrick Donovan Industrial Correspondent
VOLVO is taking a £2.4billion stake in the Swedish state-controlled industrial conglomerate, Procordia, in exchange for the motor giant's Provendor food division and a 29 per cent holding in the Pharmacia drugs company.
In a move intended to rationalise Volvo's interests outside its core activities of car and truck manufacture, the company will then hold a 40 per cent stake in Procordia.
The impact of the deal, the biggest ever in the Swedish market, will turn Procordia into one of Europe's 20 largest pharmaceutical companies, with more than 48,000 employees and a yearly turnover approaching £3.5billion.
It will also become a market leader in several food areas within Scandinavia.
The asset swap, which was unveiled in Stockholm last night, puts Volvo on an equal footing with the Swedish Government, which previously held an 80 per cent share stake in Procordia.
Having taken control of Volvo's 29 per cent Pharmacia stake, which carries nearly half of the voting rights in Sweden's biggest drugs company, Procordia is expected to launch a full takeover bid of at least £1billion.
‘It's likely that Procordia is going to make a bid for Pharmacia in order to get hold of its drugs division to combine it with KabiVitrum,’(its pharmaceutical subsidiary), said a financial analyst at Stockholm broker, United Securities.
The sale of Provendor, which is Volvo's third most profitable division, making products ranging from mineral water to frozen snacks, will come as a surprise to the market when trading opens today.
Shares in the three companies concerned in the swap were suspended yesterday in advance of the evening statement.
After the swap, Volvo's only other asset outside of engineering and motor manufacturing will be its 20 per cent holding in Saga, the Norwegian oil exploration company.
A Volvo spokesman last night refused to go into the reasons behind the deal.
But the market expects it to prelude news of a major link-up with Renault of France.
Volvo confirmed recently that both companies had been holding ‘discussions’ over possible joint ventures in the European motor market.
The sale of Volvo's Pharmacia holding, bought in 1985, follows a slump in the drug company's fortunes.
With the share price peaking in July at 200 crowns, the company's share capital was worth 13 billion crowns.
The restricted B-share has since fallen to 161, reducing the total market capitalisation to 10.7 billion crowns.
Pharmacia had pre-tax nine-month profits of 545 million crowns (£54million) this year, down 14 per cent.