

Archery English will miss S African golds.
THE most Anglo-Saxon of games has been found to be compromising with apartheid.
The Commonwealth Games Council for England has told archers to end a 30-year tradition of competing with a South African organisation.
The council has asked the Grand National Archery Association to stop its member counties from holding ‘postal shoots’ with the Natal Archery Society.
It seems that although English greenswards remained innocent of South Africans, score cards from agreed events were exchanged through the mails.
John Middleton, the GNAA chief executive, told News From The Centre, an archery magazine, that the Commonwealth Games organisation had ‘deemed’ the competition ‘acceptable’six years ago, but had changed its mind ‘due to a minority of British archers bringing politics into sport’.
Rugby League Bamford tries to repeat the magic.
By Paul Fitzpatrick
WHEN he resigned from the Great Britain coaching job almost three years ago, it was inevitable that Maurice Bamford would occupy a much less prominent place in Rugby League life.
But as he proved at Knowsley Road on Sunday, although he may have descended into relative obscurity he still possesses exceptional powers of motivation, with his Dewsbury side producing the most impressive performance of the Regal Trophy so far.
St Helens went into the game having won their previous nine matches.
The bookmakers, showing unusual generosity, gave them a 44-point advantage on the handicap betting list.
Instead, with only 10 minutes left, Dewsbury led 12-6 and a genuine upset was in the offing.
A try from David Tanner levelled the scores, saving the St Helens players from embarrassment but not from the inevitable verbal roasting from their coach, Alex Murphy.
Dewsbury almost won, according to Bamford, because they stuck rigidly to their game plan, using a persistent kicking game and cutting off the supply lines to the St Helens backs.
The question is: can they get it to work a second time?
The likelihood is that St Helens will have had their minds wonderfully concentrated by the experience and should win the replay at Wakefield Trinity tonight to go through to a meeting with Oldham in the quarter-finals on Sunday.
With their experienced hooker David Watkinson still struggling for fitness, Dewsbury are likely to retain the same side as Sunday.
Their consolation this time is likely to be financial, with a crowd of 3,500 expected — four times Dewsbury's normal gate.
For St Helens, Tea Ropati, the New Zealand centre who was invalided home from the recent tour after only two matches, could make his debut.
He was given an ultimatum by Murphy to prove his fitness by Friday but went well in training on Monday.
Jonathan Griffiths, the former Welsh rugby union half-back, will play his first full game since September 24 in place of the injured Neil Holding, and Tommy Frodsham could be in contention after recovering from knee ligament damage.
But there are doubts about Paul Loughlin, the Great Britain centre, and Tanner.
FA Cup second-round replay: Burnley 1, Scunthorpe Utd 1 (aet) Burnley's opening is slammed shut by Daws.
By Cynthia Bateman
SCUNTHORPE, down to 10 men for more than an hour, equalised, forced extra time and then held out for a second replay.
The only thing they lost was the toss of the coin that decided they would play at Turf Moor again on Monday.
Scunthorpe's faithful few in a crowd of 7,682 had huddled on the terraces like penguins on an ice floe as the dankness seeped down the Pennine valleys.
Their team froze in the face of the opening blast from Burnley, which brought a 27th-minute goal from Roger Eli.
He came on for the injured Mumby and headed in a perfect Measham cross to score his first goal for the club.
Litchfield, who had kept Scunthorpe in the competition by saving a late penalty in the game at Glanford Park, almost gave this one away in the opening minutes when he dropped the ball at the feet of Ronnie Futcher.
But the angle was too acute for the veteran striker.
Understandably on an East Lancashire night as cold as a tomb, Scunthorpe took a while to warm up.
But just before half-time the blood started to circulate as Hamilton and Marshall had close-range shots blocked by the reflex responses of Pearce.
Scunthorpe's Stevenson was cautioned and then sent off in the space of 60 seconds, and while Burnley tried to take advantage the visiting 10 seemed as vulnerable as green bottles.
But a lull in Burnley's flurries saw Tony Daws leap on to a bad back-pass, skip round a defender and the converging goalkeeper and equalise just after the hour.
Scunthorpe survived largely because Futcher thought he was offside when he wasn't and Deary was when he shouldn't have been — his 81st-minute goal being disallowed to the despair of the home fans and the delight of those setting off across the black hills.
Not a night of vintage claret.
Burnley: Pearce, Measham, McGrory, Deary, Farrell, Davis, White, Mumby (Eli, 6min), Futcher, Jakub, Atkinson (Hardy, 103).
Scunthorpe: Litchfield, Smalley, Longden, Ward (Hodkinson, 40), Lister, Stevenson, Lillis, Taylor, Daws (Flounders, 103), Hamilton, Marshall.
Referee: K Lupton (Stockton-on-Tees).
Salford lose their bargain-buy prop for at least six weeks.
IAN SHERRATT, who has played outstandingly at prop for Salford since his summer signing from Oldham, could be out for the rest of the season, writes Paul Fitzpatrick.
The 24-year-old, who has proved excellent value for his price of £25,000, suffered ruptured knee ligaments and cartilage damage at Halifax on Sunday and will be in plaster for at least six weeks.
Although Lee Crooks, the Great Britain forward, was taken off Leeds's transfer list recently, a move still seems likely with Castleford the likeliest destination.
Crooks was in dispute with Leeds earlier in the season and was put on offer at £250,000, by far the biggest sum demanded for an English rugby league player.
He then appeared to settle his differences and played twice but was dropped for Sunday's match with Bradford.
David Ward, the Leeds coach, was not happy with Crooks's fitness or his weight.
Rochdale's home game with Oldham at Spotland on Boxing Day is all-ticket with a crowd limit of 9,500 because of exceptional interest within the town.
Racing: Playschool back on the Gold Cup trail.
By David Hadert
BETTING on the Cheltenham Gold Cup could be overhauled after today's Tommy Whittle Chase at Haydock.
The race has been won in the past two years by a Gold Cup winner-The Thinker 12 months ago after being successful at Cheltenham the previous season, while the 1985 Gold Cup hero Forgive ‘N’ Forget won here in 1987.
The Thinker looks certain to start favourite to land the race again, particularly after his battling one length second to Golden Friend, when conceding a stone over this course and distance last month.
The pair meet at level weights today.
The main danger to The Thinker must be Playschool, but he is having his first race since breaking down at Cheltenham in November, 1988.
On that occasion he was three lengths clear at the last, but his injury allowed Golden Friend, who was receiving 19lb, to overhaul him on the line to win by a head.
Golden Friend also meets him on equal terms today.
At his peak Playschool would have claims to being the best chaser in the country.
He had an outstanding 1987/88 season, winning the Hennessy Gold Cup, the Coral Welsh National and the Vincent O'Brien Irish Gold Cup at Leopardstown.
On that form he started favourite for the 1988 Cheltenham Gold Cup but ran a listless race before being pulled up.
His trainer, David Barons, is convinced the horse was ‘got at’ but whatever the reason for Playschool's failure it has taken all Barons's skill and experience to get him back in racing condition after his latest setback.
If he is back to his best, Haydock racegoers are in for a thrilling contest, but I prefer to wait until Playschool has shown his old sparkle before backing him.
The Thinker (1.45), we know, is near his peak and he looks a banker bet for trainer Arthur Stephenson, who, with 58 winners to date, is second only to Martin Pipe in the trainers' table.
Whether or not the Haydock crowd witnesses the next Gold Cup winner, there are many astute racereaders who consider there is a future Gold Cup winner on view today in the shape of Blazing Walker, who contests the Arlington Premier Chase Qualifier.
He, too, is trained by Stephenson, for whom he has won his last four races in smart style, albeit with a tendency to jump right.
Today's event should show if he has what is needed to take him to the top for he comes up against a very useful opponent in Sabin du Loir (1.15).
This Martin Pipe-trained 10-year-old ran up to Waterloo Boy in the Arkle Challenge Trophy at Cheltenham last March and will provide an excellent yardstick to Blazing Walker's ability.
Sabin du Loir reverted to hurdling last time out when a disappointing fourth to Nodform at Ascot.
He can be forgiven that lapse and should recover losses at the expense of the Gold Cup pretender.
I have it on good authority from the owner's husband that Homme d'Affaire will take a lot of beating if the going comes up soft for the Waterloo Handicap Hurdle.
However, I take a chance that all is well with Jabrut (2.15), who has his first outing since landing a gamble in novice company here last November.
Lord Hartington, the senior steward of the Jockey Club, sounded off about stable lads' conditions in his speech at last night's Gimcrack Dinner.
‘No industry can function effectively without a work force which is content and properly looked after.
I hope the current wage negotiations will shortly come to a satisfactory conclusion,’ said Hartington, adding a warning to owners that they must expect higher training fees to permit lads to be properly paid.
FA Cup second-round replay: Gloucester City 0, Cardiff City 1 Scott makes headway to a date with Rangers.
By David Foot
MORRYS SCOTT, the 18-year-old whose two late goals stopped Gloucester's talented side in their tracks on Saturday, last night scored the only goal of the replay to give Cardiff a third-round tie at home to Queen's Park Rangers.
His header, in injury time before the interval, brought a hardly deserved Cup exit for the £60-a-week part-timers on a night when Gloucester proved there really was sporting life locally beyond Kingsholm.
This was the first time they had reached the second round and it was reflected in the atmosphere, though the official attendance of 3,877, a record for the purpose-built Meadow Park ground, was hardly accurate.
The kick-off was put off for 15 minutes because there were long queues outside.
According to the police at least 600 supporters had to be turned away for safety reasons.
But a gate was broken down in the frustration and many spectators, mostly from Cardiff, got in without paying.
Cardiff were never allowed to demonstrate clearly that they were the fitter and more composed League team, despite an early assault when they forced five corners.
There was little sign of lethal finish.
They won because Gloucester, brave and energetic and often on top in the second half, took too long to close down on the former Eire winger Jeff Chandler.
He supplied the cross for Scott's decisive goal.
When Chandler nearly scored himself near the end, Shaw, the former First Division goalkeeper with Bristol City, made the best save of the evening.
Before that Gloucester, in an inspired spell, twice came close to equalising, through the lorry driver Steve Talboys, up at 5am so that he could play, and Townsend.
It was still a memorable night for Gloucester.
Gloucester City: Shaw; Hedges, Williams, Payne, Green, Steel, Talboys, Hughes, Morrison, Townsend, Noble.
Cardiff City: Wood; Rodgerson, Daniel, Barnard, Abraham, Gibbins, Morgan, Scott, Pike, Kelly, Chandler.
Referee: A Buksh (London)..
Snooker: Hendry flat out for win.
By Clive Everton
STEPHEN HENDRY, brimming with confidence after beating Steve Davis in the final of the Stormseal UK Snooker Open, inflicted an 8-0 session whitewash on Terry Griffiths before beating him 9-3 in their best-of-17-frame quarter-final of the Everest World Matchplay Championship at Brentwood yesterday.
In the first seven frames Hendry had breaks of 86, 129 — the highest of the tournament — 60, 44, 69, 81, 57 and 55.
Griffiths, who took Hendry to 9-7 in the UK semi-final, made an academic 46 break at the conclusion of the first frame.
But in the next six frames he aggregated only 51 points.
The Welshman had two chances at the pink to win the last frame of the afternoon but it was Hendry, with pink and black, who went through to play John Parrott in tomorrow's semi-final.
‘Stephen didn't give me a chance,’ Griffiths said later.
‘He plays a different type of game to Steve Davis.
Davis strangles you very slowly.
Hendry just comes up and knocks you flat.
‘You think he can't keep potting balls but he does.
He had a tremendous first session.
I could have won a couple of the frames but he just played too well for me.
He won't win games through safety but he's so consistent at potting balls that it hardly matters.’
Today's semi-final brings together Dean Reynolds, who ousted Davis on Saturday, and Jimmy White.
Mountainous volumes lend their weight to dreams of a snow-bound Christmas John Samuel slaloms through this year's selection of books for the skiing enthusiast.
SKI racing this season celebrates major anniversaries of its two senior classics.
Kitzbuhel's Hahnenkamm is 50 years old and Wengen's Lauberhorn 60.
Both figure in new books, Ranulf Rayner's The Story of Skiing and Arnold Wilson's Top 50 Resorts, in rather different ways.
On the one hand, Kitzbuhel is Austria's queen of the travel brochures; a walled, medieval town offering lederhosen, dirndl skirts, fig-flavoured coffee and konditorei cream-cake.
In addition it has snow (I quote Arnie Wilson) which at its floor level of 2,494 feet it has no right to expect.
Because the terrain so lends itself to visual spectacle, the grand prix races draw crowds from Vienna, Salzburg and Innsbruck like no other.
Its atmosphere is inviolable.
Wilson sees another Kitzbuhel.
Four main ski areas — Hahnenkamm, Kirchberg-Fleckalm, Kitzbuhelerhorn and Jochberg-Pass Thurn — offer more than 112 miles of prepared holidaymaker pistes which 200 ‘Red Devil’ instructors may help you to ski.
He highlights the more challenging places, but says that the skiing tends to be on the tame side.
He likes the Gilbert and Sullivan of some of the ski names — Barenbadkogl, Wilde Hag, Giggling.
It is nice to have a survey of resorts, necessarily selective, from a good, experienced skier who can weigh so many aspects.
Ranulf Rayner first skied as a child between the legs of a Bavarian guide in 1939.
He runs an adventure centre in south-west England, and commissioned a young artist, Robert Guy, to match his words with paintings reflecting the moods of mountains and skiing.
If you cannot afford the coffee table then you cannot afford the book.
It is enormous, with a price — £35 — to match.
But then Robert Guy, we are told, is a weightlifter.
Rayner cannot resist the British crow that they started downhill at Montana, Switzerland, in 1911; or that the Wengen Swiss are everlastingly grateful to the Downhill Only Club (otherwise, not too literately, the DHO) for teaching them how to race and how to lose.
The Swiss, by and large, have grown out of it, though it is 1981 since Thomas Burgler last won the Lauberhorn downhill and the slalom keeps evading them.
The appeal of the book is primarily visual.
Rayner's potted history is racily told but many of the usual English sources are apparent.
The subject awaits a major multilingual research.
Successful Skiing by Konrad Bartelski seeks to distil the experience of Britain's pioneeringly successful World Cup skier for the benefit, primarily, of beginners and intermediates.
His subsequent career in equipment and clothing has kept him in close touch with needs, and there is no PE jargon in his down-to-earth advice.
Totally Piste, Barry Waters's third essay into survival skiing, now takes aboard heli- and mono-skiing and powder.
For example: ‘Going off piste is usually more for the instructor's sake than yours.’
And there is plenty more of that.
A potential breakthrough in ski publishing is a set of Ski Guides for eight Swiss regions by a London-based pair of designers, Steve Littlejohns and Mark Packham, which do for skiers what pocket-sized, weatherproofed, hole-by-hole guides achieve for golfers.
A full page is devoted to each run, pinpointing steepness, mogul fields, trees, buildings, and the like, the object being to keep the skier within the limits of his or her capability.
Toilets, restaurants, SOS phones and potential avalanche slopes are all marked, while a master map shows the ‘card of the course’.
The pilot year saw 21,000 sold through Switzerland.
Areas featured this year are Crans-Montana, Davos-Klosters, Gstaad, Jungfrau, St Moritz, Verbier, Villars and Zermatt.
Reviewed: Thomas Cook International top 50 Ski Resorts (Arnold Wilson; Webb and Bower, £15.95); The Story of Skiing (Ranulf Rayner, paintings Robert Guy; David and Charles, £35); Successsful Skiing (Konrad Bartelski; Sackville Books, £4.95); Totally Piste (Pelham Books, £6.99); Ski Guides (Creative Approach, 28 Hatton Wall, London, £3.95).
Videos: Ski Perfect I and II (Scottish instructional guru Ali Ross teams with the Sunday Times editor Andrew Neill and staff for beginner-intermediate easy-learn techniques.
Back to you, Harry Evans).
Equestrianism: Brothers benefit.
By John Kerr
JOHN and Michael Whitaker, European gold and silver medal winners, are the principal beneficiaries of Britain's biggest showjumping sponsorship.
The deal with Henderson Unit Trust Management, announced yesterday, is worth more than £1.5 million over three years.
During the seven years of their previous patronage by Next, the brothers have reached the pinnacle of the sport.
John's grey, Milton, his European Championship partner, is close to winning a record £150,000 for the year.
Last September, Michael, on Monsanta, won the Calgary Grand Prix, the world's most lucrative event, worth close to £90,000.
The Henderson deal also includes sponsorship for a Horse of the Year Show event and £80,000 for a new series of eight grands prix at county shows.
John Whitaker will take a day's leave from this week's Olympia show to ride Gammon in the final event of the Renault series in Grenoble.
After his win in Frankfurt on Sunday, he lies second in the series just behind Michel Robert.
Soccer: Bull and Lineker to be twin scavengers.
By David Lacey
ENGLAND's team for tonight's friendly against Yugoslavia at Wembley revives the wishful thought that international goal-scorers can be cloned.
Gary Lineker is joined by Steve Bull as Bobby Robson tries to end a run of three goalless draws.
Altogether the England manager has made four changes from the side that drew with Italy at Wembley a month ago.
Bull comes in for Beardsley, Thomas replaces McMahon in midfield and is joined on the right by his Arsenal team-mate Rocastle.
Waddle switches to the left for the injured Barnes and Parker plays at right-back instead of Stevens.
Because this is England's last match for at least 3 ½ months, Robson had to balance his desire to try out a few options with the need to retain the basic framework of his World Cup team.
Thus the backbone of the side remains the same, running from Shilton in goal through Walker and Butcher at centre-back and Bryan Robson in midfield to Lineker up front.
It makes sense to retain Lineker, for though his rate of scoring may have dropped considerably over the past two years he remains the only England striker of sufficient class to succeed in Italy next summer.
And the only way a goal scorer can regain his touch is to keep playing.
Yet the choice of Bull as a partner is an odd one, for he and Lineker are essentially penalty-area predators and past experience has shown that when two such players are used together they tend to be like dogs after the same bone.
Robson said yesterday that he hoped Bull would be a foil for Lineker; he also thought Lineker might be a foil for Bull.
What do two foils make — a foible?
Lineker has appeared 45 times for England and scored 29 goals; Bull has played for 60 minutes and scored one, a smartly taken opportunity against Scotland in May.
Wolves provide Bull, who has yet to play in the First Division, with passes over the midfield and crosses from overlapping full-backs.
He will be fortunate to receive a similar service this evening against some of the toughest and most knowledgeable defenders in Europe.
Robson did think of playing Platt alongside Bull but rejected the idea of using two inexperienced players at the same time.
Maybe Platt will come on to join Lineker if Bull looks out of his depth.
Moving Waddle from the right wing, where he performed so imaginatively against the Italians, in order to accommodate Rocastle, whose form has been patchy all season, is another selection open to doubt.
Even when Barnes is missing there is still apparently no room for Hodge, who is playing consistently well for Nottingham Forest.
England will need frequent penetration on the wings if they are to make the most of Lineker and Bull.
Waddle may give them this on the left, but it would surely have done no harm to start the match with Dorigo's dash instead of the perennial, peripheral Pearce.
Thomas last played in the full England side 13 months ago when he won his first cap in Saudi Arabia and did little of consequence.
Since then he has turned in some useful performances for the under-21 and England B sides but he has some way to go before becoming a player of real international class.
Parker, a defender of genuine quality, is at his best when playing sweeper.
Since England do not use a sweeper he has to come in at right-back, a position which tends to emphasise his limitations going forward.
Yet England are short of a cover for Stevens — and that is some shortage — so Parker's appearance tonight makes a bit of sense.
Robson needs a win tonight.
As he said himself: ‘We don't want to be sitting on a bad result for the next 3 ½ months.’
One explosion from Bull and some serious sniping by Lineker could do the trick, but Yugoslavia have only lost twice in 20 matches since England routed them 4-1 in Belgrade in the European Championship two years ago and that wound was deep.
Just over three years ago England defeated them 2-0 at Wembley, but Yugoslavia might have drawn or even won that game had they taken their chances.
Last month they held Brazil 0-0 in Sao Paulo and tonight they field what is likely to be their World Cup team, including the fast and skilful Skoro and the experienced Stojkovic, bound for Marseilles.
For England, another barren draw would end the year with a groan and put them in the position of having to begin the final run-in to the World Cup after nine months without a goal.
No wonder the manager got het up with one of the tabloids yesterday for printing a picture of Bryan Robson yawning behind his back in training.
It is enough to give anybody the World Cup willies.
ENGLAND: Shilton (Derby); Parker (QPR), Walker (Nottingham Forest), Butcher (Rangers), Pearce (Nottingham Forest), Thomas (Arsenal), Robson (Manchester United), Rocastle (Arsenal), Lineker (Tottenham), Bull (Wolves), Waddle (Marseille).
YUGOSLAVIA: Ivkovic (Sporting Lisbon); Stanojkovic, Spasic (Partizan Belgrade), Brnovic (Metz), Hadzibejic (Sochaux, capt), Vulic (Real Mallorca), Skoro (Torino), Susic (Paris St Germain), Mihajlovic (Bayern Munich), Stojkovic (Red Star Belgrade), Savevski (AEK Athens).
Subs: Maroviv, Prosinecki (Red Star Belgrade), Panavic (Zagreb)..
JOHN PARROTT, who won the European Open title last February, has made a disappointing start to the season and he suffered some anxious moments before clinching a 9-6 win over Dennis Taylor last night in the quarter-finals of the Everest World Matchplay Championship at Brentwood, writes Clive Everton.
A spell of what Parrott described as ‘the best snooker I've played this season’ enabled him to take a 6-2 interval lead which he then increased to 8-2 before Taylor showed his renowned tenacity by winning the next four frames.
‘I took a liberty at 8-2 and got punished for it,’ said Parrott.
‘It did get to me,’ he said of Taylor's prolonged rearguard action.
‘Dennis played some great safety.’
However that was where the comeback ended and it was with much relief that Parrott eventually clinched victory, taking the 15th frame 64-11.
He now meets either Stephen Hendry or Terry Griffiths, who play today.
However that was where the comeback ended and it was with much relief that Parrott eventually clinched victory, taking the 15th frame 64-11.
Tennis £400,000 for appearing.
By David Irvine
APPEARANCE fees, accepted as a legitimate means of attracting top players to world series events on the Association of Tennis Professionals' inaugural tour next year, will match the £400,000 prize money on offer at the Stella Artois indoor championship in Milan from February 5 to 11.
Tournament officials, though unwilling to say precisely how the appearance money will be distributed, confirmed they expect to pay out £400,000 to ensure a quality 32-man field.
And it seems safe to say the three main beneficiaries will be Ivan Lendl, John McEnroe and Jimmy Connors.
Appearance money or guarantees previously were illegal — though not unknown — and under the new system it has been estimated that some top players (Lendl and Boris Becker make around £1.5 million a year) could increase their annual earnings by 40 per cent.
This year's Milan tournament, won by Becker, offered £230,000 in prize money — of which the champion took £50,000.
Neither Becker nor Stefan Edberg is likely to enter Milan next year as it comes directly after a Davis Cup week.
Championship series events, tournaments offering £625,000 or more in prize money, cannot offer appearance fees but are guaranteed six top-10 players.
With each man in the top 10 required to play 11 championship events, competition for their services in world series tournaments will be fierce.
Milan, perhaps significantly, announced it would have Lendl for the next three years.
Pat Cash and Darren Cahill were yesterday named in the Australian Davis Cup squad for the first-round tie with France despite their injury troubles.
Cash is recovering after an Achilles tendon operation and Cahill is set to have exploratory knee surgery, but Australia hope they will be fit for the match on Perth's grass courts from February 2 to 4.
Stoltenberg, Kratzmann, Fitzgerald, Masur and Woodforde complete the squad.
Squash Soutter finds a style that suits.
By Richard Jago
LUCY SOUTTER, the 22-year-old former champion who nearly gave up the game this year after long-lasting viral problems, unexpectedly reclaimed the British national title at Newcastle yesterday by beating Suzanne Horner 9-3, 9-5, 9-3 in a final lasting only 43 minutes.
Soutter, the fourth seed, thus beat the player who caused her exclusion from England's world title-winning team, in a final that for the first time since 1979 contained neither of the Guernsey girls, Martine le Moignan and Lisa Opie.
Horner, in her first final, looked the edgier.
Her nerves were not smoothed by two mistimed drives that sailed over the side walls, hurtled under the bleachers and were lost from sight.
On each occasion it took time to warm a new ball.
There were two jangling mistakes from Horner giving away early penalty points to Soutter, and after only 11 minutes the former champion had pocketed the first game with a good backhand drop from a short ball.
Horner's fierce forehand had been her best weapon, but Soutter was able to contain it with steady and accurate driving and a calm mind.
The crisis came at 5-5 in the second game, by which time Horner had begun to dig in.
Service changed hands eight times and there were four lets in between until Soutter broke the deadlock with a tight drop that created an opening and a lovely cross-court forehand slice that zipped away for a winner.
Those two shots were indicative of the extra variety Soutter has added to her game since she was last at the top of the English heap four years ago.
She is no longer simply a steady rallier and scampering retriever but can tie opponents up and utilise the openings created.
It was this that eventually scuppered Horner.
PAGE
Cricket Australia v Sri Lanka: first Test, fifth day.
Taylor repairs seam weakness
ALLAN BORDER settled for a draw with Sri Lanka at the Gabba yesterday.
Though his batsmen dominated most of the final day, they failed to silence a grumbling chorus.
Australia batted all day to reach 375 for six.
Sri Lanka, who had lost their previous two Tests against Australia by an innings, were never put under pressure.
Border chose not to expose his all-seam attack, so ineffective in the first innings and in the recent draw with New Zealand, to the chance of further indignity.
For the next Test, starting at Hobart on Friday, Peter Sleep, the veteran leg-spinner, has been called into the squad at the expense of Geoff Lawson, who took one wicket in this Test.
Geoff Marsh has also been recalled.
Merv Hughes hit an enormous six and Mark Taylor made 164 to become the first player to score 1,000 runs in the course of his first season of Tests, but Australia's batsmen did not escape the day without damage from an attack weakened by injury to both its opening bowlers.
Tom Moody, a century-maker in the first innings, wasted his chance to secure the Test place offered to him by Marsh's injury when he sliced Asoka de Silva to first slip.
In one spell in the last session the Sri Lankans took three wickets for eight runs.
And Taylor, who survived an early stumping chance off De Silva, was out in circumstances that would bring a smile to all but the most partisan lips.
Shortly after tea Champaka Ramanayake complained about the ball to the umpires.
When Taylor was asked if he was happy with its shape he said he was seeing it clearly.
Next ball Ramanayake had him lbw.
Taylor had plundered 17 fours and two sixes in his 425-minute innings.
This was the third century in 10 Tests for the left-handed opener, who made his debut in the fourth Test against the West Indies in January and hit 839 runs in the Ashes series.
University Match: Cambridge 22, Oxford 13 Davies brothers light upon Dark Blue gifts.
By Robert Armstrong
CAMBRIDGE survived a frantic succession of alarms and excursions to win the 108th University Match and lift the Bowring Bowl for the second time in five seasons at Twickenham yesterday.
It was an afternoon of high drama and low farce in which Cambridge all but threw away a 15-0 lead before Oxford, with a plethora of errors, nullified two fine tries by their American wing Hein.
Ultimately Cambridge were well worth their victory by two goals, a try and two penalties to a goal, a try and a penalty because they displayed a predatory instinct for making the most of their chances.
The Davies brothers, Adrian (who scored 14 points) and Graham (four), exercised an important creative influence on Cambridge fortunes while their flankers Holmes and Pool-Jones were full of fire and tenacity in the loose.
This was one of the most ragged performances Oxford have given in recent memory with their captain, Smith, responsible for several mistakes.
Oxford's forwards were slow and scattered in getting to the breakdown.
If anything their backs were worse, sometimes dropping the ball, at others slinging passes into eager Cambridge hands.
One quality Oxford possessed in abundance, though, was spirit, which enabled them to claw their way back.
They were assisted by the referee, Clive Norling, who added on nine minutes' injury time despite the lack of an injury stoppage worth the name.
Five of those minutes came at the end of the first half, allowing Hein to score the first of his morale-boosting tries for Oxford in the right corner.
Remarkably, Cambridge let the initiative dribble away in the third quarter despite spending most of that period camped in the Oxford half.
Hein's second try and a marvellous penalty goal by Smith from the left touchline brought Oxford back to 13-15 but, with a quarter-hour left, a fatal lack of composure undid Oxford again.
First they killed the ball, enabling Adrian Davies to kick a short penalty goal, his side's first score of the half.
Then the Oxford prop Jones was warned for stamping, another penalty was awarded and Cambridge swept to the other end to seal the match with an opportunist try by Adrian Davies.
The Welsh fly-half hacked on after a sloppy pass by Bray went to ground and two defenders were beaten to the touchdown.
In the remaining 12 minutes (four by the grace of Norling) Oxford were too spent for a second comeback, but Cambridge were no doubt relieved that their efficient rucking and slick passing established such dominance in the first half.
They had taken the lead after two minutes with a simple move that found the Oxford defence in disarray.
When Booth sent a short chip into the left corner Graham Davies made a deft pick-up and ran round the rear of the Oxford defence to score at the posts.
Adrian Davies converted.
Cambridge increased their lead on the half-hour when Simms intercepted an ambitious cut-out pass by Smith inside his own half and sprinted 70 yards down centre-field to score between the posts.
Davies's conversion made the score 12-0.
After 40 minutes Adrian Davies established a three-score advantage with a short penalty goal when Oxford killed the ball.
Oxford began their comeback with a try in the 44th minute, Smith sending another cut-out pass to Hein, who burst 15 yards to score at the flag.
Oxford sustained their aggressive driving at the start of the second half and forced Cambridge back on their own line.
A ruck was set up to the left of the Cambridge posts and, when Smith flicked the ball out to the right, Hein charged through on the overlap to score behind the posts.
Smith converted.
Once Smith's penalty goal had cut the Cambridge lead to two points Oxford appeared to be in the driving seat.
But their old propensity for self-destruction surfaced again, much to the joy of Adrian Davies, and an exciting though careless game ended as it began — with Cambridge on top.
SCORERS: Cambridge: Tries: G Davies, Simms, A Davies.
Conversions: A Davies 2.
Penalties: A Davies 2.
Oxford: Tries: Hein 2.
Conversion: Smith.
Penalty: Smith.
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY: A Buzza (Hughes Hall, capt); S Bell (Clare), N Simms (Robinson), P Reed (Magdalene), G Davies (Magdalene); A Davies (Robinson), A Booth (Hughes Hall); J Foster (Robinson), J Ashworth (Homerton), S Wordley (Downing), J O'Callaghan (Sidney Sussex), A MacDonald (Hughes Hall), R Pool-Jones (Magdalene), S Holmes (St Edmund's), J Wilby (St Edmund's).
OXFORD UNIVERSITY: K Bray (Mansfield); G Hein (St Anne's), J Elliott (St Anne's), D Curtis (St Anne's), D Cooke (Christ Church); B Smith (St Anne's, capt), S Taylor (University); A Jones (St Anne's), E Norwitz (University), D James (St Anne's), J Fewtrell (St Anne's), T Coker (Lady Margaret Hall), M Egan (St Anne's), W Van der Merwe (St Anne's), R Horrocks-Taylor (St Peter's).
Referee: C Norling (Wales).
Racing: Playschool back on the Gold Cup trail.
By David Hadert
BETTING on the Cheltenham Gold Cup could be overhauled after today's Tommy Whittle Chase at Haydock.
The race has been won in the past two years by a Gold Cup winner-The Thinker 12 months ago after being successful at Cheltenham the previous season, while the 1985 Gold Cup hero Forgive ‘N’ Forget won here in 1987.
The Thinker looks certain to start favourite to land the race again, particularly after his battling one length second to Golden Friend, when conceding a stone over this course and distance last month.
The pair meet at level weights today.
The main danger to The Thinker must be Playschool, but he is having his first race since breaking down at Cheltenham in November, 1988.
On that occasion he was three lengths clear at the last, but his injury allowed Golden Friend, who was receiving 19lb, to overhaul him on the line to win by a head.
Golden Friend also meets him on equal terms today.
At his peak Playschool would have claims to being the best chaser in the country.
He had an outstanding 1987/88 season, winning the Hennessy Gold Cup, the Coral Welsh National and the Vincent O'Brien Irish Gold Cup at Leopardstown.
On that form he started favourite for the 1988 Cheltenham Gold Cup but ran a listless race before being pulled up.
His trainer, David Barons, is convinced the horse was ‘got at’ but whatever the reason for Playschool's failure it has taken all Barons's skill and experience to get him back in racing condition after his latest setback.
If he is back to his best, Haydock racegoers are in for a thrilling contest, but I prefer to wait until Playschool has shown his old sparkle before backing him.
The Thinker (1.45), we know, is near his peak and he looks a banker bet for trainer Arthur Stephenson, who, with 58 winners to date, is second only to Martin Pipe in the trainers' table.
Whether or not the Haydock crowd witnesses the next Gold Cup winner, there are many astute racereaders who consider there is a future Gold Cup winner on view today in the shape of Blazing Walker, who contests the Arlington Premier Chase Qualifier.
He, too, is trained by Stephenson, for whom he has won his last four races in smart style, albeit with a tendency to jump right.
Today's event should show if he has what is needed to take him to the top for he comes up against a very useful opponent in Sabin du Loir (1.15).
This Martin Pipe-trained 10-year-old ran up to Waterloo Boy in the Arkle Challenge Trophy at Cheltenham last March and will provide an excellent yardstick to Blazing Walker's ability.
Sabin du Loir reverted to hurdling last time out when a disappointing fourth to Nodform at Ascot.
He can be forgiven that lapse and should recover losses at the expense of the Gold Cup pretender.
I have it on good authority from the owner's husband that Homme d'Affaire will take a lot of beating if the going comes up soft for the Waterloo Handicap Hurdle.
However, I take a chance that all is well with Jabrut (2.15), who has his first outing since landing a gamble in novice company here last November.
Lord Hartington, the senior steward of the Jockey Club, sounded off about stable lads' conditions in his speech at last night's Gimcrack Dinner.
‘No industry can function effectively without a work force which is content and properly looked after.
I hope the current wage negotiations will shortly come to a satisfactory conclusion,’ said Hartington, adding a warning to owners that they must expect higher training fees to permit lads to be properly paid.
Squash Soutter finds a style that suits.
By Richard Jago
LUCY SOUTTER, the 22-year-old former champion who nearly quit the game after a long illness, unexpectedly won back the British national title at Newcastle yesterday when she beat Suzanne Horner 9-3, 9-5, 9-3 in a final lasting less than 45 minutes.
Thus the fourth-seeded Soutter gained revenge over the player who denied her the last place in England's world-title winning team this year, with a hint that her rehabilitation might now be complete.
Kisses afterwards from her parents, her coach Ian Robinson and her manager Ian Mackenzie contained relief as much as celebration.
‘That's helped turn her career around,’ said Mackenzie.
Horner, in her first final, was understandably the more nervous player.
She was not helped by two long delays in the first game when the ball flew out of the court and was lost under the bleachers.
It was not until 5-5 in the second game that Horner settled herself and dug in.
Eight changes of serve followed until Soutter broke the deadlock with a drop that created a gap for a lovely cross-court forehand sliced winner.
The shots were indicative of the extra variety that Soutter has added to her game since she was last British national champion four years ago.
She is no longer simply a steady rallier and scampering retriever, but can tie opponents up and make use of the openings created.
It was this that finally scuppered her opponent.
The men's title was won by the favourite, Del Harris, although he lost his car, stolen from the nearby street earlier in the day.
He nearly had the match purloined from him too because Bryan Beeson, who captained England's world bronze-medal winning team, took the first two games with some astutely controlled slow drives that induced the 20-year-old England No.1 to make errors.
Beeson also reached 4-0 in the third game before his energy ran out.
He knew before the match that his marathons with Chris Walker and Paul Carter in the quarter and semi-finals had left him low on gas.
‘I was 10 minutes from the title,’ he said ruefully afterwards.
Harris still needed character, hard work and some spectacular court coverage to get him home by 1-9, 6-9, 9-4, 9-2, 9-3 against the local hero who got good support from the crowd to the bitter end.
The International Squash Rackets Federation will introduce random drug testing at next year's world championships.
Ten of the 16 quarter-finalists were checked for drugs during the World Open in October and proved negative.
Reid set to rejoin Kendall.
By Cynthia Bateman and Russell Thomas
PETER REID is about to become a vital part of the new Manchester City regime by teaming up again with Howard Kendall.
Kendall said last night: ‘I have had long talks with Peter and I am optimistic that I can get him to come to City.
We will be having further talks tomorrow.’
The former England midfielder, who is expected to be player-coach, said before leaving for the talks: ‘I would be happy to come back north and it will be great to be working with Howard again.’
Queen's Park Rangers earlier yesterday granted Kendall permission to approach Reid, who joined the London club from Everton on a free transfer in February, and said they would ask no fee for the 33-year-old player in recognition of his ‘marvellous attitude’ in his time at Loftus Road.
Roy Wegerle, the £1 million Rangers newcomer who has declared himself available to the United States, was last night offered the chance of an alternative route to the World Cup next summer by Bobby Robson.
‘If Wegerle's interested in playing for England, I'll put him in my next B squad,’ said Robson.
Leicester have offered £150,000 for Barnet's 21-year-old striker Andrew Clarke.
Kidderminster Harriers want at least £40,000 for Kim Casey, their prolific scorer, who is transfer-listed.
West Ham are interested in taking Manchester United's reserve goalkeeper Gary Walsh on loan.
Charlton, who are meeting Greenwich Borough Council officials tomorrow night over the projected return to The Valley, are unhappy at being told recently by the council that it wants the club's proposals to be revised dramatically to take account of environmental requirements.
They had hoped to be back at the beginning of next season but it now looks unlikely to be until half-way through it.
B international: England 2, Yugoslavia 1 Understudies shine as Gascoigne cuts the clowning.
By David Lacey
THE England B team, looking bright, brisk and keenly balanced, sharpened their appetite for bigger things last night at The Den after dominating large parts of the match.
Wise and Newell scored in each half as England demonstrated the simple virtues of producing accurate crosses and getting someone on to the end of them.
Yugoslavia faded after an imaginative start and did not offer a serious threat until late in the game, when Mladenovic curled in a free-kick.
England's performance confirmed the impressions they made in the second half of their 1-1 draw with Italy at Brighton last month.
Wise and Beagrie gave their movements speed and width and, once Newell had replaced the persevering but internationally inexperienced Wright, the attack gained a sharper cutting edge.
Adams showed the authority and leadership you would expect from a defender who has won 17 caps at senior level but in World Cup terms the most significant performance came from Gascoigne, who cut out the asides and showed some of the tactical discipline he has to acquire if he is to make the most of his natural talent in international football.
In the first half his passing had the right weight and direction to give Williams and Wright opportunities to use their speed against the Yugoslav defence and bypass the sweeper, Petric.
In the second half he moved forward more often and eventually created England's second goal.
Bobby Robson, suitably impressed, said: ‘Gascoigne gave a very reasonable performance.
He did all the things we know he is capable of doing and he behaved himself as well.’
Dave Sexton, the B team manager, said Gascoigne's was ‘the perfect midfield performance’.
Gascoigne enjoyed good support from Batty, who had another busy game in midfield and rarely allowed the opposition to establish the sort of rhythm they tried to set up at the start, when Boban and Suker tested Woods with low shots after some swift exchanges of passes had succeeded in outmanoeuvring England's defence.
Yugoslavia's poise lasted seven minutes.
Forsyth forced a corner on the left, Beagrie swung the ball towards the near post, Adams nodded it on and Wise forced in England's first goal at the far post.
A minute later Dixon, sent through a gap by Gascoigne, hit the bar with a well-struck left-footed shot.
After that England always looked the likely winners.
Sexton made four changes at half-time, replacing Woods with Martyn, Dixon with Sterland and Linighan with Pallister and bringing Newell on for Wright.
However the direct, positive pattern of England's football remained the same.
Yugoslavia became ragged as their football grew increasingly unproductive.
Just past the hour Suker, their only effective forward, worked his way to the left-hand byline and shrugged disconsolately when nobody ran through the middle to meet his pass.
In the 64th minute Gascoigne performed a similar duty for England but, after he had crossed from the right-hand byline, Newell rose to head past Lekovic, the substitute goalkeeper.
The two moments summed up the difference between the teams.
ENGLAND B: Woods (Rangers); Dixon (Arsenal), Forsyth (Derby), Batty (Leeds), Linighan (Norwich), Adams (Arsenal), Wise (Wimbledon), Gascoigne (Tottenham), Wright (Crystal Palace), Williams (Charlton), Beagrie (Everton).
YUGOSLAVIA B: Omerovic; Brnovic, Marovic, Bogdanovic, Petric, Bozovic, Mihailovic, Mladenovic, Penacev, Boban, Suker.
Referee: J Spillane (Rep of Ireland)..
Hockey: A wealth of inexperience.
By Pat Rowley
ONLY five of the 12 players selected to represent England in this weekend's annual HDM international indoor tournament at The Hague have played for the indoor team before — and England will be defending the title.
The squad have just 52 caps between them and 31 of those belong to the new captain, Andy Halliday of St Albans.
England are forced to field such an inexperienced team because none of the World Cup players or reserves is available.
England would have had six existing internationals in the team but Kevin Stamp was accidently hit in the mouth by a stick at the training weekend and has withdrawn.
His place has gone to Paul Krishman, a new cap who is joined by the goalkeepers Andy Forshaw and Martin Langston, John Roberts and three Teddington players, Jason Laslett, Philip McGuire and Neil Barker.
ENGLAND SQUAD: A Forshaw (Formby), M Langston (Wakefield); A Halliday (St Albans, capt), J Roberts (Bournville), M Riley (Teddington), G Wisher (St Albans), J Laslett (Teddington), P Krishman (Old Loughtonians), P Nail (Havant), N Barker, P McGuire (both Teddington), I Jennings (Old Loughtonians).
Manager: I McIntosh.
Coach: R Clarke.
ENGLAND UNDER-21 (for Mid-shires tournament, Birmingham December 14-16): J Barrow (Indian Gymkhana), D Luckes (East Grinstead); S Organ (Firebrands), J Barber (Old Loughtonians), J Lee (East Grinstead), S Osborne (Gloucester City), P Capper (Formby), A Degun (Barford Tigers), S Avery (Havant), R Stokes (Wakefield), G Banbury (Slough), J Chana (Bournville).
Leicester offer £20,000, car, and pension as bait for coaching director.
LEICESTER are set to make club history by appointing a paid director of coaching.
Having failed to lure the former coach Chalky White away from the Rugby Football Union, the Tigers are to advertise the post with a salary of around £20,000, plus a pension and car.
The secretary, John Allen, said: ‘We need to expand our coaching organisation because people are finding it more and more difficult to do what is needed.
This will take some of the load off our coaches.’
Northampton were the first to go down this road when they appointed Barrie Corless last year.
Unlike Corless, who is involved in all aspects of the club, the man Leicester appoint will be involved purely on the coaching side.
Adrian Davies, Cambridge's stand-off yesterday, has been included in the Wales Under-21 training squad in Cardiff on December 28-29.
Steve Crandon, the Cardiff and Wales B centre, seems ready to rejoin Newbridge.
He played 130 games for the Gwent club before switching to Cardiff two years ago.
The England prop Andy Mullins and Dave Thresher have dropped out of the London divisional squad to play for Harlequins against Rugby at Rugby on Saturday.
Skiing Girardelli injured.
SWITZERLAND's Pirmin Zurbriggen yesterday won his first race in over a year in the World Cup Alpine super-giant slalom down Sestriere's fast and slippery Kandahar course, while the overall champion, Marc Girardelli, crashed and was taken to hospital.
Girardelli, Austrian-born but racing for Luxembourg, fell heavily 30 seconds into the 2,525-metre course, which was condemned as ‘dangerous’ by Zurbriggen.
‘It was almost like a downhill in places and there was not enough security for us in case of falls.
It was definitely a dangerous race,’ he said.
Girardelli suffered severe bruising to his hip and the small of his back and has been advised to rest for a month and so could miss six World Cup races.
The men's downhill, his strongest event, begins in Val Gardena in Italy with races on Friday and Saturday.
He joins an already impressive list of casualties, which includes Italy's Alberto Tomba and Michael Mair, Tamara McKinney of the US, Martin Hangl and Vreni Schneider of Switzerland, and Austria's Helmut Mayer.
Zurbriggen, the Olympic downhill champion and World Cup super-giant titleholder, swept to his first victory since November 1988 in the ninth World Cup race of the current programme in 1min 37.39sec.
Lars-Boerje Eriksson of Sweden, the winner of the opening giant slalom in Thredbo, Australia, in August, was second, 0.11sec behind Zurbriggen.
The Olympic super-G champion, Franck Piccard of France, finished third in 1.37.86 after being second in the season's first super-G in Val d'Isere, France, on Sunday.
The World Cup leader, Ole Christian Furuseth of Norway, finished down the field but remained top of the standings on 118 points.
But Zurbriggen moved up to second from third on 101 points and could overtake Furuseth in Val Gardena, where the Norwegian slalom specialist will not compete.
The men's World Cup downhill scheduled for Saalbach-Hinterglemm on December 21 has been switched to Schladming because of a lack of snow.
Random drug tests ‘mandatory’ at next year's world championships.
RANDOM drug testing will be introduced at next year's world championships.
Prasad Pillai, secretary of the International Squash Rackets Federation, said 10 of the 16 quarter-finalists were checked for drugs during the World Open in Kuala Lumpur in October.
All 10 proved negative, but he added: ‘That was something of a dry run.
From now on it will be mandatory.’
PAGE
Lendl leads the way down under.
IVAN LENDL, No.1 in the computer rankings, heads a list of 12 of the world's top 20 players who have entered next month's Australian Open.
Also entered are the Wimbledon and US Open champion Boris Becker, the Masters champion Stefan Edberg, the fourth-ranked John McEnroe, his fellow American Aaron Krickstein, No.8 in the world, and the former Australian Open winner Mats Wilander.
Among those missing from the first Grand Slam event of the year are Andre Agassi and Jimmy Connors, who has not played the Australian Open for more than a decade.
The French Open champion Michael Chang is injured.
Rebuked Toshack in Real danger of losing job.
THE chances of John Toshack completing his two-year contract as Real Madrid's manager look thin, with speculation growing in the Spanish capital that he will go by next summer.
According to the influential El Pais newspaper, Real's president Ramon Mendoza has rebuked Toshack on a number of counts and is already seeking a replacement for the Welshman hired only last summer on a £1 million contract.
The report said Mendoza had met Toshack to censure him over stormy relations with his players and high-handed treatment of the media.
It was a sharp reminder of Real's expectations after their latest failure to win the European Cup, the only trophy that matters to the Spanish champions.
By Russell Thomas
DON HOWE started one of his busiest weeks by completing the £1 million signing of Ray Wegerle for Queen's Park Rangers, seeking to borrow a goalkeeper for the club and, in between, helping out with England matters.
Rangers' chief coach says Wegerle ‘will have to force his way in’ to a side that has scored seven goals in two games, but that did not prevent the club's managing director Clive Berlin hailing the South African-born striker as ‘the new Rodney Marsh’.
Wegerle has two ambitions after a move that is a record for both Rangers and the sellers, Luton.
The first is to take up Howe's challenge, the other to play in the World Cup with the United States.
The 25-year-old, who started his career with Tampa Bay Rowdies, says of the Americans: ‘I feel more loyalty to them because it's my wife's country.’
Howe still needs a goalkeeper on loan because David Seaman has only a slender chance of returning on Saturday and his two deputies are injured.
The sale of Wegerle leaves Luton with a £925,000 profit in 18 months on the player bought from Chelsea.
Luton will use it strengthen their central defence.
They are likely to renew interest in a former player, Manchester United's Mal Donaghy, while keeping an eye on Brian Gayle's progress under new management at Manchester City.
At Maine Road, Howard Kendall was installed as City's manager amid rumours that Alex Ferguson had resigned as United's manager — denied at Old Trafford but tantalising given earlier speculation that.
Archery: English will miss S African golds.
THE most Anglo-Saxon of games has been found to be compromising with apartheid.
The Commonwealth Games Council for England has told archers to end a 30-year tradition of competing with a South African organisation.
The council has asked the Grand National Archery Association to stop its member counties from holding ‘postal shoots’ with the Natal Archery Society.
It seems that although English greenswards remained innocent of South Africans, score cards from agreed events were exchanged through the mails in what is said to be a contravention of the Gleneagles Agreement.
John Middleton, the GNAA chief executive, told News From The Centre, an archery magazine, that the Commonwealth Games organisation had ‘deemed’ the competition ‘acceptable’six years ago, but had changed its mind ‘due to a minority of British archers bringing politics into sport’.
PAGE
Boxing: Hodkinson takes a European view.
By Jack Massarik
PAUL HODKINSON, who recently feared that he would never box again, returns to action in front of his home-town supporters at Kirkby Sports Centre tonight to defend his European featherweight title against Farid Benredjeb of France.
Myopia, or short-sightedness, is the 24-year-old Liverpudlian's problem — if indeed it is a problem for someone with 15 professional wins, all but one inside the distance, and one draw.
But such is the pressure on professional boxers to prove their absolute fitness that the British Boxing Board of Control last month ordered Hodkinson to undertake full medical tests, and he was cleared only after being examined by four ophthalmic surgeons.
‘I had a few sleepless nights,’ confessed Hodkinson, whose draw, which he later avenged, came against Thomas Arguelles two years ago.
‘I have watched videos of Benredjeb and he will be a tough opponent, but he is just my height and should be perfect for me,’ he said after sparring with Arguelles at the Belfast gym of his manager, Barney Eastwood.
Hodkinson, a fighter noted for accuracy and stamina, took the British title from Peter Harris of Wales 18 months ago and added the Lonsdale Belt with two successful defences.
The 29-year-old Frenchman went the distance with the former European champion Jean-Marc Renard, of Belgium, last year.
He also outpointed Raymond Armand, the Frenchman from whom Hodkinson took the European title in two rounds.
Billy Hardy, the British bantamweight champion, has been offered a world title fight next month, and in his home town.
Hardy, who has twice failed to win the European title, can feel somewhat fortunate to be matched with the International Boxing Federation champion, Orlando Canizales of Mexico, in Sunderland on January 24.
It will be the third world title fight in the North-east in six months, following two IBF cruiserweight fights won by Glenn McCrory of Co Durham.
Canizales, who is 24 and has lost only one of his 24 fights, lives in Houston, and Hardy's manager, Dennie Mancini, said it had cost ‘certainly far in excess of £100,000’ to entice him to Sunderland.
It has been confirmed that Steve Collins, an Irish-American middleweight from Brockton, Mass, will challenge Mike McCallum of Jamaica for the WBA title in Dublin on February 3.
Collins replaces London's Michael Watson, who broke his nose while sparring.
Table Tennis: Prean opts out.
By Richard Jago
CARL PREAN has written to the English Table Tennis Association asking to be omitted from future ranking lists because of the way they are determined.
The 22-year-old, who is based in West Germany, is upset that many of his overseas results count for nothing.
If they were included he would surely return to No.1 for the first time in six years.
The latest list, released yesterday, shows Alan Cooke still at No.1.
Cooke was due to slip below Prean on the next list, which should appear at the start of the New Year, but unless there is a rapprochement between the player and the ETTA, whose chairman is Prean's father John, the rankings will have lost much of their meaning.
Such an agreement is not out of the question.
Even though Prean senior has chosen to sit out from executive committee meetings discussing his son's request, there is a favourable attitude towards reform.
The defects of the present set-up were inherited from the previous regime and those who see Prean's point of view and are aware of the dissatisfaction of many players at the way in which computer points are calculated had already been planning a more advanced system.
There is, for instance, likely to be different ‘weighting’ for results.
Points for winning a critical match in the European League may no longer be the same as for victories in a three-star tournament; defeats may be taken into account as well as victories; and victories in the European Club Cup should also be included.
But Carl Prean may not be accommodated on one issue, the exclusion of German Bundesliga results, which account for most of his successes.
They are thought to introduce too many complications.
Desmond Douglas and Nicky Mason are ranked next behind Cooke.
There are two new names in the top 10: Chris Oldfield has risen 10 places to seventh and Michael O'Driscoll moves from 14th to eighth.