

Jordan lifts 22 years of martial law.
By Wafa Amr in Amman
JORDAN'S Prime Minister, Mr Mudar Badran, yesterday announced the freezing of martial law for the first time since 1967 as a prelude for formally revoking most of its provisions and abolishing it.
Mr Badran, who was seeking a vote of confidence from the newly elected parliament, said: ‘I announce that martial law is now considered frozen…until such laws are constitutionally abolished in the near future.’
Under martial law, which was imposed by King Hussein after the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, freedoms have been restricted and the Jordanian constitution was practically suspended.
Almost all candidates in last month's general elections, which were also the first in more than 22 years, called for lifting of martial law and defence laws and demanded the freedom of the press, freedom of association, and the legalisation of political parties banned by law since 1957.
Almost all aspects of life suffered under martial law which was used by consecutive governments to ban large public meetings and to crack down on any political groups and political parties working underground.
Martial law courts replaced civilian courts and government decisions were immune from trial.
Many people were arrested for their political affiliations.
Such restrictionsled to the resignation of former Prime Minister Zaid Rifai's government after bloody rioting in the southern parts of the kingdom last April.
Last week, Mr Badran ordered the return of confiscated passports to their owners and promised further amnesties for political prisoners after the recent release of 48 political detainees.
Sources estimate the number of confiscated passports at around 33,000.
In his ministerial programme submitted to parliament for the deputies' vote of confidence on December 30, Mr Badran said his government will study the legal and economic effects of martial law after taking steps to return suspended passports, restore the elected boards to the three Arabic dailies and abolish a previous martial law order to dissolve the Jordanian Writers Association.
Yasser Arafat arrived in Jordan yesterday for talks with King Hussein, Reuter adds, as part of the American-backed effort to promote Israeli-Palestinian peace talks.
This comes ahead of a proposed meeting in Washington next month between the foreign ministers of the US, Egypt and Israel.
At the top of the agenda is Israel's insistence that the PLO should have no role in the peace talks.
March elections ‘will cripple opposition for ever’, merger congress told Zimbabwe must be single party state, says Mugabe.
By Andrew Meldrum in Harare
PRESIDENT Robert Mugabe yesterday made an impassioned call for a Marxist-Leninist single party state in Zimbabwe.
His plea came in a speech to nearly 5,000 delegates at a congress marking the final stage of the two-year process to merge his ruling Zanu-PF party and Joshua Nkomo's Zapu.
His emphasis on a one-party state surprised many Zimbabwean political analysts, who expected the issue to be quietly forgotten.
Earlier this week, Mr Ibbo Mandaza, a prominent intellectual and head of the government's Parastatals Commission, said: ‘The one party state is a thing of the past.
International events have shown that there is an inherent contradiction between a one-party state and mass democracy.
That lesson from eastern Europe has been learned here in southern Africa.’
Others within the newly united Zanu-PF, including the Provincial Chairman, Mr Eddison Zvobgo and Mr Dumiso Dabangwa, have gone on the record against a one-party state and it is known that many in Mr Nkomo's Zapu, as well as several middle level Zanu officials, are also opposed.
Mr Mugabe asked the conference: ‘Is our development path to be that of socialism or capitalism?
I am a Socialist, but what are you?’
‘Socialist, Socialist,’ shouted some of the crowd in answer.
Mr Mugabe said he would be part of the debate with the delegates.
They, not he, would make the decision.
‘What I find unbearable and cannot brook as leader is those who, after we make that decision, will deviate and not comply with our decision,’ he said.
The debate will take place today and tomorrow behind closed doors, but party insiders say that it is very unlikely that Mr Mugabe will face serious opposition.
The delegates, largely from Zimbabwe's rural areas, are expected to endorse enthusiastically Mr Mugabe's call.
Mr Jonathon Moyo, lecturer in political science at the University of Zimbabwe, said: ‘The selection of delegates has been done carefully.
These rural people know a great deal about the land issue and agriculture, but the implications of a one party state do not affect them directly.
Those who are likely to complain about a one-party state have been left out of the delegations.
‘The argument against a one-party state is shared by many intellectuals, including those in the party and who work for the state, but those in power are for it.
Mugabe and (Minister of Foreign Affairs Nathan) Shamuyarira are for it and they are in a position to effect it.’
Mr Mugabe announced yesterday that the national elections are expected to be held in March.
The establishment of a one-party state may come very quickly after that.
He said the electoral defeat of opposition parties ‘will be so massive and crippling that they will not rise again’.
The Mozambican President, Mr Joaquim Chissano, has announced general elections for 1991 but hinted they would be single party only, the Portuguese news agency, Lusa, said yesterday.
‘Democracy can exist in a one-party as well as in a plural-party system,’ he told a summit of five African nations on Monday in the Cape Verde capital, Praia.
— Reuter.
Argentina drops market controls.
By Jeremy Morgan in Buenos Aires
ARGENTINA's new Finance Minister, Mr Antonio Erman Gonzalez, has quickly plunged into the free market economics President Carlos Menem promised when he took power in July.
Within minutes of being sworn in on Monday evening, Mr Gonzalez announced a nine-point economic package ending government price controls and foreign-exchange regulations.
He also reversed a decision by his predecessor, Mr Nestor Rapanelli, who resigned last Friday, to raise export taxes by 11 per cent.
Foreign bankers and economists cautiously welcomed the minister's initiative, but warned that he and President Menem should steel themselves for a ‘very rough ride’ during the next few weeks.
Unofficial forecasts for inflation this month alone now range between 25 and 60 per cent— and companies will be free to set whatever prices they like from now on .
Argentina's currency, the austral, has plummeted since it was devalued by more than 50 per cent a week ago.
Financial markets remained closed by government order yesterday but will reopen today.
Nobody has forgotten the rapid descent into currency chaos, rampant inflation and food riots which greeted a short-lived move to decontrol prices and foreign exchanges during the closing stages of the previous government last spring.
In private, officials concede that Mr Gonzalez's measures are a high-risk gamble, and President Menem has already said as much in public .
‘We are in the eye of the storm,’ he said.
‘We've all taken off together on this flight and there aren't any parachutes in this aircraft.
He who wants to jump out should jump out now.’
Concern about the outlook for Mr Gonzalez's policy focuses on the attitude of not only businessmen, but also union bosses who control the dominant right wing of the ruling Peronist mass movement, and large swathes of Argentina's obstructive bureaucracy.
Both President Menem and Mr Gonzalez scorned the endlessly complex theories which had plagued economic policy in Argentina for decades, persuading one government after another to impose controls on everything.
Mr Gonzalez abandoned another long-running tradition by which Argentine finance ministers unveil their measures in tedious explanations of elementary economics.
He revealed his plans briefly, and in simple language.
The delivery was as different as the policy.
Bush's China syndrome comes under attack.
By Simon Tisdall in Washington
THE White House was under intense pressure yesterday to demonstrate positive results from its secret, high-level contacts with the Chinese Government, or face sweeping sanctions against Beijing when Congress reconvenes next month.
The leaked disclosure on Monday that the National Security Adviser, Mr Brent Scowcroft, and the Deputy Secretary of State, Mr Lawrence Eagleburger, met Chinese leaders in Beijing last July, only a month after the Tiananmen Square massacre, has compounded the furore over this month's furtive Beijing foray by the two men.
The controversy extends to the US Administration, where many officials were kept in the dark over the White House initiatives.
After the massacre, the US suspended all high-level contacts with Beijing.
President Bush, now stands accused of duplicity in his dealings with Congress, and of exercising a double standard over human rights in China, compared to the Soviet bloc.
The Senate Majority Leader, Mr George Mitchell, demanded ‘full disclosure’ of the contacts with the Beijing regime, adding that ‘the visits make a mockery of our profession of concern for human rights’.
The Democratic Party chairman, Mr Ron Brown, said that ‘there has not been such a decision so out of touch with American values since the sale of arms to the Ayatollah.
This is realpolitik run amok.’
The President has also been criticised from the right, with Republicans mystified at Mr Bush's demarche.
Mr Bush, a former US diplomat in Beijing, has countered by hinting that when his traducers were fully acquainted with the facts, his actions would be justified — and typically he has been angered by the ‘personal’ nature of the criticism.
According to sources here, unless significant, reciprocal Chinese gestures are forthcoming, demands for permanent economic sanctions against Beijing are likely to gain momentum.
In the case of Professor Fang Lizhi, the dissident leader who is still holed up in the US embassy in Beijing, Mr Bush has been unable to say when or whether the Chinese may allow him to leave for a third country, as reportedly urged by Mr Scowcroft.
A recent Chinese assurance on ballistic missile sales to Middle Eastern countries, accreditation for a Voice of America journalist, and discussions of a possible resumption of the Fulbright academic exchange programme, have been dismissed here as inadequate.
If the US has demanded an ending of martial law, freeing of jailed dissidents, and an amnesty for fugitives, then these demands remain unmet.
Mutually important issues such as Cambodian instability, the security of Taiwan and Hong Kong, and tensions on the Korean peninsula (which may have prompted the visits) could have been handled through diplomatic channels without resort to secrecy, Mr Winston Lord, US ambassador to China until this year, pointed out yesterday.
As an ‘old China hand’, Mr Bush apparently prides himself on his personal understanding in dealing with the Chinese; and as a former CIA director, he is not averse to secrecy.
But according to several Washington commentators and analysts, in sending senior aides to China, Mr Bush may have signalled that the Administration gave priority to continuity in relations over moral outrage, and thus helped to shore up the repressive Beijing regime.
In the absence of a substantive response, Congress is also expected to move to extend the visas of 40,000 Chinese students in the US, many of whom fear persecution should they return home.
Mr Bush effectively vetoed this measure but supporters of the bill are confident that they will have enough votes next month.
Unrest set off by silencing of cleric.
By Ian Traynor in Budapest
THE seeds of popular revolt that appear to be taking root across Romania were sown last Thursday in the north-western town of Timisoara when President Nicolae Ceausescu's security forces moved to evict the Protestant pastor, Laszlo Tokes, who has long been a thorn in the side of the regime.
Under a court ruling, Pastor Tokes was to be shifted east after pressure was put on church elders who acceded to the regime's order to move the troublesome clergyman away from the town.
When the security forces sought to empty the pastor's house of its possessions, a human chain of several dozen formed around the house, setting in train a flood of protest that was to escalate into what appears to have been a massacre on Sunday.
The growing volume of eye-witness accounts emerging from the firmly sealed region make it possible to gain a clearer picture of how the protests grew.
By Friday night, according to the prominent Paris-based Romanian human rights activist, Mr Mihnea Berindei, the chain around the pastor's house was 200 strong.
It was at this point that police initially peacefully and totally unsuccessfully, sought to persuade the protesters to disperse.
But their numbers grew throughout Saturday.
By the evening, many Romanians joined the ethnic Hungarians and the first cries of ‘wake up Romanians’ were heard.
Another prominent call was for libertate, the Romanian word for freedom.
It appears that although the initial protest was by ethnic Hungarians seeking to protect Pastor Tokes, himself a Hungarian, Romanians were quick to join the demonstrations.
There are reported to have been minor clashes with security forces on Saturday evening, but no notable casualties.
It was on Sunday that the scenes turned ugly.
The crowd swelled to around 10,000, making it the biggest protest in the country since the bread protests in Brasov in 1987.
Eye-witnesses say that the demonstrators marched on the local government offices and occupied them.
They tore down pictures of President Ceausescu, cut the Socialist emblem from the national flag, and set on fire any red flags they came across.
A Hungarian, Ms Erszebet Varga, who returned from Timisoara on Monday, told Hungarian television that on Sunday pregnant women taking part in the demonstration approached the bayonet wielding soldiers and, pointing to their swollen bellies, demanded that the unborn children be killed immediately as they would only starve to death when they were born.
A speaker at the demonstration compared the situation in Romania unfavourably with the dramatic events unfolding across Eastern Europe and demanded an end to the Ceausescu dictatorship.
Shop windows containing the Romanian dictator's portrait were also smashed and vehicles overturned and set alight.
By then Pastor Tokes had disappeared and has not been heard of since.
But by then, the show-down had come from one of support for the clergyman to one of outright resistance to the regime.
The response of the security forces was first to bring in police.
As demonstrations escalated, water cannon and fire engines appeared.
Some accounts say that the fire engines were attacked, overturned, and set alight.
It was at this stage that tanks and troops wielding guns and naked bayonets were introduced and gunfire was heard.
By Monday the protests had spread across the region, and smaller demonstrations were reported in Arad, Cluj, Oradea and Brasov, while the security forces were mobilised across Transylvania and all the borders sealed.
Magazine ‘can prove’ secret burial of Seveso dioxin.
By Paul Webster in Paris
AFRENCH magazine has promised to publish more proof of an allegation that dioxin from the 1976 Seveso disaster in northern Italy was secretly buried in a central French town where the inhabitants have been suffering from fumes from a toxic waste dump.
The magazine, Politis, claimed it had more evidence after the French Environment Ministry dismissed the report but adding that it was dangerous to dig in the recently closed dump because it ‘would be like opening a tomb’.
Mr Michel Moussel, the pollution director at the ministry, said that there was no question of checking the allegations by digging in the dump at Montchanin in the Saone et Loire department even if it was proved that the dioxin was buried there.
‘This would be the worst solution possible,’ he said.
‘Apart from anything else the waste would have to be got rid of somewhere else.’
The Politis editor, Mr Jean-Paul Besset, said his magazine had carried out a long investigation into dangerous waste dumping, including the discovery in 1983 of barrels of earth impregnated with dioxin from Seveso that were illegally shipped to northern France by an independent contractor.
The owners, Hoffmann-La Roche, were forced to transfer the waste to Switzerland for destruction.
According to Politis, 200 grammes of dioxin have not been accounted for.
EC joins plans for common market including East Europe economies.
By John Palmer in Brussels
THE foreign ministers of 19 West European countries yesterday laid the foundations for what they hope will emerge as a pan-European association joined by the reforming countries of Eastern Europe.
The 12 members of the European Community and the six members of the European Free Trade Association, plus Lichtenstein, aim to create a 19-nation European Economic Space by the end of next year in which virtually all barriers to the free movement of goods, services, capital, and people will be removed.
The EC-EFTA meeting in Brussels was overshadowed by the visit of the Soviet Foreign Minister, Mr Eduard Shevardnadze, who this week unveiled plans for a ‘common European home’ based on links between the EC, EFTA, and Comecon.
However, while the EC is reluctant to upgrade links with Comecon, at least until the impact of economic reform in Eastern Europe is clearer, the Commission yesterday published proposals for wide-ranging trade and economic co-operation with East Germany and signalled a readiness to conclude similar agreements with Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia.
Clearly working under the pressure of the speed of events in central Europe, the West Europeans have decided to go all out to form a united economic bloc, if possible by the end of next year, but at all costs by January 1992 when the EC internal market is due to be completed.
However, significant differences remain between the EC and EFTA about sharing political responsibility for the EES.
The European Commissioner for External Affairs, Mr Frans Andriessen, said in Brussels yesterday that the Community would not compromise its autonomy and the supremacy of its political institutions.
However, the Icelandic Foreign Minister and president of the EFTA Council, Mr Jon Baldvin Hannibalsson, made it clear that EFTA wants parity with the EC in deciding all new directives.
Moreover, while the EC countries want EFTA to be subject to the rules of the European Court of Justice, EFTA governments would prefer a new legal structure consisting of judges from both sides.
If these political differences are overcome, a common market of more than 350 million people, will be created.
Largely at the insistence of the EFTA countries — Austria, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland — the EES will also tackle common social, environment protection, research, and development issues.
Under the pressure of the EC's decision to accelerate its own internal integration, the sovereignty-conscious EFTA countries have agreed to give their association greater political authority to negotiate on their behalf as a united front.
However, Austria has already submitted its request for full membership of the EC and this might be followed by Norway and Sweden if the attempt to negotiate a wider West European unity breaks down.
Neither side is clear about when and how to involve the reform-minded East Europeans.
EFTA does not want to be a ‘kindergarten’ for East European countries embarking on the path to market economies, but the looser 23-nation Council of Europe — to which Hungary has already sought entry — might be asked to play this role once democratic elections are held in individual east European countries.
Meanwhile, Turkey's Foreign Minister, Mr Ali Bozer, said yesterday that the European Commission's rejection of Turkey's application to join the EC until after 1992 did ‘not fully correspond to Turkey's aspirations’.
Mr Bozer said Turkish public opinion expected ‘a further and more positive approach’.
The government welcomed Brussels' confirmation of Ankara's eligibility for eventual membership of the EC and proposals to strengthen economic links with Turkey.
Havel rise to presidency endorsed by Czech PM.
By Foreign Staff
CZECHOSLOVAKIA's playwright-turned-politician, Mr Vaclav Havel, moved a step nearer to the presidency yesterday when the country's Communist Prime Minister, Mr Marian Calfa, recommended that he should be installed by the end of the year.
Mr Calfa also said that all domestic operations of the dreaded secret police have been halted.
‘It is one of our priorities to adjust the work of the Interior Ministry to the new social conditions and turn this ministry into a component of state administration based on democratic principles…
As of today the operations of the police force in the field of internal intelligence have been stopped,’ Mr Calfa said.
Turning his attention to Mr Havel, the Prime Minister said, ‘It is the government's opinion that there is no alternative [to him].’
According to the constitution, Mr Havel should be elected by December 24 — within two weeks of the resignation of President Husak.
However, there were indications last night that some Communist deputies may seek to complicate the vote, by not turning up in sufficient numbers, or to delay it, possibly by as much as three weeks, to allow their own party to re-group after its recent humiliations.
An ‘extraordinary’ Congress to elect a new Party leadership opens in Prague today.
Mr Havel, himself a victim of the secret police, has spoken frequently of the never-ending threat of a house search, the knowledge that every visitor was photographed and every conversation bugged by the Communist regime.
Mr Havel's house was continously monitored from a nearby tower of the Manes gallery in central Prague, and cameras were installed by the secret police in other streets where dissidents lived.
During the 41 years of Communist rule, an as yet undisclosed number of secret police agents were involved in continuous surveillance operations against citizens and were responsible for the interrogation and harassment of dissidents.
Meanwhile, the Socialist Party, one of the four smaller parties represented in the assembly, announced last night that it would also be backing Mr Havel's candidacy.
While these constitutional niceties were being debated, a crowd of students gathered in the rain a few hundred yards away in Wenceslas Square to demonstrate support for Mr Havel.
Balloons were released and Czechoslovak flags were waved as passing motorists sounded their horns in noisy support.
The chances of the man who was seen as a contender for the presidency until a few days ago, the former leader, Mr Alexander Dubcek, winning the post are now seen as receding.
Unconfirmed reports say he could become Speaker, a position of some honour but no great responsibility.
Mr Calfa went on to outline an economic programme which would be operational until free elections can be held.
‘The economic system of the last few decades has failed,’ he said.
The long legislative road to Hong Kong's lost passports Stephen Vines explains when a passport is not a passport as he unravels the laws which forbid the colony's residents to come to Britain.
UNTIL 1948 Hong Kong people were regarded as British citizens with the same right of abode in the United Kingdom as anyone born in Britain.
The 1948 British Nationality Act renamed them Citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies (CUKCs), but the people of Hong Kong retained their right of abode in Britain and during the 1950's were positively encouraged to go to the ‘Mother Country’ to fill job vacancies.
The 1962 Commonwealth Immigrants Act changed this, and only those born in Britain were henceforth automatically given the right of abode.
Others were treated as aliens, although in practice it was easier for CUKCs to emigrate to Britain than other foreigners for purposes of family reunion.
The right of entry was further reduced by the 1971 Immigration Act which introduced the concept of ‘patriality’.
Admission was only granted to those born in Britain or having an ancestral link stretching back two generations, those who had lived in Britain for five years, and spouses of patrials.
This law was widely criticised as racist because it effectively barred entry from the so-called new Commonwealth while allowing continued emigration from the predominantly white old Commonwealth countries.
By 1981, the distinction between patrials and non-partials was drawn even more distinctly by the British Nationality Act.
All patrial CUKCs were renamed as British citizens while all non-patrials became British Dependent Territory Citizens (BDTCs) who only had the right of abode in their territories of residence.
However, exemptions were made for Gibraltarians and residents of the Falkland Islands who can become British citizens.
The population of Hong Kong is officially given as 5.7 million, however it is probably around 6 million.
Of this, 3.28 million are eligible for a BDTC passport, but only some one million people possess this document.
The rest of the population (excluding expatriates which at most make up two per cent of the population) hold either Certificates of Identity (CIs) or Documents of Identity (DIs).
The DI is given almost exclusively to new immigrants from the Chinese mainland.
Last year, 28,000 people came to Hong Kong as legal emigrants from China.
The same number are expected to arrive this year.
After remaining in the colony for seven years they can apply for a CI which is a more widely recognised travel document and enables them to become British Dependent Territory Citizens.
Before the fears of the 1997 Chinese takeover began to mount, most people did not bother to change their registered status.
Nor have many responded to the offer of the new British National (Overseas) passport which was introduced to overcome problems of national status derived from China's insistence that all ‘Chinese compatriots’ in Hong Kong are Chinese nationals.
Britain introduced this new passport two years ago.
It will be available after 1997 and is essentially a travel document whose validity has been questioned by a number of countries.
Less than 70,000 Hong Kong people carry this passport.
Hong Kong people, like others considered to be aliens under British law, can also apply to emigrate to Britain under very limited criteria.
People of independent means with assets exceeding £150,000 and an annual income exceeding £15,000 per year who have a close connection with Britain can make an application.
Those with assets exceeding £500,000 can also apply, as can businessmen willing to invest over £150,000 and create new employment.
Besides those of proven wealth, the immigration laws only allow entry to specific categories of employees who are required to fill jobs which cannot be filled by the existing labour force.
Under these conditions Hong Kong emigration to Britain has been very small.
Last year 1,150 people from the colony settled in Britain, in 1987 the number was 920, and only 860 in 1986.
Jordan lifts 22 years of martial law.
By Reuter in Amman
THE Jordanian Prime Minister, Mr Mudar Badran, wooing the newly elected parliament, lifted martial law yesterday after 22 years and promised to fight corruption.
Mr Badran, who took office two weeks ago, said that martial law imposed during the 1967 Arab-Israeli war had been ‘frozen’ and would soon be formally scrapped.
Stealing the thunder of Islamic fundamentalist and leftwing MPs, he promised sweeping measures to curb official graft, saying top public servants would have to declare their wealth.
‘The government will co-operate with your council to uncover the various facades of financial corruption and will not tolerate corruption or lax behaviour,’ he declared, drawing loud applause from the packed public galleries.
Mr Badran, a former intelligence chief, has bowed to public pressure to bring in democratic reforms and investigate people blamed for the country's economic crisis.
He has already reversed many measures taken by previous governments, which used martial law over economic matters and to detain political opponents or ban them from work or travel.
The government is reviewing the cases of about 60 people sentenced for political or security offences to see if they might qualify for pardon.
The pace of political concessions has surprised even liberal Jordanians, some of whom express concern that the government, in its anxiety to win a parliamentary vote of confidence, has left itself little room for manoeuvre.
‘There's a difference between cleaning your nails and pulling them out,’ one civil servant said.
‘We are still in the Middle East and one day the government might need teeth.’
The lower house, chosen on November 8 in Jordan's first general election in 22 years, was not expected to give the government programme an easy passage.
The Muslim Brotherhood, with 22 seats, could combine with leftwing and other disaffected MPs in no-confidence motions.
Parliament meets for the confidence vote on December 30.
Soon afterwards, the Finance Minister will present an austerity budget for 1990.
Jordan's treasury, burdened by a foreign debt of about $8 billion, has little to give away and parliament is bound to attack the government on rising prices and unemployment.
Mr Badran promised to continue to subsidise basic foods and not to raise taxes, though he said the government would reform taxation and spread the tax burden more evenly.
PAGE
Popular revolt begins to shake Romania, the last domino of Eastern Europe Hero of heroes turns Stalinist dinosaur.
By Michael Simmons
PRESIDENT Nicolae Ceausescu, once regarded as the world's pet Communist, is a changed man.
Twenty years ago, to almost universal applause, he defied the Kremlin; ten years later he was an honoured guest, staying at Buckingham Palace; today, he is seen as a Stalinist dinosaur who deserves little better than assassination.
The Shining Light of the World, the Hero of Heroes, the Genius of the Carpathians, has turned 70, and is not in good health.
‘Ceausescu is a madman,’ the Romanian-born playwright, Eugene Ionesco, declared yesterday.
‘His wife, thirsty for power, is also mad and his son is an idiot.
It's these three who are being allowed to freely torture 23 million people.’
An area of consistency has been President Ceausescu's obsession with Romania's sovereignty.
Intermittently, for more than 20 years, he has accused the Soviet Union of meddling in Romania's affairs and infringing its sovereignty.
In 1968, within five days of the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia, in which Romania refused to participate, he declared that the ‘legal’ Prague Government should be reinstated.
Romanian troops braced themselves for a Soviet invasion.
Then he switched to seeking friendship and co-operation with all.
He even tried to mediate between the Soviet Union and China, then engaged in frontier disputes.
China responded with help for Romanian flood victims, and a warm welcome when Mr Ceausescu went to Beijing in mid-1971.
But that same summer, he began to demand more Communist Party purity and discipline.
His ‘open door’ to the West appeared to be closing, and the taste for the Western way of life was firmly discouraged.
Logically, within a few weeks, he also began declaring that ‘the Communist movement can no longer be led by any centre’.
Leadership purges occurred with increasing frequency.
In 1972, the cult of his personality began to take off, and his wife, Elena, was suddenly prominently at his side on big occasions, staking out a role for herself as a formidable political force.
In 1974, he became President and Elena was First Lady; but there were straws in the wind that something had turned sour.
He talked of becoming party leader ‘for life’, and when it did not come off, he sacked the Prime Minister, Mr Ion Gheorghe Maurer, after 14 years in the job.
He travelled widely in the early 1970s, probably more widely than any other world leader.
A month in Africa and five weeks in Latin America were not unusual, nor was an effusive reception in Paris or Bonn.
But then came a row with the aged President Tito over the sort of reception he might expect on a visit to Belgrade.
Leadership purges became more frequent.
By his 60th birthday in January, 1978, the personality cult was in full flower.
Awards were deluged on him, as were titles, praise and eulogies in the national press.
Books about him and ostensibly by him began to fill bookshop windows — they still do.
The US President received him in 1978 and so did the Queen — but the purges went on.
Then criticisms of him began to be heard and there were unconfirmed reports of assassination attempts.
Then the row blew up with Hungary over the enforced assimilation of ethnic Hungarians, involving plans to raze their villages.
Distinguished Romanian emigres began to speak of their erstwhile leader as a dictator and a clown.
A new obsession, to eliminate the national debt, became overriding.
But, at the same time, his isolation as an obsolete Communist and policy-maker increased, roughly coinciding with Mr Gorbachev's emergence as the new-style Communist of world stature.
Romanian politburo and central committee meetings have become empty rituals of automated applause, but almost no discussion.
Often they have degenerated into bullying harangues for harder work and more discipline from Mr Ceausescu or, occasionally, his wife.
President Ceausescu now argues that it is ‘inconceivable’ that production units should be autonomous.
‘No one can conceive of a revolutionary party saying that it will let enterprises or economic sectors manage themselves,’ he says.
But the people trying to implement policies remain human, and therefore fallible, like the rest of us; cases of ‘indiscipline’, corruption and general inefficiency now surface with embarrassing frequency.
One result is that ministers are now routinely sacked by the handful.
Earlier this year, six Romanian party veterans sent him a message full of criticism of his policies; there was talk that he might step down.
Mr Ceausescu responded with house arrests.
Now he still trundles out cliches about ‘powerful expressions’ of ‘revolutionary worker democracy’, but only his wife and his closest retainers believe them any more.
Baltic republic defies Kremlin pleas for solidarity Lithuania poised for party independence.
By John Rettie in Moscow
LITHUANIA'S leader, Mr Algirdas Brazauskas, yesterday called for a united front to establish statehood at the opening of a crucial congress of the republic's Communist Party.
The Congress is virtually certain to declare itself independent of the Soviet Party.
Mr Brazauskas, First Secretary of the republic's party, said all political forces and ethnic groups should agree on a consensus that would fight for this goal, as well as social justice, human rights, and democracy.
‘Our first goal is the promotion of democracy’ he said.
‘Our second is the re-establishment of Lithuania's statehood, and the third is an independent Lithuanian Communist Party.’
The draft document on declaring the party independent says this would not mean breaking off relations with the Soviet party, but would establish a new relationship of partnership instead of subordin-ation.
President Gorbachev and other Politburo members have angrily, and at times desperately, appealed against such a move, for fear it would lead to a breakup of the Soviet Communist Party and, ultimately, of the Soviet Union.
But the Lithuanian party is nonetheless likely to vote in favour of such a declaration today.
Another draft document said Lithuania's continued membership of the Soviet Union depended on the country being made a fit place to live.
In the draft party statutes, one rule specifically states that once the Lithuanian party has declared itself independent, members will have until the 28th Soviet Party Congress next October to decide whether to stay with the Lithuanian party, or leave it and join the Soviet party.
The statutes specifically state that a Lithuanian party member cannot belong to any other party.
The motive behind the Lithuanian party's decision to move ahead against all the pressure from Moscow was made clear by Mr Donatas Morkunas, secretary of the Siauliai regional party.
‘To stay in the Soviet Communist Party would mean the final loss of the Lithuanian party's authority,’ he said.
‘In my region, only one third of members will stay in the party if it does not become independent.’
In an interview with the Guardian Mr Valerionas Baltrunas, one of the party's ideology secretaries, said he thought Mr Gorbachev quite understood this.
Lithuania, he declared, strongly supported Mr Gorbachev's idea of a ‘European homeland’ and it wanted ‘a good flat in it.’
Reuter adds: The Soviet parliament yesterday approved a government programme to rescue the country's ailing economy in what was a virtual vote of confidence in the Prime Minister, Mr Nikolai Ryzhkov.
After several days of heated debate, the Congress of People's Deputies passed the programme, outlined by Mr Ryzhkov last week, without amendment.
It was opposed by 419 deputies.
Winding up the debate, President Gorbachev warned that any attempt to amend the proposals would spell rejection of the whole programme.
‘Either you support the programme or you amend it, which means you do not support it at all,’ he said.
The Soviet Communist Party's ideology chief denied on Monday that the entire ruling Politburo had offered to resign or faced calls to resign at a key party meeting this month.
But Mr Vadim Medvedev also indicated there were no plans to set the record straight about what happened at the December 9 meeting of the Central Committee — which was by all accounts a turbulent one — by publishing the minutes.
Several people who attended have reported a fierce clash between Mr Gorbachev and hard-liners and some said he offered to step down.
Terror clamp on dissent.
By Foreign Staff
ABOUT one in every four of Romania's 23 million population is thought to be a member of the security service, the Securitate.
Officials in Bucharest laugh at such a figure, but ordinary Romanians are so afraid of reprisals for even talking to foreigners that verification is impossible.
The ruthless and indiscriminate way the weekend protests were suppressed is one side of its operation.
Another, equally sinister, is the way in which most public meeting places and telephones are assumed to be bugged; even the family is no longer a safe environment in which to talk.
The service's brief is extremely wide, and its members can, and do, act against any activity they deem ‘hostile to the Socialist system and the interests of the working people’.
The service's efficiency can be gauged by the fact that the country's dissident movement is small to the point of being tiny and that the cult of President Ceausescu's personality has been unassailable.
There are no reports in the authorised press of anti-regime demonstrations, or of political arrests or trials.
Total censorship restricts information about people who are arrested or imprisoned.
Amnesty International says it has learned of ‘only a fraction’ of the cases in which people were imprisoned for their beliefs.
It claims that ‘several hundred, whose names are unknown,’ are believed to be in prison.
It is not clear to what extent the Securitate is now a ‘state within the state’ and to what extent it is directly answerable to President Ceausescu, but it is odd that the service's worst excesses have occurred when the head of state is on an official trip abroad, in this case to Iran.
In 1967, when Mr Ceausescu had only been in power two years, he complained about the security forces taking unjustified measures against the people.
He also warned the service against what he called ‘abuses and transgressions’ of Socialist legality.
How he will now speak of the methods used last weekend by the security services could become clear in the next few days.
Britain shares Soviet fears on pace of unification.
By Hella Pick Diplomatic Editor
BRITAIN shares the Soviet Union's concern that there should be no headlong rush into German reunification, the Prime Minister, as well as the Foreign Secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, told the Soviet Foreign Minister, Mr Eduard Shevardnadze yesterday.
In a speech made during his two-day stay in Brussels, Mr Shevardnadze raised the questions about the consequences of a reunified German colossus that have also been posed in private discussions among Western officials.
But in London, as in Washington or Paris, there is an increasingly fatalistic view that there is very little governments can do to prevent popular pressure for reunification.
The Former West German Chancellor, Mr Willy Brandt, has said that any party in East Germany that decides to run on a reunification plank is virtually assured of a runaway victory at the general elections set for next May.
Western diplomats have concluded that the Soviet Union's proposal to stage a ‘Helsinki II’ summit next year is primarily aimed at eliminating any ambiguities about the ‘inner-German’frontier, and enshrining the existence of the two German states in the Helsinki Declaration in a way that would virtually rule out reunification.
Mrs Thatcher told the Soviet minister yesterday that Britain is not opposed to the idea of a pan-European summit, but the participants must agree on how it will fit into the building of the ‘new European architecture.’
The Prime Minister, with Mr Shevardnadze at her side, declared herself well satisfied with the two hours of talks.
She agreed with Mr Shevardnadze on the importance of ‘retaining the stability on the Nato and Warsaw Pact structures and of the Helsinki declaration’.
Ski Weather High-tech happiness:..
By Rosemary Burns Ski Club of Great Britain
THE LACK of snowfall in most European resorts over the last two winters has made all skiers aware of the advantages of artificial snow-making machinery.
The sudden, sharp increase in cross-Atlantic skiing traffic owes much to the claims of some American resorts that they can guarantee snow cover, even if as much as 75 per cent of it may be man-made.
None of the European resorts has yet gone in for the wholesale investment in snow-making which we see in the United States, mainly because the capital outlay is enormous and the running costs extremely high.
Many of the American resorts are owned by wealthy investors and expenditure decisions are easier to reach than where several different commercial concerns are involved.
Killington, Vermont, on the east coast of the United States, boasts the world's largest snow-making system.
All its 18 lifts, on six mountains, with inter-connecting ‘trails’(runs, to us), are serviced by snow- making machinery.
Over the past six years the ski season has averaged 223 days (more than months) per year.
It is possible to run all lifts on machine-made snow and this means that Killington has been able to open for skiing from October to June every season since 1982.
Killington also boasts the East Coast's largest fleet of snow-grooming vehicles which, in a single mid-winter night, groom the equivalent of seven interstate highway lanes from Boston to Killington.
The piste groomers work around the clock to grind up the snow which, because it possesses a denser molecular structure than the real thing, compacts easily into ice.
Killington renders it back almost into its original powder form — leaving only a few ‘death cookies’(rock-hard lumps) to trap the unwary.
Another East coast resort, Lake Placid, can pump 3,500 gallons of water per minute, along with 19,500 cu ft of compressed air, through 15 pumps and 14 air compressors.
They use four pumping stations and move their equipment around Whiteface Mountain to make maximum use of 60 snowmaking guns.
Stowe, in Vermont, claims that the energy used to pump its snow (up to 19,500 kw) far exceeds that used to light and heat the entire town down in the valley.
Further west, the resorts of Vail in Colorado, and Calgary in Canada averted what could have been a disastrous Winter Olympics last February by making extensive use of artificial snow.
In most cases, the Americans have the advantage of ready access to water, which is collected from rivers, lakes and reservoirs and pumped through pipes to emerge from cannon on the slopes.
At the same time, air is piped under pressure from enormous compressor units, housed in central pumping stations.
The two are mixed in the gun (as in an artist's airbrush) and, given the correct air temperature, the resulting mist which is squirted out crystallises, falling as snow.
One big problem with snowmaking is a high air temperature.
Here, again, the American East Coast resorts have the advantage over Europe in that they experience very low temperature during the winter months.
The cold current off the coast, combined with a prevailing westerly wind can often result in bitterly cold temperatures but a dry atmosphere.
Moscow sets terms for unity debate Following are extracts from an address to members of the European Parliament given yesterday by the Soviet Foreign Minister, Mr Eduard Shevardnadze.
ONE of the principal components of the German question, and of the entire European situation, is the recognition of the fact that the question of European borders has been solved in a definitive and irrevocable manner.
Of course, each German state retains the right to self-determination, but it can be only exercised in the context of other norms and principles of international law.
Furthermore, the very notion of self-determination implies the need to exclude any outside pressure on a country.
Any appeals or advice to exercise self-determination or prescriptions as to how and when to change the GDR government are not only inappropriate but may raise doubts about the authenticity of the eventual allegedly free choice.
Right until the time that the FRG was included in Nato, the Soviet Union favoured a united, democratic, and demilitarised Germany and was of the view that unification of the two German states was possible.
Since the refusal of the FRG to accept free elections throughout Germany in 1952, and the inclusion of the FRG in the system of closed Western military-political and economic blocs, circumstances have changed and new realities have evolved.
The question of self-determination of the German states has recently become a subject of heated debate.
The appeals to the GDR to join the FRG have aroused concern, not only among political parties and people in the GDR who are being advised to renounce their statehood and to make the GDR a part of Nato.
The neighbours of the GDR and FRG are also concerned.
Firstly, where are the political, legal, and material guarantees that German unity would not eventually create a threat to the national security of other states?
Secondly, will such a hypothetical Germany be ready to accept the existing borders in Europe and renounce any territorial claims?
The FRG has avoided answering that.
Thirdly, what would be the place of such a national German entity in the military-political structures existing on our continent?
After all, one cannot seriously expect the status of the GDR to change radically while the status of the FRG remains the same.
Fourthly, what would be the military potential of such a new entity, its military doctrine, and the structure of its armed forces?
Will it be ready to accept demilitarisation, adopt a neutral status, and fundamentally restructure its economic and other relations with Eastern Europe?
Fifthly, what would be the attitude to the presence of allied troops on German soil, to continued functioning of military liaison missions, and to the 1971 four-party agreement?
Sixthly, how would the possible creation of such a German unity fit in with the Helsinki process, and would it promote a constructive evolution of that process in the direction of ending the division of Europe and progressing toward integrated legal, economic, ecological, cultural, and information environments in Europe?
Seventhly, if the German states were to express themselves for initiating movement toward German unity, would they be ready to take into consideration the interests of other European states and to seek, on a mutually acceptable collective basis, answers to all questions and problems that might arise in that regard?
Surely the peoples of the Soviet Union are entitled to know what any changes in Central Europe would mean for their future and security.
We paid the price of 20 million lives for existing European stability.
Toxic leak kills Soviet miners.
Toxic chemicals seeping from a defence plant have killed three miners and led to the closing of the Gorlovka pit, one of the largest in the Donbass, Jonathan Steele writes from Moscow.
Survivors said 26 miners and 123 rescuers are in hospital suffering from poisoning.
Yugoslavia setback.
Yugoslavia's efforts to tackle its economic crisis received a blow yesterday when Serbia, the largest republic, and Vojvodina province rejected the government's emergency recovery plan.
The republics of Slovenia, Croatia, and Bosnia-Herzegovina have accepted the programme.
— Reuter.
Drug seizure.
US narcotics agents have arrested 14 people and seized 2.5 tons of cocaine and $2.75million (£1.83million) in drug profits during raids in California.
— AP.
Grenada PM dies.
The Grenadan Prime Minister, Herbert Blaize, who hailed the 1983 US-led invasion as a ‘rescue mission’, died yesterday, aged 71, after suffering from prostate cancer.
— AP.
War crimes trial.
An immigrant to Canada from Byelorussia, Mr Michael Pawlowski, aged 72, appeared in the Ontario Supreme Court yesterday on charges of murdering 490 Jews and non-Jewish Poles during the second world war.
— AP..
Guerrillas killed.
At least 43 Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement guerrillas were killed when army troops took them by surprise in the central Peruvian province of Oxapampa, a military spokesman said yesterday.
— Reuter..
Helicoper shot down.
Unita rebels shot down an Angolan military MI-17 helicopter, injuring two crewmen, the official news agency Angop said yesterday.
— Reuter.
Palme suspect claim.
Christer Petersson, who was acquitted of the 1986 murder of the Swedish Prime Minister, Mr Olof Palme, is demanding two million kronor (£213,000) compensation for the 10 months he spent in jail, news reports said yesterday.
— AP.
Life sentence.
A New Zealand man was yesterday sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder of an English tourist, Monica Cantwell.
— AP.
FMLN leader killed.
The Salvadorean Marti Farabundo National Liberation Front said a senior rebel leader and seven lower-ranking commanders were killed in the five-week-old offensive.
— Reuter.
Race bombings.
Police yesterday disarmed a parcel bomb at a black human rights office in Florida, the latest in a rash of mail bombings in the South that have killed a judge and a civil rights lawyer.
The FBI said white supremacists might be behind the attacks.
— AP.