

Telling tales Television.
By Nancy Banks-Smith
LONG ago, said Signals (Channel 4) in a nice, pouring-cream sort of voice-over ‘in an almost forgotten time, even before Morecambe and Wise and the James Bond movie on TV, for many people Christmas entertainment meant an evening of storytelling by the light of a log fire.’
Goodness, yes.
I remember it well.
Chestnuts roasting on an open fire, Jack Frost nipping at your nose, Cousin Lizzie Ann, a stalwart of the Band of Hope, incapable as usual on sherry trifle and the seasonal sound of feet running upstairs and passionate sobbing from the bedroom.
What a treat it all was.
As Signals explained, television ruined all this homespun entertainment but personally I found it quite a relief when we got a set and could all sit around watching King George's funeral.
To reintroduce us to the joys of story telling round the log fire, Signals rounded up a slightly disconcerting group of five contemporary writers, all strange to me.
Some stranger than others.
Kathy Acker's off-the-shoulder dress displayed to advantage her collection of off-the-shoulder tattoos; Sara Maitland wore a pale pink pyjama suit and Jean Binta Breeze seemed to be smoking a pipe.
Having told her story with some brio, Miss Breeze burst into tears and was comforted by the motherly Miss Maitland.
There were gruff mutterings of ‘excellent story’ or ‘very good’from the two men, who were never in the same league and knew it.
The stories were of an dullness to bring a water buffalo to its knees.
When John Logie Baird was born I do not doubt that a star stood over the little saviour's cradle.
AND now stand by for our Christmas competition.
I offer a flask of Featherwheel's famous body lotion (‘Wave goodnight to cellulite’) as seen in Blackeyes (BBC 2) to anyone who can describe, without breaking into a light sweat, what was going on.
‘What?’ as Blackeyes herself said in this last episode ‘What?
What?
What?’
Being in effect a doll, Blackeyes was as dumb as she was beautiful but I couldn't have put it better myself.
Blackeyes was a disorientating experience like being caught up in someone else's feverish dream.
Her very name, like Snow White or Red Riding Hood, is not real at all, but out of a fairy story.
It suggests at once beauty and brutality for some are born with black eyes and some are given them.
There was a beautiful girl, a prince and a wicked uncle.
A wolf, perhaps.
It was a child's story about child abuse.
The whole thing seethed, illusion and allusion swinging from branch to branch like gibbons in the treetops.
It was painful, beautiful and obscure, a not uncommon state of affairs when the creator also directs, gives a running commentary on the action and writes himself into the story at the end.
If God had not kept everything in his own hands, life might be a bit clearer.
Long ago when Dennis Potter was a television critic too, he was reviewing Miss World.
He said he had been to a beauty contest where the audience were mostly farmers.
As the girls paraded, the men shouted out bids.
‘WE HAVE decapitated him from the dictatorship,’ said General Powell, briefing the press in the Pentagon on Sky, which comes into its own on stories like this.
There was a picture of Noriega, coincidentally a head shot, looking like Ronald Kray with a serious skin condition.
At first General Powell called him General Noriega then, after some consideration, changed it to Mr Noriega.
These rolling stories, coming in live, prickle the skin in a way that is almost primitive.
You seem to smell danger and taste excitement and, as television has no smell or taste, that is powerful evocation.
PAGE
It's easy to criticise.
But is it so easy when you're on someone else's patch?
We invited our critics to trade places for a day.
So how does an art buff see radio, and what does an architecture expert make of TV?
Not always the obvious — there's Dennis Potter's debt to Neighbours, for instance Anything you can do….
Television Martin Pawley (Architecture Critic) on Blackeyes
IT IS amazing how few critics seem to have been able to recognise Dennis Potter's Blackeyes for what it is, just another Anglo-Australian copy of Neighbours.
Potter's earlier production The Singing Detective shared the same provenance.
Then the hero's ghastly disease was loosely based on the Ramsey Street saga of Bev's car crash and coma.
This time the original is more closely followed.
At one point in episode three Blackeyes actually says; ‘Funny isn't it, I never used to like tea.’
Almost too close to Madge Ramsey's famous; ‘Say what you like, there's nothing like a nice cup of tea.’
Then there is the use of repeated sequences in Blackeyes, many of them differentiated only by the actors' wardrobe.
This too is a technique pioneered by Neighbours, where it works best at the beginning and end of each episode, and in the poignant identification of the tragedy of Paul and Gail, who do and say the same things day after day, but wear different clothes.
This leads me to my only criticism of Potter's version, its extravagance.
In the original not one second of dialogue is ever wasted and Potter could learn a lot from this.
When Mrs Broadly is stretchered out of the Coffee Shop in an oxygen mask, for example, we all know Dr Beverley Marshal is going to be sued for malpractice — such is the power of consummate technique.
But Potter's version is profligate with clues, for instance, in the rape scene.
If anywhere, it is here that Potter's inexperience shows.
Not many viewers can have realised that this was a deft parody of the catastrophic visit of Mike's ‘uni-mates’ a week or so ago that ended in Bron cruelly dumping him just before his psychology exam.
Horses.
Mary Clarke (Dance Critic)
IF I WAS not writing about dancers, I would love to write about horses.
Not to encroach upon this paper's wonderful racing pages but rather to hymn the beauty of the noble steeds.
If not at yet another matinee of Swan Lake during the flat season, I am usually in front of a television set fascinated by the fine-boned, immaculately-trained and groomed creatures and then by their sheer grace in motion once they begin to race.
Grace in motion is the quality that is shared by professional dancers and thoroughbred horses, for dancers can also be described as thoroughbred — the classical ballet technique, especially, brings beautiful refinement to dancers' bodies.
Ballet traces its origins to the great court spectacles of the Renaissance and horses participated in the ‘horse ballets’— both horses and royal riders gorgeously caparisoned by artists such as Henri Gissey.
Horses have been favourite subjects for artists from time immemorial-how lovingly is the horse depicted in Rembrandt's The Polish Rider-but the artist who paid equal attention to dancers and horses was Degas; he understood the special elegance of the way in which they both moved.
A number of race horses have been named after dancers.
Most famous perhaps has been Nijinsky.
In April 1970 Romola Nijinsky, widow of great Vaslav, saw the horse win the Two Thousand Guineas.
A very special example of classic horsemanship in performance is provided by the Lipizzaner, the grey-white stallions of Vienna.
Beneath the chandeliers of the Spanish Riding School, they display their virtuosity to the music of Mozart.
‘It's like Balanchine,’ cried an American dancer when she first discovered them.
Radio 3.
Tim Hilton (Art Critic)
THIS last year my wife was ill, hospitalised, went abroad to convalesce.
I mooned about the house, not getting on well with writing, nor for that matter with reading.
But I had a friend in Radio 3: so thanks, ghostly and absent companion.
I listened all day, from the bright, undemanding getting-up-time music to the midnight news, at that terrible hour, owl-season, when newspapers have been put to bed and cold skin grows over the country's cocoa.
The music seemed unreal, especially because of my tranny.
Sounds come from an apparatus imperfectly tuned to the ether.
You find a parallel world that knows great beauty but can speak only through a tiny box of plastic and tin.
Orchestras don't work for me, but chamber music becomes cavern music, and I loved the swell of Brahms cello breaking over the piano, and pieces like the Schubert Arpeggioni Sonata (not really Schubertian, says my colleague Ted Greenfield, whose Saturday morning talks are a delight), in which the cello and piano talk together like Piccasso and Braque.
Theatre in the world at large is unimaginable without an audience: I wouldn't dream of listening to radio drama with anyone else in the room.
Simon Gray's The Holy Terror was good, but Beckett is incomparable, and Barry McGovern's reading of Stirrings Still is an owl in the belfry of my memory.
By the way, Beckett critics haven't noticed that his music sometimes comes from Lord Dunsany, the Irish cricketer, fantasist and pioneer of radio theatre.
Could we have a Dunsany night some time?
Architecture.
Tom Sutcliffe (Opera Critic) on the Meyerson
LIVING in England, I never expect to get an architectural thrill when I go to a concert or the theatre.
There are good theatres in London, all of them built before 1920, and I can take pleasure in the design of the Wigmore Hall and Covent Garden.
But of places like the Barbican and the National Theatre, ‘nuff said.
Theatres and concert halls can be beautiful and stirring places, quite apart from what goes on in them.
The frigid elegance of the new Opera Bastille, and the immanence of that whole mixed quartier of Paris viewed from the foyers, makes a memorable experience.
But the building does not reveal the hand of a master the way that the Dallas Symphony Orchestra's new Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center does.
My visit to the Meyerson, IM Pei's beautiful construction on the unimpressive edge of downtown Dallas, was a real architectural experience.
The concert hall itself reminds one playfully of reproduction art deco and is also acoustically first-class and adaptable.
Rhetoric may be a dirty word in modern architecture, because it implies waste and irrelevance.
Pei's generosity with space, the fact that one never feels oppressed by ceilings (as I always do at Lasdun's National Theatre), reveals him as a distinctive architectural sculptor.
The angles of approach to the main foyer area are scrupulously calculated.
In this vast hall, which is partly encased in stone and partly in glass, the eye is invited by the plain and effective lines of the upper level as much as by the round-the-corner restaurant space with its oriental-seeming garden outside.
Pei's openness uses the outside so that it seems as inviting as the interior.
What is architecture but the memorable and effective use of space?
Paris has its Pei pyramid.
I wish London had Pei in its skyline.
Opera.
Michael Billington (Theatre Critic) on various productions
IMANAGE to do it about eight times a year.
Miriam Stoppard, who has more stamina, says she likes to do it two or three times a week.
I refer to opera-going: something that has become not merely trendy but deep-rootedly popular.
Why?
Several reasons.
Ever-improving standards of production and design (hear Arnold Bennett in 1921 complaining that ‘operatic mismanagers are obsessed with the music and they leave everything else to people who are either dead and have forgotten to get themselves buried or who don't know the elements of their job’).
Increased accessibility: sur-titles, says Rodney Milnes, are the invention of the devil but I find they enhance my intellectual and emotional enjoyment.
Also audiences clearly find in opera a spiritual intensity and cathartic richness they are not always getting from the straight theatre.
Personal highlights of my own l989 operatic diary?
The moving, unearthly off-stage sound of Christopher Robson's counter-tenor in Aribert Reimann's Lear signifying his transformation from Edgar to Poor Tom.
The triumphant audacity of David Alden's Coliseum production of A Masked Ball (will one ever forget that last-act image of death on a pale horse smashing time?).
The fragrant sadness of Janis Kelly in Street Scene counterpointed by the ebullient jitterbugging of Catherine Zeta Jones and Philip Gould as the young lovers risking careless rupture.
The satisfying completeness of the Gotz Friedrich Die Walkure at Covent Garden with its famous Time Tunnel set: visually outre (how rarely does one encounter gods in the Washington subway), it was vocally superb and beautifully conducted by Haitink.
I was so purified and uplifted that when I came out and discovered my car had been towed away and I'd have to fork out 70 quid, I was completely unruffled.
That wouldn't have happened after The Baker's Wife.
Heritage.
Edward Greenfield (Music Critic) on Spitalfields
LIVING in Spitalfields is something which takes you over.
How else to account for what at the time seemed wildly erratic behaviour, when in 1977 a group of distinguished architects and others, members of the newly formed Spitalfields Trust, squatted in two derelict early Georgian houses in Elder Street, thwarting the property developer's bulldozers by sheer persistence.
That is only a part of the story, now told in a book published by the Trust, The Saving of Spitalfields.
It was the closest of calls, and what the book enthrallingly brings out is how much it all depended on this handful of enthusiasts to preserve an enclave unique in London.
For a generation and more it had been an area totally neglected.
Dozens of early Georgian houses built in the 1720s in Queen Anne style (surprisingly rare in central London) had been allowed to fall into decay — to be turned into sweatshops for the clothing industry, to be converted into offices for the fruit-market or simply to become slums.
Douglas Blain, secretary of the Trust, describes his own first contact with the area, by chance coming across it in 1961.
Single-handed he did his best to prevent the wholesale destruction of the big houses in Spital Square.
He failed — and photographs in the book confirm what a tragedy that was, particularly when the resulting space is still used only as a car-park.
Much later he joined forces with the fledgling Spitalfields Trust, and their efforts have ensured that since 1961 only two more Georgian houses have been destroyed, and those in flagrant defiance of the law.
Blain's very personal History of the Spitalfields Trust is as gripping as an adventure yarn.
The other big piece in the book by one of the area's longtime residents, Raphael Samuel, is both a social history of one of the most fascinatingly mixed areas of London and a passionate polemic against the fruit-market being forced to leave.
He may well be right that what he calls ‘the Holbornisation’ of the area will suck the life out of Spitalfields after all.
But both the Trust and those of us lucky enough to live there will do our damnedest to prevent it.
Ballet.
Adam Sweeting (Rock Critic) on The Prince Of The Pagodas
TAKE a chunk of Sleeping Beauty, stir in a bit of King Lear, and season with flavours from the mysterious East.
That would give you the bare bones of The Prince of the Pagodas, but not much idea of the richness of Benjamin Britten's score which, paradoxically, has proved a stumbling block in the work's history.
It's as if it's too powerful for choreographers to cope with.
Does Kenneth MacMillan's new version work?
The night I went the original leads, Darcey Bussell (Princess Rose) and Jonathon Cope (her Prince), had already been rotated out of the cast in favour of Viviana Durante and Stuart Cassidy.
Cassidy, I thought, was rather more interesting in his nightmarish salamander-prince incarnation, where he writhed around the stage in scaly green tights.
Ms Durante was suitably serene of line and firm of resolve, as she underwent an hallucinogenic rite de passage featuring dancing castles and badly-behaved kings.
I was particularly amused by Anthony Dowell's cameo as the doddering Emperor, complete with gilded wheelchair.
The music remains dependable.
There were edgy, mocking passages of woodwind, impressionistic sections led by flute and harp, clattery percussive interpolations, and concluding all's-well-that-ends-well music which must be as close to a waltz as Britten ever came.
. correction for main arts page piece
Comedy Theatre..
By David Adams Buffalo, Lil and the Indians.
FIRST seen at the King's Head six years ago, Sheridan Morley's elegant and civilised entertainment Noel and Gertie now turns up at the Comedy in much revised form.
Gone is Mr Morley as presiding anchorman and the device of splitting the evening between actors and singers: instead we have Simon Cadell and Patricia Hodge evoking the platonic passion of Noel Coward and Gertrude Lawrence and giving us generous helpings of songs and scenes from the shows.
Considering that Coward and Lawrence only ever appeared together twice in adult life, in Private Lives and Tonight at 8.30, Mr Morley manages to make a little go a long way.
But he convinces one that, from their early days of teenage touring in Hauptmann's Hannele, they shared a mutual devotion to each other, an indefinable star quality and a passion for the strange, hermetic world of theatre.
Today we expect our stars to have social consciences and wide-ranging opinions.
Coward and Lawrence (though he was obviously the brighter, better-read and more inquisitive of the two) belong to an all-but vanished world in which celebrity, success and acclaim were seen as a means of validating one's existence.
Bringing past legends to life is not that easy but Simon Cadell is astonishingly successful as Coward.
He offers not so much an impersonation as an impression of the man.
But he offers a brilliant rendering of Don't Put Your Daughter On The Stage, Mrs Worthington rising to heights of boiling, brick-red rage on ‘She's a vile girl and uglier than mortal sin.’
He is mercurially skittish as the bell-bottomed tar in Red Peppers executing jaunty scissor-like leaps.
And in a scene from Blithe Spirit he adopts a look of frozen outrage that renders a simple line like ‘A woman in Cynthia Cheviot's position would hardly wear false pearls’ inexplicably funny.
Yet underneath it all he suggests there was in Coward a gregarious solitude (‘I am no good at love,’ he poignantly records) that slightly undercuts the show's thesis that he carried a lifelong torch for Ms Lawrence.
Gertrude Lawrence's magic is harder to resurrect.
Contemporary records suggest she possessed neither classic beauty nor a great voice: simply the built-in spotlight of the incandescent star.
She must also have been quite a handful judging by Coward's ironic telegram to a Broadway manager requesting 58 per cent of the gross for the task of restraining her from being ‘Grock, Beatrice Lillie, Theda Bara, Mary Pickford and Bert Lahr all at once.’
Patricia Hodge does not quite evoke the mixture of clown and vamp that list suggests.
Her forte is a cool restraint and ladylike sexiness.
But she is excellent in the play-extracts, lending Amanda in Private Lives just the right touch of acid mockery and hinting at a whole world of repressed longing as the suburban wife in Still Life (the embryonic version of Brief Encounter).
I doubt that she is much like the real Gertrude Lawrence but she is decidedly a class act.
Alan Strachan as director knits the whole show together neatly and Jonathan Cohen on piano is a suitably reticent accompanist.
It makes for a pleasant evening that reminds us once again of the slimline precision of Coward's comic dialogue and his habit of rendering heterosexual love in terms of recriminatory bickering.
Abergavenny.
Buffalo, Lil and the Indians.
By David Adams
MASQUERADE Theatre is a Christmas institution in Wales: a company that works in both English and Welsh, it specialises in an area of theatre that appeals directly to young people.
This must be remembered when watching a show like Buffalo, Lil and the Indians which, for all its manifest weaknesses, utterly engaged the audience at Pen-y-Pound Drama Centre in Abergavenny.
The rather tacky set, the lucklustre performances, the script from David Straun and Heather Williams that lurches from trite audience participation to over-the-head jokes (would any primary-school child get the one about water privatisation?), all didn't seem to matter as the company of four scampered around with their well-intentioned tale of how the white man destroyed the American Indians.
The kids loved the chants and the masks and puppets-usually Masquerade's strength, although here even these lacked the usual imagination-but really it could all have been so much better in almost every respect.
It stretched neither the company nor the audience.
That small-scale community touring doesn't have to look cheap or lack high-energy skills is evidenced by Theatr West Glamorgan, whose Vanessa is a marvellous display of ensemble performance, sparkling entertainment, political sophistication, sharp direction and smart comedy-even to a non-Welsh speaker.
Llanover Hall in Cardiff was as packed as most venues the company play and the enthusiastic applause must become almost tedious to the team.
Vanessa looks at the familiar mucky mix of local political wheeler-dealing and multinational corruption with a Welsh village finding that embracing the entente cordiale fools them into having their lake turned into a French chemical waste dump.
Their handling of socially relevant themes, with easy solutions shunned, is a lesson to others.
The Christmas show exclusively for adults is Cardiff Comedy Explosion's nightly cabaret in the Sherman Arena.
Again the fab four take on audience suggestions for a totally impromptu couple of hours.
A feature of their new show is a hilarious This Is Your Life, where they ad-lib a potted biography of a victim in the audience to a few hints given by the subject's so-called friends, and the Christmas Story enacted in a series of styles chosen by those there on the night-Joseph and Mary as a double glazing sales force, for example, sounds tasteless but it's all surprisingly inoffensive and very funny.
The band that felt it was time to go Rock/Pop.
By Robin Denselow FELT: Me And A Monkey On The Moon (EL Acme24).
MATHILDE SANTING: Breast And Brown (Megadisc MDC7890).
THE ROCHES: Speak (MCA MCG6071).
THE HOOTERS: Zigzag (CBS 465084).
KAOMA AND OTHERS: Lambada (CBS 466055).
MARGARETH MENEZES AND OTHERS: Lambada Brazil (Polydor 841580).
O SAMBA: Brazil Classics II, compiled by David Byrne (WEA 926019).
LITTLE RICHARD: The Speciality Sessions (Ace AboxCD1).
IT SEEMS appropriate to end the Eighties with the band that decided that this decade was quite enough.
Felt started out 10 years ago and recorded 10 albums before breaking up this week after a final show in their home town, Birmingham, thus concluding the curious master-plan that was apparently drawn up early in their career by the band's singer and song-writer, who is known simply as Lawrence.
Before departing, they recorded a final album that, in their typically quirky style, proves to be their best since the early days of Crumbling The Antiseptic Beauty, even if there are moments when Lawrence comes close to outclassing Morrissey in the annals of wimp rock.
He specialises in songs of self-pity and gloom, with stories of betrayal or parting enlivened a little by an autobiographical track like Mobile Shack, with its story of escape from Birmingham thanks to the arrival of New Wave.
What makes them interesting is the interplay between depressed singer and band that is capable of creating subtle guitar and synth textures, providing languid settings for a piece like Free, then pushing into country, or a blues riff (on Get Out Of My Mirror), and proves that it can really stretch out when given a chance, as at the end of New Day Dawning.
It is exactly the same tension that made The Smiths a success, and in their low-key way I suspect that Felt will keep some of the same cult appeal now they are gone.
A band like that survived because of the existence of indie labels that kept going in the Eighties even though many of their major acts like The Smiths, and now The Fall and Blue Aeroplanes, deserted them for the majors.
The indies also have a role in picking up those that once recorded for a major label, like the Dutch singer, Mathilde Santing.
She is the missing link between the European ballad and torch-song tradition and Anglo-American white soul, and she chooses her material bravely.
This selection covers everything from John Cale, Todd Rundgren and Roddy Frame to echoes of Brecht/Weill and Richard Rodgers, with a Philip Larkin poem added in along the way, and it works because of the versatility of her gentle but dramatic singing, and the elegant but sparse settings by the producer and pianist, Mimi Izumi Koyabashi.
She uses a touch of eastern exotica and a string quartet for the breathy, sensual, and intimate treatment of Frame's We Could Send Letters, and what sounds like an oriental aquatic effect on Harry Nilsson's witty Think About Your Troubles, but most songs rely solely and triumphantly on piano and voice.
From the majors, and the American market, there is more classy female minimalism from The Roches, the trio of New York sisters who started out in the folk scene and evolved a style that veers between thinking woman's pop and close-harmony experimentation.
Their new songs range from the rhythmic and tuneful Big Nuthin', with its gently cynical catalogue of the anticlimaxes of life, to an unaccompanied half-spoken, half-sung piece, The Anti-sex Backlash Of The Eighties, dealing wittily and angrily with sexual politics.
These ladies deserve careful listening, but there are patches, as on Nocturne, where the music is far less interesting than the well-written and atmospheric lyrics.
From the good-time side of the folky American market there is another solid set from The Hooters, one of those bands that would sound ideal in any bar-room, can be guaranteed work on any night of the year, but find it hard getting into the best-sellers.
They play the standard all-American folk-rock-country fusion, with the guitars dressed up with a dash of accordion, harmonica and brass, and they write good, solid songs that are tuneful, stirring, but never wildly original.
They are at their best when they take chances, throwing a dash of reggae and a muted heavy-metal riff into Don't Knock Till You Try It, and when they re-work an old folk standard, 500 Miles, which is now dressed up with a reggae beat, lap-steel guitar, and harmonica, new lyrics about Tiananmen Square, and the dreaded Peter, Paul And Mary still joining in.
Over in the dance and the world-music scenes, the fashion is for all things Brazilian.
Great local artists like Gilberto Gil have been trying for years to promote their country's music, but (as with the African-music boom) it has taken the combination of an enthusiastic American super-star and cosmopolitan French audiences to really make the change.
Brazil has been boosted both by David Byrne, whose new Latin big band made such an impression here last week, and the dance hit, Lambada, by Kaoma, which sold over a million and a half copies in France and became the best-selling European single of the year.
Between them, these two events introduced a vast new audience to the wildly sensual new Brazilian dance called the lambada, and the songs that go with it.
Brazilian music can usually be found only on specialist world-music labels, but suddenly there are three compilation albums released by the majors.
The best, Polydor's Lambada Brazil, consists almost exclusively of Brazilian, not French, lambada stars and includes a couple of tracks by the wonderful Margareth Menezes, who has been making such an impact performing with Byrne.
Her Alegria Da Cidade is light, urgent, funky, and brassy, while other tracks show how Caribbean styles have been mixed into the Brazilian melting pot.
This shows in the songs of exuberant performers like Luiz Caldez and Elba Ramelho, and there is a hint of reggae in the track by the now veteran Caetano Veloso.
The CBS compilation, which includes the massive Kaoma hit, includes more French lambada, with its throw-away echoes of European disco.
David Byrne's new compilation, O Samba, on WEA, is concerned with the earlier dance style, the samba, and comes complete with excellent sleeve-notes, glossary, and translation of the songs, which start with the late Clara Nunes's gently rousing, elegant treatment of a Yoruba legend from West Africa.
Byrne is a fan who has done his homework.
Finally, for rich veteran rockers who want a late Christmas present, there is a massive six-CD boxed set of Little Richard recordings from the mid-Fifties and concerts from the mid-Sixties.
Glorious stuff, of course, but one for those whose devotion verges on fanaticism, and are really ready for four studio takes of Ready Teddy and six versions of Good Golly Miss Molly.
Betty Caplan on the blossoming of an experimental theatre group Magdalena takes root.
THE MAGDALENA International Women's Experimental Theatre Project has just turned three.
Its birthday — its very existence — is being celebrated in a new book by Susan Basnett.
As is the way with most infants, its future is fraught with possibility and uncertainty.
Born in 1986 in Cardiff, it has spread across Europe and to North and South America and, as the author says in her introduction, ‘has also shifted focus from experimental theatre in the first instance to all forms of theatre in which women are involved’.
The original Cardiff festival in 1986 combined experimental improvisational work with an attempt to ‘show’ the kind of work being done — something criticised by some as irrelevant and impossible to achieve in just two weeks.
Even more important, perhaps, were the discussions about the notion of a women's aesthetic: again and again, the attempt to articulate the new and unspoken came up against the absence of an appropriate language.
In her manifesto, prime mover Jill Greenhalgh wrote: ‘There's something new and vital and female that is lying latent and untapped, trapped under thousands of years of patriarchal art, and you just can't quite grasp it.’
Fortunately this did not stop the women from trying, and Basnett, senior lecturer in Comparative Literature at the University of Warwick, describes in some detail the individual practitioners who set about the task.
Fifteen countries were represented by 30 women, each of whom had been invited on the basis of her contribution to theatre in her own country.
Their areas of expertise encompassed a wide range: Sandra Salmaso and Cinzia Mascherin from Italy devised a piece called No Man's Land, described by Mascherin as ‘an empty space, without border, beyond quiet’, based on work done with objects.
Recreating women and voice work were other options, addressing questions of women's voicelessness and silence.
The issue of woman as victim as opposed to woman as survivor was tackled head on by Polish director Zofia Kalinska whose work showing women as bearers of demonic energy culminated in the formation of the Magic Circle, which went on in 1988 to tour a collectively devised piece called Nominate Filiae.
The second part of the festival, which resulted in the final performance, raised vital questions about the way women relate to one another when they are free to make real choices.
The kind of arguments that have challenged the women's movement over 20 years had to be confronted in a practical manner: were the existing hierarchies justifiable?
Should women technicians once again be relegated to a lower rung of the ladder?
Why were women of colour excluded?
What was the proper role of the director in a truly egalitarian company of women?
Many of these problems were taken up again in September 1987 when Magna was established on a permanent basis in Cardiff during a three-day conference on A Women's Language in Theatre?
A follow-up meeting in December of that year acted upon suggestions made at the earlier gathering, and aimed to ‘set up opportunities for women to explore new approaches to theatre-making that more profoundly reflect their own experience rather than that of men’.
Since then, the work has continued to proliferate.
Basnett looks forward optimistically to the future which includes a meeting in Colombia planned for 1992.
And if some of the material in the book seems occasionally to verge on the utopian, it is worth reminding ourselves that, as Jan Montefiore says in Feminism and Poetry, ‘the value of utopias is that they enable us to imagine possibilities of difference for the brute contingent world’.
Magdalena, compiled and introduced by Susan Basnett, is published by Berg at £12.95.
PAGE wom
Lights, action, read ‘em!
Critic's choice Cinema..
By Derek Malcolm
THOSE SEARCHING around feebly to find things to give film buffs for Christmas ought to consider a few of the classic books on directors, stars, studios and the movies themselves.
These are not necessarily new, but they are among the best published in recent years.
An interest in the early days — the silent cinema, in fact — would be well served by Kevin Brownlow's The Parade's Gone By…
It is now out in paperback (WHAllen) and deserves the accolade of being both the easiest to read and the most informative book about the Hollywood of the 1920s, written by a real enthusiast.
Another enthusiast — sometimes rather more controversial in his opinions — is David Shipman, whose two volumes on The Great Movie Stars, divided into The Golden Years and The International Years, are also now out in paperback from Macdonald.
There is endless browsing to be had here and you don't have to agree with everything Shipman says to enjoy the experience.
Shipman's two-volume Story of the Cinema (Hodder and Stoughton) is also a very good read — the first volume goes up to Gone With The Wind and the second starts with Citizen Kane and reaches more or less the present day.
But here I find the opinions often less easy to take, though the wide scholarship and enthusiasm involved in the books is not in question.
Unfortunately, a good many books about the cinema published today are pretty inaccurate and fairly useless, but two which are not are The British Film Institute's Companion to the Western, edited by Ed Buscombe (Andre Deutsch) and Alain Silver; and Elizabeth Ward's Film Noir(Bloomsbury).
The Western book would be a magnificent present for anyone who likes the genre because it is not only a comprehensive guide to the films and film-makers, but also to the cultural background.
The Film Noir book is equally encyclopaedic as a reference work, and its opinions are sensitive, sensible and totally without those daft claims which even films as good as White Heat and The Woman in the Window can't really sustain.
Finally, there's Joel Finler's remarkable The Hollywood Story (Pyramid) which purports to tell you ‘everything you always wanted to know about the American movie business but didn't know where to look’.
The work involved in writing this summation must have been back-breaking, and certainly took years of research.
And the result is endlessly fascinating for dippers, with the kind of information included you simply can't find anywhere else.
Best films around London include Greenaway's The Cook the Thief His Wife and Her Lover, Soderburgh's sex, lies and videotape, Kieslowski's Short Film About a Killing, Branagh's Henry V, Lehmann's Heathers, Tavernier's Life and Nothing But and Peter Weir's Dead Poets Society.
Robin Williams, Dead Poets Society: see Critic's choice Virginia Mayo and James Cagney in Raoul Walsh's classic 1949 production of White Heat…even movies as good as this can't live up to the praise lavished on them by some film reference books: see Critic's choice Hear no equal, see no equal…
Kenneth Branagh, Paul Scofield and Emma Thompson in a scene from Branagh's production of Henry V: see Critic's choice Face at the window…
Sabine Azema in Bertrand Tavernier's Life and Nothing But: see Critic's choice
Birdies, butchers and fools They called Forman a Zionist and Menzel a pornographer — Moscow's stooges had no time for the Czech New Wave.
Now the banned films are back on the screens and the film-makers are on the streets.
Can they pick up the pieces?
Derek Malcolm reports from Czechoslovakia.
WE WERE in Prague and then Bratislava for British Film Week, organised months ago by the British Council, but now thrust inadvertently into the middle of a political, social and cultural revolution.
The first film was, appropriately enough, Cry Freedom.
And Sir Richard Attenborough was there to tell his audience that he felt as if he had come not just to the centre of Europe but of the world.
It was scarcely an ideal time for such an event, except that this revolution has been led by an artist and by students, and the Czechs, unlike the British, treat their writers, playwrights, film-makers and students with high seriousness.
If they didn't interfere in politics, they would be thought craven.
Besides, Sir Richard had made Gandhi, the film about a non-violent revolutionary not totally unlike their own Vaclev Havel.
This was the bond which gave him a warm and interested reception.
What he and we were curious about in turn was the present and future fate of the Czech rather than the British cinema.
No one who went to foreign language movies in the late Sixties will easily forget the extraordinary films that seemed to pour out of the state-owned studios of Czechoslavakia.
The Czech New Wave, exemplified by such popular classics as Jiri Menzel's Closely Observed Trains and Milos Forman's Firemen's Ball, and by other directors like Jan Nemec, Evald Schorm, Ivan Passer, Vera Chytilova, Jan Kadar and Jaromil Jires, conquered hearts as well as minds.
The movement was called ‘liberal bourgeois’ by some Marxist film-makers of non-Communist Europe (including Bertolucci), and accused of Titoism, cosmopolitanism, formalism and even ‘influencialism’by the shocked bureaucrats of its own country.
It was told that it consistently ridiculed ordinary people.
But it was its political and artistic daring, enhanced by the most attractively human of values, that the rest of us so admired —‘those little films’, someone very accurately said, ‘which are, as if by accident, important.’
And it was all financed by the very regime it surreptitiously criticised.
The movement ended abruptly when the Russian tanks rolled in and Dubcek fell.
In the spring of 1970, eight finished films were banned and 12 that were being shot were stopped.
Menzel was called a pornographer, Forman a Zionist and, later, to celebrate the first anniversary of the invasion, a book was published by a Stalinist hack called They Did Not Pass.
In it was a photograph of long-haired youths, some with cameras, giving the V-sign to the Russian tanks trying to disperse them with water cannon.
The caption read: ‘The sign the young provocateurs agreed upon — in two minutes we shall start the attack.’
The history of the Czech cinema since then reads like a frequently funny if terrible farce, mirroring that of the country as a whole.
SHORTLY after the Russians invaded, the famous Barrandov Studios, in which so many world-class directors had worked, were to be used for the making of a film called Factory Of Illusions, in which a young and idealistic graduate of the Film Academy arrives to find well-known film-makers of the New Wave drinking and whoring instead of making films, and almost succumbs to counter-revolution himself.
Meanwhile, a famous singer, much loved in the film world, who had kissed Dubcek, found a paste-up photograph of her and the former leader circulating around Prague.
The couple were naked and making love.
She started a court action which virtually proved what everybody knew already — that the picture was faked and distributed by ‘state authorities’, whereupon the case was adjourned indefinitely.
Such palpable absurdities have continued for some 20 years, despite the partial and cautious liberalisation of the past three or four.
In the late Seventies I interviewed Jiri Menzel, finally allowed out of the country of his birth after years of neglect, at the National Film Theatre.
I asked him through his interpreter whether he could now make the films he wanted again.
The answer was a warning kick under the table.
The interpreter, as I should have known, was his police minder.
Early this year, the Jakes government collected together the eight films banned outright in 1970, including Menzel's Skylarks On A String.
They had them sub-titled in order to be sold abroad for possible profit.
But they were not deemed fit for home consumption.
Now, as abruptly as the New Wave was blotted out, even from the official histories of the Czech cinema, everything has changed again.
The Berlin Festival in February will show Skylarks On A String and other once proscribed films, and Gilles Jacob of the Cannes Festival has asked Juraj Jakubisko, the best-known Slovak director, to put a newly shot ending on to his banned Birdies, Orphans And Fools.
But the question is — can the charm, humanity and audacity of the former New Wave be recreated in Czechoslovakia?
No, says Dusan Trancik, the Slovakian maker of seven features who has frequently got into trouble with the authorities.
That experiment cannot be repeated.
But there is still enough talent available, including that of Menzel and Forman (who is apparently returning from Hollywood to make another film at the Barrandov Studios) to push the Czech cinema into the limelight again.
THE first 10 years after Dubcek's fall were terrible for everyone,’ he says.
‘But once the authorities had clamped down, it was not a case of political Stalinism so much as bureaucratic perfidy and complete lack of imagination.
‘For instance, the man who, up to a short time ago, was chosen to select films from the West for showing in Slovakia, and to attend festivals like Cannes and Venice, was a butcher by trade.
He knew nothing, and he cared very little about film.
‘Yes, I know Antonin Dvorak was also a butcher.
But this one was different.
He was just a fool.
And if you have an industry run by cautious fools, it is almost worse than more obvious political censorship.
‘Those in charge of distribution here used to get hold of prints of movies like Rambo and Ghostbusters and invite their friends round to see them.
After which they would inveigh against them as decadent while ordering more of the same for their next well-attended private screenings.
It was total hypocrisy, and everyone was affected by it.
‘When you get louts like this advising you on your scripts and your films, you live in a state of complete frustration rather than actual fear.
‘For instance, when you asked the official you met to find you some film-makers to talk to, he rung me up and spoke to me for the first time for years.
He knows now his job is on the line and he's very nervous.’
Milan Tomsa, the student strike leader at the Prague Film School, is not at the moment much concerned about the future prospects of the Czech cinema.
‘We can't think about the future now,’ he says.
‘We're too concerned about the present.
We have to be out on the streets documenting the revolution and helping to forge our new democracy.
You have seen the difference in Czech television in just two weeks.
We have to keep that difference going.
‘Twenty years ago, when the crackdown came, our film-makers got much verbal encouragement from the West but no real support at all.
They felt very alone — my father tells me that.
Now we want real help.
We haven't got enough equipment to do what we should.
‘That's how the West can do something for us.
We need the base material — cameras, video equipment, everything.
If you really want to aid us this time round, tell everyone that.
Send the equipment to your embassy in Prague and they will get in touch with us.
We don't want to be left to fight alone again.’
WATCHING the crowds in Wenceslaus Square avidly reading the notices in every shop window about the progress of the revolution, it seemed inconceivable that the hard-liners could ever return.
But some of the film-makers we met are not so sure.
One of them said: ‘When the Communists took over after the war, some of the Fascists became the best Stalinists of all.
It will be the same now — everyone says they were either forced to join the Party, or were never members.
There are thousands of informers proclaiming a new devotion to Vaclev Havel.
We're in for a very difficult time and we must be prepared for it.
‘What we have to admit is that the system we are now overthrowing did give us something.
The socialist state nationalised film and gave film-makers much better potential opportunities.
As employees of the studios, we had a permanent salary and nobody was as concerned about box-office potential as in the West.
Graduates of the Film Academy had a direct route towards a career.
‘What the State expected in return was some sort of obedience and a loyalty which often ran directly counter to the truth.
If you offended, you could work your way back, as Jiri Menzel had to.
Yet in the end there was this awful conformity, of style as well as content.
In the world of socialist realism, surrealism is almost as terrible as espionage.
‘That's what we hated and in the end we found it intolerable.
We're fed up with telling lies on the screen.
We would rather have no help at all than continue to do that.’
Financed by the regime it surreptitiously criticised…
Jiri Menzel's Closely Observed Trains conquered hearts as well as headsPHOTOGRAPHS: JOHN CARTWRIGHT
Obituary: Rene Tavernier.
Human rights for writers:.
RENE Tavernier was a poet, writer, critic, resistance fighter, and father of the film maker Bertrand.
But my recollection of him will be as a friend and food expert.
He introduced me to good restaurants in Paris, good food in Lugano, and good wines in New York.
Most of all, he was a campaigner for human rights for writers all over the world.
His capacity to persuade people to pay attention to the plight of the less fortunate was constant.
At times it drove his audience to anger and boredom, but he got what he wanted.
Tavernier, born in Paris and schooled in Lyon, was introduced to literary interests early in his school life.
He published his first volume of poetry, De vous la merveille — the title borrowed from Malherbe — in 1937.
A second volume, Sens de la Solitude, followed a year later.
During the second world war he played an active role in the opposition to the German occupation, eventually joining the Resistance, and creating the magazine Confluence, which was rapidly banned, and became an early edition of French samizdat.
It was wound up in 1950, as Europe moved on to other things.
His Questions au soleil levant received the Grand Prix de Poesie de l'Academie Francaise, but although it awarded him medals, the Academy never granted him the membership that was his life's ambition.
Rene Tavernier's life was peppered with great occasions not just in PEN or in his election as international President.
He was elected president of French PEN in 1979 and immediately set about organising the world congress in Lyon.
Such names as Ba Jin, Susan Sonntag, Mario Vargas Llosa and many others were in Lyon in 1981.
And Rene was there to organise everything, including my joint press conference with John Peet, the Reuters man who ‘defected’ to East Berlin in 1950.
In Lyon, Rene celebrated the return to his city, and the victory of the Resistance with a grand PEN congress and an expert's appreciation of the restaurants.
It is that memory of him that will stay with many English and Scottish writers, and for which my wife and I will always be grateful.
He never did make it to the Academie, but being made international president of PEN, following Francis King, mattered a lot to him.
(By then he was already very ill: he called it ulcers, but it was cancer.)
He had narrowly beaten the Nigerian novelist, Chinua Achebe in May 1989 at the historic congress in Maastrich when the Soviet Union rejoined the writers' international organization after opposing PEN for nearly seventy years, and the way was opened for the Czechs and Slovaks to rejoin.
A great time, enjoyed in spite of his illness.
Andrew Graham-Yooll Rene Tavernier, born Paris, April 21, 1915; died November 30, 1989.
Barnum in the big top Critics' choice Theatre..
By Robin Thornber in Manchester
ONLY ONE show opens in London immediately after Christmas — the American musical, Barnum, begins a three-week season in a big top on Shepherd's Bush Green on December 27.
Former Blue Peter presenter, Peter Duncan, treads the high wire.
Let me offer a few seasonal recommendations.
For the whole family: A Midsummer Night's Dream (Barbican).
The most festive show in town.
Down in the forest everything stirs, especially Richard McCabe's sinister Puck and David Troughton's outsize Bottom.
Whale (Lyttelton).
David Holman's ecological thriller with Emil Wolk as an airborne, interventionist raven.
The Shaughran (Olivier).
Welcome return of Boucicault's romantic melodrama.
Cinderella (Theatre Royal, Stratford East).
With pantomime a dwindling art-form (dominated by superannuated sportsmen and holidaying soap-stars), David Cregan and Philip Hedley usually nod towards traditional story-telling.
A Christmas Carol (Young Vic).
David Holman strikes again with a faithful Dickens adaptation; recommended by our own Richard Bates.
For mid-teens and upwards: Buddy (Victoria Palace).
Exhilarating tribute to the great Buddy Holly.
Highlight is Gareth Marks as the Big Bopper singing Chantilly Lace.
Mainly for adults: The Liar (Old Vic).
Jonathan Miller's delightful production of rare Corneille comedy.
Alex Jennings as the compulsive fantasist.
Jeffrey Bernard is Unwell (Apollo).
Peter O'Toole's happiest hour as the Soho scribe looking back on a mis-spent life.
Miss Saigon (Drury Lane).
A good musical about a serious subject — the emotional consequences of the chaotic American exodus from Vietnam.
Strong production by Nicholas Hytner.
The Cherry Orchard (Aldwych).
Unusually buoyant rendering of Chekhov by Sam Mendes.
Judi Dench a memorably flirty Ranevskaya.
Ma Rainey's Black Bottom (Cottesloe).
August Wilson's gutsy play on exploitation and oppression.
Fine work by Hugh Quarshie and Clarke Peters.
By Robin Thornber in Manchester
THE LAST production in Leeds Playhouse's ‘temporary’ home — a converted sports hall for the last 19 years — opens tonight.
John Harrison directs Twelfth Night, his 24th Shakespeare in 18 years at the theatre.
In March, the company moves to West Yorkshire Playhouse, where Harrison will direct two more shows before handing over to administrator Will Weston and director Jude Kelly.
Alexandra Mathie plays Viola and Saskia Downes is Olivia.
Simon Higlett designs.
Manchester Royal Exchange has Una Stubbs in Oliver Goldsmith's She Stoops to Conquer, directed by James Maxwell, also opening tonight.
Sheffield Crucible has Kenneth Grahame's The Wind in the Willows, directed by Paul Whitworth, in the studio from tomorrow and York Theatre Royal opens Aladdin and Liverpool Empire, Cinderella.
Recommended as best of the classy kids' shows: The Red Balloon, Albert Lamorisse's Fifties French fable of a small boy and his big red friend, adapted and stylishly staged by Anthony Clark at Contact Theatre in Manchester for primary school age.
Best riot for teenagers: John Doyle's Sixties nostalgia version of The Sleeping Beauty, with arm-waving singalong and fast-forward time-travelling, at the Liverpool Everyman.
Agnew's Salute to Turner exhibition ends on Thursday evening and not Friday as stated in yesterday's Guardian.
Bids are invited in aid of The National Trust for paintings by 50 contemporary artists.
Paul Hipp, David Howarth, David Bardsley in Buddy: Choice Things that go bump in the night…
Colin Farrell in A Christmas Carol: see Critics' choice Things that go bang…
Stephen Rea and Michael O'Connor in The Shaughraun: see choice
Lust and irony in the alien corn Randy extraterrestrials and delinquent Australians feature as Derek Malcolm reviews the pick of the week's new releases.
JULIEN Temple, maker and some say perpetrator of Absolute Beginners, possibly the last ambitious British musical we'll see on the screen, has taken things easier with Earth Girls Are Easy (Prince Charles etc, PG).
This is a kind of ironic musical send-up of the life and times of the inhabitants of San Fernando Valley, on the other side of the Santa Monica mountains from Hollywood, and kitsch is quite deliberately its middle name.
Tony Garnett produces for Temple in California, and it has to be as far as he has ever got from the Ken Loach films with which he was associated before going to America.
The whole operation does not so much aspire to style as do what it pleases with it.
It's like a B-movie from a past of happier memories, turned against itself by the one British director who truly understands the mode.
Temple has made some of the best music videos that exist.
Here, he brings that short-breathed talent to as effective account as he sometimes did in The Great Rock ‘n Role Swindle, his first film.
The story is simple, not to say simple-minded.
A group of aliens from outer space crashland in a private swimming pool.
What they find on earth is more unearthly than they are.
And Jeff Goldblum, the spaceship driver, falls in love with Geena Davis, whose pool it is.
Thus are the stars of Cronenberg's The Fly reunited in dramatically different circumstances.
The film's musical score and song and dance numbers are surprisingly its weakest ingredient, though the shooting and editing of Earth Girls Are Easy is often highly original-especially the black and white dream sequence that's a model of its kind and almost a music video in itself.
Slaphappy and occasionally slapdash as the film sometimes seems at its more louche moments, as a dramatic entity its energy, irony and visual wit make one forgive almost all.
Contrary to persistent rumour, Kylie Minogue's first film, The Delinquents (Warner West End, 12, from Boxing Day) is not the flaccid cods-up we might have expected.
It's too long, too slow and in no way original.
But it is carefully made by Chris Thomson, and doesn't destroy the Fifties charm of Criena Rohan's book.
She is, incidentally, the aunt of Pat Cash and can write like he can rally.
What is more, Kylie herself profits rather than suffers from her not specially glamorous girl-next-door looks and produces an unstudied and effective portrait of a young, underage provincial girl who falls for Charlie Schlatter's equally youthful sailor and gets dubbed a deliquent.
Thomson recreates the Australian Fifties with more than a cursory skill and catches the censorious, more petit bourgeois than the English tone of the times well enough to convince.
He is aided in this by good actors like Angela Punch McGregor as the girl's mother and Bruno Lawrence (so good in New Zealand's in Smash Palace) as the boy's sea-faring mentor.
As for the two principals, they play well if not brilliantly together as the star-crossed lovers.
And the fact that the film is not frightened of its sexual aspects but treats them with some taste is another point in its favour.
I hope the rather hard 12 certificate won't annoy the teenies too much.
No one in his right mind would call the Delinquents a memorable piece of work.
It is not, however, in any way discreditable, whatever it lacks in flair and narrative drive.
‘Where did you come from?,’ asks someone to the Swamp Thing in The Return Of The Swamp Thing (Cannons, Oxford Street and Panton Street, 12).
Quick as a flash, the Thing replies: ‘The bog.’
One would sincerely wish, this being the Yuletide season, that Mr Jim Wynorski's film is equipped with a sense of humour.
But by the end of 90 minutes one is a little doubtful.
There are, however, clear attempts to make us giggle, like when the Swamp Thing (Dick Durock) conceives a passion for Heather Locklear's leading lady but tells her that he can't give her the love she wants because he's a plant.
‘That's okay,’ she says, ‘I'm a vegetarian.’
Well, it just about passes.
It is a bit of a labour seeing this daft C movie last thing before Christmas, especially since it is based on the DC Comic series, which was beautifully drawn and imaginatively based on the Beauty and the Beast story.
Unwisely, as it turns out, the credits display the real thing, which is at least a dozen times better than this carelessly silly concoction.
In it is Louis Jourdan, once fabulous-looking but now not just a shadow of his former self.
He looks as if he has had one facelift too many.
He plays the evil Dr Arcane, whose daughter loves the Thing, and it is painful to watch so many bad lines falling on untilled soil.
Greetings if they are still with us to Len Wein and Berni Wrightson, originators of the comic strip.
They were better than this lot will ever know how to be.
Kylie Minogue: an effective performance in her film debut
Sarah Gristwood finds Julien Temple still in musical mode Why Earth Girls wasn't so easy.
THE gap between Absolute Beginners and Earth Girls Are Easy seems to have been rather a long one.
Industry shake-ups cursed Earth Girls with a protracted delay between the cutting room and the screen.
But much, in any case, must be allowed to a man who is single-handedly fighting against the times.
Julien Temple takes musicals seriously —‘a unique and total form of cinema’.
His first feature was The Great Rock And Roll Swindle, the story of the Sex Pistols.
Some of his more notable work has been done on music videos, a form he is far from despising.
(You shoot for three weeks, he points out, and three weeks later your work is being distributed to an audience larger than any cinema film short of Batman could hope to reach.)
He admires the old classic musicals for their spectacle if not their storyline, and says that Vincente Minelli ‘had a camera like a hawk after a mouse’.
And while he says that he is prepared to go on doing musicals until he has one that really works, he would probably not agree with that picture of himself as fighting against the tide.
As he sees it, the crest of the wave is coming right his way.
‘The energy and excitement that music videos have caused in a young audience has to be consumated into musical film.’
In Absolute Beginners he tried to explore the energy of London in the Fifties.
In Earth Girls, it's California in the Eighties.
‘Earth Girls,’ says Temple, ‘is about a culture in which the make-over is a tribal ritual, one which boasts tanning booths you can dance in.’
He describes the San Fernando Valley, where the film ‘These kids may be forgetting how to read, but visually they are very sophisticated’.
is set, as ‘a strange Utopia of people who can vote but can't think.’
One of the more memorable song titles from his film is I Like Them Big and Stupid.
(‘What kind of man does a lot for me? /Superman with a lobotomy.’)
But that doesn't mean he's entirely dismissive.
‘These kids may be forgetting how to read, but visually they are very sophisticated, which makes a playground for film-makers,’ he says.
‘It is a culture of our times — and I don't feel happy ignoring it.’
His next film is a ‘character mystery’— not a musical — about Weegee, the famous news photographer of the Depression years, named for his ability to arrive at the scene of a crime with a speed which suggested the use of an ouija board.
Casting is still uncertain — Mickey Rourke has been ‘on and off — and off.’
But shooting should begin during the spring in New York.
In one way Weegee is the film Temple has wanted to do for years.
‘I first saw his pictures during the punk period and they seemed to have a similar punch, a thriller realism.’
In another, it's a temporary aberration, the straight film he needs to do just to prove he can.
He is currently finishing the script for Big Bad Apple, to be set in New York during the late 1990s.
Oh yes — it's a musical.
Temple is not deterred by the fact that Earth Girls did what he describes as ‘not terribly’ at the box office in the States.
‘The secret to making musicals,’ he says, ‘is to keep the costs down.’
Presumably, it is a truth he came to realise with the experience of Absolute Beginners behind him.
‘If you can make a film that makes its money back, you can justify making another.’
The toons are taking over the show Bob Swain on animation after the Roger Rabbit revolution.
IF YOU thought Max Headroom was just some crazy dream, think again.
There are people out there who really do see him as the pioneer of a computer-generated escape from reality.
By the end of the nineties, we could be set for the first Oscars awarded to synthetic actors.
Although Mr Headroom was actually flesh and blood posing as the unreal thing, there are plenty of computer animation specialists who think he had the right idea.
The trick now is to remove the human element altogether and let artificial intelligence take care of the rest.
Pioneering work a few years ago by Keith Waters at Middlesex Polytechnic experimented with a computer-generated version of Spitting Image.
The advances in synthesising realistic facial expressions were highly impressive.
At about the same time, Nadia Thalmann began work on a new project at the University of Geneva, animating synthetic actors using artificial intelligence and robotics.
A short film called Galaxy Sweetheart, starring a synthesised Marilyn Monroe, demonstrates that the theory is well on its way to being proved.
The possibilities opened up by such work are unlimited.
But whether artificial intelligence turns out to be good enough for the movie makers is likely to be another matter.
The history of computer graphics in film production has not been the smoothest.
Over-confidence in the early days has led to a surfeit of caution ever since.
The first major attempt to use computer animation in a feature film was largely down to the novelty of the medium itself.
Tron was released in 1982, using computer animation to rescue a poor script.
As the setting was inside a series of computer games, there was no real requirement to go beyond the ‘computer look.’
Realism wasn't really on the agenda for the time being.
At about the same time, the computer graphics lab at the New York Institute of Technology was working on what it ambitiously claimed would ultimately be the first full-length computer-generated feature, The Works.
The new three-dimensional worlds and creatures were truly mind-shattering.
But like Tron, it could go no further than creating a transparently synthetic world.
Appetites were whetted among those working on the Tron project and a host of computer animation specialists sprang up in California looking for a piece of the Hollywood action.
The most ambitious of tham was Digital Productions, installing a mighty Cray XMP supercomputer to take care of the number crunching.
About 20 minutes' worth of space-age special effects were created for the 1984 movie The Last Starfighter.
Whereas the Star Wars films had already hit the mark with computer-controlled model shots of space ships, DP took things a stage further by building the entire star fleet in the Cray's memory.
Scenes using the ships were then animated and shot at high resolution on to 35mm film.
Although the film was finished, the cost finally pulled Digital Productions under — together with other Hollywood hopefuls — in the big US computer animation crash of 1986.
The approach has generally been both more realistic and more viable since those days.
The current crop of releases includes two movies that demonstrate the reality today of computer graphics in film, making significant but very different uses of the technology.
The Abyss builds on the heritage of computer special effects, while Oliver and Company offers a showcase for the latest technical additions to the classic Disney school of animation.
Industrial Light and Magic's construction of a realistic creature made of water in The Abyss is the kind of job the ‘synthetic reality’ wing of the computer animation business has been waiting for.
Unlike all those old spaceships, there is no way you could have done this without using advanced computer graphics.
Not only is the creature convincingly modelled and animated, but ray tracing and lighting effects are used to give accurate refraction and reflection so that it really does look as if it is made of water.
Computer graphics should now make the same kind of inroads into feature film production that they already have in television.
With its lower resolution, television proved an easier first target for electronic special effects.
Cheap high-resolution input and output devices will soon ensure the same kind of revolution in the cinema.
You might have thought that the last bastion of resistance to computers would come from the classic craft environment of hand animation.
In fact, computers play a leading role in a great deal of cartoon production these days.
Some 11 minutes of the latest Disney feature, Oliver and Company, use computer-generated elements.
This does not include the characters themselves, but that wouldn't now be such a giant leap to take.
Scenes are also still hand-coloured in order to give them the classic Disney feel, but developments in automatic colouring systems could well change this before too long.
Of course it was Roger Rabbit who, last year, brought animated feature films back from the dead.
The secret of that film's success was the realistic merging of the cartoon world and live action — an achievement that was once again down to clever computer effects at Industrial Light and Magic.
But why go to all that trouble to make a 2D character appear solid when you could generate it on a computer in 3D in the first place?
It shouldn't be too long before we get an answer in the shape of the first computer animation feature films.
All the smart money for the first to finally come up with the goods is on John Lasseter of Pixar, the perennial star of animation festivals and the winner of the 1989 animation Oscar for the short film Tin Toy.
Having cut his teeth at Disney Studios, Lasseter has developed a reputation with a series of shorts over the past five years which have brought together the very best aspects of hand and computer animation, creating something quite special in the process.
His latest film is a knockabout tribute to the cartoon greats called Knick Knack.
It's likely to be his last film made purely on a research budget.
A production company has been set up at Pixar producing commercials and Lasseter is now predicting a fully computer-generated movie within the next three or four years.
It's time for the synthetic actors to start learning their lines.
Computer graphics in feature film production will be discussed at the Imagina conference on new images in Monte Carlo, February 6-8.
Contact: INA, 4 Avenue de l'Europe, 94366, Bry Sur Marne, France.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE mc1
Adam Sweeting on why Prince's dancing sensation is aiming for stardom-without him Cat goes for the cream.
IS THERE life after Prince?
Cathy Glover, the Chicago-born dancer who shot to prominence on Prince's Sign O The Times tour, is in the process of finding out.
It hasn't been easy.
‘It was pretty difficult to break away from Prince,’ she says.
‘It seemed like it was the hardest decision I ever had to make in my life.
I used to see him every day, basically, every night, just working with him in the studio and stuff, and I think it will always be there, thinking of him and everything.
‘But it was just a decision I had to make under the circumstances I was given.
I couldn't work in those circumstances, so I decided this was the right time if I really wanted to do something with my solo career, just break loose completely.’
But she doesn't really look as though she's broken loose.
Dressed in vivid orange, with black lettering down her legs and wearing one of Prince's big heart-shaped mirrors on her sleeve, she could be the same girl who blew into town with the spectacular Lovesexy roadshow last year.
She's even wearing a Batman ring on her left hand.
The Minneapolis Marvel has left an indelible imprint on her.
When Prince and his band played their after-hours show at the Camden Palace on Cat's birthday, Prince gave her a cake with 26 candles on, with the message ‘Happy Birthday Darling’ in chocolate icing.
He even sang Happy Birthday.
The speculation, inevitably, was that Cat was Prince's new girlfriend, but she insists that their relationship was strictly professional.
She was chief dancer and choreographer, he was bandleader and strategy-maker.
Prince, she suggests, never leaves the recording studio long enough to have time for anything romantic like a candelit dinner or taking lady-friends to the movies.
Which still doesn't quite explain why, on the Lovesexy sleeve, Cat is represented by the shape of a heart.
Somewhere along the line, Cat and Prince's Paisley Park organisation couldn't see eye to eye.
The original plan was for her to make a solo album on the label, produced by Prince and featuring songs written by Prince.
But Cat wanted more input of her own, which led to her departure from his Minneapolis HQ.
‘We had a disagreement about it, we didn't actually fall out,’ she backtracks.
‘Of course I wanted him to produce me, I love his work, but I only wanted him to produce half the album and I wanted to work with other producers.
I felt I had music inside me that I wanted people to hear.
I didn't just wanna be put in a chair, given some lyrics to read and say ‘that's it.’
‘Put it like this.
If I did it and it didn't come out as good as I thought, or if I failed, then I'll deal with that, but until I take that chance I'll never know.
I'm really confident and positive about my music, it's really energetic and it's fun music, and I think a lotta people need that these days.’
The first evidence of Cat's ‘I felt I had music inside me that I wanted people to hear.
I didn't just wannabe put in a chair, given some lyrics to read and say ‘that's it.’.
own sound is the new single Catwoman.
It's a reasonable enough slice of hyperactive club-pop, featuring roaring guitars, a tense, busy beat, and Cat's imprecations to ‘dance all night long.’
The snag is it could be almost anyone, and if I were Neneh Cherry or Stock, Aitken or Waterman, I don't think I'd be losing sleep over it.
But there's an entire album to follow in the New Year, called I Am Energy, produced by Tim Simenon of Bomb The Bass.
When she came to London with Prince, Cat was impressed by the local music-types and by their willingness to find new sounds and try anything.
In the States, the emphasis is on sticking to the tried and true.
But despite a guest appearance by Jack Nicholson, and the assistance of the ingenious Simenon (a man so uninfatuated by Prince and all his works that he fell asleep during the Sign O The Times movie), does Cat have the creative wherewithal to make it as a solo act?
There's no doubting her dance credentials.
She remembers being in a kids' dance troupe called the Wee Winkies when she was a seven-year-old in Chicago, she enjoyed a run of successes on the TV talent show Star Search, and she was eventually spotted by Prince dancing in a Los Angeles nightclub.
As a writer and singer, though, she has ground to make up.
Being one of Prince's chosen women has its drawbacks.
Jill Jones, for instance, recorded an album for Paisley Park with Prince as co-producer and guest songwriter.
It sounded like Purple Rain Falls Again.
This was the kind of thing Cat was worried about.
‘Jill Jones's album had been on the shelf for so long that when it did come out, it sounded old,’ she reveals.
‘It was recorded during the 1999/Purple Rain days.
But Jill is very talented, she's going to be really big once she gets her music together.’
Obviously.
Consider, then, Wendy & Lisa.
As Prince's sidepersons, they featured prominently in the Purple Rain movie, and evidently contributed substantially to the Little ‘Un's sound of the period.
Their subsequent career has met with approval from punters and critics, yet there's that lingering feeling that they're just chips off the Master's block.
There's no getting round the fact that Prince's powerful mythology can create starlets in its own image.
Sheena Easton has been shrewd enough to ride Prince's coat-tails just so far and no further, without letting her identity be submerged.
Sheila E, Prince's drummer, had already established her musician's credentials before she joined him, though it remains to be seen where she goes from here.
Cat has high hopes, though.
‘At first everyone thought I was gonna sound like Prince.
I go ‘no no no, this is what I wanna do, this is Cat.’
I'm not perfect, I know.
I'm working on it, but I'm not perfect.’
Well, it's a start.
OVERNIGHT FILE
Trivial treats from a playful Puccini Classical.
By Edward Greenfield The Unknown Puccini-Domingo/Rudel.
CBS MK 44981.
Joan Sutherland Prima Donna Assoluta, recordings 1959-1972.
Decca 425 605-2.
Faure: La Chanson d'Eve and 18 other songs-Baker/ Parsons.
Hyperion CDA 66320.
Favourite Encores for String Quartet-Delme Quartet.
Helios CDH 88038.
The Carol Album, Seven Centuries of Christmas Music-Parrott/Taverner Consort, Choir and Players.
EMI CDC 749 809-2.
Taverner: Western Wynde Mass, Tallis: Missa Salve Intemerata Virgo-Guest/St John's College Choir.
EMI Eminence CD-EMX 2155.
Bach: Violin Concertos in E and A minor, Double Violin Concerto, Violin and Oboe Concerto-King/Mackintosh/ Wallfisch/Goodwin/ King's Consort.
Hyperion CDA 66380.
Saint-Saens: Carnival of the Animals, Bizet's Children's Games, Ravel: Mother Goose -Wordsworth/LSO.
IMP PCD 932.
Tchaikovsky: Romeo and Juliet, Francesca da Rimini, 1812, Marche Slave-Edwards/ RLPO.
EMI Eminence CD-EMX 2152.
Horowitz At Home.
DG 427 772-2.
HERE for Christmas are some lighter offerings, only one of them seasonal but all of them in their different ways highly recommendable.
The Unknown Puccini has Placido Domingo in disguise on the front cover.
Sitting nonchalantly in straw boater and white suit and sporting a moustache, he sits in the Galleria at Milan, masquerading as the composer himself.
This is a celebration of Puccini in trivial mood, a collection of songs written for odd occasions at odd moments through his career.
Most of them are early, including two conventional religious pieces and a charming salon song written for a magazine.
In it, tongue in cheek, the composer signs off with his name on the final cadence.
It later became the Act 3 finale of La Boheme.
Another song celebrates the launching of a friend's motor yacht, and a tiny fragment, Casa mia, was written for a house agent to use, when Puccini wanted to sell his house.
Domingo gives them all, however trivial, golden treatment.
Joan Sutherland, Prima Donna Assoluta, is one of the most cherishable CD collections yet of La Stupenda's great recordings, though it comes on Decca's bargain label.
The item to covet most is the earliest and the most extended, the whole of the Lucia di Lammermoor mad scene in the recording Sutherland made in 1959 soon after her first Covent Garden triumph when her voice was at its freshest.
Other items include a ravishing account of ‘Qui la voce’ from Bellini's Puritani done in 1960, the end of Act 1 of Verdi's La Traviata, the Bell Song from Delibes' Lakme and a rare Donizetti aria once used as a substitute item in Lucia.
Dame Janet Baker may have announced her retirement from public performance, but she still plans to make one or two recordings.
This representative, beautifully chosen collection of Faure songs is the first issue to appear since her announcement, and it whets the appetite for many more.
The centre-piece of her collection of 28 songs is the cycle, La chanson d'Eve, late settings of symbolist poems with Faure at his subtlest and most refined.
Before that the chronological sequence of songs starts with a charming Gounod-like salon piece, and follows the composer's development, after which the collection is crowned by the best-loved Verlaine settings.
Favourite Encores for String Quartet brings together 15 lollipop items to defy any idea that this is an austere medium, with the Delme Quartet making persuasive advocates.
The obvious piece, Schubert's Quartetsatz is missing, but that is very well covered on record already, and most of these little charmers are neglected on disc, even Hugo Wolf's deliciously sparkling Italian Serenade.
Other items range from the Haydn-Hofstetter Serenade once used as the Music in Miniature signature tune and Tchaikovsky's Andante cantabile to Puccini's Crisantemi and two delightful folk-song settings by Frank Bridge.
Helios is the mid-price label published by Hyperion.
The Carol Album is a carol record with a difference.
Puccini: A celebration Andrew Parrott with his Taverner Consort, Choir and Players has gone back to medieval sources, and devised a sequence not just of carols in more robust settings than is common but of instrumental pieces like the March of the Kings.
That uses a theme which Bizet much later cribbed for his L'Arlesienne music.
There is an abrasiveness about the Parrott approach, anything but charming in a conventionally cooing way, which is most refreshing.
Strong, virile performances of two of the finest of all Tudor settings of the Mass come from the choir of St John's College Cambridge on a label not normally associated with early music, mid-price EMI Eminence.
The Western Wynde Mass of Taverner was one of the pieces which first alerted non-specialist listeners to the glories of Tudor church music.
What was always striking was the emotional undertow to Taverner's polyphonic writing, more obviously involving than the ethereal Palestrina.
That involvement is well caught by the St John's Choir, bringing out the ingeniously woven repetitions of the Western Wynde theme, used as a ground through the whole Mass.
It helps that the song itself is sung as a prelude to the performance.
Tallis's Missa Salve Intemerata Virgo from a generation later, is a so-called ‘parody mass’ based on one of the composer's own most extended motets.
Though the tenor part was originally missing, it has been faithfully restored by analogy with the motet to make a glorious addition to the recorded repertory of Tallis's music.
Bach's violin concertos have been well-treated on record, but this new version from Hyperion using period instruments is exceptional.
Until now period performances have tended to be abrasive and to whizz through the slow movements, making even the sublime Largo of the Double Concerto into a trivial siciliana.
Catherine Mackintosh and Elizabeth Wallfisch with Robert King and the King's Consort without sentimentality allow themselves a more relaxed view.
Though purists may object, the performances of all four concertos on the disc spring to life, fast movements as well as slow, and will equally delight those who would normally choose an account on modern instruments.
Besides the Double Concerto and the two solo Concertos in E major and A minor the disc includes the delightful Concerto for Violin and Oboe reconstructed from the Double Keyboard Concerto in C minor, with the oboist Paul Goodwin joining Catherine Mackintosh.
It makes an ideal coupling for children of all ages to have three French masterpieces on a single disc-not just Saint-Saens' Carnival of the Animals, but Bizet's Children's Games and Ravel's Mother Goose, all in fresh, well-sprung performances from the LSO under the ballet conductor, Barry Wordsworth.
The Saint-Saens comes in the chamber version using single strings, with its wit well caught and the Swan done with stylish restraint.
The Bizet is given a sparkling performance too, while generously the Ravel comes in the complete ballet version, even more hauntingly atmopheric than the usual suite.
Excellent sound on the mid-price IMP label.
EMI Eminence is also promoting completely new orchestral recordings for its mid-price label, and Sian Edwards in her first major recording draws brilliant performances from the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra of the three most popular Tchaikovsky overtures, Romeo and Juliet, Francesca da Rimini and 1812 plus Marche Slave.
The vivid recording helps to bring out the degree of refinement that Miss Edwards finds even in 1812, without losing anything in dramatic bite.
These are performances to make you forget these are pieces usually treated as potboilers.
Horowitz At Home is the master's very last recording, capturing him at his most relaxed, when here he is playing in his drawing-room on his own favourite Steinway.
Unexpectedly three of the seven items are of Mozart-an early little sonata which he magicks into the status of masterpiece, as well as the late B minor Adagio and Rondo in D. The best-known of Schubert's Moments Musicaux, the little F minor, is given a chirpily personal reading, before he tackles three Liszt pieces, the Fantasy based on Schubert's Serenade as well as the Valses-Caprices nos 6 and 7.
On the cover Horowitz himself beams at us like a naughty gnome, and that is just the way his irrepressible musical personality comes over in the performances.
OVERNIGHT FILE
Last exit to Frith Street.
By Norman Shrapnel Hazlitt: A Life, by Stanley Jones (Oxford, £35)‘W.
ELL, I've had a happy life’— as Hazlitt may not have said after all, in which case bang goes the cheeriest of all the Famous Last Words.
At least, Stanley Jones mentions in his deeply interesting new biography that doubts have been cast on the authenticity of the celebrated exit line, though without actually vouching for it he considers it just what Hazlitt would have said.
Would he?
Not, surely, on the evidence of an angst-racked life as painstakingly marshalled here.
A man of his far from sanguine temperament would hardly want to go through all that again.
As for last words, there are some fully-authenticated late ones addressed to an editor which sound more convincing: ‘I wish to God you could let me have £5 more on account.’
Worrying his head off, scratching about for the rent, weathering one disappointment after another — it seems to have been like that all the way.
Hazlitt has not been short of biographers, but before reading Jones I never felt I had begun to know the man, or formed any satisfying conception of his obviously contradictory nature.
After reading Jones I still don't know him but at least begin to recognise the sort of person he was.
Self-contradiction is natural in the human make-up; inconsistencies are not worrying in themselves, so long as they aren't planted by memoir-writers or biographers putting down other biographers.
The personality contradictions have in no way been ironed out; if anything they emerge more starkly.
Hazlitt remains a baffling man.
The appeal of this closely-worked new study is that it presents him as a comprehensive human being.
The contradictions fall into something like a natural order of things, in a flamboyant era when the natural was notalways easy to come by.
Hazlitt, as he nervously emerges here, is the ordinary mixed-up man confronting the hero-figure of the romantic revival, diffident amid the posturing.
Though not sure whether he wanted to be a painter or a writer he knew he was no Haydon, the fashionable golden boy of the day, the ‘angry young man of romantic art.’
There was a gulf between the truculence of his views and the introversion of his behaviour.
While others were being lionised he conducted himself like a lamb or even a mouse.
He was as little at home in the country as in town; he believed ardently in social freedom but its ambiguities made him equally ill at ease with all classes.
Anyone setting out to keep tracks on Hazlitt must indeed find it a cat-and-mouse exercise.
The elusive creature may be successfully trailed for a time, then disappear for months and even years.
He seems to have had the strongest instinct for cover.
And always he was scratching for crumbs.
His grander friends had to eat too but set their claims higher.
Not for him the elevation and security of Wordsworth's appointment as His Majesty's Distributor of Stamps for the County of Westmorland.
Hazlitt found the humbler job of reporting parliament for the Morning Chronicle; we find him describing how one MP rose to a parliamentary occasion by ‘soaring into mediocrity,’ a joke any modern sketchwriter would be proud to use and probably has.
Often he seems out of his period and the more attractive for it.
He professed to be unnerved by Wordsworth's towering self-esteem, which he judged a form of dementia because Wordsworth himself considered that nobody else was elevated enough to measure it.
This sounds like a satirical whim ahead of its time, and certainly well beneath its victim's cloud-capped head.
He could be Proustian: ‘It is better to desire than to enjoy — to love than be loved.’
Yet although Haydon mocked his ‘passionate timidity’ there was plenty of action in the amatory field — no ambiguity there, even if his style fell short ofByronic.
Hazlitt confesses a preference for ‘humble beauties, servant-maids and shepherd-girls, with their red elbows, hard hands, black stockings and mob caps.’
This sounds uncharacteristically bold but he knew when to take time off from his introversion.
And although followed diligently by Mr Jones along many a fascinating track he seems to have won out in the end and disappeared from view.
‘The obscurity which enshrouds many earlier moments of his life becomes well-nigh impenetrable in his last years,’ Mr Jones finds.
He went on writing busily in the journals which employed him, the Edinburgh Review and others.
There were the words, as large as life and often twice as sane.
But of the man, scarcely a trace.
Even so, the story ends on a note of macabre paradox.
He died in Frith Street, at one of various lodgings after his second wife had left him.
For several days his body was ‘thrust aside, hidden under a piece of furniture by his landlady, so that she might not lose the chance of showing the room to a prospective new lodger.’
Hazlitt: large as life, twice as saneENGRAVING: THOMAS BEWICK
OVERNIGHT FILE
Paperbacks.
By David Bodanis Kowtow! by William Shawcross (Chatto Counter Blasts, £2.99).
Dirty Water, by Judith Cook (Unwin, £4.99).
Manufacturing Consent: The Political Economy of the Mass Media, by Edward S. Herman and Noam Chomsky (Pantheon New York, $14.95) How to Shit in the Woods: An Environmentally Sound Approach to a Lost Art, by Kathleen Meyer (Ten Speed Press, UK distributor: Airlift Book Company, £4.95)
TWO psychiatrists are in a lift.
One is relaxed, the other dishevelled.
The dishevelled one says: ‘How can you look so comfortable, after all the grief our patients give us?’
And the first one answers, surprised: ‘Who listens?’
Polemicists do not like this joke.
William Shawcross says clearly, with simple words in only 57 pages of fairly large print, why Britain should take Hong Kong refugees after the Chinese takeover if needed.
It would be good for the Hong Kong citizens, and it would be inconsistent for Thatcher not to do this, since she has said, for the Falklands, that a people should be able to choose their own government, and we shouldn't give in to dictatorships.
Although I'm persuaded, Thatcher's government is probably not going to listen; nor will most Britons.
Where is it written that Thatcher has to be consistent?
She used big general terms about the Falklands, but all she really meant was: Argies aren't going to mess white Britons about.
The problem is one that most pamphleteers face.
They want to appeal to people's better nature, but to do that they can't point out what shmucks most of us are, most of the time.
The complacent citizen looks up and sees a distant jet's contrails, whooshing along in impressive white streams.
He might even say: ‘My, how crisp and impressive is Shawcross's argument up there.’
But it's not touching what that citizen really feels, and so is unlikely to change him.
None of this means Shawcross should stop — the cause is too important — but it can make for a frustrating life.
Judith Cook should have had an easier job in her pamphlet against water privatisation, for it's British people themselves, in the near future, who will suffer.
What they already owned will be taken from them, and they will pay higher bills to feed cash to shareholders who've done nothing.
Once again this is wrong, clearly so: ‘It is a ‘scam’ on such a scale it takes the breath away.’
But why must I worry about those future citizens, today's citizen-slob might reason, even if they are likely to include me?
The me of 1989 exists and can gain money from the shares.
The me of 1999 doesn't yet exist.
I would feel bad if I knew for certain that someone was going to cosh me with a lead pipe on January 15 of that year.
I might even give money to The Campaign for Heavier Helmets today.
But otherwise, without this exact knowledge, that future me is just someone vague, no more worth acting for…than the poor Hong Kong Chinese today.
The question is one of how to extend human empathy.
Television is excellent for this, and Chomsky for long has had that great domain in which to show how governments and the big businesses linked to most television powers are very, very careful to be sure that few views are presented which violate the currently useful consensus.
Working with Edward Herman, a business school professor, he's especially good on showing how the companies create acceptable experts when ordinary ones — simple academics who've spent lifetimes studying some area — can't be trusted not to point out inconvenient facts.
For Latin America it's very difficult, as you need someone who won't bring up any of the bad guys the US has supported and still does support there when the topic is those dreaded Sandinistas again.
But corporate America is a can-do world, and the US networks usually succeed.
The best solution is for a pamphleteer to show people how much fun it is to do good.
Working with what might appear an impossible topic, Kathleen Meyer shows what a master can achieve.
First she disarms us: ‘Several seasons of guiding city folks down white water rivers both sharpened my squatting skills and assured me I wasn't alone in the klutz department.’
Then she shows how much fun the proper outdoor technique is for her —‘The ideal occasion for communing with nature…is while you're peacefully sitting still.’
There are even special joys for women: the pride in learning a guaranteed way to keep the boots dry which, if performed behind waist-high bush, means ‘you can casually and with dignity intact carry on a conversation with the rest of the camp’; no more of the old ‘search for a place to hide (God forbid anyone should know we have to pee in the first place).’
OVERNIGHT FILE
Flight from enchanters.
By Desmond Christy The Torch in My Ear, by Elias Canetti, translated by Joachim Neugroschel (Andre Deutsch, £13.95)
BERLIN in 1928 really was no place for a puritan like Elias Canetti.
Back in Vienna he had been bewitched by the viciously witty judgments of the satirist, Karl Kraus.
If Kraus judged Vienna so harshly, what words could be severe enough for Berlin?
Canetti, for example, couldn't imagine writing for money.
When he met Brecht he even railed against the advertisements ‘contaminating Berlin.’
Brecht, whose poetry Canetti admired enormously, wasn't the least bit bothered.
‘On the contrary, he said advertisements had their good points; he had written a poem about Steyr automobiles and been given a car for it.
For me, these were words from the devil's own mouth.’
Much worse was to follow.
Karl Kraus had come to town.
Karl Kraus ‘whom I venerated more than anyone else in the world, without whose wrath and zeal I wouldn't have cared to live, whom I had never dared to approach.’
Kraus is the man whose magazine, The Torch, provides a title for this, the second volume of Canetti's autobiography.
Kraus, who once defined journalists as people ‘with no ideas and the ability to express them,’ had come to Berlin without his thunderbolts.
He was quiet, polite, and concerned about everyone he met.
And who was Kraus's great friend in Berlin, who did he regard almost as a son?
Why, Brecht, the car salesman!
Here was the beginning of Canetti's slow escape from the thrall of Karl Kraus.
But his whole autobiography — this volume covers the years 1921-1931 during which Canetti lived in Frankfurt, Vienna and Berlin — is largely about his flight from enchanters.
Much of his childhood, after the death of his father, and early manhood was spent wresting himself away from the embrace of his mother.
He even ended up inventing women — he is a very good story teller — to distract his mother's jealousy from Veza, the amazing woman under whose spell he fell (and who, in part three of the autobiography, he marries).
Veza was even better read than Canetti (and she could remember it all).
But although she was also one of Kraus's greatest admirers she had dared to read Heine, of whom Kraus had once said: ‘Heinrich Heine so loosened the corsets of the German language that today even little salesman can fondle her breasts.’
But though certain extremely powerful individuals — like Kraus and his mother — enslave him, it is people, ‘ordinary’ folk who are to him completely extraordinary, who free him from the greatest enchanter of them all — books.
Canetti had read more by the time he was 16 than most of us manage by the time we are 40.
He had read them in more languages, too.
On a polyglot diet of great classics the bookworm might have gorged himself into a mere know-all, not into a writer capable of winning, and deserving, numerous prizes, including a Nobel.
But people, especially when they ganged together into that mysterious thing called a crowd, were his liberation.
Crowds were to provide him with the project that kept him busy for decades, the writing of Crowds And Power.
On July 15, 1927 he saw a kind of Peterloo massacre in Vienna.
The Palace of Justice (a terrible misnomer) was set on fire by the workers.
The police, only doing their job, opened fire and 90 people were killed.
‘In a side street, not far from the burning Palace of Justice, yet out of the way, stood a man, sharply distinguished from the crowd, flailing his hands in the air and moaning over and over again: ‘The files are burning!
All the files!’
‘Better files than people, I told him, but that did not interest him: all he could think of was the files.’
The behaviour of the crowd found its way into Crowds And Power, the behaviour of the man moaning about the files into Canetti's novel, Auto da Fe, and Karl Kraus's behaviour was what, in the nightmare recollections of the massacre, seemed to provide some ‘legitimate connection to literature.’
All over Vienna posters appeared demanding the resignation of the police chief who had given the orders to shoot.
Kraus had put them there, the only public figure with the ‘courage of his indignation.’
Canetti is not, I think, earnestly recording his life; his passion is really for the others he writes about, be they as famous as Brecht or as obscure as his landlady.
He can devote a few paragraphs to Brecht but pages to the crippled young would-be philosopher who spends his life in a barrow flicking through Spinoza and Kant with his tongue.
Just as Canetti didn't like the advertising hoardings in Berlin, so he dislikes self-advertisement.
He very rarely gives an interview, he hates the prose of feature writers (and, I fear, of book reviewers).
But sometimes he relents.
The German critic, Bernd Witte, recalls that in 1980, Cannetti gave an interview in which he explained why he embarked on this autobiography in which other people are so important.
In August 1971, the same year in which he married for the second time, Canetti's brother, Georg, was dying.
The two brothers were very close and no writer I can think of has such a hatred of death as Canetti.
When he was a child and his mother was ill, he thought he could make her better by writing a play.
So he wrote one.
In 1971 he thought he could help his brother in his illness by writing about their childhood.
His brother did not live to read about it.
Canetti's great foe is death and his belief in the power of words to fight it is some kind of myth that motivates his pen.
In 1936 he gave a speech in honour of Hermann Broch's 50th birthday.
He felt as if his address was saying to Broch: ‘Don't be afraid, you have been afraid enough for us.
We all have to die; but it is still not certain whether you too have to die.
Perhaps your very words are what must represent us to posterity.
You have served us with loyalty and honesty.
The age will not release you.’
This has been well translated, apart from some American sounding idioms for which Karl Kraus would probably have shot his translator.
Canetti has learned to be more human.
Kraus taught him to listen and about the limitations of judging.
In Berlin Issac Babel taught him how to see.
On any page you can see how well he has learned these lessons and like any great novelist he leaves you wondering if you've ever really used your eyes and ears.
OVERNIGHT FILE
Good dirty fun New Fiction.
By Robert Nye Myself and Marco Polo, by Paul Griffiths (Chatto & Windus, £12.95) Goatsong, by Tom Holt (Macmillan, £12.95) The Fly in the Ointment, by Alice Thomas Ellis (Duckworth, £10.95) Sex and the City, edited by Marsha Rowe (Serpent's Tail, £5.95 paperback)
MYSELF and Marco Polo is a working model of a novel, a clever toy, a verbal tournament, a facetious blueprint for a possible future seriousness: it could only be called a success if its author's aim was merely to intrigue, and I do not feel that Paul Griffiths can be that crude.
Mr Griffiths is the music critic of the Times and has written several books on music, including a study of Olivier Messiaen.
The present text, his first novel, strikes me as amusing, irritating, and impressive in about equal degrees, and for all I know it might well have been composed rather than written; certainly it seems to have been constructed in 64 chapters based on the hexagrams of the I Ching — it is subtitled A Novel of Changes, in case anyone should miss this — with frequent references to Marco Polo's own writings, in Ronald Latham's Penguin translation.
None of this would be worth remark if the narrative carried us along by virtue of its own strength, but it hardly does.
All the time the reader is reminded that he is reading, confronted with his own reactions, reminded to keep his distance, forced into sceptical attitudes by an author determined that nothing shall appear easy or comfortable.
Healthy for us perhaps; but Mr Griffiths himself has the disease of any performer: he needs his audience.
Myself and Parco Polo seeks meaning in what it does to us, and it left me thinking that the late Italo Calvino has a lot to answer for.
Still, as a post-Calvino performance, this novel has the merit of being fairly convincingly dissatisfied with its own absurdity.
Marco Polo tells his tales in a Genoan prison cell, and a scribe called Rustichello writes some of them down, alters and embellishes others, or treats us to his own tourism of the spirit.
Between disquisitions on Chinese opera and Venetian architecture, the story of Marco Polo's voyage from Venice to Peking is more or less retold, though the narrative is continually being brought to a halt in moments when it half-realises that it does not mean enough.
At best, Mr Griffiths has a useful sense of humour, and he does not spare Rustichello a single revelation of his own insignificance.
It is when he tries to make the reader an accomplice in the fiction, over-ambitiously, that the book degenerates into experiment.
I suggest that Mr Paul will feel better for having tried this on, and failed, and that his second book will be the one this could have been.
Goatsong is also quite good fun as literary games go.
Its author Tom Holt began, if I remember right, by publishing his collected poems at the age of 12.
Since then he has graduated to writing sequels to E.F.Benson's Lucia novels, a book with the good title of Expecting Someone Taller (which I must read sometime) and another with the awful title of Who's Afraid of Beowulf?(which I recently read for amusement, without success).
The hero of his latest effort — volume one in a series — is Eupolis of Pallene, gentleman farmer, goatherd, and writer of comedies.
Athens is in the middle of her golden age; Pericles is building the Parthenon; the Gods are on Olympus, and all's right with the world…
Except that Eupolis, our narrator and celebrator of these blisses, is himself a cynic.
He has lived on, you see, through the time when Athens embarked on the Peloponnesian War, and Cleon and Alcibiades buggered up the world's first and best democracy.
Mr Holt's theme is sex as a source of confusion.
His secondary theme is Athens, which on the whole he seems to prefer.
He treats both subjects with a wit which is lucid and ambiguous at one and the same time, so that I recalled Charles Lamb's remark about the possibility of obscurity through too much meaning.
The artful honesty of this novel's conclusion — with Eupolis impelled towards a moment of self-knowledge which he is not quite permitted to understand — certainly makes the book stand out.
The rest of the series may justify some of the thickness of material introduced here.
Meanwhile, this one can be enjoyed for what it does in its own right.
The Fly in the Ointment brings to a conclusion the trilogy of novels by Alice Thomas Ellis which began with The Clothes in the Wardrobe and The Skeleton in the Cupboard.
Miss Ellis writes cleverly and without wasting words, and her tale of Lili whose father is Egyptian and whose mother English, and whose own nature allows her to assume either nationality as the whim takes her, can be said to be compact and readable.
Lili, needless to remark, is unhappy: when she is in the heat of the Nile she longs for the mists of England, and vice versa.
Success in love only bores her.
I suspect that as with the not dissimilar talents of Anita Brookner, the reader needs to share the author's attitudes to enjoy all this.
No such problem rears its pretty head with Sex and the City, a compilation edited by Marsha Rowe in which a number of writers contribute stories about love and lust in an urban — not to say cosmoplitan — context.
Rosalind Belben's ‘My sole feeling of happiness lies in the fact that no one knows where I am’ stands out as a brilliant piece of writing, but the stories by Alison Fell, Tom Wakefield, Ian Breakwell, and Elizabeth Cook are also noteworthy, particularly the last about two women who send each other erotic messages by leaving little bite-marks on their mutual man's body.
The whole book comes into the category of good dirty fun, and is not the worse for that.
OVERNIGHT FILE
Quisling: bigamist, hypocrite, puritan, racist A labour of loathing.
By Dan van der Vat Quisling: a study in treason, by Oddvar K. Hoidal (Oxford, £48)
ONE OF THE few quotable quotes attributed to Vidkun Abraham Lauritz Jonssoen Quisling, uttered with contempt on one of the many occasions when his Norwegian countrymen rejected him, is: ‘Ibsen knew his people.’
What he meant was that his reluctant compatriots were so inward-looking that they could not perceive his genius.
One suspects that Ibsen, faced with a character like Quisling, would immediately have applied to join the Norwegian Resistance.
Quisling stands supreme as the synonym for traitor.
With its onomatopoeic qualities, redolent of a snake in the grass, the name could have been invented by Dickens.
None of the collaborators mobilised by Hitler's conquests, not even Petain, evokes quite so much disgust.
The reasons are simple: Quisling, a former army officer, diplomat, and minister of defence was the first of his kind; and his bid for power, though his own idea, by coinciding with the German takeover was assumed to be part of it.
Readers will soon discern, on page 42 if not earlier, that in the personality of Quisling they are faced with a thundering, breathtaking, unsurpassable bore: ‘He lacked a sense of humour to give him balance.’
At that point they will still have 735 pages of text to go.
The biographer is absolutely right to say at the very beginning that Quisling is not at all difficult to understand.
This should not be seen as a deterrent.
The psychological black hole which is Quisling's superabundance of gravity is more than counterbalanced by the light thrown on the society which spawned him: a small country struggling in the economic and political tempests of the years between the wars.
Among the unconcealed shallows of his character were a vast and voracious ego and many unmistakable traits of the authoritarian personality.
His ability to rationalise verged on the psychopathic.
He was notably indecisive, especially in a crisis.
One of the 20 to 2,000 facts you and I didn't know about Quisling which are in this book is that he was a lifelong bigamist.
He was also a hypocrite, a puritan, and a racist.
But the central irony about him is that it was not only the Norwegian people that rejected him: even the majority of Norwegian fascists didn't want him.
Nor was it only Norway that shunned him: the invading Germans couldn't stand him either.
Even the Fuehrer, not a man to rush to admit error, changed his mind about the Foerer, as Quisling styled himself, and had him sacked within a week.
It is a measure of Quisling's obstinacy that he was back as ‘premier’— albeit the puppet of Reichskommissar Josef Terboven — within two years, thus ensuring that he shared the guilt for the occupation war-crimes for which he was duly shot in 1945.
Even the most committed opponents of capital punishment will find it hard not to see the Norwegians' point of view.
One of the most deeply satisfying moments in the bleak record of Hitler's lightning conquests in 1940 is the sinking of the heavy cruiser Bluecher.
This ship was the floating HQ of a generally brilliant invasion operation; it was also carrying one complete, portable occupation government.
As the brand-new warship entered the narrows outside Oslo, the ancient but sturdy cannon of the coastal artillery, ironically of the finest Krupp workmanship, disgorged their projectiles at optimum range.
So did shore-based torpedo-tubes.
Down went the Bluecher.
The seizure of Oslo was delayed by only a few hours, just long enough for the king, his ministers and most of parliament — the collective personification of constitutional legitimacy — to evade capture.
The author reveals that this almighty blunder was down to Quisling who had told German intelligence that the battery would not fire without direct cabinet orders.
As for this book, it is regrettably much too long and expensive for all but the most dedicated explorers of the byways of the second world war to buy.
It is exhaustive, impeccably organised, and generally well written (apart from a few Germanicisms like telephoning ‘over’ instead of‘via’Sweden, and Norway's defence being ‘overmanned’instead of ‘overwhelmed’).
What one misses most is jokes.
Even though he exhibited less humour than Ibsen on a bad night, the frantic phone calls just mentioned — by the conquering Germans from Oslo to Berlin trying to get the importunate Foerer off their backs — offer clear elements of farce.
Yet Quisling was anything but a joke to the people he fought so hard to betray.
One is left hoping that this painstaking and honourable labour of loathing helps to exorcise the most evil spirit in Norwegian history.
OVERNIGHT FILE