

Endara's belated rise to power comes as mixed blessing.
By Simon Tisdall in Washington
THE man who took office as President of Panama early yesterday morning was popularly elected last spring but had to wait more than six months before being thrust into power by the United States.
Although most Panamanians will welcome the departure of General Noriega, the fact that their new President was sworn in by a US army general at a US army base is likely to colour perceptions of the new government.
Mr Guillermo Endara, leader of the Civic Democratic Opposition Alliance,(Adoc), won the May 7 presidential elections by a margin of three-to-one over Mr Carlos Duque, the head of the Noriega-approved National Liberation Coalition (Colina), according to US and independent observers.
Mr Endara, aged 53, is a labour lawyer who served as an aide to the former President, Mr Arnulfo Arias Madrid.
Three days after the poll, Gen Noriega annulled the elections.
A post-election attack on an opposition motorcade protesting against election fraud by paramilitaries and Panama Defence Forces (PDF) troops put Mr Endara in hospital, after he was clubbed with an iron bar.
Mr Guillermo ‘Billy’ Ford, a vice-presidential Adoc candidate, was also severely bloodied and beaten even as the other Adoc leader, Mr Ricardo Arias Calderon, condemned the cancellation of the poll as ‘an unbearable mockery of the will of the Panamanian people’.
The fraudulent conduct of the poll, and the subsequent annullment, was deplored by the former President, Mr Jimmy Carter.
But the US appeared powerless to intervene as Gen Noriega persisted in the harassment and arrest of his opponents and the continued muzzling of the media.
Mr Ford and Mr Arias Calderon subsequently left Panama and last summer, Mr Ford visited Mrs Thatcher at Downing Street.
In an interview last October, conducted in the Adoc offices in Panama City as armed pro-Noriega thugs paraded outside, Mr Endara said: ‘I will be arrested again.
They can arrest me, they can do anything they want…but what does this man (Noriega) want?
He cannot arrest everybody.’
Shortly after the interview, paramilitaries raided the Adoc offices and Mr Endara was forced to flee by taxi, taking refuge at the Vatican embassy.
Mr Endara and Adoc campaigned in the May elections on a straightforward anti-Noriega platform, pledging to renew democratic institutions, purge the armed forces of corrupt elements (a reference to the involvement of the PDF in drug trafficking) and restore Panama's economic fortunes through a free market system.
Central to this last promise was a US agreement to end the economic sanctions imposed on the Noriega regime, should the opposition win.
But US support for Adoc was a mixed blessing, given the history of US intervention in Panama and the passionate determination of Panamanians to achieve soberania total — complete sovereignty — over the Panama Canal by 2000, as agreed with the US in 1977.
Mr Endara was moved to distance himself from proposals in Washington to support anti-Noriega parties with CIA funds, describing the scheme as ‘insulting’.
The opposition also denied US news reports that Washington had contributed $10 million to his election campaign.
Mr Endara also rejected the use of force by the US as a means of resolving the situation, urging that solutions be sought through the Organisation of American States and the United Nations.
President Endara's first task will be to appoint a cabinet and dissolve the absurd, rubber-stamp National Assembly which last week issued the fateful declaration of war against the US.
He will be assisted by the lifting of US sanctions and the unfreezing of Panamanian assets held in the US.
But obvious problems will centre on the security situation, and the reconstruction of the defence forces and the economy.
Mr Endara, like it or not, is likely to be leaning fairly heavily on the US for some time to come.
Grenada PM sworn in.
By Greg Chamberlain
BEN Jones, an elderly lawyer and nutmeg farmer, has been sworn in as Grenada's prime minister after the death of Herbert Blaize, who had ruled the southern Caribbean spice island since the withdrawal of US invasion troops five years ago.
Mr Jones, long Blaize's self-effacing righthand man, is expected to call a general election, which is constitutionally due within three months.
The conservative Blaize, who died of prostate cancer and had been confined to a wheelchair for the past year, lost his parliamentary majority five months ago but had clung to office despite opposition protests.
The Governor-General, Sir Paul Scoon, broadcast an appeal for calm to the country's 103,000 people.
He appointed Mr Jones because the opposition, which has a three-seat majority in the 15-member parliament, is divided.
Blaize had been deposed as leader of the New National Party which he led to a landslide electoral victory under US auspices in 1984 and had defiantly formed a new grouping.
A lawyer and former oilfield worker, he was head of government for nine years in the 1950s and 1960s under British colonial rule before being beaten at the polls by a charismatic rival, Mr Eric Gairy.
He was brought out of retirement after US troops invaded Grenada in 1983 and overthrew the island's Marxist government.
The US and other Caribbean leaders persuaded squabbling Grenadian politicians to accept him as a compromise to prevent an electoral comeback by Mr Gairy.
But his government coalition soon fell apart.
Most leading ministers resigned, complaining of his dictatorial behaviour, and now form the parliamentary opposition.
The National Democratic Congress party, which has six seats and is headed by Mr Nicholas Brathwaite, is tipped to win the general election.
Behind Mr Brathwaite, an elderly teacher who chaired the interim government installed by the invasion forces, are two of the island's most influential politicians, Mr Francis Alexis and Mr George Brizan, whose disagreement led to the original choice of Blaize in 1984.
Two weeks ago, the island was paralysed by a strike of government workers, who accused Blaize of breaking his promise to hand over more than £2 million in back pay.
Obituary, page 33
Lurking threat of the jean-clad Dignity battalions.
By Simon Tisdall in Washington
ONE of the many weapons of control — and one of the most intimidating — employed by the General Noriega was the civil militia known as the Dignity Battalions.
Composed of sympathisers, spies and informers of the regime, the Battalions are made up of men, mostly in their late teens and 20s, who cruised the streets of Panama City in trucks and open Jeeps, armed with clubs, rubber truncheons (akin to South African sjamboks), knives and hand-guns.
Members wear no uniform other than the paramilitary garb — a mixture of jeans, leather jackets, and army fatigues — familiar throughout Central America.
Contacted by telephone early yesterday when fighting was still under way, a young American couple told of how they crouched on the floor of their appartment, armed with their own guns, terrified that reports of the Battalions roaming suburban areas would mean the thugs appearing at their door.
Luckily for the couple, the Battalions did not come their way.
Seemingly other foreigners — principally Americans — were less fortunate, as local news media reported kidnappings and hostage-taking.
While pro-Noriega units of the Panamanian Defence Forces might indulge in such abuses, the most likely culprits were the Battalions.
And the Battalions, as they drop from sight, may pose one of the most serious threats to the new government of Guillermo Endara.
David Fairhall adds: The regular Panamanian forces, not all of whom opposed the American intervention according to the Pentagon, were vastly outnumbered by US troops.
Excluding the para-military National Guard, they number only 4,400, whereas the normal US garrison of about 10,000 men had already been augmented to 13,000 before airborne units parachuted in to secure the international airport and clear the way for further reinforcements.
The Americans finally assembled a combined total of 24,000 men.
If the immediate military objectives were to seize Noriega and paralyse potential opposition before it could organise, both seem to have failed.
But the use of overwhelming numbers, if not of overwhelming force, was clearly a good way to start.
The Panamanian army can only muster 3,500 volunteers, lightly equipped with armoured vehicles, mortars and rocket launchers.
It has a couple of fully formed battalions, the rest organised in indiviudal companies, two of which are devoted to maintaining public order.
The Panamanian air force was in no position to oppose the intervention, whatever its political leanings.
It has only four combat aircraft — armed maritime reconnaissance aircraft — and no armed helicopters.
The navy's main force consists of half a dozen inshore patrol craft.
The problem for the US troops, as in the bombing attacks aimed at Colonel Gadafy's Libyan regime, is that there is no such thing as a surgical military strike against targets surrounded by civilians, many of them in this case US citizens.
Monroe doctrine lives on as Bush wields big stick.
By Mark Tran in Washington
PRESIDENT Bush's decision to throw US combat troops against General Noriega shows that the Monroe doctrine is alive and well despite talk of new standards of behaviour from the superpowers.
It is a fair bet that the Panama episode will not be the last time that the US will intervene militarily in the region, given the pattern of repeated American meddling in its ‘backyard’.
The assault on Panama marks the second time in six years that the US has employed its military forces against a country in the hemisphere.
In October 1983, President Reagan dispatched an invasion force to Grenada after radical forces overthrew and killed the Prime Minister, Maurice Bishop.
The official reason for the invasion was to protect some 600 medical students supposedly endangered by the coup.
More likely, the episode was considered an opportunity to rid the island of Cuban influence and a chance to demonstrate US firepower just after 241 troops had been killed in Lebanon.
US forces made heavy weather of overcoming 700 Cuban engineers, and the operation exposed glaring shortcomings.
Troops had to use 1977 tourist maps that had such points of interest as nutmeg factories instead of the grid coordinates needed in battle.
The US finally conquered the island after increasing the invasion force from 1,900 to 6,000.
The other manifestation of the Monroe doctrine under the Reagan administration was the US proxy war against the Sandinista government in Nicaragua.
President Reagan spent an inordinate time in trying to destabilise the Sandinistas by arming the contra rebels.
His venom against a country of 3 million people not only reinforced the Latin American image of the US as a bully, it also led directly to the Iran-contra scandal, the most serious political crisis of his administration.
The CIA-backed contra war was an inconsequential affair in world terms, although it brought much destruction and suffering to the Nicaraguans themselves.
That could not be said of the Cuban missile crisis which could be seen as President Kennedy's determination to uphold the Monroe doctrine.
Kennedy's insistence on keeping Soviet influence out of the Western Hemisphere and miscalculations by both superpowers brought the world to the brink of nuclear conflict in 1962.
Following Fidel Castro's seizure of power, Kennedy failed to keep a gung-ho CIA in check, which proceeded with its ill-conceived invasion plans of Cuba.
The episode ended in the Bay of Pigs disaster, with Cuban exiles pinned on the beaches cursing the US for failing to provide air cover.
In order to reassure Castro of Soviet support Khrushchev began sending nuclear missiles to Cuba, triggering the October crisis.
In the Nixon-Kissinger years, while there was no direct military intervention against the democratically-elected Marxist government of Salvador Allende, there was certainly a concerted destabilisation programme which contributed to his fall from power.
Set forth in 1823 by President James Monroe, the doctrine's original thrust was designed to keep the Western Hemisphere free from European interference.
It evolved, however, into a more robust policy of US intervention under President Teddy Roosevelt.
Under the big stick policy, the US sent armed forces into Honduras in 1905, Cuba in 1906, Panama — the first of four invasions in a decade — in 1908, Nicaragua in 1912, Haiti in 1914, and the Dominican Republic in 1916.
The Dominican Republic got a further dose of American bayonets in 1965, when President Johnson sent the marines to thwart a rebel coup.
British passport offer fails to restore Hong Kong confidence on future.
By Steve Vines in Hong Kong
THE Hong Kong Government yesterday endorsed the British offer to grant 25,000 passports to residents of the colony.
A cautious welcome was also given by the colony's business establishment, but it was not shared by many of those who have campaigned for more generous measures to help restore confidence after China's bloody suppression of its democracy movement in June.
The Governor, Sir David Wilson, set the tone for the establishment's response, saying the offer ‘will be a psychological boost.
It will mean that a very substantial number of people who might have left Hong Kong will stay.’
He added: ‘Of course, in an ideal world we should have preferred to have passports for all British nationals in Hong Kong.’
Mr Simon Murray, managing director of Hutchison Whampoa, one of the colony's largest companies, and chairman of the Honour Hong Kong campaign which represents leading firms, said: ‘Our reaction is one of welcome, we see this as a good way to restore confidence in Hong Kong.
‘I'm not saying we're over the moon, but it's a good move.’
He did not explain why the campaign had suddenly reversed its recently declared position that passports would be needed for more than 300,000 key wage-earners in the colony as well as their families.
That is six times the number to be offered the right of abode in the government's package.
A diametrically different view came from a trades-union leader, Mr Lee Chuk-Yan, who said: ‘This whole thing of right of abode gives one more choice to people who already have lots of choices.
It gives nothing to those who have no choice.’
A similar view was expressed by Mr Lee Wing-Tat, the radical local council leader, who made history by heckling the former Foreign Secretary, Sir Geoffrey Howe, at a lunch last July.
‘
The Hong Kong Chinese are very pragmatic.
They won't like this but I don't think they will make a violent reaction,’ he said.
Most people would think that ‘the United Kingdom Government is not taking enough responsibility to protect the people of Hong Kong,’ he argued.
But would they do anything about it?
Mr Lee had his doubts: ‘That's life,’ he said.
‘Ordinary people don't have a chance to leave.’
Mr Lee Chuk-Yan reflected a similar weary resignation: ‘We won't bother campaigning, it's a hopeless case,’ he said.
He believed the offer of passports would ‘split the community into those who have passports and those who believe that the British have betrayed them.
That's not good for confidence.’
This fear was shared by Ms Gladys Li, a lawyer who dazzled the parliamentary foreign-affairs committee with her presentation of the case advanced by the Lobby Group, representing liberal-minded professionals in the territory.
She said: ‘The message is that the UK government couldn't care less, they are just applying a Band-Aid to a mortal wound.’
According to Ms Li: ‘Most people are fairly cynical and fairly resigned about the UK Government's attitude to Hong Kong.
People don't have much confidence, this is just one more nail in the coffin.’
Mr James Tien, a member of the legislative council and a textile manufacturer, said that as an employer he was already experiencing acute shortages of skilled staff.
‘We have a confidence problem.
In all conscience, I can't tell my staff that everything's all right.’
Mr Tien saw the package as damaging the colony's business prospects.
‘As an investor, I have to say that this environment does not allow me to put more money into Hong Kong.
I don't want to invest in anything where every day I have to worry whether my managers are going to leave me.’
What impact the British offer would have on the brain drain, which is expected to push over 10 per cent of the population out of the colony before China's 1997 takeover, was not clear.
Ms Li said: ‘I don't know if it's possible to have less confidence in the future than people already have, but I'm certain it will decrease confidence in the British Government.’
Transylvania clergy take the lead Calvinist pastors are an increasing threat to Ceausescu's domination of the Romanian churches, Ian Traynor writes.
THE role of the church in helping to topple the Communist order in Poland and East Germany, compounded by the fact that it was the fate of a Protestant clergyman in Timisoara that triggered the unrest in Romania, has raised the prospect of Romanian churches becoming a focus of political resistance.
Observers are quick to point out that the main church, the Romanian Orthodox, is well under the control of the secret service and constitutes no threat to President Nicolae Ceausescu.
In the north-west, the seat of the current crisis, the situation is different.
In Transylvania, the two million strong Hungarian minority is served by the Catholic and Hungarian Reformed Churches.
The pastor, Laszlo Tokes — reported by Human Rights workers to be in a remote village in the Romanian district of Salaj — belongs to the latter, Calvinist denomination.
He appears to be the standard bearer of a young, more radical generation of clergymen in deep conflict with their elders and increasingly assertive in their defence of religious, cultural and ethnic rights.
The Hungarian Reformed Church in Transylvania has about 800,000 members, slightly fewer than the Catholic community.
The 680 pastors that serve the region are said to preach to well-attended churches on Sundays.
Mr Gyula Keszthelyi, the former editor of a Hungarian-language daily newspaper in the main Transylvanian town of Cluj, who fled to Hungary last year but remains in close contact with the region, says that there is now a serious row raging between the local pastors and the church hierarchy.
‘There is a grave conflict between the bishops and the local clergy because the pastors are getting rebellious, particularly those of the Tokes generation.’
The two elderly Reformed Church bishops in Transylvania, Laszlo Papp in Oradea and Gyula Nagy in Cluj, are widely viewed as being beholden to the regime, giving them little authority with their congrega-tions.
‘The bishops do what the Securitate Party tells them to do.
The pastors are trying to defend the Hungarian identity,’ says Mr Keszthelyi.
Pastor Istvan Szalatnay, a member of the Hungarian Reform Church General Synod in Budapest, responsible for links with the Church's communities outside Hungary, describes Bishop Papp as ‘the hand of the Ceausescu regime and the secret police.’
In contrast, most local clergymen seek to serve their local communities and defend them against Bucharest's policies of assimilation.
‘The great majority of the pastors try to live in their congregations,’ he says.
But the scope for resistance is limited and the all pervasive security network is said to extend to Sunday services where sermons are monitored for hints of dissent.
‘The pastors try to survive.
They see no possibilities of widening the issues beyond their congregations.’
His General Synod colleague, Pastor Tamas Bertolan, goes further.
‘The church leadership implements the policies of the regime, while the pastors are persecuted.’
But the grass roots is fighting back.
This month the clergy forced the hierarchy to issue a letter requesting ethnic Hungarians to stay in Transylvania and work for change rather than seeking to flee to Hungary.
It was the first time the church authorities had discussed the issue of the refugees, some 25,000 of whom have entered Hungary from the south over the past year.
The grass roots also tabled a demand for 30 new pastors to be appointed each year to take over vacant parishes.
At the moment half a dozen vacant posts are filled a year.
Pastor Szalatnay was in Transylvania last month and says that the atmosphere among local Hungarian intellectuals is one of expectation.
The events in East Germany and Czechoslovakia have made a strong impact, he says.
‘The mood now is that there is a chance for change.’
Germanys agree on spy swap in sign of improving relations.
By Anna Tomforde in Dresden
EAST and West Germany have set in motion a big spy swap, as a sign of rapidly improving relations, it was announced yesterday.
The exchange involves the handing over of 24 convicted West German agents for four high calibre Communist spies held in West Germany.
They include two top secretaries formerly employed in Bonn ministries and the Chancellory.
Mrs Margarete Hoeke, sentenced in August, 1987 to eight years in jail for spying for the KGB, and Mrs Elke Falk, a ministerial secretary sentenced to 6 ½ years last May, both said they were forced into spying after love affairs.
In advance of their exchange, they were pardoned yesterday by President Richard von Weizsaecker.
Meanwhile, Chancellor Helmut Kohl yesterday described German longing for unity as an historic fact and said those trying to ignore it were making a ‘serious mistake’.
Dr Kohl was speaking at the end of a two-day visit to Dresden — his first official trip to East Germany — which left him clearly pleased with his reception and warm response to his striving for German unity.
But the enthusiasm of the 10,000 East Germans who cheered Dr Kohl and pinned their hopes on him to bring the two Germanys together was in stark contrast to official statements on the future from East Germany's reform-minded leaders.
Mr Wolfgang Berghofer, the mayor of Dresden and deputy Communist Party chairman, insisted after meeting Dr Kohl that East Germany would continue as a sovereign state.
But he also said that, after the Chancellor's Dresden meeting with the East German Prime Minister, Mr Hans Modrow, ‘relations between the two German states will never be the same again’.
A day after Britain and the Soviet Union cautioned against ‘hasty steps’ towards German reunification, Dr Kohl yesterday made a point of citing US support for the desire for German unity.
He maintained President Bush totally agreed with his own viewpoint on unification.
‘President Bush understands the position of his friend Helmut Kohl very well,’ the Chancellor said.
Asked whether the same applied to Mrs Thatcher, Dr Kohl replied: ‘She is a democrat, she supports self-determination, but her ideas about a time frame for German unity are different.’
Dr Kohl said he understood fears over unification arising from Germany's past.
But no one needed to be afraid of a future where 17 million ‘dynamic’ East Germans were united with 62 million West Germans.
Europe was a ‘vocation’ for Germans, and within a European framework reunification would be acceptable.
‘It is absurd to talk about a fourth Reich, because it is us Germans who are today leading the way in ceding national sovereignty to European institutions’, he said.
East Germany's leaders will have the opportunity of discussing the future of the two Germanys over the next two days with President Franois Mitterrand of France, the first head of state of the Western wartime Allies to pay an official visit to East Germany.
The French President, who arrived in East Berlin last night, will have talks with Mr Modrow, the Communist Party chairman, Dr Gregor Gysi, and Mr Manfred Gerlach, the acting head of state.
Mr Mitterrand, who will visit the southern city of Leipzig today, said on television he was looking forward to his talks with East Germany's new leaders after the extraordinary changes that had taken place in the country.
‘I hope for a rapprochement between our two countries, which know very little about each other,’ he said.
Rogue regimes show up the shortcomings of law Experts agree the US breached international conventions.
But, John Cunningham argues, it is not quite as simple as that.
PANAMA is the latest in a series of rogue regimes, the menacing state of whose internal affairs has led to armed intervention by other countries — and to an unresolved international tangle about the legality of such action.
The chain has stretched from Uganda to Grenada and Nicaragua, since the 1970s.
Experts cite Romania as a possible future instance where human rights violations could lead to a call for action from outside national boundaries.
This strengthens the case for powers to be granted to the United Nations to deal with such conflicts.
Gen Noreiga said last Friday that Panama considered itself at war with the US so long as American aggression against Panamanians continued.
The reaction of a Pentagon spokesman to the remark was first an incredulous ‘What?’ then laughter.
The implication was that Gen Noreiga's bravado could in no legal sense be taken as a declaration of hostilities.
The mechanisms for registering and resolving a conflict via the United Nations, which would apply in this situation, had not been gone through by the general.
The thrust of the Bush justification for US action was the very real danger to US personnel.
‘I have no higher obligation than to safeguard the lives of American citizens,’ he said on television.
The President gave lower ranking to ancillary reasons: safeguarding democracy, combatting drug trafficking and protecting the integrity of the Panama Canal Treaty.
To experts in international law and relations, the US action demonstrates a breach by a major power of international conventions.
It also shows the shortcomings of international law in not providing a mechanism for dealing with such situations.
Panama, as a sovereign state, can claim that any interference in its domestic affairs by another country contravenes the UN charter, says Paul Wilkinson, Professor of International Relations at St Andrew's University.
He points out that such a provision bans any invasion of sovereign territory, air space and maritime zones, even where there might seem to be good grounds.
‘That's why human rights violations, even those by Idi Amin in Uganda, have been such embarrassments, because you can't legally do anything about them in international law,’ Prof Wilkinson says.
The public, at least, generally reconciles its conscience if such interventions end cleanly, effectively and quickly, says another academic, Professor William Gutteridge, executive director of research at the Institute for Conflict.
It's a cynical view, he admits, but if there are few casualties, people will tolerate such action, without condoning it, even though‘Americans have a habit of being very clumsy, as in Grenada’.
The thornier aspects continue to intrigue international legal experts.
Prof Wilkinson points out that the international community might not decry unilateralist intervention provided that it approves of the outcome.
While intervention on the basis of protecting American lives might win approval because it could be classified as a humanitarian act, President Bush has apparently widened this to take in replacing one leader with another.
‘I don't think what is happening in Panama can be compared to a raid to rescue hostages,’ says Prof Gutteridge.
Nor does the drugs menace pose a sufficient threat to US security to justify the US action, says Professor Wilkinson.
However, he feels that there are instances where regimes violating human rights might justifiably be subjected to external action.
He sees it as a weakness of international law that no such machinery exists, and argues that an internationally authorised force should be set up by the UN Security Council to intervene in rogue states on various continents.
PAGE
Delegates fear a split as minority hardline grouping displays bitterness Lithuanian Communists vote to be independent.
By John Rettie in Vilnius, Lithuania
IN an historic decision to break with Moscow, the Lithuanian Communist Party voted yesterday to declare itself an independent party by more than 5 to 1, well above the two-thirds majority needed.
After the vote at the 20th party congress, delegates leapt to their feet in rapturous applause and sang the Lithuanian national anthem.
A beaming party leader, Mr Algirdas Brazauskas, went to the podium to declare the party ‘rejuvenated and ready for new battles’.
In the name of the Congress, Mr Algimantas Cekuolis, an influential member of both the party and the nationalist movement, Sajudis, issued a clarion call to young people to join the party now.
‘We are a great force,’ he declared.
‘There are over 200,000 of us but we need more.
Let us not leave it to others to fight for our goals.’
The decision is seen in Vilnius as the biggest step yet on the road to the complete independence of Lithuania, although Mr Brazauskas was careful to draw a distinction between party and state relations.
Only a fortnight ago, the Lithuanian parliament abandoned the constitutional guarantee of the party's leading role in society, in favour of a multi-party system.
In the new year, Lithuania, together with the other two Baltic republics of Latvia and Estonia, will become economically autonomous within the Soviet Union.
But there is a real possibility of a split within the Lithuanian party.
The minority which voted for a ‘sovereign party within a renewed Soviet Communist party’ arranged to meet last night to consider its position.
The vote for independence came after two days of acrimonious debate between the Lithuanian majority and the Russian Polish minority, who were joined by a handful of old-guard Lithuanian Communists.
The minority, which could muster only 160 votes against the majority's 855, displayed considerable bitterness towards what they said was pressure on them to accept independence, and threats that they would lose their jobs or worse.
A woman tractor driver, Ms G. Serzhantovich, said: ‘I consider that the formation of an independent Lithuanian Communist Party will lead to its annihilation.
But there is no opportunity to express an opinion other than that of Sajudis.’
They expressed fears of leaving the embrace of what they regarded as the mother party.
‘The proposed new independent status would mean a split in the party,’ said the Vilnius district secretary, Mr Vladislav Shved, speaking in Russian.
‘Is it democratic to declare the Lithuanian party independent without a referendum of party members?’
Delegates rejected proposals for a referendum.
But there was even greater bitterness among many Lithuanian nationalists, who felt the Russians had never wanted to understand why the Lithuanians felt resentment against years of oppression.
‘I can well understand the feelings of the minority, but I cannot understand why they're offended,’ said Mr Sliudikas, another district secretary in the capital.
‘People had begun to look on the Lithuanian party as the servile agent, even the secret agent, of the Soviet Communist Party.’
American soldiers killed Bush pledges swift withdrawal of 12,000 troops Protracted resistance by guerrillas feared Elite paratroopers spearhead US attack.
By Martin Walker in Washington
IN the biggest American paratroop operation since the Allied attempt to seize the Rhine bridges in 1944, the US Army dropped two battalions of elite Rangers into Panama in an operation involving 24,000 troops, tanks, warplanes and gunships.
Claiming a military success in toppling the regime, even while General Manuel Antonio Noriega remained at large, the chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Colin Powell, said: ‘Noriega has been decapitated from the dictatorship of this nation.’
More reinforcements flew in yesterday morning from the 7th Infantry Division in Fort Ord, California, to back up the earlier contingents from the 82nd Airborne and the 5th Mechanised Infantry, who launched the initial assaults.
The highlights of the operation were two night-time parachute assaults by the Rangers, one on the International Airport, the other on the Rio Jara base of the 7th company of the Panamanian Defence Forces.
The first casualty reports from the Pentagon said 11 US troops had been killed in action, 39 had been wounded and one man was missing.
Briefing reporters at the Pentagon yesterday morning, Gen Powell said he had ‘no reliable information’ on Panamanian military or civilian casualties.
Facing powerful political pressure in Washington for reductions in the defence budget, the Pentagon was also keen to overcome the embarrassing memories of the chaotic invasion of Grenada in 1983.
President Bush and Gen Powell insisted that the 12,000 extra troops deployed in Panama over the past 48 hours would be withdrawn ‘as soon as possible’.
But as the shooting and the mopping-up continued yesterday, the prospect of a protracted guerrilla operation began to loom over what the Pentagon had hoped would be a splendid Christmas victory.
Four separate military task forces were deployed in the first major military deployment of the Bush presidency, with the Pentagon keen to show that if the traditional threat in central Europe was declining, it was ready to project US power elsewhere in the globe.
But the clear intelligence failure which let Gen Noriega escape, to organise what could prove to be a prolonged guerrilla resistance, threatens to turn this latest military adventure into a political embarrassment.
After weeks of planning, the first phase of the military operation went well.
The troops were delivered to their start lines with the traditional logistical efficiency of the US armed forces.
They launched their assaults with the equally traditional use of overwhelming firepower.
As convoys of military cargo planes flew into Howard Air Force base all day on Tuesday, bringing the advance elements of the 82nd Airborne, there was little real surprise.
The combat operations began just after 1am local time, shortly after the new government was sworn in.
The first military operations were launched by Task Force Atlantic, charged with securing the canal itself.
Special Forces seized control of the main dams on the canal, and prepared landing grounds for the helicopter-borne troops who came in to block the roads and defend the canal against guerrilla attacks from the pro-Noriega armed militia, the Dignity Battalions.
Simultaneously, Task Force Semper Fidelis, composed of US marines and military police, seized the main road across the canal, the Bridge of the Americas, and secured the approaches to Howard Air Force Base, which was always under US military control.
Almost immediately afterwards, Task Force Bayonet, the armoured force, headed into the centre of Panama City.
A mechanised battalion from the 5th Division based at Fort Polk, Louisiana, they had been deployed in Panama since Gen Noriega's suppression of the elections in May.
Task Force Bayonet launched its platoon of light tanks and its companies of armoured personnel carriers against the HQ of the Panamanian Defence Forces (PDF).
Some of the heaviest fighting took place here, and witnesses reported severe damage to some of the civilian areas in the tight-packed streets around the headquarters.
Most of the civilian casualties were incurred here.
Defended by well-armed troops, the US assault forces had to use heavy weapons, including anti-tank rockets and mortars, to blast their way into the building, which was largely destroyed in the fighting and the fires.
TF Bayonet was also charged with protection of US bases and sent two assault companies of helicopter-borne troops from the 87th Infantry to block the PDF base at Fort Amador.
The 5th company of the PDF, apparently surprised by the American move, slowly organised a counter-attack and gunfire was still being heard from this area yesterday morning.
The paratroops, known as Task Force Red, dropped in two waves from C-141 cargo planes.
The first wave landed at about 1.55am and the second some four hours later, at about 5.15am.
They were dropped around the Rio Jara base, where two Panamanian companies were ‘neutralised’ by a parachute battalion of 600 US Rangers.
Some of the Panamanians managed to escape with their weapons and spasmodic fighting continued in the area yesterday.
A second battalion, dropped onto the International Airport, was also charged with neutralising the elite Battalion 2000, the most formidable of the Panamanian forces.
These first three strikes were launched in Panama City and its immediate surrounds on the Pacific Ocean end of the canal.
The wider operations were the responsibility of Task Force Atlantic, which included naval forces and troops which had been sent to reinforce Southern Command earlier in the year.
Their main objective was to seize and hold the canal itself against the demolition attacks which had long been threatened by Gen Noriega.
A battalion of the 7th Light Infantry Division and a battalion of the 82nd Airborne, being used as ground troops, were deployed to seize the Atlantic Ocean end of the canal at Colon.
They also took command of the crucial Madden Dam, which regulates the amount of water flowing into the canal, and maintained helicopter and motorised patrols along the 51-mile length of the canal.
Task Force Atlantic also attacked and seized the main military prison, freeing some 48 prisoners who had been arrested by Gen Noriega after the abortive coup against him on October 3.
Other operations were directed against the small Panamanian Navy of coastal gunships, and against the airports used by the small air force.
Not seen as a serious military problem, these naval and air assets were seized mainly to cut off possible escape routes for Gen Noriega and his supporters.
Rent-a-colonel outlives value to old friends.
By Mark Tran in Washington
AN AMERICAN visitor to Panama who had the rare chance of meeting General Manuel Antonio Noriega said the dictator bore ‘that look of doom on his face’.
Plucked from obscurity by US intelligence and groomed into a CIA asset over three decades, the general took no chances.
He never slept in the same place, and his meals were prepared mostly by women he trusted — his partner, Vicky Amado and her mother.
But the strain took its toll.
‘Noriega looked like a man who hadn't slept for 20 days,’ said Mr Larry Birns of the Council on Hemispheric Affairs.
There could be further strain for Gen Noriega.
Wanted on drug charges, he may end up at the centre of an extraordinary trial in Miami.
US authorities allege that Gen Noriega made millions in illegal profits by allowing drug trafficking to go on freely in Panama.
They also accuse the general of permitting banks in Panama to launder billions of drug money made by the Colombian drug cartels.
Such a trial, however, could well prove to be a double-edged sword for the administration, since the general once boasted that he possessed information that would prove highly embarrassing to President Bush.
That claim may have been sheer bravado, but given his long association with US intelligence, the general undoubtedly has enough mud to splatter many of his erstwhile US friends.
Of all the dictators the US has befriended and turned against, Gen Noriega has proven the most resilient and ruthless — partly out of necessity.
One Colombian drug boss, upon hearing in 1987 that Gen Noriega was negotiating with the US to abandon his command for a comfortable exile, sent him a hand-sized mahogany coffin engraved with his name.
The US knew the kind of man it was dealing with.
In 1960, when Gen Noriega was both a cadet at an elite military academy in Peru and a spy-in-training for the US Defence Intelligence Agency, he was detained for allegedly raping and savagely beating a prostitute.
He became a formal CIA asset in 1966 or 1967.
He rose to chief of intelligence in Panama's G-2 in 1970 after providing the populist dictator, General Omar Torrijos, the support to defeat a coup.
Gen Noriega, however, soon started freelancing for Cuban, Israeli, and Taiwanese intelligence services.
‘Early on in the State Department, we took to calling him the rent-a-colonel, in tribute to his ability to simultaneously milk the antagonistic intelligence services of Cuba and the US,’ said Mr Francis McNeill, a former deputy assistant secretary of state for Inter-American Affairs.
In 1976, US intelligence discovered that the rent-a-colonel was buying recordings of taped conversations from Military Intelligence.
He was taken off the CIA payroll.
But all was forgiven when the Reagan Administration came to power.
Gen Noriega ingratiated himself by offering his services to a White House bent on making the Sandinistas ‘cry uncle’, although his help for the contra cause was limited.
The downfall of Gen Noriega can be traced to the brutal killing of the opposition leader, Hugo Spadafora, found beheaded in 1985.
Public opinion in Panama turned against him.
While in the past, US officials blocked investigations into Gen Noriega's drug links; this time they let justice take its course.
In February last year, lawyers in Miami indicted him on drug charges.
If Gen Noriega goes to trial, it could well be dubbed ‘trial of the century’.
Oil prices surge ahead.
By Patrick Donovan Industrial Correspondent
OIL prices surged yesterday amid market fears that the Panamanian crisis could hit US crude supplies.
North Sea oil on the London spot market rocketed 30 cents a barrel before settling back to $19.45 in late trading.
In New York, the spot price of West Texas Intermediate, the main crude traded on Wall Street, rose 35 cents to nearly $22 a barrel.
About one quarter of production from the giant Alaskan oilfields is pumped through the 81-mile TransPanama pipeline for shipment to the US Eastern seaboard.
The oil mostly comes from British Petroleum and Exxon's Alaskan fields together with a small quanity of Latin-American and Asian crudes.
Only small quantities of oil are transported through the actual canal because the shallow water depth bars the passage of large tankers.
The pipeline operators, US Northville Industries, claimed yesterday that production is being held at normal levels of around 300,000 barrels day.
Offloading from a tanker on the Pacific seaboard into the pipeline system was last night suspended.
A Northfield spokesman said: ‘We have held one ship which was scheduled to unload until we are sure that everything is quiet.’
But oil traders said there would be no immediate impact as there were storage facilities with at least eight days supply at both ends of the pipeline system.
Brokers at Nomura Research, the Japanese financial giant, said a halt of supplies for one day would be of ‘minor consequence’.
A longterm shutdown, however, could force BP to ship its oil around Cape Horn.
A BP spokesman said that the company was taking no action to seek alternative methods of transport until events in Panama became clearer.
Analysts said the Panamanian Government would make every effort to ensure that supplies are continued because of the country's reliance on oil revenues.
Proceeds from both pipeline and the canal amount to around $100 million, about 25 per cent of Panama's GDP.
Night of terror turns to sorrow.
By Candice Hughes in Panama City
THE fighting had just broken out in Panama City when a group of men dressed in civilian clothes and armed with rifles surrounded the Marriott Hotel and began rounding up guests.
For the next 4 ½ hours the men held us hostage, told us about their comrades who had already fallen in battle, and threatened to kill us.
‘A lot of Panamanians have died and we can kill you,’ one of them told New York Times correspondent, Mr Lindsey Gruson.
‘Don't think we won't.’
I had just checked into the hotel and come down to the sunken terrace when I saw armed men running in a crouched position by the swimming pool.
About the same time I heard gunfire.
It was about midnight (5am GMT) and the US assault had started.
I made for the hotel's main building with several other reporters when a man with an assault rifle appeared and said: ‘Hit the floor.’
He herded us into the lobby, which was full of people.
The gunmen took people's passports and they searched my bag.
About a dozen men took charge of me and 11 other foreigners.I never saw more than 20 armed men in the hotel.
They told us they had surrounded the building.
‘We're being invaded, so we're taking hostages,’ said one, who appeared to be their leader.
They did not threaten me personally, but they made it clear that they could kill us all.
There were about eight US citizens in our group.
The armed men eventually let me retrieve my bag and notebook — my money had been taken — and remain in the lobby.
Mr Gruson went upstairs where he said he was threatened by one of the gunmen.
At one point, the gunman put the muzzle of his weapon against Gruson's mouth, he told me later.
About 1.45am a few other hostages and I were herded into a red van at gunpoint and driven to a private home in the wealthy neighbourhood where General Noriega lives.
We were ordered into the service area off the kitchen and made to sit on the floor.
Our captors let us have water and smoke cigarettes.
We were there until 4am.
I kept hearing aircraft passing low overhead and sporadic gunfire from automatic weapons.
Things were tapering off.
Then a man who seemed to be in charge said, ‘We're going to let you go.
We don't want to kill you.
Tell the truth about Panama.
We're not killers.
There are hundreds of dead in the Central Barracks.’
The men seemed very sad.
One was crying.
They put us back into a van and let us out in the street.
I raced to a private home and called the Associated Press office.
— AP
Nemeth quits his party role in Hungarian budget row.
By Ian Traynor in Budapest
THE Hungarian Prime Minister, Mr Miklos Nemeth, quit the leadership of the ruling Socialist Party yesterday amid bitter disagreement over his economic policies and the pace of the country's transition to a market economy.
Mr Nemeth, a strong adherent of neo-monetarist measures to resolve the country's fiscal crisis, accused his party colleagues of failing to support him as head of government and claimed his resignation was guided by national rather than party interest.
In his letter of resignation to the party leader, Mr Rezsoe Nyers, with whom he has been waging a long-running feud, Mr Nemeth stated he had no option but to resign.
But there was no indication that his tenure of the premiership would be threatened by the decision.
‘The praesidium decided not to support the 1990 budget and the party is against the (government's) housing programme.
This could be a clever pre-election manoeuvre.
But since I represent the country, I cannot agree with this,’ he stated.
Despite the party leadership's opposition to aspects of Mr Nemeth's austerity measures, the budget is expected to be approved today, after parliament successfully watered down the controversial changes in housing policy which entailed steep rent rises and a sharp increase in mortgage payments.
The budget is critical to Hungary's hopes for economic recovery, as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) will not authorise the release of western credits until the tight fiscal regime is applied.
Introducing the budget yesterday, Finance Minister Mr Laszlo Bekesi said that only such a regime could prevent economic collapse.‘
In order to meet the IMF's requirements and thus ensure $350 million in stand-by credits and another billion dollars in European Community funds, Mr Nemeth intends to slash the huge budget deficit from around 50 billion forints (£500 million) to 10 billion.
An emergency congress of the Czechoslovak Communist Party yesterday elected the former prime minister, Mr Ladislav Adamec, as chairman to guide it through free elections due within six months.
Mr Adamec replaces Mr Karel Urbanek, who took over less than four weeks ago after the ousting of hardliner Milos Jakes.
East and West leaders join in condemning killings...
By Foreign Staff OUTRAGE and concern at the violence in Romania during the weekend came from all parts of the world yesterday, with the Soviet Union and the US in the lead.
The White House said the repression was ‘totally unjustified’ and that the US would consult its allies on a co-ordinated response.
European foreign ministers, meeting in Brussels, condemned ‘in the strongest possible terms’ the measures taken by the Romanian security forces.
The Soviet Foreign Minister, Mr Eduard Shevardnadze, was foremost among those who deplored the violence.
Questioned as he left Nato headquarters in Brussels, he said ‘if indeed some loss of life has occurred, I can only express my very profound regret’.
The Soviet Union was categorically opposed to the use of force, he added.
The Soviet news agency, Tass, was also explicit about developments in Romania, stating that ‘tension was high’ inside Timisoara.
It reported that Romanian state institutions and factories were under intensified guard, and that the frontiers were closed to tourists.
There was no official comment from China which has had close relations with Romania's President Ceausescu.
Solidarity's leader, Mr Lech Walesa, said: ‘We demand respect for the human and civil rights of Pastor Tokes and all Romanians persecuted by the inhuman regime of Nicolae Ceausescu.’
He appealed to Nobel Peace laureates (of which he is one) to take common action to defend Pastor Tokes and to exert pressure on the Romanian authorities.
The Polish Parliament stood for a minute's silence after approving unanimously a resolution which accused the Romanian authorities of ‘exceptional brutality’ leading to children being shot at and expressed solidarity with the ‘victims of terror.’
The World Council of Churches, the World Alliance of Reformed Churches, the Lutheran World Federation and the Conference of European Churches said in a joint telegram they were ‘deeply disturbed by the disquieting intervention of the army against civilian people in Timisoara.’
They added: ‘We urge you to take all necessary measures to guarantee the safety of people and a lawful solution of the problems involved.’
The Romanian ambassador in London, Mr Stan Soare, was summoned to the Foreign Office where Mr William Waldegrave, the Junior Minister responsible for Eastern Europe, said ‘the right thing’ for Romanian state employees, including those working for the security services, to do was to represent ‘the true will of the Romanian people’and overthrow the Ceausescu Government.
Some 1,000 Bulgarians attended a requiem Mass outside the Romanian embassy in Sofia for those killed.
Reporters said demonstrators carried banners decorated with swastikas and calling President Ceausescu a fascist.
The crisis that could not be contained.
By Martin Walker in Washington
THE latest phase in Panama's crisis began last Friday, when General Noriega had himself declared formal head of government by his self-appointed National Assembly, and simultaneously announced that a ‘state of war’ now existed with the US.
Gen Noriega's apparently gratuitous escalation of the crisis played into American hands, allowing President Bush to claim a strong degree of bipartisan support from Congress.
The ‘state of war’ declaration clouded what might otherwise have been a clear-cut case of American aggression and gave the White House the makings of a case under international law.
But it is not clear whether the military operation which unfolded yesterday could have been organised in only four days.
Gen Noriega's provocations may simply have accelerated a plan that had been ready to be unleashed at any time.
The day after the declaration, which did not seem at first to be being taken seriously in Washington, Gen Noriega's troops escalated the crisis into a confrontation.
The shooting dead of a US marine and the wounding of another at a Panamanian roadblock on Saturday forced the US to take the situation more seriously.
Colombian-born Lieutenant Roberto Paz, was unarmed when he and other marines in civilian clothes were stopped at a roadblock.
The Panamanians claim the car was trying to escape.
The Pentagon claims that the marines had shown their papers and been passed through the roadblock, when the Panamanians opened fire.
Later, an American naval officer and his wife were arrested at a roadblock.
According to the Pentagon, in four hours of brutal interrogation, the officer was beaten and repeatedly kicked in the head and the testicles while loaded pistols were aimed at him.
His wife was slammed against a wall, sexually threatened and ordered to stand with her arms raised over her head until she collapsed.
On Sunday, a Panamanian soldier loaded his assault rifle and aimed it directly at patrolling US troops.
Tensions between the US and Panamanian forces were running high on Monday, when a US Army lieutenant in civilian clothes, who was not authorised to carry arms, shot and wounded a Panamanian traffic policeman.
On Monday, the White House declared the violence to be ‘part of a pattern of harassment’ and claimed that this ‘co-ordinated campaign’was linked to the state of war declaration.
That evening, the US charge d'affaires in Panama, Mr John Bushnell, made discreet contact with Mr Guillermo Endara, the leader of the Civic Democratic Opposition Alliance, which most independent observers reckoned the clear winner of the elections last May.
Mr Endara was told of the planned attack, and asked for his support, which he apparently granted, saying that he was ready to become the new leader if the US could topple the Noriega regime.
Mr Endara was sworn in as President shortly after midnight last night, on a US military base, in the presence of a US Major-General, with members of Panamanian human rights groups as witnesses.
Videotapes of the ceremony were made ‘as proof of the legitimacy of the occasion’, US officials claimed.
Yesterday, US diplomats formally told the UN that they intended to file an explanation of their actions under Article 51 of the UN Charter, which grants states the right to self-defence.
Tamil Tigers give up war to enter political arena.
By Chris Nuttall in Colombo
SRI LANKA'S Tamil Tiger guerrillas announced yesterday that they had renounced violence and registered as a political party.
The Tigers, who are fighting for military supremacy in the Tamil-dominated north and east of the island, told a news conference their political wing would be known as the People's Front of the Liberation Tigers.
The Tigers have had a political wing since 1976 but never registered it as a legal party.
The move is the culmination of more than six months of peace talks with the government during which the Tigers declared an end to their 17-year guerrilla war.
The Tigers boycotted elections in November last year for the North-Eastern Provincial Council, the new body set up as a compromise to demands for self-rule, saying that it did not fulfil the aspirations of the Tamil people.
But the guerrilla leadership now says the council will serve as an interim administration.
Once elected, they would negotiate for greater devolution.
While the Tigers are finally embracing democracy, violence seems certain to continue in the north and east.
The guerrillas are embroiled in a civil war against an alliance of rival Tamil groups, the Tamil National Army, in areas from which the Indian Peace-keeping Force has withdrawn.
The Tigers say they will not contest elections until there is peace.
The Indians, who they fought for nearly two years, must also complete their pullout.
As well, the Tigers' chief political adviser, Mr Anton Balasingham, said the guerrillas would not contest elections until the government drops a constitutional amendment requiring election candidates to swear an oath of allegiance to a unitary state.
This is bound to create suspicions among the majority Sinhalese community that the Tigers still harbour ambitions of their own Tamil state.
The new party is also dedicated to ‘fighting for the right of self-determination of the Tamils and Muslims’ and ‘protecting and preserving the geographical identity and integrity of the traditional homelands of the Tamils and Muslims’.
But Mr Balasingham stressed that ‘self-determination’ was different from separatism.
‘It is like a husband and wife,’ he said.
‘If they can live harmoniously and happily together, they will remain united.
If the relationship becomes intolerable, the parties will have the right to divorce.
By self-determination we mean the right for us to associate and integrate with the unitary state, or, as a nation, to secede.’
The constitution should not constrain us from articulating these political ideas, therefore we will request the Sri Lankan government to bring about an annulment of the amendment.’
This could be difficult.
The ruling United National Party does not have the two-thirds majority in parliament required to change the constitution.
The Tigers' political leadership is attempting a difficult balancing act.
It is entering the mainstream to satisfy the demands of the people of the north and east, whose high turnout in last November's election was seen as a cry for peace.
It has had to soften its stance on separatism to try to convince the Sri Lankan Government and the Sinhalese people that it sincerely wants a negotiated settlement.
At the same time, however, the Tigers cannot antagonise their own supporters by abandoning the concept of a homeland called Tamil Eelam.
Ousting Noriega will help US to fulfil treaty terms.
By Mark Tran in Washington
THE ousting of General Noriega is likely to make it easier for the US to live up to its commitments under the Panama Canal treaties agreed by President Carter and then Panamanian strongman, Omar Torrijos.
Signed in 1977, the treaties ended unilateral US control in 1979.
All US operational rights over the canal will terminate by the year 2000.
But rightwing members of Congress have never reconciled themselves to the return of the canal to the Panamanians.
Figures such as the Florida senator, Connie Mack, saw the Noriega affair as a golden opportunity to make the 1977 canal treaties void.
By toppling Gen Noriega, President Bush has deprived rightwing resentment of a focus.
‘I am fully committed to implement the Panama Canal treaties and turn over the canal to Panama in the year 2000…
As soon as the new government recommends a qualified candidate, Panamanian, to be administrator of the canal, as called for in the treaties, I will submit this nominee to the senate for expedited consideration,’ Mr Bush said yesterday.
Now that Gen Noriega is gone, senate approval of the administrator is likely to be much less of a problem.
The history of US policy towards Panama is inextricably tied to its canal.
President Roosevelt first contacted Colombia to get rights to build a canal through the isthmus of Panama, which was then within its boundaries.
When the democratically-elected Colombian senate rejected Mr Roosevelt's proposal because the money offered was too low, he sponsored an invasion instead.
Thus Panama gained its independence from Colombia and the Canal Zone was born.
Since then, with the exception of the period beginning with Torrijos coming to power in 1969 and the Noriega years, the US controlled not only the Canal Zone itself, but Panamanian politics as well.
A 1903 treaty between the US and Panama gave the US the right to build and open a waterway.
The US also received the right to govern an area of land called the Panama Canal Zone on both sides of the canal.
The arrangement eventually became a sore point in relations between the US and Panama, which regarded the original treaty as an affront to its sovereignty.
As a result of the 1977 treaty, most of the zone reverted to Panamanian control in 1979.
The canal itself will be handed back to Panama on December 31, 1999.
A second and less well-known treaty gives the US the right to defend the canal's neutrality.
Once considered a vital and strategic waterway — huge quantities of war material passed through the canal during the Vietnam war — the Panama Canal has lost some of its importance because of air freight.
The Panama Canal Commission said in Washington yesterday that it planned to reopen the waterway for daylight transit today.