

Basketball Leicester put the Cat out.
By Robert Pryce
GARY ‘CAT’ JOHNSON, the coach of the season in 1987-88, has been dismissed by the Leicester Riders.
Leicester have won just one of their 11 Carlsberg League games this season, but the club suggested that the reason for the dismissal was Johnson's unwillingness to involve himself in the club's junior programme.
‘I don't believe that,’ Johnson said yesterday.
He suggested that the club expected him to score more points.
‘I've always been an unselfish player.
Some people appreciate that.
Some people don't.’
He also suggested that their had been a clash of opinions.
‘They've always had a yes man.
I have very strong views.’
A 5ft 9in point guard out of Oral Roberts University in Tulsa, Johnson played for the Lancaster Lightnings in the Continental Basketball Association before moving to this country to join Newcastle.
He was player, coach and director at Calderdale before joining Leicester last season.
Tennis Golden deal for the golden girl from Florida.
Russell Thomas on the riches awaiting the 13-year-old Jennifer Capriati
JENNIFER CAPRIATI, the 13-year-old American prodigy, is joining the professional ranks on a contract almost certain to make her the youngest millionairess in the sport.
The girl from Tampa, Florida, has signed a long-term deal with Mark McCormack's International Management Group even though she is still three months away from making her senior debut.
Capriati has been courted for months by IMG, whose promotion, coupled with success on court, will bring their teenage client millions of dollars.
The girl who this year became the youngest Wightman Cup player in history is technically not allowed to join the professional tour until she is 14, in March.
But she has been given special dispensation to play in two events in her home state before that birthday.
She will make her senior debut in the Boca Raton Grand Prix, starting March 5, and then appear in the prestigious Liptons International at Key Biscayne.
Capriati, who won the junior French and US Open titles this year, admits she is ‘excited but anxious’ about playing on the tour.
She will be accompanied by her father, who will continue as coach, with her mother looking after her studies.
Education appears to be the main priority for Sarah Loosemore, the 18-year-old who is Britain's best women's prospect.
The South Wales player, who yesterday reached the final of the BWTA tournament at Queen's Club, has won a place at Oxford and starts a degree course in psychology and sociology at St Hilda's College in September, 1991.
Pat Cash, out for eight months with an Achilles tendon injury, could make his comeback in the doubles at the Australian Open in Melbourne next month.
Ian Barclay, coach to the 1987 Wimbledon champion, said it was extremely unlikely Cash would play singles then, but he was aiming to be fit for the Davis Cup tie with France in February.
The rival powers of men's tennis — the International Tennis Federation and the Association of Tennis Professionals — have come to an agreement over umpiring at the Australian Open.
The ATP will provide seven umpires for the event, which comes under the ITF's aegis.
The organisers had feared the ATP would withhold its officials, the most experienced in the men's game.
Snooker World series back on the calendar.
By Clive Everton
BARRY HEARN and Ian Doyle, who between them manage 13 of the world's top 20 players, have jointly announced the relaunching of a world series.
The initial 1987-8 venture was abandoned after three events in the face of a rival promotion in Beijing, but Hearn, unabashed, said: ‘This is a different time and a different set-up.’
There will be six world-series events in 1990, starting with the new French Masters at Toulouse in June.
The other events will be in Belgium, New Zealand, India, and two more in the Far East.
The fields will comprise the leading eight in the world rankings at the end of this season and eight more players supplied by the host association or invited by the sponsors.
Inevitably most of the players will be from the Hearn and Doyle camps, which are headed by Steve Davis and Stephen Hendry respectively, but Doug Mountjoy, who is unmanaged, and Dean Reynolds, who is managed by Mark McCormack's International Management Group, are also provisionally in the top eight.
It is hoped that clashes of dates with the World Professional Billiards and Snooker Association's world-ranking events, which the Hearn and Doyle camps still intend to support, will be avoided.
According to Hearn the WPBSA intends to take only 16 players for a week to its overseas events instead of 32 for nearly a fortnight.
If so, these clashes of dates may not occur.
Clashes with the WPBSA on other fronts, however, appear inevitable.
Doyle said that he had been ‘totally frustrated’ by his two years on the board.
Hearn and Doyle are certain to be vocal at the WPBSA's annual general meeting at Bristol on December 29.
‘I have no intention of wiping out the WPBSA or of setting up an alternative governing body,’ Hearn said.
‘But the game has gone down the wrong road and we are not sitting back and just letting it happen.’
Cricket Riot stops Pakistanis.
THE one-day international between Pakistan and India was abandoned yesterday after a demonstration in Karachi's National Stadium turned riotous.
Indian fielders were pelted with stones and oranges and police retaliated with tear-gas.
Several shots were fired but no casualties were reported.
Many of the 25,000 crowd fled at the sound of the shots.
A student with a revolver was caught trying to climb a wall into the ground.
Police used steel-tipped batons on the crowd outside the stadium.
Mohammed Azharuddin was slightly hurt when struck on the elbow by a stone while fielding, prompting the visiting team to run off the field through a hail of rocks and oranges.
The second game in the three-match one-day series, reduced from four after the first was downgraded to a friendly, was suspended after little more than an hour's play.
Pakistan had reached 28 for three after 14.2 of their allotted 40 overs.
Imran Khan was not out nine with Shoaib Mohammad on 13.
The umpires tried to restart the game after about 35 minutes but the Indian team again left the ground when Ravi Shastri complained the crowd was hurling stones.
Pakistan's Javed Miandad then appealed for calm, but he failed to quieten the protesters.
Although organisers still hoped the match could resume, the Indians refused to make another attempt to enter the field.
‘We played under tension for 45 days on this tour,’ said Chandu Borde, the Indian team manager.
‘How can you expect me to risk my boys?’
The trouble began after spectators carrying flags of the opposition Mohajir National Movement gathered near a high steel fence outside the general enclosure and shouted slogans expressing their opposition to a visit to Pakistan planned by Indian film stars.
Fundamentalist groups in Pakistan are hostile to the Bombay film industry, believing that shows featuring women desecrate Islam.
Violence between Muslims and Hindus in India is reported to have claimed some 300 lives in the past few months.
Azharuddin, the one Indian player hurt in yesterday's demonstration, is a Muslim.
The final game of the series is due to be played tomorrow in Lahore.
South African Cricket Union officials, responding to an allegedly inaccurate itinerary published in a national newspaper yesterday, said they do not intend to reveal the schedule for the unofficial English team's six-week tour any earlier than mid-January.
But David Graveney, the team's player-manager, expressed some disquiet yesterday at the Sacu's reluctance to reveal details of the tour.
‘This is not an undercover operation,’ he said.
‘The players don't want to be leaving this country in disguise.
All this secrecy creates more fuss than is necessary.’
The tour dates cannot be changed too much.
Travel agents in England have already sold package deals for holidays that include tickets for the international matches — five-day games in Cape Town (February 8-13) and Johannesburg (February 16-21) and a six-game series of one-day matches (February 23 to March 7).
Graveney said that the venues for the three three-day warm-up games were subject to alteration but that the international matches ‘are as first planned’.
The first game is provisionally scheduled to begin on January 26.
Red League faces.
ITV's controversial screening of Liverpool's match with Manchester United on Saturday has caused the Football League more embarrassment.
Already almost £200,000 poorer because of ITV's decision to delay screening of the match rather than show it live, the League has now admitted that its own company, Worldwide Soccer, will provide the network with the pictures.
Worldwide, through its Chrysalis subsidiary, has a contract with Granada TV to provide the coverage of all matches in the region, which includes Liverpool and Manchester.
Lee Walker, of the League's commercial department, confirmed the ‘long-standing’ arrangement, adding: ‘We will receive a fee, which I can't divulge, for the service.’
ITV, paying £25,000 compared with £200,000 for a live broadcast, was accused earlier this week of acting outside the spirit of its £44 million contract with the League.
Meanwhile, ITV announced yesterday that it will televise live Norwich's game with United on January 21.
Liverpool's call for a British Cup has been given a frosty reception by the Scottish League president, Jack Steedman.
The Anfield club want a tournament featuring top English and Scottish clubs plus two from Ireland.
But Steedman said: ‘The risk to our European status would be considerable with fans coming from the south to see games.’
Stoke's manager Alan Ball has criticised agents after finally signing Preston's striker Tony Ellis for £250,000.
A deal collapsed last week over personal terms.
After new talks succeeded, Ball said: ‘Sometimes agents’ demands exceed what the players want but, because they are in their stable, they have to take advice from these gentlemen.
Sometimes they price the players out of the buying or selling.’
Steve Foley has become Colchester's caretaker-manager for a second time, Jock Wallace having been appointed a director last week —‘I will do all in my power to help the club,’ he said.
Foley, a former Colchester player, was caretaker for three months before Wallace's arrival last January.
Foley does not want the permanent job, saying: ‘I again regard it as a short-term business.’
Sailing Prime Factor in Britain's climb.
By Bob Fisher
APENALTY of nine places against the Australian yacht Prime Factor has dropped her team to third overall in the NorTel Southern Cross Cup series and lifted Britain to second.
Prime Factor was protested by Britain's Canon Express for an infraction of the basic right-of-way rule on the first leg of the fourth race.
The jury found that Canon Express, on starboard tack, was forced to give way to Prime Factor on port.
Britain trail New South Wales by 21.5 points but there is a protest outstanding against one of the NSW boats, Cyclone, which finished second in the race but is alleged to have fouled the Hong Kong yacht Foo2, the former Jamarella.
If the protest, to be heard before today's 25-mile inshore race, goes against Cyclone it will put Britain in the lead.
The wind gusted to 30 knots in the fourth race, and Heaven Can Wait, the British team's 50-footer skippered by Harold Cudmore, was among the damaged boats.
The mainsheet traveller tore off the deck and began a chain reaction: next to go was the boom vang, and this caused the boom to fracture at the gooseneck, overloading the mast check-stay which parted.
A temporary vang, taken to a pad-eye on the deck, then ripped the eye and a part of the deck away.
Surprisingly Cudmore and his crew finished seventh and kept their lead in the individual standings.
The Australian yacht Southern Cross inverted her mast — made it S-shaped — when some rigging gave way.
She will sail gently round the course in today's race to score what points she can, while a replacement spar is completed in time for the climax of the series, the 630-mile Sydney to Hobart race which starts on Boxing Day.
Racing: Morley Street looks tempting Ladbroke wager.
By Richard Baerlein
IN the £40,000 Victor Chandler Handicap Chase, to be run at Ascot on January 13, Barnbrook Again is handicapped 14lb below Desert Orchid.
Yet William Hill, in the betting on the King George VI at Kempton on Boxing Day, only offer 3-1 against Barnbrook Again beating Desert Orchid, who stands at 15-8 on at level weights.
Admittedly, handicap weights have meant little of late in the top chasing events, with Long Engagement successful when carrying 15lb overweight and Solidasarock winning with 11lb overweight.
Although the Victor Chandler is a very well endowed race judged by English standards, there were only 23 entries and all but six are out of the handicap proper.
That does not say much for the top chasers of the day, which are very thin on the ground.
There may well be only six runners in the King George, but as long as Desert Orchid runs the faithful will be there.
If the English handicapper appears to have been lenient with Barnbrook Again, the Irish handicapper has been the same with Morley Street.
When the champion hurdler, Beech Road, and Morley Street won at Cheltenham ten days ago it was hard to say which put up the better performance and which would be the stable's first choice for the Champion Hurdle should both be trained for the race.
The general opinion, never a good guide, suggested there would not be much between them, but the Irish handicapper has decided that Morley Street is 12lb below his stable companion when framing the weights for the Ladbroke Hurdle.
Now that Toby Balding has decided to send Morley Street to Ireland for the race the 10-1 on offer from the sponsors is a most attractive price.
He must be well handicapped and is an improving horse.
Jonjo O'Neill cannot be dissatisfied with a 10st 2lb awarded to Vicario di Bray, whose rise to the top was somewhat dented in the middle of last season.
He looked such a handicap certainty for the Tote Gold Trophy that he quite ruined the betting on the race when starting 7-4 on in a field of 10, the smallest of the series.
He was well beaten and in a later race broke a blood vessel.
He is at his best on soft ground and would be a danger to all off his present mark if he could find his best form.
Even then I doubt if he would be a threat to Morley Street.
There will be no shortage of runners at Towcester or Kelso this afternoon.
The directors of Kelso, however, are disappointed at the continual absence of southern trained horses at their meetings, though half the prizes are at around £1,500 to the winner and few above the £2,500 mark.
The horse box charge from the south would be a minimum of £500 and more for those coming from the West Country, so there would be little change from a £2,000 race when all the expenses, including the deductions for trainer, jockey and stable lads have been completed.
A year ago we won a race at Carlisle, nearer to the south than Kelso, where the first prize was £503 and the horse box alone was £500.
The answer might be to reintroduce transport allowances, but only on Tuesday the Racehorse Owners' Association voted against that.
Furthermore, David McHarg, clerk of the course at Kelso and other Scottish tracks, said that when the transport allowances from the Levy Board were cut off it made no difference whatsoever to the number of runners.
When a clerk of the course comes out with a statement like this it seriously weakens the case of those, like myself, who would like to see transport allowances reintroduced.
The ROA would prefer to see the money used to increase prize money in the lower races, but when money is reallocated in that manner it has a way of disappearing.
At Kelso this afternoon Jonjo O'Neill can win the Birgham Hurdle with Stay Awake.
Northern Brave, the probable favourite, was rather disappointing last time out, and Valiant Boy may not have won such a good race as Stay Awake.
Dancing River, from the local stable of Arthur Stephenson, is a tip, but Stay Awake could be on the upgrade.
Gordon Richards, whose horses are bang in form, can win the Elibank Handicap Chase with Tartan Trademark.
Highfrith can be another winner for Richards in the Racing Post Novice Chase.
The horse was quite impressive when winning at Haydock and could record his fourth consecutive victory of the season, during which he has been unbeaten.
Miss Timber Topper looks best in the opener and after Richards has had another winner with Pyjamas in the St. Boswell's Handicap Chase I expect Stephenson's Jupiter's Glory to complete a great day for punters.
At Towcester Nicky Henderson can score a double with Mr Gossip, who will be making his seasonal debut, and Master Bob.
The stable is just finding its form now that the ground has changed and his horses can be followed with some confidence.
Jenny Pitman is another who has been waiting for the rain before releasing a very strong team.
There is a big tip for Egypt Mill, her runner in the final event, and he should not be opposed, though Father Time will be backed to beat him.
PAGE
Cool head with Italian passion on his hands Patrick Agnew in Cagliari watches Italy's manager Azeglio Vicini take a long view of today's match against Argentina.
AZEGLIO VICINI is not exactly a typical Italian, even less is he a typical Italian national team manager.
Born in the North at Cesena 56 years ago, he fits the stereotype of rational northern European much more comfortably than that of fiery Latin.
He fielded question after question from television crew after television crew in the unseasonably warm Sardinian sun yesterday, causing onlookers to wonder at his calmness, patience and diplomacy.
In the next six months, as Italy faces the responsibility of hosting next summer's World Cup finals, Vicini is likely to need all his inner calm if he is to keep his head while all about him people are becoming a little agitated.
As he prepares for this afternoon's prestige friendly against the World Cup holders, Argentina, in Cagliari, Vicini is characteristically playing the match down.
‘Today's game is only of relative importance, not just because it is a friendly but for the good reason that today's Argentina bears little resemblance to the one that will play in next summer's finals.
The Argentines base their whole preparation on the last month of pre-World Cup training.
Next summer they will be much more prepared.’
Win or lose, the important thing for Vicini is to set an example of calmness to his side, to remove some of the pressure of the nation's extravagant expectations.
For, as he never tires of repeating, Italians will judge anything less than a semi-final place next summer as a total failure.
In the meantime, however, Vicini has to consider how best to protect his players from Diego Maradona.
In his phlegmatic way, the Italian manager declined to say which defender will be assigned to mark the enfant terrible.
‘Until I see the entire Argentine line-up,’ he said, ‘how can I possibly know how I shall mark him?’
Under his apparent calm, however, the desire for victory is apparent.
A win against the reigning world champions is always good for morale, but in the wake of less than convincing performances against Brazil (1-0 defeat), Algeria (1-0 win) and England (0-0 draw), a resounding victory would keep the huge weight of the Italian sports press off Vicini's back.
Significantly, the Italian manager will not use today's game to experiment.
Leaving aside the injured Roberto Baggio, Andrea Carnevale and Ricardo Ferri, today's side is the strongest available.
It is significant, too, that Vicini has asked the Milan trio — Roberto Donadoni, Paolo Maldini and Franco Baresi — to play.
Since all three have been to Tokyo and back last weekend to help Milan win the World Club Championship, they might have expected to be rested.
As Italy have only two full-scale friendlies between now and the start of their World Cup training camp (against Holland in February and against Switzerland in March), Vicini wants to try out his strongest side.
Argentine preparation for today's game has been disrupted by the ever-controversial Maradona.
The world's most famous footballer declined to turn up at the Argentine team camp until late on Tuesday night, 48 hours later than most of his team-mates.
Furthermore, as soon as he did turn up, Maradona unwisely told the expectant press corps that he thought the World Cup draw had been fixed so that Italy would find itself in an easy group.
‘I think the draw had already been done [before being]shown publicly for the benefit of television,’ he said.
‘I'm convinced of it.
I swear it.’
The Italian Football Federation has taken note of Maradona's remarks and will pass them on to Fifa.
A heavy punishment could be on the way.
Carlos Bilardo fields a mixture of old and new.
The World Cup finalists Ruggeri, Batista, Pumpido, Olarticochea, Giusti and Burruchaga are joined by two newcomers, Dezotti in attack and Simon at libero.
These days, Bilardo is constrained to do his team coaching down the transatlantic telephone line, since half his squad play in Italy, France or Spain.
Given the difficulties of keeping tabs on faraway players, it comes as no surprise to learn that Bilardo has appealed to one of the key figures of his 1986 World Cup team, the 34-year-old Jorge Valdano, to end his two-year retirement.
Valdano, who gave up playing after struggling to throw off a viral-hepatitis problem, has agreed to attempt the unlikely come-back.
In the meantime Dezotti, who has scored eight goals for lowly Cremonese in the Italian First Division, has a chance to stake his claim to Valdano's old position.
Italy: Zenga; Bergomi, Maldini, Baresi, Ferrara, Berti, Donadoni, de Napoli, Giannini, Serena, Vialli.
Argentina: Pumpido; Ruggeri, Simon, Monzon, Batista, Olarticochea, Giusti, Bermaldo, Burruchaga, Mandolone, Dezotti.
PAGE
Cool head with Italian passion on his hands Patrick Agnew in Cagliari watches Italy's manager Azeglio Vicini take a long view of today's match against Argentina.
AZEGLIO VICINI is not exactly a typical Italian, even less is he a typical Italian national team manager.
Born in the North at Cesena 56 years ago, he fits the stereotype of rational northern European much more comfortably than that of fiery Latin.
He fielded question after question from television crew after television crew in the unseasonably warm Sardinian sun yesterday, causing onlookers to wonder at his calmness, patience and diplomacy.
In the next six months, as Italy faces the responsibility of hosting next summer's World Cup finals, Vicini is likely to need all his inner calm if he is to keep his head while all about him people are becoming a little agitated.
As he prepares for this afternoon's prestige friendly against the World Cup-holders, Argentina, in Cagliari, Vicini is characteristically playing the match down.
‘Today's game is only of relative importance, not just because it is a friendly but for the good reason that today's Argentina bears little resemblance to the one that will play in next summer's finals.
The Argentines base their whole preparation on the last month of pre-World Cup training.
Next summer they will be much more prepared.’
Win or lose, the important thing for Vicini is to set an example of calmness to his side, to remove some of the pressure of the nation's extravagant expectations.
For, as he never tires of repeating, Italians will judge anything less than a semi-final place next summer as a total failure.
In the meantime, however, Vicini has to consider how best to protect his players from Diego Maradona.
In his phlegmatic way, the Italian manager declined to say which defender will be assigned to mark the enfant terrible.
‘Until I see the entire Argentine line-up,’ he said, ‘how can I possibly know how I shall mark him?’
Under his apparent calm, however, the desire for victory is clearly visible.
A win against the reigning world champions is always good for morale, but on this occasion it would be especially welcome.
In the wake of less than convincing performances against Brazil (1-0 defeat), Algeria (1-0 win) and England (0-0 draw), a resounding victory would keep the huge weight of the Italian sports press off Vicini's back.
Significantly, the Italian manager will not use today's game to experiment.
Leaving aside the injured Roberto Baggio, Andrea Carnevale and Ricardo Ferri, today's side is the strongest available.
It is significant, too, that Vicini has asked the Milan trio — Roberto Donadoni, Paolo Maldini and Franco Baresi — to play.
Since all three have been to Tokyo and back last weekend to help Milan win the World Club Championship, they might have expected to be rested.
As Italy have only two full-scale friendlies between now and the start of their World Cup training camp (against Holland in February and against Switzerland in March), Vicini wants to try out his strongest side — which, of course, means playing both Baresi and Donadoni, arguably the two most influential players in the squad.
Argentine preparation for today's game has been disrupted by the ever-controversial Maradona.
The world's most famous footballer declined to turn up at the Argentine team camp until late on Tuesday night, 48 hours later than most of his team-mates.
Furthermore, as soon as he did turn up, Maradona unwisely told the expectant press corps that he thought the World Cup draw had been fixed so that Argentina would be in a difficult group and Italy in an easy group.
Carlos Bilardo, the Argentine coach, fields a mixture of old and new.
The World Cup finalists — Ruggeri, Batista, Pumpido, Olarticochea, Giusti and Burruchaga — are joined by two newcomers, Dezotti in attack and Simon at libero.
These days, Bilardo is constrained to do his team coaching down the transatlantic telephone line, since half his squad play in Italy, France or Spain.
Given the difficulties of keeping tabs on such faraway players, it comes as no surprise to learn that Bilardo has appealed to one of the key figures of his 1986 World Cup team, the 34-year-old Jorge Valdano, to come out of his two-year retirement.
Valdano, who gave up playing after struggling to throw off a viral-hepatitis problem, has agreed to attempt the unlikely come-back.
In the meantime Dezotti, who has scored eight goals for lowly Cremonese in the Italian First Division, has a chance to stake his claim to Valdano's old position.
Italy: Zenga; Bergomi, Maldini, Baresi, Ferrara, Berti, Donadoni, de Napoli, Giannini, Serena, Vialli.
Argentina: Pumpido; Ruggeri, Simon, Monzon, Batista, Olarticochea, Giusti, Bermaldo, Burruchaga, Mandolone, Dezotti.
Badminton Smith scents gold.
By Richard Jago
FIONA SMITH's brisk late-night win over Helen Troke in the final of the English National Championships at Crawley on Tuesday established her beyond question as the country's best woman player.
She is also an obvious favourite for the gold medal in the Commonwealth Games.
Smith was both the holder and top seed and, despite suffering from a heavy cold, she won 11-1, 11-7 with something to spare.
But she still laboured under the apprehension that she had to prove herself better than a famous opponent who has been more successful than any other English singles player of the decade.
‘I just got used to being in her shadow and I still thought there were people who didn't reckon I was better,’ said Smith.
‘But I have beaten her three times in a row, which proves the point.
It is probably the second most important win of my career.’
The most important, Smith believes, was her success against South Korea's Hwang Hye-Young in the Wimbledon Open final in October and she has now improved her speed and self-confidence enough to seek regular victories over foreign opponents abroad.
She also has a genuine chance of succeeding Troke as a Commonwealth Games gold medallist, and may also make a challenge in Moscow in April for the European title, which Troke has won twice.
But first she must think about Auckland.
PAGE
Skiing The grass was greener in 1750.
John Samuel talks snow-famine with the FIS secretary
IN A normal year Franco Kasper, the International Ski Federation's secretary, would be at Saalbach in the Austrian mountain heartland today, running a critical eye over the brand new downhill course being tested in World Cup before next season's World Championships.
This, though, is not a normal year, or what many once thought of as normal.
Saalbach has been cancelled because the artificial snow at the bottom of the course has melted.
Schladming, just to the east, which tried to take on the World Cup commitment, has suffered similarly.
In either case Kasper could only have got there, like many of the top racers, on crutches.
In the autumn he broke a leg while attending the World Grass Ski Championships.
Where the new season's races have taken place, all have been on strips of man-made snow set into dun-coloured grass.
If they sound like Vimy Ridge then so, according to some, are the casualty lists, verbal exchanges of fire, post mortems and cries of ruination.
In recent years the FIS has known nothing like it.
Six hundred races were cancelled or rescheduled in 1987-88 and 800 last year, the worst on record.
Kasper was just back from an hour-long agonising on Swiss television about the disaster in store for the winter sports industry.
‘It's true this is the first time all but one of the World Cup downhills have been called off before Christmas and, with the Madonna slalom cancelled, that's unique.’
Already the FIS is discussing whether it should start the European season in Scandinavia, these days more reliably enjoying early snow, then move down to Central Europe to artificial-snow centres.
Critics, though, say man-made snow is dangerous.
Top racers already sidelined with injury include the World Cup champions Marc Girardelli, Vreni Schneider and Tamara McKinney; the former world champion Peter Mueller; the Olympic gold medallists Alberto Tomba and Martin Hangl; and the silver medallist Helmut Mayer.
‘Yes, the injuries are worrying, but you can't lump them all together and blame artificial snow,’ said Kasper.
‘Without man-made snow we would not have had the 1980 Lake Placid Olympics.
We would not have had World Cup races this season in Australia and the USA, or any at all in Europe.
‘Yes, there are problems.
When you have fohn [warm wind]and temperatures go from minus 20 to plus 10 you get a kind of surface soap which can be a problem.
It is a little more difficult to ski at high speed.
‘Man-made snow is harder to fall on.
Some of the runs are too narrow.
Falling on grass or hard ground can be dangerous.
Organisers set up safety netting well beforehand, then find course setters have changed the lines, so the nets are in the wrong places.
Mueller fell in practice on the Camel bumps where the man-made snow was perhaps too thin.
Those are things we are urgently addressing.’
The postponed Val d'Isere and Saalbach downhills will be staged as early as possible in the New Year: low-level Garmisch will be the first notional beneficiary, but people are already talking in terms of Are, Sweden, in March.
‘The winter only began in spring of last year,’ said Kasper, ‘but I'm cautious about changing our whole programme, even if we could.
‘We've discussed the idea of continental championships in each of the disciplines and bringing the best skiers together for a Masters final late in the season.
‘But how can you have Kitzbuhel and Wengen as qualifiers?
Would anyone want Wimbledon as a qualifying competition?
January is high season for ski racing.
There's a declining interest wherever we stage World Cup afterwards.’
Kasper recalls the 1750 St Moritz snow record, culled by his father from church records.
‘This year we had our first snow…on February 28.’
A pity they did not have TV to show us Christmas cattle grazing the Alpine pastures.
Soccer Holland 0, Brazil 1 Brazil win a phoney war.
By David Lacey in Rotterdam
BRAZIL gently teased Holland's irregulars in the rains of Rotterdam last night without feeling the need to reveal the full range of their attacking talents for the benefit of prying eyes from Scotland and England.
Andy Roxburgh, who knows he will face the Brazilians in the World Cup next summer, and Bobby Robson, who suspects that he might, were reminded of Brazil's flair but had to take their finishing on trust until Careca won the game with a 54th minute header.
Brazil, undefeated in 15 matches since their disastrous European tour last June, when they were beaten by Sweden, Denmark and Switzerland, have now won in Italy and Holland as part of their warm-up programme for the World Cup.
Although these games are only part of the phoney war the results are still important to a country's prestige and confidence and Brazil would love to add England to their victims when they visit Wembley at the end of March.
This is the date England had originally set aside for a friendly against the Republic of Ireland in Dublin but which both Robson and Jack Charlton agreed to abandon when they found themselves paired in the same World Cup group.
England, who could meet Brazil in the second phase, may find the exercise more worthwhile than an hysterical afternoon at Lansdowne Road.
For their part the Brazilians want to play British oppositon to remind themselves of what it feels like to be searching for the ball in the air for much of the game.
Every time they looked up last night all they experienced was rain, rain and more rain.
It was Holland's first home defeat since they lost a friendly 2-1 to Bulgaria in the same stadium in May 1988 shortly before embarking on their triumphant course towards the European Championship.
The truth is that Holland were not Holland last night, just a raw collection drafted in to complement the remnants of their regular side.
None of their Milan players made an appearance.
Gullit, of course, is injured and there are still fears for his playing career, never mind his appearing in Italy.
Rijkaard and Van Basten had travelled to Holland but Milan did not want them to play and both pulled out of the squad, Rijkaard with flu, Van Basten claiming he was tired after his trip to Tokyo for the World Club Championship.
Ronnie Koeman captained the Dutch team for half the game after Johan Cruyff, the expatriate but hardly patriotic Dutchman who manages Barcelona, had ordered him to rest for a week.
Barcelona only released Koeman after the Dutch Football Federation had threatened both the club and the Spanish FA with legal action over a clause which stipulates the number of matches for which their foreign-based players have to be released during the season.
Koeman gave Holland 45 minutes of limited credibility and might have inspired a Dutch goal in the second minute when his early through-pass beat Brazil's offside trap and sent Kieft clear on the right.
On a dry pitch Kieft might have gone for goal instead of squaring the ball to Berghuis, one of four new Dutch caps to appear during the game, whose shot sailed high over the bar.
Holland gained few glimpses of goal after that, although Taffarel failed to hold a hard low centre from Berghuis eight minutes before half-time and was fortunate that no Dutchman was around to pounce on the loose ball.
Brazil, marking tightly and tackling hard, looked as well organised in defence as they had done against Italy in Bologna two months earlier.
Again, however, their finishing was hardly commensurate with the skill and imagination of their approach work.
Valdo, Alemao and others often showed a remarkable lightness of touch in the soggy conditions but several times promising movements failed for want of a penetrative final pass or someone reading the right space at the crucial moment.
For the best part of an hour Brazil produced a dainty dish to set before the Queen of the Netherlands, who may have felt that she had something better to do than sit out a sparring match in driving rain.
But the match needed an attacking spark from Romario or Careca to bring it fully to life and the goal saved the evening a damp, dismal denouement.
The moment was worth waiting for.
Jorghino, suddenly spring-heeled and full of running on the right wing, outflanked the Dutch defence before producing an inspired centre.
Careca rose to head the ball firmly down past Van Breukelen.
Brazil will fill Wembley next March and if they show just a fraction more ambition near goal it will be a night to remember.
Last night was one to bear in mind.
Not a bad game in the circumstances but just a preliminary skirmish in World Cup terms.
HOLLAND: Van Breukelen (PSV Eindhoven); Sturing (Vitesse), Reekers (Bochum), R Koeman (Barcelona, Laamers, h-t), Van Tiggelen (Anderlecht), Wouters (Ajax, Blind, 68min), Latuheru (Vitesse), Van Aerle (PSV), Kieft (PSV, Van Loen, 79), Ellerman (PSV, Winter, 20), Berghuis (Volendam, Van't Schip, 58).
BRAZIL: Taffarel (Porto Alegre); Jorginho (Leverkusen), Aldair (Benfica, Julio Cesar, h-t), Mozer (Marseille), Branco (Porto), Ricardo Rocha (Sao Paulo), Alemao (Napoli), Dunga (Fiorentina, Silas, 73), Careca (Napoli, Muller, 73), Valdo (Benfica), Romario (PSV, Bebeto, 58).
Referee: W Fockler (West Germany).
Soccer.
Holland 0, Brazil 1
Soccer Holland 0, Brazil 1 Careca rules the waves.
By David Lacey in Rotterdam
BRAZIL teased and tantalised Holland's irregulars in Rotterdam last night without feeling the need to reveal the full range of their talents for the benefit of prying eyes from Scotland and England.
Andy Roxburgh, who knows he has to face the Brazilians in next summer's World Cup, and Bobby Robson, who knows he might, were reminded of Brazilian flair but were left to take Brazilian finishing on trust until Careca, the Napoli striker, headed them in front early in the second half.
With all the rain emptying itself over the Feyenoord Stadium it was hard to put last night's match in the context of a World Cup which is more likely to present problems of heat than waterproofing.
The Queen of Holland probably felt she had something better to do.
At least the night held more relevance for the manager of England who, though watching a Dutch side deprived of most of its foreign-based players, now had a chance to run the rule over a Brazil team finally set to play at Wembley on March 28.
The Brazilians want to remind themselves of the British style before they meet Scotland in Italy.
The earliest they can play England or Holland is in the second phase.
Not that Sebastiao Lazaroni, the Brazilian manager, was ever going to learn much about the Dutch last night that he did not already know.
Gullit is still injured, with his playing career in doubt, and the other two Milan players in the Dutch World Cup squad, Rijkaard and Van Basten, both pulled out yesterday at short notice.
Rijkaard had flu and Van Basten said he was still tired after the trip to Tokyo at the weekend for the World Club Championship.
Milan had asked both not to play.
However, Ronnie Koeman was in the Holland team as captain in spite of Johan Cruyff, his manager at Barcelona, ordering him to have a week's rest.
Koeman's presence almost brought Holland a goal in the second minute.
His early through pass caught Brazil moving up too late for offside and Kieft broke clear before squaring the ball to Berghuis, one of three new caps in the Dutch team, who lifted his shot high over the bar.
Unlike Holland, Brazil played the team which will probably appear in Italy.
Valdo and Romario soon defied the squelching conditions with a double exchange of passes that took them through the middle of the Dutch defence before the ball rolled across a gaping goalmouth with no one to apply a finishing touch.
Holland lost Ellerman, victim of a brusque tackle from Mozer, midway through the first half and, although his replacement was the experienced Winter, the change did nothing to help the Dutch search for a blend.
After their early opportunity Holland did not glimpse another scoring chance until eight minutes before half-time, when Kieft and Koeman combined to set up Berghuis for a hard, low cross which Taffarel could not hold.
Winter was just too far away to take advantage.
A few minutes later Branco sent a typically fiendish Brazilian free-kick dipping and swerving past the wall and Van Breukelen, who rarely encountered anything like this in his Nottingham Forest days, punched the ball clear without knowing much about it.
After half-time Holland allowed Koeman to resume his week's rest and Laamers, a fourth new cap, replaced him.
Brazil replaced Aldair in their back four with Julio Cesar.
The rain returned in earnest and, for all the skill and craft of Valdo, Alemao and the rest, the evening desperately needed an explosion from Careca or Romario near goal to bring it to life.
Right on cue a Brazilian goal arrived in the 54th minute and was largely the result of a surging run on the right and inspired cross from Jorginho, Careca rising to meet it with a firm header down past Van Breukelen.
Given their weakened state, the Dutch had done well to hold out for so long.
HOLLAND: Van Breukelen (PSV Eindhoven); Sturing (Vitesse), Reekers (Bochum), R Koeman (Barcelona), Van Tiggelen (Anderlecht), Wouters (Ajax), Latuheru (Vitesse), Van Aerle (PSV), Kieft (PSV), Ellerman (PSV), Berghuis (Volendam).
BRAZIL: Taffarel (Porto Alegre), Jorginho (Leverkusen), Aldair (Benfica), Mozer (Marseille), Branco (Porto), Ricardo Rocha (Sao Paulo), Alemao (Napoli), Dunga (Fiorentina), Careca (Napoli), Valdo (Benfica), Romario (PSV).
Referee: W Fockler (West Germany).
PAGE
Italian League may ban Maradona over allegations.
DIEGO MARADONA could be fined or banned from playing in the Italian League because of his reported remarks that the World Cup draw was fixed, a spokesman for the Italian Federation said yesterday.
The disciplinary commission of the Italian League will consider disciplinary action against the Argentinian, who plays for Napoli.
Maradona, who captains the defending World Cup champions, was quoted in several Italian newspapers yesterday as saying that ‘World Cup groups had been predetermined and the draw was made just for the fun of the television audience’.
A federation spokesman said that Fifa had been informed.
Maradona allegedly made his remarks after he arrived by private aeroplane to join the Argentinian team in Cagliari for today's exhibition match against Italy.
Scudamore lands treble and equals his record century.
PETER Scudamore landed a 71-1 treble at Bangor yesterday on Miss Chalk, Redgrave Devil and Abbotts View.
His second victory — on Redgrave Devil in the Barkin Developments Novice Chase — brought up the 100 on the same date he achieved the fastest ton last season.
Scudamore, who went on to ride a record 221 last term, said: ‘To ride 100 winners is always a thrill.
Everything else is a bonus, but it's also a bit like hunting round the first circuit safely in the Grand National — you know it's the next circuit that matters.’
Both Miss Chalk and Redgrave Devil are trained by Martin Pipe.
Miss Chalk, who joined Pipe a couple of months ago, started 5-2 for the first division of the Yellow Collar Selling Hurdle and made all the running to beat Dreaming Star by 10 lengths.
Pipe watched the race in a Wellington betting shop then returned to his car to hear the racecourse auction relayed on a phone from his son David.
After Miss Chalk had been retained for 5,000 guineas David said: ‘I think my father is pleased.
She cost only 3,000 guineas.’
At Folkestone the stewards asked trainer Roger Hoad to explain how Carfax came to be declared a ‘non-runner’ by the Press Association, who supply riding plans to the newspapers, after running second to Yanbu in the Sellindge Selling Handicap Hurdle.
He told them he was unable to account for the error.
None of his staff had given the information to the news agency and the explanation was accepted.
Judges declare Jockey Club is above the law.
TWO judges yesterday dismissed the case brought by a racehorse owner and trainer in the High Court and upheld the Jockey Club's argument that its decisions were not open to judicial review by the courts.
But Lord Justice Neill, sitting with Mr Justice Roch, said that Adrian Massingberd-Mundy had been treated with a ‘surprising lack of courtesy’ by the Jockey Club.
Massingberd-Mundy, a 62-year-old former Royal Navy submarine commander of South Ormsby Hall, Louth, was attempting to quash a decision by the Club to strike him off the list of potential chairmen of the stewards' panel at Doncaster racecourse.
This followed an argument seven months previously about a stewards' inquiry into a televised race.
The inquiry was ordered into the Glasgow Paddock Selling Hurdle on December 12, 1987 after allegations of interference by the riders of the first and second horses.
Massingberd-Mundy, then chairman of the panel and a local steward since 1970, claimed the stewards' secretary, Major Peter Steveney, threatened to report him to the Jockey Club if he stuck to his personal view that both horses should be disqualified.
Massingberd-Mundy complained to Lord Vestey, then chairman of the Club's disciplinary committee, about Steveney's remark.
In July 1988 he received a letter from Lord Vestey saying his name was withdrawn from the rotating list of those qualified to act as chairman.
He claimed in court that he had been treated unfairly.
Lord Justice Neill said an examination of the Royal Charter under which the Jockey Club was set up and of the powers conferred on it suggested that in some aspects of its work it operated in the public domain.
(The judicial review procedure is available to complainants only in public-law matters, not in private contractual disputes).
But in an earlier case, he said, it had been held that the authority of the stewards of the National Greyhound Racing Club to suspend a trainer's licence was derived solely from a contract between him and the club and that the stewards were purely a domestic tribunal.
The judges in that case recognised that decisions of the stewards might affect the public but concluded they were not decisions in the sphere of public law.
‘It is important,’ Lord Justice Neill said, ‘that the courts should act with restraint before interfering with the decisions of sporting bodies, however wide-ranging their powers may be.’
Costs were awarded against Massingberd-Mundy.
Paul Fitzpatrick finds the gem of rugby league literature Semi-detached Moorhouse.
SINCE Raymond Fletcher and David Howes joined forces nine volumes ago the game has been well served statistically by the Rothmans Rugby League Yearbook, and the standard remains impressively high.
Complementing it is the British Coal Yearbook which offers a written record of the season and which has expanded this time to embrace the seasons in France, Australia and New Zealand.
It is doubtful, in these expensive times, if there is a sports book anywhere that offers better value for money.
No question, though, about the pick of probably the largest and choicest crop of books in the game's history.
Geoffrey Moorhouse's At the George is, to my knowledge, the first collection of essays on the sport.
It could well remain the best.
It was only to be expected that a man who has written with such insight and style about Calcutta and New York, cricket and the crossing of deserts would do justice to a life-long passion.
But, while working from the premise that rugby league ‘is incomparably superior to any other winter game’, this is no emotional treatise but an intelligent, dispassionate examination of the game in relation to its environment, to art and to other sports.
There is a sense of hero-worship for the Wigan side of the immediate post-war period especially and for Wally Lewis.
But detachment is one of Moorhouse's qualities, and he is blind neither to the failings of individuals nor to those of the game as a whole.
Ray French does not possess Moorhouse's gifts as a writer, but he has never been short of constructive opinion, good ideas or a sense of humour, qualities readily apparent in More Kinds of Rugby.
This takes a look at where the game has been in the Eighties and where it might be going in future.
French has had a busy year.
He has also compiled 100 Great Rugby League Players.
It is expensive but has a host of fine illustrations to support the 500-word pen-portraits.
Robert Gate has gone up in the world, and no one deserves it more.
There was a time when he was forced to publish his own works, but now Arthur Barker has done him proud with Rugby League: An Illustrated History.
Gate, now the game's official historian, has written a typically well researched text to go with an excellent collection of illustrations and cartoons.
Rothmans Rugby League Yearbook by Raymond Fletcher and David Howes; Queen Anne Press, £11.95.
British Coal Yearbook; Kingswood Press, £6.99.
At the George by Geoffrey Moorhouse; Hodder and Stoughton, £10.95.
More Kinds of Rugby by Ray French; Kingswood Press, £7.99.
100 Great Rugby League Players by Ray French; Macdonald, £15.95.
Rugby League: An Illustrated History by Robert Gate; Arthur Barker, £9.95.
Sports Politics Burns dismissed as World Student Games organiser.
By John Rodda
PETER BURNS, head of the Sheffield World Student Games organisation, has been dismissed by the company which is organising the event, Universiade GB Ltd.
He goes because of‘an irretrievable breakdown’ between the board of the company and himself, according to the official announcement issued by Irwin Mitchell, the company's solicitors.
At a long meeting of board members on Monday, Burns was asked to resign and refused.
There was a further meeting yesterday — at the solicitors' offices — at which he was not present.
Forecasting his impending departure, Burns, who was appointed as a consultant in April of last year, said on Radio Sheffield that if he was dismissed he would be seeing his solicitor.
The Universiade GB board also announced that the immediate cash-flow problems, revealed a week ago, had now been resolved by an injection of funds by Sheffield City Council and that further offers of financial support are to be followed up immediately.
Members of the board then went to the organisation headquarters to reassure the staff — there are now 35 working on the project — that the Games would go ahead.
Norman Adsetts, chairman of the Regional Council of the CBI and a leading Sheffield businessman, has been appointed to oversee the running of the day-to-day business of the company.
Last night he pledged ‘determination, effort and energy’ to make the games a success.
The key to the problems facing Sheffield has been a lack of sponsorship by commercial companies.
Announcements have been promised but have not materialised.
Two months ago the company was confident that sponsorships would be in place by Christmas.
Yesterday, however, Peter Price, deputy chairman of the council and a member of the board, said that they would not now be likely to be available before Easter.
There should, however, be a timely upswing in Sheffield's fortunes with an announcement that a television contract has been agreed.
It is likely that Sky and Eurosport will be taking the role of host broadcaster, which will guarantee sponsors some form of exposure of their products during the Games, from July 14-25, 1991.
Sheffield City Council, which is handling the infrastructure for the Games, has also met problems over one of the showpiece arenas, the Pond's Forge swimming complex.
The project is three months behind schedule and will not be completed until December 1990, with a cost over-run of 14 per cent, or £6 million.
Davies speaks volumes Robert Armstrong on the biography destined to be a rugby union classic.
BOOKS FOR CHRISTMAS
TO BE sure of getting value for money in rugby books it is usually good policy to lash out on a yearbook or an expensive work of reference.
Autobiographies, ghosted or not, and ‘humorous’ essays tend to lurk in the literary equivalent of shark-infested waters.
One notable exception to the bland, sanitised image-building that marks many a sporting biography is Jonathan, the story of perhaps the most gifted Welsh fly-half the Lions never had.
Written by Peter Corrigan, with first-person inserts from JDavies, this handsome book is about as close as one can get to a warts-and-all picture of an ambitious international player.
The loss of Davies to Widnes last January has cast a long shadow over British rugby.
What a difference he could have made to the Barbarians in their recent clash with the All Blacks.
Jonathan charts the painful break with union which it seems remains his first love — while Corrigan delves into the psychology of a man who temporarily split up with his wife, Karen, as a result of the grinding pressures of the modern game.
Strangely Davies has never been fully appreciated in Wales, possibly because his genius could often only flicker in a context of national decline.
In a real sense league has been the making of him, supplying the hard gloss finish he might never have acquired in union.
Davies may number John McEnroe and Alex Higgins among his heroes yet mundane security has now replaced his self-destruct button.
A quick sidestep from the sublime to the ridiculous carries one into Ripley's Very Rough Guide To Rugby.
The tactical value of Velcro, jock straps scented with Chanel No.5, the pitfalls of mixed rugby, the Exiles' disease chronicus Taffyitis — there is information here for the most esoteric taste, not to mention pictures so surreal that Magritte (a minor Belgian prop) would be proud to own them.
Andy Ripley is mad, mad, mad, but he made me laugh.
It is less disconcerting to tackle the Rugby Union Yearbook, a glossy new annual edited by Mick Cleary who sets out to offer more words and less statistics than the respected Rothmans Rugby Union Yearbook.
Cleary wanted to include the imprimatur ‘Official’ in his title but somehow the Rugby Football Union, despite weighing in with pieces by the President and the Secretary, never got around to giving its official blessing.
Never mind: the action pictures by Russell Cheyne are worth the price on their own.
For a good lively read it is worth dipping into The Whitbread Rugby World ‘90.
The former Wallabies coach Alan Jones examines the umbilical links between commerce, international rugby and player demands for financial security and much of the Whitbread, edited by the broadcasters Nigel Starmer-Smith and Ian Robertson, is devoted to the Lions’ tour of Australia which gives a sharp retrospective edge to interviews with David Campese and Ian McGeechan.
However, one could have done without the editors' patriotic digs at Australian journalists who are certainly no more chauvinist than British fans with typewriters (or indeed television cameras).
The rise and rise of league rugby makes the Official Rugby Union Club Directory an indispensable guide to the intricacies of England's premier domestic competition.
If you never knew the club colours of Bakewell Mannerians or the membership fees for Old Patesians, here is the ideal means of finding out.
The Rugby Clubs of Wales hit the bookstalls in good time for the All Blacks' tour.
Anyone who wishes to hone up on the likes of Cross Keys or Maesteg, not to mention aristocrats like Llanelli, will find a great deal to intrigue and amuse.
Finally, the autobiography of Colin Deans, You're A Hooker Then, has been reissued in paperback.
His wife Val contributes a postscript in which she reveals, rather wanly, that she is still looking forward to her honeymoon, postponed because of a rugby match.
‘Prepare to sacrifice a lot of your own life,’ is Val's advice to would-be rugby wives.
Jonathan, by Peter Corrigan (Stanley Paul, £12.95).
Ripley's Very Rough Guide To Rugby, by Andy Ripley (Stanley Paul, £9.95).
Rugby Union Yearbook, edited by Mick Cleary (Virgin, £12.95).
Rothmans Rugby Union Yearbook, edited by Stephen Jones (Queen Anne Press, £11.95).
The Whitbread Rugby World ‘90, edited by Nigel Starmer-Smith and Ian Robertson (Lennard Publishing, £9.95).
Official Rugby Union Club Directory 1989-90 (Daily Mail, £9.95).
The Rugby Clubs of Wales, by David Parry-Jones (Stanley Paul, £12.95).
You're A Hooker Then, by Colin Deans (Pan, £3.99).
Hockey England skip cup.
By Janet Ruff
ENGLAND and Holland have declined to enter the sixth European Women's Indoor Cup early next month because it has been sprung on them by the European federation.
The event has been brought forward a year from 1991 and moved also from France to West Germany.
The switch and consequences leave the Germans with the gold medal practically on a plate.
They have won all previous championships.
The Dutch were silver medallists last time and England have taken the bronze in the last two events.
They are reluctant absentees but with the difficulty of revising an overcrowded fixture list, and no financial provision for the event or the extra training at £1,200 a weekend, they have taken the line of least resistance.
‘It was a decision taken without any joy,’ said Joyce Clarke, chairman of the England indoor committee.
‘We are all disappointed, particularly the players.’
England's World Cup preparation outdoors could clearly not be ignored but, even with a weakened squad, a medal might have been in reach.
Last weekend they won the HDM tournament in The Hague for the first time while Karen Brown, Mary Nevill, Sandy Lister and Tracy Fry were engaged on outdoor commitments.
Scotland at their best and Ireland should now reach the semi-finals and Wales, competing for the first time, could join them.
EUROPEAN WOMEN'S INDOOR CUP (Jan 6-7): Pool A: Scotland, Poland, W Germany, Italy or Switzerland.
Pool B: Ireland, Wales, Spain, France.
The Hockey Association has acknowledged its error in planning to stage the eighth-finals of the Nationwide Anglia English Cup on January 6, writes Pat Rowley.
It has agreed that, because of international players' commitments, only three of the eight ties will be played on that date, with the others in the following four weeks.
Rugby Union Banned for year.
By David Plummer
RICHARD ANTHONY, the Cross Keys lock forward, has been banned for 33 playing weeks for verbally abusing a referee.
He was reported for remarks made to the Taffs Well official Gwyn Bowden after Cross Keys' local derby against Newbridge three weeks ago.
The Welsh Rugby Union disciplinary committee handed out such a stiff sentence — Anthony will be out of the game until December 1990 — because this was his fourth offence.
He received a 16-week suspension for a third sending-off when he was playing his rugby with Cwmbran.
‘Similar offences in the past have received a fortnight's suspension, but because of the player's disciplinary record he has been given this long ban,’ said the committee chairman David Johnson.
‘He has been told that if there is another occasion he will attract an indefinite period of time out of the game.
‘He was suspended for two weeks for the abuse offence, one week for a previous sin-bin and then the rest came from his past cases.’
The WRU and its leading 18 clubs are deadlocked over the issue of leagues, with no sign of a thaw in the cold war between the two bodies which has gone on for two years.
The Merit Table clubs are refusing to take part in the WRU's national league structure unless they are allowed to run the competition.
The Union says that that will not happen, and the clubs have refused to enter into any more negotiations with the WRU.
The WRU now has to decide whether to take its ultimate sanction and expel the 18 from membership.
The governing body insists leagues will start next September, but it wants to delay as long as possible any decision about what to do with the Merit teams.
‘We hope they will resume talks, but we cannot waste much more time.
That is not fair to all the other clubs.
I just hope that the Merit Table representatives fully realise the implications of the stand they are taking,’ said a WRU spokesman.
Steve Bates, the Wasps scrum-half, has recovered from an ankle injury in time to take his place in the England B team for Saturday's match against the Soviet Union at Northampton.
Earlier in the week Rupert Moon, the Neath scrum-half, was drafted into the squad as possible cover for Bates but primarily to fill the gap left by Dewi Morris on the replacements' bench.
Morris was concussed playing for the North at the weekend.
The London play-off between Middlesex and Hampshire to decide the division's county championship semi-finalists, postponed last night because the Staines pitch was water-logged, will be played on January 31 at a venue to be decided.
Jon Webb, the Bristol full-back, has told the England manager Geoff Cooke that he still wants to play international rugby.
There had been speculation over his future after he was dropped by the South-West.
Triple Cross sinks Derby.
STEVE CROSS, a tireless Derby midfielder, settled the Zenith Cup tie at Newcastle last night with his third goal of the game in the 114th minute.
Unfortunately, it was into his own net.
Cross equalised Liam O'Brien's 25th-minute goal with a superb chip over John Burridge, then put Derby into the lead in the fourth minute of extra-time.
Peter Shilton, who had performed impeccably, then conceded the decisive goals to a deflected shot from Gallacher and Cross's own-goal.
Bernie Slaven brought his goals for the season to 19 — one behind Mick Quinn and Darran Rowbotham among the League's top scorers — with three for Middlesbrough in their 4-1 win over Sheffield Wednesday.
Alan Kernaghan scored the fourth when Kevin Pressman was unable to hold another shot from Slaven.
Chris Lightfoot scored two in three minutes to overcome a seventh-minute deficit at Rochdale and put Chester City into the first round of the Leyland Daf Trophy.
The match of the day, though, took place at Darley Abbey in Derbyshire.
Nigel Clough, the 23-year-old Nottingham Forest and England striker, married Margaret Sharp.
Table Tennis Douglas takes on the Preans.
DESMOND DOUGLAS has accused the English Table Tennis Association of giving preferential treatment to Carl Prean, the son of the ETTA chairman.
The 34-year-old left-hander, 10 times the England champion, wants a meeting between players and officials at the end of the season.
‘We want one rule for everyone and no favouritism.’
Douglas referred particularly to Carl Prean's recent decisions to withdraw from the national rankings and forgo the English Top 12 tournament at the end of the year.
‘Carl's decision not to go on the ranking devalues the No.1 position of Alan Cooke,’ Douglas said.
‘And Carl has decided not to play in the Top 12 because of a commitment with his German League team.
But when I missed it last year because of the Euro-Asia match I was severely criticised by the chairman.’
Douglas and Prean will face each other tonight in the Macartney and Dowie Classic at the Peneil Academy in Brentwood.
They have been drawn in the same group, along with Steve Dorking, the England No.9.
Cooke, the winner of the inaugural tournament last year, faces Nicky Mason and Matthew Syed in the other group.
Australia v Sri Lanka: second Test, fifth day Border's year ends on a high note.
MERV HUGHES took the final wicket with just half an hour remaining as Australia beat Sri Lanka by 173 runs to win the second Test in Hobart yesterday.
It was Australia's sixth victory in 11 Tests during 1989.
With the other five games drawn, the unbeaten run is Australia's best for 15 years.
Australia, who had set Sri Lanka 522 to win after declaring their second innings at 513 for five, appeared to be coasting home when they took three wickets before lunch to reduce the touring side to 208 for six.
But Ravi Ratnayeke and Asoka de Silva took Sri Lanka to within 70 minutes of their second draw of the two-match series.
The resistance was broken when a tiring Ratnayeke was superbly caught by the wicketkeeper Ian Healy, one-handed down the leg side, for 75 after flicking once too often at Greg Campbell.
Ratnayeke hit 13 boundaries in adding 124 for the seventh wicket with de Silva, whose 50 was his maiden half-century in first-class cricket.
The remaining three wickets fell cheaply, with Aravinda de Silva named man of the match after his innings of 72.
Arjuna Ranatunga, the Sri Lankan captain, accused the Australian team of making racist taunts during the game.
He said: ‘When we played last time we didn't have any problem, but here they tried to unsettle us because they were really frustrated.
We were not disappointed but we were a little hurt.’
Australia's captain Allan Border said: ‘I wasn't aware of any problems.
There certainly weren't any racial taunts, so there's obviously been a misunderstanding there.’
The leg spinner Peter Sleep, the all-rounder Tom Moody and Carl Rackemann have been left out of next week's squad for the one-day tournament against Sri Lanka and Pakistan.
Rugby League Hull try to catch Webbe.
By Paul Fitzpatrick
HULL officials are travelling to South Wales this weekend ‘to talk, not to watch’ and are confident that they will sign two players, one believed to be the 26-year-old Bridgend wing Glen Webbe.
Nigel Davies, the Llanelli centre, has been touted as the possible second man, but he has recently recovered his place in the Welsh squad.
Hull, who had Webbe watched in Bridgend's game with Neath a week last Saturday, say that the two players involved were ‘very keen’ to turn professional.
But Hull also say that if the pair decide to change codes it will be for realistic sums of money.
Webbe is reported to want a four-year, six-figure contract.
Webbe's appearances for Bridgend have been limited this season and he has only five tries so far.
But he is regarded as one of the quickest men in Welsh rugby and has 198 career tries to support the claim.
He has played 10 times for Wales.
The success of Gerald Cordle at Bradford Northern could persuade Webbe that a move to the Boulevard would be in his interests.
The former Cardiff winger has his faults but so far he has adapted well to his new code and in a Bradford side playing more expansively these days is seeing plenty of the ball.
He is joint fifth top scorer in the First Division with 16 tries.
Gary Lord has replaced Gary Spencer at full-back in the Leeds side to meet Wigan in tonight's Regal Trophy quarterfinal replay at Central Park.
Hugh Waddell, the Great Britain forward, absent since November 19 with a broken jaw, and David Creasser, who has played only once this season, are the Leeds substitutes.