

for 3rd arts south Celebrating the first steps of a maestro.
By Mary Clarke at Sadler's Wells
SADLER'S Wells Royal Ballet opened their Christmas season at the Wells with a programme which paid tribute to the 60th birthday of Kenneth MacMillan, whose early ballets were staged in that theatre.
It was a curious evening, a backward look to pieces in which could be seen the seeds of the choreographic gift that was to develop, sometimes into epic stagings, in the years ahead.
The programme began with Danses Concertantes of 1955, with which MacMillan made his debut as a professional choreographer.
It was the first work on which he collaborated-and collaborated happily-with Nicholas Georgiadis but it is now given in the heavy scarlet, black and gold designs which Georgiadis substituted in 1980.
They tend to overpower the spiky, inventive choreography.
On the other hand Solitaire, which closed the evening, has had its original 1956 designs by Desmond Heeley restored, to the delight of those who admire this ‘kind of game for one’.
It needs a stronger, warmer personality for the solitary girl than Bonnie Moore can provide but the dancing was sprightly.
If these two ballets were evidence of MacMillan's gift for using the classical technique in a fresh and personal way, La Hermanas (based on Lorca's The House of Bernarda Alba), which came between, showed those themes of dark sexuality which would find their full development in Mayerling.
Made for the Stuttgart Ballet in 1956, the ballet has stayed the course because of its tight construction and the meaty roles it offers.
On Tuesday Marion Tait was superbly tragic as the older sister, Karen Donovan full of spite as the jealous one, and Anita Landa fiercely repressive as the mother, while Joseph Cipolla gave due emphasis to the pelvic thrusts of which his role chiefly consists.
MacMillan has come a long way since 1963 but Hermanas can still grip when done as well as this.
SWRB at Sadler's Wells until January 6; this programme repeats on January 2 and 3.
Hit and miss from Frank.
By M Grosvenor-Myer 3 Pantomimes.
THERE is a first time for everything: Aladdin was the first panto I'd been to and the first Frank Bruno has performed in.
I hope he had as good a time as I did.
But he did not look very relaxed in his supporting role of the Genie.
He should not be nervous: by the time he arrives on stage just before the end of the first act the youngsters in the audience had been thoroughly warmed up by all the silliness created by Michael Barrymore and the Roly Polys; the bruisers from Essex who turned up to see their hero had been thoroughly oiled with lager and were ready to send their love across the footlights.
Bruno is turned out in a set of white-sequined boxing trunks with blue stripes and a matching set of Masters of the Universe shoulder pads, his incredibly muscled midriff exposed between.
For most of the time he shifted about from one foot to the other, more like a naughty schoolboy who has been hauled up in front of the head master than a genie rubbed out of a bottle.
He was difficult to hear — either a touch of flu or a dose of technical problems.
Still, Bruno has charm and stage presence.
I was surprised, although not as surprised as Mike Tyson when Frank got up and hit him back.
Two acting notes for Frank: Less is more — do not shift your eyes at the audience so much, stare them down once every scene; when in doubt about what to say next do not keep ad-libbing about Harry.
Use his name once a performance: keep 'em waiting for it.
The rest of the production hums along.
Barrymore's Wishee Washee carries the evening on his narrow shoulders.
He arrives on stage going faster than an Olympic sprinter.
He could not possibly be on steroids: he is too damn skinny.
The evening is a holiday stew with something for everyone: multi-ethnic chorus lines, poll-tax jokes, Kylie and Jason jokes, and Second World War jokes for those old enough to remember.
There are the usual look-behind-you routines.
There are no mother-in-law jokes, although inevitably a few ethnic ones slipped in.
The great thing for a first-timer like me was the crowd: noisy and well behaved.
People who will not like Aladdin are doctrinaire anti-vulgarians or those who were traumatised as children at other pantos.
Among the others in my party, four-year-old Caitlin liked the Princess best.
Her sister, 10-year-old Claire, was amazed that people could make rude jokes and not get into trouble for it.
Taunton Allen Saddler.
Irma La Douce.
TAUNTON'S Brewhouse Theatre continues its Christmas tradition of shows that have nothing to do with Christmas with the opening of the Century's tour of Irma La Douce.
Touring reduces a full-scale dancing and singing show to a chamber musical and is an ambitious venture.
Century engage actors who are also musicians.
It is entertaining to see a group of loushe Parisian types forming a street band or filling in for cabaret.
Bob Eaton has many bright ideas for direction, but the show lacks a really winning song.
There are lots of bright and witty numbers but The Language of Love is the nearest to a heart-schmaltzy ballad and it isn't very convincing.
Irma La Douce is a musical based on the farce mechanism, with a cast of Damon Runyon characters, transferred from Brooklyn to the Pagally.
Irma, a prostitute and a really nice girl, falls for Nestor, a young law student, who is jealous of her clients.
Nestor invents an elderly admirer, who can pay enough for Irma to dispense with other clients.
The elderly admirer is Nestor himself in a false beard and Irma, who is clearly short sighted as well as dim and really nice, hardly notices the difference.
Nestor gets jealous of his other self and stages a killing of his rival, for which he is arrested and convicted.
Well, a law student might have spotted that a man cannot be convicted without the dead body being around.
Elementary.
But this ruse gives a chance for Nestor and the gallery of small time crooks and pimps to be transported to Devil's Island, an escape on a raft in a storm and end up at the North Pole for a sequence with a dancing penguin and a polar bear, to give the show a Christmas gloss.
Shelley Willetts plays Irma like a grubby angel.
She gives a wistful version of the title song, but her Irma is more EastEnders than Montmatre.
Wayne Morris is very active as Nestor and surely has a career in regular farce.
Irma La Douce is lightweight entertainment, held down by the off hand commentary of Liz Spenz as the owner of the back street cafe where the plot keeps boiling over.
Birmingham Gerald Larner.
CBSO/Rattle.
NEXT time Simon Rattle and the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra perform Messiaen's Et Exspecto Resurrectionem Mortuorum they should do it in a great cathedral.
Not a modest one like St Asaph, where the gong and tam-tam crescendos of the third movement would be damagingly deafening, but in some vast Gothic building where the acoustic reverberations would be as effective as the spiritual associations in enhancing the effect of the piece.
In a place with an acoustic as dry and an atmosphere as worldly as Birmingham Town Hall it doesn't work.
Indeed, without the ecclesiastical aura, the passages of massively slow-moving melody, unadorned and sometimes unharmonised, can sound too plain and even too thin in texture.
The birdsong episodes in the third and fourth movements, projected in brilliant colours and vital rhythms on this occasion, can only benefit from concert-hall clarity, it is true.
But most of the score-for 40 wind and percussion players without strings-is about immensity rather than detail, above all in the last movement.
The culminating voice of the multitude cannot be heard without a congregational blurring of the line in long-accumulated reverberations, however heroic the efforts to magnify the dynamics at the end.
The consolation was in a wonderfully spontaneous performance of Rachmaninov's Second Symphony.
If the CBSO strings failed to assert themselves strongly enough in the overall balance at certain crucial points in the first movement, they certainly approached the textural problems of the adagio with great sensitivity and, when it came to them, phrased the main theme as eloquently as the clarinet had done on its first appearance.
We didn't really need a Christmas present after that but the encore, the intermezzo from Delius's Fennimore and Gerda, was very welcome all the same.
Newcastle-under-Lyme.
Barber Of Seville.
By Robin Thornber
BEAUMARCHAIS's comedies are less well known in this country (though still popular with the Comedie Francais) than the operas derived from them, Rossini's The Barber Of Seville and Mozart's The Marriage of Figaro.
But it seems he's suddenly being rediscovered here.
Henry Livings faced formidable problems in tackling this new translation of the original Barber.
An elderly gent wandering the streets talking to himself about his secret wedding to his ward tomorrow (because the plot requires him to be overheard so she'll find out) is the sort of thing you can only get away with in opera.
But he has, on the whole, pulled it off.
He succeeds brilliantly in finding a style of speech which is neither archaic nor too modern (apart from the odd anachronism like cash-flow) but belongs to a timeless tradition of broad, popular comedy, like Ayckbourn with clogs on.
Beaumarchais/Livings is funnier, faster and subtler than, say, the average Whitehall farce and could be just as accessible.
But Peter Cheeseman's production at the North Staffordshire New Victoria seems to strive too hard for lightness of touch; it feels too scholarly and reverential.
There is much to enjoy in an unbuckled way in this basically commedia dell'arte wheeze of young lovers enlisting the wily servant's help to outwit the old guardian-in this it springs from the same dramatic roots as much of pantomime.
Two of the company seemed to have clocked that slightly outrageous, out-front performances were called for-Graham Fellows, as a nudging, naive Count Almaviva, and Victoria Scarborough as a gloriously posing heroine, Rosina.
If only the rest had been encouraged to play it big and brassy like this.
But on the first night at least Richard Hague's careful Figaro seemed only part way there, tentative and restrained in his guile.
(Think what Bob Hoskins would have made of it.)
As did Edward York's Basilio-he had it, but wouldn't let go of it.
There was some very insecure playing, too.
The whole company appeared nervous.
Maybe, now that they know it works and if they are embold-Clare Shearer as Rosina ened, it will grow during the run into the big, bold bellylaugh it ought to be, forgetting operatic pretensions to high art and closer to situation comedy.
North Staffordshire New Victoria (0782 717962), in repertory until January 27.
Leicester.
Chicken Tango.
By Pat Ashworth
THIS is such a delicious offering, of the kind that makes you chuckle in recollection on the way home, that I do not really want to give the game away by saying too much about what goes on.
The Phoenix Arts Centre in Leicester is trying to shake off its persistent image of being just too highbrow for words and it is striving to show the general public that they might actually enjoy some of the things that go on there.
So they have put on a Christmas show that runs until the end of January, which while still being very different from anything else in the Midlands this Christmas, should entice a new audience into the theatre.
It is described as a comic love story for clumsy people, and it is just that: endearing, touching, and very, very funny.
Fiona Gordon and Dominique Abel, who both studied at the Paris School of Mime, Movement and Theatre, play Rosie Tickletoe and Charles, two remarkably unremarkable people, who meet, fall in love, and get married.
She is strikingly unattractive in a bright-green stretchy dress, jumble-sale hat, thick spectacles and slightly protruding teeth; he is a wonderfully bashful, not very good magician in an oversized jacket.
In quite outrageously comic and very skilful sequences of movement, mime and clowning, they attempt courtship, and in a shower of champagne that misses more often than it hits the glass, approach the great unknown of the wedding night.
How they actually manage it is not revealed and so it is highly suitable for family viewing.
Supported with some powerful sound effects and swelling music, this rare treat it has toured Europe and north America, and after the Phoenix it is off to Africa, so catch it while you can.
At Phoenix Arts (0533 554854) until January 30.
Cambridge.
3 Pantomimes.
By M Grosvenor-Myer
BACK to a festive original; or, if not quite Garrick or Grimaldi, at least H. J. Byron.
His Aladdin or The Wonderful Scamp, first performed at the Cambridge ADC Theatre in 1862, was brought back to its original home by the enterprising Hamlyn's Music Hall company, complete with appalling Victorian puns and outrageous Victorian rhymes.
Lovely.
Elsewhere in these parts, it's been the more traditional (i.e. more modern) panto.
TV stars, tights and drag, eclectic music.
In the Cambridge Arts Dick Whittington, La Donn' E Mobile was pressed into service for a song about cooking by Graham James as Sarah the Cook, a delightful dame smack in the Dan Leno tradition.
Of the big names, Esther Rangzen's two present front men, my eye and ear were most taken by the gifted and versatile Grant Baynham.
Joanne Robley-Dixon was an expressive and acrobatic cat.
Amanda Bairstow's principal boy was attractive, but, whatever the provincial accent she adopted as the fortune-seeking Dick was meant to be, it was nowhere near the Gloucester that the script (and history) specified.
There was much for the eye, especially a lovely sinking ship effect followed by a charming underwater ballet.
The woodland ballet and the black-light sequence were high points of Red Riding Hood at the Theatre Royal, Bury St.
Edmunds, a colourful confection well danced, agreeably sung, and with a good lot of laughs from Alan Wells's Dame and Neil James's Simple Simon.
Blow for freedom.
By John Fordham at the ICA
JAZZ Against Apartheid (an organisation launched early this year to raise cash for black South Africa) ended 1989 in positive shape.
It assembled a variety of skilled sympathisers on the stage of the ICA that both set the audience hopping up and down and delivered music of such a strong African flavour as to make the issue and the entertainment inseperable.
Appropriately for the cause, the music on Tuesday night was emphatically collaborative -much of it a jam involving trumpeters Dave DeFries and Claud Deppa, saxophonist Dudu Pukwana, guitarist Lucky Ranku and others.
The two trumpet players made a particularly attractive contrast, Deppa brittle and fiery, DeFries (on flugelhorn) rounded and measured, his phrasing full of potential new tunes.
Toward the close of the show, following enthusiastically received representations from the South African trade union movement, a steadily intensifying free-blow ensued, showcasing Deppa and DeFries before the great Port Elizabeth altoist Dudu Pukwana came on stage and the dynamic Tony Marsh to the drum.
Probably anticipating the enhancing of the already considerable temperature that might ensue from a stretch of proven hell-raising, Pukwana called for a blues, and set about declaring his intent with that impassioned alto cry (the instrument in his hands displaying the weight of the tenor as well as the wild, wayward quality of the higher horn) that has been thrilling British audiences since the Sixties.
Pinise Saul's vocals added a spine-tingling force to a mid-tempo theme, Dave DeFries's flugalhorn complementing her with brisk fluttering phrases.
Tall tales and mortal quirks Radio.
By Val Arnold-Forster
I CAN'T think of anything more likely to get us through the pre-Christmas traumas than a new play by Don Hayworth.
He is one of the jewels of radio, a playwright who understands the medium, but who doesn't use radio merely as a way of playing tricks that wouldn't work on stage or television.
He can combine tenderness and humour without becoming mawkish.
His latest is called Fairy Story (Radio 4, Monday, to be repeated on Saturday).
Cindy is a farm maid, at the beck and call of her wicked, snobbish guardians, with a travelling shoe salesman Ginger as her Prince Charming and the local lady of the manor as the Fairy Godmother.
Actually, Hayworth isn't intent on following the classic Cinderalla theme, but in telling us a pleasantly absurd tale of country life in the Thirties.
Her wicked guardians try to marry Cindy off to a local nob; a disastrous fire frustrates their plans and, as we are fully expecting, love triumphants.
Not a wildly exciting play, though with the production in the safe hands of Alfred Bradley and charming performances all round, it was always easy to listen to.
Hayworth's ear for the quirks and sayings of ordinary people never fails.
It's not satire exactly, since Hayworth has too kindly an eye for the human condition.
Even the wicked guardians prosper, and end up taking tea with the gentry.
A spot of folklore in Turpin Hero (Radio 4, Wednesday) in which David Ashford investigates the reality of that famous highwayman's legend.
He was, we were told, a butcher from Thaxted who joined a gang of baddies and eventually landed up in York jail, where he was hanged for horse stealing.
Turpin, it seems, wasn't an especially heroic character — but the half-hour programme was full of minor insights into social history.
The gang of baddies were originally deer stealers; and it was The Food programme, discussing the increasing availablity of game in High Street supermarkets, who had pointed out that at one time British prisons held more poachers than all the prisoners in France put together.
The most memorable detail, though, was the achievement of Turpin's ex-school master.
He recognised his ex-pupil's handwriting on a letter and thereby identified the highwayman — even though Turpin had only been his pupil for three quarters of a year.
Harry Thompson's Carry On Up The 55s (Radio 4, Wednesdays) finished this week with a look at the Fifties and sex.
Cheery stuff, with Thompson wide-eyed at those fuddy duddy old attitudes.
Mind you, its easy enough to giggle if your main sources for Fifties's sexual attitudes are the Ron and Eth dialogues.
But it's been an entertaining series, even though there must be quite a few Radio 4 listeners somewhat startled to hear the Fifties treated as risable history.
Once more, I found myself sympathising with a Punters lady.
Not the one who wanted, for goodness sake, to have a different matching shopping trolly for her different outfits But how much I agree with the lady who wanted the cost of High Street Christmas lights spent on something more practical.
Christmas makes grumpies of us all.
PAGE
Appreciation: Lynn Bari.
Always the other woman:.
THERE are some movie stars in the minor league who are held in almost as great affection by film fans as the major ones.
One of these was Lynn Bari, who has typically had to wait a few weeks after her death before receiving an obituary due her.
With over 65 pictures to her credit (and debit), Lynn Bari has probably been seen on television in more homes on weekend afternoons than many more famous names.
Twentieth Century-Fox musicals of the '40s were expertly wrapped lighthearted packages — just the thing to send the troops at the front — and Lynn Bari was invariably one of the prettiest ingredients.
In 1945, she was selected second only to Betty Grable as the most popular pin up amongst servicemen.
But then she was used to playing ‘the other woman’.
Most memorably, in Hello Frisco Hello,(1943), she was the upper crust lady who temporarily takes social-climber John Payne away from the saloon-singer Alice Faye.
In fact, she had started pinching other women's men in Always Goodbye (1938), in which Herbert Marshall strayed from Barbara Stanwyck into Bari's arms.
However, her favourite roles came in two Glenn Miller movies Sun Valley Serenade (1941), as the band's vocalist (Pat Friday dubbing her singing ‘I Know Why’), and as one of the Orchestra Wives the following year.
But by 1946, after playing the small role of Jeanne Crain's rival in Margie, she left Fox because she felt the studio hadn't given her enough big parts over the past decade.
At Universal, she found herself painfully opposite the eponymous talking mule in Francis Joins The Wacs (1954) and as the female lead in Abbott and Costello Meet the Keystone Cops,(1955) but had delightful moments in Has Anybody Seen My Gal?(1952) singing ‘The Red Red Robin’ while bobbing around doing the housework.
Lynn Bari, who was born Marjorie Schuyler Fisher on December 18th 1913 in Roanoke, Virginia, concocted her screen name from that of the actress Lynn Fontane and author James Barrie.
She broke into films in 1933, when MGM advertised for ‘tall girls in bathing suits’, and made her movie debut in the chorus in Dancing Lady, which also happened to be Fred Astaire's first film.
Unfortunately apart from some of the movies mentioned above, she found herself stuck in the '40s with the unwelcome label of Queen of the B's, because of her frequent roles in Charlie Chan, Mr Moto and Falcon Quickies.
An outstanding exception was in The Bridge of San Luis Rey in 1944, as the singer who becomes the favourite of the Viceroy of Peru.
Bari's three marriages were to agent Walter Kane, Producer Sid Luft (who later married Judy Garland) and Dr Nathan Rickles, for whom she worked as a nurse for a while in 1956.
Her last movie was as Patty McCormack's mother in The Young Runaways in 1968, but she toured with stock company stage productions in the ‘70s.
A lengthy illness prevented her from appearing on Alice Faye's ‘This Is Your Life’ tribute a couple of years ago.
Ronald Bergan Lynn Bari, born December 18 1913; died Goleta, California, November 20, 1989.
Letters:
Ruth Hill-Williams writes: J.P.M.Millar had a long life (obituary, December 7), and his death signals the end of an era.
My own father (1897-1940) was one of those who, although he had a brilliant mind, came from a large, poor, working-class family.
He was sent at the age of 14 to work as an office boy at the city railway station.
Passionate with indignation at the poverty and injustices which he daily met around him in the industrial north of Bradford, he sought, and was able to gain from, J.P.M.'s National Council of Labour Colleges, that knowledge which served him so well throughout his short working life, as a weapon with which to fight and change the capitalist system which tolerated and perpetuated such inhumane living conditions.
As a child of the Thirties I heard much talk of J.P.M. and Fred Shaw (the NCLC Organiser), Plebs and the Railway Service Journal — and the Manchester Guardian — were as much a part of my youthful literary life as Mickey Mouse and Film Fun.
As Allen Saddler's notice so rightly says, many of the Labour MPs who swept to power in 1945 had come through J.P.M.'s schools and were thus well armed to fight for the legislation which so transformed society after the second world war.
That society became a more egalitarian, caring and humane society, and the present generation would do well to reflect on this.
Expect the unexplainable Top of the chat
By Rick Glanvill
ASK Vic Reeves to describe his sense of humour and you get an answer which sums up his offbeat, skewed vision of the world.
‘It's like a shopfront with a little bit of dust in the corner.’
His view of contemporary comedy as a whole is equally oblique: ‘I see it as a very, very long trench with a worm and a piece of hot bacon nearby.’
Perhaps it's not the kind of humour that transfers well to paper — try explaining Reeves's hero, Tommy Cooper, in print.
Reeves stumbled into performance five years ago when, as manager of a club, he had to stand-in for a guest who failed to turn up.
Imagine a post-modern, post-punk Morecambe and Wise and you are getting close to Reeves and his foil, Bob Mortimer.
Reeves puts their humour down to their upbringing in Darlington and Middlesbrough respectively.
Their sell-out shows invariably consist of a series of increasingly strange guests (usually played by Bob Mortimer) constantly interrupted by Reeves's tangential monologues and a catalogue of references to pop music and trash television.
In spite of this anarchy, Reeves engenders a kind of instinctive conspiracy between himself and the audience, encouraging a call and response, particularly appropriate tomorrow night when there will be a seasonal pantomime.
This is as well as ‘an attempt at mind regression’ and Vic and Bob's appearance as alter-egos, Donald and Davey Stott, who this weekend will be trying out some magic.
‘They are going to cut someone's leg off and then pour some hot oil on a bird.’
His current activities point to a bigger future.
He now shares an agent with comic icons Rowan Atkinson and Harry Enfield.
Having worked his way up via his own live spoof chat show Vic's Big Night Out, he has latterly been guesting on television's One Hour With Jonathan Ross, a show whose format bears a strong resemblance to Reeves's own showcase.
You can usually spot Reeves on the programme by his larded-on northern accent.
Future projects include a series on Channel 4 in April, to be followed by a sitcom for Granada, hopefully in the summer.
‘The working title is The Weekenders.
It's about two men who go away every weekend doing different things.
In the pilot we go off mine-detecting on the Isle of Wight and discover some lizards.’
There is also a Radio One show in the pipeline, so tomorrow's event may well prove to be one of Reeves's last nights out in his adopted home of Deptford.
Vic Reeves's Christmas Big Night Out is at the Albany Empire tomorrow night.
Three more shows there are provisionally planned for January
Bondi's best
By Rick Glanvill
THIS year has seen a procession of visiting Senegalese acts.
Their West African near-neighbours redress the balance somewhat when Gambia's top dance band Ifang Bondi visit the Africa Centre today.
For a band that has been performing for around a decade, their output is remarkably small, but perfectly formed.
Like the more accessible Senegalese acts like Xalam or Super Diamono, Ifang Bondi combine the strength of their own culture with the best of the rest, interpreted by a stunningly androgynous dancer.
Funk, jazz and reggae influence their sound, but the result never dips into a Western dirge.
Their social concern is subtly voiced, occasionally in English, and the new Sanjo set continues their maturation.
See Rock listings for full details.
Steve Harley; Hammersmith Odeon: see Rock/Folk Talk show-off…
Vic Reeves presents his Christmas Big Night Out at the Albany Empire: see Top of the Chat Big Audio Dynamite; Raw-knuckled rock ‘n’ roll at the Subterania: see Rock/Folk Thomas Mapfumo: chart topping with the album Corruption
Daisy-cutter: Snowella pantomime at Sutton and Peckham.
V&A's Spirit of Christmas.
Miniature winter wonderland: the Playboard Puppets' Spoon family and Egbert Ugly sister's secrets Holiday what's on..
By Betty Jerman
LIVE theatre, as we have come to call it since the advent of television, is a feature of Christmas, never forgotten.
Theatres specialise for children, ready to tell us tales, ancient and modern, in spectacular fashion.
Of course there is also pantomime and now in a museum!
London's Theatre Museum could rout its critics by putting on its very first, entitled Cinderella And Her Very Ugly Sisters, as well as a Panto Fun Week of workshops where families can find out how Daisy the Cow negotiates the stage or how a handsome actor is turned into an Ugly Sister, or personally seem to be a Dame or a Principal Boy by being photographed with face beaming through a cut-out stylised figure.
In some museums, like the Museum of London, and those in Bradford and Birmingham, you can put on your own show; in Chester you can put on theatre make-up.
These are among the enticing participatory events organised by museums and art galleries for the holidays.
Liverpool opts for Bulgarian traditions, Maidstone for fossils, Manchester for funny faces.
If you seek something completely different, what about a Tudor sing-along in a Royal Palace?
That is a rarity indeed.
It is a pleasure to see that so many museums still have free admission and free events but if you are dropping in on a favourite, remember that many close at Christmas and New Year and booking is advisable.
Quote….
CONTRARY to Broadway gospel, Dustin Hoffman does not have star billing in the new ‘Merchant of Venice.’
That honour is reserved instead for the Peter Hall Company — or, to put a finer point on it, for Peter Hall.
Once you've seen the production, in many ways an unexpected one, you'll understand that Mr Hall isn't being pretentious and that Mr Hoffman hasn't suddenly been struck by false modesty.
This really is the director's ‘Merchant’— at times Shakespeare's, too — and Mr Hoffmann plays a supporting role.
It's the modern practice that Shylock dominate any version of ‘Merchant,’ whatever the interpretation, despite the fact that he appears in only five of 20 scenes.
Mr Hoffman's Shylock — meticulous, restlessly intelligent, emotionally and physically lightweight — does not.
His performance is a character actor's polished gem rather than a tragedian's stab at the jugular.
This Merchant is likely to prove a big target for American people who routinely deplore British Shakespearean acting and staging.
Though the production has gained some Amercian actors since its inception, its classical look and blander, if well-spoken, performances are ripe for Anglophobic attack.
But to criticize Mr Hall's production as an exercise in fuddy-duddy Shakespeare is beside the point.
The results may look conservative, but in this century it is almost a novel idea — even if born of necessity — to restore romance and comedy to ‘The Merchant of Venice.’
Which isn't to say that Mr Hall's novel idea is necessarily the whole idea.
His solid, highly watchable production, like Mr Hoffman's performance, leaves one thinking about this endlessly debated play without for a second being challenged or moved by it.
Frank Rich, New York Times
December 20
It was a film-maker's dream — total artistic control and a healthy budget.
So why did it end with dwindling audiences and a critical drubbing?
Hugh Hebert investigates the troubled history of Dennis Potter's ‘one-man show’ Blackeyes and red faces.
BLACKEYES ended, trailing an ever thinner line of puzzled viewers, exasperated critics, and the nagging question, what went wrong?
In a sense, the hype answered that question even before we saw the programme.
Here was Dennis Potter, by critical consent the best pure television writer we have, directing his first ever film: as near as dammit, total artistic control under conditions of time and budget that were extraordinarily generous; the film-maker's dream.
The irony is that, despite the hype, that was not the way it was planned, and there were snags from early on.
It was known that Potter wanted to direct some of his own work at some stage.
But the assumption was always that his first attempt at direction should be on a modest scale.
The initial production planning on Blackeyes was done by Kenith Trodd, who has produced most of Potter's major work, including Pennies From Heaven and The Singing Detective.
The idea was that it should be directed by Jon Amiel, who directed Singing Detective and never got much credit for its success, but he didn't want to do it.
Nicholas Roeg was approached but didn't like it.
With production dates looming, Potter decided he would direct it himself.
Trodd says that he supported that decision at the time.
But differences began to emerge, with Trodd uneasy about the casting of Gina Bellman as Blackeyes.
That unease had already been there over their previous BBC project, Christabel.
And Trodd's later analysis of that feeling has a direct bearing on one of the central criticisms made of Blackeyes: its dangerously ambivalent attitude to its central character.
There was never much chance that Potter, of all writers, would escape the accusation that his exposure of the exploitation of a model was itself exploitative.
It was one of the reasons that earlier discussions with Thames Television fell through — though Blackeyes was always designed as a movie or a BBC series.
It was inherent in the project that Blackeyes should be played by a relatively unknown, inexperienced actress.
Despite the doubts, Gina Bellman does have the naive, vulnerable quality Potter clearly wanted — to that extent, she was right.
Trodd now believes that the problem with Christabel and Blackeyes was that ‘in the conception, the writing and the casting of women in key roles, Dennis's judgment is flawed.’
Just over a year ago, Trodd left the Blackeyes project, and Rick McCallum became the sole producer.
There is no doubt that Trodd would have done some things differently, or at least struggled hard to get them changed.
But there is no guarantee that he would have succeeded.
His presence on Christabel did not prevent it being, to my mind, a critical failure though a modest popular success.
Potter's strength is creation not adaptation.
What is clear is that once Trodd, a strong and familiar collaborator had gone, dangers crowded in.
For one thing, too much was now riding on the project.
Pennies and Singing Detective raised interest and expectation, but not on anything like the same scale.
The BBC, quite rightly, had given Potter unprecedented freedom, a large budget, and lots of time.
But two of the mediating factors that had been present in his triumphant Pennies From Heaven and Singing Detective had gone: no independent director or challenging producer.
Everything was in Potter's hands.
Potter then began rewriting, as he usually does, adding more and more layers, which is another of the dismaying aspects of the series.
He added his own voice as yet another narrator.
And as director, he adopted a slow, fluid style that compounded the problem.
The fact that it looks so good is a credit at least as much to the man behind the camera, Andrew Dunn, as to Potter's fledgling talent as director.
As narrative, it ends in an even more labyrinthine post-modernist muddle than it began.
There's a lesson here for the BBC or for any television organisation — and it's important that everyone should get that lesson right.
All credit to any television organisation that backs one of its best talents with money, time, and freedom.
But there's also some danger in drifting into a situation where all of that, and the power to get exactly what he wants, is in the hands of one person struggling with a new job, isolated among unfamiliar collaborators.
Directors love that power.
But it's not only Trodd and other producers who believe that what makes good work in a collaborative art is the challenge of having to justify decisions to your colleagues, and having colleagues who are not afraid to make those challenges.
Trodd, the original producer (left), Potter, and Bellman (centre), the star they fell out over