

Albert Fisher food group seeks £180m for expansion plans.
By Tony May
THE Albert Fisher fresh food distributor is to raise £180million to fund expansion and has found itself a strong shareholder in the process.
Its chairman, Mr Tony Millar, has done a deal with the US Corporate Partners group which invests some £1billion of funds on behalf of US and foreign institutions like pension funds.
He is placing about 29million shares at 110p with the company to raise £32million.
Shareholders are offered a one-for-three rights issue at 110p to raise £152million, but Corporate Partners will take up any shares not subscribed to.
He also proposes a one-for-10 bonus issue of warrants to subscribe for shares at 185p.
If no one took up the rights issue, Corporate could end up with nearly 29 per cent of the shares, but a 20 per cent stake is more likely.
Mr Millar is forecasting dividends for the year to next August of 3.35p net per share, a jump of 22 per cent.
Pro-forma net assets will be £328million.
Trading so far this year is up and the board expects ‘another year of good growth.’
Corporate Partners is keen to talk to other UK companies with a strong balance sheet and a proven management ability to execute a business plan.
Its stategy is to make substantial investments, primarily through direct private placements.
Bell seeks to cut Bond Corp link.
By Reuter
BELL Resources, 58 per cent owned by Alan Bond's Bond Corporation, is running out of time to obtain money or assets from Bond that would save it from collapse, its chairman, Geoff Hill, said yesterday.
‘Time is a luxury that Bell Resources may well not have,’ he told shareholders at the annual meeting in Perth.
Mr Hill, appointed chairman this week, said one of his first moves would be to separate management of the company from Bond Corp, which is struggling under huge debts.
He described his company's fortunes as inextricably tied to Bond and the fate of the group's brewing arm, Bond Brewing.
‘Even now, Bond Brewing bankers are meeting to assess their position in respect of Bond Brewing.
‘The consequences of a receiver being appointed to Bond Brewing are, as you can imagine, potentially calamitous for Bell Resources, which has a A$1.2billion (£591million) deposit partially secured against the capital of Bond Brewing.’
He was appointed chairman in a deal negotiated between Bond Corp, 19.9 per cent shareholder Adelaide Steamship and Australia's corporate watchdog, the National Companies and Securities Commission.
Several shareholders sharply criticised the behaviour of Bond Corp, which posted a net loss, the largest in Australian history, of A$814million in the year to June 30.
But a move to vote the Bond Corp chairman, Alan Bond, off the Bell Resources board failed.
Mr Hill said Bond's board term was not over so the meeting could not vote on removing him.
At the annual meeting on Thursday of Bell Group, another Bond subsidiary, the chairman, Tony Oates, said his firm would weather a collapse of Bond Corp because it was a separate company.
‘It has its own assets, it has its own financing.
It's not interdependent,’ he said, in response to a shareholder question.
Bell Group is about 75 per cent owned by Bond Corp.
Whitbread clinches sale of spirits arm.
By Ben Laurance
WHITBREAD will today announce the sale of its wines and spirits business to rival brewer Allied-Lyons for between £530 and £550 million.
The business was put up for auction two months ago when Whitbread decided that its spirits operation, including brands such as Long John Scotch, Laphroaig malt whisky, Burrough's mixed doubles and Beefeater gin, was too small to compete with the giants of the industry like Grand Metropolitan's IDV, Guinness' United Distillers and Allied-Lyons' Hiram Walker Allied Vintners.
The stock market has been expecting an announcement all week.
But details of the sale were finalised only last night.
There had been speculation Allied-Lyons would clinch the purchase of the Whitbread operation by teaming with its existing partners Suntory of Japan — whose liqueurs and spirits Allied already markets in the US.
But sources yesterday indicated that Suntory would not be involved.
Seagram of Canada and France's Pernod-Ricard are understood to have put in bids for the Whitbread business.
Included in the sale is James Burrough, best known for its Beefeater gin, which was bought by Whitbread little more than two years ago; the Buckingham Wile Company, which distributes Beefeater, Cutty Sark Scotch, and Benedictine in the US; and the Atlas Peak vinyards in California.
Allied-Lyons already sells Ballantine's, Canadian Club, Glendronach malt, Teacher's Scotch, Tia Maria, Canadian Club, Courvoisier, Babycham, Harveys Bristol Cream and Cockburn's port.
The company is currently auctioning its Embassy Hotels and is likely to sell the J. Lyons catering operation which provides food at events like Wimbledon.
Allied-Lyons' $325million takeover of American fast-food operation Dunkin' Donuts has just become unconditional.
Whitbread says it will spend the money from selling the wines and spirits business on expanding its Pizza Hut, Beefeater Steak Houses, Country Club Hotels and TGI Friday's chains in the UK and Europe and on the company's Keg chain of restaurants in the US.
Only this week, Whitbread announced that it had won the franchise to operate TGI Friday's restaurants in Canada, Washington State and Oregon.
Societies hit by water shares.
The popularity of the water privatisation reduced the net receipts of building societies to £177million in November — the second lowest this year — the Building Societies Association says today.
However, the success of societies in winning back a bigger market share of mortgage business from the banks was highlighted by the increase in gross home loan advances to £4,157million, a figure topped only once during 1989.
Pressure on UAL.
United Airlines is under new pressure to agree to a buyout proposal from its employees, writes Mary Brasier in New York.
Coniston Partners, the New York investment group which holds nearly 12 per cent of UAL, has given the board until January 8 to come up with an alternative to the $6.75billion buyout which failed to take off in October.
If the pilots, flight attendants and management cannot agree a new buyout, Coniston said it would force a restructuring of UAL which could include selling off the company's planes and its air routes.
It has also threatened to oust most of the UAL board by a shareholder vote.
£55m damages.
Broker Maclaine Watson must pay two Shearson Lehman Hutton companies more than £55million in damages for breach of contract after the collapse of tin prices in October 1985, a court ruled yesterday.
Tin had been sold by Shearson to Maclaine for more than £9,000 a tonne but prices nosedived after the International Tin Council market support pact collapsed.
Maclaine subsequently refused to accept delivery from Shearson.
Boots sale.
Boots is selling Fine Art Wallcoverings to its management for an undisclosed sum.
Fine Art was acquired as part of Boots' £900million takeover of Ward White in August this year.
Fine Art had a turnover of £17.2million in the year to January 31, 1989..
Wall Street higher.
On Wall Street, bargain-hunting lifted stocks to a moderately higher close but concern about credit dampened any year-end cheer.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average ended the day up 3.20 points at 2,691.13.
Cable's talks on £750m China deal boost shares.
By Mark Milner
SHARES in Cable & Wireless received a sharp boost yesterday after the company disclosed it was discussing the sale of up to £750million worth of shares in its Hong Kong telecomunications subsidiary to the Chinese Government.
The company, headed by Lord Sharp, said the talks centred on China International Investment and Trust (CITIC) acquiring a ‘significant minority interest’ as a long term investment.
Cable & Wireless finance director, Mr Rod Olsen, said the size of the stake being discussed was ‘not less than 10 per cent and not more than 20 per cent’ which would cost CITIC between £375million and £750 million.
Cable & Wireless said the transaction was only at a preliminary stage but the talks were taking place on the basis of Hong Kong Telecom's average price last month.
If it does go through it will provide a double benefit for the UK-based telecommunications group and is also likely to be seen as a significant plus for Hong Kong's stock market.
Hong Kong Telecom, which operates the colony's domestic and international telephone system, accounts for almost 13 per cent of the Hong Kong stock market's Hang Seng index.
The market has been in the doldrums in the wake of the suppression of the pro-democracy movement in China this summer and a decision by an arm of the Chinese Government to make an investment of the size being planned by CITIC is likely to have a considerable impact.
For Cable & Wireless, the CITIC investment would remove what analysts describe as the ‘political factor’ which has been hanging over Hong Kong Telecom.
The company accounts for around two-thirds of group profits.
As one London analyst said yesterday: ‘Psychologically, having the Chinese Government take a stake like this is going to be seen as very positive.’
The proceeds of any sale would also remove another concern which has influenced attitudes towards Cable & Wireless.
The group has invested heavily in building up its Mercury business in the UK and is also committed to the expansion of its PCN business but the disposal of between 10 per cent and 20 per cent of Hong Kong Telecom will allay concerns about the group's funding requirements.
News of the negotiations pushed Cable & Wireless shares up 29p to 548p on the stock market in London.
Yesterday Mr Olsen said the company had been approached by CITIC about the possible purchase of a holding back in November and the talks had reached a point at which they had had to be made public.
Cable & Wireless holds around three-quarters of the shares, the Hong Kong Government another 7 per cent and the remainder are held by outside shareholders.
Though both Cable & Wireless and the Hong Kong Government sold shares when the company was floated on the stock market, the government is not thought likely to join in the sale of the stake to CITIC, though it is aware of the negotiations.
The UK group has a long standing commitment, made to the Hong Kong Government, to broaden the shareholder base of Hong Kong Telecom and a deal with CITIC would be consistent with that.
However Mr Olsen made it clear that the company had no intention of allowing its stake to fall below 50 per cent.
‘We will maintain majority equity control and management control.’
Hong Kong Telecom was created by the merger of the colony's domestic telephone operator, the Hong Telephone Company, with its international carrier, Cable & Wireless Hong Kong, in January last year.
Cable & Wireless held around 80 per cent of both companies.
When the merger plans were announced, an offer for sale of shares to the public was planned for early 1988 but it was scrapped in the wake of the 1987 stock market collapse.
Brussels to examine large cross-border EC mergers.
By John Palmer in Brussels.
THE European Community yesterday agreed regulations for vetting large cross-border mergers, after years of complex and tough negotiations.
Ministers from the 12 EC countries unveiled a new system which may involve around 40 multi-million pound takeovers being subject to the approval of the European Commission in Brussels each year.
Under the scheme, which will operate for four years, the Commission will have the sole authority to investigate and — where it deems fit — veto mergers involving transnational companies with a combined turnover of more than £3.5billion a year.
This will apply where at least two of the firms earn £170million or more of that turnover in the EC but do not earn more than two-thirds of their total turnover in a single EC country.
Hailing the agreement as ‘important’ yesterday, the British consumer affairs minister, Mr John Redwood, said it might catch about 12 major mergers involving British companies annually.
Had the system been in place before, mergers such as GEC-Plessey and Nestle-Rowntrees would probably have come under Brussels' scrutiny, he said.
Proposed mergers involving companies with a turnover of less than £1.4billion may be examined by the Commission at the request of an affected member state.
Any decision on whether to change the criteria so that smaller mergers would be automatically referred to the Commission will be taken by a qualified majority of the Council of Ministers.
The mergers agreement, and progress on a range of other single market issues such as rules for public procurement, the harmonisation for testing and market veterinary medicines and the labelling of irradiated food, were seen as a triumph for the French presidency of the EC Council of Ministers which has ensured that the legislative timetable for the 1992 single market remains on course.
‘The Community can be proud of reaching agreement on an issue of such complexity and importance after so many years of negotiations,’ the British Commissioner, Sir Leon Brittan, said last night.
‘Following this decision, the Community will have for the first time a single framework within which takeovers and mergers of a Community dimension can be dealt with, recognising the importance of maintaining fair competition throughout the single market.’
The final compromise over how the system would operate was only reached after concessions by the British and West German Governments.
But although Mr Redwood agreed to allow the West German competition authorities special rights to look at sensitive mergers, he obtained a commitment from the Council of Ministers that this could only be used ‘in exceptional circumstances’.
Mr Redwood said that, in effect, the agreement installed a ‘one-stop shop’ for vetting mergers, so companies concerned would always know clearly where they stood.
ICI in $193m explosives deal.
By Ben Laurance
ICI, the chemicals giant, is paying $193million (£120million) to buy an American explosives manufacturer.
The company is buying Atlas Powder Co from its parent, Tyler Corporation, and will pay for the deal by taking on about $58million of debts and issuing new ICI shares to cover the balance.
ICI has explosives businesses in Canada, Europe, Australasia, Asia, Latin America, the Indian sub-continent and South Africa.
Last year, their sales totalled £364million and showed a trading profit of £47million.
Atlas Powder's 1,500 employees will join the 8,000 who work for ICI's worldwide explosives operation.
The principal uses of explosives are in mining, quarrying, the building industry and seismic exploration.
The deal is the latest step in a steady series of disposals and acquisitions under ICI chairman, Sir Denys Henderson.
Within the last 18 months, the company has sold: its European silicones business to Rhone-Poulenc for £30million; four businesses from its Canadian offshoot CIL; a computer software company to managers; a West German printing inks business; its over-the-counter drugs business in the US and Savlon in Britain; a Canadian building products business to Trafalgar House; and its Coopers Animal Health, which it owned with Wellcome, to Chicago-based Pitman-Moore; During the period it has bought: Cambridge research Biochemicals; a privatelyowned US acrylics company, K-S-H; Rayca Chemical Corporation, which makes chemicals for the US textiles industry.
It has also taken full control of its Spanish pharmaceuticals business, ICI-Farma, announced a £150million investment in a Taiwanese chemicals plant making the raw material for polyester fibre and trimmed its UK fertiliser business.
The business league proves more interesting than sport Outlook.
By Roger Cowe
IF BUSINESS were as simple as sport it would now be possible to present a league table for the 1989 season, showing games played and points won and leaving one company out on top.
Thankfully business is more interesting than that.
So for the next few days this column will present several different ways of assessing corporate performance for 1989.
As with all the best competitions the rules are entirely arbitrary and drawn up by an impartial judging commmittee consisting of the proprietor of this column and nobody else.
Different criteria are used for each table, but a common minimum market value of £100million is used to exclude the smallest companies where small changes can produce disporportionate results.
Where employees are concerned, a minimum of 2,000 has been used for the same reason.
The facts are drawn from the Datastream database, and are thus subject to the vagaries of any such enterprise.
Still, it is the best information available, so with those caveats, the show goes on.
Today the tables focus on growth, or lack of it.
Three criteria have been chosen, attempting to measure the most important attributes of company performance over the year.
Growth in earnings per share is the key short-term measure so far as the City is concerned.
Return on capital attempts to measure the efficiency or otherwise with which directors use the funds entrusted to them: while employment is a rather important measure of companies' progress which tends to be overlooked in conventional financial circles.
Even with individual measures such as these, however, it is not easy to decide who has won.
Take earnings per share.
If the percentage increase in eps is taken as the key measure, companies which begin with very low earnings have an unfair advantage.
But if the absolute rise in eps is used, companies which begin with high eps have an unfair advantage.
In the true spirit of liberal compromise, the eps league combines both these measures, leaving LLoyds Abbey Life the winner even though it did not top either individual table.
Most of the companies in the top 10 are small and fast-growing, which is only to be expected — after all, it would be extraordinary for ICI to double its earnings.
The exceptions are WPP, the new giant of the advertising industry, and insurance company Sun Alliance.
Interestingly, though, the bottom 10 includes many household names fallen on hard times.
De La Rue, still struggling despite the sale of Crosfield printers, props up the table, with a fall of 28p virtually wiping out earnings.
Poor old Westland has plunged into loss, leaving it second from the bottom below the likes of Storehouse and Amstrad.
Amstrad is the only company also to appear in the return on capital bottom 10.
At the bottom end of the ROC table it is no surprise to see companies like Dixons, Saatchi and Saatchi, United Newspapers and Amstrad.
But BodyShop's appearance is more a reflection of accounting curiosities which gave it such a huge return on capital last year: likewise fire extinguisher company Nu-Swift, whose remarkable figures last year put it at the top of the ROC table.
WPP's appearance in the top 10 by employment growth as well as the other two tables suggests there is some sense in the measures used.
That does not mean that those which have lost most employees during the year are struggling — Grand Met and Guinness appear due to the clear-out of peripheral businesses, and Reed International because of its transformation from manufacturing to publishing.
The employee top 10 features those companies which are expanding fastest, and it says something for the performance of WPP that it has managed to perform well in eps and return on capital terms at the same time as it has achieved that expansion.
The composite league table at the end of next week will combine these and other factors to produce the overall winners and losers of 1989.
Meanwhile, since Christmas fast approaches, tomorrow will identify the Scrooge of 1989.
The threat behind the Eastern promise Frontiers of work.
Simon Beavis Labour Correspondent.
WHEN Lech Walesa made the keynote speech of his recent five-day visit to Britain most people in his audience of trade unionists, politicians and church and business leaders wore Solidarnosc badges — some old, some spanking new.
The welcome for the man who is recognised as a significant player in unleashing the democratic tides sweeping Eastern Europe was genuine and widespread.
Even Norman Fowler, Employment Secretary, who was representing the Government, was persuaded to wear one of the distinctive red and white labels.
Yet Mr Walesa's message — particularly his calls for massive investment to rebuild the Polish economy — has sparked a wave of largely half-muttered fears in the British union movement about the way the economic rebuilding of East European economies will unfold.
He came calling for Europe to work towards economic integration to ensure that the democratic hopes of people in the East did not give way to an opposite undertow of disillusion.
He appeared to give carte blanche to investors, predicting that by spring there would be significant business between Britain and Poland.
His meetings with the CBI and the Prime Minister were clearly the main focus of his mission.
But he also included some explosive thoughts about the future political makeup of Poland.
Notably, he refused to say whether it would be a socialist or capitalist state, insisting that these words no longer meant anything in Poland.
But it was the call for investment that aroused the most plain fears, and these have been compounded in recent days by a clutch of investments in Eastern Europe by big western manufacturers.
Not least was the announcement that Fiat will build a car plant in the Soviet Union, a move described candidly by one Fiat official in the Guardian: ‘Fiat believes that Eastern Europe will become the new Korea of the motor industry, except this time cheap production will be available on our doorstep,’ he said.
Simultaneously, the US group Combustion Engineering announced a $2billion deal to build a petrochemical plant in Siberia.
Since then General Electric has paid $150million for a half stake in the Hungarian light bulb manufacturer Tunsgram and General Motors has decided to build an engine plant there.
These investments are seen by some as the start of an inevitable flood establishing a low-cost source of supply for the West.
Mr Roger Lyons, the assistant general secretary of the MSF technical union, sees the need for a massive programme of training to equip trade unionists in the East with skills to handle multi-nationals.
But he also sees the need for guarantees on employment conditions there.
‘We are very worried that multi-nationals with a captive audience in the East will impose conditions there that would not be acceptable in the European Community.
We don't want to deny them opportunities, but those opportunities musn't be unrestrained,’ he says.
He sees the Fiat plant as a signifiant threat to motor manufacture in Western Europe, and the potential for GE and Tungsram (which has 8 per cent of the world market in light bulbs) to flood the western European market.
Governments and the EC, he argues, have not realised the inherent threats to manufacturing in the West.
They would need to insist on Eastern states meeting minimum labour standards as a pre-cursor to trading with the West.
This is an issue which Western Governments and unions are only really beginning to grapple with in the context of the Single European market, and for many that is where the debate will stay for some time.
Mr Bill Jordan, president of the AEU engineering union and the leading figure on the right of the TUC general council, dismisses the prospect of a sudden flood of western investment in Eastern states.
Extending the debate over minimum standards to new trading partners in the East is a long way off.
Multinationals are by nature conservative, seeking out investment areas which are politically stable.
‘These countries are going to go through a period of not only political but also economic instability for some time to come,’ he says.
Many on the right of the labour movement expect that the biggest problems will occur among unions on the left who have fostered close ties with East European unions which are now being discredited.
For TUC bureaucrats the emphasis in the short term is to concentrate on helping to develop real trade union structures in Eastern European states.
The need is to move unions on from being state-controlled agencies for controlling industrial production to collective bargaining organisations.
There is a clear realisation that attempting to export western trade unionism to the East would be futile.
The need to prepare the economies for unemployment and social security provision for the first time will be the important issues.
So far the TUC has begun a series of training seminars with Solidarity aimed at pushing it away from being a political and highly regionalised organisation into being an industrial and truly national one.
Heads of department from the Soviet trade union centre, the AUCCTU, are expected to visit Congress House in the New Year on a fact-finding mission, and there have been requests for training links to be built between the TUC and the Hungarian trade union body, SZOT, which has been attempting to restructure itself over the last two years.
The threat from investment in the East is also being played down by TUC officials who say the biggest business to be done by investors will be in filling East European markets with much-craved products.
The clearest message from Mr Walesa's visit, however, was that in Eastern Europe now nothing is particularly clear politically or socially.
Until crippled economies are rebuilt everything will be very brittle.
OECD says rate rise may be needed to defend pound.
By Larry Elliott Economics Correspondent
THE UK economy faces a period of considerable uncertainty, with the risk that the government will have to raise base rates again to defend the pound, according to an international report today.
A survey by the Paris-based Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) predicts that the UK will be one of the worst performing nations next year, and warns that a recession will be a real risk if interest rates rise again.
It adds that inflation is likely to be higher and domestic demand slower than it predicted in its last report six months ago.
Then the OECD forecast that UK interest rates would be 13 per cent by the end of 1989, which would allow the economy to grow by just over 2 per cent next year and inflation to rise by 5 ¾ per cent.
It now believes consumer prices will rise by 6.5 per cent in 1990 but growth will be 1.3 per cent, and could be less than 1 per cent excluding North Sea oil.
There was ‘no strong case’ on domestic grounds for the last base rate increase to 15 per cent.
Growth in Germany and Japan next year is expected to be 3.2 per cent and 4.5 per cent respectively.
The average for the 24-nation OECD is 2.9 per cent.
The OECD says it is concerned by the increase in inflation among members, but the average of 4.5 per cent is still well below the forecast for the UK.
The cost of living in Germany is expected to rise by 3 per cent in 1990, with Japan's inflation rate even lower at 2.6 per cent.
While its overall assessment paints a picture of relative stability over the next two years, the assessment of the UK's economic prospects is downbeat.
It includes the UK in the category of countries where trade deficits are worryingly large, adding that if market confidence in the pound is not restored, ‘exchange rate stability might require a further increase in interest rates.
‘Further tightening of credit conditions could tip the already slowing economy into recession,’ the report says.
However, it adds, an even greater risk is that higher mortgage rates will add to wage pressures.
It predicts a brighter outlook for the balance of payments, with the lower pound helping export growth and flat domestic demand curbing import growth.
However, improvement in the current account deficit will be slow and gains in market share are likely to be limited because Britain's inflation rate is higher than its competitors.
Investment is expected to remain subdued and a period of destocking is possible as firms respond to lower demand.
Cash is back…or why dearer credit is on the cards Notebook.
By Edited by Alex Brummer
IN ALMOST every area of commercial activity the phrase cash discount carries special resonance.
It is part of the daily truck in street markets; it the kind of thing which turns on the average car dealer; it is part and parcel of many of the transactions carried out in the building trade and cash or at least early settlement means a better price for the retailer when negotiating with a manufacturer.
In the United States even those most staid of institutions, the public utilities, offer a cash discount to those customers who pay for their water, electricity or gas on time.
The current regime governing credit card transactions in the UK runs counter to such basic trading practices and principles.
Far from receiving a discount the purchaser arriving at the average high street store which a bunch of fivers in most cases pays more for his new washing machine or bicycle because the retailer has factored into the pricing structure the credit card company's fee (which can range from one to four per cent).
Thus, the decision by the Trade Secretary, Mr Nicholas Ridley, to abolish the credit card companies ‘no discrimination’ rule must be sensible.
It allows retailers to set prices as they see fit.
They can either follow customary practice and offer cash buyers a discount or charge the credit card buyer a surcharge.
This is not revolutionary.
Anyone crossing the Atlantic (on a cash only bucket shop fare) will quickly find filling stations only too happy to offer a substantial cash discount at the pump.
Moreover, the average service station in the US seems to have no trouble operating a third tier of pricing which offers an even more generous discount for self-service.
So much for the idea that two-tier pricing will somehow be too complicated.
Other criticisms of the Ridley ruling appear to show scant regard for the integrity of the retailer or its competitiveness.
It is argued that there will be no discounts only surcharges, on original prices, and this will be inflationary.
This seems highly unlikely at a time when high street stores are holding sales before Christmas.
Admittedly, it's a nuisance in going into crowded banks to obtain cash.
That could be resolved if financial insitutions were willing to invest a little more in cash dispensers in shopping centres.
There may also be collateral benefits.
In effect the Government is imposing a surcharge on an important source of credit: the direct controls it abhors.
If this were to inhibit credit expansion it could lead to lower interest rates.
Trivial detail.
WHEN Kingfisher's Geoff Mulcahy launched his £560million bid for Dixons, he insisted that a takeover — merging Kingfisher's Comet with Stanley Kalms' chain — would give the combined company 22 per cent of the UK retail electrical market.
This was the first piece of silliness: Comet already has 8.8 per cent and Dixons has almost 18 per cent— quite enough when merged to breach the 25 per cent ceiling which triggers a Monopolies Commission inquiry.
Mr Mulcahy's 22 per cent figure could be justified only by including rentals of new TVs, video recorders and other hired electrical equipment.
The second piece of silliness came from Dixons' Mr Kalms.
After the Guardian pointed out on December 8 that Kingfisher did indeed face a prima facie competition problem, he told another newspaper that during his 1986 bid for the then Woolworths, he had been obliged by the OFT to pre-sell Comet to Granada to avoid a monopolies investigation.
Yes, Dixons had lined up Granada as a buyer of Comet were the bid to succeed.
And yes, the OFT did take this into account when clearing the bid.
But the sale was not a precondition of clearance.
Then when Dixons admitted that Mr Kalms had perhaps overstated his case when talking about the ‘86 bid, Kingfisher smugly declared that it was ‘pleased to note’ Dixons' clarification.
The important point is this: whether or not Kingfisher-plus-Dixons would have a market share of 26 per cent or 22 per cent, a successful takeover would give a single company a large and powerful share of electrical retailing.
This would not necessarily be a bad thing.
In the past, Kingfisher has argued cogently that tipping the bargaining balance towards the electrical retailer and away from the manufacturers would benefit consumers.
This may well be true.
If it is not, the bid should be be blocked.
If it is true, then Kingfisher should not be afraid of arguing its case in front of the Monopolies Commission.
Kingfisher's bid for Dixons should be investigated.
At the very least, it would mean that the real issues are debated rather than the trivial detail of statistics and history.
Shop soiled.
THE final act of the bloody TSB reorganisation was played out yesterday when banking chief Don McCrickard moved into the group chief executive slot, until now occupied by Philip Charlton, who is to become one of three deputy chairmen.
Mr McCrickard has two years to get the TSB into shape before the protection against takeover bids expires.
The results of the inaugural year of new chairman Sir Nicholas Goodison will be published on January 11.
It will be odd if he does not exercise the incoming chairman's prerogative of dumping as much rubbish as possible into the accounts.
Analysts are forecasting £340-£350million before tax.
There are also likely to be provisions against losses on swap deals with local councils, which may be over £50million.
Most of the reorganisation charges incurred in the efficiency drive announced last month, which will prune 3,000 jobs, are also likely to appear in the next accounts.
That could be nearly as much again.
The result will be a shop-soiled look for the TSB.
If Mr McCrickard gets it right, the benefits of cost savings will begin to come through in 1991.
If he does not, analysts are already talking about recommending the shares on bid hopes.
Warsaw wrestles with tricky task of selling share ownership to the workers.
By Daniel John
AS THE argument over economic solutions to solve Poland's ills grows, the debate has turned to ways of maintaining worker interest and participation in industries which will be subject to a tougher managerial and financial climate.
With the new Polish Government actively considering large-scale privatisation, much attention is beginning to focus on a proposal favoured by both sides of the political fence in Britain.
It is a solution which fits in neatly with Mr Lech Walesa's suggestion that the future political make-up of Poland may be neither capitalist nor socialist.
Hence why, six weeks before Mr Walesa arrived in Britain for his historic visit last month, a group of merchant bankers, accountants and lawyers, led by rightwing theorists from the Adam Smith Institute (the doyen of advisers to Mrs Thatcher's government), went to Warsaw to discuss the different aspects of privatisation, including the idea of influential worker share ownership.
Given what has happened in Britain, certain enterprises could lend themselves to being sold to the Polish public who, surprisingly, might have few difficulties putting up hard cash to buy shares.
Evidence suggests that there is a sizeable amount of foreign currency held in Poland — it is thought between one and two billion US dollars is currently banked with the financial institutions, but the undeclared amount almost certainly swells that figure many times over.
But considerable problems lie ahead.
Dr Kristof Lis, Poland's minister in charge of the Plenipotentiary for Changes in Ownership, is currently having to wrestle with the fact of real worker power — from the concept of actual ownership to the committees which have a large say in the running of industry.
He has to come up with a strategy which will instill new financial disciplines in Polish industry and satisfy the demands of the workers/public en masse.
And the first sell-off has to be success.
If it is not, then British privatisation experts are certain that the programme will be still-born.
Selling industries, lock, stock and barrel, to their workforces is not an option in the Polish case.
Going straight from state ownership to worker ownership is unlikely to change the company's culture or management style, believes Mr Laurie Brennan, chief executive of New Bridge Consultants, an arm of the law firm, Clifford Chance, set up to promote employee share ownership, and who has just returned from Poland.
He bases his argument on inefficient and corrupt managers who will be unable and unwilling to adopt the necessary business-like ethics needed to turn their companies round.
And some of the painful medicine required — like plant closures and unemployment — will not appeal to the workers either.
But there is also another reason why management and/or employee buyouts are unlikely to succeed.
Part of the point of selling state businesses is to raise hard cash, and taking on more debt to fund worker buyouts in return for low or non-earning equity stakes (which may prove to be worthless in the long run) is not a real option for the government.
Western banks are even more reluctant to part with cash, seeing the possibility that East European borrowing could become the Third World debt problem of the 1990s.
And even if this could be got round, extra sums would be needed for redundancy payments, investment and modernisation.
However, this does not rule out worker participation in Dr Lis' plans.
The workers will have to be part of the success of the sell-offs, which is why advisers like Mr Brennan are proposing that they be given sizeable stakes in companies for nothing — up to 5 per cent or more — with the possibility of them buying more shares at big discounts.
This would allow them to have some influence in the company (unlike in Britain, where there has been no sizeable reservations of shares on a collective basis in the shape of employee trusts) as shareholders as well as having worker-directors.
The theory sounds fine but there remains the problem of the deep cultural clash which the new government itself represents.
Solidarity, quite rightly, sees the recent changes as its victory.
Overnight, government ownership has become the peoples' ownership but soon that will change a third time to shareholder ownership.
Little wonder then that the prospect of a Solidarity-led government clashing with Solidarity-led trade unions is a real fear to those involved.
Frontiers is edited by Peter Large
PO says pay deal will hit profits.
By Andrew Cornelius Business Editor
THE Post Office warned yesterday that this year's profits will be affected by higher than usual cost increases, including the latest pay deal for Royal Mail staff this year.
This followed the announcement that the corporation made pre-tax profits of £58million in the first half of the year, from April to September, against £4million in the first half of 1988.
The second-half results will also be affected by higher than usual increases in costs in the second half.
The Post Office said that the pay deal for 160,000 Royal Mail Letters staff which came into effect last month would affect the full year results.
In previous years, their pay increases operated from April.
The financial figures exclude the contribution from Girobank, the banking subsidiary, which is to be sold to the Alliance and Leicester Building Society.
Girobank's post-tax profit — calculated on a basis that does not take inflation into account — was £9million, unchanged on the first half of 1988.
Full-year results for the bank are expected to be higher than last year.
Post Office Counters, the business which includes all sub-post offices in the country, made pre-tax profits of £16million in the first half of the year.
Last year's results were lower because of the national postal strike and because of the pay increases, the Post Office said.
This year's profits will be used to help fund a record £1.5billion programme of investment over the next five years to cope with what is described as ‘a phenomenal’ growth in mail.
The money will be invested on upgrading sorting offices and expanding the Post Office vehicle fleet.
The Post Office is the last state-owned business still controlled by the Department of Industry.
Surcharge put on flexible friends.
By Teresa Hunter
SHOPS will soon be able to charge higher prices for goods bought by credit card, the Trade and Industry Secretary, Mr Nicholas Ridley, announced yesterday in a written reply to a parliamentary question.
Retailers will be able to choose whether to surcharge credit card customers or to offer a discount for cash, giving them greater price control.
But the Consumers Association and banks are concerned it could lead to excessive surcharging.
Mr Simon Hinde, Consumers Association spokesman, predicted: ‘There is potential for profiteering.
We would have preferred a six-month trial period and controls to prevent abuses.’
The Retail Consortium, which lobbied the government hard for the abolition of what is known as the ‘no discrimination’ clause in agreements between banks and shopkeepers, was delighted.
The Petrol Retailers Association also welcomed the scope to slap a surcharge on credit card bills.
But most banks reacted with dismay, predicting that the measure would be inflationary, and lead to a rise in crime as people were encouraged to carry more cash.
A Monopolies and Mergers Commission inquiry into credit cards recommended the abolition of the ‘no discrimination’ clause in agreements between banks and their retailers when it reported in the summer.
Retailers have to pay between 1 and 4 per cent of all credit card transactions to their bank.
It averages 1.8 per cent.
The government squashed a previous recommendation to abolish the ‘no discrimination’ clause, made by an earlier inquiry in 1980.
But this time Mr Ridley has concluded that the ‘no-discrimination’ rule is anti-competitive.
‘It restricts the freedom of retailers to set their own prices.
The effect of ending the rule will be to give retailers freedom to choose whether or not to charge the same, whether payment is made by credit card or cash.’
Large stores are unlikely to dual-price.
Marks&Spencer and Storehouse, representing BhS, Habitat, Richard Shops and MotherCare, have already confirmed that they will not be introducing dual pricing.
But smaller shops, restaurants, jewellers and petrol stations are likely to be attracted by the prospect.
Shops will have to clearly display signs warning customers that those paying by credit cards may have to pay more.
However, it is not yet clear whether the new regulations, will call for the individual dual pricing of all goods in the shop, or whether a simple surcharge could be added to the bill.
Mr Ridley has called on the banks to publish greater details of their various charges to retailers, to encourage competition.