

A Country Diary: NORTHUMBERLAND: When we saw our first immigrant golden-eye bobbing on the waters of Bolam Lake in the early months of each year, we always took it as the first sign of spring.
Black and white in appearance, the male golden-eye can be distinguished from the less strikingly marked male tufted duck by its lack of drooping crest and an ostentatious white patch behind the bill.
‘Bucephala clangula’ sounds noisy but, in fact, the golden-eye is a silent duck compared with the mallard and wigeon.
Bolam Lake has now been designated a Country Park and has a warden to protect it.
I often see foxes, roe deer and red squirrels in the conifer plantation there.
Surely a tribute to sensitive management.
David Noble-Rollin, of the Natural History Society of Northumbria led a party to Bolam last week.
Mist hung over the water and the huge concourse of duck swam and ducked and preened.
I picked out two golden-eye amongst teal and wigeon.
David told us that swan pattern of movement was currently being monitored in the north-east, so he was trying to read the leg bands through his glass.
All on the same alder tree we saw coal tits, gold crests, marsh willow tits and long-tailed tits and I learnt to distinguish the whip-like whistling note of the marsh tit.
A first sighting of a nuthatch was recorded.
A group of yellow bar-winged siskins caused a flurry of excitement; the first time such a large flock had been sighted at Bolam Lake.
Whooper swans are molested by irresponsible trigger-happy parties but here, at Bolam, they visit in peace.
The wild whooper swan is a bird of great beauty and, I think, on the increase in the Border region.
The swan was once a highly regarded delicacy on the Christmas table.
Ornithologists gave the bird a Christian foundation and believed that the first mute swans were brought to Great Britain by the Crusaders from Cyprus in 1192.
This theory was contradicted following the discovery of swan bones in Cambridgeshire, Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex.
VERONICA HEATH
Presents of mind Gifts say an awful lot about the giver — and can be hazardous: a timely warning from John Illman.
YOU CAN blame the three wise men.
They started it all.
Not for nothing, however, are they called wise.
We know absolutely nothing about them.
They gave away very little about themselves in their choice of the first Christmas presents.
They would not get away so lightly today.
The psychologists would be in the manger with the TV crews, evaluating them on the basis of their offerings — gold, frankincense and myrrh.
The psychology of present giving is a great giveaway, revealing more about the giver than the recipient.
Gifts are expressions of taste, emotions, wealth, power, social awareness, aspirations, imagination, fashion — oh yes, and love and affection — well, sometimes.
If you're lucky.
What kind of present-giver are you?
And how should you regard relatives bearing gifts?
We've classified 12 types of present-giver — one for each of the 12 days of Christmas, plus health hazard rankings, with top scores of 10.
THE ROMANTIC: They may please Barbara Cartland, but the true romantic scorns heart shaped chocolates, Chanel No. 5, sexy underwear and other fashionable cliches of romance.
He spares nothing in pursuit of surprise and mystery.
But being romantic can be a health hazard — threatening both your life and your wallet.
Witness the mystery buyer of the world's most expensive teddy bear: a £55,000 present for his wife.
The message here is that romantic cliches may safeguard you from a heart attack and prevent you making a fool of yourself.
Health hazard ranking: six.
THE JOKER: He may also decide to give sexy underwear that doesn't actually fit, or, if he is feeling malicious, spicy chewing gum for the loud mouthed — gum that cements the lips together.
A typical present might be a bomb, or rather a hand-grenade alarm clock.
When it goes off you throw it against the wall to stop the noise.
The joker, however, gives the present knowing that in the confusion as it goes off, it may be thrown the wrong way — into the face of the recipient's partner.
So beware the joker.
HHR: seven.
THE BLACKMAILER: The biggest health hazard of them all — there is at least one in every family.
He gives an expensive present to a dying aunt, hoping to be remembered in her will.
Always hovering like a vulture around the vulnerable, pressing on them the drinks and fattening foods to make all his dreams come true.
HHR: eight.
THE MACHO MAN: His present is his presence: his life story, a feel of his biceps, a drunken kiss to any woman who is silly enough to stray within reach of his groping; and, if he is feeling generous, the promise of a night out at his local.
Another health hazard.
Fill him up with food and booze, direct him to a warm room and then pray hard.
HHR: eight.
THE DIY BORE: He likes nothing more than to celebrate his talent, big or small.
A picture from the artist; a plant from the gardener; a book from the author, obtained at discount (or even free) from the publisher.
HHR: four.
THE NEW MAN: The term may now be unfashionable, but the man himself is still in evidence.
He presents his wife with a food processor or the latest wisdom on toilet training or breast feeding.
She spends Christmas wondering if Macho Man really is the pig he is made out to be.
HHR: 10.
THE PEACEMAKER: He sees gifts as an excellent way of atoning for sins, but can put himself at risk by overstating himself — giving an exquisite set of English porcelain when a book token would do.
His genuine desire to make up may be interpreted as an attempt to embarrass or be-little.
His present may trigger the inevitable family festive fall-out usually breaking out somewhere between the Queen's speech at three and the Christmas cake at five.
HHR: nine.
THE ENTHUSIAST: The biggest bore of them all, and, again, every family has one.
His mission in life is to expand the horizons of those around him.
The Christmas present gives him one more chance to convert the family to the alleged delights of fly fishing or English cathedrals or war games — or whatever his confounded passion is (Oxfam shops, however, are very grateful to him).
HHR: four.
THE IMPROVER: The kids want a bicycle or the Beano annual or the latest computer game.
But the improver is into intellectual nourishment on a lavish scale.
The kids, aged, typically, eight and nine, are baffled to receive the complete works of Shakespeare, especially when he starts reciting Hamlet over the Christmas pud.
HHR: one.
THE IMAGE MAKER: Christmas is another opportunity to cultivate perfection — the right dress, perfectly matched with bewitching accessories.
She wants to walk out, but is afraid of ‘spoiling’ Christmas for the rest of the family.
HHR: nine.
THE DUTY MAN: Pants, socks et al, with big Christmas bonuses for M&S.
The functional never gives away to the festive.
Invariably the butt of the family joker, he leaves his wife clamouring for an image maker for a husband.
HHR: six.
THE REFORMER: Cosmetics for people with skin trouble, watches for bad time keepers, personal organisers for the chaotic — the reformer is convinced that all the answers are in his hands.
HHR: four.
Macho Man and The Joker…the Sylvester Stallone and Jack Nicholson characters would offer gifts likely to endanger health OVERNIGHT FILE
If we're not careful we can kiss this goodbye Mistletoe-that old Christmas staple-is dying out.
Malcolm Smith explains why.
WORSHIPPED by the Druids and used for generations to guarantee a Christmas kiss, mistletoe — long a traditional part of the festive season — is dying out.
This year, the white-berried twigs with their narrow, leathery leaves are harder to come by and more expensive than ever.
And if you do buy a couple of tiny sprigs for £1 it's likely to be French mistletoe.
The decline in home-grown mistletoe is the direct result of the continuing loss of yet another typical feature of the English countryside, the apple orchard.
Mistletoe grows on old tree branches, preferring the rugged bark of apple trees but also poplars, limes and, occasionally, hedgerow hawthorns.
Conifers it detests.
Apple trees are its bread and butter in Britain but mistletoe clearly has no meal ticket.
In 1957, England had 26,000 hectares of dessert apple orchards.
Now, fewer than 14,000 hectares remain.
Many of these survivors are not traditional tree orchards at all, but bush varieties on which mistletoe is incapable of gaining a foothold.
Cider and culinary apple orchards have gone the same way, all helped along until a few years ago by government grants to grub up the old trees and replace them with easy to spray, prune and pick bush types.
A partial parasite, mistletoe relies on birds such as thrushes eating its oily berries and dropping the seeds out at the other end on to the branches of trees where they perch.
If it ends up in a bark crevice, the seed may germinate and penetrate the tree.
The growing plant partly relies on the host tree for nutrients but it also makes its own by the usual photosynthesis.
Evergreen mistletoe stems can be a metre or so long.
Mistletoe was once quite common — as were apple tree orchards — in eastern and southern England, the south-west and parts of the Midlands.
It has always been absent from Scotland and Ireland.
Its decline explains why the wholesale price of mistletoe has gone up this year by as much as £15 a hundredweight at England's largest market — Tenbury Wells in Herefordshire.
Nick Champion of Russell, Baldwin and Bright Markets, who run it on the four Tuesdays prior to Christmas and sell several tons a year, says dealers are having to travel far afield to collect mistletoe to sell at Tenbury.
Once, they could gather all they needed from orchards in Shropshire, Herefordshire and Worcestershire.
Scouring the countryside is bound to deplete it even further.
From Tenbury Wells market, mistletoe is sold on to other markets all over Britain.
French mistletoe is making big inroads.
Covent Garden deals in it, as do many provincial wholesale markets.
But nurseryman Peter Summers of Teme Valley Nursery at Tenbury reckons that the English variety is far superior.
‘The French mistletoe (exactly the same species) is cut earlier and dries out more because of the distance it comes,’ he says.
‘That is why the berries drop off sooner.’
The French, though, have retained far more of their apple orchards.
And Napoleon started a useful trend in planting poplars along French roadsides to shade his soldiers from the midday heat.
Unless, that is, his motive was to supply the infantry with sprigs of mistletoe to give to their sweethearts at Christmas.
OVERNIGHT FILE PAGE sci