

Great Britain has lost an Empire and has not yet found a role Dean Acheson, West Point, 1962
The Whitehall Market-place and the Military Road to Absurdity
Britain's influence in the world depends first and foremost on the health of her internal economy and the success of her export trade.
Without these, military power cannot long be supported Duncan Sandys, 1957 Defence White Paper.
This book is about Britain's Defence policy in her post-imperial era, and is the sequel to my Withdrawal from Empire , published in 1986, in which I looked through military eyes at the creation, development and eventual transformation of the Empire into the loosely-knit British Commonwealth.
I used the analogy of a family that goes from rags to riches and back to rags in three or four generations.
The first generation establishes the foundations of the family's wealth; the second and third develop and enjoy it; and the fourth loses it, not necessarily through riotous living or altruism, but because times have changed and the foundations upon which their wealth was built have collapsed.
It took Britain four centuries rather than four generations to complete the cycle.
We are now back where we were in Elizabeth I's days: a middle power, making our way in a world dominated by two superpowers, and doing so through intuitive manipulation of balances of power, as we have always done over the centuries.
In the first Elizabeth's time the superpowers were France and Spain; but, while much has changed, Britain is still an island upon which no other nation has any territorial, ethnic or political claim.
We prize our independence as much as ever, although we accept that in the run-up to the twenty-first century independence can only be relative: international interdependence is a Line qua non .
My first choice of tide for this book was The Offshore Island because it reflects a return to our seventeenth-century political and military status, and our true position in the world today.
We are Europeans and yet we are separated from Europe both physically and psychologically.
We have a closer relationship with North America, but, like Canada, we have no wish to  rejoin our former American colonies as the fifty-first State of the Union, despite our common Anglo-Saxon heritage.
We have even closer blood relationships with the more distant Australians and New Zealanders.
Our ties with them still matter, though they have been weakened by Australasia's dependence on the United States for security and by our entry into the EEC.
And, having freed over a quarter of the world's population from our colonial rule, we have no desire to lose our own independence.
The politico-military problem that we face in our post-imperial era is how to maintain the greatest practicable measure of national independence without jeopardizing the security of our islands and of our wider interests in the world at large.
But in the light of the collapse of the Berlin Wall, which occurred after this book was completed and sent to my publishers, we have changed its title to Britain's Defence Dilemma: An 
Inside View.
My conclusions, expressed in the last chapter —‘Venice of the Twenty-First Century?’— have been reinforced by the events that have been taking place in Eastern Europe since the autumn of 1989.
In devising policies to ensure national security with minimal loss of independence in the post-imperial era, successive Secretaries of State for Defence and their principal military advisers, the Chiefs of Staff, have had to grapple with three dominant factors: a growing Soviet military threat; a decline in Britain's ability to create wealth until the very recent Thatcher revolution; and an accelerating rate of technological change.
The first needs no elaboration; the second stemmed from socialism and the growing demands of the Welfare State; and the third created rampant inflation in the cost of defence equipment, which has yet to be mastered.
There is no generally recognized date marking the end of our imperial era.
The grant of independence to India in 1947 removed the keystone from the British imperial archway, but, because India and Pakistan became Dominions in the fashion of Canada, Australia and New Zealand, nothing seemed to change: the Empire went on.
Attlee, Churchill, and Eden, as Prime Ministers in the 1950s, could well have repeated Churchill's own words, uttered during a wartime speech at the Mansion House in the City of London in November 1942, ‘I have not become the King's First Minister to preside over the liquidation of the British Empire.'
In military terms the imperial era came to an end when the last British troops were withdrawn from East of Suez in 1972, but politically it had ended sixteen years earlier at Suez.
Before the Suez débâcle in the autumn of 1956, British governments had felt themselves able to dictate the pace at which the colonial Empire would be transformed into a cohesive Commonwealth of Nations: after Suez the imperial ethos was shattered, and our run down to middle-power status was no longer resisted.
Suez was the watershed between our imperial past and our offshore island future: before Suez we sought to restore our declining power; after Suez we shed our self-imposed colonial responsibilities as fast as we could reasonably do so.
I have, therefore, taken 1957 as the true starting Point of our post-imperial era.
The exact date of the beginning of our post-imperial era is, however, relatively unimportant.
The development of Defence policy is slow and essentially evolutionary.
The Services themselves are living organisms that, like the human beings of which they are composed, develop slowly, each generation handing on its accumulated wisdom and experience to the next.
Their weapons, equipment and tactics take decades rather than years to develop.
And Defence policy cannot grow in isolation from the rest of national decision-making in Whitehall.
It is rarely, if ever, possible to start with a clean sheet of paper: the starting point has to be the existing force structure and the current consensus of opinion within Whitehall.
In this chapter, I will sketch briefly the Defence policy-making machinery; and then, in chapter 2, look equally briefly at the development of our military thinking in the immediate post-war decade, 1946 to 1956, from which our post-imperial policies have flowed.
But, first, a distinction should be drawn between national grand strategy, Defence policy and current military strategy.
The first is long-term, evolutionary, and the product of centuries of often painful experience — the pain caused more often than not by repeated failure to pay a realistic Defence insurance premium.
The second is the medium-term and politically expedient view, taken by the government of the day, on how Britain's grand strategy should be implemented within its perceived availability of resources —— perceived because it is the product of subjective views and intense bargaining within the market-place that is Whitehall.
And the third is the current military method of implementing that Defence policy in terms of operational roles and resources allotted to the different elements of our military forces.
British grand strategy is, like the Constitution, unwritten.
The strategic equivalent of the Constitution are the ‘Three Pillars’ of British strategy that cohave evolved since Crécy and Agincourt in the Hundred Years War of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.
They can be stated in a number of different ways, but they are generally accepted to be:
1.
Ensuring the security of the British Isles.
2.
Maintaining a favourable balance of power in Western Europe.
3.
Projecting and protecting British interests overseas.
Until 1939, the Three Pillars stood upon a foundation of British sea power.
During the short five-year period of the Second World War, a layer of air power was added to that foundation, but since the atomic bombs were dropped on Japan in 1945, and Britain armed herself with nuclear weapons in the 1950s, the Three Pillars have stood just as securely upon the strategic nuclear deterrent.
It is worth recalling that even at the height of Britain's imperial power we rarely tried to go it alone.
We usually gained our ends by astute and almost instinctive creation of alliances, for which we provided leadership, and small  but professional military forces that were sought by friends and feared by foes for the impact they could make upon contemporary balances of power.
In Britain's heyday we provided financial subsidies as well; but though we have retained our fighting abilities, as was demonstrated by the Falklands Campaign, the decline in our resources relative to the superpowers now limits our influence and inhibits our quest for the greatest possible measure of national independence.
While the Three Pillars have stood the test of time, there has always been controversy about their relative importance, and hence about the allocation of resources between them.
Few strategists would gainsay the primacy of the First Pillar — the defence of the British Isles — upon which the sovereignty of the realm depends; though, paradoxically, the United Kingdom has usually been so secure behind its sea walls that Home Defence has been accorded the lowest allocation of resources.
On the other hand, arguments have raged since the early eighteenth century about the relative emphasis to be placed upon the Second and Third Pillars.
During Queen Anne's reign, the Continental and Maritime schools in British strategic thought clashed over the Second and Third Pillars.
The two schools became closely associated with the Whig and Tory Parties, in much the same way that the Labour and Conservative Parties champion non-nuclear and nuclear policies today.
The business-inclined Whigs believed that victory in Europe would automatically secure our overseas interests: the land-owning Tories, with their traditional dislike of the high taxation needed to pay for a standing army, sought to achieve the same ends with peripheral maritime operations, carried out by the Navy, which could largely pay for themselves by taking other powers' colonies and trading posts.
In practice, however, we have rarely fought any of our major wars with an exclusively Continental or Maritime strategy.
We have usually deemed it strategically unwise not to employ a judicious mix of the two.
Four examples make the point.
Continental strategy was uppermost during Marlborough's campaigns in the war of the Spanish Succession in the eighteenth century and during the First World War, though Britain's maritime effort was far from insignificant.
Few would challenge the Maritime school's claim that both these wars resulted in massive haemorrhages of blood and treasure.
Nevertheless, in their aftermaths, Britain's voice was undoubtedly strengthened in world affairs.
By way of contrast, the British campaigns during the Napoleonic Wars and in the Second World War were fought, perforce, with a Maritime strategy for most of the time; but, as the Continental school rightly points out, final victory was won on the Continent at Waterloo in 1815 and in north-west Europe in 1945.
The Maritime school can counter-claim that casualty lists were far shorter in these two wars.
In the present nuclear era, the controversy still rages.
It is convenient to continue using the shorthand of Continental and Maritime schools of thought, although the issues are more complex than they were in Queen Anne's day.
The  extremists among the Continental school argue that all our military resources should be concentrated upon the defence of Western Europe as the best way to ensure the country's continued survival.
In their view, only minimal forces should be trained and equipped to protect Britain's residual interests outside the NATO area.
The Maritime school acknowledge that the greatest Soviet threat is to Western Europe, but they believe that the most likely threats to British and Western interests lie in the more unstable areas of the world beyond NATO's boundaries.
They believe that our forces must be so trained and equipped that they can play both a Continental and Maritime role.
Some of the Maritime school go further and ask the question, ‘Who are We ?; and answer it by pointing out that We are not just the people living in the United Kingdom today.
We are the descendants of all those generations that emigrated out of Europe over the last three centuries to populate the emptier quarters of the earth.
We , and the other races who took on our way of life during our imperial era, encircle the globe.
British Commonwealth links, though gossamer thin for most of the time, can become emotional ties of steel in times of crisis, drawing us into unexpected military commitments, as occurred in the Falklands Campaign.
They remember also that the Dominions came voluntarily to our aid in the two world wars: we would be in honour bound to do likewise if any of them came under threat.
Nonetheless, the Maritime school accept that our forces should be deployed primarily to support the First and Second Pillars, but argue that they must also be given the strategic mobility, equipment, and training to continue Britain's global role as required by the Third Pillar.
British Defence policy, unlike her grand strategy, is written, re-written, written about and debated annually in the Defence White Papers, in which the government of the day makes its case for military expenditure for the coming year.
It has far less to do with strategy than with financial bargains struck in the market-place of Whitehall, and with efforts to contain galloping inflation in weapons procurement.
Indeed, British Defence policy can be described as the sum of Naval, General and Air Staff special pleading.
Each is supported by parliamentary, industrial and media lobbies, and makes the best use of political trends, economic factors, technological change, and the rush of world events to reinforce its case for a larger share of the national cake.
Cynical though this description of Defence policy-making may be, the analogy of the Whitehall market-place is apt.
The currency of the market is compelling argument: the more convincing a case, the higher its value in the bidding for national resources, and in the creation of a favourable climate of opinion in Whitehall and Westminster.
Personalities, presentational skills, prejudices, and political dogmas all play their part, but the working of the market-place helps the coinage of sound argument to drive out the counterfeit of special pleading.
Alter most of Britain's major wars there is a rush to demobilize, and to return to the parsimonious levels of peacetime Defence expenditure.
In 1945 this did  not happen: indeed, more than a decade was to pass before conscription was phased out.
Defence could muster cogent arguments to maintain an unusually high level of expenditure.
The hostility of the Soviet Union, generous American aid, and the disinclination of successive governments to abandon Britain's great-power status, all made higher Defence expenditure politically acceptable.
The Attlee administration, and Ernest Bevin in particular, believed it was only a matter of time before the British economy would recover.
They hoped that the dynamic forces released by socialism would generate new wealth, enabling Britain to stride the world once more in a continuing and -equal partnership with the United States, rather than as the American satellite which she had become in the latter phases of the Second World War.
While the remorseless Soviet military build-up continued to give Defence powerful arguments for keeping up Britain's Defence forces, the failure of the British economy to grow in the enervating climate of the Welfare State progressively eroded Britain's military strength.
Throughout the 1950s, '60s and '70s, both major political parties pursued Keynesian economic policies, deferred to the trade unions, and allowed overmanning and bureaucracy to strangle initiative.
And they both diagnosed high Defence spending as one of the root causes of Britain's economic malaise rather than the policies of the Labour Party, or the neo-socialism of the Conservatives.
There is a striking similarity between the preambles written by both political parties to their Defence White Papers, following the three major Defence Reviews that took place between 1957 and 1975.
In 1957 Duncan Sandys followed the quote at the head of this chapter with the words:
It is therefore in the true interests of defence that the claims of military expenditure should be considered in conjunction with the need to maintain the country's financial and economic strength.
In 1966 Denis Healey.:
Military strength is of little value if it is achieved at the expense of economic health.
In 1975 Roy Mason:
…because the economic situation is now more serious than at any time over the last 25 years, the Government decided that resources must be released for investment and improving the balance of payments…
The defence programme, with its considerable demands on skilled manpower and industry, should play its part in this process…
The credibility of Defence in the Whitehall market-place was further weakened by three other factors: first, the ‘bull’ market enjoyed by the high-spending, socially-orientated departments — Health, Education, Labour and Social Services; secondly, the failure of our West European allies to match our level of Defence expenditure, thus providing arguments that Britain was doing more  than her fair share in collective defence; and thirdly, trading rivals, like Germany and Japan, honing their competitive edge with lower military expenditure, likewise adding to the consensus view that Britain was overspending on Defence however potent the Soviet military threat might be.
The ‘bear’ market in Defence shares is well illustrated in figure 1 .
It shows the decline in the percentage of the Gross Domestic Product devoted to Defence from 1946 onwards.
The steep post-war decline was arrested by the Korean War re-armament programme, which reached a peak of 10 per cent GDP in 1953.
The decline began again in 1954: 7.8 per cent at the time of Suez in 1956; 6.3 per cent at the end of National Service in 1962; 5.4 per cent when Denis Healey completed his Defence Reviews in 1968; and 4.9 per cent in 1970, when the withdrawal from East of Suez was nearing completion.
Thereafter, it averaged 4.85 per cent until 1979 when the seven years of the NATO 3 per cent annual increases in Defence spending began to take effect.
It rose to its highest point of 5.4 per cent in 1984, falling back again to 4.7 per cent in 1988, and with a threat of a further decline to the lowest point since the Second World War of 4.4 per cent in 1989 — despite all the Conservative Party's claims to be the party that looks after the defence of the realm.
The decline in military and civilian manpower employed in the Services, shown in figure 2 , has followed a similar pattern, but with one important difference: whereas military manpower stabilized at 320,000 after Roy Mason's   
Defence Review in 1974/5, civilian manpower has gone on falling thanks to efforts of successive Permanent Under-Secretaries to reduce overheads and to increase the percentage of the Defence vote that can be devoted to weapon procurement.
To continue the analogy of the Whitehall market-place, the Ministry of Defence itself can be looked upon as a specialized commodity market, in which the three Services and the Defence scientists bargain for their share of the resources won by the Secretary of State on the main trading floor during the annual Public Expenditure Reviews.
The share quotation list in the Defence commodity market is the Ministry's Long-Term Costing, in which all programmes and projects are costed over a ten-year period.
It is a rolling assessment, which is recosted every year in the late summer so that the effects of financial targets set by the Treasury for the coming year can be fully assessed before the Cabinet starts its Public Expenditure Review in the autumn.
The figures in the first three years of the Long-Term Costing are detailed and relatively firm because they are fixed by the Public Expenditure Survey Committee each year — hence they are referred to in Whitehall jargon as the PESC years.
Thereafter, they become progressively rounder and broader for each succeeding year as the work of estimating costs becomes more difficult and hence more speculative.
The main purpose of the costings for the latter years is  to identify probable peaks and troughs in the overall programme, which can be smoothed out by phasing in major projects so as to avoid clashes.
Inclusion of projects in these latter years also provides the programme with its substance, and gives the projects themselves their validity.
If a Service fails to argue a project into the costings at an early stage, it will find it much harder to do so subsequently.
Other projects, already in the costing, start jostling for more space due to initial underestimates caused by unforeseen increases in development costs; or due to deliberate ‘thin end of the wedging’ by a department to get an expensive and controversial programme into the Long-Term Costing in the first place.
The bargaining processes within the Defence commodity market are often described in the media and in Parliament as vicious inter-Service infighting.
There is some truth in this, but it is the price that has to be paid for reaching balanced judgements on the way ahead.
It takes a lifetime to master warfare in one element — sea, land or air — and, as yet, few officers have achieved the breadth of experience to command total confidence in all three.
Without the heat of inter-departmental argument, controversial issues would not be distilled to a point where their essential elements can be clearly identified and sound decisions taken on them.
In practice, inter-Service rivalry only becomes unbridled when there is a danger — real or anticipated — of the balance between the Services being upset; or of the structure of one of them being changed in a revolutionary rather than an evolutionary way.
The occasions that stand out in the three decades of our post-imperial era are: Duncan Sandys' 1957 decision to recommend the end of National Service, which almost halved the Army; the Kennedy/Macmillan Polaris agreement at Nassau in 1962 that led to the RAF losing responsibility to the Royal Navy for the British nuclear deterrent; Denis Healey's scrapping of the TSR2 in 1965, which threatened to ‘unhorse’ the RAF's knights; his cancellation of the aircraft-carrier replacement programme in 1966, which did much the same thing to the Royal Navy; and John Nott's attempt in 1981 to maintain the strength of the Rhine Army and RAF Germany at the expense of our maritime capability.
On these occasions the gloves came off as the Service most adversely affected sought support in Parliament, in the media, from industry, and from the electorate, in what it saw as its fight for survival.
In most years the updating of the Long-Term Costing, though always difficult, is a relatively gentlemanly struggle between sensible men, trying to squeeze a pint of requirements into a half-pint financial pot, as happens in the budgetary processes of any large organization or commercial conglomerate.
Inter-Service friction has been eased over the years by successive steps taken to concentrate greater power in the hands of the Central staffs as more tri-Service experienced officers have become available; and to bring the Services closer together at every level of command, and in training and operations.
Paradoxically, in most years the outcome of the Defence budgetary process is under-rather than overspending, and this is not because the accounting officers  fear the wrath of Parliament, but because of what has become known as the ‘Bow-Wave Phenomenon’, illustrated in figure 3 .
In the first three years of a Service's Long-Term Costing after the actual estimates year, there seems to be a bow-wave of requirements that cannot be fitted into the programme.
Before presenting the Service's estimates to Parliament, the department should, in theory, prune its programmes down to  the financial target line imposed by the Treasury; but, in practice, it has been found that the bow-wave tends to dissipate as the actual financial year goes by because there are always delays in most programmes that lead to underspending on individual projects.
Even the most experienced managers cannot tell how, when and in which projects delays are going to occur; the wise accounting officer discounts his programmes by an arbitrary percentage judged from past experience to be sensible for his particular field of responsibility: that is to say he keeps in his programme some ten to twenty per cent more potential expenditure than his financial allocation theoretically allows.
As each financial year passes, the bow-wave does, indeed, dissipate as research and development programmes meet snags; as decisions are delayed in the labyrinth of Whitehall committees; as procurement contracts slip behind schedule; and as units expend less than they asked for due to similar delays in their day-to-day training and operations.
The best and most experienced accounting officers come out about all square and do not have to suffer the indignity of having to ask their ministers to present supplementary estimates to  Parliament at the end of the financial year.
Even so, Defence has constantly underspent its vote, and by substantial margins on those occasions when there have been unforeseen delays in the deliveries of major equipments such as warships and advanced aircraft.
There was one exceptional year that proved the rule: in 1980, the economic recession so emptied British industry's order books that firms were able, and keen, to deliver faster than anticipated with embarrassing consequences for the accounting officers in post at the time.
There was a gross overspend that year, which led, in part, to the replacement of Francis Pym by John Nott, as will be recounted in chapter 8.
Some good, however, came out of this.
Hitherto departments had not been allowed to carry forward underspends into the next financial year though the Treasury was allowed to penalize departments by deducting overspends from the next year's targets.
In consequence, there was always a scramble to spend in the last half of the financial year when the danger of an underspend was becoming apparent.
By then it was usually too late to accelerate existing contracts or to initiate new ones.
Hence, the ‘Bow-Wave Phenomenon’ turned into the ‘Barrack Square Syndrome’, in which the only way to mop up money was to spend it on a few quickly and easily let contracts, like refurbishing barrack squares and military roads!
Defence is now allowed to carry forward a percentage of its vote into the next financial year.
The problems of the Defence budget are generally well known.
An average of forty per cent of the vote is spent on pay and pensions, which have to be held at comparable levels with their civilian equivalents if the principle of voluntary recruitment is to be sustained.
About twenty per cent goes on the maintenance of the forces in being at the time.
Any cheese-paring of the logistic stocks reduces battle efficiency, and failure to look after barracks, married quarters, and installations in the short term piles up trouble and expensive rebuilding for the future.
The only flexibility lies in the remaining forty per cent, which is devoted to research, development, and procurement of equipment.
But here too, room for manoeuvre is limited: the long-term nature of most major weapon programmes is such that few can be brought to a successful conclusion in much less than a decade, and in some cases even longer.
Needless to say, it is on this part of the budget that the debates are fiercest.
The majority of potentially battle-winning systems are pursued at or beyond the frontiers of existing technology where the risks of failure are high; where cost estimates are notoriously uncertain; and hence where the judgments of the soundest and most experienced men can turn out to be fallacious.
At the beginning of the annual costing exercises there is usually a significant gap between the targets set by the Treasury and the genuine requirements of the Services, which no amount of discounting can bridge.
The mismatch is part of the bargaining process of the Public Expenditure Review, and is common to all major spending departments in Whitehall.
A laborious internal review of the Long-Term Costing is undertaken to whittle down the gap, and to highlight vulnerable programmes so that the Secretary of State can be given the strongest  possible brief to help him fight for a higher allocation of resources; and conversely to enable him to fend off attacks by other high-spending ministers, who are intent on grabbing a larger share for themselves, often at the expense of Defence.
Closing the costings gap is never easy, and is resisted by the Service departments with all the ingenuity that they can muster.
One of two methods is generally applied: the ‘illustrative cut’ of individual projects and commitments, or the percentage cut across the board.
In the former, Service departments are asked to list their lowest priority items, and to state the implications of their demise if the books cannot be balanced by other means.
In theory, this should produce a list of the least harmful cuts from which the Secretary of State can choose, if he fails in his bid for more resources.
It also reinforces his case by demonstrating the implications of not giving him the cash that he needs.
On some occasions, however, the gambit can backfire.
A Service department may take the risk of including an important project in its list, not because it believes it has a low priority, but because it knows it would be politically awkward for the party in power to consider cutting it.
In most years, the blunt instrument of the percentage cut is used to close the final gap when all else has failed.
Some programmes are ‘stretched’ to reduce expenditure in the estimates year.
In the case of logistic programmes this entails reducing activity generally and training in particular— less sea time for the Navy, fewer track-miles for the Army, reduced flying hours for the RAF, and lower allocations of training ammunition for all three; and in equipment procurement, the rate of re-equipment has to be slowed down.
Other programmes are ‘slipped to the right’, which means delaying them to later years in the Costing; and the rest are pruned in size or cut out all together.
‘Stretching’, ‘slipping’, and ‘pruning’, reduce costs in the short term, but increase them overall because shorter and slower production runs increase overheads.
Cancellation is the least favoured option: once a project is cut out of the Long-Term Costing, it is rarely possible to argue it back in again.
Each Service department has its own well-known strengths, weaknesses, sensitivities and prejudices in the bargaining on the floor of the Defence commodity market.
The Army, being manpower intensive, is on its guard against cuts in the operational commitments that underpin the existence of its named infantry and armoured regiments, whose traditions stretch back to the Restoration.
There has to be an operational role or ‘peg’, which provides the raison d'être for each regiment, if it is to survive in the harsh financial climate of our post-imperial era.
For instance, it has, at times, looked desirable to reduce the order of battle of the Rhine Army, in order to build up a larger uncommitted and strategically mobile central reserve in the United Kingdom.
Such ideas tend to be anathema to the Army Board, not because they are against the creation of stronger reserves; nor because of the difficulties of finding barrack accommodation and training areas in the cramped and over-populated British Isles; but because the units withdrawn from the Continent would become  vulnerable to pruning in some future retrenchment programme — reserves are always the first to go when cuts are demanded, since their size is based on subjective rather than objective judgments.
The loss of traditional regiments would mean the forfeiture of three centuries of accumulated battle experience.
The Royal Navy and RAF, being capital intensive, tend to shield their major re-equipment programmes.
The Navy's costings are the most brittle: cancellation of just one warship or submarine punches a yawning hole in a year's programme, and slowing down construction increases overheads and hence costs dramatically.
The RAF's aircraft replacement programmes tend to be more expensive than warship construction, but they have greater flexibility since the number of aircraft ordered in any one year can be varied without throwing the Air Department's costings off balance.
By way of contrast, the Army's re-equipment has the greatest flexibility in that it consists of many smallish programmes, each involving the production of large numbers of relatively low-cost weapons or equipments.
However, herein lies the Army's greatest weakness in the bargaining process.
Its programmes are much the most susceptible to ‘salami slicing’, since it is difficult to claim that the end of the world will come if the Army receives, say, ninety instead of a hundred tank replacements in a particular year.
Whitehall market forces have produced an optimum balance in the allocation of resources between the three Services.
Figure 4 shows the costs of the nuclear deterrent, and the General-Purpose Combat Forces of each Service in percentages of the total Defence vote from 1965, the first year in which  functional costings were presented in the annual Defence White Papers, to 1988.
They show the consistency that is to be expected from a ten-year rolling programme.
The main variations are caused by the phasing in of major re-equipment programmes: Polaris in the latter half of the 1960s; RAF re-equipment in the early 1970s; Army re-equipment in the mid-1970s; the Tornado programme in the mid-1980s, and the start of the Trident programme in the late 1980s.
The RAF and the Army vie with each other fairly closely with an average of 18.3 per cent and 17.0 per cent of the vote respectively over the 24-year period.
The Navy averages 13.2 per cent, but, if the nuclear deterrent average of 2.7 per cent is added, resources allotted to naval forces comes to 15.9 per cent , which is not far below the allocations to air and land forces.
In the broadest terms, these figures can be rounded to:
Air 18% Land 17% Sea 16%
These cold statistics do not show one important trend that has been taking place since 1945.
Equipment-cost inflation has done more than the huge cost of the Welfare State and our poor economic performance to reduce Britain's military independence.
At the end of the Second World War, we could go it alone across the whole spectrum of military weapon systems from high-performance aircraft at one end to the simple automatic rifle at the other.
In the early post-war years, we were confident that our research and development establishments and armament firms could compete with and, on occasions, surpass in innovative ability the much larger but more cumbersome organizations in the US and USSR.
Not only would we be able to provide battle-winning equipments for our own forces, but our balance of payments would benefit from a flourishing export trade in armaments.
Had it not been for the Cold War, these expectations might have been realized.
The United States would probably have reverted to isolationism as happened after the First World War; Congress would have cut back Defence spending, starving the US defence/industrial base; and American big business would have looked elsewhere for profitable enterprises.
This did not happen; instead Soviet-American military rivalry generated the nuclear, conventional, and space arms races on a scale that dwarfed British efforts.
With the American Research and Development budget exceeding the whole of the British Defence vote, we had to become progressively more selective, concentrating on those projects in which success would give us the greatest measure of national independence.
In past centuries, shortages of military manpower used to force us into alliances with continental powers.
In the second half of this century, we have had to seek partners in the US and Western Europe to overcome our technological and industrial limitations.
The problems of equipment-cost inflation have become so crucial in Defence planning that it is worth recalling briefly how the British weapon procurement  system works.
The initiative comes from the Operational Requirements Staffs of the Naval, General, and Air Staffs (now part of the Central Staff under the latest reorganization of the Ministry, but still carrying out the same function — see page 175).
It is their responsibility to decide what new equipments are needed, and to specify their performance and other critical parameters.
They do not work in isolation.
On the one hand, they are experienced officers drawn from operational units with whom they keep in close touch; and, on the other, they are advised by the Defence scientists and by the technologists in British industry.
They have also the closest links with the equivalent staffs in the Pentagon, and in Western European and major Commonwealth capitals, particularly Bonn, Paris, Rome, Canberra and Ottawa.
It is their job to know where new technological doors are opening, and when to recommend going through them.
The OR Staff, as they are called, specify what is needed in two documents: the ‘Staff Target’, which is couched in broad enough terms to allow several solutions; and the ‘Operational Requirement’, which subsequently narrows down the possibilities, and sets out more detailed specifications for the research and development phases of the project.
When prototypes have satisfied the OR Staff, production is carried out by the Procurement Executive of the Ministry of Defence, using commercial contracts of a number of different types such as‘fixed price’, ‘single tender’, and the much criticised ‘cost-plus’, which is used when the technical risks are too high, the contractors able to tender too few, or the time too short for normal competitive tendering.
Staff Targets for new weapon systems are most often written for the replacement of existing equipments that are likely to become obsolescent in a specific time-frame.
They are also written in response to technological breakthroughs; to counter Soviet changes in weapons and tactics; and to compete with new systems emerging from other countries' armament industries.
They are often written as well to support private ventures by British firms, which are showing promise, but need a Staff Target or Operational Requirement before they can be given official consideration.
The Operational Requirement system, while entirely logical and well practised, is also inherently unbalanced in one important respect, which tends to exacerbate equipment-cost inflation.
The OR Staff are quite rightly intent on seeking battle-winning performance; the scientists and technologists enjoy and rise to the challenge; and so both the principal groups of participants in equipment development are pushing in the same direction without an effective countervailing force.
There is little, apart from general cost-consciousness, to restrain their enthusiasm until the risks and costs of a project can be established with any certainty and the Treasury is in a position to intervene.
By then it is often too late and too expensive to turn back.
Both sides know that ‘the best is the enemy of the good’; that the Services want reliable, cost-effective equipment without ‘gold plating’ and that asking and striving ‘for the moon’leads to cancellation through costs becoming  unmanageable.
They are equally aware that achieving the last few percentage points in performance of ten causes a disproportionate increase in costs.
But, and it is a very big but, where should the line be drawn?
Servicemen must not be asked to fight and risk their lives equipped with inferior weapons; and yet, they will have too few weapons if the costs are too high.
Judicious balances between all the multifarious factors are needed, but they are notoriously difficult to strike, and are even more so in international collaborative projects.
Throughout the first three decades of our post-imperial era, equipment-cost inflation has outstripped monetary inflation, and there has been insufficient growth in the British economy to make up the difference.
We have been riding down what the Americans have called the ‘Military Road to Absurdity’.
The higher the performance, the greater the cost, and the fewer the weapons the Services can buy; and the shorter the production runs, the larger the overheads and the higher the price, leading to ever smaller orders.
‘Absurdity’ would be reached when we can only afford a one-ship navy, a one-tank army and a one-bomber air force!
The development of Defence policy since the Second World War has been dominated as much by efforts to find ways off the ‘Military Road to Absurdity’ as by the struggle for resources in the Whitehall market-place.
Apart from remorseless administrative efforts by the successive Permanent Under-Secretaries of the Ministry of Defence to reduce overheads so that more resources could be freed for re-equipment programmes, two well-trodden paths off the ‘Military Road to Absurdity’ have been thoroughly explored: partnership with the US, Canada, Australia and New Zealand (the ABCA countries); and collaboration with our Western European allies.
Both paths have proved tortuous and are strewn with awkward boulders.
On the ABCA path, it used to be relatively easy to agree common operational requirements, and to collaborate in research and development.
The Chiefs of Staff and most senior officers on both sides of the Atlantic and Pacific knew each other, having served together on NATO, CENTO, and SEATO staffs and in exchange appointments in each others' armed forces.
They had also shared operational experience of the Second World War, and comparable experiences in the Cold War.
Although Britain took no part in the Vietnam War, we faced similar but lesser problems in Malaya, Kenya, Cyprus, Borneo, and Aden.
In recent years the advantages of the old Dominion connection in the ABCA grouping have tended to fade as Canadian, Australian and New Zealand attitudes to Defence, their relations with the US, and their view of Britain have changed with their own growing maturity.
Nevertheless, reaching understandings with them on operational requirements is still easier than with our European partners.
The Anglo-American special relationship, on the other hand, is as alive as ever, and has made it possible for us to buy advanced US weapon systems like Polaris and Trident on very favourable terms.
The difficulties arise when joint production with the US is involved, as was the case with the ABCA Mallard trunk communication system, or when outright US purchases of British manufactured weapons, like Rapier, are  contemplated.
However co-operative the Pentagon may wish to be, the American industrial lobby in Congress usually intervenes at a late stage to protect its own narrow interests and the projects collapse.
The joint Harrier venture with the US Marine Corps has proved an outstanding exception, though it has not been without its problems.
The ‘not invented here’ syndrome is as prevalent in US military thinking as it is in Britain's.
The close relationship between the British and American Services, while admirable in most respects, has its dangers.
British officers on the Defence Adviser's staff in our Washington Embassy, and in exchange appointments at US military establishments, see the products of the vast US research and development programmes and become wedded to them to the detriment of British-developed equivalents.
Moreover, they become mentally attuned to American tactical doctrines, which are often devised to sell US equipments to the Western Alliance.
American salesmen thus have a built-in launch pad for their products within the British military establishment that they are not backward in exploiting.
Collaboration with Europe presents almost diametrically opposite problems.
Agreeing operational requirements is the first and most tiresome obstacle.
Apart from the language barrier, which has been eased by the general acceptance of English everywhere except in France, British and Continental military staffs have practically no shared operational experience or traditions.
It is perhaps easier to work with the Germans, whom Britain fought so bitterly in the first half of this century, than with the French or the Italians, whose active roles in the Second World War were prematurely curtailed.
When it comes to sharing development and production with our European partners, we have the common aims of all middle powers: protecting our own national armament industries; and preserving the greatest practicable measure of military independence.
In consequence, European collaboration is fraught and costly: operational requirements are made more complex than they ought to be by the need for compromise; sharing development leads to mismatches of components that have to be corrected late on in programmes; and divided production and assembly increases overheads and puts up costs.
On the credit side, collaboration with Europe has three great advantages: development costs, though not halved, are reduced from about a third to a quarter for each country depending on how many countries participate; production runs are longer, leading to lower costs; and, from the cynical military point of view, expensive high-risk collaborative projects are more difficult for governments to cancel.
It is often argued that we would all be better off if we followed the Warsaw Pact system of accepting their superpower's equipment, produced mainly in the Soviet Union, but also in satellite countries like Czechoslovakia.
We could standardize on US equipment with production under licence of those items that it is practicable and economic to manufacture in Western Europe.
But the loss of military independence, industrial capacity, employment and markets that such a policy would involve has always made it unacceptable to Western  European governments and electorates, including our own.
Developing convincing arguments that will satisfy the brokers in the Whitehall market-place; squeezing the pint of requirements into the half-pint pot of the Long-Term Costings; and trying to find new paths off the ‘Military Road to Absurdity’ are the monotonous fare of the Defence policy-makers.
When a new government takes office and opens the Defence books, it expects to find ample room for change and improvement.
The new ministers soon find that there is remarkably little room for manoeuvre, and that most of the quick and easy panaceas to the intractable problems of Defence have been tried many times before.
The long-term nature of the programmes imposes evolutionary rather than revolutionary change.
The whole structure which the Ministry controls and administers is as closely integrated as that of modern warships and high-performance aircraft.
Evolution rather than revolution is also imposed by the British system of government, which has given the country twenty-one Ministers of Defence since the Second World War.
Most Secretaries of State only manage to tap the helm, giving Defence policy little more than a change in emphasis during their time in office.
The Defence wheel can only be put over for a major change of course when there is a fortuitous coincidence of national and international events, political trends, and economic pressures at a time when there is also a Secretary of State in office, who has the strength of character and political standing to create a new consensus in Whitehall, Westminster, and the electorate.
In the thirty-two years that have passed since Suez, there have only been four such occasions when the wheel has been put over:
1957: Duncan Sandys' ‘Big Bang’ philosophy, that led to the end of National Service; 1965: Denis Healey's rolling Defence reviews, ending in the withdrawal from East of Suez; 1974: Roy Mason's concentration of resources on Western European Defence, taking the withdrawal from empire to its logical conclusion; 1981: John Nott's intended sacrifice of Maritime in favour of Continental capability, that was aborted by the Falklands Campaign.
All four changes of course had a Continental bias.
On each occasion, however, the currents flowing in world affairs swung Defence policy back to a more balanced Maritime/Continental course.
The fact is we remain an island power and cannot ignore the sea however close we may be to the Continent.
The military strategy devised to implement successive governments' Defence policies reflects both long-term national grand strategy and the directions given by the government of the day, and is largely the responsibility of the Chiefs of Staff.
Their power and influence in the Whitehall market-place has waxed, waned and waxed again since 1945.
Under Field Marshal, the Viscount, Alanbrooke's chairmanship during the Second World War they were  the Government's most powerful advisers.
Their influence declined only slowly after the war because British military operations continued around the world as Britain at first struggled to retain her empire, and then, after Suez, fought to bring about a prudent and dignified withdrawal from colonial responsibility.
By the early 1970s the struggle was over, and the decline in the Chiefs of Staff's activity and influence in national affairs was soon being reflected in the steady drop in the frequency of their meetings.
This waning of the Chiefs of Staff's influence was caused by the combination of three factors.
The first stemmed from Britain's own decline as a world power.
She no longer wished nor was able to gain her own ends by military means, the handling of which is, after all, the Chiefs' raison d'être .
Moreover, although there was a continuing flow of military operations in the post-war years, their scale and frequency also declined steadily, all but fading out entirely by the mid-1970s.
The second factor was the change in the Ministry of Defence's decision-making processes brought about by the increasing complexity of Defence issues.
The contributions of the Chief Scientific Adviser, the Chief of Defence Procurement and the Permanent Under-Secretary and their staffs increased progressively relative to those of the military Chiefs, creating new and inevitably rival centres of power within the Defence commodity market.
And the third factor was the splintering of the collective voice of the Chiefs of Staff as decision-making swung away from operational problems to arguments over the Defence programmes.
Each Chief had to pay far more attention to the interests of his own Service in the cut-throat struggle for resources in a declining market.
It became extraordinarily difficult for them to speak with one voice on critical issues.
In consequence, Secretaries of State tended to look elsewhere within the Ministry and elsewhere for impartial advice.
The progressive loss of the Chiefs of Staff Committee's influence in the Defence commodity market led to a failure to formulate a military strategy that was understood and accepted in the main market-place of Whitehall.
Reviews of strategy turned into financially-driven Defence reviews, in which pruning hooks were more prominent than spades to plant new strategic ideas for the future.
The last time that the Chiefs of Staff managed to formulate a genuine military strategy was in 1961: after Macmillan's ‘Wind of Change’ speech; Iain McLeod's acceleration of the decolonization programme; and de Gaulle's veto on the British application to join the EEC.
The subsequent withdrawal from empire, which flowed from these events, was carried out on a strategy set out in a Chiefs of Staff Paper which remained the military planners' increasingly tattered bible until Roy Mason's 1974 Defence review made British military strategy synonymous with NATO strategy.
The Forces were then given four strategic roles: maintaining the British strategic nuclear deterrent; defending the United Kingdom Base; contributing to the landward defence of Western Europe; and helping to secure our seaward defences in the eastern Atlantic.
Since the low point in the mid-1970s, the Chiefs' influence has begun to wax  once more.
Britain now has a louder voice in world affairs that needs to be backed by a coherent national military strategy.
And the Chiefs' voice is no longer fragmented.
The Chief of Defence Staff is now the sole military adviser to the Government, drawing his advice from the three single Service Chiefs of Staff, whose responsibility is to give the naval, army and air points of view, unfettered by the need to reach collective decisions.
That is now the task of the Chief of Defence Staff and his Central Staff, who are responsible for formulating national military strategy, and for expressing it to the government of the day and within the Whitehall market-place.
Suggesting how Britain's future military strategy might be developed into the twenty-first century is the main purpose of this book on post-imperial Defence policy.
But first let us look back briefly at the events from 1945 to 1956 that provided the prologue to the post-imperial era which began at Suez.
the Coequal Anglo-American Partnership: 1945–56
The British decision to make an atomic bomb had ‘emerged’ from a body of general assumptions.
It had not been a response to an immediate military threat, but rather to something fundamentalist and almost intuitive — a feeling that Britain must possess so climacteric a weapon in order to deter an atomically armed enemy, a feeling that Britain as a great power must acquire all major new weapons, a feeling that atomic weapons were a manifestation of the scientific and technological superiority on which Britain's strength, so deficient in sheer numbers of men, must depend.
Professor Margaret Gowing, Official Historian to the UK Atomic Energy Commission.
Suez, in 1956, may have been a buoy in the main stream of British history, marking the end of empire and the beginning of the post-imperial era, but the course taken by Britain when rounding that buoy was based upon her experiences since the end of the Second World War.
These will be sketched briefly in this chapter to provide the background to Duncan Sandys' revolutionary Defence White Paper of 1957 — the first attempt to establish a post-imperial Defence policy.
The Empire reached its zenith after the First World War with the acquisition of former German colonies in Africa and with the addition of League of Nations mandates to govern parts of the old Ottoman Empire in the Middle East — Palestine, Jordan and Iraq.
The Second World War added no territory to the Empire, but it left British troops in occupation of the Italian empire in Africa, and the Dutch and French empires in the Far East.
But it also left her economically and psychologically exhausted.
Britain had once again snatched victory from defeat, but on this occasion the electorate decided charity should begin at home; although without consciously wishing to see any decline in Britain's influence in the world.
There seemed to be no incompatibility between building a welfare state at home and discharging the responsibilities of a great power abroad.
Indeed, socialism was expected to release the dynamic qualities of the British people that would create the wealth needed to sustain standards of living and world power.
While it was generally accepted that the country was economically near bankruptcy and would need time and a continuation of generous American aid to effect recovery, few people doubted the economy could be rebuilt faster than that of devastated Europe and Japan.
The majority view was that Britain was and would remain a great power, giving the world leadership based on her experience over the centuries rather than on the depth of her pocket.
After the First World War — the war to end all wars — hopes of a better world had rested upon the creation of the League of Nations, headed by the United States.
The American people opted for a return to isolationism: in consequence, the League lacked the power and cohesion to curb the ambitions of the Axis powers.
After the Second World War there was a greater sense of realism in implementing the provisions of the Atlantic Charter through the creation of the United Nations, but the Charter had contained a pledge that amounted to a promise to dismantle colonial empires.
Its third principle, which was based upon a draft by the imperialist Churchill rather than the anti-colonialist Roosevelt, read:
Third, they [the Western Allies]respect the right of all peoples to choose the form of Government under which they will live; and they will wish to see sovereign rights and self-government restored to those who have been forcibly deprived of them.
Although this principle was intended to apply to the Nazi-occupied territories of Europe, nationalists throughout the colonial world, particularly in India and  Burma, demanded its application to all dependent peoples.
They were pushing at a partially open door as far as Britain was concerned.
Both major political parties accepted that colonialism would be dismantled at a pace consistent, first, with the speed of political and economic development in each territory; and, second, with the growth in its ability to look after itself militarily.
Britain's voluntary, though gradual, conversion of the colonial Empire into the British Commonwealth of Nations would help her recovery as a great power: her military commitments to provide overseas garrisons should diminish, and her influence was expected to be enhanced as she became the central pivot of an association of free and independent states girdling the globe.
In the early stages of independence, former colonies were expected to need some military assistance through defence agreements, supplies of military equipment and provision of training teams.
Such agreements could only be honoured if Britain retained the power to go to their assistance when called upon to do so.
The old imperial line of communication through the Mediterranean, Suez Canal, Red Sea and Indian Ocean to the Far East and the Antipodes would be just as important to the Commonwealth as it had been to the colonial Empire.
And so it was envisaged that the former coaling and oiling stations of Gibraltar, Malta, Port Said, Suez, Aden, Bombay, Colombo, Penang, Singapore and Hong Kong would become air staging posts as well in the post-imperial era.
Two imponderables worried the British policy-makers: an American return to isolationism, and Soviet emulation of Tsarist imperialism.
Neither seemed imminent in 1945.
The closeness of the Anglo-American special relationship during the Second World War boded well for a continuing post-war partnership, in which Britain would be able to influence US policy in a mutually beneficial way; and latent Soviet hostility, which became apparent in London sooner than in Washington, was lessened by the assumed technological backwardness of Russia, and by the devastation she had suffered at the hands of the Germans.
Such was British confidence in the future that the Attlee government reintroduced Lloyd George's notorious ‘No war for ten years’ assumption for Defence planning, but for sounder reasons.
The military world was on the threshold of far-reaching revolutionary changes in weapon technology, not only in atomic weapons, but also in propulsion systems, missile guidance and electronics generally.
Sensibly, priority was to be given to research and development before any major re-equipment programmes were undertaken.
Meanwhile, the Services had to live on their very considerable wartime fat until the way ahead could be seen more clearly.
Sadly, all these post-war ambitions and assumptions proved fallacious.
Socialism could not create the wealth needed for the Welfare State as well as great-power status.
Britain lurched from one economic crisis to another under both Labour and Conservative governments.
It was not until the political and economic Thatcher revolution of the 1980s, in which the creation of wealth was  given priority over its equitable distribution, that a start could be made in reestablishing British influence in world affairs, although this process has been beset with the economic problems of the late 1980s.
The transition from Empire to Commonwealth was remarkably successful, but it did not strengthen Britain as had been hoped.
The loose-knit and voluntary grouping of independent states, united by ties of sentiment and not much else, could not match the political, economic and technological power of the homogeneous United States or Soviet Union although the total population and raw material resources of the Commonwealth were not inferior to those of the two superpowers.
Moreover, the theory that the pace of colonial development should and could be controlled effectively from Whitehall was soon disproved.
Like all withdrawals, the conversion of Empire into Commonwealth went far faster than was prudent or planned, thanks to American impatience, and to the hostility of the Communist and the Third World states.
Anglo-American relations, too, proved less harmonious than Britain expected or would have liked.
However co-operative US administrations might try to be, Congress was always there to put narrow American interests first.
The special relationship was born of a common heritage, but it was nurtured by American and British self-interest as well.
Even the most generous US aid was limited by the value placed upon it by Congress in terms of American advantage.
Nowhere was this more evident than in the marked differences in the handling of collaboration in the atomic and conventional weapons fields.
The United States sought to maintain an atomic energy monopoly — both military and civilian — as a God-given right; but for the purposes of conventional warfare they needed the support of allies and were prepared to buy international collaboration with superficially altruistic aid programmes.
In the immediate post-war years the special relationship almost collapsed.
Americans looked upon Britain not only as a poor relation, ignoring the causes of her poverty, but a dangerous one as well.
British socialism, so alien to the American way of life, was to them only a short step away from communism, which they feared would engulf the whole of Europe.
In the American view, the British Isles were too exposed to risk production or minimal stockpiling of atomic weapons on British soil.
And to make the point even more strongly, Lend-Lease was ended at Congressional insistence in August 1945 before the war with Japan was over; and the Truman Administration was only allowed to grant Britain her first post-war loan on the most ungenerous terms.
Congress would brook no potential economic rivals in the post-war world.
British, and for that matter American, estimates of Russian intentions and capabilities were equally awry.
As late as mid-1947 a reunited Germany was seen by the Foreign Secretary, Ernest Bevin, as a greater danger to world peace than the Soviet Union; and the Chiefs of Staff were assuming that Russia was unlikely to solve the problems of atomic weapon production before 1956 at the earliest.
In fact, the first Soviet atomic device was detonated in August 1949!
And as if to cap the list of failed British assumptions, the Korean War broke out  in June 1950, forcing the abandonment of the ‘no war for ten years’ rule and its substitution with an over-hastily generated rearmament programme, the size of which proved beyond Britain's economic capacity.
Revolutionary changes in weapon technology had not been the only reason for the reimposition of the Ten-Year Rule.
There was the pressing need to concentrate on national reconstruction, which imposed financial stringency in all other fields of government expenditure, including Defence.
And there was a deep feeling of uncertainty about the continuing validity of the Three Pillars of Britain's traditional grand strategy — defence of the British Isles, maintenance of a favourable balance of power in Europe, and projection and protection of British interests overseas.
Had the advent of atomic weapons invalidated them; did they need re-definition; and what priority should be accorded to each of them?
The most difficult strategic question was whether sea power was any longer the foundation upon which the Three Pillars could continue to stand.
Strategic air power had all but won the Second World War.
If it had not been for the extraordinary resilience of Hitler's Wehrmacht and the fortitude of the German people, it would have done so.
Would the addition of atomic weapons to the RAF's armoury make it, rather than the Royal Navy, Britain's ‘Senior Service' in the atomic era?
(The term ‘nuclear’, as opposed to‘atomic’, did not emerge in general parlance until the hydrogen bomb was tested by the United States in November 1952.)
There were many theories, but the clouded crystal of the future was almost opaque in the immediate post-war years.
The Labour Government and the Chiefs of Staff needed time to chart a new course in Defence policy.
As far as the First Pillar — the defence of the British Isles — was concerned, the country was, paradoxically, more secure and yet more vulnerable than it had ever been.
There was no immediate threat to the United Kingdom.
Germany was prostrate; France had ceased to be Britain's inveterate enemy; and the Soviet Union had enough on its hands rebuilding Mother Russia.
The spread of Communism presented a threat to the Second and Third Pillars, but was making no impact upon the British political system.
But our crowded islands were as vulnerable as Japan's had been to atomic attack, and there appeared to be no sure defence against it.
The Air Staff were not slow to underline the Second World War's lessons of air warfare: the need to win and to maintain air superiority by offensive air action.
In their view, two things were required to give Britain the prospect of security in the atomic era: first, the atomic bomb itself; and second, the means of delivering it at strategic ranges.
The Naval and General Staffs did not demur.
The principal questions that the Chiefs of Staff Committee addressed were whether long-range missiles would eventually replace the bomber as the delivery system; and if so, whether, in the meantime, the last generations of bombers needed to be supersonic or not.
The development of delivery systems — bombers or missiles — was well within  Britain's technological and financial resources in the late 1940s and 1950s.
Operational Requirements for the V-bombers were issued in 1946 with an in-service date of the mid-1950s, as required by the Government's Ten-Year Rule.
In the meantime, the wartime Lancasters would be replaced, as a stopgap measure, by the unpressurized Lincolns, which would be large enough to carry atomic bombs, if the Government decided to manufacture them in spite of US objections.
Beyond the V-bombers, which were to be high-altitude, subsonic aircraft with a range of 1,500 nautical miles, the Air Staff envisaged a supersonic successor with greater range and navigational accuracy.
They were confident, despite predictions by some eminent scientists, that the manned bomber would prove superior to any cruise or ballistic missile that might be developed from the German wartime V-1 (Flying Bomb) or V-2 (Ballistic Missile).
Nevertheless, they accepted the need for research into missile technology to go ahead in parallel with aircraft development.
With Australian collaboration, the Woomera Rocket Range was established in 1947 in the South Australian desert west of Adelaide with a telemetered track over the uninhabited heart of the continent to the Indian Ocean 1,250 miles away to the north west.
The problems associated with the development of the British atomic bomb for the V-bombers to carry were of a different order of magnitude.
The effort involved was likely to overstrain Britain's available scientific, financial and material resources, but the Government, supported by the representations of the Chiefs of Staff, accepted the burden as an essential component of Britain's recovery as a great power.
The strain could, however, be eased if renewed American co-operation in atomic development work could be negotiated.
In the wartime agreement on pooling brains and resources for the original work on the atomic bomb, which was signed at Quebec in 1943 between the United States and Britain in association with Canada, there were five clauses: the signatories would not use atomic weapons against each other; they would not use them against third parties without the others' consent; no information would be given to third parties without mutual consent; Britain disclaimed any interest in commercial and industrial exploitation, because the heavy burden of production would fall on the United States; and a Combined Policy Committee would be set up to ensure full and effective collaboration.
Subsequently a Combined Anglo-American Development Trust was established to handle the procurement and allocation of uranium ore.
Most of the then known uranium deposits were in British overseas territories, except for the very high quality ore of the Belgian Congo.
Britain had successfully negotiated long-term contracts for the total output from the Congo, and so had a near monopoly of ore supplies, which she had been happy to share with the US in the wartime atomic weapons programme.
In addition to the Quebec Agreement, there was a record of a conversation between Roosevelt and Churchill, agreeing that Anglo-American collaboration should continue in both military and commercial atomic development after the  defeat of Japan.
This was known as the Hyde Park Aide-Memoir of September 1944.
It was on this document rather than the Quebec Agreement that the British Government pinned its hopes of continuing post-war collaboration and for American help with its own atomic bomb programme.
Almost as soon as the Japanese surrendered in August 1945 these British hopes turned to doubts.
The Truman Administration had already been forced by Congress to end Lend-Lease; many of the joint boards set up to co-ordinate the Anglo-American war effort were summarily dismantled; and, although the Combined Policy Committee and the Combined Development Trust survived, the flow of technical information, on which Britain was depending to set up her own atomic establishments, began to dry up.
Attlee flew to Washington in November 1945 with two purposes in mind: to agree a joint Anglo-American approach in the United Nations on the international control of atomic weapons; and to update the 1943 Quebec Agreement.
He was successful in the former, and he thought that he had laid the foundations for the latter.
But, as so often happens when dealing with the United States, informal agreements reached with Presidents are not necessarily supported by Congress.
Continued atomic collaboration with Britain had many enemies on Capitol Hill, amongst the American scientific community, and within the Government.
There were several prominent Anglophobes in Truman's Administration, like James Byrnes, the Secretary of State, but most of the opposition stemmed from the widely held belief within the American electorate that the United States should guard its lead, if not monopoly, in military and civil uses of atomic energy.
Very few American politicians and officials were aware of the secret Quebec Agreement, which was not revealed to them until May 1947, and none knew of the Hyde Park Aide-Memoir , which had been filed amongst Roosevelt's papers.
The arrest of the British scientist, Alan Nunn May, as a Soviet spy in March 1946, undermined American confidence in British security.
The general ground swell of opinion in Washington enabled the ‘American Firsters’ in Congress to force through the MacMahon Act in August 1946, making it a criminal offence to divulge classified atomic information to any other country, including Britain.
For internal political reasons, Truman did not oppose the passage of the bill despite his informal understanding with Attlee.
The MacMahon Act strained relations with Britain, but did not close the door entirely to limited atomic collaboration.
The Combined Policy Committee and the Development Trust stayed in being to handle unclassified and declassified information, and to adjudicate on the allocation of British controlled supplies of uranium ore, upon which the US programmes were heavily dependent.
Personal relations amongst officials on both bodies remained cordial, and as much as possible was done to keep collaboration alive without breaching the letter of Congress's legislation.
The MacMahon Act did not, as is often suggested, trigger Attlee's decision in January 1947 to go ahead with the development of the British atomic bomb.
Important steps had already been taken that were to lead to the decision.
Setting up of the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell had been agreed in October 1945; approval to build the first British atomic pile for the production of plutonium had been given in December; the Chiefs of Staff had stated their requirement for a British manufactured atomic bomb in January 1946; William Penney (later Sir William) had begun to plan the Atomic Weapons Section of the Armaments Research Establishment, of which he was Director, in mid-1946; the Air Ministry placed its first requisition for an atomic bomb on the Ministry of Supply in August; and Lord Portal, the wartime Chief of Air Staff, who had become Controller of Atomic Energy in the Ministry of Supply, sought a mandate from the Prime Minister to set atomic bomb development in train during the autumn of 1946.
Attlee gave the decision to go ahead in January 1947.
The MacMahon Act only reinforced his reasons for doing so.
It was symptomatic rather than part of the train of thought that led to his decision: Britain, as a great power, could not leave her security in the hands of the Americans, who, however friendly, could veer so unpredictably from generous international collaboration to self-centred isolationism.
The view of the Official Historian, Margaret Gowing, on Attlee's decision is quoted at the head of this chapter.
She went on to say:
The decision was also a symbol of independence.
It had not been taken as a result of the breakdown in 1946 of Anglo-American atomic cooperation.
The decision to produce fissile material in the United Kingdom had been taken before the breakdown and was regarded as non-negotiable in any circumstances….
It is conceivable that if an agreement had been signed and if henceforth Anglo-American relations had been bathed in sweetness and light, arrangements might have been made for pooling atomic weapons production.
But in view of the actual American mood at this time, such a possibility is not worth even a cursory exploration.
As it was American atomic attitudes in this period hardened British resolution not to be bullied out of the business and not to acquiesce in an American monopoly; it encouraged her determination to be a nuclear power for the sake of the influence this was expected to give her in Washington!
What the MacMahon Act did do was to make the British programme slower and more expensive; and from the wider standpoint of the Western Alliance, it led to unnecessary duplication of effort.
The Government was tempted to seek alternative partners in the Commonwealth and Europe, but did not do so because the Americans had so much more to offer if the MacMahon restrictions could be circumvented or ameliorated.
Instead two further attempts were made during Attlee's prime-ministership to negotiate a replacement for the Quebec Agreement.
Both came near success, but, in the end, were defeated by those in the US Administration, who believed fervently in the preservation of  the American monopoly, and who considered that sharing with Britain constituted too great a risk to American security.
The first attempt was made in the autumn of 1947.
Some of the awkwardness in Anglo-American relations had been dispelled by a combination of circumstances; James Byrnes had been replaced as US Secretary of State by the anglophile General George Marshall; Britain, for her part, had supported the launch of the Marshall Plan in Western Europe; and the Americans were beginning to appreciate that they were unlikely to be able to tame the malign hostility of the Soviet Union as Roosevelt had once hoped.
British representatives in Washington thought that they detected an American shift towards a more liberal interpretation of the MacMahon Act whereby closer collaboration with Britain could be defended in Congress as being in the United States' best interests.
They felt that the time was ripe for a new approach.
Unfortunately they had misread the omens.
The actual driving force behind American thinking on a renewal of atomic collaborations was anxiety about uranium ore supplies, which were being consumed at an increasing rate as American programmes accelerated.
Here too the British misinterpreted American intentions.
They thought that Congressional leaders were trying to make Marshall Aid to Britain a quid pro quo for larger allocations of British controlled ore supplies.
The American ploy, however, was even more devious.
Their hidden aims, according to the British Official History, were:
to abrogate the wartime agreements, to acquire British ore stocks, to get a much greater share of the Congo production and to obtain British and Canadian support for ore negotiations with South Africa.
In return the United States would give some information.
The meetings of the Combined Policy Committee, which was tasked to draft a replacement for the 1943 Quebec Agreement in the form of a modus vivendi , were constructive and cordial: the Americans had much to gain from making them so.
The Quebec clause, giving Britain a veto over an American use of the atomic bomb against third parties, was dropped in exchange for the release of Britain from the clause restricting her commercial exploitation of atomic energy.
The allocation of ore was settled for the next two years in America's favour, but the compensating exchange of information was far less liberal than the British negotiators had hoped.
The ‘some information’ turned out to be nine specific subjects in research and development fields, which, though useful, excluded anything to do with weapons.
Working on the principle that half a loaf is better than none, the British side accepted the agreement, intending to open negotiations separately on military issues.
The modus vivendi was not signed, but it was promulgated in January 1948 in the minutes of the Combined Policy Committee so as to avoid reference to Congress or to the United Nations, which would have been necessary for a formal international agreement.
The proof of the pudding was in the eating: the modus vivendi turned out to be a  great disappointment.
The Americans got their ore, but the British received a pittance of information in return.
An attempt by the Minister of Defence, A. V. Alexander, to reach an agreement on the release of weapon information with James Forrestal, the US Secretary for Defence, was equally unsatisfactory.
Forrestal was a believer in the theory that it was too dangerous for atomic weapons to be manufactured and stored in the United Kingdom, where they could be overrun in a Soviet invasion of Western Europe.
Furthermore, he saw incompatibility in Britain spending large sums on atomic weapons whilst accepting Marshall Aid.
There was just no meeting of minds on the weapons issue.
The Americans did not want Britain to acquire weapons of her own, and, though they were not prepared to say so publicly, they were determined to make acquisition as difficult and expensive as possible.
The British Ambassador, Sir Oliver Franks, wrote at the time.
The whole question of our relations with the Americans on atomic energy questions seems to me bound up with the larger issue of the extent to which the Americans are prepared to treat us on more or less equal terms as a first-class power.
The year 1948 was a US presidential election year, so further attempts to reopen the issue were deferred until a new Administration had taken office.
The delay proved wise, since in the meantime pressure of world events had begun to draw the two sides closer together again.
The Communist coup in Czechoslovakia (January 1948), the Berlin Blockade (June 1948), the signing of the North Atlantic Treaty (April 1949), the first Soviet atomic bomb test (August 1949), and Mao Tse Tung's proclamation of the Peoples Republic of China (October 1949), all rekindled a sense of common purpose between Britain and the United States, and created an urge to find a way of harmonizing their atomic energy programmes.
The second attempt to replace the Quebec Agreement with something more useful than the modus vivendi began in September 1949, just after the detonation of the first Soviet atomic bomb was confirmed, and coincidentally with a devaluation of sterling, which threw a spotlight on the shakiness of the British economy.
The Americans wanted the greatest possible acceleration of weapon production on behalf of the Atlantic Alliance in order to keep ahead of the Russians, but they insisted on two principles: first, that production and storage facilities should be located with due regard to strategic considerations, and that meant location in North America with minimum holdings in Europe; and second, that there should be co-ordination of the American and British programmes to make best use of available expertise and resources, including exchange of scientists.
During the negotiations the British team accepted the force of most of the American arguments.
After much soul-searching, British ministers were prepared, if necessary, to concentrate upon industrial uses of atomic energy, provided there was full technical co-operation and no restriction on exchange of information.
They also insisted that a minimum stockpile of atomic bombs (a figure of 20 was mentioned) should be maintained in the United Kingdom under British operational control at all times for use by Bomber Command.
The ministerial position went a long way towards meeting the US criteria, but the British side had worries as well.
They had been bitten too often by Congress reneging on agreements negotiated in good faith by the White House.
They insisted, therefore, that the agreement must have the formal approval of the President and a guarantee that no subsequent action by Congress could invalidate it; after all, the future security of the United Kingdom was at stake in such a far-reaching agreement.
All avenues were explored to see whether such a guarantee could be given by the Americans, but no way of doing so could be found without breaching the US Constitution.
The only way forward was via a formal international treaty, and there were still enough isolationists, atomic energy monopolists, and anglophobes in Congress to make the passage of the necessary legislation impracticable.
The price of integration of the British and American programmes had proved too high for both sides.
And so the British Government decided that Britain would remain independent unless there was a genuine change of heart in Washington that would allow the passage of a formal treaty through Congress.
Two events occurred that ensured, for the time being at least, no such a change in Congressional attitudes would occur.
In January 1950, the Americans decided to develop the hydrogen bomb.
They were determined to snatch and hold a lead in nuclear fusion weapons: exchanging information with Britain would, in their view, be far too risky.
This was given unfortunate confirmation a month later by the arrest, as a Soviet spy, of the British-naturalized Austrian scientist, Klaus Fuchs, who had worked at Los Alamos.
Matters were made worse by the defection of the Harwell scientist Bruno Pontecorvo in September 1950; and later by the escape to Moscow of the British diplomatic defectors Burgess and Maclean in June 1951.
It might have been possible for Britain to enforce Anglo-American nuclear collaboration by withholding ore stocks, but to have done so would have reduced American production of fissile material to the Soviets' advantage.
Until the RAF was carrying atomic bombs, the First Pillar of British grand strategy — the defence of the United Kingdom — depended upon the US Strategic Air Command.
It would have been foolhardy to risk weakening it at a time when the Cold War was about to turn hot in Korea.
The development of Labour Government policies for the Second Pillar — the maintenance of a favourable balance of power in Europe — was a happier story in that British and American interests coincided.
This was not so in 1946, but thanks to the blatancy of Soviet hostility, to the efforts of Churchill and Ernest
Bevin amongst the politicians, and to Field Marshal Montgomery amongst the military, they were soon aligned.
Churchill's Iron Curtain speech in March 1946  at Fulton, Missouri, and Montgomery's discussions in September with the American Joint Chiefs of Staff, on the Potomac river in the yacht Sequoia , articulated the threat and laid the foundations for Anglo-American cooperation in the defence of Western Europe.
The first positive step in the post-war consolidation of Western Europe came about through Ernest Bevin's down-to-earth leadership amongst his Continental colleagues, which helped General Marshall to push his aid programme through Congress, thus pre-empting an economic collapse and a Soviet take-over.
Thereafter, events had an almost predetermined ring about them as Soviet action was matched by Western reaction.
The Communist coup in Czechoslovakia in February 1948 was followed by the signing of the Brussels Treaty with a 50-year term in March.
The Berlin Blockade of June heralded the stationing of the first three US bomber groups in the United Kingdom in July; and was followed by Montgomery's appointment as Chairman of the Western European Chiefs of Staff committee in November, and the signing of the North Atlantic Treaty the following April, coincidently with the passage of the US Mutual Defence Aid Programme through Congress.
And the outbreak of the Korean War in June 1950 looked so very like the preliminaries to the Third World War that it led to Eisenhower again becoming the Allied Supreme Commander, Europe, with Montgomery as his deputy in November to prepare resistance to a probable Soviet invasion across the Iron Curtain.
This chain of events led to British support of NATO becoming the basis of her Second Pillar of grand strategy, but it was to be another four years, and under Churchill's last Administration, before it was finally set in concrete with the extension of the Brussels Treaty in the October 1954.
Britain pledged herself to keep BAOR, comprising four divisions, and RAF (Germany) on the Continent in order to assuage French fears of German rearmament, which the extended Treaty now authorized.
For the first time since Mary Tudor lost Calais in 1558, Britain had troops permanently stationed across the Channel in peacetime.
Formulation of Labour Government policies to support the Third Pillar — the projection and protection of British interests overseas — needed least reorientation of traditional British military thinking that had evolved from three centuries of global geo-political experience.
The threat to British interests had changed, with international Communism replacing the political and military intrigues of predator European powers and Tsarist Russia of earlier centuries, but the policies for meeting the new threat remained traditional: the judicious stationing of garrisons to protect overseas territories from external aggression and from internal subversion; the deployment of naval forces to maintain the freedom of the seas in areas of British interest; and the positioning of strategic reserves at key points, like Egypt and Singapore, on the imperial lines of communication through Suez to the Far East.
Domination of the Middle East had always been seen as an important element of British strategy since Nelson defeated Napoleon at the Battle of the  Nile in 1798; and it remained so into the 1940s and early 1950s.
The Middle East was seen as the sea and, later, the air crossroads of the Eastern Hemisphere; as the land bridge between Europe, Asia and Africa; and as the main source of sterling oil upon which Britain and Western Europe were becoming increasingly dependent.
Britain had sunk vast capital sums into the military installations set up in the Suez Canal Zone and at Alexandria to serve the British campaigns in the Mediterranean during the Second World War.
Much the same could be said of Singapore.
It, too, was at another of the world's maritime crossroads: it was part of the island chain from Asia to Australasia; it was an important source of sterling rubber and tin; and it had major naval, army and air installations to house and support strategic reserves.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the continuing use of the Canal Zone and Singapore became axiomatic in post-war military planning.
While the Anglo-American partnership was vital but unequal in maintaining the First and Second Pillars of grand strategy, Britain was expected to go it alone in supporting the Third Pillar, which was an essentially British requirement that had little to do with the Americans or the North Atlantic Alliance.
Moreover, in the light of the Americans' deep-seated anti-colonialism, neutrality was the most that could be hoped for in the problems that would face Britain in converting her Empire into the Commonwealth at a prudent and realistic pace.
The United States was not in the business of helping to prolong British imperial power.
Such Anglo-American co-operation as there was outside Europe was directed towards the containment of Soviet and Chinese Communism.
And in this endeavour Britain had much to offer: experience in handling Afro-Asian affairs, and bases around the periphery of the Communist Bloc, from which political and military pressure could be exerted.
Although old-fashioned spheres of influence were anathema to the United States, there was a tacit acknowledgement of areas of primary leadership in the protection of Western interests from the cancer of Communism.
The division of responsibility was based upon past historical connections and more recent wartime involvement with particular areas of concern.
The United States took the lead in North East and East Asia due to their occupation of Japan, and to their support of Nationalist China: Britain led in South East Asia, the Indian Ocean and the Middle East.
While the Americans were re-educating Japan, the British were waging their long but successful campaign against the Chinese Communist terrorists in the jungles of Malaya, and the French were failing to master the Communist-inspired rebellion in Indo-China.
The Anglo-American partnership outside Europe was put to the test when the Korean War started in June 1950.
The Attlee Government loyally supported the American-led United Nations war effort, not only with naval, army and air forces, but also with a major rearmament programme of its own.
Its loyalty was to contrast favourably with American disloyalty five years later during the Suez crisis.
Allied intelligence assessments suggested that the  Communist offensive in Korea was a preliminary skirmish to draw Anglo-American forces eastwards, and to hold them in the Far East while Soviet forces destabilized the politically shaky states of Western Europe.
The chances of these Communist tactics leading to the Third World War by 1953 were deemed too high for any complacency in Western capitals.
In Washington, the Combined Anglo-American Chiefs of Staff Committee was reactivated, and it proposed massive rearmament programmes for both countries.
The British programme was costed at £6,000 million spread over three years, to which the United States would make an undefined contribution.
Subsequent Cabinet and Service Department screening in Whitehall reduced the figure to £4,700 million which was the most that the Treasury believed the economy could bear without being put on to a war footing.
At the same time National Service was increased from eighteen months to two years.
By 1953, Defence expenditure had almost doubled and was running at around 10 per cent of GDP.
The British electorate, conscious of the lessons of pre-war appeasement policies, accepted the burden as a reasonable insurance against a Third World War.
The Korean War, and more particularly the fear of a major Soviet offensive of some kind in Europe in 1953, which killed the Ten-Year Rule, led to crash production programmes at the expense of the previous policy of giving priority to research and development.
Although the first production order for V-bombers (the Valiant) was placed in December 1950, the V Force itself, carrying British-manufactured atomic bombs, could not become operational before the mid-1950s at the earliest.
The United States had already agreed under the Mutual Defence Aid Programme to provide 70 B-29 bombers (renamed Washingtons in RAF service) as a stopgap, and these had started to arrive in March 1950 as part of the NATO build-up in Western Europe before the Korean War began.
The Washingtons, though welcome, could not fill the gap entirely, so thoughts turned to the production of relatively simple flying bombs.
Two flying bomb systems were tried: Bristol Aircraft's plastic Blue Rapier, and Vickers' light alloy Red Rapier.
When the intensity of the crisis had died down and fears of an imminent Soviet advance into Western Europe had receded in late 1953, both were cancelled and work was started on a stand-off weapon for the V-bombers.
The first was Blue Boar, a glide missile with television guidance and a range of only 25 nautical miles, on which preliminary work had begun in 1951.
By 1954, the Air Staff decided that an all-weather system was needed and that the technology for it was available.
Blue Boar was dropped and replaced by Blue Steel Mk 1, an inertially guided cruise missile with a range of 100 nautical miles that eventually came into service with the V Force in 1962 as part of Britain's Independent Nuclear Deterrent.
The development of the V-bombers' supersonic successor, the AVRO 730, and of Blue Steel MkII with a range of 750 nautical miles, began in the mid-1950s.
The story of Britain's fighter development was more complex and was  slowed by one fundamental error of scientific judgment.
In 1945, the Miles Aircraft Company was developing a supersonic experimental aircraft, the M 52, but lack of basic data on supersonic conditions led to the decision in 1948 not to risk a pilot's life flying it until more was known about the compressibility of air, or the sound barrier.
Instead, it was decided to use remotely-controlled test vehicles.
The M 52 development was stopped, but testing without ‘a man in the circuit’ proved unreliable.
Data accumulated subsequently suggests that the M 52 could have been flown safely and might have given the British aircraft industry a commanding lead in supersonic fighter development.
Nonetheless, research and development in post-war fighter aircraft went forward at a brisk pace and over a wide range of options.
It was not without its setbacks, one of which was the Korean War rearmament programme, that resulted in premature production of two subsonic fighters as short-term stopgaps: the highly successful Hunter and the unsuccessful Swift, both of which entered RAF service in 1954.
By that time there were three supersonic contenders for the medium term: the English Electric Company's P-1, which later became the Lightning, the Saunders Roe P-177, which combined jet with rocket propulsion; and the Fairey delta-winged PD-2, in which Peter Twiss wrested the air speed record from the Americans in 1956 with a speed of 1,132 m.p.h.
Concurrent with these military developments the British aircraft industry was waging a losing battle with the Americans for a large share of the civilian passenger and freight markets.
The health of the industry in the longer term, and hence the degree of independence Britain would attain in military aircraft production, would depend on the outcome.
It was not a happy saga.
Commercial, political and military misjudgments played significant parts in Britain's defeat.
The commercial misjudgment centred upon British Airways' obstinately held belief that turbo jets were more economic than pure jets and were preferred by passengers.
Politically, unemployment in Belfast created pressures favourable to the turbojet Britannias, that were built there, to the disadvantage of Vickers' VC-7 with pure jet engines.
Unfortunately, the Air Staff, who preferred the military version of the VC-7, the V-1000, could not make a strong enough case to offset the commercial and political arguments favouring the Britannia.
The VC-7/V-1000 was scrapped, and the Boeing 707 rode through the gap as pure jets proved both economic and attractive to passengers in spite of the Comet 1 disasters.
On the other side of the technological coin, missile development was going ahead concurrently with aircraft design.
Both the American and British missile programmes owed much to German wartime work on their V-1s and V-2s, which did so much damage to London, Antwerp and Paris during the closing stages of the Second World War.
The Americans forged ahead not only because they could deploy greater resources, but also because they were more ruthless in seeking out key German experts during the chaos of the German surrender, and in persuading them to work for them in the United States.
The British  research and development establishments were curiously loth to employ them, and the Germans themselves preferred to rebuild their lives in North America where the scientific opportunities were so much greater.
Unlike their failure to collaborate in the atomic field, the two countries did decide to work together on missiles.
An agreement to do so was signed in February 1950, just over a month after the breakdown of the second attempt to replace the 1943 Quebec Agreement.
In the British programme, the missile rival to the AVRO-730 supersonic bomber was Blue Streak, a liquid-fuelled ballistic missile with a 2,500-nautical mile range and weighing 100 tons.
The American equivalents were Atlas and Titan 1.
The British air defence missiles were the Royal Navy's Sea Slug, the Army's Thunderbird, and the RAF's Bloodhound.
Their American equivalents were the Hawk and Nike families of missiles.
During the early 1950s too little was known about rocket propulsion and missile performance for finite decisions to be taken in favour of either aircraft or missiles.
It was generally assumed that they would probably prove to be complementary to each other, but what the optimum mix would be was far from clear.
There were, of course, the inevitable extremists who foresaw the demise of one or other system for a variety of different and often conflicting reasons.
But in the history of warfare new weapon systems rarely achieve immediate dominance: only the passage of time and operational experience decides whether the older, well-tried systems should be superseded or not.
The Korean rearmament programme soon proved to be too ambitious for Britain's fragile economy and fatal to Attlee's Labour Government.
The balance-of-payments crisis of 1951 was caused by one foreseen and two unexpected factors.
The former was the obvious clash between Britain's need for exports to pay her way in the post-war world and the requirement of the rearmament programme, both of which competed for the same scarce skills and resources of the metal-working industries to the detriment of the export trade.
The two unforeseen factors were the Iranian nationalization of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company during the Abadan crisis of May 1951 which forced Britain to buy oil for dollars; and the inflation of world raw material prices due to the demands of the American rearmament and strategic stockpiling programmes.
British colonies profited by the latter, but spent their newly earned dollars on their own development programmes, causing a major outflow of dollars from the sterling area.
The Socialist Government might have survived the crisis had it not been for the internal rift within the Labour Party that was brought about by the Cabinet's decision to impose charges for medical prescriptions to curb excessive waste in the newly established National Health Service.
Aneurin Bevan, who led the revolt against the charges, portrayed them as the direct result of the financial strains caused by the rearmament programme.
Attlee went to the country over the issue and lost the general election of October 1951.
The clash between the demands of the Welfare State and Britain's desire to regain her position as a great power had claimed its first victim!
Churchill's return to power had an immediate and dramatic effect upon Anglo-American relations.
Doors that had remained firmly shut in Attlee's days began to open.
During his visit to Washington in January 1952, he was briefed in depth on the US Strategic Air Plan.
The briefing convinced him that the combination of the atomic bomb and air power would give the Western Alliance a favourable balance of power in the world for the foreseeable future.
A month later, the NATO Council met in Lisbon and surprisingly ignored US atomic capabilities.
They based the Alliance's first ‘Force Goals’ upon outdated concepts that called for the deployment of very large conventional forces by the Alliance.
The target set by NATO for Britain was nine to ten regular and territorial divisions (in 1954 the figure was raised to the even more impracticable level of nine of each by D-day plus 30).
The superimposition of massive conventional forces on what should have been an atomic strategy, made no sense to Churchill, who appreciated that financial pressures would reduce rather than increase the number of divisions that Britain could contribute to Western European defence.
He instructed the Chiefs of Staff to examine ways of discharging Britain's military commitments more economically, absorbing less manpower and reducing dollar expenditure.
The Chiefs of Staff took the unusual step of going down to the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, in the late spring of 1952, where they worked for a fortnight on Churchill's requirement with their principal scientific and technological advisers, free from the day-to-day hubbub of Whitehall.
The Global Strategy paper that they produced pleased Churchill, and it became the starting point for the development of British military strategy in the nuclear era.
The term ‘nuclear’ rather than‘atomic’is appropriate from this time onwards because the first American hydrogen bomb was tested in November 1952.
Although the first British atomic bomb had only just been tested a month before at Monte Bello Island off the north-west coast of Australia, the British government, under Churchill's leadership, decided remarkably quickly in December to follow the American lead and to build its own hydrogen bomb as soon as possible.
The Chiefs of Staff 1952 Global Strategy paper concluded that Soviet and Chinese Communist aggression could best be countered by nuclear deterrence.
Although the US Strategic Air Command's nuclear capability was already formidable, Britain should make her own contribution to the Western nuclear deterrent by giving absolute priority to the rapid build-up of the V Force in order to maintain British influence in the Atlantic Alliance, and as a hedge against isolationist tendencies in the United States.
They hoped that the number of troops committed to NATO for conventional defence could be reduced when tactical nuclear weapons, then under development in the US, became available within the Alliance.
At sea, the Royal Navy should prepare for a long ‘broken back’ period after a nuclear exchange in Europe, during which resupply across the North Atlantic would  be vital to the United Kingdom's survival, whether the exchange had been decisive or not.
In considering policies for the protection of British interests outside Europe, the Chiefs of Staff envisaged a reduction in the very large forces deployed in the Middle East, provided a new Anglo-Egyptian Treaty could be successfully concluded in 1952 as the Foreign Office was confidently expecting.
In the Far East, they believed that Chinese Communist subversion would create increasing instability and prevent any reduction of force levels East of Suez.
Bearing in mind the continuing need to protect British interests and to support friendly states in the Middle and Far East, they recommended that steps should be taken to build up RAF Transport Command's capacity to provide greater strategic and tactical air mobility.
The creation of air-mobile strategic reserves could lead, they thought, to a reduction in static overseas garrisons; and the replacement of troop-ships by trooping-aircraft should also save manpower locked up in the trooping pipeline.
The years 1952 and 1953 saw further major changes in the world's political leadership.
Eisenhower won the 1952 presidential election, and brought in John Foster Dulles as his Secretary of State.
Stalin died in March 1953 and was succeeded by the moderate Malenkov, who was to be ousted by the raucous Khrushchev in February 1955.
The Korean armistice was signed in July 1953; the first Soviet hydrogen bomb was tested in August; the RAF received its first British atomic bombs into service with the V Force in November; and at the turn of the year, Foster Dulles announced the United States' twin policies of ‘massive nuclear retaliation and the containment of the Soviet Union’.
The US Strategic Air Command had the bombers and nuclear weapons to make his ‘retaliation’ policy credible.
His energetic, though convoluted, diplomacy gave reality to ‘containment’ with the formation of SEATO in May 1954; the extension of the Brussels Treaty in 1954 to include the rearmament of West Germany and the British pledge to keep four divisions on the Continent; and the signing of the Baghdad Pact in February 1955 that led to the formation of CENTO in 1957.
One of the conclusions of the Chiefs of Staff was soon disproved by events.
The Middle East became more troublesome than the Far East where the British successes in the Malayan jungles contrasted sharply with the French disasters in Indo-China (Dien Bien Phu fell in May 1954); and Anthony Eden's diplomacy led to the Indo-China settlement at Geneva in July 1954.
It was the fall of King Farouk of Egypt in July 1952 and the subsequent rise of Colonel Nasser, not only as dictator of Egypt, but also as the leader of Arab Nationalism, that invalidated the Chiefs of Staffs assessment of the Middle East.
Nasser drove a much harder bargain than Farouk's negotiators, which seriously delayed the completion of the New Anglo-Egyptian Treaty, preventing any reduction of British troops in Egypt.
The negotiations were not helped by American diplomats in Cairo, who covertly supported Nasser, or by the machinations of the US oil companies operating in the Middle East.
Anglo-American relations in the Middle East were far from satisfactory in the early 1950s.
While Britain had given the United States wholehearted support in Korea, she had also shown her independence by what the Americans saw as over-precipitate recognition of Communist China, and by Attlee's personal efforts to dissuade Truman from extending the war to mainland China and from using atomic bombs to settle the conflict.
The boot was now on the other foot in the Middle East where the Americans were the critics and Britain was shouldering the primary responsibility for the stability of the area.
The American view of the Middle East situation was that any failure of British colonialism to come to terms with Arab Nationalism would open the door to Communist infiltration and eventual domination of the area.
American political pressure on Churchill in London, and diplomatic help to Nasser in Cairo, resulted in the highly unsatisfactory Anglo-Egyptian Agreement of October 1954, whereby the military base installations in the Canal Zone were to be handed over to British civilian contractors, and all uniformed personnel were to leave Egypt by the end of March 1956.
The bases could only be reactivated if the Egyptian Government agreed that there was a military threat to international integrity of the Suez Canal.
The British Government had every right to expect uninhibited American support in ensuring the success of this impracticable settlement: it was not forthcoming.
Anthony Eden took over from Churchill in April 1955 as British troops began their withdrawal from the Canal Zone to new bases in Cyprus and Aden, and back to England to reinforce the Strategic Reserve.
(The last troops, in fact, left
Egypt on 13 June 1956.)
The first V-bombers were entering service equipped with free-fall atomic bombs (Blue Steel stand-off missiles were not available until 1962).
The development of the Blue Streak ballistic missile that might replace the V-bomber had started, and was greatly helped by the 1950 Anglo-American agreement to collaborate in missile technology; and the development of the British hydrogen bomb was well under way.
In Europe, NATO had accepted the deployment of US tactical nuclear weapons.
BAOR was about to be equipped with US Corporal and Honest John missiles with their nuclear warheads held by American custodial teams.
The same arrangement was to be extended to nuclear artillery shells when these too became available.
No attempt was being made to manufacture British tactical nuclear weapons, but the Army was developing its own surface-to-surface tactical missile, called Blue Water, to replace Corporal.
With a new Prime Minister at the helm, the time was opportune for a further review of strategy to take account of these recent advances in weapon systems.
Eden took a close personal interest in the 1955 Review of Strategy, writing the guidelines himself:
1.
The main threat to our position and influence in the world is now political and economic rather than military; and our policies should be adapted to meet the changed situation.
Effort must be transferred from  military preparations to maintenance and improvement of our political and economic position.
2.
The period of foreign aid is ending and we must now cut our coat according to our cloth.
There is not much cloth.
We have to find means of increasing, by £400 million a year the credit side of our balance of payments.
3.
In our defence programmes generally we are doing too much to guard against the least likely risk, viz. the risk of a major war; and we are spending too much on forces of types which are no longer of primary importance.
The possibility of ending of National Service was not mentioned in these guidelines, but it was the first item on the agenda of subjects to be discussed, and it was seen in the Whitehall market-place to be the political ‘Blue Chip' stock of the year.
The market discounted the fact that most of the military policy-makers doubted the practicability of reverting to the British tradition of voluntary regular service without taking undue risks with the country's security.
The chances of recruiting enough regulars seemed slender in the conditions of overfull employment prevailing in Britain in the 1950s.
In his memoirs Eden wrote:
I had long wished to bring National Service to an end.
A large proportion of our forces had to be ready to travel to distant theatres of war and it was uneconomic that they should be composed of National Servicemen, admirably though those carried out their duties….
I was not, however, prepared to give an undertaking to bring National Service to an end until I was certain that we had the necessary voluntary enlistment.
The 1956 Defence White Paper summarized the outcome of the 1955 Review of Strategy:
The increased power of the deterrent, that is, the nuclear weapon and the means of its delivery, has made global war more frightening and less likely.
Our first and chief objective must be to prevent war by the maintenance of the Allied deterrent, to which we have begun to make our own substantial contribution.
It is our belief that given the deterrent, given the robust faith on the part of the free world in the strength of their institutions, and given continued growth of NATO's defensive power, global war can be prevented.
In the deterrent must be included an effective early warning system and the ability of the forces of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation to hold the line by land, sea and air until the nuclear counter-offensive has broken the back of the enemy assault.
In the military strategy devised by the Chiefs of Staff to support the Eden  Government's Defence policy, the Services were to fulfil four roles: contributing to the Allied nuclear deterrent; exerting influence in the Cold War; dealing with outbreaks of limited war; and playing an effective part in global war, if the deterrent were to fail.
There was to be a modest reduction in their strength from 800,000 to 700,000 in all ranks.
No mention was made in the 1956 Defence White Paper of the possibility of ending National Service, but within the War Office a committee was set up under General Sir Richard Hull (later to become Field Marshal, succeeding Mountbatten in 1965 as Chief of Defence Staff) to examine the size of regular Army that would be needed, and could be recruited, if National Service was abolished.
The Navy and Air Force were less dependent on National Servicemen, but were directed to formulate contingency plans for their demise.
And so it came about that while the Operational Staffs of the three Service Ministries were grappling with the Suez crisis of 1956, which entailed increasing the Defence effort and calling up reservists to fill gaps in the order of battle for the contingency plan Musketeer , they were answering questions posed by the Hull Committee about the implications of halving Service manpower by April 1960 or 1961 at the very latest!
The rights and wrongs of the Suez débâcle will be debated as long as the history of the mid-twentieth century has any relevance in world affairs.
The crisis itself, and the subsequent failure of the Anglo-French efforts to topple Nasser, demonstrated where real power lay.
In effect, the two new superpowers came together to crush the great powers of yesteryear; and the growing voice of Afro-Asia in world affairs was heeded for the first time.
As far as Britain was concerned, the failure showed the limits not only of British power, but also of the Anglo-American special relationship.
It was cold comfort to realize after the event that the drama had been played out by three sick men, whose judgments contributed to this deeply wounding incident in Anglo-American relations: Eisenhower was suffering from ileitis; Dulles had cancer; and Eden had a recurrence of the abdominal obstruction that had laid him low once before in 1953, and was to do so again after he resigned.
Eden, who in pre-war days had fought a losing battle in British politics against the appeasement of the dictators, saw Nasser as the reincarnation of Mussolini, if not of Hitler; and in consequence, tried to use a sledge-hammer to crack a nut.
Dulles precipitated the crisis by peremptorily withdrawing US financial aid for the Aswan Dam, thereby opening the door to the flow of Eastern Bloc arms and influence into the Middle East — the very situation that he had feared British colonial obduracy would create.
And yet he refused to follow through the consequences of his devious diplomacy.
Siding covertly with Nasser, he progressively undermined the Suez Canal Users Association, which he himself had created, and sapped British and French confidence in American good faith with every twist in his tortuous attempts to reach a peaceful solution.
Eisenhower, who was in the midst of his re-election campaign and was presenting himself to the American electorate as ‘a man of peace’, failed to  make clear to his British and French colleagues in the Atlantic Alliance the depth of his reluctance to countenance the use of force over an issue that was only important and not vital to US interests.
During the Korean War, Attlee made Britain's objections to the extension of the conflict to mainland China crystal clear to Truman.
Eisenhower and Dulles prevaricated over Suez, and, in the longer term, the United States has paid the price for their misjudgments.
America inherited Britain's thankless task of trying to maintain a semblance of stability in the Middle East, and has been singularly unsuccessful in doing so over the three decades that have passed since Suez.
The political lessons of Suez could not be disguised.
In relative terms, Britain was shown to be a middle-ranking power with her ability to take independent military action strictly limited.
In the face of American, Soviet and Afro-Asian opposition to colonialism, it was also clear that Britain no longer had the resources to dictate the speed at which her Empire should be transformed into the Commonwealth of independent nations.
Her imperial era was over, though it took another decade and two major anti-terrorist campaigns in Borneo and Aden to complete the transition.
The military lessons were equally clear.
British military reaction had been too slow and ponderous to command respect in the politico-military environment of the post-war world.
The Suez operation smacked too much of a Normandy-style landing, and too little of the quick military reaction needed in the nuclear era, which is also the era of instant communication and mass-media debate on a world scale.
The buttress of the Third Pillar of grand strategy — domination of the Middle East — had collapsed into a pile of rubble, blocking Britain's sea and air communications to the Far East.
Finding ways round the block of Arab Nationalist states, that stretched from Syria in the north to the southern frontier of the Sudan in the south, was to become one of the major tactical problems faced by the Defence operational staffs and the Diplomatic Service throughout the 1960s.
While it may be debatable whether Suez marked the end of Britain's imperial era, it undoubtedly blew away the mirage of coequality in the Anglo-American partnership.
This might have been the moment for Britain to transfer her loyalties to the European Community, but her ties with the Commonwealth and the special relationship were too strong.
Europe might be geographically closer than the United States, but it was psychologically much farther away.
Britain's attachment to her colonies, past and present, was far stronger than her recently acquired Brussels Treaty links with her historic rivals across the Channel.
Moreover, Europe was still recovering from wartime devastation, and had achieved neither political coherence nor a sound enough military/ industrial base to provide a viable alternative to the North American connection.
In the aftermath of Suez, Britain had no other option but to try to repair the damage done to her trans-Atlantic anchor cables and to accept her position as an offshore island of the United States.
The Offshore Island of the United States: 1956–70
The British Empire and the United States will have to be somewhat mixed up in some of their affairs for mutual and general advantage.
For my part, looking out for the future, I do not view the process with any misgivings.
I could not stop it if I wished,; no one can stop it.
Like the Mississippi, it just keeps rolling along.
Let it roll.
Let it roll on full good, inexorable, irresistible, benignant, to the broader lands and better days .
Sir Winston Churchill
Duncan Sandy's Nuclear Reformation: 1957–59
The forebodings of the Chiefs of Staff were largely justified.
He [Duncan Sandys]treated them with scant consideration, brushed their doubts and fears aside, and scarcely allowed them to make their voices heard.
Philip Ziegler,Mountbatten :
‘The Sandys Years’.
The Suez crisis of November 1956 had demonstrated Britain's economic vulnerability, the decline in her political power, and the cumbersome orthodoxy of her military establishment.
But it did not throw a spotlight on the inadequacies or otherwise of British weapons and equipment, apart from obvious shortages of transport aircraft and ageing of her amphibious shipping.
There was, however, a growing realization in Whitehall that Britain could no longer‘go it alone’ in weapon development, and so she would have to seek some form of closer partnership with the United States, at least , until Europe could provide a viable alternative.
And that, in 1957, seemed a very long way off.
When Harold Macmillan took over from Anthony Eden in January that year, he had three primary objectives in mind: to place the British economy on a sounder footing; to repair the damage done to Anglo-American relations by Suez; and to restore the fortunes of the Conservative Party.
With the next general election not due until May 1960, he had three years in which to establish himself as Prime Minister, provided he could ride through the political fallout from Suez.
Radical changes in Defence policy lay at the root of Macmillan's aspirations.
Righting the economy demanded major cuts in Defence spending and the release of skilled manpower from the Services to export-orientated industries.
Closer collaboration with the United States would reduce costs in weapon  development, and enable Britain to be more selective in the projects she chose to pursue by herself in order to maintain the greatest measure of national independence.
And the electorate's view of the Conservative Party would depend upon its success in creating a Defence policy that was perceived to give reasonable security at lower cost.
There was, as yet, no significant revulsion amongst the general public towards the use of nuclear weapons to save manpower.
Indeed, it was considered a desirable benefit flowing from Britain's advanced technology.
Ending National Service, if it proved practicable, would be a political prize of great value.
Should the Conservatives fail to bring it about, the Labour Party would certainly incorporate it in their next election manifesto.
Macmillan decided on a two-handed approach.
With one hand he would try to mend Britain's fences with the United States by using his own close relationship with President Eisenhower and other senior members of the US Administration, which he had formed when he was British political adviser at Eisenhower's Allied Force Headquarters in the Mediterranean during the War.
With the other, he would exploit the nuclear defence philosophy sketched out by the Chiefs of Staff in their 1952 Global Strategy paper to get rid of National Service.
As a former Minister of Defence, Foreign Secretary, and Chancellor of the Exchequer, he was all too familiar with the Defence arguments in the Whitehall market-place.
They had convinced him that no radical change in Defence policy would be negotiable unless the Minister of Defence was given greater powers to override the special pleading of the Admiralty, the War Office, the Air Ministry, and the Ministry of Supply.
The vigour with which changes were imposed would help to create public confidence in his administration; and a measure of ruthlessness would be needed to overcome the conservatism of the military establishment.
He needed a minister with the strength of character, reforming zeal and awareness of technological opportunities to push through the changes in Defence policy that he had in mind to help in the consolidation of his political power.
Duncan Sandys was the obvious choice.
He had the drive and determination that Macmillan sought, and his time in the Ministry of Supply had given him experience in, and a fascination for, advanced technology in weapon development.
On 18 January 1957, he was invested with the necessary powers.
In the immediate post-war years, the Minister of Defence had been little more than the co-ordinator of the three autonomous Service Ministries and the Ministry of Supply.
His Chief Staff Officer was not even a full member of the Chiefs of Staff Committee, the chairmanship of which was rotated between the three Service ‘Chiefs’.
In October 1955, Eden had increased the powers of the Minister marginally, and his Chief Staff Officer was made Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee.
Appreciating that the RAF would be playing a dominant role in manning Britain's nuclear deterrent, Eden had appointed Marshal of the Royal Air Force Sir William Dickson to the post.
Macmillan now  took the process of integrating the Service Ministers a step further by making Duncan Sandys, his new Minister of Defence, responsible for:
the formulation and general application of a unified Defence policy relating to the Armed Forces of the Crown as a whole and their requirements.
Duncan Sandys was personally tasked by Macmillan:
to work out a new Defence policy in the light of present strategic needs which would secure substantial reduction in expenditure and manpower; at the same time to prepare a plan for reshaping and reorganising the armed forces.
Subject to the overriding authority of the Defence Committee and the Cabinet, he would have the power to decide:
all questions on the size, shape, organisation and dispositions of the forces, as well as their equipment and supply, and their pay and conditions of service.
Sandys went off to Washington at the end of January to update himself on the latest US operational thinking and advances in weapon technology.
During his visit the Americans offered to supply Britain with 60 of their Thor intermediate-range ballistic missiles to reinforce the nuclear deterrent while the V Force was being built up with Vulcans and Victors.
Manning these missiles would give the RAF experience in handling ballistic systems while Blue Streak was being developed.
Thanks to the updating of the 1950 Anglo-US missile agreement in 1953, British development costs and time were being saved by fitting Blue Streak with Atlas rocket engines and inertial guidance systems.
The Thors and their nuclear warheads were to be provided at US expense.
The launch sites would be constructed by the United Kingdom, and the missile systems would be fully manned by the RAF crews.
Control would be by ‘Dual Key’.
Generous though the offer seemed to be at first sight, it was in American interests to acquire missile sites in Britain to bring the Soviet Union within range of American attack.
Turkey and Italy were the only other NATO countries that would provide sites for Thors.
Allowing the British to man the
Thors was a small price to pay for the risks that Britain would be running by having American missiles deployed in her crowded islands.
The possibility of the Soviets being able to counter with similar missiles of their own seemed remote in January 1957.
Sandys' friendly reception in Washington, and the Thor offer, confirmed suggestions, gleaned through diplomatic channels, that the Americans were as anxious as the British to start healing the wounds of Suez.
At Eisenhower's suggestion, he and Macmillan met at Bermuda in March.
The meeting did start the healing process, and it gave the US an insight into the thinking behind  the changes in British Defence policy towards which Macmillan was working.
It also formalized British acceptance of the Thor missiles and the agreement that they would only be used with the sanction of both governments.
Meanwhile, Duncan Sandys had been imposing his own view of future British Defence policy upon Whitehall with the dogmatic enthusiasm of a religious reformer.
On 21 October 1517, Martin Luther had nailed his Ninety-Five Articles of Religion on the door of Wittenberg Cathedral, starting the Protestant Reformation.
On 4 April 1957, Duncan Sandys published the 73 paragraphs of his notorious Defence White Paper entitled Defence: Outline of Future Policy, thereby triggering the British Nuclear Reformation.
Prior to Sandys the orthodox military priesthood had seen nuclear weapons as being in support of conventional forces.
In the Sandys doctrine their roles were reversed: primacy was to be given to the nuclear weapon, and conventional forces were to be reduced to a supporting role.
Neither Luther nor Sandys would have achieved much had the political conditions of the day not been extraordinarily favourable.
In the sixteenth century, Roman Catholicism was ripe for reform, but Luther's success depended less on religious conviction than on the determination of the north German princes to be rid of the political influence of Rome.
In the latter half of the twentieth century, belief in Sandys' nuclear philosophy counted for less than the political opportunity that it provided for ending National Service.
The Sandys doctrine was a crystallization of the imponderables of the early years of the nuclear era.
It solidified the tentative ideas that had been evolving in Whitehall since the drafting of the 1952 Global Strategy paper; and it was, in many respects, ahead of thinking in Washington, where traditional military orthodoxy still held sway.
It rested on two basic assumptions: that Britain's power and influence in the world depended upon a sound economy; and that by making the fullest use of nuclear weapons, missiles, and modern transport aircraft, men and money could be saved for the country's economic benefit.
The traditional ways of supporting the Three Pillars of Britain's grand strategy would need radical revision.
The embryo British independent nuclear deterrent would, in Sandy's opinion, replace sea power as the foundation upon which the Three Pillars would stand in future.
Sandy's view of the First Pillar — the defence of the British Isles — was chillingly realistic:
It must be frankly recognized that there is at present no means of providing adequate protection for the people of this country against the consequences of an attack with nuclear weapons.
Though in the event of war the Royal Air Force would unquestionably be able to take a heavy toll of enemy bombers, a proportion would inevitably get through.
Even if it were only a dozen, they could with megaton bombs inflict widespread devastation.
The conclusion ‘that the overriding consideration must be to prevent war  rather than to prepare for it,’ was inescapable.
He recognized that, pending a comprehensive international disarmament agreement:
the only existing safeguard against major aggression is the power to threaten retaliation with nuclear weapons.
Although the defence of the West depended primarily on the American nuclear umbrella, he could justifiably claim that there was a wide measure of agreement in Britain that the country must possess ‘an appreciable element of nuclear deterrent power’ of its own.
British atomic bombs were already in steady production.
A British megaton weapon had been developed and would shortly be tested.
They would both be delivered by the V Force.
The crux of the White Paper lay in para. 42:
The revised Defence plan, with its greatly reduced demands on manpower and its emphasis on highly trained mobile forces, now makes it possible to contemplate putting the Services on to an all-regular basis; and the Government will endeavour to bring about this change as soon as practicable.
The crunch came in para. 47:
The Government have accordingly decided to plan on the basis that there will be no further call-up under the National Service Acts after the end of 1960.
Sandys acknowledged that the Army would have the greatest difficulty in making ends meet.
It had about 164,000 regulars, of whom only some 80,000 were on more than a three-year engagement.
The Government's demographers advised that the largest regular army that could be recruited and sustained, under the conditions of full employment prevailing at that time, would be in the order of 165,000, excluding the 14,600 Gurkhas and other locally recruited forces.
Sandys hoped to reduce the risks of failure to reach this figure by making regular military service a more attractive long-term career.
In weapon procurement the highest priority was to be given to:
The development of British nuclear weapons suitable for delivery by manned bombers and ballistic missiles.
Nuclear warheads were also being developed for defensive guided missiles.
Close co-operation with the United States was seen as a means of saving time and money with little regard to the risks of losing some national independence.
In view of the likely progress in missile development, the supersonic AVRO 730 manned bomber would be cancelled; and no further work would be done on fighter aircraft after the completion of the development of the English Electric Lightning.
There would be increased emphasis on nuclear propulsion for maritime purposes.
And closer collaboration would be sought with Western Europe and the Commonwealth, particularly with Australia.
Sandys set out the ways and means of his reformation in the form of a five-year rolling programme.
Before he took office the Defence estimates for 1957-58 were running at £1,700 million.
His short-term measures to reduce expenditure brought the figure down to £1,420 million.
He had every hope that his longer-term plans would reduce the Defence share of the GDP from 7. 1 per cent down to 5 per cent by the end of his five-year programme.
He did, however, warn that savings would not be proportionate to the cut in manpower because regulars were more expensive than National Servicemen, and equipment costs were rising.
Sandys concluded his White Paper with a peroration:
The Government are confident that this defence plan, while helping to relieve the strain on the economy, will produce compact all-regular forces of the highest quality, armed and organized on the most up-to-date lines.
It might have been more honest to have said that the price paid for ending National Service was increased dependence on nuclear weapons.
The corollary was just as true: elimination of nuclear weapons would require a return to National Service.
It would do so just as surely today, in the 1990s, as it would have done in the late 1950s.
The contents of Duncan Sandys' White Paper were judiciously leaked during March; a standard Whitehall ploy based on the well-founded assumption that neither the market nor the media like to be taken by surprise.
They need time to digest radical change, otherwise their immediate reaction is negative.
Sandys' ‘Articles of Religion’ were well received by the majority in both major political parties in the House of Commons, and in the country at large.
Labour showed some chagrin that the Tories had stolen a march on them by ending conscription, but even Aneurin Bevan, the shadow Foreign Secretary and a unilateralist at heart, accepted the need for the British nuclear deterrent, making his famous remark that to abandon it would ‘send a British Foreign Secretary, whoever he may be, naked to the conference table’.
At the Labour Party Conference of 1957, it was generally accepted that to give up the independent nuclear deterrent would disable a future Labour government from pursuing a foreign policy not approved by Washington.
British vital interests might not necessarily coincide with those of the Americans as Suez had shown all too clearly.
Over-dependence upon the United States should be avoided at all costs.
Hugh Gaitskell made the Tory Government's case for it when he said in the House of Commons Defence debate:
We might have to say to them (the US), ‘Will you please threaten to use the ultimate deterrent?
We have not got it.’
Could we be sure in those circumstances that the American president and Congress would be prepared to risk the wholesale destruction of American cities merely to meet our point of view?
George Brown, who later became Foreign Secretary, when asked why in his opinion Britain needed the hydrogen bomb replied:
I want us to have our own foreign policy, and that means having the means to carry it out.
Attitudes outside Parliament were very similar, and would have reduced Labour's chances of winning the next election if they had advocated non-nuclear defence in 1957.
In an opinion poll taken in December of that year on the question ‘Which do you think is the more important for Britain to concentrate on: building up strength in atomic weapons and missiles, or in conventional weapons like troops, tanks and bombers?’ 52 per cent favoured the former, 8 per cent the latter, 22 per cent neither, wanting disarmament instead, and 18 per cent did not know.
Sandys' proposals were not so well received inside Whitehall.
Service attitudes — even in the RAF, which had most to gain from the Sandys Reformation — were bitterly hostile.
Part of the trouble stemmed from a dislike of Sandys' refusal to heed professional advice, and from his propensity for allowing the senior civil servants in the Ministry of Defence to usurp the powers that properly belonged to the Chiefs of Staff.
Justifiable comparisons were made with Hitler's OKW, where selected men exercised unbridled power without the responsibility of executive management.
Nevertheless, Sandys had some Service supporters.
For instance, Lord Mountbatten, who was First Sea Lord at the time, records that he found Sandys a good listener.
This was perhaps because he managed to stop Sandys sweeping the aircraft-carriers onto the junk-heap of history as he had intended to do when he first took office.
While the Chiefs were largely as one in their dislike of Sandys and his methods, there was little else that united them: each had to do his best to preserve the interests of his own Service in the turbulence that hit the Whitehall market-place in 1957.
The Royal Navy's primacy was threatened and, with Mountbatten as First Sea Lord, the Admiralty was soon fighting back.
The Army was more ambivalent: while welcoming the end of National Service and the return to ‘real soldiering’ with a regular army, the Army Council looked askance at the loss of 51 regiments, 17 of which were infantry battalions with battle honours stretching back over the centuries.
Once such regiments had been disbanded, their accumulated battle experience would be lost for ever.
The CIGS, General (later Field Marshal) Sir Francis Festing, felt the price of Sandys' Reformation was too high and considered resignation, but the other Chiefs would not support him, believing that such gestures would have little impact on a government that had the full support of Parliament and the electorate for its Defence policy.
The Air Staff were relatively content since Sandys had confirmed the RAF's ascendancy as the wielders of the independent nuclear deterrent.
Nevertheless, even they had qualms about the longer term.
The disappearance of manned bombers as well as fighters would reduce  the RAF to a missile and air-transport force — not an inviting prospect, but one that seemed too far ahead to worry about unduly in 1957.
Sandys soon found that the easiest part of his Nuclear Reformation was writing and pinning up his ‘Articles of Religion’ in Westminster.
During the two shorts months that it took to draft the White Paper, opposition could be quelled, using the new powers and wholehearted support given him by the Prime Minister.
But starting the Reformation was only half the battle: turning its principles into practicable policies and maintaining momentum in the face of opposition from determined vested interests was much more difficult.
Sandys' task was eased to some extent by Macmillan's success in reestablishing the Anglo-American special relationship.
In the aftermath of Bermuda, goodwill surged to and fro across the Atlantic.
British confidence and American respect for Britain were enhanced by the successful detonation of the British hydrogen bomb at Christmas Island in the Pacific in May 1957, which gave credibility to the independence of the British nuclear deterrent.
Even Admiral Hyman Rickover, father and all-powerful master of the US Navy's nuclear programme, who had hitherto blocked all Anglo-American collaboration in nuclear submarine development and had a well-known contempt for all things British, agreed not only to Britain purchasing an American reactor for her first nuclear submarine,Dreadnought , but also for the reactor to be the most recent second-generation version, thus saving Britain valuable time and development costs.
British staffs were also made aware of the progress being made in the development of two mobile strategic missiles in the United States: the US Air Force's bomber-launched Skybolt missile; and its rival, the US Navy's submarine-launched Polaris.
Sandys, when Minister of Supply, had already been instrumental in deciding to develop Blue Streak as the replacement for the V-bombers, and so in 1957 he saw no requirement for either Skybolt or Polaris.
There was, none the less, an element of condescension, if not charity, in the American efforts to undo the Suez damage.
Condescension disappeared on 4th October 1957 when the Russians launched their Sputnik 1 into earth orbit, and on 3rd November sent up Sputnik 2 with a dog in it.
The world's strategic balance had been upset dramatically.
The Western hemisphere would soon be in range of and vulnerable to Soviet intercontinental ballistic missiles, carrying megaton warheads.
The American nuclear umbrella over Western Europe would become less certain and the case for the independent British nuclear deterrent was correspondingly strengthened.
More immediately the Americans appreciated that the measure of technological superiority over the Soviets, on which their political and military plans were based, had been an illusion.
They needed British and West European support more than they had previously been prepared to admit.
Self-interest, if nothing else, brought about a genuine change in American attitudes.
The shock waves of the unexpected Sputnik launches, which broke on both shores of the Atlantic, brought disarmament into coequal partnership with  deterrence as a primary aim in Western Defence policy.
This was clearly demonstrated in Duncan Sandys' second Defence White Paper, published in February 1958, in which disarmament was given pride of place.
It was appreciated, even at this early stage in the post-Sputnik era, that nuclear disarmament had to be accompanied by reduction in conventional forces as well, and an effective system of verification had to be devised.
Every Defence White Paper to this day has stressed the importance the British Government attaches to the achievement of a comprehensive nuclear and conventional force disarmament package as the only alternative to nuclear deterrence.
Soon after the first Sputnik launch, Macmillan crossed the Atlantic to consolidate the refound Anglo-American special relationship.
He was very conscious of ‘An ominous note of confidence and truculence in recent statements of Russian policy.‘
The meetings in Washington recaptured something of the wartime Anglo-American relationship that had done so much to win the Second World War.
They ended with the ‘Declaration of Common Purpose’ at the heart of which lay a commitment by the President to:
request the Congress to amend the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 as may be necessary and desirable to permit close and fruitful collaboration of scientists and engineers of Great Britain, the United States, and other friendly countries.
Such was the state of American public opinion that Congress did not demur.
The MacMahon Act was amended in July 1958, enabling the two countries to sign the Agreement for Co-operation on the Uses of Atomic Energy for Mutual Defence Purposes.
Under its terms, exchange of information and materials was permitted solely to those countries that had made ‘substantial progress’ in the development of nuclear weapons.
The Administration's interpretation of this proviso was such that only Britain was able to benefit from it.
Thus the costly development of the British hydrogen bomb had paid off handsomely.
It had opened the door to closer collaboration in the nuclear field, bringing substantial savings in research and development costs, and enabling Britain to retain and constantly modernize her independent nuclear deterrent in ways that otherwise would have been beyond her economic means.
The exchange of nuclear information was not a one-way street.
The British thermo-nuclear tests on Christmas Island showed that British scientists were ahead of their American colleagues in several important areas and could contribute significantly in the collaborative exchanges.
In operational planning, the Declaration of Common Purpose, which Macmillan would have preferred to have called the Declaration of Interdependence, led to even closer relations between the British and American air forces.
The provision of bases in Britain for the US Strategic Air Command bombers and the RAF-manned Thor missiles were repaid in exchanges on nuclear strategy, tactics and  targeting.
The RAF's V Force began to play a modest, but significant, role in the Western deterrent.
The Royal Navy had been the first Service to react strongly to the Sandys Reformation.
Soon after Sandys had been appointed, Mountbatten's immediate predecessor as First Sea Lord, Sir Roderic McGrigor, had written to warn him about Sandys’ views.
His letter is worth quoting as it shows the depth of feeling and suspicion in the Services at that time.
Sandys believed, he said, that:
(a) In war very little in the way of a navy is necessary as everything will be finally decided by the H-Bomb (b) In peace foreign stations are unnecessary.
We can always warn trouble-makers that if they don't stop it the RAF will deal with them (c) Cruisers are not needed and should be scrapped (d) Aircraft Carriers and naval Aircraft are unnecessary.
The RAF can do it all and it is their job (e) Other types of ships should be drastically reduced
In fact the Navy is no longer needed and it is a luxury the country cannot afford.
On taking office Sandys did, indeed, warn the Board of Admiralty that he believed that carriers cost more than they were worth.
He did not believe in the 1952 Global Strategy paper's concept of a period of ‘broken-backed war’ after an indecisive nuclear exchange in Europe that would give the Navy a worthwhile role in the Atlantic in global war.
The Admiralty stood its ground on the principle of always maintaining a balanced fleet, based on a limited number of capital ships, which, in 1957, were generally agreed to be the aircraft-carriers.
However, their Lordships shifted the emphasis in Naval policy away from global to limited war scenarios, while, at the same time, stressing the continuing need for anti-submarine forces and carrier-borne nuclear strike aircraft in the NATO area for global war purposes.
The naval arguments were persuasive.
Sandys accepted the need for carriers in limited war and enshrined the continued existence off our carrier groups, one of which would normally be deployed East of Suez, in his 1957 White Paper.
Moreover, he did not cancel the development of the naval strike aircraft, the NA 39, which eventually became the highly successful Buccaneer.
The Navy can be said to have won the first round of the long-running carrier battle, which was to bedevil Naval-Air relations for the next decade.
The Naval shift of emphasis to limited war capabilities was strongly supported by the General Staff, who doubted whether the degree of strategic mobility, upon which Sandys was banking to reduce overseas garrisons, would be practicable with the transport aircraft likely to be available in the foreseeable future.
Quick air-reinforcement with infantry was one thing, but  any serious fighting or prolonged operations would need far heavier loads and greater tonnages of ammunition and supplies than the RAF could lift in the required time scale.
The gap would have to be bridged with supply by sea.
Moreover, they saw a strong case for the development of amphibious forces, supported by the carrier groups, to seize points of entry for the fly-in of air-transported forces.
There were few potential trouble spots, in which British forces were likely to be involved, that were not reasonably close to the sea; and naval forces had the advantage of being able to lie out of sight over the horizon during periods of tension.
The Naval and General Staff cases were made for them by Sandys’ tour of the Mediterranean, Middle East, and East Africa in July 1957, and of the Far East in August.
Perhaps the greatest impact was made on his thinking by the Commonwealth Prime Ministers’ Conference of that year, when general dismay was expressed about his proposed reductions in overseas garrisons before adequate air-reinforcement capabilities had been built up.
He was made aware that nuclear weapons were no substitute for the presence of frigates on station and infantry battalions on the ground in maintaining stability in Afro-Asia.
In developing the future size and shape of the Royal Navy, the Admiralty had two useful and recent precedents: the successful use of carrier-borne aircraft in interdicting the Chinese supply routes during the Korean War; and the much more recent use of carriers to provide the lion's share of tactical air support during the Suez landings, and the ad hoc use of the carriers Theseus and Ocean as Commando-helicopter-carriers in the amphibious assault on Port Said.
Realizing that they had a fight for Naval survival on their hands, the Admiralty took the unprecedented step of ‘going public’ to win support of opinion-makers, politicians, industrialists, and Commonwealth representatives in London.
They staged a major presentation of Naval policy, called Exercise ‘Fairlead’, at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich, in May 1957.
What the general effect of their anti-Sandys offensive was on informed opinion in the country at large and in Whitehall in particular is not easy to judge.
In some quarters it was counter-productive, as it was seen as naked lobbying, and in others it was applauded as a justifiable counter-offensive against an ill-founded doctrine.
Nevertheless, it seems to have had some effect on Sandys.
In July, he authorized the conversion of the carrier Bulwark into a Commando Ship, and the inclusion in estimates of funds for the subsequent conversion of Albion as well.
In one important area the Navy held its ambitions in check for bargaining reasons within the Whitehall market-place.
The Board of Admiralty had been well aware since 1955 that the US Navy's Polaris-armed submarines might become the capital ships of the future, and might prove to be more invulnerable as mobile launch platforms for the nuclear deterrent than the US Air Force's Skybolt, if it too was successfully developed.
They watched the progress of  Polaris closely, but made no bid for it because to have done so would have loaded the Naval votes with its costs at the expense of the rest of the Fleet.
Taking over responsibility for Britain's nuclear deterrent from the RAF would be attractive only if funds allocated for it were transferred from the Air vote; or
Polaris was paid for out of a Central Staff vote.
The Admiralty were also well aware that the Air Council would oppose a naval bid for Polaris, and that they would have most of Whitehall on their side.
For the British nuclear deterrent to be truly independent, it should be based upon British and not US delivery systems.
Blue Steel Mk II and Blue Streak were in full development and their cancellation was unthinkable.
Added to which, a serious takeover bid by the Navy at a time when the Services needed to stand together to mitigate the worst excesses of the Sandys Reformation, would have been unforgivable.
The Admiralty held its hand.
The Air Staff's worries were longer-term.
As far as could be foreseen, they were to retain responsibility for the nuclear deterrent after ballistic missiles had taken over from manned bombers.
The men being trained on the Thors would provide the cadre for the future RAF Missile Command.
In the meantime, the life of the V Force would be extended and its vulnerability reduced by the provision of Blue Steel Mk II with its stand-off range extended from the Mark I's 100 nautical miles to 700, and its speed raised to Mach 3 at 70,000 feet.
Skybolt did not figure, as yet, in the Air Staff's calculations.
At the heart of the
Air Staff's confidence lay the belief that Sandys would be proved wrong by events and that the days of manned aircraft were still far from over.
Like the Royal Navy, the RAF sought and found a gap in the Sandys doctrine, and it was the Army's requirements that again provided the case.
There was little doubt that tactical support and reconnaissance for the land battle would still need piloted machines.
Furthermore, the need to win air superiority over the battlefield was as vital as ever.
It was generally accepted that this was best achieved by attacking enemy tactical aircraft on their airfields.
There was already an Air Staff Target (GOR 339) in existence for the replacement of the Canberra light bomber with a Tactical Strike and Reconnaissance aircraft capable of carrying nuclear or conventional weapons, which would be ideal for airfield attack.
The RAF's case for the Canberra's replacement was also reinforced by the need to preserve the viability of the British aircraft industry, which was threatened with collapse after cancellation of work on the supersonic bomber and ending fighter development.
The orders for civil aircraft alone could not sustain the large number of smallish firms that comprised the industry.
And so the Air Staff found that they had a vociferous and powerful industrial lobby in both Westminster and Whitehall to back their case for GOR 339.
Sandys bowed to the political and industrial pressures generated by the Air Lobby and accepted the validity of the Air Staff requirement for GOR 339, which became the ill-starred TSR 2.
He insisted, quite reasonably, that one basic airframe should be used to meet both the Air and Naval Staff  requirements for a strike/reconnaissance aircraft.
The development of the Naval version, the NA 39, was ahead of the RAF's and was showing great promise.
It was partially funded by the US under the Mutual Defence Aid Programme, and, from the Defence costs point of view, was the obvious choice as the common airframe, if the operational requirements of the two Services could be harmonized.
Whether harmonization of requirements would prove feasible or not, there would have to be a major rationalization of the aircraft industry if it was to continue competing in world markets.
The prospect of amalgamation led to a bitter battle amongst the aircraft contractors over the TSR 2, in which only the fittest and most ruthless firms survived.
Out of it came the British Aircraft Corporation (an amalgamation of Vickers and English Electric) with the design contract, and Bristol-Siddeley with the responsibility for the development of the Olympus engine.
Harmonization proved impossible: the two Services were looking for two quite different aircraft.
The RAF wanted a new ‘capital’ aircraft with a broad spectrum of capabilities that would replace the V-bomber in the missile era, and would demonstrate the continuing need for pilots in air warfare.
The Navy, on the other hand, looked on the Buccaneer as just another weapon in their armoury with specific and narrowly-defined tasks.
In the arguments that followed Sandys' decree that a common airframe should be used, the fundamental weakness of the Whitehall bargaining system in equipment procurement was demonstrated.
The Air Staff sought battlbattle-winningormance in an aircraft that would do virtually everything in all weathers from long-range nuclear deterrent strike, through all the phases of reconnaissance, down to close battlefield support for the Army, almost regardless of cost since it was to be their capital aircraft.
The Defence scientists accepted the challenge and supported the Air Staff in making the best the enemy of the good.
In the end, they priced the TSR 2 out of the market, though this outcome still lay in the clouded mists of the future.
In 1957, costs were too uncertain and experience too limited in putting together so complex a weapon system for the Treasury to do more than impress on the Air Staff that the TSR 2 must be accommodated within the Air Ministry's financial ceilings.
But when a Service is seeking a capital system upon which its very future may depend, it will always offer to accommodate the cost by slipping lesser-priority programmes to the right or cancelling them altogether.
During the propaganda war that was waged between Sandys and the Services, the Air Staff were not to be outdone by the Admiralty.
In May 1958, just a year after the Navy's ‘Fairlead’ presentation at Greenwich, they mounted a larger and more elaborate seminar of their own, called Exercise ‘Prospect’, at the Royal Commonwealth Society in Northumberland Avenue, London, to put the RAF case to the opinion-makers.
In his summing up at the end of ‘Prospect’, the Chief of Air Staff, Sir Dermot Boyle, publicly expressed the RAF's opposition to the Sandys Reformation.
He said:
We in the Royal Air Force, if you ask for our professional advice, are convinced that we will require manned aircraft as far as we can see to supplement the missile in both the offensive and defensive roles.
No man, even such a strong and determined minister as Duncan Sandys, can force Whitehall to accept more change than it collectively sees as reasonable.
The Navy had won the first round of the carrier battle: Sandys now conceded the RAF's case for developing the TSR 2 around a new airframe instead of forcing the naval NA 39 upon them.
Unfortunately, the TSR 2 was such an advanced and complex weapon system that British industry could not provide a firm with sufficient breadth of technological expertise to act as prime contractor.
In consequence, the project became a Whitehall ‘camel’(a vehicle designed by a committee) instead of having a chief designer able to impose his personal decisiveness on the final product.
The committee system was to become standard practice in aircraft development in Europe for the rest of the century.
The TSR 2 did not establish a happy precedent, though the full implications still lay in the future.
The Army had no capital ships or aircraft to worry about: manpower was its principal concern.
Its size and shape depended on the number of infantry battalions and armoured regiments in its order of battle.
Artillery, Engineer, and Signals regiments, and its logistic corps, were tailored to support them.
Each infantry battalion and armoured regiment had to have an operational ‘peg’, but much of the sting was taken out of the Sandys Reformation, as far as the Army was concerned, by many of its regiments having 2nd and 3rd battalions, which could be amalgamated with 1st battalions as National Servicemen ran out, thus preserving regimental traditions.
The Army was also promised that a large proportion of the financial savings, which flowed from ending of National Service, would be ploughed back into major re-equipment and barrack rebuilding programmes to make regular service more attractive.
The Army had another reason for quiet confidence.
The figure of 165,000 could be taken as the basis for further negotiation, because no one could tell how regular recruiting would go.
The level of future military commitments was just as uncertain.
In the General Staff's view, instabilities in Britain's overseas territories were likely to grow rather than decline as Sandys hoped.
Afro-Asian aspirations for more speedy decolonization than the British Government thought wise, or indeed practicable, were already causing concern in the aftermath of Suez.
Moreover, there were four years before the last National Serviceman would leave the Army, in which time world instabilities would, in the General Staff's opinion, make the Army's case for a higher manpower ceiling.
They had few doubts that the Army could recruit as many regulars as it really needed, within reason, provided the country was prepared to pay enough for them.
From the moment the 1957 White Paper was published, the Army Council maintained discreet but relentless pressure on the Government to increase the ceiling as commitments grew, just as the General Staff had  predicted they would do, and as recruiting figures showed that it was practicable to find enough men to take ‘the Queen's Shilling’.
In 1958 regular recruiting went far better than the demographers had predicted, and the Army Council was able to substantiate its claim for a higher manpower ceiling.
Its pressure paid off, but Whitehall had to find a face-saving formula to cover its miscalculation.
The 1959 Defence White Paper announced that the Army would be allowed to recruit up to a ceiling of 180,000 ‘to ensure that its strength shall not fall below the planned figure of 165,000’— a lame excuse since this requirement was just as valid in 1957.
The new ceiling enabled the War Office to retain some extra units that would otherwise have been disbanded.
The first task that faced the Government after the publication of Sandys' White Paper of 1957 was to convince its European allies, the United States, and the Commonwealth, that nuclear weapons were a valid substitute for manpower, and that the proposed reductions in British forces deployed overseas would not increase world instability.
It proved to be an uphill struggle, and was far from successful.
The French were the first to object: they still had qualms about German rearmament.
The Germans themselves were equally nervous about any reduction in the strength of the Rhine Army.
Even when the Bundeswehr was fully established, NATO's Central Front would still be relatively weak compared to the Soviet deployment in Eastern Europe.
Moreover, the Germans had no desire to be saddled with more of BAOR's sector of the front: they had enough on their hands under-pinning the Dutch and Belgian corps, whose military worth they had good reasons to doubt in the late 1950s.
And to all Britain's European allies there seemed to be something incongruous about her ending conscription just as they were trying to expand their conscript forces under American pressure, in order to make the forward defence of Western Europe, which they all desired, a practicable strategy.
It was also vital to raise the nuclear threshold in Europe by increasing the level of conventional forces, and yet the British, for all too obvious financial reasons, were doing just the opposite!
In Washington there was understanding, but just as much disquiet about British Defence policy.
The Sputnik demonstration of Soviet technological capabilities had made Foster Dulles’ philosophy of massive nuclear retaliation untenable, and in its place had come the theory of imposing a pause with conventional forces to allow time for last-minute negotiations to reduce the chances of mutual nuclear suicide.
It took the very considerable diplomatic skills of Macmillan and the British ambassadors in Washington, Brussels, Paris and Bonn to win reluctant acceptance of Duncan Sandys’ theory that 45,000 regular troops, supported by tactical nuclear weapons, would be more valuable to the Alliance than 77,000 National Servicemen with only conventional artillery and air support.
SACEUR, General Lauris Norstadt, argued for and won some delay in Sandys'  programme and a modest increase in the proposed strength of BAOR.
The run-down was to be stretched over a longer period and the agreed strength raised from Sandys’ proposed 45,000 to 55,000.
The only consolation that Britain's partners could perceive was that she had not reneged on her Brussels Treaty obligations altogether: her commitment to station troops permanently on the Continent was still intact, but many people wondered for how long —‘perfidious Albion'!
The reduction of British troops on the Continent was within the competence of the British Government: cutting back overseas garrisons was not so amenable to arbitrary decisions in Whitehall.
In the 1950s, the National Service Army of some 450,000 men with 77,000 in BAOR had just managed to win the anti-terrorist campaigns in Malaya, Kenya and Cyprus.
In the 1960s, under the Sandys plan, a regular army of only 165,000 was expected to maintain stability in the colonial Empire as well as keeping BAOR at 55,000 men — not an inviting prospect.
Sandys’ proposed deployment of the Army might have been practicable if Afro-Asia had remained quiescent, and if the Army had been given the strategic mobility needed to compensate for its reduction in manpower.
Any chance of the former had been negated by Britain's failure to topple Nasser at Suez; and the latter was unlikely for some years because the aircraft did not, as yet, exist; and the RAF had no real enthusiasm for providing the necessary money to buy them out of Air votes, which they quite naturally wanted to use for combat and not transport aircraft.
In the event, Afro-Asian Nationalists and Communists were encouraged by the Anglo-French defeat at Suez.
The militants were tempted to think that the door to their ambitions was ajar.
The 1957 White Paper confirmed in their minds that the decline in British power had reached a point where the concerted pressure of world opinion, particularly in the United Nations, would throw the door wide open for them to walk through into their heritage of immediate rather than prudently timed independence.
During his tours of the Middle and Far East Duncan Sandys was made well aware by British Governors, High Commissioners and Commanders-in-Chief of the political and military risks that he was taking; and local political leaders, like the Tunku Abdul Rahman in Malaya and Lee Kuan Yew in Singapore, warned him of the dangers of creating power vacuums that could be exploited by the Communist powers.
But there could be no going back on the decision to end National Service, which had been taken over-hastily in the first place, and without adequate consultation in the second.
The General Staff was left with unenviable task of deploying a smaller army than was needed in such a way as to reduce the risks of the Sandys Reformation.
From the General Staffs’ point of view, there were some bright patches in the otherwise sombre overcast of the last years of the 1950s.
The US Congress had passed the Eisenhower Doctrine in March 1957, which expressed the US resolve:
to block the Soviet Union's march to the Mediterranean, to the Suez Canal, and to the pipelines and to the underground lake of oil which fuels the homes and factories of Western Europe.
The United States was, at last, firmly committed to helping in the maintenance of the stability of the Middle East, though British commitments to the Arab sheikhdoms in the Persian Gulf and the Aden Protectorates were undiminished.
Political progress was being made in establishing the Federation of South Arabia to give the Arab tribes around Aden enough political cohesion to resist the ambitions of the Imam of the Yemen and his Egyptian backers.
The struggle for Cyprus had been eased by British acceptance of the Sovereign Base concept, though the Zurich Agreement between Greece and Turkey, which enabled Britain to grant Cyprus its independence, was not signed until February 1959.
And in Malaya the last of the Communist terrorist gangs were being driven to their destruction in the jungles of north Malaya and south Johore by British military pressure and the financially inspired defections of many of their leaders.
But these bright spots were dimmed by the assassination of the Western-orientated Hashemite royal family in Baghdad on 14th July 1958 during the Nasser-inspired coup, which ended Britain's treaty relations with Iraq and led to the RAF's withdrawal from the Habbaniyah and Shu'aiba air bases that lay on the air-reinforcement route to the Far East.
In developing its plans for the redeployment of the Army, the General Staff were faced with three major difficulties: lack of genuine air mobility; loss of overflying rights over Arab countries and restricted overflying of the Indian subcontinent due to India's ‘non-aligned’ stance and Pakistan's natural sympathy for Moslem Arab Nationalism; and the justifiable reluctance in Whitehall to build up new overseas bases.
The three were closely linked and led to two important conclusions: part of the Strategic Reserve would have to be positioned East of Suez; and there would have to be some stocking of heavy equipment and supplies, and the establishment of essential repair facilities, on the far side of the Arab air/sea barrier.
There was also general agreement that logistic stocks and infrastructure on the far side of the barrier should be kept to a minimum — a principle that was easier to propound than fulfil.
On the nearside of the barrier, it was agreed that the existing facilities at Gibraltar, Malta and Cyprus would be adequate for the of British commitments on the southern flank of NATO and to the Baghdad Pact.
The problem was where to position reserves East of Suez.
The views of the Foreign, Commonwealth Relations, and Colonial Offices were sought on the security of tenure that British forces were likely to enjoy in territories East of Suez; but in the late 1950s there was no consensus on the probable speed with which Britain's dependent territories would advance to independence.
The need to ensure that the new all-regular Army lived in conditions that would not deter recruiting became more pressing than consideration of the risks of capital expenditure on accommodation in areas  where reasonable security of tenure was not assured.
As the 1960s went by, cynics began to observe that barrack building in an overseas territory was a sure sign that it would soon be granted its independence!
Singapore was the obvious place for the main base East of Suez.
It had all the facilities needed by the three Services and there were as yet few worries about security of tenure.
Moreover, the Commonwealth Strategic Reserve Brigade of British, Australian and New Zealand troops was already stationed at Malacca in support of SEATO, and the 17th Gurkha Division was responsible for security in Hong Kong, Malaya, North Borneo and Singapore.
The Gurkhas were a useful bonus because they were not included in the Army manpower ceiling of 165,000 men.
Singapore, however, had one military drawback: it was a long way from the Arabian Peninsula and the Persian Gulf.
Aden was the right place for forward operating facilities, but its scorching barren rocks and unhealthy climate made it an unattractive place in which to station Army and RAF units of the Strategic Reserve.
The General Staff; therefore, pressed for troops to be stationed in Kenya where the climate was more suitable and, in the wake of the Mau Mau campaign, where troops were needed anyway to reassure the White settlers.
Such limited logistic installations as were needed west of Singapore were to be built up at Aden, but as few troops as possible would be stationed there.
The Quartermaster General's staff were instructed not to allow Aden to become another expensive base and hostage to fortune.
Sandys accepted the General Staff view after his visit to Kenya, during which   he came under pressure from the settlers to give confidence by building permanent barracks for the Strategic Reserve units likely to be stationed there.
Contracts were let in 1958 for both barrack building and the modernization of the RAF stations at Eastley and Embakasi.
The Governor of Kenya, Sir Evelyn Baring, was able to reassure the settlers by saying that ‘Kenya can't go independent because it is a fortress colony.'
The establishment of a secure air-reinforcement route was a problem that had to be solved by the Air Staff in conjunction with the Foreign Office.
Prior to the Iraq coup in mid-1958 the route had skirted hostile Arab air-space to the north by overflying Turkey and Iraq to reach the Persian Gulf and Indian Ocean.
Pakistan and India could be avoided, if need be, by using Colombo, but, after the Suez crisis, the Government of Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) had demanded the closure of British bases on the island.
They had been handed over amicably in November 1957, as work had already been started on building a staging airfield on the Indian Ocean island of Gan, just south of Ceylon.
When Gan was complete, the Britannias, which were just coming into service with the RAF, would be able to reach Singapore without overflying India.
With the loss of the Iraqi airfields, the route was shifted further north over Iran, making the principal stops Ankara, Tehran, Bahrein, Gan, Singapore.
An alternative southerly route was established from Malta to Kano in Nigeria, and thence across Central Africa south of the unstable Congo to Nairobi in Kenya.
Sandys would have liked to have unified the policy direction and command of the three Services as part of his Reformation.
He was supported in this view by Mountbatten, who, with his experience as Supreme Commander South-East Asia and Viceroy of India, believed that such a course was desirable for efficiency's sake and was practicable.
Macmillan, however, saw that amalgamation of the Service Ministries and the Ministry of Supply concurrently with sweeping changes in Defence policy would be more than the Defence establishment could take.
He believed, quite rightly, that there should be evolution and not revolution to achieve Service unification.
It took a lifetime of service to master warfare in one element: breeding officers who could handle operations in all three would take time.
Nevertheless, Macmillan had no objection to experimental steps being taken in that direction.
I he opportunity for doing so arose in the Middle East.
After the evacuation of the Canal Zone in 1956, GHQ Middle East had been re-established in Cyprus.
By 1957, it had become clear that it was easier to direct affairs on the far side of the Arab sea/air barrier from London rather than from Cyprus, which had little or no contact with Aden and Kenya.
In July 1957, Sandys announced that the headquarters in Cyprus would become GHQ Near East.
Its responsibilities East of Suez would be taken over by a new tri-Service headquarters established at Aden under an air vice-marshal with the title of HQ British Forces, Middle East.
With that decision came the near certainty, strenuously denied at the time, that Aden would grow into a fully fledged  military base.
Sandys would have liked to have established a similarly unified headquarters at Singapore, but determined Naval opposition thwarted him.
Turning the dogmas of the Sandys Reformation into practicable military policies had not been easy when faced with the real world beyond the confines of Whitehall and Westminster.
Before 1957 was out, world events were sowing the seeds of a conventional forces counter-reformation.
At the end of July, a rebellion against the rule of the Sultan of Muscat and Oman broke out.
The Sultan, who had treaty relations with Britain, asked for help.
Aden was at that time an RAF command, in which the operational policy of air control had been successfully applied for some years.
Political officers in the Aden Protectorates had been supported by lightly armed local levies, led by RAF officers.
Whenever there was trouble beyond their capacity to snuff out, they could call for air support from Khormaksa, the RAF base at Aden.
In the past, this had sufficed to keep the peace between the rival warring tribes.
In 1957 air control failed in the Oman.
There was a hard core of Egyptian-trained Arab Nationalists, loyal to President Nasser, amongst the dissident tribesmen.
They were not deterred by air action.
Despite a statement by Selwyn Lloyd, the Foreign Secretary, in the House of Commons on 23rd July that there was ‘no question of large-scale operations by British troops on the ground’, Army units had to be flown up to the Oman from Kenya to support the Sultan's armed forces in crushing the rebellion.
A combination of ground and air action broke the back of the rebellion.
The Sultan's writ was re-established throughout the Oman, except in the mountain fastnesses of the Djebel Akhdar, which were eventually cleared by the SAS in 1959, while on their way back from Malaya for probable disbandment under the Sandys cuts!
This minor affair underlined the Army's contention that nuclear weapons and air power were no substitute for troops on the ground in the type of fighting in which Britain was likely to be involved as long as she remained a colonial power.
Selwyn Lloyd pointed out in the House of Commons, during a debate on the operations in the Oman, that Britain had to honour two types of obligation.
He said:
the difference between a formal obligation and the obligations of a longstanding relationship of friendship is not readily apparent to the local rulers and people.
If we were to fail in one area it would begin to be assumed elsewhere that perhaps the anti-British propaganda of our enemies had some basis to it, and that the Government were no longer willing or able to help their friends.
World power, like stock markets, depends largely on confidence.
Most of Britain's dependent peoples saw the presence of British troops close by, and not far away in the United Kingdom, as the assurance they needed of continuing British protection.
A much more serious crisis of a similar nature arose immediately after the Iraqi coup of July 1957 when the Hashemite dynasty was overthrown, and the  Eisenhower Doctrine for the Middle East was put to its first test.
The governments of Christian-dominated Lebanon and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan feared that Nasser-inspired coups were about to be sprung in Beirut and Amman.
The Lebanese Government appealed to the United States, and King Hussein of Jordan invoked his long-standing friendship with Britain to ask for her help.
US Marines from the American Sixth Fleet landed at Beirut on 16th July; and next day the British 16th Parachute Brigade was flown into Amman, but not without difficulties that highlighted two weaknesses in the air mobility assumptions of the Sandys doctrine.
First of all, there was an unfortunate delay in obtaining diplomatic clearance to overfly Israel.
Although on this occasion the Israeli objections were quickly overcome, this might not always be possible in future emergency operations.
And secondly, due to shortage of heavy-lift transport aircraft in the RAF, the US Air Force had to be asked to provide those needed to fly in the heavier military equipments and supplies into Amman until an overland supply route could be established.
The carrier Bulwark had to be sailed hastily north from Mombasa with an infantry battalion embarked to establish a forward base at Aqaba on the Red Sea, through which supplies could be despatched to Amman by road.
The case for the Navy's amphibious capability was being made by events.
The Iraqi coup seemed to confirm all the Foreign Office's worst fears about Nasser becoming the Hitler of the Middle East.
The likelihood of Britain having to meet her obligations in the Persian Gulf and the Arabian Peninsula increased in step with the raucousness of Radio Cairo's ‘The Voice of the Arabs’, adjuring all true followers of Islam to oust every vestige of European colonialism from their lands.
In the Far East, where Britain had been so successful in defeating Communist terrorism, there was also growing instability.
The flimsy Geneva settlement, engineered by Eden in 1954 to enable the French to withdraw from Indo-China, was breaking down as Ho Chi Minh had begun his attempt to take over the South with backing of Communist China.
And in Hong Kong Communist subversion was rife, involving British troops in border incidents and in quelling vicious internal rioting that over-stretched the colony's police.
The Sandys reductions in Army manpower looked uncomfortably premature.
Fortunately, 17th Gurkha Division was still available to underpin the British position in the Far East, which depended more upon trained and acclimatized infantry than on nuclear weapons.
Back at home the first positive political opposition to the philosophy of nuclear deterrence, upon which the Sandys Reformation depended, began to crystallize with the formation of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament.
‘Rather Red than Dead’ became its slogan, and protest marches from Aldermaston Atomic Weapons Research Establishment to Westminster became a way of life for many church-goers, left-wing intellectuals, pacifists and liberal moralists.
The leaders of the Labour Party only just managed to hold the party to a (common-sense) multilateralist line on disarmament against  increasingly emotional demands that unilateralism, already espoused by the Liberal Party, should become Labour Party policy as well.
Morality and pacifist emotion were the driving forces behind much of the uninformed criticism of the Sandys Reformation.
There was also a growing body of opinion in Westminster and Whitehall amongst many of those who had initially welcomed Sandys’ 1957 Defence White Paper, that his doctrine was not as sensible as they had first thought.
The premise of Britain's influence over American policy and her standing as a great power, was being questioned more widely, and with some justification.
At the time of the Korean War, when Attlee helped to persuade Truman to drop any idea of using the atomic bomb against the Chinese mainland, Britain had not exploded her first nuclear weapon.
Then, at Suez, Britain's possession of the Bomb had not helped her one iota in swaying American Middle East policy.
In the opinion of Sandys’ opponents, his and Macmillan's emphasis on the independence of Britain's nuclear deterrent was creating gross misconceptions of her real power and influence in the world.
The facts, in their view, should be squarely faced: defence was no longer practicable on a national basis; technologically Britain was becoming ever more dependent upon US Research and Development; and Macmillan's concept of Anglo-American interdependence was a myth.
The amendment to the MacMahon Act might have saved Britain money and time in establishing her nuclear deterrent, but, as each year passed, the deterrent would become less and less independent as Britain's own research establishments were bypassed, and more and more of its sub-equipments and components came from America.
Strategically, the only conceivable reasons for using British nuclear weapons would flow from the collapse of NATO.
In that case, the electorate might well prefer to be Red and live to fight another day rather than be consigned to a nuclear crematorium.
Duplicating the American nuclear deterrent was a waste of national resources, which Britain could ill afford in the straitened circumstances of her post-imperial era.
The strength of the critics’ arguments was neutralized to some extent by Macmillan's determination to seek both nuclear and conventional disarmament with the twin-track approach, which has remained valid to this day: maintaining the potency of the deterrent while, at the same time, seeking genuine arms limitation, if not disarmament.
The general election of 1959 was fought, as usual, on domestic policies.
The Conservative Party manifesto set out the issues as:
Do you want to go ahead on the lines which have brought prosperity at home?
Do you want your present leaders to represent you abroad?
Hugh Gaitskell countered by promising that the Labour Party would make improvements in the Welfare State and increase pensions without increasing taxation.
Labour's promises were judged by the electorate to be impracticable, and so the Conservatives were returned with a just over one hundred-seat  majority.
Macmillan was thus able to pursue his own policies during his second term in office rather than having to concentrate on damage limitation forced upon him by Anthony Eden's Suez disaster.
Across the Channel great changes were taking place in Western Europe.
Apart from providing the military leadership in the formation of NATO, Britain had felt unable to join the march to a united Western Europe because of her family connections with the Commonwealth and her special relationship with the United States.
The Treaty of Rome had been signed without her in March 1957; the EEC had come into being in January 1958; and de Gaulle had been recalled to power in France to solve the Algerian crisis in June that year.
Europe would begin to play a more significant part in British affairs in the future.
Being a European offshore island was beginning to make a greater impact upon British affairs.
The Watkinson Conventional Counter-reformation: 1960–64
The primary purpose of our defence policy is, therefore, that it should protect us, our allies, and our friends against the whole spectrum of possible aggression and military threats, from small local action which might be the beginning of larger and more dangerous adventures through ‘nuclear blackmail’ to nuclear war.
Harold Watkinson's 1961 Defence White Paper.
During his first term in office Macmillan had achieved the three objectives that he had set himself when he took over from Eden in 1957.
By the end of 1959, the economy had improved so much that his oft quoted quip ‘You've never had it so good’ had a ring of truth about it.
Anglo-American relations had been fully restored.
And the one-hundred-seat Tory majority in the new House of Commons showed that he had rebuilt the fortunes of the Conservative Party.
But in terms of Defence and Overseas policy there had been a price to pay for these successes.
Ending National Service, which helped to right the economy, was also placing a limit on Britain's retention of imperial power.
Soon she would not have the troops with which to maintain her responsible policy of granting independence only when a colony was politically, economically, and militarily ready to stand on its own feet.
The growing Nationalist pressures, fanned by the United Nations’ de-colonization debates, could not be resisted without a return to conscription.
And the re-establishment of the Anglo-American special relationship, though welcome, had its disadvantages.
The short-cuts provided in weapon development were to lead to a paring of independence, stunting of British research and development capacity, and a strengthening of the anchor cables holding Britain in her position as an offshore island of the United States at a time when closer relations with Europe were becoming more compelling.
In narrower military terms, the Sandys’ Reformation, without which it would not have been possible to contemplate ending National Service, was already seen in Whitehall as premature, if not wholly mistaken.
In retrospect, it is possible to illustrate the fallacies of the Sandys doctrine, using a notional prism to analyse the spectrum of warfare in the nuclear era.
The spectrum has six bands, stretching from nuclear war at one end, through conventional war, limited war, guerrilla war, and terrorism, across to internal security or police action at the other end.
The intensity of warfare and the weight of weapons used declines across the spectrum; all the bands are blurred at the edges where they overlap; and each has a number of gradations within it.
The deterrent effectiveness of military force displayed so far in the nuclear era is represented by Curve A in figure 6 .
this curve is at its highest, i.e. most effective, over the nuclear war band, since deterrence has been 100 per cent effective in preventing the use of nuclear weapons.
It drops away only slightly over conventional war because fear of escalation into nuclear conflict is an effective, though not total, deterrent in this band of the spectrum, as the Iraq/ Iran war has shown.
It then falls away steeply across the limited war band to its low point between the guerrilla war and terrorism bands, where the frequency of such wars in the post-war period has demonstrated the greatest weakness in military deterrence —‘Davids’ have found it all too easy to defy ‘Goliaths’in these bands as the French and American defeats in Vietnam have shown so vividly.
Deterrence is almost as low over the internal security band, as the rising rate of violent crime in our so-called civilized societies and the current Israeli difficulties with the Palestinians demonstrate.
These conclusions are reinforced by Curve B, which represents the frequency and length of conflicts that have occurred since the Second World War.
It is at zero in the nuclear war band and rises steeply to its peak over the guerrilla war and terrorist bands.
Thus the peaks and troughs of the two curves match, illustrating the obvious conclusion that military policy-makers should be  seeking ways of increasing the deterrent capabilities of their armed forces in the lower-intensity bands at the right-hand half of the spectrum rather than in the higher-intensity bands at the left-hand end.
The need is to push up Curve A over the guerrilla and terrorist bands, as shown by the arrow, while maintaining the current effectiveness of the nuclear deterrent, as represented by the pillar.
Sandys’ Reformation did exactly the opposite: his policies reinforced British military capabilities for nuclear war, while cutting the ships, aircraft and above all infantry needed for the type of fighting in which military forces have been constantly engaged in the latter half of the twentieth century.
He went further.
While few Whitehall officials disputed the need for nuclear weapons to damp out the possibility of a recurrence of the conventional-weapon slaughter of the two World Wars, Sandys had breached a fundamental principle of British military policy — the maintenance of balanced military forces able to react to the unforeseen.
The unexpected usually occurs in military affairs for the simple reason that what can be foreseen can be deterred and so tends not to happen.
The overemphasis on nuclear weapons and missiles at the expense of conventional forces was seen by many observers, both military and civilian, to have gone too far, too fast, and too soon; but the political prize of ending National Service had been seized and that was all that mattered to the Macmillan Government in 1957.
The divergence of view between Sandys and the military establishment was illustrated by the Government's over-reaction to a talk given to the Royal United Services Institute by General Sir John Cowley, the Controller of Munitions in the Ministry of Supply, in November 1959.
Sir John suggested that if there was a clash in the allocation of resources between a credible level of nuclear deterrence and the necessary level of conventional forces, he, for one, would support giving priority to the latter.
He added four lines to Lewis Carroll's verse about the old man on the gate:
I also have a plan to spend a thousand million pounds,
To buy some guided missiles and to hide them in the ground,
And then to clearly paint on each ‘these things must not be used’.
No wonder that our citizens are getting so confused.
And he ended his talk by saying:
I believe that in 100 years people will look back on the middle of the twentieth century as a nightmare period when mankind suddenly discovered the means to destroy itself, and was seriously considering using this as a preferable alternative to reconciling differing political views.
Macmillan was not unaware of the stresses and strains that Sandys' Reformation had caused in Whitehall; nor of the lack of confidence that had grown up between Sandys and his principal advisers, the Chiefs of Staff.
In his post-election Cabinet reshuffle Sandys was sent back to the Ministry of Supply  to use his undoubted energies to create the much needed Ministry of Aviation.
He was replaced by the able, but less flamboyant, Harold Watkinson, who was a sound administrator and ideally suited to the task of restoring Britain's military balance.
In the same reshuffle Alan Lennox-Boyd was replaced as Colonial Secretary by Iain MacLeod, a far-sighted minister with confidence in his own convictions.
Lennox-Boyd had been in the post for five years and had asked to retire for family business reasons.
During his time as Colonial Secretary he had established the measured steps towards independence for all Britain's dependent peoples, the speed of which depended on the current state of development in each territory.
His programme, however, rested upon the continuing power of the British Government to dictate the rate of advance.
Iain MacLeod appreciated that Britain, in the post-Suez era, had neither the political will nor the military resources to slow the tide of colonial emanicipation; and so he was prepared, with Macmillan's whole-hearted support, to accelerate the process, despite opposition from the right wing of the Conservative Party.
Defence policy in Macmillan's second term of office was dominated by four streams of events: an acceleration in the rate of change in weapon technology; the ‘Winds of Change’ in Africa; Britain's first attempt to join the EEC; and the Mountbatten reorganization of the three Service ministries into a unified Ministry of Defence.
Each contributed in different ways to the Watkinson counter-reformation that began soon after he took over as Minister of Defence in October 1959.
The first task that Watkinson set himself was to re-establish a better working relationship between himself and the Chiefs of Staff.
This was not difficult because his own ideas on the way forward matched those of his Chief of Defence Staff, Lord Mountbatten, and his Chief Scientific Adviser, Sir Solly Zuckerman, both of whom had recently taken over their posts.
The three Service Chiefs welcomed his preference for evolution rather than continuing and abrasive revolution, but the doubts and suspicions that they had about Mountbatten's impartiality made it difficult for him to rebuild complete confidence between his staff at the Ministry of Defence and the Service ministries.
Nevertheless, there was general agreement on all sides that Sandys had overstepped the line between sensible and imprudent change, and that it was time to shift the emphasis away from the nuclear end of the spectrum of War and back to a more balanced, central position.
Watkinson records in his memoirs:
I was more interested in the need to achieve a reorganisation of Britain's conventional forces under firm businesslike central direction, coupled with a policy which would speed up their reaction time and create a mobile military force with a poised capacity to operate from land or sea bases.
This seemed to me a more important priority in 1959 than  overmuch argument about nuclear philosophical heresies of one kind or another.
But neither he nor his advisers were entirely free agents: events forced the nuclear band of the spectrum to his attention first.
One of the main planks of Sandys’ doctrine had been the replacement of the V-bombers by the Blue Streak ballistic missile.
By the autumn of 1959, the Chiefs of Staff had begun to doubt its viability as an effective deterrent.
It was liquid-fuelled with a relatively slow reaction time (10 to 15 minutes); and it was to be launched, like the Thors, from unprotected platforms; but since the original decision had been taken by Sandys to develop Blue Streak, the range and accuracy of Russian missiles had greatly improved.
By early 1960 it was clear that Blue Streak would be much too vulnerable to a pre-emptive First Strike by Soviet missiles to maintain the credibility of the British nuclear deterrent.
Continuing deterrent credibility would, in future, depend upon Britain's known ability to retaliate with an invulnerable Second Strike weapon.
Blue Streak was unlikely to measure up to this requirement.
Furthermore, installing any static system in the overcrowded British Isles was neither militarily nor politically sensible.
Unlike the United States, Britain had no large sparsely-populated desert areas in which to deploy strategic missiles.
Studies were put in hand to see whether it would be practicable to deploy Blue Streak in hardened underground silos in the Welsh mountains or the Scottish highlands, but the cost was found to be so great that it would have beggared the Defence Vote, making the restoration of more efficient conventional forces impossible.
Macmillan and Sandys, as Minister of Aviation, fought hard to prevent cancellation, but Watkinson and the Chiefs of Staff had an unbeatable operational case.
In February 1960, the Cabinet agreed to write off the £60 million already spent so far on Blue Streak, and to seek an alternative delivery system for British nuclear warheads.
No public announcement was to be made until a replacement had been decided upon.
Admiral Mountbatten and Professor Zuckerman had visited the United States in the autumn of 1959 and had been shown the massive underground silos of the Titan intercontinental ballistic missiles, and had concluded, quite rightly, that Britain had neither the resources nor the need to enter the land-based ICBM league.
Invulnerability for her nuclear delivery systems must be sought in airborne or submarine mobility.
There were three possible air-launched solutions: the US Air Force's Skybolt, which could be modified to fit the V-bombers; a simpler British ‘ram jet’, called Pandora, suitable for the TSR 2, whose development was at such an early stage that costs could only be guessed; and further development of the existing Blue Steel stand-off bomb on which work had been stopped after the Sandys Defence Review.
The submarine solutions were more limited.
The US Navy's Polaris missiles could either be bought with American submarines, or fitted into British-built hulls.
The debate on these options in Whitehall was one-sided, because the RAF wanted to maintain its hold on the deterrent and the Navy was still uncertain about what effect a take-over bid would have on the future size and shape of the Fleet.
Of the air-delivered systems, Skybolt was technically the most advanced and was seen by the RAF as the best weapon for extending the life of the V Force.
It had three advantages over the submarine system: British launching aircraft already existed whereas the submarines did not; the American content of the total system could be reduced by manufacture under licence in the United Kingdom; and the Americans were likely to tie the purchase of Polaris to the mixed-manned Multilateral Nuclear Force that Eisenhower was keen to foist upon NATO.
But there were also two major objections to Skybolt: it was the most expensive of the air mobile options; and the Americans pointed out that the technological risks were so high that the project might well fail.
They agreed, however, that the British could collaborate in the Skybolt development and buy it on very favourable terms.
Skybolt just won the debate in the face of a growing body of opinion that favoured fitting Polaris into British-built nuclear submarines.
This option might have to be taken up in the future when the V-bombers reached the end of their operational lives, unless the TSR 2 turned out to be as effective as the RAF hoped, and was able to extend the life of the airborne nuclear deterrent indefinitely.
Macmillan flew to Washington in March, primarily to discuss the proposed Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
He came back with an exchange of letters, in which Eisenhower had agreed that Britain could buy Skybolt; and, in return, Macmillan had accepted an American request for base facilities for US nuclear submarines at Holy Loch on the west coast of Scotland.
No formal agreement was made on the Polaris alternative, because Eisenhower hoped to persuade NATO to accept the system as part of his Multilateral force idea.
Macmillan, however, was confident that the Americans would provide Polaris, at a price, if the British needed it later were the Skybolt project to fail.
On 13th April, Macmillan announced in the House of Commons the demise of Blue Streak and its replacement by Skybolt.
The decision caused consternation on both sides of the House, because it confirmed what many people feared: that Britain was slipping too far behind the superpowers; and was, indeed, losing a measure of her sovereignty.
The cancellation of Blue Streak threw the ‘independence’ of the British nuclear deterrent into doubt.
The Tory back-benchers could take some comfort from the argument that it was operational control rather than manufacture of the weapons that mattered.
A nuclear war could only last a matter of days and would be fought with the weapons that were in the hands of the military at the time; there would be no question of re-supply, so British operational independence would not be jeopardized by buying US missiles.
Multilateralists on the Labour benches, who had supported the retention of nuclear weapons on the grounds that they gave Britain an independent foreign  policy, were seriously discomfited by the obvious loss of a measure of that independence through acceptance of an American delivery system.
Unilateralists felt that their case had been made for them; and they became more determined than ever to get rid of nuclear weapons altogether.
It was no coincidence that the largest CND march from Aldermaston to Trafalgar Square took place that Easter.
At the September Trades Union Congress, Frank Cousins came out strongly in favour of unilateralism, winning support for a resolution that rejected ‘any defence policy based on the threat of the use of strategic nuclear weapons’.
At the subsequent Labour Party Conference in October, the TUC resolution was only narrowly defeated after Hugh Gaitskell's famous last ditch speech in which he vowed ‘to fight and fight and fight again…’
While the Blue Streak saga was being played out, Macmillan and McLeod had been setting the stage for Britain's final withdrawal from Empire.
Macmillan's ‘Wind of Change’ speech in Cape Town rang bells around the world because it said what needed to be said, and signalled the forthcoming change in Britain's colonial policy.
The pace of colonial emancipation would, in future, be governed more by the dependent peoples’ view of their readiness for independence than by British administrators’judgement of their fitness to stand on their own feet.
British military forces would only be used to ensure the smooth transition of power to properly elected local governments, and to protect the newly independent states from external predators.
Greater emphasis would be needed, as Watkinson proposed, on military intervention capability rather than on the existing network of colonial garrisons.
It is one of the unhappy paradoxes of the Whitehall market-place that it reacts to the goad of strong, abrasive ministers like Duncan Sandys, whose revolutionary ideas it detests, and yet is slow to implement the more balanced, evolutionary policies of a Harold Watkinson, for which it craves.
The Watkinson counter-reformation was slow to develop.
Thanks to the forceful leadership of Mountbatten when he was First Sea Lord, the Navy's development of its limited war amphibious capability acquired a momentum of its own.
Bulwark was commissioned in January 1960 and stationed with her Commando embarked at Singapore;Albion followed as the second Commando Carrier about a year later; construction of six Army-owned Landing Ships Logistic (LSLs) was authorised in August 1960; the Assault Ships Fearless and Intrepid were ordered in 1961 and 1962; and design work was started in December 1961 on the next generation of aircraft carriers, the first of which was code-named CVA 01.
In stark contrast, the transport aircraft needed for air mobility trickled out: the Britannia inter-theatre aircraft started coming into service in 1959; the Argosy intra-theatre aircraft in 1962; and the Belfast strategic freighter in 1964.
The total number of helicopters of all types in RAF service at the beginning of 1961 was only 24, including just three of the larger twin-rotor Belvederes.
Nevertheless, RAF attitudes were changing: the disbandment of Fighter  Command and the probable demise of the V Force made pilot seats in transport aircraft more attractive than they used to be.
It is events, however, rather than personalities that generate change quickest in Whitehall.
Sandys could not have achieved his reformation without Suez.
Watkinson was helped with his by the Kuwait crisis of 1961.
The military regime in Iraq laid claim to Kuwait on the grounds that it used to be part of the Ottoman province of Basra.
Contingency plans were laid in London and Aden to intervene if the ruler of Kuwait invoked Britain's commitment to go to his assistance.
The crisis came to a head on 27 June 1961, when the British Embassy in Baghdad reported the movement of Iraqi troops and tanks from the capital to Basra.
At the time, there were three British frigates and the Amphibious Squadron in the Persian Gulf.
The latter had been redeployed there from Malta in July 1960 in anticipation of just such a crisis.
It had half a squadron of tanks embarked and there was another half squadron stockpiled in Kuwait itself.
Bulwark , with 42nd Commando on board, happened to be at Karachi doing hot-weather trials, and 45th Commando was at Aden.
The aircraft-carrier Centaur was in the Indian Ocean on passage to the Far East.
The 24th Brigade of the Strategic Reserve was in Kenya, and the nearest Parachute units were in Cyprus.
The RAF had two squadrons of Hunters and four Shackleton bombers at Aden, and a transport force of twelve Beverleys and six Vallettas split between Aden and Kenya.
On 28 June, before any request had been received from the ruler,Centaur and Bulwark were sailed for the Gulf; the Amphibious Squadron left Bahrein for Kuwait with instructions to stay out of sight of land; the Hunters and Shackletons were flown north from Aden to Bahrein; a Canberra squadron was sent from Germany to Bahrein as well; and 24th Brigade was alerted in Kenya and preparations were made to fly it to Kuwait in chartered civil aircraft.
The request for military assistance came on 30 June.
On 1 July, 42nd Commando landed by helicopter from Bulwark;and the fly-in of troops and aircraft, and the landing of tanks, began under air cover provided by Centaur .
By the end of the day, Brigadier Horsfield, the commander of 24th Brigade, had the equivalent of half a brigade with tank and air support with which to reinforce the small Kuwaiti army in defensive positions north of the city on the Mutlah ridge.
At the end of the first week, there was a force of five British battalions with tank, artillery, air and naval gun fire support ready to meet any Iraqi invasion.
Iraq did not attack.
The effectiveness of rapid amphibious and air-transported intervention as a deterrent to predator states had been clearly demonstrated.
The operation had not gone without hitches because adequate amphibious shipping and transport aircraft were not yet available.
Nevertheless, it provided Harold Watkinson with just the precedent that he needed to swing the pendulum back into the centre of the spectrum of war.
In his last Defence White paper, published in February 1962, he was able to say:
Our policy of deterring war has been severely tested in the past twelve months….
So far it has succeeded.
We must continue to make it clear to potential aggressors, however, that we should strike back with all the means that we judge appropriate, conventional or nuclear.
If we had nothing but nuclear forces, this would not be credible.
A balance must be maintained, therefore, between conventional and nuclear strength.
Kuwait made a significant impact on opinion in Whitehall.
Doubts about the practicability of amphibious and air-transported intervention operations were softened, and projects with an East of Suez flavour became more fashionable.
Amongst the projects that benefited immediately were the Vertical Take-Off ground attack fighter, P1127, which eventually became the Harrier, and its supersonic variant the P1154 air defence fighter.
The Air Staff, hardly surprisingly, began to laud the TSR 2 as ideal for East of Suez operations, using island bases instead of expensive aircraft carriers like CVA 01.
Aden's usefulness was also acknowledged in the 1962 Defence White Paper, which gave it the status of a base.
And the naval objections to the establishment of a unified command in the Far East were overcome by the clear example of the success of HQ British Forces, Middle East, during the Kuwait operation.
Admiral Sir David Luce was appointed the first tri-Service C-in-C, Far East, in November 1962.
The Kuwait intervention, though important to the Defence policy-makers, was of little consequence to the political departments, whose mandarins were immersed during the first half of 1961 in two major debates: how to handle the Anglo-American special relationship after Kennedy had taken over as US President in January; and whether or not to put less emphasis on Anglo-American and Commonwealth links by applying belatedly to join the EEC.
Britain's first application was tabled in august, just after the Kuwait crisis, but had little effect on Defence policy at the time, because negotiations were relatively short-lived.
In January 1963, de Gaulle vetoed the application on the grounds that Britain's links with the US and the Commonwealth were still too strong for her to become truly European — which was true!
It was also true that the France of de Gaulle was trying to reverse her military defeat in 1940 by winning hegemony in post-war Western Europe by political means; and her partners in the EEC lacked the unity needed to stand up to her.
The EEC negotiations were not entirely without impact on British politics.
In the sixteen months between Britain's application and its rejection by de Gaulle, a body of opinion was created in Whitehall and amongst the electorate that looked forward to Britain becoming more closely linked to Europe for a variety of reasons; one of which was to reduce America's dominance in the West's military affairs.
Although Macmillan was the driving force behind the bid to enter Europe, he had no wish to weaken Britain's links with the States.
Other members of his government, however, saw considerable advantages in developing a European nuclear deterrent, based on pooling British and French  nuclear know-how and resources.
Throwing mooring ropes out to the Continent to balance Britain's over-strong anchor cables to America made sense to many people.
Henceforth, a Defence partnership with Europe became a growing, if theoretical, possibility.
This tentative swing towards Europe was spurred by the new Administration in Washington.
The personal element in the Anglo-American special relationship, which had been based on war-time partnership, started to crumble with the departure of Eisenhower from the White House, and had to be painstakingly rebuilt with the younger generation of American leaders.
Macmillan established a personal relationship almost at once with Kennedy at their first meeting at Key West in March 1961; and Watkinson renewed the agreement on ‘interdependence’ during his visit to the States in May, during which prospects of future Anglo-American collaborative projects were optimistically discussed.
But there could be no disguising the change in American attitudes.
The changes stemmed largely from the generation gap.
Kennedy was intent upon leading the Western World with an open-handedness that made Britain no more than just one of the Western European states.
And Robert McNamara, the new US Secretary of Defence, had even less of a feel for the special relationship than the President.
He joined the Kennedy Administration direct from the board of the Ford Motor Company and began sweeping away waste wherever he could find it.
In American jargon, he was long on cost-effectiveness and short on political understanding.
There was bound to be trouble and it was not long in coming.
At the NATO meeting in Athens in the spring of 1962, and more publicly at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor in June, McNamara spoke of the nuclear forces of powers possessing limited nuclear capability and acting independently as:
dangerous, expensive, prone to obsolescence and lacking in credibility as a deterrent.
His subsequent disclaimer that he was not referring to the British nuclear deterrent, which was closely integrated in the Strategic Air Command's target planning, but to de Gaulle's Force de Frappe , lacked conviction — it was too near the truth for British comfort!
During 1962 McNamara applied his industrial cost-effectiveness criteria to all US weapons projects.
The development of the Minuteman and Polaris missiles was deemed successful; but Skybolt had failed successive tests, and was proving less reliable, less accurate and more costly than its rivals.
In November he decided that Skybolt had no place in the US weapon procurement programme and should be scrapped.
In doing so, he failed to appreciate the political impact on the British, who had put their faith in Skybolt as a way of maintaining the greatest measure of independence for their nuclear deterrent that was practicable at reasonable cost.
British irritation was increased by the suspicion that McNamara was deliberately trying to wean Britain away from her nuclear special relationship with the United States, and from her determination to maintain her own independent nuclear deterrent, which embarrassed American foreign policy towards Europe.
De Gaulle was refusing military co-operation within NATO unless the Anglo-American nuclear club was widened into a tri-partite relationship; and Washington feared that the Germans might also start pressing for a finger on the nuclear trigger.
The year 1962 had not been a good one for Macmillan: his domestic policies had started to go awry; the application to join the EEC was unpopular; his showing in the opinion polls had slumped to 36 per cent; in July he had sacked one-third of his cabinet, fearing a revolt against his leadership; in October he was seen to play little part in the Cuban missile crisis, in which Kennedy alone took the decisions that could have drawn Britain, whether she liked it or not, into nuclear war between the superpowers; and in December it was becoming clear that de Gaulle was blocking the EEC entry negotiations.
It is not surprising that McNamara received a cool reception from Peter Thorneycroft, who had succeeded Harold Watkinson as Minister of Defence in Macmillan's new cabinet, when he arrived in London on 11 December to explain the reasoning behind the decision to cancel Skybolt.
When the news of the Skybolt cancellation became public, a wave of anti-Americanism swept Westminster and Whitehall.
With anti-Europeanism also rampant over French attitudes to Britain's EEC application, Little Englanderism — or British isolationism — became fashionable in all walks of life.
Dean Acheson, US Secretary of State, did not help matters by including, in a wide-ranging speech on US foreign policy at West Point, the cutting words:
Great Britain has lost an empire and has not yet found a role.
The attempt to play a separate role — that is, a role apart from Europe, a role based on a ‘Special Relationship’ with the United States, a role based on being head of a ‘Commonwealth’which has no political structure, or unity, or strength, and enjoys a fragile and precarious reality by means of the sterling area and preferences in the British market — this role is about played out.
December 1962 was a busy month for Macmillan.
He was due to meet de Gaulle on the 15th at Rambouillet in an attempt to soften the General's opposition to Britain's entry into the EEC; and then to fly to Nassau on the 18th to meet President Kennedy for wide-ranging talks, including East-West relations, the backwash of the Cuban missile crisis, improvement of India's defences against China, the Congo Civil War, and, most important of all, the proposed Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
Macmillan made little progress at Rambouillet.
Before he left for Nassau the Cabinet agreed that he should reject offers made by McNamara for Britain to continue the Skybolt development on a fifty-fifty cost-sharing basis with no guarantee that the US would buy the  weapon in the end; or to buy the lower-performance US Hound Dog missile for her V Force.
Instead he should press Kennedy to honour Eisenhower's unwritten pledge to provide Polaris as an alternative to Skybolt.
The Nassau meeting has been described as ‘one of the great confrontations in the history of Anglo-American relations.'
The agenda for the meeting was virtually swept aside by the Skybolt issue.
Macmillan made a long and politically emotional appeal for Skybolt's replacement by Polaris.
Kennedy's advisers opposed this solution because it would again single out Britain amongst the European states for special treatment; it would fuel de Gaulle's dislike for NATO; and it would make Britain's entry into Europe, which was part of the State Department's policy, even less likely.
Allowing Britain to buy Polaris also ran counter to Eisenhower's plan that was still being worked up in Washington for the creation of a mixed-manned European multilateral nuclear force.
The American policy-makers were labouring under the delusion that such a force would be attractive to the Europeans.
Britain, for one, was not prepared to join such a militarily unsound project.
But she was quite ready to assign her nuclear units to a NATO Multinational Force; indeed, she was, in effect, already doing so through the joint targeting of her V-bombers with the US Strategic Air Command, subject to her right to use them for her own purposes if vital national interests were at stake.
Macmillan played on Kennedy's political instincts by suggesting that a failure to honour Eisenhower's Polaris pledge could sink the Macmillan Government and lead to the election of an anti-American alternative, either Conservative or Labour — anti-Americanism not being confined to one party.
If there must be a parting, Britain would continue to honour her side of the Anglo-American nuclear understandings: Holy Loch and the Fylingdales radar station would still be available to the United States; RAF bases would continue to house US bombers; and Britain would carry on accepting the risks that all this entailed.
She would not ask for any further exchange of nuclear information, but she must be released from her obligation not to use the knowledge she already possessed in seeking collaboration with other partners.
Though some of the President's advisers wished to use the crisis to drive Britain out of the nuclear deterrent business altogether, Kennedy had no intention of doing so, and insisted on a formula being found that would enable Britain to buy Polaris without jeopardizing the US policy of working towards a NATO Multilateral or Multinational nuclear force.
The agreement finally reached was over-hastily drafted, and contained many inconsistencies and much imprecision.
The upshot, however, was that the British could buy the latest mark of Polaris missile without warheads, which they would provide themselves, and could fit them into five British-built nuclear submarine hulls.
They would, in return, assign not only their Polaris submarines, but also their V-bombers and tactical nuclear delivery systems to NATO, subject to the  usual overriding proviso: ‘except where Her Majesty's Government may decide that the supreme national interests are at stake.
It was possible to argue that, because the Polaris missile was supplied by the United States, the British Nuclear Deterrent was no longer independent.
But the counter-argument still held good: that it was the operational control and not the manufacture of a weapon system that made it independent.
Moreover, Macmillan managed to ensure that the Americans did not impose a dual key system as they had done with the RAF-manned Thors.
He had thus had achieved the greatest practicable measure of independence without squandering resources on strategic missile development.
Naval fears of the financial burden of taking over the Nuclear Deterrent and its effect on the size and shape of the Fleet were allayed by the unification of the
Ministry of Defence and the centralization of the Defence votes, which were being studied at the same time as the Skybolt/Polaris crisis was coming to a head.
After appointing Thorneycroft as Secretary of State for Defence in July 1962, Macmillan decided that the time was ripe to take a further step in the gradual process of integrating the management of the Services.
The tri-Service commands in the Middle and Far East were working well, and so he tasked Thorneycroft to apply the same principles to the Service ministries in Whitehall.
Mountbatten, as Chief of Defence Staff, welcomed the idea, if he did not actually sow it in the Prime Minister's mind in the first place.
He produced a paper of his own straight away, which found favour with his political masters but was opposed by his fellow Chiefs of Staff, mainly because they distrusted his motives.
Macmillan astutely side-stepped the opposition by appointing General ‘Pug’ Ismay, Churchill's wartime Chief Staff Officer, and General Ian Jacob, who had been one of his deputies and then Director-General of the BBC, to use their acknowledged experience of the workings of Whitehall to produce a blueprint of the most practicable way of bringing the three Service ministries together into a single Ministry of Defence.
The Ismay Jacob report led to the 1963 reorganization of Defence, which abolished the Admiralty, War Office, Air Ministry, and Ministry of Supply.
In their places came a unified Ministry under the Secretary of State for Defence, who was given two Ministers of State with functional responsibilities to assist him.
All Operational, Intelligence and Weapon Development policy was made the responsibility of the Central Staff, which encompassed but did not unify the Naval, General, and Air Staffs.
The administration of the Services was to be carried out by three co-located but separate Service Departments, each under a junior minister.
Financial control was centralized under one accounting officer, the Permanent Under-Secretary for Defence, with subordinate Deputy Under-Secretaries to oversee the individual Service votes, which were still retained for administrative convenience, but could be adjusted to conform to Defence, as opposed to single Service, priorities.
The historic Board of Admiralty, Army Council, and Air Council were downgraded to become the Admiralty, Army, and Air Boards.
And the whole of the new organization was co-located in the former Air Ministry/Board of Trade building on the south side of Whitehall, where it is today.
Many people felt that the Thorneycroft/Mountbatten reorganization did not go far enough, and that Service Departments should have been abolished and a completely functional organization adopted.
This would have been unwise.
The Services needed time to grow closer together: it was just not possible to find enough officers with the experience in tri-Service co-ordination to go further in 1963.
Co-location of staffs would help to break down barriers between the Services, and the development of tri-Service staffs at lower levels would also build up the necessary expertise.
Time and experience were needed to establish new working practices.
The changes imposed were just about as much as the Services could take at that time without loss of morale and fighting efficiency.
The world outside Whitehall had not been standing still since Thorneycroft took over.
The last National Serviceman left the Army in May 1963.
By then, warnings were already blowing in the post-imperial winds of change that the all-regular Army might soon be overstretched trying to maintain stability in the final stages of Britain's withdrawal from Empire.
The Central African Federation, embracing the Rhodesias and Nyasaland, had broken up under African nationalist pressures at the end of 1960; the West Indies Federation had gone much the same way during 1961; and South Africa had become a republic and left the Commonwealth that year.
Iain Macleod's acceleration of the withdrawal timetables was being implemented: the independence of Tanganyika was brought forward from 1970 to December 1961; Uganda's from 1973 to October 1962; Kenya's from 1975 to December 1963.
Apart from South Africa, none of the new states were able to look after themselves militarily.
Although nationalist ambitions in Africa had been largely assuaged by these demonstrations of British good faith, this was not true of Arab Nationalism in the Middle East, or of Chinese Communism in the Far East.
A pro-Nasserite revolution occurred in the Yemen in September 1962, which was to lead to Egyptian-backed rebellions in the Aden Protectorates and later in Aden itself.
In the Far East, the Azahari revolt broke out in Brunei in December 1962; and, although it was crushed relatively easily by British and Gurkha troops stationed in Malaya, it led on to the Indonesian ‘Confrontation’, which began in a small way in April 1963.
Further minor straws in the wind were Archbishop Makarios’ request for British help in Cyprus in December 1963, which drew in most of the Strategic Reserve's 3rd Division before a hand-over to the United Nations could be negotiated; and the quelling of the military mutinies in newly independent Tanzania, Kenya and Uganda in January 1964, at their governments’request, by Commandos brought on the aircraft-carrier Centaur from Aden and by units of the Strategic Reserve in Kenya.
A much more significant straw, however, was the direct military involvement in August 1964 of United States military forces in Vietnam, which led to Australian and New Zealand military  contingents being provided and might have attracted British troops as well, if they had not already been committed in Borneo and the Aden Protectorates.
The overstretch of the regular army did not become a major political issue during the last of years of the Conservative Government (then under Douglas Home, who succeeded Macmillan in October 1963): it was a legacy left to Labour when they came to power in October 1964.
Harold Watkinson had not survived as Secretary of State for Defence long enough to see his counter-reformation completed, but he did have the satisfaction of knowing that, had it not been for his efforts to swing the pendulum of British Defence policy back into the centre of the spectrum of war, Britain's disengagement from empire would not have been so successful.
He had provided the foundations for the strategic and tactical mobility that enabled the small regular Army to meet its commitments in the mid-1960s — but only just.
Army overstretch was not the only awkward legacy that would be bequeathed by the Conservatives to their socialist successors.
The financial savings made possible by Sandys’ Reformation had been gradually whittled away by escalating equipment costs, and by the need to provide the strategic mobility that his policies had assumed, but which had been inadequately provided for in his costings.
When Thorneycroft took over in July 1962, the Defence Votes were under pressure again, and pruning was once more the order of the day.
In order to help accommodate the costs of the Navy's new carrier, CVA 01, and Polaris, and the RAF's TSR 2, such projects as the Army's Blue Water artillery missile were cancelled in August 1962; and, despite the pressure on Army manpower, it was decided to run down the Gurkhas from 14,600 to 10,000 rather than cut any more British battalions — a decision that had to be reversed nine months later to meet the needs of the Borneo campaign.
Such pruning was only a palliative.
There were three expensive aircraft projects in addition to TSR 2, awaiting funding; the subsonic P 1 127 vertical take-off close support aircraft; the supersonic P1154 vertical take-off fighter; and the HS681 short take-off medium-range transport.
The Navy also needed a supersonic fighter.
Thorneycroft insisted, like Sandys before him over the TSR 2, that economies should be made by the Navy and RAF using the same airframe for their future supersonic fighter, but he was equally unsuccessful: the requirements for the two environments were far too far apart.
The P1154 went ahead for the RAF only; and the Navy was allowed to buy the American Phantom.
Large additional costs could be seen arising from the Nassau Agreement on British participation in the American-sponsored NATO Multilateral Force as part of the quid pro quo for Polaris.
The US proposal was designed to assuage European, particularly German, ambitions to have more influence in NATO's nuclear forces without jeopardizing American control of the Western nuclear deterrent.
There were to be twenty-five surface ships, each armed with eight Polaris missiles.
The Ministry of Defence objected on three grounds: the  increase in nuclear missiles available to the West was operationally unnecessary and would only add to the existing nuclear overkill; mixed manning was a formula for military disaster; and the cost of the British share would have to come out of the already overstretched Defence budget.
American political pressure for agreement on the formation of the force was so intense that there seemed little chance of it being rejected by NATO on military or financial grounds.
Thorneycroft, therefore, proposed an alternative solution at the NATO Council meeting in July 1964.
Existing European air and missile forces, equipped with nuclear weapons, should be placed under SACEUR as a NATO interdiction force for use against Warsaw Pact communications.
This he believed would meet the political need without incurring the cost of building up a new fleet of surface ships and perpetrating the military nonsense of mixed manning.
The ‘Thorneycroft Proposals’ were not well received by the Americans, but they were prepared to consider them.
In the meantime, the British agreed to send thirty officers and men to take part in the experimental mixed-manning of the US destroyer Admiral Claud V. Ricketts .
But, in Britain, it was election year, and, in America, President Johnson was only just beginning to grasp the reins of power after Kennedy's assassination, and so little political progress was made.
The problem of Multilateral versus Multinational nuclear forces became another legacy bequeathed to the Wilson Government when it came to power.
At the end of the thirteen years of Conservative rule, Britain was still an offshore island of the United States, but times were changing.
Collaboration with Europe was starting to become a possibility.
De Gaulle was not immortal, and so it was only a question of time before further attempts could be made to find a sheltered anchorage off the Western European shore.