

LEADERS
Europe's latest farming muddle
Though Britain is keenest to reform the common agricultural policy, it is foolishly resisting the chance of a change
DRIVEN by one of its recurrent cash crises, the European Community is considering yet another ‘revolutionary’ reform of its common agricultural policy.
The British government, for the sake of the world trading system and the welfare of its people, ought to support this vulnerable initiative.
Instead, it loudly criticises the changes suggested by Ray MacSharry, the EC's farm commissioner, while being less than forthright about its preferred alternative.
In 1990 the EC spent about $49 billion in state subsidies to farmers.
That was dwarfed by the $85 billion of extra help that came from European consumers, whose food prices were rigged way above world-market levels.
Americans, with whom the EC is arguing over farm subsidies in a struggling GATT round, spent almost the same amount ($47 billion) on government subsidies for farmers; but, as consumers, they provided much less additional help — a mere $28 billion.
European eyes are fixed on the first of these figures: public spending that is now shooting through the ceiling set in the EC's self-denying ordinance of 1988.
Yet it is the second figure, that $85 billion, that is the real scandal.
Price-rigging is chiefly what leads to four-fifths of EC farm support going to the richest one-fifth of its farmers.
It is particularly harmful to farmers elsewhere because the Community — with its guaranteed price of, eg, wheat, standing at 165 ecus ($225) per tonne — produces more than it needs, then dumps its surplus onto the world market.
That surplus has helped push the world price down to as little as 55 ecus per tonne.
Any decent reform of this nonsense has to start with a firm recognition that it is better to take money from taxpayers than from consumers.
This is for two reasons:(a) state subsidies to farmers are harder to disguise than rigged prices, and therefore harder to keep increasing; so even if the right reforms initially seem perverse — requiring EC governments to spend more on farmers — that will be only temporary.
And (b) rigged prices lead to the dumped surpluses that distort world trade; so the goal is to move the EC's intervention prices down towards world-market ones — down, as a minimum, towards what a truly efficient European farmer can survive on.
The closer to market reality prices can be moved, the less will anybody need to worry about EC farm surpluses.
A surplus is an embarrassment only when it is subsidised: unsubsidised, it becomes an export success.
It is now widely accepted that the thrust of EC farm support must move towards direct payments to farmers.
But direct payments for what?
Mr MacSharry's answer is: merely for being farmers on small farms.
For, eg, cereals, he wants to cut the EC's intervention price by 40%, using direct aid to compensate the 4m cereal farms of less than 30 hectares.
Only 300,000 cereal farms would be too large to qualify for full compensation — but they farm no less than half of the EC's cereals fields and produce almost two-thirds of its cereals crop.
For them the MacSharry treatment is grim: slashed prices, grants that taper away with increasing size of farm, and good land forced to lie fallow.
Gimme Gummer
Here is a poisoned chalice for Britain's farm minister, John Gummer.
Half of Britain's cereal farms rank among the big 300,000.
The MacSharry scheme would enrage these farmers and reduce the budgetary payments that Britain gets from the CAP.
But Mr Gummer knows that an unvarnished ‘what's in it for us?’ response is inadequate.
He adds that the MacSharry approach would penalise efficiency and preserve allotment-sized farms, and that farmers should receive grants for doing desirable things, not just for having small plots.
Instead, he wants more money paid to all farmers for environmental virtue, and much more for ‘set aside’— paying for fields to remain uncultivated.
A CAP designed only to promote efficient farming would abolish itself forthwith.
The CAP's chief aim nowadays is to slow the rate at which struggling European farmers are leaving the land.
If it is to do this in a more precise, less trade-distorting way, it is bound to be less helpful to big and efficient farms than to small ones.
And set-aside?
That is an odd prescription from an apostle of efficiency: you pay your most productive farmers not to produce.
Mr Gummer should pick up Mr MacSharry's ideas and remould them to meet sensible criteria.
They should help small farmers, but not in a way that discourages them from getting larger or farming better: there must be no farming poverty trap.
A CAP reform should pay farmers for improving the look of the countryside — but proportionately to the physical results, and even-handedly between small farms and large ones.
It must correctly motivate the 40% of the EC's farmers who are only part-timers: that means that any income subsidies must be geared, however partially, to production.
And the new system must be fraud-resistant: that means that income subsidies must be dependent on farm-size too.
If the net result is a big change to who gets what from the EC kitty, that problem should be tackled directly through EC budget negotiations, not by warping the CAP.
There is a game that bedevils all discussion of CAP reform.
You propose a new wheeze to help farmers; I cite a specific nonsense that will result.
Any scheme that gives money directly to farmers is indeed bound to be more leak-prone, and need more bureaucrats, than a rigged-price system.
Such shortcomings must be set against the big truth — that today's CAP is a supremely insidious way of extracting $85 billion from consumers within the EC, and queering the pitch for farmers everywhere else.
Don't coddle or curb them
The pain in the world's airline industry can be eased best by more American-style deregulation, not less
ONCE a glamorous adventure, flying seems ever more like a trial to be endured or avoided.
Now the fear of renewed terrorism sparked by war in the Gulf has emptied airports and aeroplanes, giving airlines their harshest times in living memory.
Many claim they cannot survive without government help.
This week the European Commission extended a hand to Europe's carriers, relaxing rules barring subsidies and capacity-sharing for three months.
A few American airlines, financially crippled by the free-for-all in the deregulated American market, also want help.
Isn't air travel too important for governments to stand by while the industry collapses?
And surely the spectacle of American airlines gobbling each other up and then going bust suggests that government guidance is needed to preserve the orderly flow of airline flights?
Such a benign view of government refereeing of the skies is widely held outside America.
But it has always been wrong, and is more wrong today than ever before.
Lesson from America
Since its birth in the 1920s, air travel has been one of the world's most heavily regulated industries.
Government-organised cartels have stunted its growth.
Misplaced concern for national prestige has sustained in the air a costly mercantilism abandoned long ago for most earth-bound industries.
The moral is plain: any help for airlines should be tailored to the Gulf war and should not survive it.
Last year the European Community's governments reluctantly agreed to dismantle many of the rules protecting, and shackling, their own airlines after the scheduled completion of its internal market in 1992.
If the temporary air-travel hiatus caused by the Gulf war encourages the Brussels commission to falter in its commitment to deregulate, an overdue chance to extend the benefits of a free market beyond America's shores could slip away for years.
Those who fear change in Europe like to say that America's deregulation of its domestic airline industry in 1978 has resulted only in crowded airports and poor service.
In fact it has been a dazzling success, by almost every measure.
By 1990 the number of passenger-miles had increased by 95%.
Fares had fallen about 20% in real terms.
Passengers had saved more than $100 billion on their tickets, and enjoyed far more choice.
But most acts of deregulation have flaws and, in hindsight, America's freeing of the skies had two.
The first was a blunder by American officials: the lax enforcement of anti-trust rules.
This prompted big airlines to dominate the nation's largest airports and then to devour the fleet of small carriers that became airborne soon after deregulation.
Today 90% of America's domestic passenger traffic is carried by the eight largest airlines.
The second flaw was no fault of the Americans: their failure, despite repeated attempts, to persuade other governments to deregulate international flights.
With relatively small home markets, other countries feared that their national flag carriers would be swamped by big American airlines.
Even while freeing its market at home, America found itself locked into the pernicious logic of government-to-government deals abroad.
This month's tit-for-tat with Britain about the sale of landing slots at London's Heathrow airport, which provoked American officials into banning low-price fares across the Atlantic, is one perverse result.
This is why it is so vital that the EC's half-hearted plans to deregulate its airlines after 1992 should be strengthened, not diluted.
For the first time ever, the EC is forging an internal market large enough to offer America equivalent access and to support airlines that are really competing.
Europe and America should allow each other 's airlines to fly anywhere, anytime.
Restrictions on investment in each other 's airlines should go, and airlines would be allowed to merge, divest, start up or close down.
Europe's airport slots should be bought and sold like any other asset, as slots are in America, with new slots going to the highest bidder.
The dominance of airports by a single airline should be limited.
Lower fares, more choice and better service would be the rewards.
A pipe dream?
Only to those sedated by the past.
America has already shown that a free market in air travel works.
And the Bush administration is sending clear signals that it would welcome such a deal.
This week Samuel Skinner, America's transport secretary, reaffirmed his belief that the 25% limit on foreign ownership of American airlines should be raised to 49%.
Offered free access to Europe's market for American airlines, America would almost certainly reciprocate.
A genuinely free air-travel market in America and Europe would spark off a wave of restructuring among European airlines.
Glorious old names would disappear.
Either state-owned airlines would have to be privatised, or the Community's rules limiting state subsidies would have to be strictly enforced.
But there is no reason to think that airlines based in Europe could not compete in this expanded transatlantic market.
And these mergers and bankruptcies would barely affect passengers, as America's experience has shown.
So long as people want to travel, the money, aircraft and qualified staff are always available for some determined operator to keep services going, no matter what happens to individual airlines.
That is how free markets work.
Once rid of the tasks of allotting routes and setting fares, governments could concentrate on the function that rightly belongs to them: expanding the capacities of airports and air-traffic-control systems.
Chronic shortages of both cause most of the congestion and delays that reduce the quality of air travel.
Heavy-handed regulation of European airlines has done nothing to ease congestion, only kept fares twice as high as those in America.
Faced with the 1979 oil shock and recession, America did not flinch from deregulation.
Facing a similar mixture today, and with even more to gain, Europe should be just as brave.
Farewell, poll tax
Its least-bad replacement would be a tax on the value of each house and flat
FIRST catch your hare, said Mrs Beeton's famous cooking instructions for the jugged variety.
Any recipe for a successful reform of local-government finance in Britain should start in similar vein: first kill the poll tax.
The cabinet's current review of the tax now looks likely to heed this advice and go for the quick chop.
The spirit of the poll tax, though, threatens to live on.
Some Conservative members of Parliament would like to retain its principle — that everyone should pay something.
Other would-be reformers are going to the opposite extreme, trying to concoct complicated ways for people in one district to subsidise those in another.
These and other ideas do more to confuse than to clarify.
For political reasons as much as for economic ones, the government needs to come up with a scheme that is simple (so that its essence can be explained in one sentence) and seen to be fair (the duke pays more than the dustman).
To pull this off, the government should keep in mind some first principles.
Back to the rates, with a difference
On first principles, Adam Smith invariably had much to say.
His rules of taxation were that a tax should be fair, easy to predict, easy to collect and difficult to evade.
He also favoured the closest possible ties between those who were taxed and those who were doing the taxing.
Translated into today's idiom, the more that local government can rely upon its own tax base, the better.
Indeed, the best local tax would be one chosen and raised by each council as it saw fit, to cover what its voters had elected it to spend.
But that ideal runs straight into the fact that some areas of the country are richer than others, and they tend to be places that need less spending anyway.
So central government gets drawn in willy-nilly; and once it is handing out money, it will want to have some say over how it is spent.
For this reason local taxes will always be seen as part of the national tax structure.
They should therefore be consistent with the philosophy that underpins income tax: the more you have, the more you pay, leaving the poorest to pay little or nothing.
The poll tax cut across this, with its concept of a universal obligation.
But the idea of a tax as some kind of entry ticket for citizenship was always a nonsense: too many are able to dodge paying it.
As for the notion of a local tax as a payment for services rendered, it isn't.
When people must pay for services, regardless of whether they use them or not, they are paying a tax, period.
Local councils in England alone are now spending around £40 billion a year.
This total would be cut by half if they transferred their educational budgets to central government.
There is some case for doing this, particularly now that Whitehall is laying down a core curriculum for all schools.
But no minister should suppose that this would provide a painless solution, for the government would have to raise its own taxes dramatically.
So assume the councils' needs stay at £40 billion; it is hard then to see any single tax footing such a large bill.
A direct reassignment of national taxes, as in Germany, might do it — but would need a consensus between Whitehall and the town halls that Britain sorely lacks.
In short, local government's future financial base will have to be a hybrid — either of two or more taxes or of a tax-and-grants kind.
As Michael Heseltine, the environment secretary, appears now to have accepted, a property tax should be the dominant feature of the hybrid.
A sales tax would prompt border-hopping, tolerable in America but not in tiny Britain, and would fly in the face of EC moves towards greater harmonisation of indirect taxes.
A local income tax would give councils the power to jeopardise Britain's belated conversion to a belief in low direct taxation.
Property taxes, by contrast, would help to temper the British obsession with home-ownership.
Whatever its status as a castle, an Englishman's home today is easily the most familiar measure of his finances.
Most people have a far better idea of the value of their house than of their annual income tax.
And the information available on capital values in the housing market is correspondingly lavish.
To base a property tax on anything other than capital values would be perverse — even if alternatives like imputed rents and floor-space footage were inherently sensible, which they are not — and ways to compile and update the necessary data have already been examined in detail.
By introducing a tax on residential property that raised about £14 billion, together with the £12 billion that comes from taxing commercial property, and by allocating the remaining £14 billion via the present system of grants, the government would be able to pronounce the poll tax dead.
Its replacement would still have to cope with the problem of big-spending councils; the old rows about rate-capping and poll-tax-capping would simply be called something else.
But remedies involving, for example, an extra tax payable by each person in a household would at the moment be madness: many councils would be left struggling with exactly the enforcement difficulties that have made the poll tax so hard to set up and administer.
In time it may be possible to find other, better remedies.
Once the Inland Revenue is fully computerised, it would be feasible to have a local income tax to supplement the property tax.
But such a big change would be desirable only if the structure of local government was reformed, to make it more responsive to local opinion.
It is not too early to start thinking about sweeping reforms, as history shows.
After all, a mixture of property and income taxes is exactly what was proposed by the Layfield report on local-government finance in 1976.
If the Tory party is embarrassed about the 15 wasted years, it should be.
Soft on banks?
Regulators should resist pressure to be lenient
IN 1988 regulators from the dozen richest countries devised a new set of capital standards for commercial banks.
They had two aims: to boost banks' financial strength, and to reduce the competitive advantage enjoyed by banks in countries with lax capital requirements.
Gripped by recession, some banks are now asking for at least temporary relief from these capital standards.
Regulators should say no.
The capital standards, negotiated through the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), are a natural scapegoat for the credit squeeze that is deepening the recessions in Britain and America and may provoke one in Japan.
When the rules take full effect at the end of 1992, banks will have to back every commercial loan with capital equal to 8% of the loan's value; half of that must be share capital or disclosed reserves (‘core’ capital).
Less-risky assets require less capital backing.
Capital matters because it protects depositors (or, more realistically, the government guarantor of deposits) should a bank's loans go sour.
But rules that strengthen banks in good times can cripple them in recessions.
As bad loans proliferate, investors are less willing to buy bank debt and equity, making capital scarcer.
With less capital to go around, banks must make fewer loans.
The recession gets worse.
Why not, then, relax the BIS standards, or at least delay their enforcement?
Banks would lend money more freely and, in fattening their own balance sheets, would feed credit-starved economies.
The logic is seductive, but misguided.
Banks' need for capital is greatest when economies are in recession and borrowers cannot service their loans.
Aside from protecting depositors against losses, a large capital base will restrain a bank's impulse to make risky loans to maintain its profits in a depressed market.
America's thrifts debacle showed how dangerous that impulse can be.
When recession struck the oil-pumping south-west in the 1980s, thrifts in Texas and elsewhere pleaded for a relaxation of capital standards to help them grow out of trouble.
Regulators took pity on them.
Now taxpayers must pay hundreds of billions of dollars to clean up the mess left by under-capitalised thrifts.
People who trumpet the dangers of strict capital rules also exaggerate the benefits that leniency would bring.
Most large banks already meet the BIS standards, two years ahead of schedule.
In America, where the capital shortage is thought to be worst, there is ample capital around to underpin the current demand for bank lending.
According to New York's Federal Reserve Bank, even if America's banks backed outstanding loans with 50% more core capital than required, they would still have $40 billion of capital to spare.
What American banks lack is credit-worthy borrowers in the right places — an added reason why the rules that prevent America's banks operating nationwide should be scrapped.
British and European banks are comfortably above the 8% minimum.
So are Japanese banks, thanks to Japan's recent stockmarket rally (but they would slip back if the market did).
Tough for some
Some banks, including several of America's biggest, are indeed short of capital.
They face unpalatable choices.
They must either issue equity and subordinated debt at low prices or else shrink their balance sheets by selling off old loans and turning down new business.
A high cost of capital is a signal that investors do not trust banks to earn a reasonable return on their money at a reasonable risk.
Regulators must not muffle that signal by permitting banks to resume lending from a weaker capital base.
The BIS standards do have flaws, though not the ones that bankers complain of.
The rules make no distinction between triple-A loans and weaker credits, which can encourage banks to invest in high-yielding junk.
Nor do they take proper account of the risks banks run on their foreign-exchange and interest-rate positions.
These imperfections make it all the more important for regulators to enforce the BIS minimums and set higher standards for riskier banks.
Another chance for the UN
Small changes could bring big rewards
THE United Nations suffers about equally from people who want it to do everything and from those who think it can do nothing.
Until the Gulf war actually began, things at its headquarters on New York's East River were looking up.
The cold war was over.
America and Russia were solving third-world conflicts with the UN's help.
There was a chance it might grow into the international peacekeeper its founders had wanted.
Security Council resolutions aimed at getting the Iraqis out of Kuwait were a model of collective action against aggression.
When, in November, it blessed the use of force to achieve this goal, the fanfare was forgivable.
A new UN, it seemed, had been born.
False hope was duly dashed.
By authorising force, the UN did not get itself a say in the running of the war.
Its Military Committee, which the victors of 1945 had once hoped (for little more than the time it takes to shake hands) would in future enforce peace at the head of a world army, remained a jobless phantom.
Except for an unsuccessful trip to Baghdad before the allied air offensive, the UN's secretary-general, Javier Perez de Cuellar, has played a minor diplomatic part.
As middlemen since then, the Iranians and the Russians have pushed the UN further into the background and, at least until peace really does break out, the Americans have been happy for it to stay there.
On top of all this, there is some risk that the Soviet Union is returning to its hardline ways, which might include tilting back to Iraq.
If those worst fears were to come true, the Soviet-American consensus in the UN would quickly disappear — and with it the body's best hope of effectiveness.
The gloom of the UN-idealists and the ‘told you so’ from UN-doubters are both overdrawn.
The Gulf war has shown the UN's limits, but also its strengths.
As the war enters its final phase, the UN will probably return to prominence.
It has already made behind-the-scenes preparations to share the job of picking up the pieces.
Some weeks ago the secretary-general asked his staff to draw up plans to cover either an Iraqi withdrawal or an Iraqi defeat in the field.
A large peacekeeping force is now being assembled, ready to move at 48 hours' notice.
The idea is that it could supervise an Iraqi withdrawal or police the Kuwait-Iraq border if Saddam Hussein ordered a pull-out.
If his army were crushed and Kuwait taken by force, and if the allied forces were then eager to pack up and go home or found themselves no longer wanted, UN peacekeepers could step in.
Beyond those possible tasks lies a heavy load of work for the UN in what several Security Council resolutions call ‘restoring peace and stability to the area’— that is, trying to prevent the next Middle East war.
That could include traditional diplomacy, peace-monitoring, the placing of tripwire forces on disputed borders and the policing of arms embargoes.
Making it smoother next time
If the UN fails the Gulf test, it will be doing no worse than the many outsiders who have tried their hands in the Middle East over the past six decades.
If it succeeds, it will be because it concentrates on achievable tasks.
The end of the cold war has given the UN a new chance.
But it is not about to flower into a world directorate with its own army.
Its best role is the diplomatic and peacekeeping one — which is quite different from peace-enforcing, since that involves imposing an end to fighting.
The achievable tasks could be much better done if several handicaps were eased.
Three of these are internal, involving the working of the UN machine.
The first is that peacekeeping is hand-to-mouth.
The UN must beg field radios, lorries and money for each operation.
It gets by because its officials are skilled improvisers.
This could be improved with, for example, a peacekeeping fund, a staff college for training peacekeeping officers, and special UN units earmarked in national armies, leading to a permanent peacekeeping force.
Weak direction from the top is a second handicap.
A new secretary-general is to be chosen this autumn.
Mr Perez de Cuellar says he will not stand again.
Too often the UN has had less than the best.
On the whole, it has suited the big powers to have mediocre or self-effacing diplomats.
This time the UN deserves someone of consequence — who might think of making a successful businessman his deputy in order to tackle the UN's nightmarish bureaucracy.
The third problem is the Security Council, or rather the latterday powers that want permanent seats on it.
The five that already have them — America, Britain, China, France and the Soviet Union — are discovering co-operation after years of blocking each other with vetoes.
But Germany and Japan, as well as several other not-so-rich but big countries, are knocking on the door.
Clever schemes abound.
The trick will be to get fairer representation without losing small-group decisiveness, and not to avoid tackling the problem because a perfect mix cannot be found.
The fourth handicap is external.
The UN machine works only when the big powers want it to.
They alone provide the current.
Nothing guarantees that the Americans and Russians will go on supplying it as they have done for the past couple of years.
Yet it would be odd logic not to repair the machine just because the current might one day be cut off again.
The Americans do not want to play the world's policeman on their own, and cannot afford to.
Even the nastiest Soviet generals do not seem to want to restore ‘international class struggle’— stirring up third-world trouble for the West.
They can see that the UN gives them a position at the bargaining table.
Both powers know that the unappealing alternative is a return to the 1970s and 1980s, when America and Russia competed in the third world through warring clients.
His war, his peace
HE HAD another chance; it may have been his last.
Once again peacemakers put themselves between Saddam Hussein and the leaders of the alliance ranged against him.
Once again, by failing to opt clearly enough for peace, he seems to have opted for war.
Having raised the hopes of friend and foe alike — and especially of Iraqis, witness the ecstatic scenes in Baghdad last week — by agreeing for the first time to contemplate withdrawal from Kuwait, he was unwilling to commit himself unequivocally.
It could have been his peace.
After his broadcast on Thursday, it is more likely to be a new, and even bloodier, phase of his war.
The allies should not welcome this, though the argument for fighting on regardless of the latest Soviet efforts at peacemaking was neither bloodthirsty nor trivial.
In part it rested on the belief that in order to restore peace and security in the Gulf, as Resolution 678 authorises member states to do, it is necessary to destroy Iraq's capacity to wage war.
If the allies had agreed to a peace settlement before starting a land war, Mr Hussein would have been left at the head of a country whose air force and army were still largely intact.
Within a few years he could have looked almost as menacing as he did six months ago.
Better to finish the job now.
And, some would say, to finish Mr Hussein too.
Many Americans, probably including George Bush, as well as many of the Iraqi's Arab enemies, believe that there can be no lasting peace unless Mr Hussein has been humbled.
Otherwise, despite the rubble around him, he will have emerged from the war as an Arab hero, the man who took on and defied the Zionists, westerners and other infidels, and who will inevitably try to do it all again.
Unless his Kuwaiti venture is seen to be a manifest failure for him personally, runs the argument, the job will have been only half done.
It is this that has made some Americans say that, if Iraq agreed to withdraw from Kuwait, it must abandon its tanks and other heavy equipment.
Others have spoken of war crimes and reparations.
Humiliating and unrealistic conditions should set off an alarm in the coalition's collective head: they carry echoes from 1919 of Versailles, the treaty that ended ‘the war to end all wars’ and brought Europe, and the world, a new era of instability.
The allies' central aim in the Gulf is the unconditional expulsion of Iraq from Kuwait.
Achieving that aim will in itself amount to a manifest setback for Mr Hussein.
If he still appears a hero to some, that may be something the world can live with: for all his defiance, he will have thrown away everything Iraq gained from its eight-year war with Iran, and swallowed many mouthfuls of words about Kuwait remaining Iraq's 19th province for ever and a day.
The allies have to remember that, even if Mr Hussein were to fall upon his (or someone else's) sword tomorrow, he might be replaced the following day by someone just as dangerous and aggressive.
They have also, however, to remember their own troops.
If they are to throw themselves fully into battle by land and sea, they cannot wait for ever.
It is not reasonable to hold them too long while doves flutter between Moscow and Baghdad, while sandstorms gather and temperatures rise.
For soldiers, if it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well it were done quickly.
Yet would it not have been better for them if 'twere not done at all?
So far, allied casualties have been astonishingly light; in a land war they will soon multiply.
Soon too the horrors that Mr Hussein has promised but has so far failed to deliver may start to materialise: nerve gas, biological weapons, blazing oil fields.
Kuwait, already pillaged, will suffer further devastation.
The coalition has rightly been ready to run these risks to get Iraq out of Kuwait; but so long as it could achieve that central aim, how much better to do so without further fear of all the weapons in a tyrant's armoury.
For Kuwait, not against Saddam
The other kind of cost of a land war will be measured in terms of the strain on the alliance.
Against many expectations, and despite a groundswell of popular support for Iraq in the Muslim world, the coalition has held together well.
Even the bombing of a shelter full of civilians in Baghdad last week has failed to split it.
But the longer the war goes on, the greater is the likelihood of more such tragedies.
The allies could, and should, do more to minimise the chances of further disasters; they could, for instance, stop bombing Baghdad, where the targets of greatest military value must have already been destroyed.
In a land war, however, the concern will not be just for Iraqis, whether civilians or soldiers, but for allied soldiers.
If it is indeed to be a land battle, that inevitably bloody affair will with luck be fast-moving, and people will see it as a struggle fought with a clear aim against an obdurate enemy and plainly moving towards an allied victory.
If so, public opinion in the western democracies would probably put up with quite a lot of blood and bodies.
But if it looks vindictive — more a battle for Saddam's head than for the liberation of Kuwait — public opinion in the West could soon turn.
And in the Muslim world, among people at large, the war may become ever more unpopular as it looks increasingly punitive and costly in terms of Arab life.
The disaffection could spread further.
Mikhail Gorbachev has been under increasing pressure at home, especially in the Soviet army, to salvage what he can of the old Soviet-Iraqi friendship.
His full support for the anti-Saddam coalition has not been universally popular: hence his latest diplomatic effort, which he must hope will still redound to his credit and give the Soviet Union a useful base on which to build a role in the post-war Middle East.
His difficulty is that, with his economic and diplomatic credit so low, he cannot afford to antagonise the West on the Gulf.
But neither can the West, and in particular Mr Bush, altogether afford to neglect the Soviet Union.
Its co-operation has been crucial to the international consensus legitimising the war.
All such considerations pointed rational men to peace.
Yet in the end, as in the beginning, the decision lay with Mr Hussein.
On August 2nd he needlessly started a war.
Time and again between then and the UN deadline of January 15th, he could have averted the allied counter-offensive that followed.
Last week, for the first time, he showed he was ready to contemplate withdrawal — but not unequivocally.
Had he shown himself unambiguously ready to start pulling out, the coalition would have surely had to offer him something, if not to save his face, at least to cover his backside: an American commitment to talk about any Middle Eastern issue whatsoever has already been given; the call for Iraqi reparations could still be waived.
What was lacking was a clear response from Mr Hussein that he genuinely wanted peace.
As the war enters its next phase, it is ever more plainly his war.
LETTERS
Occupational hazards
In an otherwise logical case against Saddam Hussein (January 12th), you again liken his adventure to other occupations, including that of northern Cyprus by Turkey.
The two cases have nothing in common.
In Cyprus the rights of a large Turkish population were routinely abridged by a majority bent upon union with Greece.
Northern Cyprus now has an occupier whose crime is to protect those rights and whose chief affront to the majority is to remain there passively.
This occupier is anxious to withdraw according to UN resolutions and proposals which the majority will not accept.
This situation needs resolution, but to compare it with the rape of Kuwait hardly strengthens your argument against Saddam.
Worse, the comparison gives the back of your hand to a country whose firm support of the principles you voice comes at a cost of real economic suffering and terrible danger.
Beloit, Wisconsin JERRY GUSTAFSON
Your otherwise excellent leader is marred only by its comparison of the occupation of the West Bank with those of Northern Cyprus and Tibet.
The occupation of the West Bank was a result of a war launched by third parties.
In northern Cyprus and Tibet, the occupier was the aggressor.
In similar vein, withdrawal from Nicosia and Lhasa is unlikely to imperil the inhabitants of Istanbul and Beijing.
I wish the same held true of Hebron and Jerusalem.
London PETER SUGARMAN
Liberate oil
It is my understanding that The Economist has had deep roots in free-market philosophy from its very start.
It is therefore unsettling to find you pushing an ‘energy policy’ for the United States and following the old, oft-disproven notion that we are ‘running out of oil’(January 26th).
America has potentially quite large oil deposits, as well as enormous known deposits of natural gas.
Oil exploration in most promising regions is virtually prohibited by government edict, largely through the pressure of environmental extremists (with whom you seem to agree).
An ‘energy policy’ of government tends to strangle the development of economical and efficient energy sources, as any student of the free market would agree.
In addition, numerous examples show that private ownership is far more dedicated to conservation and protection of the environment.
Why not go back to your roots and advocate liberty?
Barstow, California LANNON STAFFORD
Lloyd's of London
Your article, ‘Leaking at the seams’(January 26th), made reference to the vehicle being set up by the council of Lloyd's to reinsure open years of account.
Your correspondent went on to speculate about the likely cost of reinsuring through this vehicle the 1982 account of syndicates 317/661, managed by this company.
He says his speculation is ‘a best guess’.
Rather, it is wild and uninformed.
The premium rate suggested by him would be equivalent to an amount in excess of £1 billion ($1.95 billion) for a syndicate with a capacity of £41m; this in addition to the losses already paid and reserved.
Such a figure would not suggest that a serious attempt was being made by underwriters to deal with a problem that could undermine the stability of the world's pre-eminent insurance market.
Lloyd's has put forward a constructive plan; it must not be allowed to flounder on rate.
Unless an equitable premium can now be arrived at, confidence in this new Lloyd's initiative — as well as the long-term future of the market — will be eroded.
London W.E.
BLOXHAM Chief executive R.H.M.
Outhwaite Ltd
Mining in Nauru
Your assertion that Nauru has claimed $60m in compensation from Australia (January 19th) is untrue.
Nauru has sought from the International Court of Justice a declaration of the liability of Australia for breaches of the trusteeship agreement and article 76 of the UN charter.
The question of compensation, however, has been reserved by Nauru at this stage of the proceedings.
Australia has contested, at this point, not the merits of the claim but the admissibility of the claim and the jurisdiction of the court in respect thereof.
Any damages received from the case will be used to finance rehabilitation of those parts of Nauru mined out by Australia; Australia carried out no rehabilitation of the island.
Although four-fifths of Nauru will be uninhabitable at the completion of mining, with careful planning and the necessary financial resources the island is certainly repairable over time.
Nauru was never paid $16m or any other compensation by Australia.
Your article included some gratuitous remarks about lifestyle and income.
They have no bearing whatsoever on the serious consideration of the merits of the Nauruan case.
London MARTIN WESTON Nauru Government Office
Problem-free cats
You write that recycling catalytic converters has its problems (January 12th).
Not so.
We have been recycling rhodium and platinum for some leading car makers for years, without any of the environmental problems associated with nuclear waste.
Alzenau, Germany HEINZ GIEGERICH DAR Deutsche Autokat Recycling
Gone to the dogs
You mentioned in ‘Language debased’(December 24th) the hapless airline passenger being admonished in verbose, indirect terms, to ‘extinguish all smoking materials’ and to ‘deplane from the forward cabin’.
Alas, the Gulf crisis has created a new phrase to frustrate travellers with little patience for this abuse of the English language.
The director of Dallas-Fort Worth international airport has assured the ‘flying public’ that extra steps are being taken to screen luggage for terrorist bombs.
His weapon of choice: ‘canine assets’.
Chicago JOHN WOOD
START OF BOOKS SECTION
That anti-war feeling
Japanese stagefright
TOKYO
as if the current Japanese mood of entrenched pacificism needed any underlining, the Shiki theatre company and its ambitious director, Keita Asari, have produced an anti-war musical drama called ‘Rikoran’.
Its theme is a blunt retelling of Japan's military aggression in Manchuria from the late 1920s until 1945.
This is not something the public knows much about; history textbooks are inadequate, and the older generation will not discuss it.
The play drew standing-room-only crowds at Tokyo's Nissay Theatre for the last part of its three-week run in January.
It will soon start a second run, from March 22nd to April 29th.
When it reopens, the theatre will provide simultaneous translation in both English and Chinese.
Japan's newspaper critics have added spice to the production by splitting into two camps.
Theatre critics object to the musical because it is an ‘idea drama’ that lacks believable characters; political columnists and professors praise its accurate rendering of historical events.
A headline on the theatre page of Asahi Shimbun read: ‘Plenty of Historical Remarks, Few Human Beings.’
A page-one column in the same newspaper admired the play's moral honesty, insisting: ‘It is worth Prime Minister Kaifu's time to see the musical before his trip to South-East Asia.’
The columnist added that war-time journalists were the ‘cat's paws’ of Japan's militarists, ‘reporting nothing but lies.’
In fact, the first-night audience included Yasuhiro Nakasone and Noboru Takeshita, both former prime ministers, and Taro Nakayama, the present foreign minister.
According to Mr Asari, Mr Nakayama recommended ‘everybody’ to see it.
Also in the audience was 70-year-old Yoshiko Yamaguchi Otaka, the original Rikoran, whose autobiography provided much of the material for the script of the musical.
A singer of poignant songs, Rikoran was born near Mukden in Manchuria in 1920 of Japanese parents, but lived as a young girl with a Chinese family.
Accepted as Chinese, she became a superstar appearing in China and abroad.
Between 1938 and 1945 she performed in Manchuria, working for a Japanese propaganda outfit, the Manchuria Cinema Association.
In 1945 she was tried in a Chinese military court as a traitor, but was acquitted when she admitted her Japanese nationality and described how politically naive she was.
Today, Rikoran is Mrs Yoshiko Otaka, a member of the upper house of the Japanese parliament.
The musical opens with her trial; in the theatre on the first night, she was in tears.
Supposedly, the development of northeastern China began with the co-operation of Manchurians, Mongols, Chinese and Koreans; but the Japanese army, the Kwangtung, planned to control Manchuria as a colony of Japan.
It installed Pu Yi, the last emperor of the Ching dynasty, as a puppet, and tyrannised the Manchurians.
In the musical, Chinese are gunned down to suggest the actual massacre at the mountain village of Ping Ding Shan; and air warfare and the atomic destruction of Hiroshima are shown on film clips.
The effect is terrifying.
During an interview at the Shiki theatre company's offices in Tokyo, Mr Asari explained why he had produced the controversial musical.
‘I wanted’, he said, ‘to challenge the taboos about the Japanese in Manchuria.
Neither the political right nor left wants to tell what happened from the 1920s through 1945.
The right wing says it was a good thing, Japan's going into Manchuria to develop it; the left wing calls it bad.
Nothing about it is taught at school and we are criticised abroad for not repenting of the war.’
Mr Asari remembers, as a seven-year-old elementary schoolboy, watching the Emperors Hirohito and Pu Yi ride together through Tokyo in a carriage in 1940.
He says he has never been able to get the image out of his mind.
In ‘Rikoran’ the Pu Yi of actor Masayoshi Yamaguchi is a comically astute man who realises that he is powerless as Japan's dupe in Manchuria.
In contrast, Rikoran is oblivious both to Japan's atrocities in China and to the real course of the war with the West.
She represents the ordinary Japanese who believed what was reported: first, that Manchuria was an idealistic experiment in Asian co-operation; and, later, that Japan was winning the Pacific war.
Mr Asari hopes his musical may do something to open blinkered Japanese eyes, to the future as well as the past.
‘We need to face the frustrations left over from the second world war’, he says.
‘If the Japanese government were stronger, we could have done something to prevent the Gulf war.
This is not the time to escape reality.’
He is right, though his play does not leave his audiences with much of a zest for battle.
Via dolorosa
ONLY a handful of artists have been sufficiently disturbed by the violence of war to capture it in their paintings: Goya certainly, Henry Moore in his air-raid shelter sketches, Picasso in his ‘Guernica’ perhaps, and, a step down, Paul Nash and Wyndham Lewis.
For the remainder, most of the pictures culled by M.R.D. Foot from the vast treasure trove of the Imperial War Museum in a handsome selection, ART AND WAR*, are no more than intelligent, technically competent commentaries on particular aspects of war in this century.
A few, largely born of the experience of the first world war, transcend illustration and illuminate, like flares, the nature of war in all its brutality.
One of these, Paul Nash's ‘The Menin Road’ with its two tiny indistinct figures scurrying across a shell-torn landscape, is used on the book's cover.
Having made his point so tellingly, Mr Foot makes no sweeping claims about his compilation, writing simply: ‘This is a book about war, more than about art…it is meant to contribute to the history of war, rather than to art history.’
In his comments on the pictures he has selected, Mr Foot, a stalwart of these anonymous columns for many years, stays firmly in that perspective.
A friendly, anecdotal guide, he takes his readers gently by the elbow in explaining how, as depicted in the illustrations, war has developed.
In the end, it always circles back to Wilfred Owen's pity.
His tailpiece, most aptly, is Eric Gill's woodcut of an infantryman trudging along his Via Dolorosa.
Many, alas, still have to tread that road.
German cinema
Trabi dearest
BERLIN
ONE of the more bizarre products of German unification is the film ‘Go Trabi Go’, a central-European road movie with a difference.
Forget the slick 1950s convertibles of ‘Wild At Heart’ or Wim Wenders's earlier work; this film pays homage to the Trabant, East Germany's contribution to the automobile Hall of Fame.
With the borders down, Udo Struutz, a 43-year-old teacher from the industrial hell-hole of Bitterfeld, is able to realise a lifelong dream: retracing Goethe's ‘Italian Journey’.
With his loyal wife Rita and wild child Jacqueline, he loads up the family Trabi (affectionately known as George) and hits the road to the southern sun, leaving his bemused neighbours behind.
For the past 20 years George (the real star of this western-made film) has been a cherished member of the Struutz family.
Daughter Jacqueline was conceived on the back seat, and he was a witness at Udo and Rita's wedding.
Now he faces the biggest challenge of his existence — the devil-take-the-hindmost motorways of Bavaria, Austria and Italy.
Despite a few mechanical mishaps, loyal George manages to overcome the challenge and deliver the family to Rome.
Although the film is full of comments on the remaining cultural differences between east and west, it does not set out to make fun of the east Germans.
If anything, it is the westerners who become the butt of the jokes.
The family relatives in Bavaria — fat, bigoted, suburban and narrow-minded — are a wonderful and cutting send-up of the western German petit bourgeoisie.
Despite being a western production, the film script was written by the east-west team of Peter Timm and Reinhard Kloos.
The cast is also drawn from both eastern and western Germany, with Wolfgang Strumph, a Dresden cabaret artist, putting in a good bewildered performance as Udo.
Although it would be wrong to try to read too much into such a light-hearted production, Udo's reliance on Goethe as his travel guide (‘200 years old and still topical’) is surely a statement that, while political systems may come and go, German literature remains.
Public reaction to the film in Germany has been divided.
In the west it has had little success; in the east it has been a smash.
Some cinema-goers in Leipzig even confessed that the film had made them feel emotional and slightly nostalgic for their recent past.
The mood would seem to be temporary; judging by the ever-decreasing number of Trabants on eastern Germany's roads no one, when faced with the superior horsepower of Volkswagen, Audi and Mercedes, is that nostalgic.
Even silver-screen George changes with the times when, after an entertaining accident in Rome, he re-emerges as a convertible with a Renault 4 bonnet.
The popularity of the film in eastern Germany probably has a simple explanation.
With industries and jobs disappearing around them as they still try to find their way in the new Germany, many east Germans find it comforting to enjoy some harmless fun where, for once, they get the upper hand.
Although few would accept a Trabant now even if you paid them, the spluttering papier-maché two-stroke still strikes an affectionate chord.
And the jokes remain.
How do you double the value of a Trabant, for instance?
Answer: fill it up with petrol.
Or make a film about it.
Puppet and string-puller
GUERRILLA PRINCE: THE UNTOLD STORY OF FIDEL CASTRO.
By Georgie Anne Geyer.
Little, Brown; 445 pages; $22.95 and £14.95
THE last bogeyman but five or six, in that line of third-world menaces who give the United States a sense of purpose, lives uncomfortably close to home.
Fidel Castro is no far-distant Arab, but rules an island only 90 miles from Key West, on what might have been home ground had politics gone slightly differently less than a century ago.
When they snapped up the fragments of Spain's Caribbean empire, the Americans took Puerto Rico as a colony and subsidised it lavishly.
Cuba they merely took as a neocolony.
Their agribusinesses employed its labour cheap.
Their gangsters, from the profits of bootlegging, gambling and abortion, bought up its government.
From that moral swamp emerged the Creature with the Beard and the Big Cigar.
Those who think history is formed by impersonal forces find Mr Castro a large inconvenience.
Sure, the Soviet Union wanted to shove pins into its rival from as close up as possible.
Sure, Cuba's circumstances made part of its ruling class ultra-anti-American.
But without Mr Castro, Cuba and its 10m fairly poor people could never have become the nuisance whose finger excitable types discerned in pies all round the globe.
One man's obsession with America aligned Russian opportunism behind the Cuban sense of grievance.
Georgie Anne Geyer writes of that obsession.
She does not know much about world politics; she undertakes her ‘strange Odyssean intellectual and political adventure into the soul and psyche of this unknown leader’ in, she says, ‘a systematic journalistic manner’.
This does not explain why she describes the movement of a crowd as ‘hydric’, or locates the home of Mr Castro's father, the Galician ex-soldier Angel Castro, in a ‘nouveau wilderness’.
Soon, though, she drops her fancy prose and concentrates on the relationship, almost sexual in its intensity, between Mr Castro and enough Cubans to keep him in power without the brutal repression that most Caribbean dictators go in for.
When she encounters a mess, like the ridiculous raid on the Moncada barracks that made Mr Castro's revolutionary reputation, she does not try to impose sense where there was none.
Instead of seeking to analyse Che Guevara's bungled revolutionary export-drive, she appropriately notes that its main consequence was to make black berets fashionable for a while.
She is stronger on personality than on political theory, pointing accurately at the similarities between Mr Castro and another Galician dictator, Francisco Franco.
General Franco used the army to get himself to power, then kicked it away.
Miss Geyer writes: ‘The new thing in history that Castro did was to destroy the Communist Party and create his own Fidelista Party, which he called Communist in order to stand up against the United States and to gain backing and to borrow power from the Soviet Union’.
That is the point.
Communism, while it lasted, claimed to be about economics.
Mr Castro dabbled incompetently with communist economics, but had no economic ideas at all.
This deficiency he shared with a whole crew of leaders of third-world or so-called ‘non-aligned’ countries, who like him had gained power because they were against foreign rulers, not because they had any idea of what to put in place of foreign rule.
He stood out among them not only because he had a surer command of his people at home, but also because Cuba is where it is, so the Russians helped him much more than the rest.
Like many supposed puppets, Mr Castro learnt to tug on the strings that tied him to his masters' hands.
Because he concentrated on a single target while the Russians played their world-wide game, they sometimes failed to notice where he was pulling their fingers.
If the Soviet Union had kept proper watch on Mr Castro, it would never have let him pull it into the missile crisis of 1962.
Fortunately for the world, John Kennedy's team was wise enough to create the pause that allowed Khrushchev to pull back.
The Russians did not learn their lesson.
In the late 1980s the Cubans manipulated them into a needless confrontation in Angola, which lasted much longer than it should have done because, this time, the Washington team was clumsier.
In his 31 years of dictatorship Mr Castro shifted peripheral Cuba to the centre of the world stage.
Now the strings have gone slack, and he is waiting for the end.
His folksy speeches still beguile the faithful; he can grow eloquent on anything, even when comparing the dynamo-operated lamps of Russian bicycles to the simple purity of the unlighted Chinese alternative.
But his people are hungry, their clothes worn.
The Soviet subsidies are gone, the schemes for easy payments to the East Europeans who provided his machines are over.
The Miami Cubans are flexing their wallets for the return to a country whose people are healthier, better educated and less racially divided than when the exiles left.
Whatever the style of the transition, the new Cuban regime is unlikely to pose a political threat to the United States.
But the island that in the prohibition years after 1920 profitably ran the rum trade is well placed for bootlegging cocaine.
The colony that never was may find fresh ways to annoy the giant with which proximity entangles it.
Silent, upon a peak in Darien
THE PACIFIC.
By Simon Winchester.
Hutchinson; 456 pages; £19.99.
To be published in America by Random House
DEEP, deep down, on a level only recognised by hints and murmurs, an inchoate, undefined sense of oneness, of coterminous identity is growing among some of the peoples and some of the places of the Pacific.
It cannot be quantified, nor described; if it exists, it can only be felt.’
Clearly, Simon Winchester feels it — and goes to elegant, erudite and amusing lengths to persuade his readers to feel it, too.
They will be only half-convinced.
The quarter or more of the world's population who live around the rim of the Pacific are too diverse to be cutely grouped as the ‘Pacific man’ in the ‘Pacific century’, so readily defined by fund managers and futurologists.
How can a single thread be drawn to link the peasants of Peru with the sararimen of Tokyo, or the rumbustious politicians of Australia with the venal cadres of communist China?
Look for the Pacific's ‘inchoate oneness’, and the divisions become ever more obvious.
Mr Winchester admits the difficulty — and proceeds, undaunted, to sew as many threads as he can across the world's biggest ocean (‘bigger than all the land surface of the earth, including Antarctica, and with Africa counted twice.’).
He rightly emphasises the overseas Chinese, who do indeed get everywhere, be it Jakarta or Lima, and the Confucianism which underlies so much of East Asia's economic success.
Diligence, obedience and high savings rates are the powerful characteristics of neo-Confucian Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore — and of every Chinatown from Los Angeles to Valparaiso.
Why those same characteristics come unstuck in Deng Xiaoping's China is a mystery to Mr Winchester, as to many others.
Where Mr Winchester's cross-Pacific connections become less sure is when they become tangible and man-made: the optical-fibre telephone cable that snakes beneath the Pacific from California to Hawaii and then branches out to Japan and Guam; the AsiaSat satellite and its fellow ‘birds’, sitting on the equator to bounce across Asia the telephone calls of businessmen and the television dramas of Hollywood; the new Boeing 747–400, able to fly non-stop from Sydney to Los Angeles; and, odd as it seems, the Macintosh computer.
Faith in the icons of telephonics and flight is easy enough.
There are now more jumbo jets flying the Pacific than there are the Atlantic, and the financial power of Japan will probably, in the end, clog even the optical fibres of the new Pacific cable.
But the Macintosh?
Mr Winchester, a Mac-fan of many years and now the boss of a Mac-using electronic-publishing company, has an ingenious explanation: unlike the clumsy MS-DOS operating system that powers IBM computers and all their clones, the Mac can cope with comparative ease with the pictographic scripts and unusual phonetic alphabets of Asia.
Mr Winchester may well have a point, but he fails to mention the profitable presence of IBM in Japan, Hong Kong and Singapore.
In Asia, just as in America, Big Blue is still bigger than Apple.
But if Mr Winchester's iconography is sometimes suspect, his opus is almost unfailingly entertaining.
He writes brilliantly of the great circumnavigation of Magellan, of his own voyages around the Horn, through the Panama Canal or up the peak in Darien where Balboa (not Keats's stout Cortez) first spied the Pacific.
Mr Winchester's guide somewhat spoils that last triumph by showing him a press release — written, of course, on a Macintosh — from a man who had followed Balboa's footsteps two months earlier.
Mr Winchester is impressively knowledgeable about all manner of things, from the tectonic plates that inexorably grind against each other beneath the Pacific's waves to the steamer duck paddling furiously away in Patagonia (although sloppy editing has the duck paddling at 20 knots on one page and a more believable 12 on another).
Most of all, Mr Winchester writes in a way guaranteed to lure the reader on to the most improbable journeys.
Who else would follow a lump of iron ore from Mount Newman in Western Australia all the way to a Japanese smelter and on to the Nissan showrooms in California?
Or take a white Rolls Royce into Los Angeles gangland to interview Raul (‘Pinky’) Estoban — who gave story and photographs in return for being allowed to drive the car himself?
Or persuade the operators of a slow train to Ulan Bator to put his Beatles cassette on the public-address system?
Whether all this adds up to Mr Winchester's ‘inchoate oneness’, scheduled to mature in a generation or so, is open to doubt.
Mr Winchester predictably proves his case for part of the Pacific rim, from Japan round to California, but not for the whole circumference — and certainly not for the islands dotted in the Basin, despite the charming Western Samoan girl who takes his bags at Los Angeles airport and quotes Robert Louis Stevenson to him.
Proper proof, of course, would catapult Mr Winchester into the company of ponderous scholars; one suspects that he (and his readers) would be happier if he remained simply one of literature's best travel writers.
East European poetry
Noisy witness
THE POETRY OF PERESTROIKA.
Translated by Carol Rumens and Richard McKane.
Iron Press; 128 pages; £4.99
CHILD OF EUROPE.
Edited by Michael March.
Penguin Books; 254 pages; £6.99
IN THE Soviet Union, poetry is at the centre of everyday life in a way that the West would find inconceivable.
It has a large, popular audience; books and magazines sell in their hundreds of thousands; it is a communal witness to the truth.
And this has always been the case.
‘The Poetry of Perestroika’ is an anthology of poems that were written, or published for the first time, during the period when the bureaucratic grip was gradually loosened.
Many are concerned with the Soviet Union's place in the scheme of things; with the poets' sense of revulsion at what a nation could have done to itself; with an intense probing of the values of nationhood and nationality.
These poets are trying to speak for the lost generations, condemned forever to inarticulacy; and to speak aloud about simple things that they had been forbidden even to think about.
Unfortunately, the very fact that poetry has a central role in Soviet life means that much of it is conservative in form and predictable in content.
The Soviet poet, as a voice of the people, is expected to respond to public events — and noisily if necessary.
Even the best of poets reach for their pens when something important happens in the world.
In ‘The Tale of the Turnip’, Yevgeny Yevtushenko writes about the virtual annexation of Russia by capitalist influences under the guise of ‘humanitarian aid’; Andrei Voznesensky laments the bloodshed in Tbilisi in ‘Candles and Tanks.’
Less predictable is the discovery that younger Russian poets also write the kind of private, introspective verse that is supposed to be peculiarly western — Polina Ivanovna's ‘No one 's here’ is a good example of that.
What is never in doubt is the Russian poet's belief that he has an audience to address, and one, moreover, that is ready and willing to listen.
Time and again, these poets seem to be carrying, in the very tones of their voices, the burdens of the history and the suffering of the Soviet Union and its peoples.
These words by Bulot Okhudzhava, from a poem entitled ‘A poet has no rivals in fate’(1988), sum up the Russian poet's vision of any individual:
When he reaches the end of his time
And his soul flies into the shadows,
When the field has been crossed, the deed done,
You must decide what his life was.
Whether bitter or sweet, whether holy
Or ravaged by war, ripped in two,
What was his, is now yours.
All yours.
Dedicated to you.
‘Child of Europe’ is an anthology of poems from the post-war generation of East European poets, many of whom have not been translated into English before.
The outstanding voices here are Tomasz Jastrun from Poland, whose short, often sinister poems from the martial-law years, a time ‘many centuries ago and yesterday’, make the reader uncomfortably aware that ‘what terrifies in the face of death is the fact that almost nothing has happened’; and Gojko Djogo from Yugoslavia, whose work, steeped in folklore, has a robust, defiant humour.
This collection is a sampler only — there are no more than six poems from each poet — but it testifies to the way in which poetry can — and does — survive in the most unpropitious circumstances.
British theatre
A Toad for our time
THE lady on the left had queued all day for returns.
The one on the right had flown in from Finland.
A packed run of the ‘The Wind in the Willows’ at the National Theatre is drawing to a close, but it is clear that Alan Bennett has launched a new Christmas tradition in London.
As Toad might say, his version is extensively refurbished and complete with every modern convenience: the finest show on the river.
Kenneth Grahame, the man who gave the world this masterpiece in 1908, was an escapist.
His tale was a flight from a strained marriage into a dream world where sex did not intrude, and from a City career into an Edwardian idyll.
Business, free trade and comparative advantage belonged firmly on the other side of the Wild Wood.
Rat, Badger and Mole would not have been seen dead with The Economist: Mr Toad might have flaunted it unread on the hall table.
For Toad had the dreadful whiff of commerce about him.
His vulgarity offended the code of his tweedy circle.
He abused his inheritance, behaved extravagantly, and nearly got his comeuppance from the weasels — a violent proletariat who squatted in his house while he was doing time for car theft.
Luckily, his companions rallied round to beat these oiks back into cringing servitude — the cudgel being the only language such types understand.
Mr Toad became a paragon of self-effacement.
Or did he?
Small wonder that this plot is barely discernible in modern performances of ‘Toad of Toad Hall’, the play that A.A. Milne wrote of ‘The Wind in the Willows’ in 1930.
The class-parable means much less to most Britons 60 years on.
And Milne's version was too cuddly and childish in any case.
It was high time for a fresh interpretation.
Mr Bennett has provided one.
His equivalent of Edwardian leisured escapism is today's green movement.
Railways are good.
Motor cars are bad.
Economic progress is deeply suspect.
Toad.
But Rat, I am going to show you the World.
Rat.
I do not want to see the World.
From what I have seen of it so far, it has very little to recommend it.
Everybody doing things, getting somewhere.
Toad.
You mean the rat race?
A nice riposte.
But what finally lures Rat into a caravan trip is Toad's promise of the landscape that every nimby commuter dreams of —‘the England of heath and common and hedgerow, green roads and ancient tracks.’
Meanwhile the lurking weasels are no longer a lower-class mob, but slick property developers intent on turning Toad Hall into a fully integrated leisure complex.
‘The horror.
The horror!’ groans Badger.
The four heroes are modernised, too.
Toad is now more Bedales than Eton, more Groucho's than the Turf.
Mole is an Alan Bennett.
Badger is a retired schoolmaster, rather short on gravitas.
Rat remains his dapper, timeless self.
All are more complicated than in 1908, given to emotions such as jealousy that the original riverbankers never knew.
They even succumb, in the end, to the charms of a girl, which Grahame would have winced at.
The National Theatre's production is memorably staged.
Its set is a mechanised top hat, with road or river running round its rim, while the crown falls to become the countryside or corkscrews upwards to reveal the womblike houses of Rat, Mole, or Badger.
Mr Bennett's script is deft, making an actor's use of the rambling tale's much loved situations and pantomime moments.
But the script is ultimately too spare to do justice to the book.
Mr Bennett has bravely included the ‘piper at the gates of dawn’, the chapter when Rat and Mole come into the presence of Pan, the ultimate environmental deity.
It does not work because the emotion and atmosphere in the rest of the play have been too slight to support it.
In short, this is a fine ‘Wind in the Willows’ for the 1990s; but neither Mr Bennett nor Mr Milne has written the stage version for all time.
If they could not, can anyone?
Australian jazz
Home-brewed
ARE non-American jazz players more or less doomed to imitation?
‘Beyond El Rocco’, a film by an Australian, Kevin Lucas, surveys the history of modern jazz down under.
El Rocco was Sydney's top jazz club in the 1950s, an atmospheric dive which dispensed both the worst coffee and the most daring music in town.
By the rigid conventions of its time, as one habituée recalls, it was ‘a den of iniquity’, with a clientele ‘fascinated, intrigued and slightly terrified’ by the radical sound of bebop.
In stuffy Sydney, modern jazz made you feel liberated, or better yet, ‘hip’— possessing, as the film says, ‘esoteric knowledge not shared by the mainstream.’
But however enthusiastically they cultivated this aura, Australians were bound to feel themselves second-class citizens.
According to one, ‘At El Rocco we were middle class…white Anglo-Saxon Protestants, pretending to be black Americans…
We can never get it as good as the black people do, 'cause it's their music.’
The 1960s saw some hectic Australian searching for a music that was ‘ours’, not ‘theirs’.
Some plugged into the energy and popularity of rock 'n' roll; others borrowed techniques from contemporary classical music.
Groups became not merely bands, but ‘ensembles’, deploying electronics, synthesisers and, in one case, something called ‘crossover music theatre’.
Furthest out, the leader of ‘Freak Out’ wanted his music ‘to throw away all conventional attitudes and conventional modes of playing.’
Commercially, this led to disaster.
In the 1970s Australian jazz experienced the same calamitous slump that afflicted the music generally.
The film shows a reversal of fortune only towards the end of the decade, as the rock culture waned and jazz began to be studied in conservatoires.
Australian jazz in the 1980s was varied but rigorous; less concerned with baring one's soul at all costs than, as one woman saxophonist puts it, ‘achieving a good standard of playing’.
But the essential spirit of adventure is still present too, in a quest for a jazz style that reflects the signal multi-cultural character of Australia.
One musician asserts that ‘it's silly for us to look at overseas models’; another wonders ‘if Australians understand what their own musical traditions are’.
Increasingly there are attempts to incorporate Asian and African elements, along with a sense of the Australian landscape itself.
Is it jazz?
Its roots can be traced to the heady sounds of El Rocco; but ‘Beyond El Rocco’ demonstrates that much of the inspiration of Australian jazz now comes from Australians themselves.
AMERICAN SURVEY
Airports
Unloved
DALLAS
PINPOINTING a tiny airport in Dallas as an ‘island of non-competition’, Senator Robert Dole wants to repeal a quirky law that bars direct flights from there to his home state of Kansas.
He hopes to drum up the support of sympathetic congressmen who blame the law for high fares.
The Wright amendment, named after a former speaker of the House, Jim Wright, permits flights leaving Dallas's Love Field to fly only to cities in Texas and four neighbouring states.
Bizarre travel patterns result.
Dallasites can slash fares to San Francisco in half by hopping south to Houston and proceeding on to California.
Business travellers in Wichita, Kansas, often save $300 by driving three hours south to Tulsa, in Oklahoma, and catching a flight to Dallas.
Bargain hunters can book two round-trip tickets, say Dallas-Oklahoma City and Oklahoma City-Chicago, rather than fly direct from Dallas.
Mr Wright's law was passed in 1979 to ensure that the newer and bigger Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport would thrive (he represented Fort Worth).
It has: the expansive airport on the north Texas plains is the world's second busiest — 50m passengers passed through last year.
Love Field, just 15 minutes from central Dallas, was cited as one of the most under-used airports in a recent federal study.
Traffic has continued to shrink even though the city of Dallas repaved a runway and built a new control tower.
Southwest Airlines, the only commercial airline serving Love Field, cannot offer its cheap, short-hop service to those who want to fly over Louisiana, Arkansas, Oklahoma or New Mexico.
Repealers see the Wright amendment as another post-deregulation rule that helps the big airlines get bigger.
The Kansas attorney-general has sued the federal government, arguing that the law bars free access to ports.
Colorado airport officials recently passed a resolution denouncing it.
The Department of Transportation, once headed by Mrs Dole, has commissioned a study.
The Dallas-Fort Worth airport board has allies, though.
One study estimates it would lose 6m passengers a year to Love Field.
So American Airlines, which dominates DFW, has threatened to cancel its expansion plans there.
The country's largest carrier is not keen to face new battles at home when it is trying to spread its wings overseas, by buying TWA's slots at Heathrow.
Anti-noise protesters near Love Field have also squeaked in opposition.
Last year, the Texas delegation in the House sided with American Airlines against repeal and successfully blocked the relevant bill.
Mr Dole hopes this year to slip a repeal measure through the Senate attached to another bill, but it is too early to tell whether he has enough support.
Only Southwest Airlines, sitting squarely in the middle of the controversy, takes no side.
It has cornered many lucrative short-hop routes.
And if Love Field is opened up, American and other carriers are expected to swarm in, giving Southwest stiff competition.
As old as you feel
SOLDIERS GROVE, WISCONSIN
SINCE 1970 America's old folks have become richer and richer, mostly because of a steadily increasing flow of federal dollars.
Nearly half of the budget now goes directly into their pockets through social security (pensions) and other transfers and welfare programmes.
With so much spare cash floating around, it was inevitable that industrious entrepreneurs would pop up to try to claim it for themselves.
Among some of the more senior citizens in Soldiers Grove, a tiny town (population 560) in western Wisconsin, the new market is for the oldest profession.
For the past two years, police say, prostitutes have been doing a lively business in the Golden Acres apartments — a group of flats filled with retired old men.
The ladies' timing is impeccable: usually they turn up on the day that social-security cheques are due to arrive in the post.
This month some of them were hauled before a local judge and charged with exchanging sex for cash and, in some cases, durable goods — like cars.
Few people in Soldiers Grove believe the story.
But the police have two eye-witnesses to support their charges against the women, whom they describe as ‘sporadically employed’.
Both of the witnesses — one aged 82, the other 73 — admit to having paid the prostitutes about $2,000 (at $100 per visit) for services rendered in 1989 and 1990.
Still, the case will be tough to prove.
Though apparently quite spry, the old men's memories are not what they once were.
Asked for details of the transactions, one replied: ‘I don't remember exactly what all took place.’
¡Hola LA!
LOS ANGELES
THE contest to represent the first district on the Los Angeles Board of County Supervisors hardly sounds like national news.
However, the election of Gloria Molina on February 19th is a big milestone for  California's enormous, but politically inactive, Latino (Hispanic) population.
Overnight Mrs Molina, a firebrand, has become one of the most powerful Latino politicians in America.
Los Angeles is the most populous county in America — bigger than 42 states.
Latinos account for a third of its 9m odd residents.
Yet Mrs Molina becomes the first Latino to sit on the county's governing board since 1872 — and the first woman ever.
The election itself came only after a decade of political squabbling.
Latino politicians claimed that the district boundaries discriminated against them.
Last year a judge forced Los Angeles to redraw its districts to create a special Latino one, based on areas with an especially high concentration of Spanish surnames.
There is now talk that more such districts will be created.
Mrs Molina, a Los Angeles city councilwoman, finished first in a January primary with 35% of the vote.
Her opponent in the run-off was Art Torres, a state senator who was once tipped to become California's first Latino governor.
Mr Torres's campaign was endorsed by a flock of top state politicians and the unions.
He also raised $1.2m — twice as much as Mrs Molina.
Mrs Molina, who won 55% of the vote in the run-off, triumphed by painting herself as an outsider and a reformer.
Mr Torres's two drunk-driving arrests did not help his cause.
For all her talk of shaking up the town's bureaucracy, Mrs Molina will have to learn some of her opponent's conciliatory skills to win a better deal for her constituents.
And political apathy reigns: despite the significance of the election, fewer than a quarter of Mrs Molina's constituents bothered to vote in the run-off.
Admiral Watkins's leaking energy policy
THE energy secretary found out this week what it is like to be stomped on by Washington's green lobby.
No sooner had James Watkins released what he called the ‘first edition’ of his national energy strategy (NES) on February 20th than the verdicts were delivered — in nice sound bites.
Too much on production, not enough on conservation.
A tragedy, not a strategy.
Like giving whisky to an alcoholic.
A grab-bag of missed opportunities and misplaced priorities…
Mr Watkins, a retired admiral, is unlikely to be upset by noisy environmentalists.
He has experience in wresting success from public-relations disasters.
In 1987 he took over Ronald Reagan's bickering AIDS commission after its previous chairman resigned in a huff.
Thanks to deft chairmanship and bluntness, he drew from it a respectable report that won praise for its forthrightness.
He has tried to work similar magic at the unwieldy Energy Department.
He has, for instance, been more open than his predecessors about the tens of billions of dollars that will have to be spent to clean up the department's shambolic nuclear-weapons plants.
And he has attempted to be equally frank in fashioning the NES, a task that has been spread over 18 months and umpteen public hearings.
The attempt has failed.
Until last autumn most energy lobbyists were guardedly positive.
Then the Energy Department went quiet, and word slipped out that the White House was gutting most of its proposed conservation measures while strengthening the emphasis on increased domestic production.
The lop-sided result is what riles the greens.
Mr Watkins can say that he sympathises with green views on the need for conservation but has been overruled by the troika that presides over George Bush's domestic policy: John Sununu, the chief of staff, Richard Darman, the budget director, and Michael Boskin, the chief economic adviser.
He will not be the first cabinet secretary to sell this line of being a decent person savaged by a three-headed Cerberus in the White House.
It makes a good story.
It is also a blatant bid to have it both ways.
Mr Watkins has after all signed and presented the NES.
If he really disliked what the beastly troika had done to it, he could have resigned — or, perhaps more effectively, threatened to.
Besides, the Cerberus has two good arguments on its side.
The first is tactical.
The administration's energy bill is bound to be heavily amended in Congress.
Mr Darman felt burnt by last year's clean-air act.
The bill put forward by President Bush in May 1989 went as far as he thought wise in loading new burdens on to industry.
Yet Congress merrily increased the load.
Mr Darman concluded that in future the administration should start tougher — even if that meant antagonising greens.
The second goes to the nub of energy policy: its economics.
Both Mr Boskin's recent annual economic report and the NES cogently make the case for relying on market forces in energy policy, with the government intervening only when prices are sending obviously wrong signals — usually because they do not reflect such externalities as environmental effects.
The economic report dismisses claims that America is unusually profligate in its energy use.
And it observes that the use of regulation or taxes instead of the market creates inefficiencies and slows economic growth.
Hence the thrust of the NES: leave it to market-driven energy prices to create incentives to conserve, while junking many regulatory restraints on oil, gas and nuclear production.
Half right.
The trouble is that governments have always intervened in energy, usually with a bias in favour of production.
Daniel Yergin's recent book ‘The Prize’ shows that oil has for decades been cosseted with tax breaks and government subsidies.
Mr Bush, a former Texan oilman, must remember such practices well.
Last year's budget agreement included new goodies for oil.
And if, as the NES proposes, the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska is opened to drilling (lobbyists give this a 50–50 chance of passing through Congress), the government will ensure that the drilling happens.
Nuclear energy, above all, tests market enthusiasts.
Mr Watkins, once a commander of a nuclear submarine, has always been a believer in nuclear power.
So has Mr Sununu, who as governor of New Hampshire fought a long battle with the greens to open the Seabrook nuclear plant.
They share the conventional wisdom of the nuclear lobby that what has stopped America's nuclear industry in its tracks is what the NES calls an ‘impossibly cumbersome nuclear licensing process’— of a kind that pro-nuclear countries like France do not allow.
Hence the proposal for a single-licence procedure, allowing no further challenges after a plant has been approved by the regulators and built.
The market has spoken
No doubt there is too much red tape and lawyering in the nuclear business — as in so much of American life.
But red tape is not the only or even the main problem.
It is just as likely that the market, left to itself, would not finance or build nuclear-power stations, not because of the greens but because of their poor rate of return.
Nor can the market get rid of or store nuclear waste.
Tellingly, the publicly owned Tennessee Valley Authority is the only utility to have expressed interest recently in nuclear power.
Mr Watkins is said to be keener on education than energy — indeed the NES includes plans to improve science education.
But if his NES is to survive the lobbying in Congress, both he and the White House beast may need educating themselves.
Faith in the paramountcy of the market must be consistent to be persuasive.
The Mafia and garbage
Refuse you cannot offer
NEW YORK
MOST New Yorkers are cynical about current efforts to clean mobsters out of their city's waste-disposal business — and with good reason.
Along with the building and waterfront trades, garbage collection is a stronghold of the organised-crime syndicates whose nefarious activities add so much to the cost of doing business in New York.
The Justice Department faces a struggle as it seeks at secret meetings to persuade big national operators like Browning-Ferris and Laidlaw Industries to bid for commercial garbage-collection contracts.
Household and public rubbish is carted away by the city's relatively efficient Sanitation Department.
But New York's 250,000 commercial concerns have to contract with private hauliers to have their rubbish removed.
Maximum rates are set by New York's Department of Consumer Affairs, but the city's 450 private garbage-disposal firms decline to compete with one another.
Grumbles from businessmen about bad service, extortionate prices and victimisation for trying to switch garbage collectors have provoked at least eight government investigations since the mid-1950s into racketeering in the city's waste-disposal industry.
None has loosened criminal control, though crooked operators are periodically sent to jail.
Two of the most notorious, Angelo Paccione and Anthony Vulpis, are serving 12-year terms for illegal dumping.
Only Salvatore Spinelli, a lawyer who represents many of the city's private hauliers, is able to say with a straight face that intimidation is ‘a myth’.
Even big companies fear that the safety of their equipment and their employees will be at risk if they seek waste-disposal contracts in the city.
The same fear sustains extortionate bills in some other businesses.
At Manhattan's Fulton fish market in the shadow of Brooklyn Bridge, fishmongers pay about $1.40 to have 100lb of fish carried across South Street — the same price they would pay to have it carried all the way from the Gulf of Mexico.
The influence of the Genovese crime family in this $2 billion-a-year market is said to date back 70 years.
It has survived several challenges by federal investigators.
The latest is led by Frank Wohl, a court-appointed monitor.
In a report last summer, Mr Wohl said the market was dominated by an atmosphere of violence and extortion that significantly increased the retail price of fish in the city.
Independent transport companies that have sought to win business away from existing contractors in the Fulton market have had their lorries damaged and their workers hammered with loading hooks.
Although crowds have gathered to watch these beatings, the police are never able to find anybody who has seen anything.
The building trades are also riddled with extortionate practices, but here the influence of the Mafia is probably exaggerated.
Tradesmen presenting inflated bills have no interest in countering the popular belief that slow payers tend to end up in the Hudson River wearing cement slippers.
A particularly notorious den of restrictive, and extortionate, practices is the Jacob Javits Convention Centre, where the Democratic party will hold its convention next year to nominate its presidential candidate.
Exhibitors at trade shows in the convention centre complain that they are bullied into hiring tradesmen to perform such simple tasks as hanging a picture.
Labour costs at the centre are the highest in the country: $78.50 an hour of straight-time for an electrician, compared with $45 an hour at a comparable centre in Los Angeles and $28 in Atlanta.
Workers at the convention centre are said to take longer to complete a task than tradesmen anywhere west of Poland.
Exhibitors also complain they have to put up with the theft of their merchandise, and suspect their bills are inflated by ‘ghost’ workers, who are paid but do no work.
Like the rip-offs in rubbish collection and fish transport, these charges are under investigation.
New Yorkers confidently expect the inquiry to turn up nothing.
Anti-Americanism in Europe
From on high
IN THE words of George Bush, Americans are doing ‘the hard work of freedom’.
So why is the rest of the world so ungrateful?
The Gulf war has not reduced the superciliousness of many Europeans about America one bit; if anything the reverse.
The yanks are castigated for their heartless reaction to the deaths of civilians in Baghdad (‘the manner of the American military's response betrays something about its values,’ opined Britain's Independent on Sunday) and mocked for the fear of terrorism that has kept them away from Europe — thus cruelly hurting Europe's tourist business.
Theo Sommer, the editor of the influential German weekly Die Zeit, captured the intellectual mood in his country when he wrote that the Gulf war was a ‘last, almost spastic twitching of US supremacy.’
In France, Jean-Pierre Chevènement, who resigned as defence minister shortly after the outbreak of war, accused the United States a few years ago of ‘the organised cretinisation of our people.’
Anti-Americanism is a slippery concept.
It is easily confused with opposition to particular American policies — rather as McCarthy used to accuse his enemies of ‘unAmerican activities’.
The real thing goes beyond political disagreement and comes in two flavours: a distaste for American culture, and a systematic resistance to the exercise of American power.
Polls suggest that cultural snobbery is largely confined to intellectuals.
But they have been sneering at America since Sidney Smith, François Mauriac and George Grosz and will go on doing so long after Harold Pinter is gone.
Such people hate McDonalds, Coca-Cola, ‘Dallas’, Rambo and other items of American popular culture largely because they are so…popular.
Ordinary people are more mature.
In Germany since the early 1960s, opinion polls have consistently shown around 50% of people saying that they ‘like Americans’— whatever the prevailing political climate.
In Britain, attitudes to American foreign policy have fluctuated, but polls have always shown warm feelings towards the United States as a nation.
Since the 1960s the same has been true of France.
In Germany, recent surveys have shown 75% support for the war.
A week after the outbreak of war, one poll showed 85% of Germans opposing ‘anti-American trends’ among protesters.
In France, a poll taken around the same time showed 75% approval for the Americans in the Gulf.
In February 69% of Britons told pollsters they were satisfied ‘with the way the American government is handling the situation in the Gulf’— up from 49% the previous month.
But the existence of a quiet pro-American majority in Britain, France and Germany is not proof against big changes in attitudes to America's role in the world.
In Britain both the Vietnam war and the Reagan years saw remarkable collapses of faith in the good sense of American leadership.
In May 1977, over 50% of Britons expressed confidence ‘in the ability of the United States to deal wisely with world problems.’
By May 1984, after America had invaded Grenada and withdrawn from Lebanon, this figure had declined to less than 20%.
By contrast, the French were far keener on President Reagan than the Germans or the British.
In 1984 opinion polls showed that Ronald Reagan would have been decisively defeated had he been running for re-election in Britain.
In France he would have won easily.
The French were impressed by the image of a resurgent and technologically advanced America.
The Nouvel Observateur concluded that ‘even socialists think that America is chic.’
Recent years have seen a revival of popular faith in America among Britons and Germans.
President Bush has enjoyed rising approval ratings, and communism's appeal has collapsed as fast as communism.
But Europeans are increasingly keen (1992 and all that) to see themselves as cultural pioneers and not to emulate the United States.
A recent poll showed that only 2% of Germans regarded the United States as a suitable model for their newly united nation — Switzerland topped the pops.
Intriguingly, the experience of the mid-1980s suggests that the pursuit of an independent line in Europe is likely to lessen fear and mistrust of the United States.
In 1984 Britain and Germany were quaking under the American nuclear umbrella.
Some 50% of Britons and 38% of Germans believed that Mr Reagan's foreign policy had increased the dangers of war in Europe.
Only a quarter of the French believed this, and yet their government had been engaged in a series of clashes with the Reagan administration on issues ranging from star wars to Nicaragua.
More friction meant less tension — a lesson for the new world order?
Arizona politics
Mud wrestling
PHOENIX
WHEN a lightning storm stopped the transmission of a televised debate between Arizona's two candidates for governor, Fife Symington and Terry Goddard, locals joked that even God was disgusted by Arizona politics.
A previous governor, Evan Mecham, was impeached and removed from office in 1988.
The state's two senators are both members of the ‘Keating Five’, under investigation by the Senate for peddling their influence.
A tenth of its state legislators may be indicted following a corruption sting.
And the current campaign for governor is mired in mud.
A good state to govern?
Surprisingly, yes.
The sting — known locally as ‘Operation Desert Shame’— is the most fun.
‘Tony Vincent’, supposedly a mobster from Las Vegas, offered various politicians inducements to help legalise casino gambling in the state.
His successes and failures are now collected on 200 video tapes, some of which have been shown on television.
‘You sure there isn't a camera?’ one state assemblyman asked nervously, before he pushed $55,000 in cash into his gym bag.
‘What's in it for me?’ was the favourite phrase of another.
‘Everyone has their price,’ was the excuse of a third.
Seven of the state's 90 legislators have been indicted (together with 11 lobbyists).
Phoenix gossip reckons that another five politicians may soon be charged.
Another investigation, this time into lobbying on behalf of chiropractors, could thin the legislature's ranks still further.
Even before these upsets, Arizona was in the political dog house because its voters decided to cancel the Martin Luther King holiday.
This offended blacks and caused the removal of the 1993 Super Bowl to another state.
One politician argues that ‘Arizonans have broken through a shame barrier; they now just find it all funny rather than sad.’
Bumper stickers proclaim ‘Honk if you haven't been indicted’.
However, even the most fun-loving Arizonans are tiring of the governor's battle.
In November Mr Symington, a Republican developer, narrowly beat his Democratic opponent, Mr Goddard, at the ballot box, but he won only 49.7% of the vote.
Arizona law demands that the victor receive over 50%, so a run-off will be held on February 26th.
The November campaign was, if anything, a bit too earnest, with education the main issue.
The run-off has been nastier.
Mr Goddard, a former mayor of Phoenix who had been expected to win the November race easily, first lowered the tone by comparing Mr Symington to Charles Keating, the financier at the heart of the Lincoln Savings and Loan disaster.
Mr Symington's campaign was mildly cleaner until a recent commercial that finished with a picture of Mr Goddard being locked behind bars.
The irony is that, unlike many Arizona politicians, Mr Goddard and Mr Symington are respectable citizens.
Mr Symington was on the board of a savings and loan, as Mr Goddard's advertisements allege, but he resigned in 1984 when the thrift was still in good shape.
One explanation for all the flying muck is that, after such a long campaign, the candidates (whose views are similar on many issues) simply ran out of things to say.
In the television debate Mr Goddard sounded like a petulant school master who was sure that a pupil had done something wrong but couldn't prove it.
The odds are that barely one in three voters will bother to cast a ballot on February 26th.
That should favour Mr Symington because there are 90,000 more registered Republicans than Democrats.
It remains a race worth winning.
Rob Melnick, at Arizona State University, reckons that the economy will soon pick up again.
Acres of empty office space should attract investors.
Despite its reputation as a rest home for elderly Chicagoans, Arizona's average age is below the national average, and its education standards are higher.
Moreover, simply by being there the new governor will add a little stability to Arizona's politics.
Over the past 12 years the state has had eight governors.
There has also been a high turnover of state Senate leaders, House speakers and even local newspaper publishers.
Arizona, according to one columnist, E.J. Montini, ‘is like the kid who stole his parents' car and is out careering on to other people's lawns, crashing into garbage cans and running red lights.’
Providing he can install a little discipline, the next governor may also be able to take the credit for cleaning up Arizona's politics.
One political consultant, Bill Jamieson, reckons that a new wave of young and unvenal state politicians has just arrived in Phoenix.
They claim as their spiritual leader Bruce Babbitt, Arizona's talented and common-sensical former governor who ran for president in 1988 and now works as a lawyer in Phoenix.
New world order: What's new?
Which world?
Whose orders?
WASHINGTON, DC
THE inter-agency group charged with developing a post-war American foreign policy has an almost impossible job.
Inevitably it has had to lard its work with contingencies and question marks.
This much, however, seems clear: George Bush will insist that American policy reflects his belief in a ‘new world order.’
The hardest task for his subordinates is to decide what the phrase (now often shortened to NWO and not to be confused with the airline that used to be called Northwest Orient) might mean.
Beyond saying that he sees a world where aggression is deterred and disputes settled peacefully, Mr Bush has not offered a definition.
Yet, if nothing else, the phrase shows how American foreign policy has been changed by the war in the Gulf.
A year ago, when the Soviet retreat from Eastern Europe seemed almost guaranteed, American strategists saw the prospect of a series of global partnerships.
One was to be with Japan (the very term ‘global partnership’ was coined for the American-Japanese relationship).
One was to be with Western Europe, led (pretty explicitly) by a united Germany.
State Department planners saw neither of these partnerships as necessarily limited geographically.
The Americans have long been eager for the Japanese to help Latin America's economies, and mused that the Europeans might want to shoulder a degree of responsibility for Africa.
When Mr Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev met in Washington in June 1990, a third partnership seemed possible.
Once the Soviet Union allowed pluralism in Eastern Europe, America was prepared to look for areas where Soviet help could come in handy.
James Baker, the secretary of state, told Congress recently that his review of Middle East policy convinced him long before the invasion of Kuwait that the ‘old view that we somehow did not want the Soviets involved is a mistake’.
How have the past six months altered this picture?
The main change has been in attitudes to Japan and Western Europe.
Their view of the seriousness of Iraq's action, and the reaction it demanded, was different enough from Mr Bush's to scupper talk of global partnerships and replace it by what might be called contingent leadership.
Mr Baker has spoken of the renewed ‘need for American leadership’.
Mr Bush says much the same.
Cheerleaders of the new policy, like Charles Krauthammer, a columnist, speak with approval of the new ‘unipolar’ world — in which ‘our best hope is in American strength and will, unashamedly laying down the rules of world order and being prepared to enforce them.’
This ‘leadership’, however, is not that of a gallant subaltern, charging the machine guns while his platoon has a smoke in the dug-out.
It is leadership only if America is convinced that others will follow — that is the contingency.
They can follow in kind, like Britain is doing in the Gulf, or they can follow in cash, like Japan and Germany.
But they must follow somehow.
Domestic politics dictates that.
The past six months have made it clear that latent isolationism can be inflamed if it is felt that the allies are shirking.
This is especially the case in hard economic times.
So the domestic political and economic cost of go-it-alone adventurism is one constraint on America's freedom of action overseas.
A second is the Soviet Union.
America's reaction to the Soviet peace plan for the Gulf was strikingly polite.
Mr Bush spoke of his ‘appreciation’ for Mr Gorbachev's communication of his plan.
His press secretary even said that the Soviet Union was still a superpower — not at all what the cheerleaders think.
A senior White House official recently said that the days when Soviet foreign policy was ideologically driven are gone.
That gives America opportunities to work with the Soviets that it did not have in the past.
At the same time, both the White House and the State Department recognise that Soviet foreign policy will be driven by Soviet national interests, and that these will not always coincide with America's.
Nobody is starry-eyed about a world condominium with Moscow, but nobody except some of the administration's conservative critics (who have had a field day trashing the Gorbachev plan for the Gulf) thinks the Russians can be ignored.
Colin Powell, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, put the matter most clearly (which is getting to be a habit) when he testified to Congress on February 19th.
He drew a distinction between what had changed — superpower rivalry defined by ideology — and what had not: Soviet military power.
The Soviet Union, he said, was the only country capable of destroying America in less than 30 minutes.
He went on to say that another enduring reality lies in America's interests across the Atlantic — expanding the definition of across-the-Atlantic to include the Middle East, both because of its considerable economic resources and because it was home to some of ‘our closest friends’.
And he stressed American interests across the Pacific, home to another clutch of friends.
Save for a mention of the enduring reality of ‘the unknown’, that was it — which begs a question.
The ‘new world’ that Mr Bush seeks to order is quite small.
It includes Europe, the Middle East, parts of Asia, Canada and Mexico.
Mexico apart (and for domestic reasons no American government can ignore Mexico), the administration is not much bothered with what goes on in Latin America.
It will vaguely push to expand trade with South American countries, but that is about it.
The same lack of interest marks America's policy towards Africa.
There is a sense that things are heading in the right direction in South Africa, and that is all.
India?
Pakistan?
Indonesia?
Never heard of them.
Leading where others follow
Perhaps the half-a-world that Mr Bush wants ordered is quite big enough.
But how the ordering is to be done remains an open question.
If every confrontation requires the dispatch of half a million troops half way round the globe, the NWO will have failed.
In the case of the Gulf, cover for America's use of force was provided by the United Nations, and this was useful.
That, needless to say, is one reason why America cannot ignore the veto-wielding Soviet Union.
But many in the administration remain sceptical about how useful the United Nations will prove to be.
For instance, Defence Department officials doubt that UN cover for the use of force could easily be obtained again.
Some officials have spoken of getting NATO to spread its wings, though they might have a hard time persuading the Canadians and Europeans of that.
But in the NWO America will always have to persuade someone: that, despite the fashion for unipolarity, seems likely to be its central fact.
Take post-war policy in the Gulf.
If America wants to bring a reconstruction bank into being, it will have to convince the Saudis and other Gulf states to cough up most of the money.
If it maintains its present determination to keep little more than a naval force in the region, it will have to convince others (the Egyptians?
The United Nations?) to provide a peace-keeping force on the ground.
If it is to make good on Mr Bush's hope that it may be possible to ‘settle the conflicts that divide the Arabs from Israel’, it will have to convince the Israelis that they can be secure even shorn of the occupied territories.
This is but a particular example of a new truth.
America is fated by politics and economics at home to find willing backers abroad for its plans; it is doomed by continuing Soviet military might to have an eye always on Moscow.
It is not the unfettered giant that, tautly ready for a fierce ground war in the Gulf, it may appear to be.
ASIA
Thailand
North-east passage
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN ROI ET
THERE are two Thailands.
One, found almost exclusively in Bangkok and its suburbs, is the product of rapid industrialisation; its inhabitants enjoy incomes only a little below those of the  Portuguese .
Their rural cousins, who still make up 75% of the population, scratch a living from the soil.
The growing discrepancy is starting to make the villagers despair that any of the city's wealth will trickle down to them.
Looked at as a whole, Thailand has done well.
According to the World Bank, the proportion of Thais living below the poverty line fell from 59% in 1960 to 26% in 1986 and, with the three years of double-digit economic growth that followed, must have fallen much further since.
By the usual measures of third-world misery — infant mortality, unsafe water, calorie intake, illiteracy — Thais live at least as well as, if not better than, people in other countries with Thailand's GNP per person of about $1,000.
But Thailand is not a whole.
Esarn (the north-east) is the poorest bit of the country.
The Esarn diet includes such delicacies as tadpoles and joodjee beetles (found in buffalo dung).
They taste a lot better when you are hungry.
During the Vietnam war, Esarn had its own communist insurgency.
The fighting did not end until 1980.
Although many people in Esarn are poor, most have the bare necessities.
But they are aware of their relative poverty.
Now that electricity has been brought to nearly all the villages, the inhabitants can cluster around a television set and see how much better things are in Bangkok.
A comparison between life in the capital and in Roi Et, in the centre of Esarn, is startling.
Bangkok has a doctor for every 722 people; Roi Et can produce one for every 23,681 people, on a par with the Central African Republic.
More than 70% of Thailand's bank deposits are held by residents of Bangkok.
Most people in Roi Et have no money to deposit and cannot borrow from banks because they lack collateral.
The alternative is money-lenders who charge 6–10% a month.
The way to escape from the poverty of Esarn is to find work in Bangkok.
Parents usually keep their children at home for a couple of years after they have completed their six years of compulsory education.
When they are 15 or 16 they are sent off to work as building labourers, clothing makers or worse.
(Migrants from Roi Et specialise in driving taxis, usually lethally.)
If they are lucky, workers receive the legal minimum wage of 100 baht ($4) a day.
Many do not.
After a few years of gutting chickens for 14 hours a day, they are often thrown out of work by younger and cheaper competitors.
It is not only labour that the economic power of Bangkok is sucking out of the north-east.
Over the past 30 years the region's forest cover has fallen from 42% to less than 15%.
During the insurgency villagers were encouraged to chop down trees to deny shelter to the communists.
Now many villagers are being expelled from land they cleared.
This land, and other former forest land, is being planted with eucalyptus to supply pulp mills.
Then there is salt mining.
Salt water is pumped up from deep below the ground.
The salt crystallises and is carted away for use in soda-ash plants and glass-making.
The waste water is often dumped, making the surrounding land infertile.
Salt mining at the head of the Nam Siew river has made parts of the river twice as salty as the sea.
One result of environmental damage is the rise of peasant politics.
Esarn has 62 self-help organisations, most of which are in the business of agitation rather than welfare.
Activists have been shot in the towns of Buriram and Udon Thani.
In January policemen arrested the leaders of some farmers near the Cambodian border who are trying to save their land from eucalyptus plantations.
Bamrung Boonpanya, who helped to organise protests against the pollution of the Nam Siew river, says that trying to get the police to enforce the law was ‘like running after rats’.
The police are in the pay of the entrepreneurs doing the mining, he claims.
However that may be, the entrepreneurs do have powerful friends in Bangkok: the finance minister has an interest in the glass industry; the interior minister has an interest in soda ash.
Whenever talk turns to the government, the name of General Chavalit Yongchaiyudh comes up.
He is believed to be honest and is known for his involvement in the army-backed project for ‘Green Esarn’.
At the next election the general is expected to stand in Khon Kaen, in the heart of Esarn.
If he can convince the 19m north-easterners that he and his recently formed New Aspiration Party will give them a better deal, and he manages to form an electoral pact with the honest and popular governor of Bangkok, he could be on the way to becoming Thailand's next prime minister.
The joy of Chinese sex
FROM OUR CHINA CORRESPONDENT
IT MUST be the result of all that western decadence and spiritual pollution: the Chinese like sex.
The Shanghai Sex Sociological Research Centre, after questioning 23,000 people in 15 provinces, has concluded that 86% of Chinese approve of sex before marriage, 69% approve of extra-marital affairs, and more than 70% believe one purpose of sex is pleasure — not just, as Maoist traditionalists would have it, procreation and the dreary fulfilment of conjugal duty.
This should not surprise even the casual observer of China.
Miniskirts are now commonplace in Beijing, Shanghai and Shenzhen, and teenage couples (for whom pre-marital sex is no longer a rarity) canoodle publicly.
But the figures will still offend an instinctively puritanical government, and give ammunition to those who believe that the economic liberalism of the past decade is corrupting China's morals and weakening the family.
Actually, they have plenty of ammunition already.
The number of divorces, for example, rose to 750,000 in 1989, up from 440,000 five years earlier.
That is small compared with the number of marriages — 7.8m in 1984 and 9.3m in 1989 — but in Mao's day a divorce was considered an offence against socialism and so was almost impossible to obtain.
Moreover, prostitution and venereal disease, supposedly eliminated under Mao, are once again flourishing.
Officially reported cases of gonorrhoea, syphilis and other venereal diseases now number more than 375,000, which surely understates things.
Even the presence of AIDS, which the Chinese associate with the foreign wickedness of homosexuality, is now acknowledged.
So what should be done?
The State Council has launched a campaign against the ‘Seven Evils’: prostitution; pornography; the kidnapping and sale of women and children; the trafficking and use of drugs; gambling; swindling through superstitions; and triads (criminal societies).
The campaign is needed to fight what the People's Daily says is ‘a struggle between socialist and capitalist ideologies’.
But, as the Shanghai researchers discovered, some human urges respect no ideological boundaries.
Sri Lanka
Bad behaviour
FROM OUR SRI LANKA CORRESPONDENT
THE Mothers' Front is a new and potentially powerful human-rights organisation in Sri Lanka.
The government does not much care for it.
The defence minister, Ranjan Wijeratne, gave warning that a rally called in Colombo by the mothers would be violent.
He called for ‘democracy through good behaviour’, a maxim that could have come from the mouth of Chairman Mao.
In fact the rally, on February 19th, attended by 10,000 people, passed off peacefully, as the organisers had said it would.
Mr Wijeratne's warning, however, dissuaded thousands more people from attending.
The Mothers' Front is demanding information about more than 40,000 people it says have disappeared in the past few years.
The mothers, says Mr Wijeratne in what sounds like an unfeeling remark, should have paid more attention to what their children were doing.
The government is concerned that most of the disappearances are blamed on the security forces.
Nearly all of them took place in the central and southern parts of the island, where the Sinhalese are in the majority.
A violent uprising by a Marxist-nationalist group, the JVP, was effectively but brutally crushed in 1989–90.
Thousands of bystanders disappeared in the process.
The government cannot ignore the growing political clout of the security forces.
They would grow restive, perhaps even rebel, if the government allowed the human-rights movement to develop too fully.
Their message to the politicians seems to be, ‘We protected you from the JVP.
Now it is your turn to protect us.’
In the north and east, where the war with Tamil Tiger separatists continues, it is the army, rather than the government, that is taking the decisions.
A short-lived ceasefire broke down in January after army commanders demanded another chance to smash the Tigers.
President Ranasinghe Premadasa agreed, though he is said to have set a deadline for definite military results to be produced.
The army claims the Tigers are on the ropes.
The rebels replied on February 17th by killing 45 soldiers in an ambush on the northern coast where the army has some camps.
Farther north, in the Jaffna peninsula, where the rebels are strong, government aircraft have been bombing civilian areas.
Schools, temples and churches have been hit too many times in the past few weeks to be the victims of mistakes.
Many Tamils fear they are being softened up for another assault on Jaffna.
The authorities are said to take the view that the Gulf war will distract attention from civilian casualties in Jaffna.
Mr Wijeratne has suggested that civilians in the area — a million of them — should pack their bags and leave.
Few have the means or the inclination to do so.
Reports that occasionally emerge from independent sources in the north also criticise the Tigers for using civilians as cannon fodder, to try to win sympathy for their cause abroad.
On the part of both the government and the guerrillas, the behaviour is not very good for democracy.
Indonesia's Muslim dilemma
FROM OUR INDONESIA CORRESPONDENT
THE Javanese have a legendary fruit called the simalakama.
It kills your mother if you eat it and your father if you don't.
Indonesia's President Suharto, a good Javanese, may ruefully be recalling the legend these days as he ponders over what attitude to take about the Gulf war.
America, Japan and the other allies fighting Iraq provide the investment and aid money that supports Mr Suharto's ambitious development programmes.
On the other hand he does not want to jeopardise his shadowy courtship of Indonesia's 160m Muslims.
Well, maybe not 160m.
All Indonesians must have their chosen god stamped on their identity card.
(This precludes them from being irreligious communists.)
Some 90% choose Islam, but many chain-smoking, beer-drinking ‘ID-card Muslims’ are less than fanatical about their faith.
They are, however, almost universally cross about the bombing of their brethren in Iraq, the schooling ground for many of Indonesia's brightest Muslims.
(There is little love lost, on the other hand, for Kuwait, whose price-busting oil policy hit Indonesia and other producers.)
Whether or not they support Saddam Hussein's call for a holy war, there is a feeling that Islam should be solid for Iraq.
Add in the poor world's anti-Americanism and the mixture is potent: no one was very surprised that a bomb was planted in the American ambassador's residence in Jakarta soon after the war began.
The demonstrators against the war in the streets of the capital are using the weapon of Islamic solidarity to have a go at the western powers, and some are indirectly critical of Mr Suharto, who is assumed to be the West's friend.
The 69-year-old president is well aware of the potential of Islam as a political tool, and during his 25 years in power has done his best to regulate the influence of Muslim politicians.
Muslim political parties were involved in regional rebellions during the rule of President Sukarno in the 1950s.
By 1973 Mr Suharto had forced the Islamic parties into a single body — the United Development Party, whose leaders were carefully screened.
This screening proved so uncomfortable for the group's largest component, the Nahdlatul Ulama (NU) that, in 1984, it pulled out of competitive politics altogether.
The NU, a conservative, village-based organisation, turned to school-building and social work instead.
Mr Suharto has been tempting it back into his orbit by, for example, encouraging a Chinese business group to help it set up a bank, thus giving the NU's members a useful stake in the economic largesse that the government can dispense.
Golkar, Mr Suharto's own political grouping, has also done its bit to co-opt Islam.
Its coalition of bureaucrats, soldiers and other groups includes Muslim youth organisations and Islamic advisory councils.
The Muslim organisations that remain outside the fold, such as Muhammadiyah, an NU group with modernist ideas, dare not dabble in politics.
(Nevertheless, Mr Suharto's step-brother, Probosutedjo, recently gave a lecture to a Muhammadiyah conference in which he argued the need to re-elect the president in 1992.)
Not content even with this level of political castration, Mr Suharto has instructed the security forces to keep a close watch on what is said in mosques.
Preachers are paid to speak about the wisdom of Pancasila, the state philosophy.
The army stamps with efficiency on any uppity religious leaders.
Soldiers wiped out a village in south Sumatra's Lampung province in 1989 because a zealot was thought to be preaching fundamentalism (it has emerged he was just griping about land ownership).
With the lucrative business contracts that used to keep the generals happy being diverted to Mr Suharto's children, his military power-base is developing cracks, although so far they are barely perceptible.
If the army is going to be troublesome, Mr Suharto needs the Muslim masses clearly on his side to ensure he will have his way in next year's election.
Even if he stands aside, which is unlikely, he will want to retain the privilege of picking his successor.
To this end Mr Suharto has a number of gifts to distribute.
One was handed out last week.
Pupils in state schools were given permission to wear the jilbab headscarves that are the badge of good Muslim women.
For years the headscarf was frowned upon and sometimes banned on the ground that it encouraged dissent among children of different religions.
State banks, much to their chagrin, have been ordered to provide cheap insurance for pilgrims to Mecca: some 800 Indonesians died in the haj last year.
The government has announced with great fanfare the formation of Islamic courts for Muslim marital and social disputes.
In fact, according to lawyers, the new courts are little different to the ones they replace, but they appear to be generally welcomed.
Such concessions are designed for the Muslims who make up Indonesia's poor rural majority.
More educated Indonesians, though, expect more sophisticated prizes.
With this in mind, Mr Suharto has encouraged the formation of the Indonesian Association of Muslim Intellectuals, a group of thinkers, many of them educated in the West and several of them cabinet ministers.
Mr Suharto has been criticised for having too many Christians in his circle, among them the defence minister, some of his economic advisers and Chinese tycoons who control four-fifths of the country's private industry.
The new association is a way of drawing attention to the Muslim technocrats around the president.
Thinking about the dilemma captured in simalakama legend, Mr Suharto has clearly decided that, if he has to make a choice between wooing the Muslims and placating the West over the Gulf, the Muslims will have his full attention.
The Americans do not like receiving frequent reports of pro-Iraqi demonstrations throughout the Islamic world.
But, like the anti-war protests even in America's ally Japan, they do not have any effect on the course of the war.
That being so, the West can shrug its shoulders and live with them.
For his part, Mr Suharto can tell himself that the war will not be a lasting problem.
Keeping his Muslims loyal will be.
The economies of South Korea and Singapore
When dragons stumble
FROM OUR SEOUL CORRESPONDENT
The Gulf war has hurt Asia's oil-hungry, export-dependent dragons.
For two of them, Korea and Singapore, self-inflicted wounds are hurting more
THE juicy news in the cabinet reshuffle announced this week by South Korea's President Roh Tae Woo was a $1m-plus bribery scandal that involved the arrests of a presidential aide, several legislators and the chairman of a big conglomerate, and the dismissal of the construction minister.
The more significant news was that the government's chief economics officer, Lee Seung Yun, the deputy prime minister for economic planning, also lost his job, for unrelated reasons.
But what were those reasons?
South Korea's economy grew last year at a real rate of 9.2%.
If this is failure, what miracles will Choi Gak Kyu, Mr Lee's successor, be expected to perform?
None, by Korean standards.
The government is predicting real GNP growth of 7% this year, and Mr Choi will not be blamed even for such a ‘disappointing’ figure.
He will, however, be expected to do something about the severe imbalances that are masked by the wonderful overall figures for economic growth.
The won is high.
Exports, which used to be the engine of growth, are down and imports are way up — by so much that in 1990 Korea experienced its first current-account deficit in five years.
Inflation is zipping along.
The main explanation for all this is a money supply growing faster than anything else in Korea.
Until the 1980s Korea was in chronic current-account deficit; in 1986 it went into surplus.
Between 1985 and 1989 the dollar value of exports more than doubled; planners excitedly began to talk about Korea becoming a creditor nation.
The excitement ended last year, when higher wages, an overvalued currency and lower productivity growth took their toll.
Measured by the movement of the real effective exchange rate, Korean goods suffered a 22% loss in competitiveness from the end of 1985 to mid-1989.
It is not surprising that the value of exports grew by a mere 3% in 1990.
On the other side of the trade ledger, the booming domestic economy drew in 15% more imports last year than it had done in 1989.
Capital-goods imports, many of them for huge petrochemical projects, rose 14% in 1990.
The bill for imported energy was up by 42%.
The net result: a current-account deficit last year of $2.1 billion, and of $1.8 billion in January alone this year.
Domestic spending is not letting up, which is proving a decidedly mixed blessing for Korean industry.
Many companies unable to make it in tougher foreign markets had no such problems in the forgiving local market.
A lot of last year's unexported electronics gear now sits on crowded shelves in Seoul's small apartments.
Meanwhile, building companies have been stretched to the limit by the unslaked thirst for housing.
Strong demand helped push up consumer prices by an official 8.6% last year and, because of price increases by utilities, 2.1% in January alone this year.
But Korea's price index is a notoriously manipulated figure, and the educated guess in Seoul is that inflation is now in the mid-teens.
Naturally, employers are now facing yet another round of difficult wage negotiations.
Annual wage increases for manufacturing workers ran at around 20% for the three years preceding 1990.
Settlements were lower last year, but many bosses are convinced that, despite the government's call for single-digit increases, the high inflation rate means that wage negotiations this spring will be back to the old pattern.
Instead of exhorting virtue, the government might try to do something that is in its power, about inflation.
Over the years Korea's fast economic growth, unlike Taiwan's, for example, has done little to boost inflation.
However, inflation broke rank in the mid-1980s, when monetary policy was allowed to become too loose.
Since 1985 growth in the M2 measure of money has averaged 19% a year.
The government has not done much to restrain it.
A campaign against ‘luxury’ imports and severe tax penalties for property speculation have reduced some of the speculative fervour.
But the occasional $500m-worth of speculative trading on the Korean Stock Exchange on a single day — as happened on January 17th — and a booming kerb market make it clear that a great deal of loose cash is still swirling around.
Monetary growth was last seriously squeezed in 1984, during the autocratic tenure of President Chun Doo Hwan.
Korea's present crop of elected politicians have so far lacked the stomach for a war on inflation.
It seems improbable, but perhaps the affable-looking Mr Choi can convince them one is needed.
India
Inseparable
FROM OUR INDIA CORRESPONDENT
THE puppeteer is unhappy with his puppets.
Rajiv Gandhi, on whose Congress Party the minority government of Chandra Shekhar depends, appeared this week to be on the point of withdrawing his support.
But the speculation died on Tuesday when Congress announced that it would support the government in a financial debate in parliament starting on February 21st.
Mr Gandhi's manoeuvrings — which included four visits to the president, who can dissolve parliament — appear to have been designed to lure supporters from Mr Shekhar and from the previous prime minister, V.P. Singh.
Join Congress, Mr Gandhi seemed to be saying, and create a party strong enough to have a clear majority.
Congress and its allies are 50 short of a majority in parliament.
However, it soon became clear that fewer than 30 defectors would be available and that they would demand an unacceptable political price.
So the puppets will dance on, but Mr Gandhi will withdraw even further from public sight as their master.
One reason is the state of the economy.
Another is that he disapproves of Mr Shekhar's attempts to talk to terrorists in Punjab and Kashmir on terms that could threaten the unity of the country.
He is upset with the prime minister for not trying harder to create a non-aligned peace formula to end the Gulf war.
Lastly, Mr Gandhi has been critical of the decision to let American aircraft refuel in India on their way to the Gulf.
Indian Muslims, wooed by Congress, have been especially angered.
Mr Shekhar has managed to avoid a diplomatic row with America by quietly persuading President Bush to withdraw his request for permission.
Sooner or later, however, Mr Gandhi will decide to cut the puppets' strings and bring on another election.
But when?
Should he wait for a year, by which time the quarrel between Hindus and Muslims over the disputed Ayodhya mosque will have cooled down?
Or will he by then be associated in the public mind with the troubles of the economy?
The annual rate of inflation is running at almost 13%.
India's foreign-exchange reserves have been severely eroded by high oil prices and the loss of remittances from workers in Kuwait and Iraq.
Credit from commercial banks, usually $3m-4m a year, has dried up.
India's foreign-exchange reserves would have disappeared had it not borrowed $1.8 billion from the IMF in January.
Even that will be used up within a few months, when further recourse to the IMF will be inescapable.
With an election to fight, the last thing Mr Gandhi wants to defend is a dose of IMF discipline.
When negotiating its first IMF loan, the government agreed to trim its deficit in 1991–92 to 6.5% of GDP, down from 8.3% this year.
This will involve new taxes and a cut in subsidies, including the huge fertiliser subsidy regarded as critical in the farming areas that hold most of the voters.
The alternative would be to slash public spending, a policy that few Indian politicians of any persuasion favour.
Mr Gandhi is said to be horrified by the stiff budget in prospect.
The budget is due now, but it has been postponed for three months.
To tide it over, the government will seek from parliament a limited spending authority.
This will give Mr Gandhi a little time to consider his strategy.
The IMF is likely to refuse to lend any more money until the budget is settled, but the government hopes it will just about manage, helped by lower oil prices.
Some of Mr Gandhi's advisers doubt whether the party can win an election in the near future.
They say Congress might be wiser to team up with Mr Shekhar and any other small party willing to join a conventional coalition government.
The prime minister clearly thinks this is an excellent idea.
Mr Gandhi is far from sure.
Hollywood east
FROM OUR SOUTH-EAST ASIA CORRESPONDENT
LIKE Korea, Singapore has economic problems that most other countries can only envy.
Last year real GNP grew by 8.5%, and inflation was only 3.4%, lower than anywhere in Asia except Japan and Malaysia.
Growth this year is expected to be a tolerable 5%.
Even so, the managers of the island state's economy are fretting.
Their worries are easier to understand if you recall how much Singapore depends on foreign trade.
Last year exports equalled nearly 160% of the country's GDP.
Singapore has had better luck than  Hong Kong at diversifying its export markets; but America is still a big one, and America is in recession.
It does not help that the Singapore dollar has been appreciating against not only the greenback but also the currencies of Singapore's three main trading rivals: Hong Kong, Taiwan and Korea.
The lion's share of Singapore's exports is produced by the 3,000-odd foreign companies that have set up on the island.
Its future depends on continually convincing these companies, and others yet to take the plunge, that it is the best place in South-East Asia from which to do business.
Many of them care less about the exchange rate than about what is shown on the chart on the right.
Over the past decade productivity in Singapore has risen fast, but not nearly as fast as nominal wages.
Singapore's trouble is that as soon as its economy starts to grow by more than 6–7%, the labour market tends to get tight.
This did not happen during the golden years of 1966–80: over that period GNP grew by an average of 10.4% a year and the workforce by 4.7%.
But during the 1990s the workforce is expected to grow by only 0.5–0.7% a year.
In the mid-1980s the government tried, disastrously, to deal with the labour shortage by increasing employers' contributions to the Central Provident Fund (the compulsory government-run pension scheme).
More expensive labour, the reasoning ran, would force the shutdown of sweat-shops, leaving only those businesses that could add plenty of value.
The economy did not appreciate being forced up-market; it went into a brief recession.
In 1986 the government reversed itself and cut employers' contributions to the fund (though they have since been allowed to rise again).
Now the government is trying another policy designed to achieve the same end.
At every opportunity senior ministers tout the idea of a ‘growth triangle’, with Singapore at the apex, the Malaysian state of Johore to the north, and northern Sumatra and a string of Indonesian islands to the south.
The idea is picking up speed.
The first stage of a 60,000-hectare (150,000-acre) industrial park, in which the Indonesian government has invested $570m, has just opened on the Indonesian island of Batam.
The aim is to encourage a process that has already started: a shift of labour-intensive manufacturing away from Singapore to its lower-cost neighbours.
The thinking is that once all the mucky bits have been moved out, Singapore's well-educated workforce will specialise in research and development, marketing, finance and other services.
The tricky part will be to squeeze from service industries alone the entire 4% of annual productivity increases that the government wants for the economy as a whole.
Consider financial services, for example, which already account for nearly a third of GDP.
As more foreign banks and fund managers have arrived in Singapore, wages for experienced staff have risen sharply, as have office rents.
But, as banks all over the world know, higher wages and more computers often fail to result in higher productivity.
Perhaps the most intriguing question is how Singapore will fare with some new service industries.
It hopes to become a regional centre for medical care.
It also has ambitions to displace Hong Kong as the Hollywood of Asia.
The tycoon Deacon Chiu is building three film studios at his Tang Dynasty Village, which is due to open in the middle of this year.
The Singapore Broadcasting Corporation is building a further nine film and  television studios in a complex to be called Television World.
Can this tightly-controlled society churn out inspired film producers?
INTERNATIONAL
The tranquillising of Kenya
FROM OUR EAST AFRICA CORRESPONDENT
THE old leader of Kenya's opposition announces a new and certainly illegal party.
He is not detained.
He is not even denounced by the government.
His plan draws no crowds into the streets.
The tranquillity seems odd after the demonstrations, riots and arrests that beset Kenya last year.
President Daniel arap Moi's Kenya African National Union (KANU) has learnt to tread more softly, to ignore rather than  lambast its opponents, and to appear at least to consider political reform.
When Oginga Odinga's new party was announced on February 13th, it went unmentioned by local journalists.
Last year's riots, by contrast, were eagerly reported.
In the months leading up to them, KANU barons competed to insult multi-party advocates.
This helped transform a small disturbance into a full-blown campaign.
So did the mysterious attack on the home of a leading multi-party proponent.
So did the government's unapologetic and violent demolition of slums.
Unexpectedly, after activists had been arrested and street violence abated, the ruling party stopped besieging itself.
It forbore from interfering in August when the funeral of a dissident cleric (killed in what appears to have been a genuine road accident) turned into an anti-government rally.
It sent a special commission round the country to sound out grievances from the general public.
And it cleverly let pressure dissipate by allowing several months pass before revealing the commission's findings.
These recommended new electoral rules but left unchallenged KANU's supremacy.
Dozens of people had explained the need for a real opposition, but the commission simply ignored the issue.
It merely said that the president had never told it to question Kenya's one-party system.
The commission was denounced as cosmetic.
But the riots were four months past, the party was at least trying to seem reasonable, and Kenya's habitual political somnolence won the day.
This owes as much to the country's past success as to the ruling party's new tact.
A healthy economy in the 1960s and 1970s created a sizeable and conservative urban middle class.
It does not like riots.
Slum youths hurled bricks and fired shops not in support of Jeffersonian ideals, but because of their poverty.
The frightened middle class stayed home and stopped grumbling aloud.
A dose of old-fashioned repression dealt with some of the bold exceptions.
The two main leaders of the multi-party movement, arrested last July on the eve of the riots, are still held without charge.
The wife of one says her husband has been denied proper access to lawyers and medical care.
Thirteen others arrested during the ferment are being brought before the courts in two batches.
In both, defendants say they were tortured in detention; one says he was kidnapped from neighbouring Uganda.
Internal security police still dog real or imagined opponents, though not so blatantly as last year.
A few brave magazines take the government to task.
A few brave lawyers continue to represent the imprisoned dissidents, and to speak of human rights.
A semblance of opposition helps Kenya's case with the foreign donors without whom it cannot prosper.
It no longer indulges in slanging matches with the American embassy, which had hinted that Kenya's aid might suffer if it did not tolerate an opposition.
In return the Americans this month unblocked $5m in military aid that had been held up after last year's arrests.
Continued tact may prise money from other capitals.
Kenya needs it.
The main foreign-exchange earner is, or has been, tourism.
But the Saddam effect has emptied some hotels, crippled others, and brought predictions of dismal earnings this year.
The coffee industry, until tourism's rise the country's biggest earner, is in semi-collapse.
The shilling is sliding against hard currencies.
Inflation, around 12%, is lowish but bothersome.
Economic distress need not bring unrest.
Intrigue might.
The killing a year ago of Kenya's foreign minister, Robert Ouko, is still unsolved.
His burnt and tortured body was found on a brushy hill near his home in western Kenya.
The government refuses to release a Scotland Yard report on the death, and is instead running its own commission of inquiry.
The dead man's brother has gone to ground.
Lavish press coverage keeps the issue before the public.
The government says it had nothing to do with the case.
Kenya's tranquillity could vanish if it were shown to be involved: the killing prompted the first of last year's riots.
Meanwhile the government sometimes betrays its old paranoia.
This month the ruling party's organ absurdly accused Uganda of planning an invasion, inciting a ritual round of denunciation from party leaders.
Mr Moi himself occasionally gives off whiffs of his old sense of encirclement.
He has called for secret police to track down those spreading rumours of early elections, and recently warned golfers (who include many rich Kenyans) against anti-government talk on the fairways.
His insecurity will persist so long as he bottles up change, no matter how well his ruling party behaves.
Peru
Free to be poor
FROM OUR CORRESPONDENT IN LIMA
PRESIDENT Alberto Fujimori is striving both to stabilise the economy and to lead the country back into the international financial fold.
Everybody feels the pinch.
Recession is guaranteed for several months to come by higher taxes, higher interest rates and an exchange rate depressed both by a squeeze on the supply of local currency and by a surfeit of dollars from the booming trade in cocaine paste.
Times being hard, the vicious squabbles that have plagued Peru since the 1960s have broken out again, between raw-material exporters (who want freer trade) and manufacturers (who want still more protection).
To make things worse, after six months of stringent government austerity, the inflation rate for the month of January was almost 18%.
Last week, seven months after taking office, Mr Fujimori therefore reshuffled his cabinet.
The new finance minister, Carlos Bolona, was educated at Oxford and is as financially orthodox as they come in Peru.
He is expected to hasten Peru's rapprochement with the IMF, even as Mr Fujimori, the politician, hints at new measures to ‘avoid recession’.
A new industry minister, Victor Joy Wa, took a third tack, announcing to startled industrialists that he will do away with all privileges for all manufacturers save exporters, who can expect reimbursement of taxes that ‘should not be exported’.
Mr Fujimori's manoeuvrings with his ministers remain enigmatic.
But he clearly dislikes ‘mercantilists’.
The word is much used by his closest adviser, Hernando de Soto, author of ‘The Other Path’— a celebrated study of Peru's huge and dense informal sector of street vendors, cottage industries and red tape.
The message from Mr de Soto's Liberty and Democracy Institute (largely financed by contributors in the United States) is that vested interests with privileged access to the state (that is, mercantilists) hinder development and foment social discontent.
Mr Bolona, the new finance minister, is a former head of the institute's economics department.
Mr de Soto tells the president that it is not just the size of Peru's state sector, which includes several hundred companies as well as the ministries, that burdens the people via the fiscal deficit.
He argues that most harm is done by the state's imperviousness to ordinary Peruvians.
Mr Fujimori has now promised that new laws will be debated in advance by the general public.
For a start, the public will be invited to revise a plan that would liberalise controls on direct foreign investment and allow investors to repatriate all their profits.
Most political analysts think Peru's main problem is that it is deeply divided, by race, by geography and by extremes of income.
They detect something phoney in Mr de Soto's utopia of consensus, and something unconvincing in Mr Fujimori's commitment to it.
His real style, they believe, is authoritarian and his policies excessively sympathetic to the armed forces.
Mr de Soto was much offended when one of these commentators labelled him Rasputin.
But Mr de Soto goes down well in Washington, where he has helped persuade the authorities to take the previously unknown Mr Fujimori seriously.
Mr Bolona is equally welcome in financial circles in North America, where he worked for a time as a consultant on Latin American debt.
Some well-informed people suggest that the Americans may have played a discreet role in last week's cabinet reshuffle.
If so, it suggests that liberal policies will be implemented in Peru at least for a few months this year, whatever the general public thinks.
South Africa
Trial and error
FROM OUR SOUTH AFRICA CORRESPONDENT
IT SHOULD have been a good week.
On February 15th President F.W. de Klerk announced that most of the remaining obstacles to constitutional negotiations with the African National Congress (ANC) had been cleared away.
But the previous day a judge had adjourned the trial of Winnie Mandela, wife of the ANC's leader, who faces charges of kidnapping and assault.
One witness had disappeared, two more had been intimidated; doubts were aroused about the ANC's commitment to the rule of law.
Mr de Klerk is making progress, but towards what?
The basis of the new accord is the agreement of last August, whereby the ANC undertook to suspend its 30-year armed struggle ‘and related activities’.
Did those words imply a halt to recruiting and training guerrillas, as well as to shooting and bombing?
The government insisted that they did.
The ANC said it had agreed to a ceasefire, nothing more.
The accord spells things out a bit.
It forbids infiltration of insurgents and arms into South Africa, the training of guerrillas in the country, and the establishment of ‘underground structures’.
It rules out incitement to violence and threats of armed action (what Mr de Klerk calls ‘war talk’).
But the ink was hardly dry when the ANC asserted its right to train fighters outside South Africa and to seek new recruits inside.
Mr de Klerk gave warning that any hostile forces found on South Africa's borders would be dealt with firmly.
Still, the two parties have moved towards the round-table talks that both want — although the government calls them a multi-party conference, whereas the ANC looks forward to an all-party congress, to be followed eventually by an elected constituent assembly.
The ill-feeling around Mrs Mandela's trial will make the talks tougher, especially because the ANC has identified itself closely with Mrs Mandela.
Each day, congress leaders have attended court, apparently on a roster.
Nelson Mandela is the most assiduous.
The trial is so entangled with the standing of the ANC that the right-wing Conservative Party has blamed the ‘state intelligence service’ for the disappearance of an important state witness; the party's argument was that the government wanted to persuade whites of the virtue of negotiations with the ANC, and found the trial embarrassing.
The government promptly got a court order requiring the party secretary and the editor of its newspaper to reveal their sources to a magistrate, or face indefinite imprisonment.
The state's missing witness, Gabriel Mekgwe, disappeared the night before he was due to give evidence against Mrs Mandela.
Two other state witnesses, Kenneth Kgase and Barend Mono, then said they were too frightened to give evidence.
All three men had allegedly been abducted by Mrs Mandela's bodyguards at the end of 1988.
Without their testimony the prosecution case could collapse when the trial reopens on March 6th.
If Mrs Mandela were convicted, her party would suffer.
An acquittal by default could be just as serious.
Mr Mekgwe was reportedly last seen in the company of three ANC men a few hours before he was due to give evidence.
The ANC's elliptical denial that it was ‘organisationally implicated’ has done little to calm white people's doubts about its commitment to the rule of law.
Mr de Klerk may, therefore, find it harder to get approval from the white electorate for whatever emerges from the negotiating table.
The ANC's peace agreement with Mangosuthu Buthelezi's Inkatha Freedom Party looks shaky too.
Since it was signed on January 29th there have been two massacres, with a total of at least 30 people killed.
The two organisations have established a joint Peace Implementation Committee, brought warring local leaders together for face-to-face talks, and jointly toured trouble spots.
Mr Mandela and Mr Buthelezi had promised to make joint visits to areas of tension.
They are still awaited.
Killer virus
FROM OUR CORRESPONDENTS IN LIMA AND LUSAKA
PROSPEROUS people rarely die of cholera.
The virus, whose main symptom is explosive diarrhoea, kills those who drink water mixed with sewage, are weak from disease or malnutrition, and do not get prompt care.
Until this year it had hardly occurred in Latin America since the first world war, when indentured workers stopped arriving from Asia.
By midweek it had killed 115 Peruvians in six weeks.
Peru's medical services have coped valiantly: untreated cholera can kill up to half of those infected, and the hospitals had treated 22,500 people for the disease.
But the capital's water supply leaks and its drains overflow.
The towns on the Pacific coast are crammed with people fleeing terrorism and hunger in the interior.
Sheltering in shanties, they have now been advised not to eat fish (so many will go hungry) and to boil water (yet they can scarcely afford fuel).
Neighbouring countries have closed their borders.
All Latin America fears that newly-poor Peru may have opened the door to the sickness of poverty.
Latin America's scare is Africa's sad normality.
Local outbreaks of cholera occur frequently in war-torn Angola and Mozambique, and sporadically elsewhere.
So far this month 465 deaths, and more than ten times as many suspected cases, have been reported in Zambia, black Africa's most urbanised country.
Like Peru, it has been made poorer by persistent misgovernment.
Last year there were some 200 cholera deaths in Zambia.
Rich countries help pay for medicine.
Sewers and wells might halt the disease, but cost much more.
From the Moluccas, Indonesia's eastern archipelago, 97 more cholera deaths have recently been reported.
There too the virus in people's bowels gets into other people's badly built water supplies.
The travellers' advice centre at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine says cholera vaccine is ‘of limited efficacy’.
The best prevention is to boil or filter water, and eat only well-cooked food.
Being well-off helps too.
Trinidad
It's not funny
FROM A CORRESPONDENT IN PORT-OF-SPAIN
POLITICAL satire was out of fashion at this year's Trinidad Carnival.
An abortive coup last summer, and serious squabbling ever since, had taken the fun out of the island's favourite pool of jokes.
For once the economy was not to blame.
The only thing that has gone right for A.N.R. Robinson's National Alliance for Reconstruction (NAR) since its election with a huge majority in 1986 was Saddam Hussein's war.
The Iraqis invaded Kuwait the day an uprising by local ‘Muslimeen’ collapsed.
The rebels — whose version of Islam is North American rather than Arabian — went to jail, and the outside world forgot about them.
Trinidadians, disgusted by their violence (they captured Mr Robinson and shot him in the leg), nevertheless reckoned that poor people had a lot to grumble about, as the government slashed away at public spending to rectify past extravagance.
As the oil price rose, so did oil production.
The government could afford a slight relaxation of its austerity.
Devaluation and lower real wages helped exports.
The sugar crop was good.
Even tourism has held up, despite travel scares.
The government prudently used most of its bonus to rebuild the foreign-exchange reserves; it also restored the 10% cut made last year in public-sector salaries, and raised pensions by 5%.
More riskily, the budget announced in December was based on the assumption that the oil price would average $22 a barrel for the year; it is not much more than $17 now.
Nobody thanked the prime minister.
Junior ministers have been inviting the sack by asking him to resign.
According to the opinion polls, 60% of the electorate thinks he should have gone last August.
It is a bitter contrast with the mid-1980s, when the impatience of the multiracial middle class with the country's bad old habits gave birth to the NAR.
Trinidad's middle class, thinned by emigration, is small; most of its members are civil servants, recruited from across the country's racial spectrum.
Now they are impatient with a government that cut their pay by 10% (even if it restored the cuts later).
Multiracialism is not what it was, and the NAR has little support among the (largely Indian) rural sugar workers, or among the (mainly black) urban poor.
Soon after the party took office, many of its Indian supporters moved out to form their own United National Congress.
Black people are now moving back to the People's National Movement, which ruled for 30 years before Mr Robinson came to power.
It won the latest by-election, to replace a respected minister killed in the attempted coup, in a middle-class suburb of the kind Mr Robinson once fared best in.
The prime minister is taking the blame for the pain of trying to cure the economy.
Despite recent improvements, unemployment is more than 20%, and real wages are lower than they were in the early 1980s.
Recession has brought back racial politics.
Parliament must be dissolved by the end of the year.
Mr Robinson's one consolation is that in Tobago, his fief, Indian voters are rare.
EUROPE
Oscar for Babar
FROM OUR PARIS CORRESPONDENT
TEENAGE mutant turtles are already old hat in France.
A 61-year-old French elephant is all the rage: Babar is back.
The gentle green-suited elephant is everywhere — on dressing gowns, duvet covers, nappies, plates, carpets, soft drinks, television and now in a feature film, ‘Le Triomphe de Babar’, which had its world première in Paris last week.
Reassuring, virtuous and wise, Babar apparently provides a welcome escape from the violence and insecurity of the real world.
Babar was born into an upper-class French Protestant family one summer's evening in 1930.
To send her two young sons, Mathieu and Laurent, to sleep, Cécile de Brunhoff told them the story of a little elephant who left the forest to discover the town and learn the ways of men, before returning to his own idyllic land of the elephants to be crowned king.
The boy's father, Jean de Brunhoff, a painter, decided to illustrate the story.
‘Histoire de Babar’ was published in 1931 and became an immediate hit.
Six other Babar volumes followed before Jean de Brunhoff's death at the age of 38 in 1937.
His son, Laurent, then aged 13, completed the colouring in the last two books.
After becoming a painter in his turn, Laurent decided to continue the Babar series, publishing his own first book in 1946.
In all, 30 Babar books have been written by the de Brunhoffs.
Translated into 17 languages, they have sold tens of millions of copies.
It was the launch of the animated Babar television series in 1989 that started the current Babar cult.
The 65 half-hour episodes (each costing $350,000) of the series were produced by a Franco-Canadian team in collaboration with Clifford Ross, an American painter and film producer who owns the world rights to Babar's animation and derived products.
(Some 300 Babar products are sold worldwide by 70 licensed companies.)
The same team has produced the new film.
The film and the television scripts were all sent for approval to Laurent de Brunhoff, who now lives in Connecticut.
Although he had to make some concessions, he has declared himself by and large satisfied.
And they all lived happily in Celesteville.
Going, going, glasnost
FROM OUR MOSCOW CORRESPONDENT
THE current crackdown on Soviet press and television is, like so many of President Gorbachev's policies, a probably unworkable muddle.
Full censorship makes people mistrust the press.
Mr Gorbachev has three instruments that, he hopes, will make the press more pliant while falling short of complete censorship.
The first sounds like a rare disease: GUOT.
This is the body that, supposedly protecting state secrets, issues lists of forbidden subjects.
According to its boss, most newspapers have signed agreements with his agency.
The second instrument is control of publishing and broadcasting equipment.
The Communist Party and various affiliates control nearly all Soviet printing presses and broadcasting stations.
Komsomolskaya Pravda, which has emerged as the most informative of all Soviet newspapers because it runs articles others refuse to print, depends on the Pravda printing house, which is owned by the party.
It has been reduced from six to five issues a week.
The editor of Ogonek complains that his reform-championing magazine is now hardly distributed outside large cities.
Control of broadcasting is even more complete.
The new head of Soviet state television and radio, Leonid Kravchenko, says he was appointed to do the president's bidding and thinks his job is to ensure that state television does not criticise the state.
Acting on this belief, he has: taken one of the most outspoken current-affairs programmes, ‘Vzglyad’(Outlook), off the air; confiscated the property of the independent news agency Interfax, which was saved from closure only by the intervention of Boris Yeltsin and the Moscow city council; suspended a free-thinking television news show called ‘TSN’; and consigned Radio Russia, Mr Yeltsin's mouthpiece, to a frequency where most of the population cannot hear it begin its broadcasts with phrases like ‘In another move reminiscent of Stalinism, President Gorbachev today…’
Mr Kravchenko will not stop there.
At the beginning of February, his organisation, formerly a government department, was turned into a nominally independent company.
The significance of this is that the head of it, who had the status of a minister, need no longer be approved by the Soviet parliament, with the potential embarrassment of being rejected.
More insidiously, the change is a cover for sacking journalists who do not share his idea of what a state broadcasting company should be.
The only employee of this company so far is Mr Kravchenko himself.
He will decide who else will be employed.
The third instrument of control is self-censorship.
‘Vzglyad’ and ‘TSN’were singled out because they were among the few television programmes willing to challenge Mr Kravchenko.
In contrast, the main evening news programme, ‘Vremya’, has voluntarily lapsed into stirring stories about tractors.
This instrument of control, however, is the least effective of the three because, in contrast to the good old days, parts of the press are refusing to be browbeaten.
Newspapers like Moscow News and Nezavisimaya Gazeta (Independent Newspaper) busily report what the president does not want to hear.
On January 17th, the day after Mr Gorbachev called for the suspension of a new law designed to guarantee press freedom, Nezavisimaya Gazeta published a white space on its front page captioned: ‘This is what Soviet newspapers will look like after political censorship is reimposed.’
At the government-controlled newspaper Izvestia, the staff threatened to go on strike when their editor, who is a Kravchenko-like conservative, tried to get rid of his liberal deputy by giving him a cushy job as Madrid correspondent.
The conflict reached heights of black farce when the editor told a parliamentary meeting that his staff was betraying him, and ended his speech by having a heart attack.
All this suggests that gentle pressure will not work on the press.
Journalists who refuse to toe the line will have to be sacked.
But if they are, Mr Gorbachev's policy of trying to find a pliant press that people trust will also have failed.
Partial censorship will become complete censorship.
Reform in Eastern Europe: Hungary
Italy on the Danube
FROM OUR BUDAPEST CORRESPONDENT
Inefficient government and public services at the top, hard work and good entrepreneurship at the bottom: could Italy, we wonder in the third of our occasional articles on the good news from Eastern Europe, be a model?
HUNGARY has nearly run out of misfortune.
Economic statistics are losing their credibility and capacity to depress.
The four harbingers of East European apocalypse — the collapse of the Soviet Union as a trading partner, dear oil, government paralysis and civil disorder — visited last year and may have already done their worst.
When the gloom lifts, Hungary's famous pessimists will be surprised to discover how much has actually been going right.
Official Hungary is not a pleasant place to live in, say the statisticians: GDP fell by 5% in 1990 after a decade of near-stagnation.
Yet the officially measured real consumption in the past two years has been stronger than it should have been if the official measurement of GDP were accurate.
That suggests that the official measurement is wrong.
Count in private-sector output, much of which the statistics ignore, and the depression evaporates.
In unofficial Hungary, the private (mostly black) economy may provide 25–30% of GDP, says Istvan Gabor, a professor at the Budapest University of Economics.
That is up from 16–18% a decade ago and the share is growing fast.
Mr Gabor estimates that national output is roughly stable.
It just does not look that way sometimes because there are as many as three times more losers than winners from the economic transformation.
These losers make up the core of the 74% of Hungarians who in a recent opinion poll said they thought the economic situation had worsened.
But the winners make up with the size of their winnings what they lack in numbers.
The first Rolls-Royce went on sale in Hungary recently, joining the many Mercedes and BMW cars that have recently flooded the country, particularly in 1989.
Even after increases in customs duties staunched the flow, 27,000 cars were imported privately in 1990, over half bought by customs-exempt ‘invalids’.
A typical Mercedes-owner would live in the hills of Buda, in one of the luxury apartment houses studded with satellite dishes that are constantly springing up.
Nearby is a new little grocery store selling expensive avocados, bottled prawns and kiwi fruit.
Only the dilapidated roads remind the visitor that this is Eastern Europe.
The depression is one myth; the sluggishness of privatisation another.
Bela Kadar, the minister of international economic relations, claims that Hungary has been the recipient of half of all recent foreign investment in Eastern Europe.
Most of the money has gone into joint ventures, which now number over 5,000.
Joint ventures have been the main means by which about a tenth of Hungarian state companies have been touched by privatisation.
Goulash capitalism
Joint ventures account for only a small part of Hungary's company start-up boom.
The number of enterprises grew from 14,400 at the end of 1989 to 23,300 in the third quarter of 1990.
Cynics retort that these are mostly shops, selling western consumer goods and damaging the balance of payments.
Maybe, but at least it is Budapest rather than Vienna shopkeepers who benefit from Hungarians' urge to splurge; and the availability of a wide range of goods has encouraged people to hold forints, the Hungarian currency.
Trade with the Soviet Union has collapsed since the new year, when hard currency replaced the rouble as the main medium of transaction.
The Hungarian trade ministry advises firms not to export to the Soviet Union without first getting bank guarantees (so far, few companies have managed to obtain one).
Officials reckon these will appear only after Moscow and the republics settle budget differences.
Until then, exports are on hold.
But it matters a lot less than it used to.
Hungary's trade with the Soviet Union accounted for 30% of total trade in 1980 but about 20% in 1990.
What is more, the volume may have reached bottom.
Laszlo Csaba, an economist at Budapest's Institute for Market Research, predicts that trade will recover later in the year as the opportunities for profit overcome bureaucratic obstruction.
In any event, shrinking East European markets have usefully pushed Hungarian companies westwards.
A 10% increase in the volume of hard-currency exports mitigated a 26% decline in rouble exports in 1990.
The boom in hard-currency exports led Hungary's dollar current account to improve by a remarkable 4–5% of GDP.
The last resort of the habitual pessimists is to admit that Hungary's opportunities are great, but that the government is bound to muff them.
Without Jozsef Antall, the argument goes, the government is paralysed.
Witness last October's petrol-price protests, when ministers rushed around like headless chickens because the boss was ill in hospital.
Mr Antall's health has improved.
And economic policy now has clearer direction since Mihaly Kupa was appointed finance minister and made economics supremo.
But according to one central-bank official, not even the quality of government is a condition of economic success.
Ministers should draw up a budget and then pack up for the year.
Italy, he jokes, should be Hungary's model.
Indeed, the parallels are striking: cumbersome coalition government, tax evasion, distrust of the state, and shambolic public services and infrastructure.
That is the bad news.
The hope is that Hungary, like Italy, will wake up one day, count its black economy and find it is rich.
Is Germany really united?
FROM OUR BONN CORRESPONDENT
NEARLY five months after regaining its national unity, Germany seems as divided as ever.
Economics partly explains the paradox — capitalist boom in the west, quickening collapse in the east.
But the main problem goes deeper and will take longer to solve.
Even before unity day last October 3rd, the euphoria over the fall of the Berlin Wall had evaporated and new friction was emerging between the two Germanies.
Now, according to an opinion poll this month, nearly 90% of Ossis (easterners) feel like second-class citizens in the united country they voted and demonstrated for.
True, they have D-marks, though their pay is less than half that in the west, and in principle full rights under the constitution.
But they do not feel treated as partners.
Often they are regarded as a nuisance; sometimes, in Wessi (western) cabarets, as good for a snigger.
Are they just being over-sensitive?
That is one of the friendlier charges Wessis level at their  brethren in the ‘new federal states’(a description Ossis loathe because it slights the history of regions like Saxony and Brandenburg).
The answer is No.
Start with politics.
In the government formed by Helmut Kohl after the election in December, every main ministry stays in western hands.
The Ossis have been fobbed off with one middling portfolio, transport, and two lightweight ones.
True, they would have had a stronger showing had not their former prime minister, Lothar de Maizière, stepped down before the election amid charges (which he denies, and which an inquiry looks set to discuss) that he used to work for the former East German secret police.
But Ossis have even been denied sought-after representational jobs too, like president or vice-president of the Bundestag.
Of the eastern deputies who pipe up in parliament, some (like the eloquent former communist Gregor Gysi) are heard out with wrath, most only with amused disdain.
At regional level the western states have for months managed to wriggle out of paying more than a fraction of the growing unity bill.
Under pressure from the federal government and the eastern states — some of which threaten to go to the federal constitutional court unless they get a better deal — the pfennig-pinching westerners are now ready to put up an extra DM15 billion ($10 billion) over the next four years.
That is not the sacrifice it may seem, because the western states are raking in lots of extra tax revenue thanks to the boom fuelled by demand from the east.
Meanwhile the eastern states are sliding towards a budget deficit of DM50 billion this year and many towns there are nearly bankrupt.
The easterners need qualified staff at least as much as cash.
State and local authorities struggle on with a handful of experts, usually on loan from the west, and an army of communist-trained bureaucrats lacking the faintest idea how a market economy works.
The judicial system is in chaos.
The eastern states say they badly need an extra 4,500 judges, 1,000 state prosecutors and 1,300 lawyers — not least to deal with the hundreds of thousands of property claims flooding in from the west.
So far only 130 western judges have turned up ‘on loan’.
This is not the support that might have been expected for fellow Germans stuck on the communist side after 1945.
There are exceptions: retired professionals keen to help; entrepreneurial youngsters with pioneer spirit.
But, in the main, westerners fear a spell in the east will mean a kink in their careers, or that life will be too grey (‘not even a decent pub’, groaned one civil servant back from an eastern town he decided not to work in).
Only 19% of western schoolchildren, according to a recent poll, want to make contacts with eastern pupils.
Why has there not been more response?
Partly for lack of leadership.
Mr Kohl seems worn out, as well he may be, after the helter-skelter dash to unity last year.
After refusing tax increases to help pay the unity bill, he has now agreed to them to help finance the Gulf war — from an Ossi viewpoint an odd order of priorities.
President Richard von Weizsäcker, often able to set the tone, has been unusually reticent since the storm he created last year by urging that the government should move from Bonn to Berlin (an issue that remains undecided).
Could it be that the Germans in the west did not want unity after all, despite those opinion polls over decades showing they did?
Hardly.
But the united nation they had in mind, when they thought hard about it at all, was probably not what they have been landed with.
Instead of acquiring fairly smoothly a bigger version of the cosy old federal republic, with its powerful economy and low political profile, they have inherited an unknown country packed with problems and with people who have mostly turned out to be German-speaking strangers.
At the same time they are told they must shoulder bigger world responsibilities.
Their reaction, towards the east and to the Gulf war too, has been to pay up and keep their heads down.
Ossis, mostly baffled by the society they thought they wanted, expect a sympathy most Wessis seem unable to muster.
To the relief of its neighbours, Germany achieved unity with virtually no upsurge of nationalism.
To complete unity it needs not just a flow of money from west to east but a sense of national solidarity.
That may come eventually.
But it is conspicuously absent so far.
Turkey
Ozalland
FROM OUR TURKEY CORRESPONDENT
AN UNEXPECTED variant of pillow politics is forcing the Turkish president, Turgut Ozal, on to the defensive.
The trouble started with the decision of his wife, Semra, to stand for the powerful job of head of the Motherland Party in Istanbul.
Having publicly backed his wife's move, Mr Ozal now finds himself at odds with the party he founded and led for more than six years as prime minister.
Mrs Ozal's supporters — among them many of those who deserted the party en masse in the 1989 municipal elections — like her attempt to dislodge the Islamic conservative wing, which now controls the party in Istanbul.
The Gulf war has divided the Islamic right in Turkey.
So now, argue those who want the party to be modern and secular, is the time to act.
Mrs Ozal's detractors claim that her candidacy is an example of third-world dynastic ambitions in the Peron mode.
as if to prove the point, some of those crying nepotism loudest are themselves close members of the family.
Yusuf Bozkurt Ozal, the president's brother and a member of parliament, opposes his sister-in-law's move into politics.
The president has accused the defence minister, Husnu Dogan, a younger relation and an orphan brought up in the Ozal household, of being nothing short of a Brutus for opposing Semra's decision.
To many middle-class women, Mrs Ozal is no distant Eva Peron but someone able to overcome familiar problems — including a set of overbearing in-laws.
Others admire her brassy style.
She has boldly paraded her stocky figure at charity fashion shows and at one time was famous for wielding equally chunky Havana cigars.
Now no longer just a colourful first lady but a full participant in politics, Mrs Ozal is forcing not only the Motherland Party but her husband to declare where they stand.
Constitutionally, the Turkish president stands above party politics.
In practice, Mr Ozal keeps both cabinet and party on a short rein.
When he was prime minister, this meant holding the Motherland Party together by playing off its various factions against each other.
Now, as president, Mr Ozal intends (many argue, at the insistence of his wife) that the party's ‘liberal’, free-market wing should be seen to dominate.
With just under six years of office still to run, Mr Ozal presumably calculates that the party needs his popularity much more than he needs the party — particularly if there is to be an early general election to take advantage of an alliance victory in the Gulf war.
But he must worry that if his wife does not succeed in the party elections scheduled for March, then his own authority will be badly diminished.
Mrs Ozal is not having it all her own way.
At one local headquarters she found the door literally locked, and one lunch was boycotted by the very party bosses she intends to oversee.
The Ozals, however, are determined to win through.
Mr Ozal will throw his presidential weight behind his wife's campaign, not least because his own future is now linked to hers.
Soviet Union
Yeltsin's last stand
FROM OUR MOSCOW CORRESPONDENT
THEY had been nit-picking for weeks.
How much airtime should Boris Yeltsin, Russia's president, get on state television?
When?
On what channel?
Should his interview be recorded or transmitted live?
The event, when it came on February 19th, was worth the wait.
After half an hour's question-and-answer, Mr Yeltsin suddenly began reading from a prepared text:
I gave warning in 1987 that it is part of Gorbachev's character to search for absolute personal power.
Everything he has done has been aimed at bringing the country to dictatorship, to presidential rule as they call it.
I distance myself from the position and policies of the president.
I call for his immediate resignation and the transfer of power to a collective body, the Council of the Federation…
I believe in your support, in the support of the peoples of Russia, and I hope for it.
The relationship between the Soviet Union's two dominant politicians here reached its nadir.
The reaction was swift.
The next day Pravda, the Communist Party daily, accused Mr Yeltsin of seeking a showdown with the president that was tantamount to wrecking the country.
The Soviet parliament voted the address unconstitutional and set up a special committee, dominated by Communist hardliners, to send a formal appeal to the Russian parliament.
That indicates what might happen next: a vote of no-confidence in Mr Yeltsin in his own parliament which, because that parliament is increasingly under the sway of Communist deputies, might pass.
Mr Yeltsin's appeal looks like a gesture of despair after his failure to influence the central government.
Mr Gorbachev has recently proved himself determined to ram through conservative policies.
The day before Mr Yeltsin's broadside, the new prime minister, Valentin Pavlov, confirmed to parliament that he was planning to increase retail prices by an average of 60%, with wages and benefits to rise 50% in compensation.
Although Russia, along with the Ukraine and Belorussia, opposes this plan, there is little it can do to stop it.
Mr Yeltsin has lost his top three economic ministers in the past three months.
All have resigned in despair at the Russian government's inability to influence the central government.
Mr Yeltsin's best hope was to persuade four of the largest republics — Russia, Belorussia, the Ukraine and Kazakhstan — to club together and outline the powers of the central and republican governments.
This too is ending in failure.
Kazakhstan's president has called for Mr Gorbachev's union treaty to be signed at once, with negotiations over the details to follow.
Mr Yeltsin has one more option.
He fell from power in 1987, resigning from the Politburo over the slow pace of reform.
He bounced back by winning an overwhelming election victory.
He might try to do so again.
Russian law allows the direct popular election of the president.
If he loses a vote of no-confidence in parliament, he could yet try to force such an election, appealing over parliament's head to the voters — as he did on television this week.
Britain's re-entry
FROM OUR BRUSSELS CORRESPONDENT
THE influence of Britain on the European Community sank to an all-time low in 1989 and 1990.
Britain's partners became so fed up with Margaret Thatcher's strident opposition to economic and monetary union (EMU) and to political union that she was left utterly isolated at last October's Rome summit.
But three months is a long time in Euro-politics.
John Major has ended Britain's isolation.
Suddenly other EC countries are interested in what the British have to say.
Together with his foreign secretary, Douglas Hurd, and his chancellor of the exchequer, Norman Lamont, Mr Major has shifted the style, the tactics and even, to some extent, the substance of Britain's European policy.
Britain's heavy involvement in the Gulf war has also helped to restore respect for its views.
The calm, friendly manner of Mr Major and his ministers has impressed their colleagues.
At a meeting of foreign ministers earlier this month Mr Hurd opposed a German plan to send emergency aid to Israel, on the ground that the right procedures had not been followed.
But when he saw that others liked the plan he refrained from blocking it.
‘Next time he asks us for something, we will find it harder to say no,’ said one of those present.
Many European diplomats doubt that Britain's new style will lead to new policies.
Yet British policy has already shifted subtly.
Foreign Office officials gleefully admit to being freer to launch new ideas, particularly on security policy.
The Foreign Office has moved some way towards the French idea that the Western European Union (WEU) should become the Community's forum for defence policy.
Mr Hurd's speech this week in Luxembourg, which called for the European Council (as summits are known) to have strong links with a reinforced WEU, would not have been made in Mrs Thatcher's day.
And in other debates, such as that on the European Parliament's powers, there are hints that British intransigence may soften.
Even the Euro-sceptical Mr Lamont has shifted the official line on EMU a few inches.
He says he wants a compromise acceptable to Britain and its partners — which means he does not want to stop other countries moving towards EMU.
Although Britain opposes the idea of a single currency, its officials play an active part in discussions on how EMU might work.
The Treasury's recent draft treaty revealed new thinking on some of EMU's details, with, for instance, an option for the new central-banking institution to be independent of governments (a suggestion that Britain had opposed).
The combination of smoother style and slight changes of substance has allowed Britain to build different alliances on different topics.
Mr Major has made a special effort to patch up relations with Germany.
The two countries are at opposite sides of the argument on political union, yet Mr Major and Chancellor Helmut Kohl get on well and share similar centre-right views.
They agree that there should not be a currency union before there has been much more economic convergence within the Community.
When they met this month, Mr Kohl made it clear that he wanted an agreement on EMU that does not oblige Britain to accept a single currency before it is ready to do so.
Mr Major got off to a stickier start with President Mitterrand, who neglected to tell him about the Gulf peace plan that France was about to launch in mid-January.
But Britain's view of the future of the EC has more in common with France's than Germany's.
Britain and France both want to maintain the authority of national parliaments and governments.
Britain therefore likes the French idea that the European Council should take on a larger role at the expense of the commission.
France has talked sweetly of promoting use of the ‘hard ecu’, as Britain has proposed, on the way to EMU (for France, any alternative to the D-mark is appealing).
France is backing a British plan for a new organisation to run co-operation on terrorism, drugs, visas and immigration.
Such things are now handled by informal working parties of national officials; these are, in Britain's view, too messy.
The European Council would give guidance to this set-up for ‘inter-governmental co-operation’ and, as with ‘European Political Co-operation’in foreign policy, the commission would be allowed to sit in.
Federalist countries such as Belgium and Italy recoil from this idea, as they want interior-ministry work turned over to the EC.
Britain seldom agrees with Italy about anything.
But most EC members are now no longer ashamed of being seen to strike tactical alliances with Britain.
This is particularly true of Spain and Holland, which resent Franco-German dominance.
Spain likes parts of Britain's hard-ecu plan since it could slow moves to EMU.
Holland often teams up with Britain in discussions on foreign policy, since both want to avoid any weakening of NATO.
Denmark and Holland usually back Britain when it champions free-market causes; yet, like Britain, they want the common agricultural policy to go on subsidising their large farms.
None of this will stop the Franco-German alliance from remaining the Community's dominant force.
Britain is not about to start writing joint papers with other countries, as France and Germany regularly do together.
Its outlook will remain uniquely short-term, pragmatic, suspicious of grandiose institutional change.
But Britain's views now count.
START OF BRITAIN SECTION
Repossessed homes
Snapped down
ALMOST the only corner of the housing market showing any perkiness these days is the trade in repossessed homes.
The Council of Mortgage Lenders announced on February 14th that the number of people who lost their homes last year because they could not keep up their mortgage payments nearly tripled from the year before.
For a government committed to widening home-ownership, it is an embarrassment; for a family that is evicted, it is a personal tragedy.
For some estate agents, though, it is a boon.
Most repossessions take place within the first three years of taking out a mortgage.
They soared last year, particularly among people who bought property early in 1988, often on generous mortgages that stretched monthly payments to the borrowers' limits.
These limits were then overshot by month after month of interest rates above 14%.
Most borrowers did not anticipate this; indeed, a 1989 survey by the Office of Fair Trading shows that only 37% of borrowers gave any thought at all to the likely future movement of interest rates when they took out a loan.
Most mortgage lenders stress that they are not keen to repossess homes.
They usually wait until mortgage payments are between three and six months in arrears before seeking repossession orders.
By the time court orders are granted — some six to 12 months later — most families have moved out.
Only a few go through the final humiliation of meeting the bailiff at the door and watching him change the locks.
This reluctance of lenders to repossess homes owes little to sentiment: few lenders want to sell assets into a falling market.
Building societies are legally obliged to sell repossessed properties at the best possible price.
But different societies tackle this obligation in different ways.
Some are reluctantly accumulating properties in the hope that prices will firm up later this year; others are taking the best prices they can get, without waiting.
Hugh Dunsmore-Hardy, the president of the National Association of Estate Agents, reckons quick sales by the societies have definitely pulled down prices.
They have also caught the eye of estate agents.
Several have recently set up services specifically to deal in repossessed properties.
General Accident Property Services, the third-biggest estate agent, now has a division that it reckons sells around one-third of all repossessed properties.
As Maureen Freeman, a GAPS director, points out, repossessed homes are a good buy: they are already vacant, the owner will not change his mind and there is no precarious chain of buyers and sellers to hold things up.
Hurry on down
The agents insist, naturally, that they are out to get a good price.
But a much higher premium than usual is being put on a speedy transaction.
Norman Mazure, a London estate agent, set up a special unit two years ago with Stickley and Kent, a large London chain of agents, to deal mostly with repossessed homes.
He claims the unit gets 60% of its properties under offer within six weeks.
Last year it sold 2,000 properties; it expects this year's total to reach 3,500.
This cuts two ways for the evicted home-owner.
When he hands in his keys, he no longer owns the house; but he is still liable for interest on the loan, until the house is sold and the loan repaid — so he wants the sale to be quick.
But the price raised by an estate agent desperate for his commission is now all too likely to be lower than the original mortgage taken out by the borrower.
So unless the luckless borrower is covered by an indemnity policy, he will be landed with a bill to pay the difference.
And if the difference is big enough, he can end up still burdened with a hefty home-loan — and no home to show for it.
Grocer profits
While other retailers are dropping like flies, supermarkets are making fat profits.
The good times are unlikely to last
TODAY'S subtly-lit supermarkets, where loganberries nestle against kiwi-fruit, are a world away from Jack Cohen's ‘pile it high and sell it cheap’ Tesco's.
After the price wars of the late 1970s, when many supermarkets were still conspicuous mostly for their general ugliness and grubbiness, the big chains decided to invest their way out of trouble.
It paid off.
They introduced rigid quality control, centralised distribution and electronic tills.
With town centres increasingly congested and car-ownership rising fast, people were keen to shop outside town.
So the supermarkets (with the exception of Kwik Save) also started closing their high-street stores and building big edge-of-town stores.
A relaxation of planning rules under Margaret Thatcher made this expansion easier.
The supermarkets then found that they could charge bigger margins on goods that were peripheral to their core business, processed foods.
Shoppers liked the quality, the fresh fruit, the hot croissants and chilled meals.
They still expected to get cheap baked beans, but would pay over the odds for high-quality fresh food.
The price gap between the supermarkets and other retailers has been shrinking ever since.
Most surveys show that a basket of food still costs a bit less at a supermarket than it does at an independent grocer's; but The Economist did not find that this week.
Of an arbitrary 13 goods, five were more expensive in the independents, seven more expensive in Sainsbury's, and one (tinned tomatoes) cost the same.
White cabbage was selling for 12p a lb at the greengrocer's and 29p a lb in Sainsbury's.
Fresh food is the most extreme example of the change that has come over the shops.
Ten years ago, there were a few incidental boxes of onions in supermarkets; in the new-age groceries, the shopper is usually greeted at the door by a banquet of fresh fruit and vegetables glowing with health.
The supermarkets' muscle enables them to demand quality yet keep farmers' prices down, and the gap between what they pay and what they charge has widened.
According to Verdict, a retail-industry analyst, the gross margin on fresh foods has increased from 21% in 1986 to 28% in 1990.
For some items it is even greater.
John Ricks, a farmer near Colchester, says his onions cost 9p a lb wholesale; packing and transport costs 10p; they sell in the supermarket for 29p.
In paper bags, at the local independent, they cost 15p.
The speedy, low-inventory distribution systems that big retailers have invested in have made things even more comfortable.
The supermarkets get paid cash by the customer a few days after the goods arrive in their shops, while they pay their suppliers between one and two months after delivery.
Suppliers admit they get more stability than in the past, but some complain of ruthless use of retail muscle.
They say that supermarkets will overestimate next year's requirements and then force farmers to discount.
Why does the farmer not switch to another retailer?
‘It isn't so easy,’ says one.
‘You've invested capital to tie in with their distribution system.
And if you are recognised as a supplier of one, the others may not be interested.
They insist on loyalty.’
The retailers argue that their life is not all that cushy.
Net margins on sales may be better than those of their foreign counterparts (see table), but they have to employ more capital to build the new prettily-lit, out-of-town shops that the British want.
American retailers' building costs are lower, they say, because the price of land is lower.
On the continent, planning controls are often so tough that retailers cannot build expensive new shops and are stuck with their ugly, cheap ones.
Yet British retailers still get a better return on their assets.
Of the big foreign chains, only America's Albertson's makes a similar return; all the continentals do worse.
Gerd Krampe, of Rewe Leibbrand, a German retailer, gave clear advice to a recent conference of British retailers on the question of expansion abroad: ‘You stay at home with your nice profits.’
But if British food retailers are in clover, why does some foreign beast not intrude on their patch?
For one thing, there are highish barriers to entry.
Building an up-to-the-minute superstore costs around £25m ($49m).
And until a company has the volumes, it will not be able to get the same good terms from suppliers.
A German retailer, Aldi, is trying to move in.
It has opened a dozen shops with an intriguing new concept — pile it high and sell it cheap — and plans a chain of 200.
It stocks a relatively small range of products and plans to hit the supermarkets in the processed-foods business.
But Aldi says it has had trouble: the Office of Fair Trading is investigating Aldi's claim that suppliers, frightened of affronting their main customers, have been giving it the cold shoulder.
A judgment is expected any moment; but even if the OFT decides in Aldi's favour, the matter will still have to be investigated further by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
It could be many years before the Department of Trade and Industry decided to take action — or not, as in the case of the brewers.
Long before then, though, market laws look likely to prompt changes.
The supermarkets are still expanding furiously and expensively.
On January 29th Tesco launched a rights issue to help finance an investment programme averaging £900m a year for the next three years.
Sainsbury, which has concentrated on the south, has just opened its first store in the north-east and is moving into Wales and Scotland.
There are plenty of distant, though real, risks.
People's eating habits may change: as in America, take-aways may bite a chunk out of the market.
An environment-minded government may increase petrol tax.
This could discourage people from driving ten miles to buy their groceries.
And success will bring its own problems.
So far, they have grown without competing too much against each other.
But in three years' time Sainsbury will hit the North Sea.
Tesco may not be able to get planning permission for any more stores.
According to Ian Davis of McKinsey, a management consultancy, ‘they will inevitably end up competing with each other in their push for increased market shares.’
It may be, too, that the small independents, squeezed for so many years, are starting to fight back.
In 1986–89, the average annual decline in their market share was around 1%; in 1989–90 it fell by 0.3%.
Not surprising, when the corner-shop grocer is selling cabbage for 40% of the supermarket price.
Enter a different world
DEPARTMENT stores are the pride of British retailing.
They may not be so for much longer.
On February 19th Harrods announced that it would sack 600 of its workforce, on top of 90 redundancies last month.
Lewis's, a provincial chain of department stores which employed 3,400 people, is in the hands of the receivers.
And Allders, a chain of 11 stores that also operates duty-free shops in many of Britain's airports, has been plagued by rumours of financial difficulty in recent weeks.
The recession is hitting the stores hard.
As house sales have slumped, so has spending on department-store specialities like furniture, carpets and electrical appliances.
The one buoyant retail sector has been food, but few department stores sell much of that.
Government statistics out this week show that sales for ‘mixed retail businesses’ have grown only half as fast as sales for all retailers in the past three years.
Harrods itself has other worries.
The row over the Fayed brothers' acquisition simmers on, thanks to the Bank of England's embarrassment over Harrods Bank.
(As the governor had to confess to a Commons select committee on February 19th, banks are not supposed to belong to people publicly castigated for past mendacity — as the Fayeds were, by inspectors from the Department of Trade and Industry in 1988.)
But Harrods's biggest concern must be the generally worsening climate for all department stores.
Between 1980 and 1990 their share of total retail trade fell from 5.2% to 4.5%, according to Verdict, a retail analyst.
Several factors underlie this decline.
Department stores tend to be based in city centres and are losing trade to out-of-town sites.
Some groups have been buying into the new sites — as House of Fraser, which owns Harrods, has done at Meadowhall in Sheffield — but such an expensive strategy requires cool nerves in the present recession.
Meanwhile, specialist retailers like Dixons, an electricals chain, and niche shops like Tie Rack have been paring away at the department stores' share of the high-street market.
The big stores used to enjoy some competitive advantage from running credit accounts; the credit-card boom has put paid to that.
And the nature of the department store — stocking a little bit of everything — puts them at a disadvantage compared with more specialised retailers when it comes to exerting leverage over suppliers.
The one chain that may yet escape the decline is the John Lewis (‘never knowingly undersold’) Partnership, which continues to outrun its rivals.
Its turnover has tripled in the past decade; analysts reckon it now sells some £450-worth ($880) of goods per square foot each year, against an average of £216 for all department stores.
But even John Lewis has been feeling the pinch.
Sales in its department stores in the year to January 1991 were only 6.4% higher, by value, than in 1989–90 — and plunged by 16% on the previous year in the first, snowy week of February.
Primary schools
A classroom revolution?
Primary schools are in the middle of a big shake-up.
Some of the results may surprise the government
YOUR local primary schools have never been busier.
Headteachers shuttle between special courses on the national curriculum and evening classes on managing budgets.
Teachers spend their breaks preparing lesson plans, and their evenings swotting up on jargon.
Staff rooms are littered with glossy guides to assessment targets and fiendish charts of the new curriculum.
Young enthusiasts chat about SAT, AT, INSET, KS, PoS, and, above all, NC.
Some schools are so overburdened by all this activity that they have been forced to draft in extra staff to deal with the more mundane aspects of education — like teaching children.
No wonder everyone is so busy.
Primary schools are pioneering the most far-reaching shake-up of education in living memory.
Since October 1989 teachers have been delivering the first stages of a new national curriculum; and in the early summer they will start testing (sorry, assessing) all seven-year-olds on the three core disciplines: mathematics, English and science.
as if all this were not enough, schools have started managing their own financial affairs.
Heads may have gone into primary teaching because they liked young children; no matter.
Now they have to spend their mornings planning budgets and their afternoons paying bills.
Is the upheaval worth it?
Supporters of the reforms (by no means all of whom are Tories) argue that the new curriculum will introduce a little rigour into the soppy world of sand pits and colouring books.
For too long, over-indulgent teachers have churned out children for whom reading is a challenge and writing a mystery.
Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Schools is more of a lap-dog than a rottweiler.
But in mid-February it complained that a fifth of primary schools are offering sub-standard teaching in reading.
It singled out the upper reaches of primary schools for particular criticism.
Most 11-year-olds are not being encouraged to develop advanced reading skills; a small but significant number are illiterate.
Primary schools, it argued, are failing to stretch older children.
Many parents put it less politely.
Opinions differ over whether standards have actually been falling.
Some psychologists point to a decline in the mid-1980s and blame new-fangled teaching methods; others insist that things have always been this bad.
But even the most optimistic pundits agree that British schools are dismal compared with many rivals abroad.
Standard tests of numeracy and literacy reveal that English 11-year-olds are as much as two years behind their contemporaries in Germany and Japan.
Although teachers flinch at such international comparisons, most of them are surprisingly enthusiastic about the national curriculum.
More uniform arrangements will allow good schools to flourish, they say, while forcing bad ones to mend their ways.
A national curriculum, they add, will allow children to move schools without utterly disrupting their education; and objective assessment will enable both teachers and parents to see how well a child is doing.
Teachers also confess that, for the first time, they now know what they are supposed to be teaching and (thanks to the elaborate assessment targets) how well they are teaching it.
The fact that primary schools now teach technology and science is an added bonus.
Those who can't, account
The local management of schools (LMS) initiative, however, is altogether more controversial.
The theory must have sounded wonderful to the think-tankers who dreamed it up.
By making money follow the pupil, LMS will encourage good schools and penalise bad ones; and by delegating budgets to individual heads, it will cut down on time-wasting bureaucracy.
Those who know the children best can decide whether to splash out on a part-time assistant or a fancy computer.
The intended beneficiaries of LMS are rather more sceptical.
Though heads are delighted to have more autonomy — they will now be able to hire a plumber without going through the town hall — many feel that they are being buried under a mountain of paperwork.
Educationalists agree (and experience shows) that headteachers who are actively involved in teaching can galvanise a school: but LMS is turning even the most committed among them into under-paid chartered accountants.
It is impossible to spend much time teaching Johnny to read if you have a budget of £500,000 ($980,000) to worry about.
Small schools with a handful of teachers find budget-management particularly irksome.
But it is pupil-driven financing that really upsets the heads.
One headmistress gives a pungent summary of the prevailing philosophy: ‘Market forces are very dangerous when you are messing with children's brains.’
She hints that teachers and local officials will do their best to blunt the impact of the market.
Local heads will not allow a school run by a friend to go under.
Even heads who do not share this cartel mentality may find that aggressive expansion is not worth the candle.
Additional pupils bring extra costs as well as extra cash.
Over-zealous expansion may be counter-productive as well as burdensome: a good school may cease to be a good school if its classes are overflowing and its playgrounds full of makeshift accommodation.
Besides, some heads like to lord it over local parents — particularly over the pushy ones.
Like National Health Service consultants, they treat waiting lists as a sign of status rather than a symptom of failure.
The children now embarking on the national curriculum will still be in school at the turn of the century.
Perhaps one day an inspired current-affairs teacher will ask them about the long-term impact of the 1988 Education Act.
The more mischievous may suggest that, as an exercise in the once-discredited art of nationalisation, it was a huge success; but as an attempt to apply market forces to public services it made little difference.
Old habits die hard.
Spring sprung?
HOW does the song go —‘De spring is sprung, De grass is riz, I wonder when D'election is’?
Something like that; Bagehot's synapses are not all they once were.
At any rate, this is the seasonal question for MPs, as February snow gives way to thin, unconvincing sunshine.
Most election-timing talk is nonsense or propaganda.
Tory planners think the Labour party is talking up a May or June poll, trying to bounce them into an election while interest rates are still high.
John Major would prefer to wait.
But many of his backbenchers are getting over-excited (which is their constitutional function).
And the cabinet is divided on the issue (which is its).
The truth is bland: Mr Major will call an election if the opinion polls suggest he cannot lose.
Otherwise, he will hang on.
The party machines, however, are being oiled and watered for an early poll.
The 20 groups of Tory MPs asked by Margaret Thatcher last year to write policy papers for the next manifesto have been told to hand in their work to Number Ten by the end of the month.
The chairman, Chris Patten, will shortly sit down with the new head of the Downing Street policy unit, Sarah Hogg, to write the first draft of Mr Major's manifesto.
Both the Tories and the Labour Party are frantically fund-raising.
The Tories' problems are, on paper, worse.
The party's accumulated deficit — made up roughly half-and-half of overdraft and term-borrowings — will be nearly £10m by the end of this financial year.
Meanwhile, Central Office's non-election expenses are running at an annual £12m or so.
A leading fund-raiser and one of the party's three treasurers, Lord Beaverbrook, has said the election campaign itself could involve spending £20m.
Add it all together and — unless they are prepared to go deeper into debt — the Tories are hoping to raise anything up to £42m.
This compares with just over £15m raised for the 1987 election.
No one thinks that the party, with its umbilical connections to business, will fail to outspend Labour several-fold in the campaign; but Lord Beaverbrook and his fellow treasurers, John Cope and Lord Laing, have their work cut out.
In theory, the Tory constituency parties could come to the rescue.
The Wessex area alone, according to its treasurer, John Strafford, has £3m in local-party bank accounts.
Across Britain, Tory associations have enough to pay off the Central Office deficit and still spend plenty on local campaigning.
In practice, they so mistrust the secrecy and alleged profligacy of Central Office that they refuse to shell out.
According to one insider, local associations have still paid only half the £3m quota they were asked for in 1990 — leaving Lord Beaverbrook and friends increasingly reliant on donations from rich individuals.
But patrons with deep pockets will not forever carry on subsidising an organisation seen by the local parties as so ramshackle.
The most muttered-against official is the director of campaigning, John Lacy, though no one in the organisation expects him to go before the election.
Meanwhile, the most urgent task Central Office has been set is nearly complete — to turn the three-week campaign programme arranged for Mrs Thatcher into one suitable for Mr Major.
This has involved finding him venues for walkabouts and group discussions, where his staff think Mr Middle-England will come over well on television, even as they cut down on those wearisome charades, campaign ‘photo opportunities’.
All this, plus the commissioning of party-political broadcasts and advertising, is designed to have the Tories ready for a fight whenever Mr Major chooses — even as early as May.
But ministers and party officials would prefer a later poll.
One bonus of delaying an election until 1992 would be that Mr Major could use a summer reshuffle to continue reshaping the government he inherited from Mrs Thatcher.
If this happens, who will suffer?
Despite official denials, William Waldegrave, the health secretary, is unpopular in Downing Street.
This is partly because of his super-conciliatory attitude to the doctors.
But it also harks back to the leadership campaign, when this noted intellectual was reported as saying some unkind things about the cerebral quality of one candidate, a Mr John Major, who heard the reports.
But he would be moved sideways, rather than demoted.
Peter Lilley, the trade secretary, is thought to be underperforming in the Commons.
Both the Northern Ireland secretary, Peter Brooke, and the social-security secretary, Tony Newton, are also being spoken of as possible losers.
Candidates for the cabinet include John Patten, the Home Office minister; Tristan Garel-Jones from the foreign office; Michael Portillo, the environment minister; and Gillian Shepherd from the Treasury.
Richer Labour
Without having suffered the turmoil of a leadership contest, Labour can boast that it is better prepared for an election than the Conservatives.
It has an overdraft of just over £1m, and its finance committee was told this week that, after hoarding trade-union and individual affiliations since 1987, the party would have some £6m to spend in a May or June election — still much less than the Tories, but twice what it spent in the last election.
The party has been using some bright capitalist techniques to get itself in election-fighting mettle.
It has been taking on staff, including temporary organisers in the constituencies, whose contracts will expire four weeks after a general election.
And it has launched a successful ‘affinity’ credit card, which has just netted Labour £250,000 in its first 12 months.
Labour's party-political broadcasts are being filmed now, and work is almost finished on planning the campaign diaries.
Does Labour really expect an early election?
Suffice it to say that Labour's internal opinion-polling, now being carried out by NOP, is being ‘front-loaded’ to give more information through this spring.
And Labour has friends in the advertising industry who will try to spot advertising space being bought up for fake corporate campaigns by pro-Tory companies for May or June.
What about the voters?
Opinion polling suggests that the British electorate would rather like an early election.
Whether they will feel as enthusiastic after being deluged for three weeks with the results of the £30m-plus likely to be spent by the main parties is more questionable.
Toying with the Gulf
THE allied forces are not the only people fighting Saddam Hussein.
Manufacturers are hurriedly bringing out Gulf war model kits and war games to satisfy the armchair generals who want to fight it out for themselves.
Give or take the odd aircraft kit — including a bigger and better model of the Stealth fighter-bomber — there are few new products hitting the market.
But a lot of ingenuity is going into fresh packaging.
Almost all the military hardware committed to the Gulf was already available in kit form, with stick-on identification markings for a European war.
Gulf versions have been rushed out.
Humbrol, the French company that owns Airfix, Britain's biggest model manufacturer, now gives pride of place in its collection to Tornado, F-16, Mirage and even AWACS jets — hastily re-packaged as a ‘Gulf series’.
Generally, smaller companies have been quickest at churning out new lines; one paint maker had pots of ‘desert pink’ paint on the shelves within a week of the first television pictures showing pink-coloured tanks.
The star of many a shop display, though, is a 22-inch high model Patriot missile; it can fly to a height of 600 feet.
It was about to be discontinued by its Colorado makers until the war dramatically boosted demand.
Some retailers have been doing a brisk trade in the new toys, others apparently have not.
Hamleys, the country's largest toy shop, claims it still sells more Concordes than Tornados.
Staff at London's Games Store had sold little of anything to do with the war until the war-games club of an American military base in Britain cleared them out of T-55 tanks (Iraq's main battle tank) and German armoured personnel carriers (used by the Saudis).
The T-55s, at least, would not have been much in evidence in their previous table-top forays against the Red Army.
Gulf board games, for people who want to slug out the war by pushing cardboard counters across a map, are also proliferating.
Any budding Napoleon with a few hours to spare — or a few days, for some games — can choose from titles such as‘Butcher of Baghdad’, ‘Gulf Strike’ and ‘Line in the Sand’.
All of them are made in America, where this kind of stuff is more popular.
One exception, imaginatively titled ‘Gulf War: The Board Game’, comes from a Malaysian company that discovered it could change an America v Russia contest into a Gulf version without rewriting any of the rules.
Other games sound more convincing.
Both ‘Gulf Strike’ and ‘Butcher of Baghdad’claim to have been designed by advisers to the Pentagon.
Even such an exalted pedigree as this, though, has not been enough for some of Britain's big stores.
They have cleared their shelves of anything that could offend the public or bring down the wrath of the tabloids.
Most of them are sticking to a policy, adopted during the Falklands war, of not stocking war games until the war is over.
BRITAIN THIS WEEK
Bombers again
An IRA bomb at London's Victoria station killed one man and injured 38 other people hours after another exploded at Paddington station.
Police said other stations had not been evacuated because a warning call from the terrorists had been too vague.
Security cameras at Victoria, which could have filmed the bombers, had been switched off.
Subsequent bomb alerts caused travel chaos in the London Underground.
For two days running, thousands of commuters had to leave trains to walk along the tracks, some of them after being stranded between stations for six hours.
Interviewed on television, Sir Bob Reid, the chairman of British Rail, urged the government to spend up to £2 billion ($3.9 billion) on improving the country's rail network.
That sinking feeling
Insiders at Westminster reported that the cabinet was poised to scrap the poll tax and replace it with a property tax.
Labour said Michael Heseltine, the environment secretary, was in a ‘fever of indecision’ over an alternative to Mrs Thatcher's flagship.
A U-boat, perhaps?
Britain's recession became official.
Government figures for October-December showed real gross domestic product had fallen, by 1%, for the second consecutive quarter — the conventional definition of recession.
Retail sales fell by 1.3% in January, despite some of the biggest price-cuts in the shops for many a decade.
Some of those who are spending should not be; the number of bouncing cheques rose by almost half on last year.
Lord Young, a former trade secretary, deliberately and seriously misled both Parliament and the European Commission when he pushed through the 1988 sale of Rover to British Aerospace, concluded an inquiry by a Commons select committee.
It also accused the trade and industry department of behaving unprofessionally over the sale and the inquiry.
Michael Heseltine, the environment secretary, rejected British Coal's plans to build a £400m ($780m) superpit on green-belt land near Coventry as environmentally unfriendly.
A man was legally allowed to savour his first curry for three months.
Southampton's magistrates lifted an order temporarily restraining him from entering any Indian restaurant, imposed after he used threatening behaviour in a local tandoori.
They closed the case by fining him £100 ($196).
Kenneth Clarke, the education secretary, poured cold water on the recommendations of a working party set up by his department to look at physical education.
It urged that all children should be taught to swim.
The idea was too expensive, said Mr Clarke.
Winners and losers
Long-term unemployment, defined as people out of work for more than a year, is rising for the first time in five years.
Michael Howard, the employment secretary, said the new total, at 525,000, was in line with the ‘interruption’ in the decline of the jobless total.
More signs of contraction in the service industries.
Barclays bank announced it is preparing to sack 15–20% of its 87,000 domestic employees.
Thomas Cook, a travel firm, asked 7,500 staff members to take voluntary pay cuts.
After warning had been given that poll-tax bills will average £400 ($780) in April, Westminster council announced that residents will have to pay only £176, down £19 on last year.
Lady Porter, the council's leader, thought the occasion merited a second trumpet-blast — so she resigned.
Margaret Thatcher will be awarded America's highest civilian honour, the Medal of Freedom, when she visits the country next month, announced the White House.
Reports that electricity charges would go up by 13% in April set off a furore in the press.
Industry bosses were rumoured to be reconsidering their plans, possibly curbing the increases to 10%.
Brain-teasers
In an open letter to the government, 72 senior expatriate scientists representing Britain's ‘brain drain’ gave warning of severe economic and social consequences unless scientific research was given a higher priority.
MPs put the governor of the Bank of England in a tight spot over Harrods bank.
Robin Leigh-Pemberton told a Commons committee that banking laws prevented him from saying anything about the case of the Fayed brothers, the owners of Harrods, strongly criticised by official inspectors for their behaviour in acquiring the store in 1985.
When the conveyor belt stops, out come the text books.
More than 4,500 Ford employees have taken up the company's new education scheme to encourage them to learn a foreign language.
German is the most popular, though adventurous workers are opting for Norwegian, Greek and Russian.
BUSINESS
Corporate governance in Germany
Our crowd
BONN
WHEN it comes to mounting a defence against hostile bidders, big German companies can tap an influential old-boy network which, together with legal takeover barriers, can make them all but impregnable.
A rare glimpse of how this system works has been provided by the attempt of Italy's Pirelli to gain control of Continental, Germany's biggest tyre-maker.
Like some other German companies, Continental has a rule that no shareholder can own more than 5% of its voting rights.
Even so, Pirelli claims to have assembled an alliance controlling just over 50% of shareholders' votes, which might seem to give it victory.
But if Continental's supervisory board, which opposes the Pirelli bid, can muster one more vote than 25%, it can block even an offer supported by a majority of shareholder votes.
This is probably what will happen at a shareholders' meeting on March 13th, thanks to a closing of ranks by Germany's top industrialists.
Organising the defence, much to Pirelli's pique, is Deutsche Bank, Germany's biggest bank.
Ulrich Weiss, a top Deutsche executive as well as the chairman of Continental's supervisory board, originally favoured the takeover, according to Pirelli.
Mr Weiss denies this.
In any case, Deutsche is now wholly opposed and has coaxed powerful friends into buying Continental shares to help block the bid.
One is Daimler-Benz, the aerospace and vehicles group.
Its supervisory board is headed by Deutsche's boss, Hilmar Kopper, and a former head of Continental, Helmut Werner, sits on Daimler's management board, a second-tier of executive directors that actually runs the giant industrial firm.
Another ally is Volkswagen, the car maker; it too is led by a one-time head of Continental, Carl Hahn.
Even rival German firms have put aside their differences to jump to Continental's defence.
BMW, Daimler's chief competitor in the luxury-car market, is helping the tyre company.
Allianz, the largest German insurance group and a strong rival of Deutsche Bank's, looks likely to join the defence effort because its finance chief, Friedrich Schiefer, also sits on Continental's supervisory board.
The ‘rescue’ of Continental recalls a famous victory for Germany's business elite in seeing off a foreign interloper in the 1970s.
The Shah of Iran sought to buy a hefty stake in Daimler, Germany's most prestigious company.
German companies rallied round to form a holding company just to buy Daimler shares.
To this day the holding company owns a 25.23% blocking minority in Daimler.
Another 28.2% is held by Deutsche Bank.
Foreigners can win control of German firms, but usually only when the target company is in trouble and when no leading German firm objects to the acquisition.
Grundig is controlled by Holland's Philips, Standard Elektrik Lorenz by France's Alcatel and Triumph-Adler by Italy's Olivetti.
But when Germans decide a national asset is at stake, and the old-boy network starts buzzing, a foreign buyer's chance of victory is almost always low.
New Zealand farmers
Sell them sunny meadows
WELLINGTON
‘ALTOGETHER too many damned sheep,’ was how George Bernard Shaw summed up New Zealand.
True, there are a lot of them — 58m compared with only 3m people.
But, unlike the rest of the rich world's sheep, they do at least stand on their own four feet without any government support.
While the European Community quarrels over subsidies with America and other farm exporters in the Uruguay round of world trade talks, New Zealand's farmers are showing that eliminating subsidies completely will not wipe out farming, but make it far more efficient instead.
In 1984 New Zealand farmers received an effective level of government aid (taking account of subsidies, minimum-price supports and so on) of 33% of the value of their output — almost as much as European farmers then received.
That year a Labour  government uncharacteristically committed to free-market economic policies won office.
Over the next few years, all farm support was phased out.
For farmers this was a bruising experience.
The real net incomes of beef and sheep farmers have fallen by more than half since 1984, as have land prices in real terms.
The number of sheep has shrunk by 12m from its peak.
And now two of New Zealand's main export markets have been badly hit by political and economic troubles: the Middle East and the Soviet Union.
Despite this, Federated Farmers, the farmers' lobbying group, is not calling for a return to subsidies.
Its main gripe is the high level of tariffs on manufactured imports, still among the highest of the 24 rich countries in the OECD.
This amounts to a tax on farmers because they import most of their machinery and materials.
But New Zealand farmers could not be better placed for the day when (if) other rich countries lower barriers to food imports and abolish farm subsidies.
New Zealand's dairy and meat farmers have become the cheapest producers in the OECD, thanks to their country's mild climate and to their average herd size of 160 cows, compared with the EC's less-efficient average of only 20 cows.
Not only do other rich countries restrict access to their markets, the EC also dumps surplus food on world markets, depressing the prices on which New Zealand farmers depend.
As a result, they receive for their milk only a fifth of the price paid to European farmers, a third of the price paid to American farmers, and one-seventh of that paid in Japan.
Even at these prices New Zealand farmers earn a living.
If other countries eliminate farm supports and stop dumping surplus food abroad, then world prices of dairy produce might double and export prices for other food items would move upwards too.
With farm exports accounting for 70% of New Zealand's exports, that would be good news for the entire economy.
In the meantime, Owen Jennings, president of Federated Farmers, reckons that New Zealand farmers have to learn to market their produce, no matter what happens to subsidies elsewhere.
Though the easy life of acting as Britain's larder ended in the 1970s, they have been slow to add value to produce before exporting it — oven-ready lamb rather than frozen carcasses, fancy cheeses rather than plain cheddar.
Even if other countries reduce their subsidies, marketing will matter ever more as low-cost producers from Eastern Europe and other developing countries enter the world market.
New Zealand farmers have one big advantage in any marketing campaign: their country's sparklingly clean environment.
New Zealand lambs and dairy cows grow fat the old-fashioned way, by grazing in sunny meadows, not by munching bags of feed full of additives or wandering about on pastures drenched in chemical fertilisers, as their European and American cousins do.
Many consumers might be happy to pay a small premium for the reassurance of sunny meadows.
Lean, mean and through your windscreen
Having been exporters for decades, Japan's car makers are at last becoming real multinationals, with factories all over the world.
So they have to make a choice: should they stay Japanese, or try to blend in with the locals?
Our correspondent visited Nissan's plants in Tennessee and north-east England, and Toyota's in Kentucky, to find their answers
ONE goof made by Michael Dukakis during his campaign for America's presidency in 1988 was a speech attacking foreign investment.
He had chosen it as a desperate, populist issue, yet the audience was even cooler than the unenthusiastic crowds the embattled Democrat had faced elsewhere.
Unknown to him, the stump on which he was standing happened to be a car-parts plant owned by Italians.
Tell that story to one of America's many grumblers about Japanese investment and the response is that Mr Dukakis would never have made that mistake at a Japanese firm: he would have been able to tell the difference.
Japanese firms do not blend into their surroundings.
They are run by Japanese, the real decisions are taken at head office, foreigners have no chance of promotion, and all the fancy design work is done at home, leaving the overseas factory as just an assembly plant for imported components.
This is why Japanese car factories are known rudely as ‘transplants’: unnatural organs vulnerable to rejection by their new body.
About 30 miles south of Nashville, in the small town of Smyrna, Tennessee, stands a reply to that description.
Nissan's ten-year-old car and truck plant is a huge complex of white, impersonal, low-slung buildings.
But outside the main entrance stands a tall flagpole, at the top of which flies as large a sample of the Stars and Stripes as any patriot could hope for.
This firm wears an American suit of clothing.
The Japanese presence has been pared to a minimum: only 25 Japanese managers, and few cultural references.
No morning exercises, and scarcely an ikebana to be seen.
By the production line stand basketball nets and ping-pong tables for use during breaks.
The boss, Jerry Benefield, is as American as they come.
He spent 18 years working for Ford, ending up as manager of its Dearborn assembly plant.
Most of his senior colleagues, and his predecessor, Marvin Runyon, came from the same stable.
Nissan is the extreme case among the seven Japanese car makers settling into America and the three that are in Britain.
Honda has more Japanese managers at its Ohio plant; Toyota in Georgetown, Kentucky, is somewhere in between.
But all face an awkward balancing act.
The more Japanese they are, the more criticism they attract, both locally and nationally.
Japanese never like to stand out in a crowd.
Yet the quicker they become local the greater the risk of degrading themselves to the styles and practices of their local rivals, losing the differences that account for their superiority.
The problem is an old one: Ford faced it in the 1920s when it shipped its mass-production methods across to old-fashioned, craft-based Europe.
Ultimately, as Ford did in Europe, the Japanese have to become local to succeed.
But in their own way, at their own pace.
Their superior methods of waste-free — what a fine new book* calls ‘lean’— production and close relations with suppliers cannot work across oceans.
They have to be set up, in full, locally, with a minimum of imported parts and remote decisions.
At the same time, Toyota, Nissan and the others will find it hard to expand if they do not design their cars, and many of the parts contained in them, to meet local tastes and fashions.
Those car firms that build a more or less complete organisation for manufacturing, supply and design in America and Europe will be most likely to do well.
In other words, it will be those that do just what the grumblers demand — cutting imports, using local suppliers, doing R&D on the spot — that will be most threatening to General Motors, Ford, Volkswagen, Peugeot and Fiat.
The area in which blending-in has to be most immediate is employment: factory workers have to be Tennesseans, Kentuckians or Geordies, dealt with in their own way.
Yet handling and recruiting people is a task at which the Japanese are famously different from their American or British counterparts.
So which are they, Japanese or local?
In some ways, a comparison between Nissan and Toyota in America and Nissan in Britain reveals as much about those two countries as it does about the firms.
Walk around the plants: though the machinery is similar, the atmosphere is not.
Nissan's British plant at Washington, in north-east England just south of Newcastle, may be slick by local standards, but is grubbier and more human than its older Tennessean cousin or Toyota's newer factory in Kentucky.
There is more litter, and piped pop music blares throughout the factory.
Rules seem less strictly enforced.
In America, many of the welders and fitters are women; in Britain, as in Japan, they are all men.
The trappings of Japaneseness are worn differently.
British workers felt uncomfortable with the slogans common in Japanese factories, so there is none, but the American plants are full of them: ‘Let's talk quality’; ‘Quality today, success tomorrow’; ‘Professional Results In Daily Efforts’(spot the acronym); ‘Best die-change team, 1988’.
Company uniforms are voluntary in all three plants, but seem less widespread among British workers (though almost universal among the managers).
While Nissan uses an American flag at Smyrna to underline its Americanness, the British plant has no such patriotic symbol but few Japanese decorations either.
Toyota seems less ashamed of its origins, with Japanese carp streamers and a huge red daruma plaster head in the factory for luck.
Superficially, there are other signs of Japaneseness — but they are often more ‘Japanese’ than many factories in Japan itself.
Toyota in Kentucky and Nissan in Britain emphasise their managers' open-plan, egalitarian offices.
Yet in Nagoya and Tokyo many top managers have private offices (as do Nissan's American managers).
Indeed, Nissan's original Japanese boss in Britain had his own office; it was the idea of Ian Gibson, his British successor, to move into the open.
Similarly, the absence of parking privileges and separate dining rooms, celebrated features of the Japanese firm abroad, exaggerate the absence of hierarchy at home.
But exaggeration is the point: the aim is to make things appear strikingly different from American and British equivalents.
Ways of negotiating differ markedly across the Atlantic.
Of the three plants, only the British one has a recognised trade union, the Amalgamated Engineering Union.
But local practice made a union appear essential; to have a single one — compared with the half-dozen common at other British car plants — was new.
Nissan's factory is not a closed shop, and membership is low (about 35% of total employment and 50% of the shop floor) though managers claim to have encouraged it.
And the main talking-shop with workers is not the union but a quarterly ‘company council’ with delegates elected by all employees.
At Smyrna, Nissan discouraged union membership, fighting off an effort in 1989 by the United Auto Workers to organise the plant.
The UAW has tried to recruit at Toyota, but with scant success.
In employment, then, these firms respond pragmatically to local conditions.
The same is true of wages.
To reduce the desire for formal negotiating sessions but to remove suspicions that workers in the American South are being treated as low-cost, both the American plants tie wages to national car-industry levels, taking an average of pay at American and other car makers.
Nissan in Britain, however, gives its union a role by holding pay negotiations every two years with no formal industry benchmarks.
Both American firms pay annual or biannual bonuses, and are searching for ways to link more of managers' pay to performance.
They argue that a balance must be struck between team spirit and individual rewards.
But Peter Wickens, Nissan's British personnel director, rejects the idea of productivity pay or bonuses for workers or managers.
It encourages ‘short-term thinking’, he says.
He is also puzzled by the fact that the Smyrna and Georgetown plants both have a pool of job applicants selected for them by their state governments before they make the final choice.
Mr Wickens would not dream of handing selection or filtering to anyone else, whether the union or a local government.
That is his job.
Not quite in time
Although employment mixes local and Japanese flavours, manufacturing is firmly Japanese.
That, after all, is what gives Nissan and Toyota their competitive advantage.
The methods of quality control they use are Japanese, and can, they find, be drilled into Britons and Americans just as well as into Japanese.
Productivity, measured by cars per man-hour, is just as good as in Japan.
But a car factory is not an independent unit: it is part of a much wider network of manufacturers, deliverers, suppliers and designers.
Once parts and ideas come to the assembly line, the overseas factories are virtually as good or as bad as their Japanese counterparts at sending cars out of the factory doors.
But the whole process is still not as efficient.
The trouble is that none of the three firms is nearly as Japanese as the owners would like it to be.
Critics think this means that they prefer to import more parts and to retain control in Japan.
The truth is just the opposite.
In the Japanese style of manufacturing, two things are vital: the elimination of waste in production and stocks by ‘just-in-time’ delivery of parts; and close co-operation with parts-suppliers over quality as well as R&D.
Both require proximity.
Production cannot be ‘just-in-time’ when parts are imported from thousands of miles away in Japan.
At Georgetown, Toyota keeps three days' worth of stocks of imported parts, compared with 1.5 days' worth of American parts — or four hours' worth at its Japanese plants.
It is not simply a question of distance: hundreds of miles in America can be crossed faster than 30 in crowded Japan.
Rather, what matters is the certainty of supply schedules.
Some ‘just-in-time’ delivery is possible: all three plants boast that their car seats are made by local firms to synchronise with the car assembly line.
But none can say that of other parts.
For some parts, the problem is scale.
Engines and transmissions are usually made by car firms themselves, but with larger production runs than for cars, so the small scale of overseas car output makes it still sensible to import most of these things from Japan.
Nissan now assembles engines at Smyrna and Washington from imported kits; it now plans to spend $600m on a new engine plant at Smyrna.
Toyota plans to make them at Georgetown when it doubles annual car output from 200,000 to 400,000 in the next few years.
Honda already makes engines abroad.
But with most parts the problems are quality, reliability and development.
Until the Japanese arrived in the 1980s, American and British suppliers had to meet lower standards than the Japanese demand.
They also had little experience either of designing parts together with the customer or of having the customer inspect (and interfere with) the suppliers' own factories.
The Japanese preference is to treat suppliers as if they were a department of their own firm — sharing design work and swapping ideas on quality control and manufacturing methods — but one that, because it is separate, is subject to market disciplines.
To achieve that abroad, they need not only to find suppliers willing to work in their way, but also to build a commercial relationship in which each is dependent on the other.
That takes time, but also requires scale: so long as the car makers' output — and thus demand for parts — is small, it is hard to force suppliers to change their ways.
The local world car
So far, no Japanese car maker has managed to reproduce its native strengths abroad.
For the time being, however, the weaknesses resulting from long supply lines and independent parts producers are being outweighed by other strengths, compared with American and European rivals.
For how long?
Many American and European firms are closing the gap in productivity and quality.
Some are even making cars that customers want.
If there is one thing that Japanese managers respond to, it is this sort of pressure.
What follows is that Toyota, Nissan and the others will seek to eliminate the weaknesses in their overseas production.
The logic of their own methods is thus pushing them to buy more parts locally — for their own reasons, regardless of political rules demanding higher local content.
All three claim local content of 60–80%, depending on the car.
But they will not match Japanese efficiency until they hit 100%.
There are two other things to be tackled before the Japanese can operate at full tilt.
The first is to shift more research and development out of Japan.
In a world instantly connected by a finger on a facsimile machine, it might seem unnecessary to decentralise research.
One lab, one set of engineers and a worldwide sales force would seem to be all that is needed if it is true that companies and markets are becoming more global.
Yet markets are not global: tastes differ, especially in cars.
And as it becomes easier and cheaper to span the globe, knowledge of local wrinkles is becoming more important, not less.
This need not apply to basic research and design.
Toyota need only have one team inventing electric cars or ceramic engines.
Some central components can be more or less standard, worldwide, notably the engine, for some tastes are universal.
But other sorts of research need to be done on the spot.
This can involve the whole car, where a market has a taste for a certain type (such as four-wheel drives in America).
Or, more often, it involves particular parts.
In any case, closer links with parts suppliers require designers and researchers to be nearby.
This is why all the big Japanese firms are setting up research centres in America and Europe.
This is not just a bending to political pressure to bring in higher-paid jobs; it is a commercial necessity.
What all of Japan's car makers are evolving towards is a worldwide structure something like this.
There will be a strong Japanese parent with two full-range subsidiaries, one in Europe and one in America.
Each of the three will design cars and components to match local tastes.
Ultimately, no parts will be shipped across oceans, though some designs will be.
But each will export cars to one another.
A ‘European’ car, for instance, would be designed and built in Britain for the local mass market, but also exported as a niche product to Japan and America.
This is close to what GM and Ford already practise in Europe, with one difference: the American firms' subsidiaries rarely trade cars or parts with their parent.
If anything, say the Japanese, they are too separate.
None of the Japanese firms is anywhere near its goal; they make only one or two models at each plant, which is too few.
Honda in Ohio may be the closest, with its wider model range and higher output, though the company's progress in Europe is slow.
In December Honda introduced in America a new Accord station wagon, the first Japanese car to be both designed and built abroad.
By the end of the decade, all will want to be doing this for their main cars in America and Europe.
A chance from the bottom up
The remaining task matters just as much, but it is trickier: to acquire, retain and exploit local managers.
This is more an opportunity to be grabbed than a threat to the survival of Japanese factories abroad.
The American and British managers of the Nissan and Toyota overseas plants are not about to quit.
In particular, they do not worry that they will never be chairmen of the parent companies.
Their chances of being chairmen of Ford or General Motors are pretty slim too; non-existent (on past experience) if they are a British manager at an American ‘transplant’ in Britain.
Nor is interference an issue.
There are few Japanese managers at Smyrna, Georgetown and Washington, and the few are seen as teachers, not meddlers.
The opportunity, rather, is this: apart from lean production and quality control, one of the big domestic advantages of the best Japanese manufacturers has been the way they garner information within their own firm and use it to take decisions.
Compared with the stereotyped western firm, they operate from the bottom up rather than the top down.
Information flows freely up the organisation and decisions are taken, or at least initiated, at relatively low levels.
The generals rarely send orders to the troops.
The troops send orders to the generals, for their approval.
In principle, that ought to make Japanese firms the ideal global companies.
Information should flow up the overseas subsidiaries and to the parent; decisions would be decentralised.
For that to happen, though, the foreign managers have to be treated as equals of the domestic managers.
They have to want to pass on information, have to trust that it will be taken seriously, and have to be given appropriate decision-making powers.
This is not needed merely to run the factories properly — which is what foreign managers' present jobs mainly amount to.
But it will become more of a factor as more design and development is shifted overseas.
Those dreaming up ideas for new cars, new seats, new air-conditioning systems will be non-Japanese managers.
If Nissan, Toyota and the others fail to tap this source they will still be formidable firms all around the world.
But if they succeed, overcoming barriers of language, culture and distance, they have the chance to grow on such a worldwide scale that they could overtake the world's two biggest car makers, General Motors and Ford, in a decade or so.
That enticing possibility is why they are bound to have a go.
High-definition television
On the blink
PARIS
QUEL chagrin.
Helped by heavy subsidies from the European Commission, France's Thomson and Holland's Philips have been busily developing a new European standard for high-definition television (HDTV), a new broadcasting technology that offers cinema-quality pictures on a TV screen.
Just when they were about to ask Brussels to impose the fruits of their labour as the official standard for European direct-broadcast satellites, someone at the French foreign ministry leaked a report which argues that their technology, called D2 MAC, is already out of date.
Although the Japanese have long led the commercialisation of HDTV, it is American technology that has caught the eye of French diplomats.
Specifically, they are impressed by the Digicipher system, developed jointly by General Instruments and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
One of the biggest problems in HDTV is cramming into crowded airwaves the huge amounts of data needed to recreate pictures of lifelike clarity.
D2 MAC fudges that problem by offering a picture which, though far better than today's TV, is not as good as what HDTV will eventually provide.
Digicipher, by contrast, squeezes a full-blown HDTV signal into a smaller slice of the radio spectrum.
The French foreign ministry report, says Digicipher may be good enough to make the compromise solution of D2 MAC unnecessary.
Right or wrong, the report increases the chances of a row in Brussels at the end of February, when industry representatives meet to reconsider Europe's HDTV policies.
That meeting was never likely to be a happy one.
Though European regulations now say that D2 MAC should be the standard on all direct-broadcast satellites, few are lining up to use it.
On the contrary, one of the few broadcasters likely to use D2 MAC was recently shut down.
After a bruising fight for market share, British Satellite Broadcasting sold out to its rival, Rupert Murdoch's Sky Broadcasting.
The new company will beam its signal off Mr Murdoch's Astra satellite, which cannot handle D2 MAC signals.
The European Commission must now decide whether to give broadcasters a harder push towards D2 MAC or bow to lack of interest.
A cold wind blows through Europe
Will continental Europe follow America and Britain into recession?
EUROPE'S economies are diverging.
While Germany remains robust, Britain and Sweden are already in the grip of recession.
Which way will the rest of Europe go?
Though eastern Germany's economy has virtually collapsed, western Germany's shows few signs of faltering.
Industrial production surged 5.7% in the year to December while the volume of retail sales rose by 4.9%.
A regular survey carried out by IFO, a research institute, shows that business confidence has slipped slightly in recent months, but it still remains far higher than at any time in the 1980s.
Most forecasters still expect GNP growth of 3–3.5% this year, down from an estimated 4.6% in 1990.
France, Italy and Spain, on the other hand, have slowed sharply since last summer, with industrial output now below its level a year ago in all three countries.
The Gulf war has severely dented business and consumer confidence.
French retail sales fell by 3.6% in the year to November, while business confidence has fallen more sharply in the past two quarters than at any time in the 1980s.
Unemployment in France has started to rise again, from an already high level of 9%.
Many forecasters expect France's economy to grow by only 1.5% in 1991, down from 4% in both 1988 and 1989 and from an estimated 2.6% last year.
Italy's growth is also expected to slow, to around 1.5% this year, while forecasters have pencilled in 2.5% for Spain — barely half its average growth over the past four years.
What happened to the pull of the German locomotive?
The increase in German demand resulting from unification was supposed to boost economic growth in Germany's trading partners.
Instead, unification has proved a mixed blessing for the rest of Europe.
The Bundesbank's fear of inflation and the impact of unification on Germany's budget deficit have resulted in higher real interest rates in Germany — and hence in other countries that are members of the European Monetary System (EMS).
Unless governments accept a devaluation of their currencies against the D-mark, they have limited room to cut interest rates to revive flagging demand.
Member governments have two good reasons for resisting devaluation.
First, it would undo the anti-inflationary credibility that they have painfully won in recent years, and which is the precise benefit offered by EMS membership.
A loss of credibility could lead to higher interest rates in the longer term, as investors demand compensation for the increased risk of devaluation.
A second reason is that the D-mark is already overvalued, not undervalued, against most other member currencies in terms of its purchasing-power parity.
Indeed, since 1986 unit labour costs have risen more slowly in France than Germany, and by the end of this year France's rate of consumer-price inflation could be lower than Germany's.
Some economists argue, however, that German unification required a real appreciation of the D-mark to help shift resources from its current-account surplus into domestic investment and consumption.
If other countries resist a realignment, then a real appreciation can only come about if their inflation falls below Germany's, at the cost of slower growth.
Either way, devaluation against the D-mark would not solve the real cause of reduced export competitiveness in France and Italy, namely the weakness of the dollar.
For example, although France's trade deficit with Germany narrowed last year, its trade balance with America moved from surplus into deficit.
On top of this, Germany's trading partners have benefited less than they had hoped from increased demand in Germany.
Germany's trade surplus with the rest of the European Community did shrink last year, to DM65 billion ($40 billion) from DM94 billion in 1989.
But that was due more to slower growth in domestic demand — and hence slower growth in demand for German exports — on the part of its trading partners than to a big jump in German imports.
Germany's imports from France rose by only 7% last year in D-mark terms, well down from the 13% average rise in 1988 and 1989, even as the rate of growth in France's imports from Germany slumped from 15% to 1%.
In the fast lane
Despite these disappointments, it remains true that the stronger a country's trade links with Germany, the better its economy is holding up.
The latest available figures for Holland, Belgium and Austria (which, though not a member of the EMS, pegs its currency to the D-mark) show that output remains fairly buoyant.
All three economies are forecast to grow by 2.5% or so this year.
Exports to Germany are equivalent to 15% of Holland's GDP, 12% of Belgium's and 11% of Austria's, compared with only 4% of France's and 3% of Italy's and Britain's.
Holland actually moved into trade surplus with Germany last year.
Exporters in France, Italy and Britain are more exposed to the cheap dollar.
Not only do they send a bigger share of their exports to America, but they are also facing fierce competition from American firms in third markets.
One example: French and British aerospace exports are all invoiced in dollars.
Even Italy and France, however, should avoid recession in 1991.
Not only will Germany continue to provide some support for their exports, but neither of the two economies spent and borrowed with the abandon of the English-speaking world in the 1980s.
It is no coincidence that North America, Britain and Australia — the biggest borrowers and spenders — are now suffering the deepest downturns.
That remains the best reason for believing that continental Europe will remain a region of growth in a faltering world economy.
Young love, great riches, first tiff
Microsoft's partnership with IBM has made Bill Gates, Microsoft's founder, a billionaire and helped IBM become the biggest personal-computer maker in the world.
Is the romance over?
THEY were the glamour couple of the 1980s.
The unlikely marriage between tousled Microsoft and buttoned-down IBM created the hottest products in the decade's hottest industry, personal computers.
Celebrated everywhere, the duo had no reason to question their good fortune, and no need to wonder which their friends really liked best: IBM's earnest reliability or Microsoft's youthful creativity.
Now a setback has brought long-buried differences to the surface.
Computer-industry gossips wonder if the marriage can survive.
Premature though speculation of divorce may be — both Microsoft and IBM are quick to pledge their commitment to each other— even minor flaws in their domestic harmony will be closely watched.
Together, IBM and Microsoft set the technical standards that helped fuel the explosive growth of personal computers in the 1980s: ‘IBM-compatible’ hardware and Microsoft's DOS operating-system software, the basic program needed to run any computer.
Together, both companies are trying to set a new standard for the more complex computing world of the 1990s: a jointly developed operating system called OS/2.
But customers have been slow to embrace OS/2.
The frustration is driving Microsoft and IBM apart.
The eventual result may be new leadership for the personal-computer industry, or no clear leadership at all.
Since they first began holding hands, Microsoft and IBM have shared barely a care.
The men from Big Blue originally came to Microsoft's founder, Bill Gates, to license the programming languages that he had written for the early personal-computer enthusiasts, most of whom had built their own machines.
IBM also needed an operating system.
Gary Kildall, whose Digital Research created the CP/M operating system for the first generation of personal computers, did not jump at IBM's offer.
So in 1980 IBM came back to Mr Gates, then 25, who quickly bought a rudimentary operating system from another young company, renamed it DOS, and fixed it up for IBM.
DOS now sells about 17m copies a year, and Mr Gates's 40% stake in Microsoft is worth about $4 billion.
Today's success was created largely by yesterday's success.
Because it was IBM jumping into the computer market with Microsoft in 1981 — as opposed to yet-another bunch of blue-jeaned entrepreneurs — would-be competitors reckoned the couple's technology might be worth copying.
Microsoft's willingness to license DOS helped rivals to copy it and then use that technology as the basis for their own innovation.
The more people jumped on to the bandwagon, the more others wanted to join them.
Almost everybody in the computer industry expected something similar to happen with OS/2.
It hasn't.
Since its launch in 1988, sales of OS/2 have grown to only about 300,000 a year.
Nobody knows why.
Perhaps the relatively high price of the more powerful personal computers needed to run OS/2 has put off budget-minded companies.
Perhaps buyers are put off by the complexity of learning a new technology.
Or perhaps OS/2 simply solved problems that do not trouble most customers.
Whatever the reason, OS/2's adversity is pushing Microsoft and IBM apart.
Microsoft responds to slow OS/2 sales with a youthful eagerness to do better.
‘We were wrong,’ admits Steve Ballmer, a top Microsoft executive.
He says both he and Mr Gates thought OS/2 would outsell DOS by 1992 at the latest.
It will not.
So Microsoft is now concentrating its efforts on a product customers do want to buy: Windows.
Windows does the most visible part of the job OS/2 was designed to do.
It helps users to juggle a variety of programs at once, each in its own window on the screen.
It is nowhere near as good as OS/2 at managing complex tasks, like getting computers to co-operate across a network.
But customers do not seem to care.
In nine months on the market, the latest version of Windows has sold 3m copies.
Microsoft is now trying to market Windows as a stepping stone to OS/2, by making it easy for users of Windows and writers of programs for Windows to migrate to OS/2 eventually.
Microsoft's enthusiasm for Windows annoys IBM.
For Big Blue, OS/2 is just one piece of a grand vision about how all of a company's computers can work together.
Any gains it might make by fiddling with its strategy for OS/2 would be offset — perhaps more than offset — by the confusion such fiddling would engender about IBM's overall strategy.
So IBM is publicly sticking to OS/2, though it is also quietly hedging its bets by incorporating into its grand scheme other products with many of the same capabilities.
Piece by small technical piece, these strategies are eating away at the consensus that originally made OS/2 seem a certainty as the computing world's next-generation technical standard.
Microsoft has set up Windows as a rival to a component of OS/2 called Presentation Manager, which is still backed by IBM.
Perhaps in retaliation, IBM has signed an agreement with Novell, a maker of personal-computer networks.
This could make Novell's products an alternative to Microsoft's networking software, called LAN Manager.
And IBM is financing an ambitious project by a young Californian company, Patriot Partners; it would let software companies write programs compatible with OS/2 and Unix, an operating system with similar capabilities originally created by AT&T's Bell Labs.
With more and more options to choose from, customers and software developers are increasingly reluctant to plump for just one.
What makes this a particular problem for Microsoft and IBM is that, while the consensus on OS/2 is unravelling, its chief rival, Unix, is at last making headway.
When OS/2 was announced, Unix was dismissed as a flop because there were almost as many versions of Unix as people selling it.
Now various versions of Unix have been boiled down to two: one from the Open Systems Foundation, a consortium that includes IBM, Hewlett Packard and DEC, and one from Unix International, a consortium involving AT&T and Sun Microsystems.
About 1m copies of Unix were sold in 1990.
A recent poll by DMR, a Canadian information-technology consultancy, shows that nearly as many American companies are planning to adopt Unix as OS/2.
This raises the possibility that OS/2 — and, with it, IBM's partnership with Microsoft — will get caught in a vicious circle, much like DOS got caught in a virtuous one.
Slow sales will encourage Microsoft to innovate and IBM to hedge, which will make customers cautious, which will slow sales, which will encourage further tiffs between the two companies, and so on.
It could all end in tears.
Japan's chip makers
Falling off the learning curve
TOKYO
JAPANESE manufacturers of memory chips are poised on the brink of a bloody price war.
The price of a 1-megabit dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) chip — the current workhorse of the Japanese semiconductor industry — has tumbled 40% since September, to around $4.50.
Falling prices for 1-megabit chips erode prices for the coming generation of 4-megabit DRAMs.
At $17 a chip, the price of 4-megabit DRAMs is already probably too low for semiconductor manufacturers to recoup the cost of the new production lines needed to make them.
The last time Japanese chip manufacturers faced a ruinous price war over a new generation of chips, they were saved by American stupidity.
This time they may not be so lucky.
In 1985, when Japanese chip makers last started slashing prices, America's government insisted that they raise them in order to protect the (virtually non-existent) American DRAM industry.
That agreement is about to expire.
Although America's electronics industries are keen for the government to renew the parts of this agreement that call for the Japanese to buy more American chips, their ardour for price-fixing has cooled.
Instead of government-rigged prices, they want little more than a reaffirmation of existing anti-dumping rules.
That may not be enough to save the Japanese from cutting each other 's throats.
The main market for Japan's semiconductor makers — the American computer industry — has been sinking deeper into slump since August 1990.
Now chip sales in Japan are beginning to collapse as well.
As a result, big DRAM producers like Toshiba, Hitachi, Mitsubishi Electric and NEC have 4-megabit chips piling up in their warehouses, just as they start opening additional factories.
Over the past year Japanese semiconductor firms have spent a colossal ¥850 billion ($6.7 billion) building more production lines for 4-megabit chips.
Each has been trying to outbid the rest in an attempt to gain market share and so exploit economies of scale.
Between them, Japanese semiconductor firms will produce 120m of the new 4-megabit chips for the year ending in March.
According to World Semiconductor Trade Statistics, customers are expected to buy 100m of these chips at most.
All told, demand for memory chips fell more than 16% in 1990.
Behind the brave faces of Japanese DRAM makers, anxieties are beginning to show.
Most are now talking about launching the next-generation DRAM, the 16-megabit chip, as soon as next month.
Previously it was not expected to reach the market until 1992.
Over the past couple of months all the leading Japanese DRAM suppliers — including Hitachi, Toshiba, NEC, Mitsubishi Electric and Fujitsu — have started shipping ‘engineering samples’ of 16-megabit chips.
So have Texas Instruments in America and Siemens in Europe.
Korea's Samsung will start doing so in a few weeks.
For the first time in its brief history, the semiconductor industry is going to be making, and trying to sell, three generations of memory chips in large volumes at the same time.
Prices should tumble as each cannibalises sales of the others.
A 4-megabit chip ought to sell for five times as much as a 1-megabit device, the price premium justified by the smaller space and lower power needed to provide four times the amount of memory.
Dataquest, a market-research company based in California, is now forecasting that a 4-megabit chip will cost barely three times more than a 1-megabit chip by next year (see chart).
More painful still, 16-megabit chips will hit the market at only nine times the price of existing 4-megabit DRAMs.
New generations of memory chips normally arrive at 30–40 times the price of the industry's mainstream product.
Pundits are now beginning to wonder whether Japanese chip makers may be preparing to ‘leap a generation’.
Hitachi, Fujitsu, Toshiba, Mitsubishi Electric and Matsushita hurried out experimental 64-megabit models for last week's ‘Silicon Olympics’(the annual conference in San Francisco where chip designers show off their latest inventions).
For semiconductor makers not already committed to building 16-megabit production lines, the case for going straight for the 64-megabit device looks increasingly attractive.
Fujitsu recently showed that 64-megabit DRAMs could be made using fairly conventional lithographic equipment, based on ultra-violet light rather than exotic lasers or X-rays.
In January Fujitsu announced that it will spend ¥100 billion ($770m) next year getting its plant in Miyazaki prefecture ready for making 64-megabit chips.
Meanwhile, Japanese and American officials have begun negotiating a renewal of their semiconductor-trade pact.
The Americans are asking that the Japanese guarantee American firms 20% of Japan's chip market, up from 13% today.
Japanese officials plead that they do not have the power to carve up the market in this way.
They also calculate that the Americans already have 18% of the Japanese market.
Their figure includes chips made in Japan by subcontractors to American companies, exported for assembly into circuit boards and then re-imported.
There has not yet been much debate about prices.
But the Americans do not seem likely to force the Japanese to overcharge them for chips again.
Keeping mum
CORKY RA is the sort of entrepreneur who likes a challenge.
In the 1970s he bet his father he could open a vineyard in Utah, a state where drink and the devil are considered kissin' cousins.
Mr Ra won his wager by building a 40-foot-high pyramid in Salt Lake City, making sacramental wine in it, and selling the stuff to religious groups — wine made in pyramids was said by the ancient Egyptians to have supernatural powers.
His company, Summum, now sells $1m-worth of wine each year.
Seeking to diversify, Mr Ra (who was born the distinctly un-Egyptian Claude Nowell) jumped into an industry ripe for a little niche marketing: the funeral business.
Until Summum's arrival, burial or cremation were its two main products.
Taking his cue from the Egyptians, Mr Ra came up with a third: Mummification (with a capital ‘M’ because Summum, besides patenting the process, has somehow registered the word as a trademark).
For around $7,700 — rather more than the cost of a burial — clients can be pickled and preserved for eternity.
Another $26,000 buys a bronze, sealed sarcophagus filled with inert gas that kills body-eating bacteria.
The price also includes an engraved likeness of the deceased's face and clothing on the lid, just like King Tut.
One client — Summum has 130 so far — has specified a bejewelled ‘mummiform’ costing $150,000.
To help offset the expense, Mr Ra has persuaded America's IRS that, unlike conventional funerals, mummification funerals should be tax-deductible.
There is a snag.
None of Summum's clients has yet died.
So far only Butch, Mr Ra's dog, and Oscar, his cat, have succumbed.
Both now sit, mummified and in gold-leafed sarcophagi, in Summum's pyramid headquarters.
FINANCE
Japan's monetary policy
Wait for it
TOKYO
INVESTORS are convinced that the Bank of Japan will soon be forced to lower interest rates sharply.
They may be wrong.
Bond and share prices have rallied, discounting a full percentage-point decline in the official discount rate (ODR), which now stands at 6%.
The new benchmark ten-year government bond yielded 6.3% on February 20th, down from a peak of 7.9% (on a compound yield basis) at the end of September.
The stockmarket is up by around 30% from its low at the start of October.
The reason is a succession of statistics that suggest a rapidly weakening economy.
Bulls were further excited by a recent report on a government-owned television station that an ODR cut was imminent.
Though this was dismissed as groundless by Yasushi Mieno, governor of the central bank, it was seen as a trial balloon to test reaction.
Mr Mieno is still talking and acting tough because he is intent on bursting the speculative bubbles in shares and property.
To this end the ODR has been raised five times since May 1989.
Mr Mieno does not want to let up until he is sure the job is done.
True, there is growing evidence that higher interest rates, combined with stiff controls on bank lending, are producing the desired effect.
Money-supply growth is slowing: M2 plus CDs, the favoured measure, grew by only 7.3% year-on-year in January, after growth had peaked in May at 13.2% — the steepest slowdown since 1973.
The monetary evidence is supported by various other signs of weakness.
Private machinery orders collapsed in December, down 28% from the previous month.
Bankruptcies (mostly property-related) reached ¥642 billion ($4.9 billion) in January — the second-highest monthly figure ever, and almost one-third of last year's total.
Mikuni & Co, a credit-rating agency, thinks bankruptcies will total ¥4 trillion this year and ¥10 trillion in 1992.
This will not be good news for those banks left with the bad debts.
Even so, Mr Mieno seems in no mood to be pushed into premature easing.
To make that clear, the central bank hauled the overnight call-rate back up after the denied television report.
It was 8.2% on February 20th, compared with the 7.1% on three-month Euroyen futures, the best gauge of market expectations.
Apart from bursting bubbles, the Bank of Japan also wants to be sure inflation has peaked.
It has not yet.
Domestic wholesale prices were up 2.6% year-on-year in January.
Tokyo consumer prices in January were 4.2% up year-on-year, the biggest increase since December 1981.
The central bank would probably like to delay easing until at least one headline-grabbing bankruptcy confirms the damage done and inflation starts dropping.
Some fear that if Mr Mieno delays much longer, he risks overkill.
That could mean that, like America's Federal Reserve, he will later be trying to jump-start an economy already in slump.
Exploding services
AMERICA could have a current-account surplus — yes, surplus — in the first half of this year, for the first time since 1981.
Its deficit has been shrinking steadily, from a peak of $162 billion in 1987 to about $95 billion last year, as the cheap dollar has helped exports and sluggish demand at home has slowed imports.
And now America has found a miracle service export: security.
Contributions promised by the Saudis, Kuwait, Japan and others to help pay for the Gulf war count as invisibles receipts.
They could reach $45 billion-50 billion during the first half of 1991, if the ‘bills’ are paid promptly.
Meanwhile, if oil prices remain low, America's visible-trade deficit could shrink to around $40 billion in that period.
Add the two together, reckons Jan Duesing, an economist at Credit Suisse First Boston, and the deficit could — for a time — become a six-month surplus of $10 billion-plus.
So stand by for a new trade war, as America is accused of dumping subsidised security services on world markets?
Maybe not: Japan and the European Community don't seem much interested in this business, do they?
Japanese banks
Our survey of Japanese finance (‘Downbeat’, December 8th) included a table purporting to show Japanese banks' BIS capital-adequacy ratios as at September 1990, attributed to James Capel and from a study it made in October 1990.
We did not make it clear that the table showed not the banks' actual ratios but a hypothetical estimate of what they would have been had the banks not borrowed subordinated loans to boost their capital (as Japan's finance ministry let them do after June).
We are sorry for any misunderstanding or embarrassment this caused to James Capel and to the banks.
Jardine Matheson
Drifting apart
HONG KONG
HONG KONG's financial regulators and Jardine Matheson, its grandest trading house, are at odds.
Both are trying to present the disagreement as a storm in a teacup.
Yet it could turn nasty.
Jardines has threatened that, unless the regulators leave it alone, it may delist the shares of companies it controls from the local stock exchange — 14% of the market's capitalisation.
On the surface, the spat is over whether Jardines has broken a rule that forbids Hong Kong companies — directly or through subsidiaries — to buy their own shares.
At the end of last year Hong Kong's fledgling Securities and Futures Commission started looking into share purchases by Connaught Investors, part of the Jardine empire.
It is taking longer than expected.
What has emerged so far is this.
Connaught was set up as an investment vehicle after the 1987 crash.
Its aim, say its articles, is ‘to take advantage of investment opportunities in world equity markets, with particular reference to Hong Kong’.
Its three shareholders — Jardine Matheson Holdings, Jardine Strategic, a subsidiary, and Hongkong Land (see the chart)— agreed to put up to HK$3 billion ($385m) of capital into Connaught, an amount that can be raised at any time.
Connaught was activated soon after the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989, when Hong Kong share prices plunged.
This coincided with a change that extended the ban on share buy-ins to companies domiciled elsewhere.
Jardines had moved its domicile to Bermuda in 1984.
Beside various Hong Kong blue chips unrelated to Jardines, Connaught bought stakes in Dairy Farm, a supermarket chain, and Mandarin Oriental, a hotel group, both controlled by Jardines.
The argument is over a 3.4% stake that it has been forced to disclose in Jardine Matheson Holdings itself.
Jardines denies this is in breach of the rule.
If minority interests are taken into account, its stake in Connaught is 42%.
So Connaught is not a subsidiary, Jardines argues.
It further claims that neither Jardine Strategic nor Hongkong Land is in a position to exert ‘significant influence’ over Connaught — in which each holds 45%.
Underlying the bickering is longstanding tension between Jardines and the regulators.
For the past six months Jardines has been arguing that Hong Kong's largest companies should be granted ‘exempt listing status’.
This would leave them free to ignore the non-statutory takeover code and Stock Exchange listing rules.
Hong Kong grew rich, says Jardines, thanks to a lack of rules, not meddling regulators.
Some of the regulators see Jardines' bluster as a tactic to secure room for manoeuvre in the run-up to 1997, when Hong Kong reverts to China.
That year will also be the 50th anniversary of the fall of Shanghai to the Communists, an event that ravaged the Keswick family fortunes.
Lessons learnt at their father's knee have made Henry Keswick, the chairman of Jardine Matheson, and his influential brother Simon deeply suspicious of the bosses in Beijing.
Jardine Matheson, having moved in 1984 to Bermuda, last summer had its shares listed in London and Luxembourg, and redenominated its accounts in American dollars.
This month its shares were also listed in Singapore.
So threats of delisting in Hong Kong sound plausible.
Delisting would do Jardine Matheson no good in Hong Kong (though it would certainly do less harm if it were attributed to a row with the regulators than, say, to lack of faith in the future of the place).
It would not help Jardines to protect its investment in Hongkong Land, which has HK$50 billion ($6.5 billion) tied up in Hong Kong property.
Yet almost half of Jardine Matheson's profits already come from outside Hong Kong.
Dairy Farm and Mandarin Oriental are expanding abroad successfully.
The group's offshore assets are protected from post-1997 skulduggery by its Bermuda domicile.
Such complete protection is impossible for Hongkong Land's buildings.
But safeguards are being prepared.
One already in place provides that should one of Connaught's three shareholders be taken over, it would lose its voting rights in Connaught.
Getting round the buy-in ban also could help.
The more cross-holdings there are, the less chance of success for any outside raid on Hongkong Land, even if it had semi-official backing from the Chinese  government .
And if Jardines sought to sell out of Hongkong Land, it would be better placed to demand a hefty premium for offering effective control without the need to buy out smaller shareholders.
So were the Keswicks forced out by communism yet again, this time much of their wealth would be intact.
Wall Street securities firms
Red ink flows
NEW YORK
LAST year was a dreadful one for Wall Street's securities firms.
For the first time since 1973, they lost money — $200m-plus among them, on estimated revenues of $53.4 billion.
In 1989 they had made $1.2 billion on $59.5 billion of revenues.
Firms that avoided the worst excesses of the wheeling-dealing 1980s are making steady profits, and much of the loss was due to expensive restructuring at Shearson Lehman (which spent $640m) and Prudential-Bache ($370m).
But even the likes of Morgan Stanley, Paine Webber and Salomon Brothers, though still in the black, saw profits crumble.
This week Salomon announced it was moving 750 clerical jobs to lower-cost Florida.
Since its peak in 1987, the industry has lost 60,000 jobs, 23% of the total.
As many more could go if parents like General Electric (Kidder Peabody), American Express (Shearson Lehman), Credit Suisse (First Boston) and Prudential Insurance (Pru-Bache) tire of bailing out their subsidiaries.
Prudential has poured more than $1 billion into Pru-Bache since acquiring it in 1981.
Pru-Bache lost $250m in 1990, its third loss in four years.
Now it has lost its boss, George Ball.
He spent 1990 watching his paymasters demolish the investment bank that he had spent the previous seven years building up for the Pru's assault on Wall Street.
Pru-Bache is to retrench to Bache's old strength of retail stockbroking.
Mr Ball was the first Wall Street boss to be axed since Peter Cohen went a year ago in the dismantling of another 1980s tower of babel, Shearson Lehman Hutton.
That is odd, because Wall Street's troubles are not just cyclical.
With one eye on the next deal and the other on the one after that, its grandees failed to spot the long-term slide in profitability, let alone reverse it.
In the fixed-commission mid-1960s, profit margins were about 25% on total revenue.
By the early 1980s they had halved; though pre-tax return on equity ran at around 40%.
Both figures are now negative.
One big reason was that firms failed to curb non-interest costs, notably pay.
From 1980 until the crash of 1987, too many people were paid too much.
It scarcely seemed to matter while the deals came rolling in.
After the crash, the number of people shrank, but not the survivors' pay-packets.
Meanwhile, the corporate-finance deals that had been generating big bucks for Wall Street's investment bankers were starting to dry up.
From 20% in 1980, investment banking grew to account for two-thirds of the business at the bigger houses in the go-go days.
Today its share is around one-seventh, as firms limp by ‘restructuring’— ie, cleaning up — the messes they have made.
The hot new businesses on Wall Street are constantly changing.
So the slide in mergers and acquisitions did not have to mean disaster in itself.
But nothing much was replacing it.
Not even traditional agency broking was lucrative: small investors remained shy of the stockmarket, big institutions had the clout to pay the thinnest of commissions.
With costs still rising, profit had to fall.
How far depended on a firm's skills at trading for its own account.
Reality was starting to change Wall Street's profligate ways last year.
Back to basics was the new credo.
Unprofitable departments were closed.
Sackings multiplied.
Pay packets depended more on bonuses that were tougher to win.
At Morgan Stanley, Merrill Lynch and Salomon, some pay has started to arrive in the form of a firm's stock rather than by cheque.
These firms are not just saving cash.
They are trying, says Ira Kay, of the Hay Group of management consultants, to get their executives to think more like owners, and so pursue ‘shareholder value’.
Many partnerships went public in the 1980s to secure capital, so the discipline that comes from handling one's own money had been eroded.
The recent surge in stockmarket volume and the hasty dusting-down of the houses' new-issue departments threaten to bring quick profit back to the industry and delude its bosses that the good times are returning.
Getting itself back into shape may yet again be pushed to one side.
Wall Street is notorious for having scant regard for the future and even less for the past.
There is a famous ‘tombstone’ advertisement, not 20 years yellow, of an equity issue for American Motors.
Not one of the 36 Wall Street houses in the underwriting syndicate now survives independently.
Unless today's firms learn to manage for profit, not just for the revenue generated by the next deal, it is a fair bet that in fewer years than that many of them will have gone the same way.
German property: unsure, but not unsafe
While commercial-property markets in America, Britain and Japan are in the doldrums, Germany's is still booming.
Until when?
AFTER tearing down one wall, the Germans are busy putting up thousands of others.
Attracted by rents that have risen faster than in all other European cities bar Madrid, developers have been throwing up office blocks on sites from Cologne and Munich to Berlin.
Foreign investors have been queueing up to buy them.
Property men are asking themselves whether this boom can last.
The answer is, probably not.
Some optimists are still talking the market up.
They reckon that prices and rents will continue to rise.
The reasons they offer are these:
First, German reunification.
This, they argue, will give a new lease of life to moribund markets in cities like Hamburg and Hanover, which lie close to the former border between the two Germanies — near the once feared Soviet army, that is, and some way from once all-important markets to the West.
Second, they point to the 13 big property investment funds run by German banks.
These already have property assets worth some DM15 billion ($10 billion), and are still adding to them.
In one recent deal, the DGI property fund, which is run by Deutsche Bank, paid an estimated DM200m for the Chase Bank Tower in the centre of Frankfurt.
Third, a growing number of European property investment funds are targeting Germany.
One such fund is the Pan European Property Unit Trust, which has a DM300m portfolio of properties.
This invests on behalf of a number of British and American pension funds, including those of state-owned British Coal and of the United Nations.
Another is the German City Estates Fund, sponsored by London and Edinburgh Trust, a British developer, and its owner SPP, a Swedish pension fund.
Lastly, more foreign direct investment should continue to pour into Germany.
Swedish investors have been the biggest spenders, splashing out some DM5 billion last year on German property.
Japanese institutions too have been eager buyers.
In December Nomura bought a stake in Frankfurt's Messeturm, Europe's tallest building, for an estimated DM500m.
That foreign money is the more welcome because German banks have not been open-handed.
Rather than follow their British and American counterparts, who fed a property frenzy with mezzanine debt, deep-discount bonds and other financial wheezes, Germany's more prudent bankers have consistently refused to lend more than two-thirds of the value of a development project.
Equity investors have made up the difference.
The banks have done developers one favour by staying in Frankfurt rather than heading for Berlin.
Prime rents in Frankfurt have risen from DM65 a month per square metre at the end of 1989 to DM85 ($64 a year per square foot; DM10 monthly per square metre is about $7.50 annually per square foot).
In December, Deutsche Bank boosted the market again by spending DM1.4 billion on a building next door to its existing headquarters.
For those with strong nerves and deep pockets, Berlin's property market looks attractive.
After barely moving for most of the 1980s, monthly rents on prime commercial properties in western Berlin suddenly leapt from DM28 at the end of 1989 to DM65 a year later, bubbling up on hopes — now dashed — that the Bundesbank would move to the city, and on speculation that it will eventually become Germany's seat of government.
The Berlin market is likely to remain tight.
There is hardly any vacant office space, while many new developments are on hold until the planning authorities have finalised a blueprint for the city.
Even without that decision, there are already signs that the new Berlin market will resemble London's.
In the ‘West End’, formerly West Berlin, buildings will contain a mix of residential, retail and office accommodation.
The ‘City’, formerly East Berlin, will be dominated by high-rise office buildings.
Some impatient firms cannot wait.
They have been paying ridiculous rents of up to DM120 for the little decent office space that now exists in eastern Berlin — about twice as much as they would pay for similar space in the western part of the city.
Other companies prefer to build their own offices.
Daimler-Benz, for example, has bought a large site on Potsdamer Platz, in the heart of the new Berlin.
Though big firms can afford to take a risk, private investors should think twice before buying in the east.
Roughly one-third of the sites in eastern Berlin are state-owned; establishing who owns the rest could take years.
Unwary buyers could find someone else laying claim to their property.
They could also find themselves having to pay to clean up pollution on sites they have bought.
Another snag is that construction costs in Berlin, already higher than in western Germany, are now rising as fast as rents.
Cooling off
Nevertheless, property folk may be tempted by eastern promise if markets in western Germany start to cool.
There are signs of this.
First, in some cities like Frankfurt some huge new office developments are nearing completion.
Once on the market, says Robert Orr, of Jones Lang Wootton, a London-based firm of chartered surveyors, these could quickly depress rents.
Second, high German interest rates have slowed the flow of money into property funds.
Meanwhile, some prices have risen even faster than rents, bringing lower yields.
So many funds have held back from investing.
Foreign investment too may dry up, as the initial post-unification euphoria fades.
So is the German commercial-property market about to crash?
That seems unlikely.
Prices and rents are likely to fall slowly in most cities, though there could be some serious casualties in the boiling Berlin market as sanity returns.
The difference in Germany will be that ailing developers will not risk pulling bankers down with them.
Swedish investment abroad
On ice
OVER the past two years, Swedish investors have come in from the cold.
After the last exchange controls were lifted in July 1989, Swedes rushed to invest abroad.
Recently, however, a nasty combination of wobbly stockmarkets, plunging property prices and a fragile domestic banking system has made them more cautious.
Foreign investment by Swedish individuals and financial institutions like Skandia, a big insurer, and SPP, a pension fund, has been huge.
In 1989 Swedes spent a net SKr28 billion ($4.5 billion) on foreign equities, followed by a net SKr20 billion in the first nine months of 1990.
They have spent even more on property: the Swedish International Property Association (SIPA) estimates the net flow of direct and indirect investment in foreign property at SKr70 billion in 1989–90.
As Sweden's stockmarket had a bad year in 1990, interest in foreign equities is unsurprising.
Most investors have headed for Germany, piling into car and construction companies.
Since the start of 1991, however, the Stockholm market has risen by 16%, outstripping London, Tokyo and New York.
So Swedes may think twice before rushing more money abroad.
They will also have to rethink their international property strategy — if they have one.
Though they have done well in Germany and Belgium (they now own one-tenth of all the office space in Brussels), Swedish investors have come a cropper in London.
According to Debenham Tewson & Chinnocks, chartered surveyors there, Swedes invested £1.6 billion ($2.5 billion) in British commercial property in 1989–90 — just as the market was about to crumble.
The reason was simple enough: Swedes buying property abroad had — not alone — more money than sense.
Mr Erik Sondén, the managing director of SIPA, points out that in the tiny Swedish market values of investment properties have gone only one way over the past ten years: up.
With little international experience, most Swedish investors assumed other markets would do the same.
Falling property markets abroad have had a knock-on effect in Sweden.
Some heavily-indebted developers have run into trouble, causing problems for the finance companies that back them.
That in turn has worried the commercial banks that had lent money to the finance houses.
Bankers are now forcing developers to pull back abroad.
For the time being, this looks like the end of the Swedish spending spree.
Swedish investors are retreating and regrouping.
There has already been a rapid consolidation among Sweden's property investors.
But with their own economy in bad shape, and with the EC's single market just around the corner, the Swedes will soon be setting sail again.
Sorry, Auntie, I goofed
AT NOON last Friday, February 15th, Britain's rising equity prices, at 2303.8 on the FT-SE 100 index, stood within millimetres of their level — 2303.2 — at exactly the same moment 12 months earlier.
Great news, you might think, for Aunt Agatha, who had begun to fear that, instead of taking young Billy Whizzquid's advice and putting her savings under the professional management of a unit trust, she would have done better to put them under her mattress.
Alas, not so.
If she had cashed in her units at that day's prices, just two of 102 ‘UK general’ trusts recorded by Finstat (a Financial Times subsidiary) would have given her back 100% or more of the money she put in a year earlier.
The average would have been 88.4%, and 12 trusts achieved less than 80%.
Among 127 ‘UK equity income’ trusts, just two again were winners; the average was 87.2%, and 19 scored less than 80%.
Still, Auntie could have done far worse than that.
Capital growth, above all, is what the industry sells to distinguish itself from boring old building societies.
Had Auntie been fool enough last February to believe it, she had a choice of 190 ‘UK growth’ funds — and in 187 of them the growth was negative.
The highest flier soared to just 102.1%; the average was 79.3%; and the worst performer of all — stand up, MGM Special Situations Growth — managed 44.2%.
True, this is not quite fair to the industry.
Young Whizzquid and his City friends cannot be expected to toil on Aunt Agatha's behalf for nothing, and the spread between offer prices and bid — between what she puts in and what she could take out five minutes later — is around 6%.
Finstat's figures are dragged down by that spread, as a market index is not.
On the other hand, Finstat — unlike an index — adds back 12 months' income, assuming it to be reinvested in the trust.
That bridges much of the spread, but not all: it is worth maybe 5%, less 1% or so for the annual management fee that keeps Whizzquid on his toes.
True too, the FT-SE 100 is not the only index around.
The 667-share FTA All-Share index on February 15th was still 4% below its level of 12 months before.
Why pick the FT-SE to compare unit trusts with?
The short answer is, why not?
Any fool can buy a blue-chip index; Aunt Agatha could do it for herself, if she had the money and a stockbroker.
Unit-trust managers are paid for the share-picking and dealing skills that enable them to do better than elderly aunts (how much better is a question: supposedly index-tracking funds scored only from 88.4% to 93.2% over the period).
In sum, Auntie — and about 1.75m other Britons — was unwise to put her trust in units last year.
Good news, at least, you might think, for that industry's rivals, the investment trusts.
Wrong again.
The FTA investment-trust index over the same period achieved 88.2%.
True, that includes holdings abroad in earthquaked markets like Japan, so the comparison is a mite unfair.
But the moral is the same.
Aunt Agatha would indeed have been wiser to stuff her money under a mattress; or, better, in — yes — a building society, a bank or even, like great-grandpapa, 2.5% Consols.
Financial services in Europe
Single, but not level
BRUSSELS
THE 1992 programme is going to run a bit late for the European Community's financial-services companies.
The earliest that the whole — more or less — of the industry will be able to take advantage of its single market now looks like being mid-1994.
That is the European Commission's unstated timetable for EC member countries to implement its third life-insurance directive, whose draft it published on February 20th.
The directive, which follows a similar directive on non-life insurance published in draft a few months ago, is the last big element in its push to open financial markets that are still highly protected.
The broad idea is that financial-service companies should have the right to operate throughout the EC on the basis of a single ‘passport’, issued by the supervisory authority in their home country.
The commission hoped to have the main services — banking, investment and insurance — all liberalised together at the end of 1992.
Now it looks as if only the banking directive, adopted by the Council of Ministers in December 1989, will be operative in time.
A draft investment-services directive was submitted by the commission to the council in January 1989, and is much further along the legislative road than the two insurance directives.
Yet the obstacles that it has run into make it probable that even it will miss the end-1992 deadline.
The directive would let investment banks and stockbrokers serve clients throughout the EC and trade on all EC exchanges, subject only to home-country control.
Problems arose last November, when France proposed to curb their freedom to trade securities outside recognised exchanges.
This has split the EC into the usual north/south, liberal/interventionist groups.
The 12 finance ministers will try again on February 25th, but progress is unlikely.
Eventually, a compromise will no doubt be reached; probably one saying that small investors should have their orders executed on official markets unless they want otherwise.
But all this will take time to negotiate.
The council is unlikely to adopt the directive formally much before the end of this year.
Governments will then be hard put to get it on to their national statute books by mid-1993.
Do the delays in the investment-services and insurance directives matter?
The EC is adept at missed deadlines, and end-1992 was never carved in stone.
The trouble is that banks, investment houses and insurers are now in competition with each other.
Banks therefore will have a head start over their non-banking rivals in selling competitive products across the EC.
Instead of the single, level playing-field for financial services that the Community talks of, the field will indeed be single but still sloping from one end to the other.
Senior commission officials say that it is up to national governments to get a move on.
This is wishful thinking.
On February 19th the British government began consulting with interested parties on last autumn's non-life-insurance draft directive.
This process will take months to complete, and only then, say the British, will they be able to begin serious negotiations in the Council of Ministers.
The draft life directive, while sharing some principles with the non-life draft, also poses new problems that will take time to resolve.
These concern such issues as consumer protection (that is, disclosure, supervision and so on ); calculating technical provisions to meet insurers' liabilities; and the removal of certain national provisions like Belgium's ban on life-insurance policies linked to unit trusts.
Commission officials say that implementation of the banking directive cannot be delayed until the others too are ready to go into effect.
In theory, investment firms and insurers which, after January 1st 1993, feel that EC legislation discriminates against them, might take the commission or the Council of Ministers (or both) to the European Court of Justice for creating conditions of unfair competition.
Unlikely: court action is costly, and can easily last two years before judgment — by when the playing field should be level anyway.
The law of the City
Lawyers in the City of London grew rich as their financial clients did.
Now they too are feeling the pinch
IT HAS become clear these past few years that London's investment houses are rather worse at managing their own affairs than their clients'.
It is now becoming clear that the same is true of the City of London's many law firms.
The troubles of the law firms and of the finance houses are not unconnected.
The revenues that washed over both for much of the 1980s flowed from the same wellspring.
Business flourished in organising new issues of bonds and shares, loans, privatisations, property deals and much more.
League tables came to mean as much for lawyers handling mergers and acquisitions (M&A) as for investment bankers.
With the October 1987 stockmarket crash and, now, a British recession, these revenues have vanished as capriciously as they arrived.
Securities, banking, property, corporate activity: the collapse of all these businesses is hitting commercial lawyers as much as City banks.
According to Acquisitions Monthly, Linklaters & Paines topped the M&A table in 1989 by advising on £31.5 billion ($50 billion) of bids.
True, revenues do not fall in proportion, but last year's leader, Freshfields, handled £5.8 billion.
Law firms are also bound to the fortunes of City houses in a more fundamental way.
The prospect of London's Big Bang in October 1986 set in train a process of consolidation among banks (British and foreign) and City stockbrokers.
As financial firms merged, long-standing relationships with lawyers inevitably were threatened.
Law firms started to compete more fiercely with each other— through ‘beauty parades’ and even on price — in a way that would have appeared unseemly a decade earlier.
To thrive in this new era, many law firms also merged.
London's biggest, Clifford Chance, with 1,000 fee-earners, is the product of a 1987 merger between two partnerships, Coward Chance and Clifford Turner.
The third-biggest firm, Lovell White Durrant, with 600 fee-earners, is a 1988 creation.
Others pushed out of their specialities into broader areas of business.
Firms began to poach partners and to recruit dozens of assistant solicitors and articled clerks.
And they paid.
Between 1987 and 1989 annual salaries for assistant solicitors rose by well over half, to £20,000–70,000.
The pay that partners took out of their firms rose likewise, to £60,000–300,000.
Some partners have got used to awarding themselves well over £500,000 a year.
So long as fees rolled in, all this seemed justifiable.
Gross revenues for medium and big firms, for instance, grew by 36% in the year to April 1990, according to the Centre for Interfirm Comparison.
Average revenues per staff member leapt from £75,000 to £170,000.
Many firms — when else but at the peak of the property rush?— then signed up for plush, atriumed premises to house their new recruits.
Freshfields's new marbled offices off Fleet Street would pique the ego of the grandest City banker.
Herbert Smith, the tenth-largest law firm, with 425 fee-earners, has just moved into six floors (230,000 square feet) of the Broadgate complex, whose rents are already hurting investment banks.
Clifford Chance is committed to moving next year out of its half-dozen shoddy buildings into a shiny box, still under construction, on London Wall.
From management to limited liability
With the high costs of staff and premises, law firms are now more sensitive to down-draughts — and the recession is blowing over more areas of their business than ever before.
Middling and large law firms work on gross profit margins of around 20–25% (though margins of 50% are not unknown).
So unless they cut costs, a fall of that order in gross revenues would wipe out the profits that partners can share.
Since last summer, revenues from, eg, M&A, property, issues of securities, and much corporate work have fallen by more than that.
The City's ten biggest commercial-law firms are not yet unduly panicked, and probably rightly.
Most have a core of solid businesses that ensure that at least parts of the firm are making serious money.
Clifford Chance — a legal undertaker to the Thatcher boom — has good litigation and insolvency departments.
Slaughter and May has a client list of blue-chip companies.
Ditto Linklaters & Paines.
All the big firms have strong international links that cushion them somewhat from domestic troubles.
Small and medium-sized law firms are a different story.
Many of these grew wildly over the past few years, and have now seen business vanish.
Last autumn Speechly Bircham had to lay off 17 staff, including partners.
D.J.
Freeman, specialising in property, has laid off a dozen well-paid staff members.
Stories abound of partnerships that have not paid themselves for months.
Hard times are also showing up overhasty mergers, like the one two years ago between Withers and Crossman Block; they have now demerged.
In the current climate new mergers, such as the one this month between Lawrence Graham and Blyth Dutton, creating a 400-strong firm, will be much harder to make work.
With nowhere to shelter, some smallish firms may close.
Big or small, firms will now need management skills — a novel, often distasteful notion among lawyers — no less than legal ones.
Some august partnerships, such as Herbert Smith, long disdained the idea of working out what their profitable strengths were and then marketing them hard.
Other firms risk going too far the other way, imposing a too-narrow management — sometimes from outside the profession — and so alienating partners.
They will have to find the right balance between rule by unwieldy committee and by a chosen few (or fewer, as at Clifford Chance, which has a partners' council but where power, in practice, largely rests with the managing partner).
Partnerships are a legal stipulation for law firms, and, with unlimited liability, a burden for many.
For big firms with growing risks, the costs of professional-negligence insurance rival the rent bill.
Unsurprisingly, dinner-table talk often turns to incorporation and limited liability.
Many think that these will come before the decade is out.
Incorporation would also pave the way for multi-disciplinary practices, which the Law Society now bans.
Law firms could thus spread into a wider range of businesses, just as accountants have pushed into management consulting, and commercial banks into stockbroking.
Which is, given what has happened to accountants and bankers, a fairly frightening thought.
START OF SCIENCE SECTION
Cosmology
Born-again physics
WASHINGTON, DC
SCIENCE has been accused, now and then, of leaving no space for religion.
This is not an allegation that can be levelled at Frank Tipler, a cosmologist at Tulane University in Indiana.
He not only has room in his science for God; he tries to create God using only some laws of physics, some simplifying assumptions, some outrageous extrapolations, and truly cosmic gall.
As Dr Tipler explained at the AAAS meeting, his first assumption is that life — in some form or other — will continue until the end of time.
According to at least some physicists, life can be reduced to a matter of information-processing.
The end of time, according to modern cosmology, would come about if the universe, which is presently expanding, eventually contracted under its own weight into a big crunch.
Everything would then be crowded together in a state of infinite density: the end of the universe.
It is here in the big crunch that Dr Tipler looks for God.
Cosmologists call the far end of time the c-boundary.
Although it can take a panoply of four-dimensional shapes, Dr Tipler prefers it to be a single point; in the manner of the 20th-century Catholic evolutionist and mystic, Teilhard de Chardin, he calls it the omega point.
Such a point would be mathematically equivalent to the sum of all other points in time and space.
Any ray of light, emitted anywhere in the universe at any time, will arrive at the omega point.
Should such a point exist, the end of the universe is 100 billion years away.
That is a fair stretch, but it is still a finite length of time.
How can an infinite intelligence and life everlasting exist within finite bounds?
To answer this difficulty, Dr Tipler distinguishes between ‘proper time’, as measured by clocks, and subjective time.
The finite age of the universe is measured in proper time.
But, between any moment of proper time and the c-boundary, an infinite amount of information-processing is possible.
An infinite amount of information-processing allows an infinite amount of life and thought, and thus an infinite amount of subjective time.
The information-processing is made possible by the universe's collapse.
Every bit of information processed requires energy.
Gravitational collapse releases energy; and collapse to a single, dimensionless point releases an infinite amount of it.
The potential computing power gets ever bigger as the universe rushes towards the omega point.
What will the infinite wisdom of the universe do with itself as it rushes towards that point?
Dr Tipler suggests that it will occupy itself with the resurrection of the dead.
A computer programme of sufficient complexity, he (and many others) argue, can simulate any human mind to any level of detail required.
With infinite computing power, it would therefore be possible to create simulated copies of every person, cockroach, mushroom and Martian that had ever lived.
Dr Tipler argues — hopefully, but un-convincingly — that a natural tendency towards altruism will ensure that this resurrection is pleasant: heavenly, rather than infernal.
In theory it could be both: since any number of copies could be made there might be a surplus of ‘resurrected’ people.
Another difference between Dr Tipler's story and traditional religion is that man leads to God, not vice versa.
It is an extraordinary account, but then any vision of life at the end of the universe is bound to be.
Earlier this century, some cosmologists argued that it was impossible to theorise coherently about the beginning of the universe, let alone about the end.
Whether those arguments are valid or not, they have certainly not been a deterrent: the big bang is an ever-expanding field of research.
Dr Tipler's views have the charm of simple, powerful ideas taken to their absolute limits (if not beyond).
Given his assumptions, they may be as scientific as any discussion of such distant times and places can be — though hardly compelling.
All in the wrist
WASHINGTON, DC
TOMORROW's moonstruck but musically unaccomplished lover may soon get a chance to serenade with the help of a computer.
The computer runs through the song while the serenader adds nuance and expression, straight from his own aching heart.
Scientists and musicians have struggled to add feeling to synthesised computer-music ever since Max Mathews first helped to teach computers to play, more than 30 years ago.
Now Dr Mathews, a computer musician from Stanford University in California, is trying to find a way of getting people to take charge of music's humanity.
At the AAAS meeting, he described his efforts to separate music into its components: the methodical, mechanical parts which suit a computer, and the subtler qualities through which a musician struggles to express his soul.
Traditional music teachers will probably frown at his invention.
Dr Mathews's ‘radio baton’ and the conductor program which comes with it promise to liberate musicians from the drudgery of scales and repeated exercises.
It is almost ready to go on sale.
He predicts that, within two years or so, people will be able to buy it for the price of a cheap piano.
In order to perform a pre-programmed masterpiece, all the player has to do is wave a small baton over an electronic array.
Radio transmitters in the baton and a surrounding set of receivers track the position and speed of the baton.
The computer translates this motion into musicianship.
The conductor program sets most of the controls on automatic pilot.
The computer takes care of the nuts and bolts of the composition, the component Dr Mathews calls its predetermined part.
This is the part that the composer intended the musicians to follow, no matter what.
In western music, he believes this consists of the piece's sequence of pitches.
If the player tampers with those, he is blamed for hitting a sour note, not praised for a daring interpretation.
The baton-wielder is left in charge of what Dr Mathews calls the music's expressive part.
This includes phrasing, changes in tempo and dynamic, the precise duration of notes and pauses, the way in which a sound begins and dies away.
The electronic batonist can establish his tempo by striking or approaching a surface with the baton, and can shape the music with baton sweeps in different directions.
Different sweeps — sideways, front and back, or up and down — each alter different musical attributes.
Dr Mathews himself can play both the radio baton and also the old-fashioned violin.
He finds the baton much easier.
It frees him from the awkward contortions of hand and wrist that make violin lessons and practice all too necessary.
He admits, though, that moving the baton in three dimensions does take some getting used to.
Perhaps the conductor program will indeed succeed in freeing musicians from the constraints of music's pre-determined parts — namely the notes.
People might also start to make a freer kind of music.
At the least, Dr  Mathew's computer-instrument will put music within the grasp of would-be musicians who lack the time or inclination to learn how to play.
It might also unleash the musical gifts of the handicapped.
Unlikely as it may sound, the conductor program could prove the true value of practice.
It will reveal the limitations to the  interpretation a player can give, say, Bartok's ‘Mikrokosmos’ without the long hours of practice and thought which are currently necessary for the mastery of both the piano and the music itself.
There may be some musical magic which only practice can bestow.
And if playing is too easy, it might take all the fun out of it.
Music teachers might not frown after all.
Sins of the fathers
WASHINGTON, DC
The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) held its annual meeting this week in Washington, DC.
We report on fathers and fetuses; music; the universe as seen through the Hubble space telescope; and the resurrection of the dead, as seen by an imaginative cosmologist
DOCTORS have taught pregnant women to be an anxious lot.
Mothers have been warned that alcohol and tobacco — as well as various medicines and other chemicals — can injure a fetus.
This is only half the truth.
The evidence is growing that when a man is exposed to the same hazards before siring children, this too can damage the child.
Although some birth defects are caused directly in the womb, others can arise indirectly, through damage to sperm or eggs before fertilisation.
The effect of smoking may be one example.
It is so well known that women who smoke risk giving birth to underweight babies that the labels on cigarette packets in America caution that ‘smoking may complicate pregnancy.’
What the labels fail to reflect are studies showing the same link with fathers who smoke.
According to Devra Lee Davis of the National Academy of Sciences in Washington, whose work was recently published in the Lancet, there are still plenty of things about male smokers that are not understood.
She noted, however, that cotenine, a substance that the body can break down only from nicotine, has turned up in the semen of smokers.
This may help to explain why male smokers have underweight children.
Meanwhile, at the Boston University School of Medicine, Gladys Friedler has been studying the offspring from the pairing of healthy female mice with male mice that have been briefly exposed to chemicals about a week before mating.
She described her studies to the AAAS meeting.
Some of the males were injected with morphine for a few days and some were given other drugs.
Still other male mice spent a single four-hour period inhaling nitrous oxide before being put with females (none of which had been exposed to hazardous chemicals).
This gas is better known to dental patients as laughing gas, but it is also a mainstay in the operating theatres of many hospitals.
In cases where both men and women have been regularly exposed to it at work, nitrous oxide has been linked to a high rate of miscarriages.
Mouse pups born in Dr Friedler's laboratory weighed less at birth and failed to grow or mature as fast as those born of fathers treated (for the sake of comparison) with either salt-water injections or compressed air.
The pups also suffered in other less obvious ways.
When they are eight weeks old, for example, mouse pups that have been conditioned using mild electric shocks to their feet readily learn to swim through a simple water maze.
But mice sired by fathers that had been given morphine learn more slowly.
Other effects were even more subtle.
Mammalian body temperature is controlled by processes in the brain, which are affected by morphine and other drugs.
When Dr Friedler injected morphine into the offspring of mouse fathers who had themselves breathed nitrous oxide, the body temperature of the offspring dropped less than was expected.
The underlying puzzle is what makes a male's sperm susceptible to environmental damage — even more susceptible, in the opinion of some scientists, than a female's eggs, whether fertilised or not.
The theory (and it is no more than a theory) goes something like this.
From puberty onwards, the testes of the human male (and those of other mammals) produce millions of sperm a day, each of which undergoes many cell divisions before being ejaculated.
This makes the sperm, like all rapidly developing cells, especially vulnerable to damage from chemicals or radiation.
Curiously, though, it remains more common to protect working women than working men against threats to reproductive health.
For example, when it was discovered in the 1970s that male workers in America and Costa Rica had been made permanently sterile by a pesticide called dibromochloropropane, the substance was banned.
But when it is discovered that a substance harms women's reproductive health, women of childbearing age are usually kept from jobs that might expose them to it.
A case now before America's Supreme Court is drawing attention to such bias.
Johnson Controls, a maker of car batteries with plants in 13 states, is pitted against the United Auto Workers Union.
The court is to decide (among other things) whether the company may continue to refuse to hire fertile women for jobs that require exposure to lead, or whether its policy is discriminatory.
Johnson maintains that men are less vulnerable than women to reproductive damage.
Even if this is true — and it is disputed by animal and human studies — the argument overlooks the fact that reproductive defects may appear in workers' female children.
Besides, the causes of some 60% of birth defects have yet to be discovered: it cannot be assumed that all of them travel down only the female line.
The space telescope
Salvaged sights
WASHINGTON, DC
MISTY-EYED and shaky, the Hubble space telescope has been an embarrassment to NASA since its launch last April.
The mistakes made in the manufacture of the mirror, which is as smooth as could be desired but the wrong shape, have stopped it from seeing many of the faint objects it should be looking at.
A jitter, caused by the way the solar panels (which provide power) buckle when the telescope moves into and out of the earth's shadow, disturbs those observations that can be made.
The mirror's failing, which spreads starlight around in haloes when it should be concentrated in a point, has masked the effect of the jitter.
Were the mirror perfect, the jitter would still be spoiling observations — and NASA's image.
Despite its failings, though, the telescope still has unique abilities to make certain observations.
Under the right conditions, its two cameras can take pictures with unprecedented detail.
Its spectrographs can analyse the ultraviolet light given off and absorbed by stars, galaxies, gas-clouds and other celestial paraphernalia, something which earthbound observers cannot do because of the ozone layer.
Observers, using all the instruments, presented highlights of their results so far to the AAAS meeting.
The odd man out is the smallest instrument, the high-speed photometer, which has not yet managed to see anything because its work is hindered by the jitter.
Rather than making the observations that were originally planned, the telescope has been trying out various options to see what is possible, and at the same time producing pictures and results to reassure the public that all is not lost.
For this purpose, the work done by the spectrographs, which are less affected by the mirror than are the cameras, is not particularly useful, though it may well provide the greatest scientific interest for some time to come.
To the untrained eye, pretty pictures count for more than interesting spectra; neither are they without scientific interest.
The faint-object camera, for example, has produced images of a fascinating ‘Einstein cross’.
What looks like a four-leafed clover in the centre of a galaxy is in fact a product of gravitational lensing; the four leaves of the clover are four different images of a quasar far more distant than the galaxy in which they seem to nestle.
The mass of that galaxy bends the rays of light from the quasar as relativity says it must, to produce these mirages.
Studying the cross reveals things about the galaxy doing the lensing: other lenses may reveal details about the objects they magnify.
The faint-object camera has also been looking at the remnants of the supernova which excited astronomers in 1987.
Around the debris of the supernova there is a ring made up of matter lost from the star before the explosion, now illuminated by the supernova's light.
Studies of the ring have improved estimates of the distance to the supernova.
There was a delay between the time the ring started to glow and the point at which the glowing reached its peak, because light from the near side of the ring arrived at the earth while light from the far side was still on its way.
The lag between near-side light and far-side light provides a measure of the distance across the ring.
An older and smaller satellite, the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE), has recorded the ring's changing brightness, but has been unable to produce a clear image of it.
With the IUE's data on the ring's real size and the Hubble's picture showing its apparent size, it is possible to measure the distance to the supernova to an accuracy within 5%.
Previous estimates have been accurate only to within 12%.
A nice piece of work; but bear in mind that a much more ambitious measurement, which would have taken the biggest chunk of the Hubble's observing time, is completely beyond the telescope's present capacity, because it involves seeing faint variable stars in far-off galaxies.
The wide-field/planetary camera has produced its share of dramatic pictures, including detailed ones of a storm on Saturn the like of which has not been seen for 60 years.
Perhaps its most spectacular snapshots are of a red giant star called h Carinae.
It is a star in serious trouble, with bright bloated lobes of gas swelling off it, announcing its death throes.
Theory says it will soon become a supernova, and though ‘soon’ in this context means within 1m years, no other star has been diagnosed as being closer to death's door.
According to present plans, the wide-field camera will be replaced by a space-shuttle mission in 1993.
Its successor will be better, and contain extra lenses that should offset the effects of the bungled mirror.
At the same time the malfunctioning solar arrays will be replaced, and the poor little photometer will probably have its place usurped by mirrors and lenses to clear the vision of the faint-object camera and the spectrographs.
Until then, the space telescope will continue to do what it can.
That is still a lot; but, for a machine which cost more than $2 billion to build and launch, and which costs $250m a year to keep running, it is not enough.
THE GULF WAR
Our article last week on the Pope, the war and Israel mistakenly translated inutile strage as ‘useless struggle’.
It should have been ‘useless slaughter’.
The principle is the same: the Pope finds the present war inutile both in itself and in its effects.
But we apologise nonetheless.
Waiting for Aziz
FIVE weeks into the war, it felt eerily like a replay of its tense beginning.
Once again Saddam Hussein appeared to have been given an 11th-hour chance to stop the slaughter; once again, the powerful American-led military coalition was crouched, set to pounce.
But in January the Iraqi leader's flat disdain for a diplomatic alternative made the start of the war to liberate Kuwait straightforward for America and its allies.
Now, with Iraq sending signals, however foggy, about its readiness to withdraw from Kuwait, the allies' decision has become tougher — and complicated by the definition of their war aims.
Iraq might, even at this stage, have stopped the war if it could have brought itself to accept, quickly, the diplomatic initiative advanced this week by the Soviet Union.
This proposes, in essence, that Iraq should get out of Kuwait straightaway in return for being left alone afterwards.
The effect of the air war on Iraq has been cruel.
Its deputy prime minister, Saadoun Hammadi, says that 20,000 Iraqis — soldiers and civilians — have been killed; American military men talk of Iraq's ‘horrendous’ military casualties.
The allies calculate that they have already dropped on Iraqi targets about one-quarter of the total tonnage of bombs dropped on Germany in the whole of the second world war, and destroyed one-third of Iraq's tanks and artillery in Kuwait.
But on Thursday afternoon (when The Economist went to press) the signals were dismal.
In a fumbling radio speech to his people, Mr Hussein spoke of fighting on — or leaving Kuwait on Iraq's own terms.
He said nothing of the Soviet plan.
It looked as if Iraq, once again, could be muffing its chance.
With allied generals proclaiming the absolute readiness, in all ways, of the coalition forces to move from air assault to combined land-and-air assault, a full ground battle seemed imminent.
Details of the Soviet initiative were kept secret but reports in the German newspaper Bild (Chancellor Helmut Kohl was noticeably the first foreign leader to be told about the proposal) and elsewhere revealed its outline.
The main point is that Iraq should withdraw immediately and completely from Kuwait (in line with UN Security Council Resolution 660, passed on the day Iraq invaded Kuwait).
In return, the Soviet Union pledges its support for the sanctity of Iraq's own borders, promises to veto any attempt to impose penalties on Iraq, including any trial of Mr Hussein himself, and commits itself to helping to arrange a subsequent international discussion of regional issues.
It proposes a timetable for withdrawal, laying down that the Iraqis should start to leave at once, within a day of a ceasefire, and that they should be allowed to do so safely.
All that was needed was a positive reply from Mr Hussein.
The proposal was handed to Tariq Aziz, Iraq's foreign minister, in Moscow on February 18th, with urgent instructions from Alexander Bessmertnykh, the Soviet foreign minister, to be brisk in delivering his boss's reply: with the American-led troops straining at the leash, he was asked to return in the shortest possible time.
But the minister's travels between Moscow and Baghdad, by way of Tehran, and back again, partly overland since the Americans said they could not guarantee his safety in Iraqi airspace, seemed dilatory.
Mr Aziz's initial reaction encouraged the Russians to believe that they would get a good reply, and get it promptly.
The minister's conversations with his Iranian opposite number, Ali Akhbar Velayati, led the Iranian to say that he thought Iraq was indeed ready to withdraw from Kuwait but might have conditions.
After much uncertainty it became plain that the Russians could not expect Mr Aziz to return to Moscow until late on Thursday; he was expected to go at once to see Mikhail Gorbachev.
Yevgeny Primakov, Mr Gorbachev's envoy in Gulf matters, had already appealed for the full ground war to be delayed until the Iraqis cough up their answer.
But dithering and equivocation could be fatal.
The Soviet initiative builds on the ‘peace offer’ broadcast by Iraq's own Revolutionary Command Council on February 15th.
This was rubbished by western leaders for its jumble of fantasy demands and conditions: George Bush called it a ‘cruel hoax’; John Major, a ‘bogus sham’.
But its importance was not in its wish-list.
For the first time Mr Hussein appeared to acknowledge publicly that to save Iraq (and no doubt himself) he must first surrender Kuwait.
Iraqis, battered by the intense bombing of Baghdad, joyously — and prematurely — celebrated the news that they might be about to lose their 19th province.
When the Soviet plan reached Mr Bush, he welcomed it politely but with undisguised dismay.
His first public comment was to say dismissively that it fell ‘well short of what would be required…
The goals have been set out.
There will be no concessions.’
This was generally interpreted as an American rejection of the proposal, though the White House fell over itself to explain that it was not.
Since the proposal was addressed to Mr Hussein, it was not, in theory, for the Americans to reject — only to ignore.
However to ignore a diplomatic alternative, even an inadequate one, that got Iraq out of Kuwait would be difficult.
True, there would be argument about how or whether Iraq was to be made to conform with clauses in the 11 other relevant Security Council resolutions and horror at the thought of the Iraqi regime surviving with its army and air force still largely undestroyed.
Allied governments have sent the Russians several extra conditions to set before Iraq, most of them designed to make withdrawal as humiliating as possible for Mr Hussein.
The last thing they all want is a Saddam bloody but unbowed (President Bush, for the first time, last week urged the Iraqis to take matters into their own hands and force Saddam to ‘step aside’).
But getting rid of the Iraqi dictator would be, as James Baker, the secretary of state says, a desirable side-effect, not the central objective endorsed by the United Nations and most countries in the world.
If Mr Hussein had the wit to get out of Kuwait before the Americans and their allies can push him out, the war would have lost its overriding purpose — and the coalition might at last have lost its cohesiveness.
But has he?
Probably he has not.
Saddam's microbes
ALLIED commanders fully expect the Iraqis to turn chemical weapons on them once the ground fighting starts in earnest.
They are less sure, but more afraid, of the possibility that Saddam Hussein has developed biological weapons as well.
Britain and America are worried enough to have produced enough serum to immunise their troops against anthrax, one of the biological agents he is most likely to have.
Like most countries, Iraq joined the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention of 1972, under which signatories undertook ‘never in any circumstances to develop, produce, stockpile or otherwise acquire or retain’ such weapons.
The Iraqis claim that they have stuck by the convention, but are widely disbelieved.
The big question is whether they have mastered the complicated job of putting bugs from a laboratory inside a useful battlefield weapon.
The complication has less to do with breeding nasty bugs, more to do with keeping them alive.
They must survive the heat and other stresses involved in putting them into a warhead that can disperse them in a fine mist over enemy positions.
They are liable to die in storage.
And they must survive the launch itself.
If the warhead is delivered by artillery, the stresses of acceleration may kill the germs.
So may explosive charges used to burst the warheads open.
Spraying the aerosol is the best way to get them on to the enemy, but even this is difficult.
The germs have to be prevented from getting too hot or cold during the loading and flight of the aircraft that is to spray them.
The aerosol droplets have to be just the right size: too big and they may get trapped in noses, too small and they tend to be exhaled without staying in the lungs.
And it is necessary to fly low and slow directly over the enemy to spray him.
Anthrax is popular with germ warriors.
It is easy to make and its spores are tough.
Britain experimentally contaminated a Scottish island with them during the second world war, and the place was considered dangerous until 1986.
With a big dose, around 90% of the victims would die within 24–36 hours.
But biological weapons are unlikely to be much used on troops in combat, mainly because of the difficulties of getting the aerosols on to them without seeing them drift back on to those who released them.
In addition, soldiers in Saudi Arabia will get some protection from their gas masks, which will filter out more than 99% of aerosol particles.
Soviet hawks fly again
THE Gulf war has revived a strain of anti-Americanism in the Soviet army, dressed up as support for Iraq.
Since the war began, Soviet military commentators, including senior serving officers, have been expressing dismay at seeing Iraq's army, most of whose tanks and aircraft they supplied, pounded so relentlessly and effectively.
They questioned the American battle-damage assessments, and implied that the Iraqis were conserving their strength.
Major-General Viktor Filatov, the editor of a Soviet military journal, prophesied this month that the Americans would take a pasting once the ground fight began.
Startled by the systematic destruction of the force they had helped the Iraqis to build, the military critics have since grown bolder.
Until recently Saddam Hussein was supported only by a lunatic fringe in the Soviet Union; the leader of Pamyat, an anti-Semitic group, praised him for standing up to Zionism.
Then, on February 13th, a group of senior political officers from the army and KGB border guards openly condemned the war.
Mr Gorbachev's adviser on military affairs, Marshal Sergei Akhromeev, has said that the allied operation contravenes UN resolutions, which are concerned only with the liberation of Kuwait.
‘Strikes’, he said, ‘are being launched against the people and the Iraqi economy.
This cannot be tolerated any longer.’
Marshal Akhromeev admitted that his views differed from Mr Gorbachev's.
He implied that those of all the top brass did too, and that the president was changing his attitude to the war because of that.
The widespread opposition, especially from some army members of parliament, to lending Soviet troops in any form to the anti-Iraqi coalition was one factor in the resignation last December of the Soviet foreign minister, Edward Shevardnadze.
New Times has pondered whether there would be such vehement opposition about sending ‘our boys’ abroad again if they were to be sent to fight for Iraq.
After 20 years of close co-operation, it would not be surprising if there were a pro-Iraq lobby inside the Soviet ministry of defence.
After more than 40 years of hostility, it is not surprising that there is an anti-American lobby too.
Some of the worries are genuine enough.
Iraq is after all only a few hundred miles from the Soviet Union's own (Muslim-dominated) southern border.
Early in the war Soviet southern troops were put on high alert.
Military pressure on Mr Gorbachev to find a quick way of ending the war stems from a bigger worry: that, by letting America take over conduct of the war, the Soviet Union will see its influence suffer in the region, especially if American troops stay on once the fighting is over.
The suspicion of America's motives is deep-seated and extends beyond its policy in the Gulf.
Many Soviet commentators, including Marshal Akhromeev, have criticised America's determination to keep NATO in being despite the collapse of the Warsaw Pact.
Soviet military planners tried to circumvent the treaty cutting conventional forces in Europe, because they thought the cuts agreed on by their foreign ministry went too deep.
They now point to another threat: that the Americans will use the Gulf battlefields to test new weapons and so keep an arms race going, for quality if not quantity.
Before the Gulf war the Soviet armed forces were already reeling from a series of knocks delivered by Mr Gorbachev: the arms-cutting treaties, unilateral cuts and reorganisations, and the switch to a cost-cutting ‘defensive’ doctrine.
To those Soviet generals determined to cling to the notion that the West remains a threat to Soviet security, the Gulf war represents another defeat for Soviet interests, whatever now happens to Iraq.
Europe's post-war plans
Doing its best
FROM OUR BRUSSELS CORRESPONDENT
WHEN three European foreign ministers trooped off to Moscow last week, Mikhail Gorbachev talked politely about the Gulf war but failed to mention the peace plan he was about to launch.
The European Community should by now be used to such snubs.
The EC has had little to say about the Gulf, and to that few have listened.
This bothers the commission's president, Jacques Delors, who thinks the Community has a part to play in the Middle East.
So, in varying degrees, do the 12 foreign ministers.
They have now decided, at a meeting in Luxembourg, that there is one thing the EC cannot do and three things it can.
It cannot offer the territorial guarantees or military equipment that provide ‘hard security’.
It can help the softer sort by encouraging a variant of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe.
A CSCE for the Mediterranean and the Middle East could encourage better behaviour by countries towards their neighbours and their citizens.
The Italians want such a group created right away, the British once the region's disputes are settled (whenever that may be).
Second, economic aid.
The Community is already giving some of this: it set aside 500m ecus ($685m) from this year's budget for the three ‘front-line’ states: Jordan, Egypt and Turkey.
It also has trade and co-operation agreements with several Middle Eastern countries and wants to have more.
It would like something similar to the G-24 that co-ordinates western aid to Eastern Europe.
The commission would act as secretary, rich Arab countries would pay the biggest whack.
The Saudis, according to the commission, like the idea.
In all, the EC has promised aid worth $7 billion to the region.
That is enough for now, thinks Britain's foreign secretary, Douglas Hurd.
The region's problems are mainly political, in his view, and he does not want more strains on the Community budget.
Southern Europeans, alarmed by the thought of a wave of immigrants, are keener, especially since their northern colleagues will pay a larger share.
American diplomats are more enthusiastic about the commission's economic plans than the British are.
But they are less enthusiastic about the third thing the Europeans want to do.
That is to try for a solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict through a United Nations peace conference.
Israel and America
Bad behaviour
OUTRAGEOUS and outside the bounds of acceptable behaviour…’ thundered the White House.
The culprit?
Israel, whose new ambassador in Washington had complained to the press on February 14th that America was giving Israel the ‘runaround’ on housing aid for Soviet immigrants (the administration wanted to be sure that $400m in loan guarantees, now agreed, would not be used to settle immigrants in the West Bank).
He added that the Americans had also failed to compensate Israel for its financial sufferings in the Gulf war.
George Bush dashed off a furious telegram to Yitzhak Shamir, Israel's prime minister.
By saying sorry, Israel cooled the spat — for now.
Israelis speak of a ‘Scud-induced honeymoon’ between themselves and the Americans.
A ‘respite’ might be more precise.
Israeli officials crow over America's new appreciation of their country's difficulties — all those maps, for instance, that drive home just how small Israel is — but there is not much reason to believe that post-war relations between the Bush administration and the Shamir government will be any cosier than the pre-war ones were.
Greed is the least of the problems, though the administration was not amused when Israel pushed its luck by suggesting that to help with its Gulf expenses — missile damage, the cost of the prolonged military alert, loss of tourism and so on— America might like to double the $3 billion it already gives Israel each year.
Israel hopes to extract the maximum from giving in to American pressure — applied by the withholding of aircraft identification codes — not to join in the war.
America, in the middle of destroying Iraq's army, and having given Israel Patriot air-defence missiles, crews and intelligence, is uncertain whether it should still be considered in Israel's debt.
The graver problems await the end of the war.
It is increasingly taken for granted that any post-war reordering of the Middle East will include a fresh bid to break the Arab-Israeli impasse.
And here the Shamir government is busy sending negative signals.
It has reiterated Israel's long-maintained refusal to consider returning any of the Golan Heights to Syria, adding, for good measure, that the Syrian regime is as bad as the Iraqi one.
And it has made it clear that any attempt to organise a system of regional arms control or supervision should exclude Israel.
Much worse, the Israeli cabinet now includes a far-right politician who advocates ‘transferring’ the Palestinians from the occupied territories.
It is said that Mr Shamir appointed Rehavam Zeevi, who runs a party called Moledat (Homeland), as minister-without-portfolio in his inner cabinet mainly for coalition reasons: he wanted to increase his narrow majority and to avoid being attacked from outside it by the extreme right.
To their credit, several cabinet members, including the defence and foreign ministers, opposed the choice of Mr Zeevi who is seen by many people as successor to the late Meir Kahane.
Yet the appointment shows how little Mr Shamir cares for America's good opinion — and how far his thoughts are from any Arab-Israeli accommodation.
Israelis, naturally, want Saddam Hussein resoundingly defeated.
But a convoluted new thought is breaking surface.
Maybe, it is murmured, an indecisive, messy sort of ending might be better for Israel than a clear-cut one.
Then, at least, Israel might not have to respond in a clear-cut way.
Arab monarchs
Jordan's Hussein at his wits' end
Tale of two kings: the rallying of their people to Saddam Hussein is causing trouble both for Jordan's Hussein and for Morocco's Hassan
FOR as long as most people can remember, the stocky figure, big head and proud, tight smile of Jordan's King Hussein have symbolised stability in the wildness of the Middle East.
The king was educated in Britain — at Harrow and Sandhurst — and seemed to share many of its values.
Now, however, he and his western friends are speaking a different language.
The king has starkly denounced the ‘savage’ American-led war against Iraq.
After one of his recent speeches, George Bush said that Jordan had ‘moved over, way over, into Saddam Hussein's camp’.
The United States is reviewing the small amount of aid — about $55m a year — it gives its erstwhile friend.
The commonest explanation of King Hussein's behaviour is that he is only doing what he has always done best: surviving.
If you are king of a country in which six out of every ten people are Palestinians, and where Islamic fundamentalism is growing, you do not last long by siding with America against the man who is firing missiles into Tel Aviv.
There may be more to it.
People who know him well say the Kuwaiti affair has affected him deeply, chipping away at his pro-western instincts, and instilling in him a deep pessimism about the future of the region.
These days the king goes out of his way to remind listeners that he is the senior representative of the Hashemites, ‘the noblest family in Islam’ and the traditional guardians of Mecca and Medina until they were thrown out by the al-Saud family in 1925.
He called the speech that upset George Bush ‘an appeal from a Hashemite Arab to all honest Arab and Muslim leaders’.
In it the king suggested that American plans for the Gulf were like the secret Sykes-Picot agreement of 1916, in which Britain and France carved up Turkey's former Arab provinces.
This is quite an insult.
The agreement contradicted the promise of Arab self-rule that Britain had made to Sherif Hussein of Mecca (King Hussein's great-grandfather) and has become a byword for duplicity.
For most of his life the king has been haunted by the Arab-Israeli conflict.
His decision in 1967 to support Nasser in the six-day war cost Jordan its western half and ended Arab control of Jerusalem, Islam's third-holiest city.
In 1988, after the Palestinians of the West Bank and Gaza had started their uprising, he made another fateful decision, renouncing Jordan's claim to the West Bank and handing over responsibility to the Palestine Liberation Organisation.
Since then his disenchantment with the West appears to have grown.
He talks of slavish American support for an intransigent Israel, and says this is why there is no peace.
The personal friendship between the Hashemite monarch and Saddam Hussein is harder to understand.
In December the king told the Washington Post that the Iraqi leader was ‘confident, determined to do his utmost, not for himself, but for the region and its future’.
This was not the Saddam Hussein the rest of the world knows.
After negotiating a host of wars, coups and other crises in 38 turbulent years on the throne, the king is now showing the strain.
Grey-faced and grim, he is looking older than his 55 years.
His brother, Crown Prince Hassan, is 12 years younger and taking an increasingly prominent part in state affairs.
Some Jordanians suggest that, if the war ends badly for him, the king might let the crown prince take his place.
Hassan checked
FROM A SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN RABAT
HIS grip is of iron, his political skill is legendary.
But even King Hassan's powers are strained by the Gulf war.
When Iraq's tanks rolled into Kuwait last August, the Moroccan king again proved himself a staunch friend to America and Saudi Arabia.
His government was the first Arab one to condemn the Iraqi invasion, and the first to send troops (around 1,300 of them) to join the alliance in Saudi Arabia.
But his people overwhelmingly support Saddam Hussein.
The king has prudently deferred to them.
He has refused, so far, to bring the Moroccan troops home, but has issued a pamphlet explaining that they are not under allied command, and will not attack Iraq.
He has publicly criticised the bombing of Iraq, and gone out of his way not to offend his ‘dear Arab brother’, Saddam Hussein.
On February 16th he called Iraq's conditional offer to withdraw from Kuwait ‘a positive step to peace’.
No other member of the American-led coalition has said that.
On February 3rd he had tried to relax the tension by allowing a pro-Iraqi demonstration by the opposition, including the Islamic movement.
For this unprecedented event some 300,000 people turned out — so many, in fact, that they ran out of American, Israeli, French and British flags, and had to make their own crude copies before they could burn them.
The size and sincerity of the rally, for Iraq and against Morocco's traditional allies, seemed to rattle the king.
He has often shown himself ready to make concessions when faced with genuine mass discontent.
But he banned a further demonstration, planned for February 24th in Casablanca; and if the ban is not obeyed, there could be big trouble.
For most of his 30 years on the throne, King Hassan has ruled severely, in truly regal style.
(The budget is tight, but he is building his 11th, or maybe 12th, palace.)
Most of the middle class respects him, and many of the poor revere him.
One of his titles is ‘Commander of the Faithful’, and many pious Muslims prefer him to more modern-sounding fundamentalists.
But these are hard times for Moroccans, what with a $22 billion foreign debt, a depressed market for the country's main export, phosphates, and the after-effects of a long drought.
The affair in the Gulf has made things much worse.
It has depressed the tourist industry, Morocco's biggest single source of foreign currency, and ended remittances from Moroccan workers in Kuwait.
Now the king's opponents seek to unite the discontented behind Saddam Hussein's banner.
Last December strikes turned into riots in which at least 33 people were killed and hundreds injured; 900 people were jailed, the ringleaders for 15 years.
The king says he will impose martial law if anything similar happens again.
Opposition politicians are screwing up their courage.
Faced with public anger about the Gulf war, the royal autocrat did make some concessions.
Maybe he might do the same on political reform.
SCHOOLS BRIEF
Of bees and lighthouses
This brief in our series on the modern classics of economics looks at a paper that is still as controversial as when it first appeared — and suddenly much more relevant to the debate on economic policy.
It set out to demolish traditional thinking on ‘public goods’ and ‘externalities’
THE PROBLEM OF SOCIAL COST.
By Ronald Coase.
Journal of Law and Economics 2, October 1960
MOST economists, including many who would claim otherwise, find the paradigm of perfect competition indispensable for thinking about questions of resource allocation and microeconomic efficiency.
Every novice student learns the elementary propositions of welfare economics.
These assert that, under perfect competition, market forces will cause resources to be used in such a way that it is impossible to make somebody better off without making somebody else worse off — in this sense, perfect competition avoids waste.
Such a pattern of resource allocation is called a Pareto optimum.
While learning this, the novice student also learns that perfect competition does not exist.
It requires, among other things, that there be so many buyers and sellers that none can affect prices; if a firm cuts its output it will not push up the price.
It requires all the goods produced by different producers in any particular market to be ‘homogeneous’(ie, identical).
It requires ‘perfect information’.
It requires there to be markets not just for actual goods but also for ‘contingent goods’(eg, the market for umbrellas in London next January if it is an unusually rainy month).
And so on.
One strand of modern research has devoted itself to the ferociously difficult task of building formal models that precisely state the conditions that are necessary and sufficient for competition to work, and describe whether and in what sense the result is ‘efficient’.
The landmarks are ‘Existence of an Equilibrium for a Competitive Economy’ by Kenneth Arrow and Gerard Debreu (published in 1954) and ‘General Competitive Analysis’by Mr Arrow and Frank Hahn (published in 1971).
That these were towering intellectual achievements is not in doubt; however, their influence — outside the narrow circle of specialists in pure microeconomic theory — was not great.
Almost all modern economists, however much they might resist such classification, are drawn to one of two camps.
The first believes that perfect competition is a useful paradigm that policymakers should take as a guide; this is the liberalising, deregulating, competition-promoting wing of the profession.
The other, the interventionist wing, holds that the paradigm is a dangerous one that policymakers should ignore.
In choosing where their loyalty lies, the prejudice that probably matters most is their view on public goods and externalities.
Smokestack economics
One of the assumptions underlying the idea of a Pareto optimum is that private costs and benefits are the same as social costs and benefits.
In practice, this is not always so.
The price you pay for your lawnmower does not reflect the cost to your neighbours of the noise it makes when you use it.
The price people and firms pay for their carbon fuels does not reflect the cost to everybody else of filling the atmosphere with greenhouse gases.
These are examples of externalities — the economic effects that a transaction has on third parties.
Most economists define public goods in terms of‘non-excludability’ and ‘non-rivalrous consumption’.
Clean air is an example of non-excludability: if some people incur costs to avoid pollution, those who do not pay cannot be excluded from the benefits.
They will be tempted to free-ride at others' expense, and producers of clean air would have trouble collecting payment for their services.
(In a sense, non-excludability is the obverse of externality.)
Clean air, by and large, also serves as an example of nonrivalrous consumption: by breathing, you do not perceptibly reduce the supply of air for others.
This means that, even if it were possible to deal with free-riders by making them breathe dirty air, it would be economically inefficient to do so.
If, at the margin, a good can be provided costlessly, efficiency demands that it be provided free.
This is another way of stating the old rule that price should be set equal to marginal cost.
Together, non-excludability and non-rivalrous consumption imply that clean air is a public good.
There cannot be an efficient private market for it.
The social benefits of maintaining the supply of clean air will exceed the private benefits of doing so.
Unless governments use taxes, subsidies and other forms of intervention to promote it, too little will be supplied.
The crucial question for policy-makers is this: how common are externalities and public goods?
For years it seemed they were common enough to turn the competitive paradigm into something of little practical use.
Standard examples were drummed into students' heads.
The favourite illustration of a public good was the lighthouse: the conditions of non-excludability and non-rivalrous consumption were both met, and it was obvious that if governments did not provide lighthouses nobody would.
The favourite example of an externality, odd as it might seem, was bee-keeping.
Here the externality was a benefit, not a cost: bee-keepers provide pollination services for local growers of flowers and fruit.
Because they are not paid for this service, there may be a socially less-than-optimal amount of bee-keeping.
Theory concerned itself mainly with asking what form government intervention should take.
For instance, part of the trouble in the clean-air example is that nobody owns the air; if somebody did, polluters would not be able to dirty it with impunity.
Traditional microeconomic theory stressed this link between property rights and efficiency.
It is part of the government's job, on this view, to allocate property rights in an efficiency-promoting way.
Then, in 1960, Ronald Coase of the University of Virginia published ‘The Problem of Social Cost’.
Mr Coase argued that, as a rule, no form of government action is required to deal with externalities or public goods.
There is no need for taxes, subsidies and public provision; and so long as property rights already exist, there is no need for energetic policies aimed at shifting them around.
The article caused a rethink in microeconomics, a rethink that is still going on.
It spurred the growth of a distinct new branch of the subject, called ‘law and economics’.
And it converted many more economists to the liberal, anti-interventionist wing of their trade.
Choo choo
Mr Coase's favourite case of externality was an American icon, the wood-burning locomotive — whose sparks, regrettably, were prone to set fire to farmers' fields.
According to the conventional thinking, what matters in such a case is the allocation of property rights.
Suppose farmers have a right in law to enjoin the railway company not to set fire to their fields: the result is that the company will fit spark-suppressing equipment to their trains, and there will be less damage to the farmers' fields.
Alternatively, if the company has an unfettered right to spray as many sparks as it likes, there will be plenty of damage to fields.
Mr Coase asked if this analysis was good economics, and showed that it was not.
His main point was simply that legal entitlements — property rights — can be bought and sold.
They are commodities whose exchange can be analysed like that of any other.
If farmers can legally insist that locomotives are spark-free, they can sell this right to the railway.
If the railway is free to spark as much as it likes, farmers can pay them to reduce the sparks that locomotives emit.
Not only that, but the outcome will be the same in either case.
Suppose farmers have a right to stop the sparks.
If this right to emit sparks is worth more to the railway than stopping the sparks is to the farmers (because suppressing sparks is costly, say), then the railway will buy the right to emit sparks from the farmers, and the damage will continue.
Suppose instead that the railway is entitled to emit sparks — but that this right is still worth more to the railway than to the farmers.
In that case, the right will not be sold, and the damage will continue.
There is one difference.
The initial allocation of property rights affects the distribution of income; in other words, if you own something, you are better off than if you do not.
But the allocation makes no difference at all to the amount of resources devoted to suppressing sparks.
Economic forces ensure that the same efficient allocation will happen in either case.
This idea is known as the Coase theorem.
Though quick to qualify it, people with a taste for economics usually react with delight to Mr Coase's insight.
Others find it annoying: ‘All very well in theory, but how often do you see deals like that in practice?’
It is a fair question, and it deserves to be taken seriously.
Inspired by Mr Coase, economists began to look more carefully than before for transactions in property rights.
One of the most telling studies — because it scored a direct hit on the interventionists' favourite example — was a paper published in 1973 by Steven Cheung, then at the University of Washington: ‘The Fable of the Bees’.
Down on the apiary
Mr Cheung examined the bee-keeping industry in Washington.
The state's farmers and bee-keepers might not have realised that they were coping with an externality, but that had not stopped them from organising a market.
Mr Cheung wrote: ‘It is easy to find conclusive evidence showing that both nectar and pollination services are transacted in the marketplace: in some cities one need look no further than the yellow pages of the local telephone directory.’
But he looked beyond the telephone book, and studied pricing and contracts in some detail.
He found a surprisingly sophisticated pattern of prices (varying according to the sort of crop pollinated, the density of hives available, the risk of pesticides damaging the bees and so on).
Mr Cheung showed that this pattern of pricing was, by and large, efficient.
In 1974 Mr Coase turned his own attention to lighthouses — an example of supposed market failure with an even longer pedigree than the fable of the bees.
‘The Lighthouse in Economics’ sketched the history of lighthouses in Britain since the 17th century.
It showed that lighthouses can be — and typically have been — provided by private enterprise.
In the early days, shipowners and shippers petitioned the Crown to let somebody build a lighthouse and charge a specified levy on the ships that benefited from it.
These charges were collected at the ports by agents for the lighthouses.
‘The lighthouses were built, operated, financed and owned by private individuals, who could sell the lighthouse or dispose of it by bequest,’ Mr Coase found.
‘The role of the government was limited to the establishment and enforcement of property rights in the lighthouse.’
Responsibility for lighthouses was later shifted to Trinity House, a quasi-public body, but lighthouses continued to be financed by ‘light dues’ collected from ships, not from general taxation.
The Coase theorem and the further work it inspired have demolished the presumption that externalities and public goods automatically call for government intervention.
But they have not replaced it with a presumption that the market can always be left to get on with it.
The work of Mr Coase and his followers has made almost all economists, whether broadly liberal or broadly interventionist, more reluctant to generalise.
It has also suggested many lines of further research.
For instance, the Coase theorem admits that the market will fail if transaction costs are prohibitively high.
As a result, economists are much more interested than before in correcting inefficiencies by reducing the costs of doing business; pursuing efficiency through cleverer and more ambitious regulation is definitely out of fashion.
Some critics have argued that the Coase theorem stretches the idea of transaction costs too far — to the point at which the theorem becomes true (but uselessly so) by definition.
It is not much help to blame transaction costs for every market failure, as if that makes the failure somehow all right.
The theorem, and the model of competition it defends, are at their weakest when trying to account for deals struck between small numbers of transactors — in other words, when the assumption of many buyers and sellers does not hold.
This is not so much a matter of transaction costs as of the unpredictability of offer and counter-offer: it moves economics into the realm of game theory, where efficient outcomes cannot be taken for granted (see box).
Sceptics may be willing to concede on bees and lighthouses — and on many other examples hitherto thought to be market failures — but the case of clean air remains awkward.
It is hard to see how any entirely voluntary, market-driven approach to environmental economics could ever overcome, even in theory, the problem of free-riders.
Even here, however, Mr Coase and his colleagues have forced economists to think harder about how to use market forces to achieve green ends, rather than resort too quickly to the blunderbuss of regulation.
All in the game
THE assumption in traditional microeconomics of many buyers and sellers is all too crucial.
When agents are few enough for their decisions to affect others, they are bound to behave ‘strategically’— ie, take those effects, and the likely response of other agents to them, into account.
In economics, such behaviour makes even the simplest transaction difficult to analyse.
This is the task of game theory.
In most bargaining circumstances a deal can be struck that will satisfy all sides.
But if there is no agreed way to settle on it, everybody may end up unhappy.
The classic illustration is one of the simplest games: the Prisoners' Dilemma.
Two prisoners are accused of a crime.
The prosecutor tells them that if they both confess they will go to jail for ten years; if neither confesses they will get two years; if only one confesses he (the confessor) will get just one year while his fellow prisoner goes down for 20.
If they can come to a binding agreement, the prisoners will both profess their innocence and be sentenced to two years.
But suppose they cannot.
Each prisoner will then see that — regardless of what the other does — he will be better off if he confesses.
Both will confess and get ten years.
Recently game theory has made strides.
Theorists can unravel the structure of extremely complicated games.
New research also stresses empirical work, using controlled experiments to see how people behave in real bargaining situations.
Fascinating stuff.
Unfortunately, it is all too obvious that voluntary agreements among small groups need not be efficient: when the numbers are small, markets are prone to fail.
BUSINESS WEEK
Making a living
With revenues plummeting, airlines clamoured for government support to help them through the bad times.
To give themselves ready cash, some American airlines want to keep a 10% ticket tax for up to a year before handing it over to the government.
In Europe, after yet another airline made cutbacks — Air France said it would reduce its wage bill by FFr600m ($118m)— the EC is to allow temporary subsidies and will relax rules on route-sharing.
More than 1,300 Soviet businessmen, managers and scientists from the state and private sectors are planning to form a business lobby to help fight for a market economy in the Soviet Union.
The move is in response to the strengthening of central controls.
The Gulf war came too late to help the profits of Turner Broadcasting last year, whose CNN broadcasts from Baghdad since the war started have sent viewership — and advertising revenues — soaring.
Although things are looking up this year, operating profits in 1990 fell to $201.3m compared with $266.1m in the previous year.
Canada's Reichmann brothers, whose Olympia & York is developing Canary Wharf in London, sold their 9% stake in Allied-Lyons, a British food and drink group, for £403m ($790m): useful, as property values slump.
Ford's and Volkswagen's Brazilian holding company, Autolatina, is to get rid of 8,000 car workers, 16% of its employees.
The company, which has a 60% market share, has seen sales drop by a fifth since November.
By adopting the third directive on life assurance, the European Commission cleared the way for a single European insurance market.
In the chair
Red faces at Hoesch, a German steel and engineering group, because its supervisory board has failed to agree on a new chief executive, and will now have to look outside.
Detlev Rohwedder created the vacancy when he stayed on as head of the Treuhandanstalt, the state agency dealing with the privatisation of east German businesses.
Formerly a European commissioner, and now the outgoing chairman of Britain's Civil Aviation Authority, Sir Christopher Tugendhat is to become chairman of Abbey National, a building society turned retail bank.
Televiews
American Telephone and Telegraph extended its $6.1 billion bid for NCR, an American computer maker, for a second time, to April 30th.
Though two-thirds of NCR shareholders have approved the offer, NCR's anti-takeover defences are delaying the purchase.
The German postal ministry discovered 23 illegal, private telephone networks in eastern Germany, including one formerly controlled by the secret police, the Stasi.
And yet, because of a shortage of telephone lines in the old east, and even though the government has a legal monopoly, it will allow the networks to go on operating for at least another year.
Of banks and bonds
After an American judge threatened to force Drexel Burnham Lambert into involuntary liquidation, the collapsed New York investment bank has reached a tentative settlement with its creditors.
They will cut their claims to an amount which can roughly be covered by the bank's remaining assets of $2.8 billion while allowing it to carry on operating.
Seeking to raise its capital base by up to $5 billion, Citicorp, America's largest commercial bank, is to sell 20% of its credit-card business for more than $1 billion.
One of the fastest-growing companies of the 1980s, the now-ailing Saatchi & Saatchi, announced a second financial rescue package.
The first ran into criticism from some of its bondholders.
Saatchi is struggling to get its bankers, shareholders and bondholders to keep the firm going despite a slump in the advertising industry.
Trade and commodities
GATT's Uruguay round of trade talks jolted into action again — just.
The deadlock over farm-trade reform between Europe and America and its allies was broken when the EC agreed to negotiate cuts in the three areas of internal farm supports, border protection and export subsidies.
But Congress's fast-track mandate, good until March 1st, will have to be extended if real progress is to be made.
Political opposition and delays in agreeing upon its plan have forced a Japanese robotics maker, Fanuc, to withdraw its offer to buy for $10m a 40% stake in Moore Special Tool.
The Connecticut engineering company does a small amount of sensitive nuclear-weapons work for the American government.
After declining for months, the oil price shot up after Saddam Hussein rejected the Soviet Union's peace plan.
President Bush outlined his national energy strategy.
Among a mish-mash of other measures intended to reduce America's dependence on oil imports, he will allow more domestic exploration and promote fuel efficiency in cars.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL INDICATORS
OUTPUT, DEMAND AND JOBS
A gloomy week for statistics.
America's industrial production fell for the fourth successive month in January, by 0.4%, to give a 12-month decline of 0.9%.
In the past three months output has fallen by an annualised 10.8% from its level during the three previous months.
Britain's industrial output fell by 0.4% in December, to 4.2% below its level a year earlier.
The 0.9% drop in its GDP in the fourth quarter — the second fall in a row — made Britain's recession official.
In January unemployment rose in Britain, Australia, Spain and Switzerland.
PRICES AND WAGES
America's consumer-price inflation slowed to 5.7% in the year to January, and Britain's to 9.0%.
American wholesale prices rose by 3.7% in the 12 months to January — the slowest annual rise for six months.
In the same period Japan's wholesale prices climbed 2.1%.
In the year to December Japanese workers received a wage increase of 6.3%, equivalent to a real rise of 2.4%; British workers' pay rose by 9.8%, a real increase of only 0.5%.
ECONOMIC FORECASTS
Each month we publish a round-up of forecasts based on the averages of 170 seers polled by Consensus Economics.
Since January their forecasts of economic growth for 1991 have grown gloomier in all but three countries — Japan and Spain (where the forecast is unchanged) and America (where GNP is now expected to fall by 0.3% rather than 0.4%).
Worst off are Canada, where GNP is predicted to fall by 0.6% this year, and Britain, with a fall of 0.5%.
In 1992 the forecasters reckon that economic growth in the 13 countries will average 2.6%, down from last month's forecast of 2.7%.
The payoff is inflation, with lower estimates than last month in nine countries.
Inflation is now expected to average 5% this year, slightly down from January's estimate of 5.1%.
COMMODITY PRICE INDEX
Sales of soyabeans to the Soviet Union have helped to underpin prices, which rose to $5.80 a bushel in Chicago this week.
The Russians have bought 200,000 tonnes of beans with part of the $58m-worth of export credits recently allocated to soyabeans.
They could buy a further 41,000 tonnes.
However, American soyabean prices will come under pressure when the Brazilian harvest starts next month.
Brazil's 1991 crop is expected to fall to 17m tonnes, from nearly 20m tonnes in 1990.
Argentina's crop could be around 10m tonnes.
Farmers are short of cash, and are likely to step up sales early in the season, lifting exports from the two countries to near record levels over the next six months.
HOME BORROWING
When it comes to buying houses, the British are keenest of all.
Total mortgage debt in Britain rose from 32% of GDP in 1982 to 58% in 1989, by far the highest ratio in the big economies.
It is no coincidence that house prices rose faster in Britain in the 1980s (by an average of 5.9% a year in real terms) than elsewhere.
America was not far behind, with total mortgage debt equivalent to 45% of GDP in 1989.
America and Britain have the most liberalised financial systems and the most generous tax breaks on interest payments of the six countries in the chart.
In the more restricted financial climates of Japan, France, Germany and Italy, mortgage debt ranges between 7% of GDP in Italy and 25% in Japan.
In Germany, where mortgage interest payments are not tax-deductible and mortgage loans cannot exceed 60% of the value of a house (compared with 100% in Britain), home prices fell in real terms in the past decade.
TRADE, EXCHANGE RATES AND RESERVES
America's visible-trade deficit narrowed to $6.3 billion in December, bringing the total for 1990 to $100.4 billion, down from 1989's deficit of $109.4 billion.
Germany's trade surplus fell to $1.7 billion in December, trimming its 12-month surplus to $64.3 billion; its current-account surplus fell to $44 billion.
The dollar rose 1.9% during the week in trade-weighted terms and the yen fell 1.2%.
WORLD BOURSES
Stockmarkets rose strongly this week on hopes of peace in the Gulf and lower interest rates.
Tokyo touched 26000 for the first time since last August.
Milan surged 7.5% on expectations of a cut in capital-gains tax.
The world index gained 1.7%.
MONEY AND INTEREST RATES
America's narrow-money growth remained at 4.0% in the year to January.
Over the same period growth in broad money slowed to 7.3% in Japan and to 11.1% in Britain — its smallest annual increase since the series began in 1982.