

LEADERS
Superglue Gorbachev
By holding the party together, he holds the country back
IT IS a pity that Mikhail Gorbachev survived the move to oust him as leader of the Communist Party last month.
A pity because, had he lost that job, the party would almost certainly have split.
And a split is what is needed if democratic politics is to develop in the Soviet Union.
Haven't the Communists already become an irrelevance, in a country that is changing so fast?
Alas, no.
Mr Gorbachev himself, in deciding to battle on as their leader, clearly does not think so.
True, the party is a shadow of its Leninist self.
It has lost a great deal besides its guaranteed monopoly of power: its sense of purpose, its old dominance over the economy, many of its perks — these have gone, along with 1.8m members last year alone.
But that still leaves it with about 16m people, vast assets and a formidable ability to mobilise and disrupt.
However the Soviet drama unfolds, the Communist Party or its derivatives are bound to play a big part.
The non-Communist forces, in contrast, are scattered.
Certainly, assorted nationalists now dominate half a dozen outlying republics, and Boris Yeltsin can stir the masses.
But Mr Yeltsin has no political party.
In his Russian heartland the democrats, repeating the mistakes of their predecessors before 1917, have failed to organise themselves into a cohesive opposition.
They are hopelessly fragmented.
An issue that typically divides them — and caused the largest opposition group, the Democratic Party, to split at its congress last month — is whether to compromise with the Communists or to work for their complete removal.
Recognise your weakness
The argument is academic.
For the moment the democrats in Russia are far too weak to take power on their own.
Cohabitation with reform-minded Communists is their only chance of breaking out of their lonely weakness.
The trouble is that the reform-minded Communists are still in bed with barely reformed Stalinists.
The Communist Party now contains an extraordinary range of opinion, from old believers to reformers who are closer in outlook to middle-of-the-road democrats than to their hardline comrades.
Some of the reformers recently banded together as ‘Communists for Democracy’ and gave Mr Yeltsin a vital bit of support in the Russian parliament.
But it will be hard to accept that these people are serious about democracy — or can do much more to further its cause — so long as they stay in the same party as democracy-haters.
Bolsheviks and Mensheviks, please
Hence the need for a split.
Last summer, at the Communists' congress, an attempt by the so-called Democratic Platform to break the party in two failed miserably (in the end it was the Platform that collapsed).
Despite all their differences, the Communists are still holding together.
Why?
One reason is emotional.
For many Communists, it is hard to break with the party that looked after them, that they believed in, that their parents fought for.
Another reason is strictly practical.
The party is rich in buildings, printing presses, holiday homes; if it were to break into bits, there would be a battle over who kept the goodies.
Before a split, better make sure you are with the majority faction (or Bolsheviks), for the Mensheviks are likely to lose out.
However, these emotions and practicalities are no longer what really prevents the party from coming unstuck.
The superglue is Mr Gorbachev.
Reformers see him as protection against the Stalinist wing they still fear (and many of them hope that maybe, deep down, he is still on their side).
Hardliners reckon that without him they could not withstand a reformist onslaught for long.
As for Mr Gorbachev himself, he is desperate for the party to stay in one piece because he knows that, once on their own, neither hardliners nor reformers would be likely to want him as their leader.
He would still be state president, but he would lose his real power base.
That is why he manoeuvred frantically, and brilliantly, to fend off the challenge to his party leadership last month.
The best that can be said of his success on that occasion is that it postponed the period of uncertainty that a split in the party would bring.
But that is a prize that will not last.
It may now be time to risk the uncertainty of a split.
Without Mr Gorbachev as party boss, a rapid realignment of forces would take place, making it possible for a coalition-for-democracy to line up against the coalition-for-clampdown.
With him as party boss, the current impasse will continue.
Aid and enterprise
The World Bank needs to change, but America's prodding is unhelpful
THE Bush administration has blocked a capital increase for the International Finance Corporation (IFC), an arm of that large and unloved bureaucracy, the World Bank.
America wants the Bank to change its ways, and lend less to the third world's governments and more to its private businesses.
This demand is not quite as plausible as it looks, though it deserves to be taken seriously.
America's way of pressing it, however, could hardly have been more absurd.
America has attacked the bit of the Bank expressly designed to promote private enterprise in the developing countries.
The IFC makes equity investments in companies and stockmarkets; lends directly to private businesses; tells governments how to privatise state-owned enterprises; helps to establish new capital markets; and so forth.
In short, it does on a small scale what America wants the World Bank to do on a bigger scale.
The administration should be the champion of the IFC, not, as during the past few weeks, its worst enemy.
The art of development lending
If the row over the IFC's capital increase is not settled soon, work will be delayed that, according to the administration itself, badly needs to be done.
But the main question posed by America will still need to be answered: should the Bank as a whole recast itself as a lender to private enterprise?
That would be a big change.
The Bank's articles of association require an official guarantee for its loans; in effect, they oblige the Bank to lend to governments.
Without the guarantee it would be hard for the Bank to keep its high credit rating; without that rating, poor borrowers would have to pay more for their Bank loans.
The goal of the World Bank is clear enough: to promote growth in poor countries.
The best way to do that is to help businesses flourish.
In almost all countries, state-owned enterprises are far less efficient than their private counterparts; governments, shielded from market pressures, are often careless and profligate investors.
But lending directly to private businesses may not be the best way to help them.
Enterprise in the third world tends to be hampered less by lack of capital than by bad economic policies and missing infrastructure.
If policies are to improve, third-world governments need to be subjected to a shrewd combination of pressure and advice.
And if the infrastructure of schools, health centres, roads and irrigation is to be created, governments will often need to borrow; such investments are long-term and yield no direct cash returns, so private lenders are unlikely to be keen.
Here is the gap that the Bank is equipped to fill: by lending for infrastructure (or to ease the financial burden of changes in economic policy), and by tying advice and policy-strings to these loans, it can meet both needs.
In this way the operations of the Bank and the IFC are complementary.
Without a foundation of good policy and adequate infrastructure, help to the private sector from the IFC or anywhere else is likely to be wasted.
The balance between the Bank's traditional operations and those of the IFC should be shifted further in the latter's direction; that is why the IFC's capital increase ought to go ahead.
But the present definition of responsibilities is broadly correct.
In other words, America's officials have missed the point.
What matters is not to rethink the Bank's role, but to make the Bank as good as possible at the job it already has.
Nearly half of the Bank's borrower-governments break their promises about economic policy.
Partly for that reason, too many projects yield poor returns.
Sometimes the Bank's investments fail in other ways, too, causing environmental or social harm.
Without a doubt, the Bank can do better.
Lewis Preston, its new president, must make it more skilful and more efficient.
Above all, though, the Bank should be harsher on bad economic policy — even when(America, please note) this annoys governments which the Bank's rich-country shareholders would prefer to be friends with.
The Palestine puzzle
There is an opportunity for peace behind the brick wall James Baker found in Damascus and Jerusalem
HAVING offered America's help to make peace between Israel and the Arabs, James Baker has discovered something odd.
America wants peace in the Middle East more than Arabs or Israelis do.
Indeed, the governments of the region seem quite ungrateful when the well-meaning secretary of state turns up on their doorsteps.
He offers them another unsettling peacemaking idea; they invent another excuse for turning it down.
The question during Mr Baker's recent tour was whether Israel's Yitzhak Shamir or Syria's Hafez Assad would run out of excuses first.
For over 30 years Israel had no need of excuses.
No Arab state except Egypt was willing to talk peace.
In 1982 the Arabs relented, but said that (a) they needed the cover of an ‘international conference’ and (b) that Yasser Arafat's Palestine Liberation Organisation would have to be present, too.
Until the cold war ended, Israel could rely on America objecting to (a) because an international conference required the participation of the Soviet Union.
That objection has gone.
As for(b), by supporting Iraq in the Gulf war Mr Arafat made himself so unpopular that most Arab governments no longer want him to be involved.
One by one, Israel's reasons for declining to go to a peace conference are being whittled away.
The main obstacle now is the United Nations.
Syria says the UN should have a starring role at any conference.
Israel would prefer it to play no part at all.
The issue is not quite as petty as it seems.
Israel thinks Syria wants the UN there because Mr Assad has not accepted, in his heart, the need for face-to-face negotiation with the Jewish state.
He would like to rig the conference so that Israel goes on trial, with America as its attorney and the United Nations as judge and executioner.
Given the UN's notorious unfriendliness to Israel (remember the General Assembly's Zionism-is-racism resolution), the Israeli complaint has some force.
But it is also, in a way, just another excuse.
The naive observer of Mr Baker's travels might wonder why Israel wants excuses.
Ordinary Israelis pay a heavy price — in regular wars, occasional bombardment by ballistic missiles, random knifings by hate-filled Palestinians — for the absence of peace.
Opinion polls show that many of them are prepared to sacrifice territory to end the conflict.
Except for the stateless Palestinians, nobody else in the Middle East stands to gain more from peace.
So why suspect Israel, of all countries, of trying to sabotage Mr Baker's peace mission?
The answer lies in drawing a distinction between Israel and its present government.
After half a century of rejection by the Arab world, Israelis have reason to doubt whether handing back the territories they captured in 1967 would make any lasting difference to Arab attitudes.
If they think peace is impossible, they will hang on to the extra layer of defence these territories provide.
But it is neither fear of the Arabs, nor a belief in the impossibility of peace, that explains the attachment of Mr Shamir's Likud Party to the West Bank.
He, and the leaders of the extremist parties in coalition with him, are motivated primarily by ideology.
They say the West Bank is Israel's land, literally by divine right.
The sad thing about the past decade is that, by playing upon (and then hijacking) the legitimate fears of their secular compatriots, these ideologues have come to dominate Israel's politics.
The do-nothing temptation
In theory, Mr Shamir's obstinacy on territory leaves Mr Baker with four options.
He can work towards a peace that does not entail Israel leaving the West Bank; he can force Israel out of the West Bank by applying economic pressure; he can give up altogether; or he can try to break that Likud armlock on Israeli politics.
In practice, only the last two of these options look feasible.
If Israel stays permanently in the West Bank, the Arabs will not offer peace; and the American Congress is not likely to support sanctions against Israel.
So Mr Baker can either give up, or he can work at weakening Likud.
Giving up is not usually the American way, but it does have some attractions.
If the Americans accepted that the Israel-Palestine problem was insoluble, at least for now, they could concentrate on what really matters to them in the Middle East.
This is not the fate of the Palestinians, but avoiding another Arab-Israeli war.
That prospect is anyway slight so long as Soviet-American cosiness continues and Iraq's war machine remains broken.
An America that stopped trying to ‘solve’ the conflict could still try to keep it manageable: by promoting arms control, say, or making Israel treat the Palestinians more gently.
In the Gulf war many Arab regimes supporting the alliance were uncomfortably aware that the Palestine issue was being used against them.
Some might be happy to see it pushed, temporarily, to the margins.
The idea of giving up sounds enticing, but it would be a mistake.
The conflict over Palestine is not insoluble, if the Arabs bring to the table a peace offer that ordinary Israelis feel they can safely accept.
Indeed, it is fear of the other side proving reasonable that makes Mr Shamir, and the extremists on the Arab side, strive so hard to block the road to negotiation.
Only one outside power is capable of removing those roadblocks.
Mr Baker must keep up the peacemaking.
Rethinking NATO
Change it as times change, but do not split it up
NOW that the blush of embarrassment at their mixed showing in the Gulf war has worn off, Europeans have gone back to doing what they do best: dickering over abstractions.
In Washington this week Germany's Helmut Kohl insisted that uniting Europe would not mean undermining NATO.
But Europe's obsession with clearing a path to a common foreign and defence policy risks doing just that.
With the cold war declared over, a lot of Europeans wonder whether they still need a NATO.
A lot of Americans are meanwhile disenchanted with an alliance that commits them to defending a Europe that could do more for itself — especially a Europe that offers America so little, so ungraciously, in return.
Without some clear thinking about what Europeans and Americans still need from one another, the transatlantic partnership that has kept Europe safe for half a century will break apart.
Neither side relishes a divorce.
Even France, ever prickly about American influence, wants some American soldiers to stay in Europe.
The Soviet Union may now be a tamer neighbour, but with more tanks and guns than NATO-Europe's armies combined, and with its nuclear missiles pointing westwards, it still poses a big potential danger.
If push ever did come again to shove, American muscles would be needed to push back.
Large non-Soviet dangers exist, too.
The war in the Gulf was a reminder of the instability along NATO's southern flank; long-range missiles are spreading dangerously in the third world; Eastern Europe is never short of alarming political wobbles.
Such common risks to the interests and values they all share still give the allies plenty to fret about collectively.
Why, then, is their alliance at risk?
One threat comes from Europe's desire to carry its Euro-integration into foreign policy, security policy and ultimately defence policy.
Euro-visionaries claim it is possible to strengthen European defence co-operation in collaboration with America, not in competition with it.
That sounds like a fine formula.
But the more Europeans insist on taking decisions on security and, eventually, defence matters without America, the more miffed Americans are liable to feel.
No defence collaboration without representation will be the refrain, as Americans increasingly ask themselves what is in it for them.
Ask not what America can do for you
The old answer to sceptical Americans, trotted out by Europeans whenever transatlantic ties were strained in the past, is that the United States is in Europe defending its own interests, not just those of Europe.
America was founded on a rejection of the things it disliked about Europe.
But the 20th century showed that, whatever the distractions in other parts of the globe, America turns its back on Europe at its peril.
Since it always ends up being drawn back to Europe, a presence that can be swiftly reinforced makes better sense than a withdrawal followed by a panicky rush back when some new danger arises.
Anyway, with the Soviet threat on the wane and the Europeans proposing to take on more of the burden that is left, the cost to the United States of staying on in Europe will henceforth be smaller.
The trouble is that such verities are no longer enough.
The fading of the cold war has not only changed what Europeans can expect from America, it has changed what Americans expect of Europe.
In the past Europe looked to America for support against a predictable Soviet threat to the survival of European democracy.
Today America must be able to look to Europe for support in containing less predictable threats to the values they have in common from outside Europe.
There's the rub.
It is not just the attraction of European union that encourages France and Germany, in particular, to push for a common European defence: it is that of America-distancing.
Although France wants American soldiers in Europe, America's leadership in the Gulf war (in which France at least played a part) seems only to have confirmed French fears that military co-operation outside Europe means American domination.
And although Mr Kohl promises that Germany will eventually amend its constitution and shoulder its proper military responsibilities in the world, he would prefer to sell that to his own people as a pro-European gesture than as a pro-American one.
The risk is that the professed desire of Europeans to co-ordinate their policies more closely masks a prospect of joint inaction.
Euro-hopefuls argue that if Europe had already been committed to a common foreign and security policy, its military contribution in the Gulf would have been swifter and more effective.
Really?
Unlike NATO, which came together for collective defence, the European Community includes neutral Ireland and may soon include neutral Sweden and Austria too.
How long would America have had to wait for the Community to pull all its members behind a common policy?
And how blurry would that policy have had to be in order to be described as common?
This is why NATO has no real substitute.
It is not just the presence of American troops that protects Europe; it is the habit of collective policy-making with America, joint exercises, the rehearsal of such war-winning concepts as the land-air battle, and a collective infrastructure.
These are things Europe cannot do effectively on its own.
These are habits that must now be reworked to meet threats that are vaguer, more elusive and spread across more of the world than precisely identified units of the Soviet army.
The task may be daunting — the weary-minded would say impossible.
But it is far more worthwhile than being polite about an old alliance, and equipping it with new ‘pillars’ that crumble when the next unexpected bugle sounds.
Patient persuasion needed
The British government could be a lot clearer about who its health reforms are designed to help
THE long-overdue reform of Britain's national health service (NHS) started on April 1st and quickly turned into a shouting-match.
The Labour Party insists that self-governing trusts (hospitals which choose to opt out of health-authority control and manage their own affairs) are in fact opting out of the NHS altogether; and that doctors who control their own budgets are going to turn queue-jumping at hospitals into a business practice.
By making these charges, Labour has boosted its longstanding efforts to persuade voters that the Tories have a secret agenda for the NHS: privatisation.
If it manages to make that charge stick, it will have got itself a powerful vote-winner.
The Conservatives, first under Margaret Thatcher and now under John Major, will have only themselves to blame.
The reforms deserve something better than the babble that has followed them from birth.
Their essence — setting up a division between the buyers of health care (usually health authorities) and its providers (often hospitals)— represents a huge improvement in the running of the NHS.
The job of the buyers is to assess the health needs of people in their area and then see that those needs are met as quickly and effectively as possible.
The job of the providers is to come up with best combination of service and cost.
This split will force the NHS to pay more attention to the needs of patients and less to the convenience of doctors.
It will link the income of hospitals to their success in attracting patients.
It will bring greater clarity into choosing how to spend public money on health.
All these are excellent aims.
They should also be relatively simple to explain, and to understand.
Yet the government has long managed to appear as though it was teaching Pythagoras to four-year-olds.
Putting patients first
Shifting to a patient-driven health system was never going to be easy — especially not for the Tories.
After the Red Army, the NHS is the largest employer in Europe.
Its staff, who will be shaken up, are visible and well-organised; the patients, who will benefit, are unorganised.
But the government did a singularly poor job in getting its patient-centred message across.
The 1988 white paper which introduced the reforms was sensibly called ‘Working for Patients’; to listen to ministers and other Tory politicians, it might have been called ‘Working for Accountants’.
Right from the start, the people who dreamed up the reforms made the mistake of including buzz-words — the ‘internal market’ and ‘opted-out’are the most glaring examples — which seemed intended to flatter Mrs Thatcher rather than to inform Mr Average.
Tory politicians compounded this mistake by talking too much about means, too little about ends.
They waxed lyrical on the virtues of introducing business-like methods and improving resource management.
They hardly mentioned the patients.
To have any chance now of holding his own, the new health secretary, William Waldegrave has, first, to explain how the old-style NHS failed its patients.
Hospitals kept them waiting for scarce beds, but sat on acres of land in the middle of booming cities.
Health authorities complained that they could not afford expensive drugs, but failed to use their buying power to drive down prices from all their suppliers.
In London the NHS spent heavily on state-of-the-art medical equipment for hospitals, but invested too little in primary care for Londoners.
British nurses were among the best trained in Europe but — thanks to the restrictive practices of the medical profession — were given the most limited responsibilities.
Mr Waldegrave should next spend more time explaining how the reforms will help put patients first.
Performance-related pay for general practitioners (GPs)— an innovation bitterly resisted by the British Medical Association — is already driving up rates of childhood immunisation and of testing for cervical cancer.
Some hospital trusts in the inner cities may be shedding staff, but others in the suburbs and the shires are recruiting new staff and cutting waiting-lists.
Budget-holding is encouraging GPs to perform minor operations themselves rather than put patients on hospital waiting-lists.
Before the reforms, GPs routinely referred patients with rheumatoid arthritis to hospital-based rheumatologists.
The waiting time was about six weeks, and each booking cost the NHS £150.
Now budget-holding GPs are finding it quicker and far cheaper to do the job themselves.
Mr Waldegrave should also point out that his reforms will make the NHS more equitable as well as more efficient.
Money will be awarded to health authorities according to the size and needs of their populations, not (as now) by vague tradition.
Getting such truths over should not be impossible.
The reforms enjoy the support of a growing number of people in the medical profession itself.
The health authorities are belatedly starting to explain their new role to the people they are supposed to serve.
Many other European countries, regardless of the political complexion of their governments, are reforming health care along internal-market lines (see page 30).
Dr Waldegrave to post-natal care, quickly.
ICI digs in
There is no public-policy reason to oppose a bid.
There are plenty of reasons why ICI should be shaken up
ALTHOUGH more than a week has passed since Hanson bought 2.82% of Britain's ICI, the only certainty about that stake is that the world's fourth-largest chemicals company will never be the same again.
By Thursday morning there was still no takeover bid for ICI.
Nor, perhaps, will there ever be one.
But, rightly, ICI is acting as if a bid is imminent, preparing its defences and making plans for itself in a way that guarantees that much will change at the firm.
Meanwhile, the kite that Lord Hanson has flown is bobbing around in the political and financial winds.
It is doing so in a way that does not give wind a good name.
The most bothersome political breeze is the idea that, on public-interest grounds, officials — whether in Britain or the European Community — must consider (ie, reject) a takeover by Hanson of a company of the size and prominence of ICI.
There are only two possible grounds for worrying about the ownership of ICI: national security, and competition.
If Saddam Hussein or Colonel Qaddaffi were bidding for control of a firm that employs 130,000 people, makes explosives and could be made to make chemical weapons, that would be reason for concern.
James Hanson is not Saddam Hussein.
Nor is there any likelihood of competition being diminished, except in the case of one minor product, titanium dioxide.
ICI, in its involvement during the 1980s in illegal cartels for polypropylene, PVC and other materials, has been shown by the EC to threaten competition more on its own than Hanson ever has.
The public may be interested in whether a bid is made, but it has no legitimate interest to defend.
If what was at stake was the existence of ICI, rather than its ownership, then concern would be understandable.
Many people would lose their jobs if the firm were to go bankrupt; skills and research would be lost; for Britain's largest manufacturer to vanish would be quite a blow.
But takeovers are not the same as bankruptcies.
Nobody is going to pay £10 billion ($17 billion) or more just in order to destroy ICI.
Which brings in the financial tornado: the myth of the stripper.
Lord Hanson's firm, it is said, is an asset-stripper, not a real business, and is therefore not fit to buy a firm like ICI.
This term, a throwback to the early 1970s, is well past retirement age.
If Hanson sells assets that do not work fruitfully together, it is not stripping them; it is finding them new and better homes.
ICI itself acted as a new home when in 1985 it spent $750m on the chemicals operations of Beatrice, an American group then being bought by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts, a firm similar to Hanson.
Doubtless ICI thinks that it has provided a good home for those stripped assets.
And in its $1.7 billion purchase of Stauffer, another American chemicals firm, in 1987 it did a passable impersonation of Hanson, paying for most of the bid with $1.15 billion of asset sales.
ICI cannot argue that the buyers of its assets would all be rogues, especially now that the party-time stockmarkets of the late 1980s have been sobered up by recession.
No public interest, no asset-stripping: how, then, should ICI respond?
By recognising that it has more to learn from Hanson than to fear.
In their different ways, Hanson and ICI are doing much the same thing: running a portfolio of businesses.
Ever since it was formed in a merger 55 years ago, ICI's portfolio has had to change with the times.
Hanson's investment is a clue that change is again overdue.
Imperial strip-tease
Hanson does not simply buy companies and break them up.
It buys them, sells some bits quickly, but then keeps the rest to manage for the long term.
Its choice of what to buy, sell or keep (see page 103) depends on clear eyes, not dreamy hopes.
It nurtures humdrum businesses such as bricks and tobacco.
In some areas, such as titanium dioxide, a pigment for paints and plastics, it is challenging ICI on innovation.
It sells businesses it does not think it will be good at, such as those in high-technology, volatile markets.
ICI also owns commodity businesses, where basic research counts for little.
But it differs from Hanson in its attachment to fancier activities, where men in white coats are essential.
It thinks, presumably, that it is good at everything it does.
Its profits record, which has been far from outstanding, suggests that it is wrong.
Concentrating on what you do well is not solely a Hanson preserve.
When the British government sold its last stake in BP in 1987, the oil firm realised that it might be vulnerable to a bid, so it began to strip itself.
Its mines, for instance, were worth more in the hands of RTZ, which bought them.
ICI has done nothing so bold.
It has nibbled at the problem, closing down its fertiliser business after failing to sell it.
Just as B.A.T started unbundling itself when Sir James Goldsmith bid for the tobacco group in 1989, so must ICI.
Discussions at the firm during the past 12 months (see page 98) suggest that many ICI staff already accept this.
The worst response would be the sort that has already begun to be hinted at for ICI: protecting itself through a tangle of joint ventures.
That was what Lord Weinstock did when his GEC seemed threatened two years ago.
The likeliest outcome would be to make a bureaucratic, clumsily managed conglomerate even more bureaucratic and more clumsy.
To protect Britain's biggest manufacturer by making it less efficient: now that should really worry the public.
In praise of touts
Why scalping is in the public interest
TICKET touts are not known for their flair for public relations.
They loiter outside the big match with fistfuls of grubby tickets priced at many times their face value.
Their customers are free not to buy.
But they do, and then feel cheated.
The grandees of sport and theatre are distressed.
Real fans, they say, need protecting; profiteering must be stopped.
Persecuting the tout — and, if possible, prosecuting him as well— has become a sport in itself.
Earlier this month a bill began its passage through California's legislature which would sentence touts, or scalpers as it calls them, to a fine of $1,000 or a year in jail.
A law passed in Pennsylvania last summer gives touts a $5,000 fine or two years behind bars.
When governments refuse to legislate, as in Britain, sport's organisers dream up complicated schemes to prevent touting.
Whinges about the black market for centre-court tickets are as much a part of the Wimbledon tennis championships as thunderstorms are — but this year's new rules mean that any tout reselling tickets at Wimbledon next month could end up in a magistrate's court.
Yours for a tenner, guv
Such repressive measures are entirely misguided.
Perhaps touts spend their free time mugging old ladies and fencing stolen cars.
By all means prosecute them for that.
But when they are scalping, they are working in the public interest.
Touts make money when the demand for their tickets greatly exceeds the supply at the official price.
Under such circumstances a ticket can be worth less to its owner than to somebody else; if so, a sale will benefit both parties.
However much the buyer may complain, he acted voluntarily: he is better off than he would otherwise have been.
In this transaction the tout is merely an agent.
In return for his scalping services, he rightly takes a cut.
Remember that the scalper sometimes loses money.
He takes risks — that the big stars will be there on the day, that rain will not stop play.
Those risks can turn sour, as they do for any pin-striped market-maker.
The tout has other costs to cover, too: these include not just his time, but also the capital cost of his initial outlay and the psychic cost of being a social outcast.
Remember, too, that he is hardly ever a monopolist: he works in fierce competition with fellow scalpers.
So the scalper's cut is not a monopoly rent, but a fair price for a service efficiently rendered.
The real question is why the scalper's services are needed in the first place.
Sometimes, as with theatres, underpricing happens because organisers choose not to set their prices according to the market — charging the same for tickets on Saturday night as on Wednesday, for instance.
In sports, season tickets set the same price for all events, regardless of popularity.
Promoters have their reasons for pricing this way; having done so, they should see that touts provide a useful service.
When demand outstrips supply by the widest margin, the reason is usually that the original seller is trying to rig the market — as at the FA Cup final, or Wimbledon.
Privileged insiders get tickets at knockdown prices, while others are excluded.
Real fans should thank the touts for exposing such wicked goings-on.
That's right: scalpers are fighters for justice, too.
India's trial
ASSASSINATION, said Disraeli, never changed the history of the world.
He may have been right, in his day.
But the bomb that killed Rajiv Gandhi this week sent its blast through an India already on the edge of tragedy.
That is why a single act of political barbarism, in the southern town of Sriperumbudur on the night of May 21st, may yet smash the world's biggest democracy into sectarian fragments.
Mr Gandhi's murder came in the middle of a general-election campaign that had already been marred by more killing, intimidation and vote-grabbing than India had seen in any of its nine previous elections.
Sikh separatists, Assamese secessionists, Tamil militants, Bihari gangsters, Kashmiri guerrillas — all had provided bloody evidence, well before the election, of an India sliding towards ungovernability.
The lofty idea that India could endure as a secular democracy of diverse peoples had come under open attack from the Hindu chauvinists of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).
Despite being an affront to the memory of Mahatma Gandhi, the founding father of independent India, the BJP's attack had been immensely popular.
Equally depressing, in its implicit rejection of the notion that merit deserves reward, was the cynical appeal made to the lower castes and the Muslims by V. P. Singh's Janata Dal Party.
Yet India contains not just the forces of fragmentation, but also reserves of strength.
One is the refusal of its generals, in contrast to their counterparts in Pakistan and Bangladesh, to be drawn into politics.
The other is the resilience of the union.
Even in its infancy, India was strong enough to survive the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi in 1948.
Decades later, in 1984, the sense of unity was still strong enough to calm the sectarian anger that followed the murder of Rajiv Gandhi's mother, Indira.
Mr Gandhi's murder is a new and testing tragedy.
But neither as a national leader nor as a party politician was he as commanding as his mother or his grandfather, Jawaharlal Nehru, India's first prime minister.
Why should his death, however tragic, threaten irreparable damage to an institutional structure of such proven strength?
The answer lies in India's recent wasted years, for which Mr Gandhi was partly responsible.
He was a charming man, and a brave man (his decision to lower the wall of security between himself and the voters must have encouraged his assassins).
But he lacked the intellectual force which his mother and grandfather had, and which he needed if he was to fulfil his ambition to drag India ‘into the 21st century’.
The opportunity was there: when he became prime minister after his mother's assassination by Sikh extremists, he carried with him the goodwill and sympathy of both parliament and public.
He talked of opening the economy to the modernising forces of technology and the market, and of ending the corruption that pervades every stratum of an infinitely stratified country.
He calmed secessionist sentiment by dealing constructively with the regional parties of Kashmir, Assam and Punjab.
Ultimately, though, he failed.
By the time he and the Congress Party were humbled in the 1989 election, his administration had fallen prey to all the usual vices of Indian factionalism.
Party colleagues, notably Mr Singh, deserted him, and his own reputation was tarnished by allegations that he had taken bribes from Bofors, a Swedish arms company.
Out of office, he played the politics of Machiavelli.
Chandra Shekhar's minority government rested on the support of Congress — support which Mr Gandhi then chose to withdraw, thus bringing about the present election.
When he died, India was still too far from the 21st century.
Can it complete the journey, as one nation, without him?
Since his widow, Sonia, has declined appointment in his place as president of the Congress Party, his murder will probably mark the end of the Nehru dynasty which has ruled India for 40 of its 44 years of independence.
The Nehru creed was of India as a secular union.
Its doctrine was self-sufficiency and the Fabian socialism that Nehru's generation imbibed during the struggle against colonialism.
The creed still makes sense but, as both Mr Gandhi and Mr Singh began dimly to realise in the 1980s, the doctrine does not.
The necessary journey
After this week's murder, India's first task is to keep the idea of secularism alive.
Only under a secular constitution can a nation of nearly 850m people that is divided and then sub-divided by race, religion and caste stay peacefully together for the journey ahead.
Lal Krishna Advani's BJP argues that a nation that is 80% Hindu can peacefully assume an official Hindu identity.
The argument is both dangerous and disingenuous.
India's minorities are huge — Muslims alone number 100m — and spread throughout the country.
When the banner of religion is raised as a banner of politics, blood will flow, just as it has done in Belfast, Beirut and Colombo.
India of all places should know that.
Vast numbers died in the 1947 partition of Muslim Pakistan from Hindu-dominated India.
Last year's attempts by the BJP to build a Hindu temple on the disputed site of a mosque in Ayodhya sparked off murderous riots across the nation.
Indira Gandhi's assassination was itself an act of revenge by her Sikh bodyguards, after hundreds of Sikhs were killed during the clearing of extremists from their Golden Temple in Amritsar.
That is why, in the short run, it matters enormously who was responsible for Mr Gandhi's assassination.
If, as the government's first reports suggested, the blame lies with disaffected Tamils, so much the better — the Indian masses care little about the problems of Tamil separatism in Sri Lanka.
Heaven forbid that Sikhs or Muslims are to blame.
To Congress, the task
When the election campaign resumes, the responsibility for India's future could well revert to the Congress Party.
It was already showing strength in the exit polls, and may now be boosted by a sympathy vote.
That is a better outcome than an India dominated by the likes of the BJP, or by the Marxist members of Mr Singh's National Front coalition, or by the woolly minds of Mr Chandra Shekhar's Socialist Janata Dal.
Congress's hands may be soiled, but at least they are experienced, a fact which the voters have begun again to appreciate.
If the party can command India's electoral centre, it stands a chance of keeping India secular, at one and at peace.
An India that overcomes its present political trial will still have work to do.
It must be fierce about preserving Nehru's creed of secularism, but equally fierce about ditching the failed policies of economic interventionism and self-sufficiency that he attached to it.
India's economic failure is not the cause of the hatred between its religions, but it makes the hatreds worse.
A country where the average income is only $350 a year, and where the poor jostle for space as well as food, will never find it easy to bind up its factional wounds.
Mr Gandhi was probably the last of the Nehru rulers, of whom the Congress Party is a creation.
But he had the unhappy knack of making enemies in the party.
The end of family rule may now give Congress a chance to reunite.
If Congress brings itself to adopt the economic freedoms which have made so much of Asia rich — but which India's intellectual and social elites have smugly rejected — the yearned-for 21st century is within its grasp.
If it fails, the world's biggest democracy will be even less able to survive the next assassin's blow.
LETTERS
Trustbusting
As one of the bright-eyed and Washington-bound young lawyers from Columbia referred to in your leader (‘America's timid trustbusters’, April 27th), I question your nostalgia for American antitrust enforcement in the 1960s.
The period you so fondly remember was dominated by activist and economically unschooled regulators and judges.
They blocked efficient economic combinations that posed no competitive risk to anyone, except the merging parties' slower-footed rivals.
In one notable Supreme Court decision, the government was allowed to bar a merger of two Los Angeles supermarket chains whose combined market share was only 7.5%.
The government acknowledged that this merger posed no immediate risk to consumers, but reasoned that other chains in the area might follow the example.
With logic like this carrying the day, it is little wonder that one dissenting judge observed that the only rule of law governing merger cases in this period was that the government always won.
Levels of antitrust enforcement in the United States have moved in cycles.
Things have begun to swing towards more enforcement after a period in which, as you note, the Sherman and Clayton acts were forgotten and the authorities charged with enforcing them were starved of resources.
Given the political pressures that often drive antitrust policy, a consistently optimal level of enforcement may be too much to ask for.
I hope, however, that you will not think me Panglossian when I suggest that we are now not far from that point.
At least we are much nearer than we were in the era your rose-coloured glasses have alighted upon.
Chicago GILAD OHANA
You seem to think that 1960s' antitrust law enforcement was wonderful because the government ‘took on giants the size of AT&T and IBM and broke up a merger of Procter & Gamble and Clorox.’
In fact, the government ‘took on’ AT&T in the 1970s, and it was the Reagan administration of the 1980s — the villain of your piece — that secured real relief and brought on the phenomenal competition enjoyed today by refusing to accept the cosmetic settlement that had been negotiated by the Carter administration.
And do you seriously believe that the American or world computer industry would be better today if IBM had been broken up into five pieces 20 years ago, as the 1960s and 1970s trustbusters proposed?
Or might we still be awaiting the development of personal computers by some Japanese company?
The proof is in the pudding.
The antitrust policy of the Reagan administration was part and parcel of an overall effort to get the government out of the market, and to permit competition to set prices and production.
The result was low inflation, job creation that was the envy of the developed world, and general prosperity.
QED.
Washington, DC JEFFREY ZUCKERMAN
The uneducated English
University is where a small range of closely related subjects is studied in depth.
In England, therefore, university starts at the age of 16 and lasts for five years.
At the end of the second year there is a stiff examination that knocks out about a quarter of the students.
The others move to different premises, where nearly all of them are given degrees three years later.
Your suggestion for A-levels, to keep one in-depth subject and cover five or six others at a lower level, will not work (April 27th).
Universities will accept applications mostly from youngsters who have done well in their in-depth subject, so 16-year-olds will still have to make the decision about their careers at an age when many are not ready, and two years before most other Europeans.
The decision-making age must truly be shifted from 16 to 18; the way to do that is to increase the number of A-levels to six for university entrance, and require passes in all of them.
Some first degrees should also be lengthened to four years.
Nothing else will have the necessary teeth to convince youngsters — and the world — that we really mean it.
London JOHN SHEPHERD
What I fear is that A-levels will be diluted without at the same time lengthening degree courses, particularly mathematical ones, to maintain standards.
This point must be addressed by those in and out of government and education before changes are made.
Please don't let the pattern of the change from O-levels to  GCSE be repeated, introducing yet another mismatch, this time between school and university.
Oxford R.C.E. DEVENISH
What you advocate is similar to the International Baccalaureat, a successful school-leaving certificate pioneered by the International School in Geneva and now accepted by reputable universities worldwide, including Britain.
Graduates pass final examinations in a minimum of six subjects, three at a higher level, similar to A-level, and three at a lower level.
For one of their higher-level subjects, students prepare during their last school year an ‘extended essay’; in effect, a mini-thesis.
Several schools in Britain already teach the Baccalaureat syllabus.
Gex, France TEUVO LEHTI
You criticise the A-level system for reducing the number of students in higher education and for leading to narrowly educated people.
I was raised in Britain where I took my A-levels and went to university, but I now teach at an American college.
You seem to be impressed by the percentage of youngsters in higher education in America.
Their quality, however, is appalling.
I teach students who are often illiterate, who do not know how to use a hand-held calculator, who have never seen a film with subtitles or read a classic work of literature, and who cannot spell even the name of important people in their field (for example, psychology majors who spell Freud as Frued).
America survives, as in the past, by attracting bright and motivated people from other nations of the world.
Pomona, New Jersey DAVID LESTER
The meaning of hostage
It was good to see references at last to what I had always understood to be the correct meaning of hostage (April 27th)— that is, ‘a person given to another as a pledge’(Oxford dictionary).
My emphasis is on ‘given’: it denotes a degree of willingness on the part of the giver.
Those wretched people held by Saddam at the start of the Kuwait invasion were prisoners.
Hostages are a useful as well as a time-honoured gesture of mutual trust.
Even the British have found it so.
In South Arabia as part of the Pax Britannica in the 1950s and 1960s, when some local robber baron was ‘persuaded’ to stop plundering caravans, he was invited to surrender a hostage to authority, as a gesture of future good faith.
This he usually did, and often it was his eldest son.
If the ‘host’ had been the Imam of the Yemen, some filthy prison might have been his lot.
What the British did, however, was to send him to school.
It worked a treat.
Kalamunda, W. Australia MICHAEL CROUCH
Corporate money
I would like to dispute the parallel drawn between J.P.
Morgan and Michael Milken in your otherwise fine survey of international finance (April 27th).
The contrasts between the two men are far more telling.
Pierpont Morgan personified the old Wall Street establishment, which was based on exclusive relations between bankers and companies.
Although Morgan could be arbitrary and intrusive with companies he financed, he insisted on sound, professional management and — with some notable exceptions — conservative financial policy.
Generations of Morgans sat on the boards of General Motors, U.S. Steel, General Electric.
Mr Milken was an anti-establishment maverick who financed raiders lacking any experience in companies they bought.
Far from trying to develop their targets for the long haul, the Milken minions broke them up for quick gain.
With Mr Milken's pronounced bias towards debt, he and his raiders left companies in a far more precarious financial shape than they found them.
He typified a decade in which financial machinations stymied long-term corporate growth.
Brooklyn RON CHERNOW
You refer to a recent study of mine on the success and failure of leveraged buyouts.
The interesting finding of the study, which you did not mention, was that there were differences in pre-buyout performance between companies that successfully underwent LBOs and those that failed.
These differences included pre-buyout cash-flow trends and margins.
Although the small sample size and bias in selection limits the predictive power of some of these measures, it demonstrates that there are real differences that distinguish companies that are suited for high temporary debt from those that are not.
The other finding of note is that debt levels at the time of the buyout, and increases in debt associated with the buyout, are not good predictive measures in judging the potential for success in a transaction.
The successful LBOs in my study, as a group, had higher debt levels at the time of the buyout than those that later failed.
The successful LBOs as a group also experienced greater increases in leverage with the buyout.
This is not to suggest ‘the more the better’; but that there appear to be other measures that portend failure better than leverage ratios.
Based on the other findings of the study, a focus on cash flow (or sellability of assets) to pay down the debt would be more fruitful.
New York HARVIN MOORE
There is an error in chart 4 of your survey; starting from the same initial point, the curve representing the traditional view of the value of a firm should rise initially and then fall, as the level of debt increases.
Your article omits a further important strand to the debate over the past 15 years as to the optimal level of borrowing for firms.
Merton Miller argued in 1977 that investors, when deciding between a company's debt or equity, will be concerned with the returns after both corporate and personal taxes.
Since much of equity returns are in the form of capital gains, at least in the long run, which are taxed only on realisation, personal tax on equity returns is generally in effect much lower than that on the returns to investing in a company's debt.
Thus the corporate-tax advantage of debt is reduced by the personal-tax advantage of equity.
Norwich C.G.C. PITTS
Worrying about Quebec
In ‘All change’(April 27th), the Reform Party of Canada, led by Preston Manning, is represented as separatist, and its supporters as having ‘a good riddance to Quebec’ attitude which must be purged.
In fact, Mr Manning has repeatedly stated that he and the party would much prefer that Quebec remain as part of Canada, but not at any price.
The qualification is not unreasonable.
The man representing English-speaking Canada in its negotiations with Quebec is the prime minister, himself a loyal Quebecker from a Quebec riding [constituency].
The conflict of interest is glaringly obvious, but the only likely alternative in the current parliament seems to be the leader of the opposition Liberal Party — Jean Chretien, a French Canadian who for years represented Quebec ridings as a minister in Pierre Trudeau's era.
Is it any wonder that Canadians worry?
Saanichton, British Columbia J.R.
JACKSON
Hong Kong's new airport
I wish to put on the record a different view of the proposed new airport in Hong Kong (April 13th).
The concerns expressed by the Chinese leadership are, in my opinion, fully justified.
The proposal was given the green light in a post-Tiananmen panic by people who will probably be living in Hampshire when, and if, the airport is built.
Along with Douglas Hurd, this expatriate clique continues to exhibit all the hallmarks of the King Canute school of diplomacy and administration.
That the project may now be delayed by Chinese inquisitiveness should be seen in the context of the fact that the current administration had dithered for 15 years on the project.
The typical small businessman in Hong Kong now has business interests in southern China, to complement his existing connections through kinship, and would much prefer that a cheaper project be put in place, with a view to the needs of Greater Hong Kong as they will be in the 21st century — this after full consultation with the Chinese authorities.
Hong Kong STEPHEN BROWN
Australia's political woes
Your article on the Australian Labor Party's troubles (April 20th) cites a figure of A$1 billion being channelled through an account controlled by Brian Burke into the party's federal campaign funds.
The figure should be A$1m.
The sum of A$1 billion is the amount lost by the Western Australian State Labor government in its business ventures (mainly with Labor Party donors) from 1983 to 1990.
The wider issue at stake is the philosophy behind Labor's current problems: the corporatist approach to government.
In Western Australia we have had the corporatist experiment.
It failed; the loss on our government's business venture is around A$700 per head.
The experiment has been repeated both in Victoria and in South Australia, where again it failed; again at enormous expense.
The lesson for Australia, and indeed for Britain, is to beware a Labor Party that has dropped nationalisation, but not intervention, from its agenda.
South Perth ANDREW GRAY
Precedent Bush
I was surprised to note a major historical inaccuracy in your excellent article ‘The Democrats' dilemma’(April 20th), when you state ‘Mr Bush might be flattered to be the first unopposed president.’
George Washington, former subject of George III, ran twice unopposed for the presidency of the United States of America.
Thornwood, New York CHARLES BOWEN
You  frivolously suggest that Mr Bush might be flattered to be the first unopposed president.
James Monroe earned this distinction in 1820.
Greenwich, Connecticut PETER BOER
BOOKS AND SECTION
The man who never was
KILL THE MESSENGER.
By Bernard Ingham.
HarperCollins; 398 pages; £17.50
WHEN Margaret Thatcher travelled the world as prime minister, she took a bulldog with her.
This jowl-shaking, glowering personification of Britishness was her press secretary, Bernard Ingham — now Sir Bernard.
Prizing anonymity in his dealings with the media, he became public property.
By the end of a decade in Downing Street, he was as essential to the Thatcher caricature as her steel-framed handbag.
Looking back, almost everything about Mrs Thatcher's 12 years seems touched with gothic melodrama — the political landscape was illuminated not by daylight but by periodic lightning-flashes.
Sir Bernard was no exception.
He has been likened to Shakespeare's Iago, to the Scottish grave-robbers Burke and Hare, to an ogre, to a rottweiler.
He became, in short, a story in his own right, the man who was said to have used his great power as Downing Street's anonymous twice-daily briefer to belittle ministers whom Mrs Thatcher intended to dispose of.
Sir Bernard denies the charge.
In two of the best-known cases — his description of John Biffen as a ‘semi-detached’ member of the cabinet and of Francis (now Lord) Pym as the depressive wartime radio character Mona Lott — he goes out of his way to explain what went wrong.
But first some background is needed.
The ‘lobby’ is the shorthand term for the club of political journalists who attend off-the-record briefings with the prime minister's press secretary.
These occur twice a day and may not, under rules drawn up by the journalists themselves, be mentioned in print.
The source of the information and views, which are widely distributed just before evening and morning newspaper deadlines, is therefore hidden.
If ministers or others who are attacked by Downing Street at such meetings object, they have no come-back.
Officially, the briefings never took place.
Sir Bernard complains that in the case of the Biffen and Pym briefings, his comments ‘were dragged out of me.
They were neither premeditated nor authorised.
They came off the top of my head.’
And, further, ‘the circumstances in which they came to be made were never reported by journalists.’
Hardly surprising, this, since they were made at lobby briefings.
Such incidents might have caused Sir Bernard to have second thoughts about the system; but he defends it with passion.
In recent years he has set himself up as a crusader for higher press and broadcasting standards, regularly harking back to the golden days of his journalistic apprenticeship in Yorkshire, where every fact was triple-checked and every speculation ruthlessly suppressed in the Hebden Bridge Times.
Yet his criticism has not, by and large, been for the tabloid newspapers whose standards fell to new lows during the 1980s; instead, he has reserved his bile for investigative journalists, particularly if they worked for television, and for those newspaper reporters who decided to boycott his lobby briefings.
Here this reviewer must admit an interest: as political editor of The Scotsman in those days, he was one of the latter.
The anti-lobby group's tactic, which became a habit, was to report particularly sensational comments made by Sir Bernard or his underlings and to name the source.
This was done by comparing the shorthand notes of several senior lobby members who willingly handed them over.
The result was predictable: the briefers stopped attacking ministers and others in the old style.
To that extent, the lobby revolt was a success.
But Sir Bernard was outraged; and since, throughout this account, he goes on about his rectitude and his impartiality as a civil servant, it is worth quoting him on what happened to journalists who fell out with him.
At the time of the lobby revolt, ‘No one could have been in any doubt that if they went over to [the rebel papers']side, they would cook their goose with Number Ten.’
As for Brian Redhead, a BBC radio presenter who had the temerity to call him a conspiracy, ‘His failure to apologise meant that he never got another interview with Mrs Thatcher as prime minister.’
Sir Bernard has nothing but contempt for politically embarrassing journalism.
A string of distinguished television current-affairs programmes are dismissed as being soft on criminals and terrorists; TV programme-makers turn out to be pretentious, corrupt, cynical and generally ‘nauseating…these saintly people, living off the fat of the land, try to kid you that they are guardians of the common weal!’
As for media prizes, ‘There is only one qualification for a media award these days: the undermining of elected authority.’
Despite his sneering tone, Sir Bernard is undoubtedly right that too many journalists, brought up on Watergate, see themselves as saintly crusaders and all government as conspiracy.
There is a good, critical book to be written about the limits and excesses of journalistic campaigning.
It is not this one.
He had his merits, this strange protector of the Iron Lady; he was courageous, decisive and a punishingly hard worker.
But his tenure of the prime minister's press office lowered its reputation and damaged Mrs Thatcher's image.
His book has interesting passages about the author's boyhood and his later disenchantment with trade unionism.
For the rest, it is distasteful where it is not dull.
Sir Bernard's many friends will fear he has not done himself justice.
His many enemies will crow that he has.
Why communism fell
Wounded pride
THE PATRIOTS' REVOLUTION.
By Mark Frankland.
Sinclair Stevenson; 352 pages; £16.95.
COMMUNISM.
Edited by Geoffrey Stern.
Amazon Publishing; 256 pages; £19.95.
To be published in America by Macmillan
THE upheaval that shook Eastern Europe felt so natural that it seems pointless to ask why it happened.
Given a chance to break loose from neo-Stalinism, with its bullying, one-party corruption and food queues, any normal country would.
Yet what looks obvious in hindsight was not at all obvious before.
Up to 1989, Eastern Europe looked to most people depressed but stable.
Nobody dreamed of so swift a break.
A common explanation is that these revolutions came from outside: East Europeans simply took the chance offered by Mikhail Gorbachev's Sinatra doctrine to ‘do it their way’.
A twisted variant is the conspiracy theory: change was started, at Soviet behest by local communists who wanted limited reform to save the system.
In Eastern Europe the idea that every sparrow's breath is measured out in Moscow dies hard.
A more flattering explanation is that this was an economic revolt from below.
By the end of the 1980s, easterners were watching the West's economies accelerate out of sight.
Another treats the upheaval as a crusade for liberty led by a few heroic dissidents.
This is why many books on the big change in Eastern Europe read either like privatisation brochures or ‘The Lives of the Saints’.
In his finely written record, Mark Frankland gives due weight to all these factors.
But his eye is too keen and his feel for the different histories of these nations too strong to slip into one-answer explanations.
As his title suggests, he thinks that national pride — battered not merely by communist but by pre-war failure — played a large part.
Many easterners are still not convinced by the virtues of unfettered markets, and only a handful were in any active sense dissenters under the previous regime.
Almost all of them, though, did agree on getting rid of the Russians.
Mr Frankland's book is a pleasure to read.
His aim is not to mock or preach but to explain one country to another, and his sense of the absurd keeps him from becoming solemn.
He can catch a mood or scene in a phrase.
Nicolae Ceausescu's famous palace in Bucharest looms ‘like an iceberg through fog’.
A dissident intellectual passing out leaflets at a factory gate reminds him of a nervous child offering a sugar lump to a large horse.
The future, Mr Frankland suggests, will be complicated.
Half a century ago, sincere East European communists expected liberation from the Nazis and the arrival of socialism to be ‘a big bang followed by eternal happiness’, in the sardonic words of Jacek Kuron, a Polish Solidarity activist.
Nobody reading Mr Frankland's book is likely to think there are magical solutions for Eastern Europe after communism.
A useful complement for people interested in communism's travails is an excellent illustrated history of the movement from 1848 to the present day, edited by Geoffrey Stern.
With 48 maps and hundreds of contemporary illustrations, it is a model of lively, popular history, doubling as a handy reference book.
Bob Dylan gets old
Subterranean half-century blues
FOLKNICK, bluesman, balladeer, gospel entertainer, country-and-western star: Bob Dylan, all these and more, was born Robert Allen Zimmerman 50 years ago in the small town of Hibbing, Minnesota.
His parents, Abraham and Beattie, were ordinary, respectable, middle-class Jews who owned an electrical-goods store in the town; his grandfather, who left Russia in the 1920s, had been a peddler and a shoemaker.
Why did he change his name?
Partly because, like any adolescent, he needed a different identity for himself; but partly, perhaps, because he had always been an admirer of outlaws and vagabonds and especially of Matt Dillon, star of ‘Gunsmoke’.
The spelling, on the other hand, may have had something to do with the poet Dylan Thomas, then an intensely romantic and dissolute figure.
Dylan's earliest musical influences were country music (the two Hanks, Snow and Williams) and rock 'n' roll (while still at school he had an ambition to join Little Richard's band).
But by the time he went to college in Minneapolis he was playing folk music on an acoustic guitar and learning to blow — not suck — the harmonica.
In 1961 he took off for New York city to pay his respects to his latest hero, hobo and folk singer Woody Guthrie, then dying of Huntington's Chorea; and he returned to Minneapolis later that year a-singing and a-playing, mumbling and slurring his words, just like Woody himself.
He had also acquired one of Woody's suits of clothes, which he wore for his debut performance at Gerde's Folk City in Greenwich Village.
He was written about enthusiastically in the New York Times, offered a recording contract by CBS Records, and by the end of that year was cutting his first album.
The second and third albums, ‘Freewheelin’(1962) and ‘The Times They are a Changin’(1963), established him as a real and original talent, as both singer and songwriter, with a message that seemed as arresting and vital as the times through which he was fortunate to be living.
In April 1962 he wrote ‘Blowin' in the Wind’, and within a short space of time he had been adopted as the spokesman of the civil-rights movement.
The 1960s had found its chronicler and its prophet.
But prophets rarely live comfortably for long in their own — or other people's — company, and in 1965 Dylan horrified his faithful audience by selling out to commerce.
He picked up an electric guitar at the Newport Folk Festival, assembled a band behind him and played loud enough to raise the roofbeams — just like he had done in his high-school days.
The troubadour of dissent had metamorphosed into a rock 'n' roll Rimbaud.
Folk-rock was born.
Audience hostility drove him onward — and inwards.
He lived and played and wrote and toured frenetically for the next couple of years, working night and day — with just a little help from Benzedrine, Methedrine , and anything else that would speed him up or slow him down.
These were the years of ‘Subterranean Homesick Blues,’‘Highway 61 Revisited’ and ‘Blonde on Blonde’, arguably his most creative period.
Then, in the summer of 1966, came the motorcycle crash — and everything stopped.
The press reported it as a big accident.
In fact, it was nothing more than some fractured vertebrae and minor concussion.
But it gave him an excuse to retire for a while, to re-assess things.
When he went back into the recording studio, the results sounded like painful attempts at self-parody or worse.
It was not until 1974 that his ability to write and perform at his best gelled again, with the release of ‘Blood on the Tracks’.
Later in that decade, God put a hand on his shoulder and Brother Bob was born.
For a time he disported himself on stage like some hell-fire preacher, but since then the message of his songs has been more mixed again: even returning, sometimes, to his great old theme of disaffected love.
There have been Dylanologists almost as long as there has been a Dylan for them to write about.
Clinton Heylin, author of the latest biography, ‘Dylan: Behind the Shades’ *, ranks amongst the most assiduous, having co-founded the Telegraph, a quarterly magazine devoted to the study of Dylan's life and work, and written an extraordinarily detailed chronology of his hero's life.
Mr Heylin is not a graceful writer, but his thorough knowledge and his generous use of interviews makes this the fullest account of the star so far.
Paul Williams's thesis in ‘Bob Dylan: Performing Artist’ ** is that the best — indeed the only — way of getting to grips with the importance of Dylan's work is by treating it as performance art, since that is the way the man himself seems to treat it.
The book has many keen insights into the nature of the Dylan achievements, but it is marred by a fault common to many who write about this man: idolatry.
Mr Williams's central argument can be tested by listening to ‘Bob Dylan: The Bootleg Series’ **, a set of five albums containing many rare and unreleased recordings from all periods of his career.
From these it is clear that the star created mayhem in any recording studio.
Suspicious of session musicians, he has never been in the habit of sharing his thoughts about chord sequences or the like; his co-artists have been expected to listen hard and play along if they can.
If a number is not right on first or second playing, it is dropped, and the star moves on to something else.
He is a great improviser — many of his best lyrics have been written on the wing.
And these records provide fascinating evidence of all this quirkishness, mostly in alternative and earlier arrangements of the best-known songs.
Dylan's voice has always been his greatest asset, carrying a huge range of emotions.
But it is never pretty.
He seems most himself when snarling like a caged animal, droning and whining like a buzz saw, hacking at his guitar as if he is chopping wood.
In spite of the fact that even the best of his songs can seem surprisingly flat on the page, his vocal performance compels a belief in the aptness of the words.
What seems miraculous, when all is said, is that a man driven by so many acts of perversity should have been embraced so widely.
American mortgages
The terrible two
A STATE OF RISK: WILL GOVERNMENT-SPONSORED ENTERPRISES BE THE NEXT FINANCIAL CRISIS?
By Thomas Stanton.
Harper Business; 225 pages; $24.95
WHEN he retired in January as chairman of America's Federal National Mortgage Association (usually known as Fannie Mae), David Maxwell received a handshake of $27m.
This caused a few gasps, as well it might.
It was a huge amount for an institution which, though run like a private-sector company, has its credit risk implicitly underwritten by the federal government.
Fannie Mae is hardly a household name outside Washington, where it lobbies fiercely, and Wall Street, for whom it is a big client.
The unlovely Fannie and her duopolistic cousin, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac), are the best known of that obscure underbelly of the American political system known as government-sponsored enterprises.
During the 1980s these quasi-government agencies became a convenient means of off-balance-sheet financing; so much so that they have now amassed nearly $1 trillion-worth of obligations underwritten by the American taxpayer.
Thomas Stanton's courageous book is the first comprehensive study of these monsters, revealing their history, how they work today and how, with better regulation, they might escape a repeat of the $500 billion savings-and-loan fiasco.
That parallel is apt.
Enterprises like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have a unique advantage over private-sector competitors: they can keep all their profits, but their losses are picked up by the taxpayer.
In practice this means they can borrow more cheaply than banks and thrifts which, being unable to compete with them, have increasingly decided to join them.
Lending institutions now sell more and more of their mortgages to Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac, which in turn package them into securities and sell them to investors.
Because they can borrow at subsidised rates, government-sponsored enterprises tend to grow until they dominate their field.
In 1970 only 8% of all residential-mortgage debt in America carried some form of federal-government guarantee.
By 1989 the figure had grown to 38%, an extraordinary risk for the American taxpayer to be asked to bear.
These enterprises are now almost as big as that other mammoth contingent liability of America's socialised credit system, federally insured deposits.
At the end of 1989 the outstanding securities of the former totalled $874 billion, compared with $959 billion for the latter.
Mr Stanton has some worthy thoughts on how to ensure the safety and soundness of these shadowy leviathans.
He has an (American) liberal's instinct that they could be valuable instruments of federal policy in pursuit of woolly-sounding social goals, providing they are properly regulated.
His concern is that they are out of political control.
An obvious starting point is to increase their wafer-thin capital requirements.
Some would argue that these enterprises have no place in a capitalist system, and should therefore be privatised as soon as possible.
In reality they are too powerful to be challenged head on, although the thrift horrors did at least prompt the first congressional hearing into their finances for more than 30 years.
They will survive unscathed and largely unregulated until their activities unleash another financial disaster; at which point this book will be a useful starting point for moppers-up.
Under the apple tree
‘I SAT where I had sat before, and the same bliss entered me.
Then I looked up.
All around me, pouring down from the sky on the garden, on the roofs of the surrounding houses, was an intense fine white light, a soft flaky blizzard of slightly pearly white light.
I knew this was the Paramatman Light, the light of the Absolute…
I studied the apple tree I had gazed at before.
It was leaping in stillness to receive the Light.
It seemed, in that brilliant silence, to be flinging open all the pores and cells of its being to the Light that poured into it.
I prayed for the ardour of the fruit tree, the passive rapture of the long grasses, the patient infinite receptivity of the stone walls that also pulsed and shivered with love of the Light.’
This passage comes from Andrew Harvey's HIDDEN JOURNEY*, an extraordinary account of his spiritual experiences at the hands of a teacher from an ashram in southern India.
It is the second of Mr Harvey's voyages of self-discovery: in the first, ‘A Journey in Ladakh’, written eight years ago, he began to embrace Buddhism under the influence of a monk in exile from Tibet.
Some will think him a spiritual butterfly, some an intellectual too ready to be hoodwinked; but his searching has a definite progress to it, and the heights and depths encountered in this book make it clear that he is getting somewhere, often against his own will and inclination.
Few writers can communicate this most difficult of subjects.
Mr Harvey does so with a clarity and beauty of expression that make his book worth reading even by those who will be sceptical of what he describes.
Best of all, he is not a proselytiser, much less a saint.
Having made all kinds of good resolutions after Ladakh, he fell out of them as soon as he returned to his usual academic haunts in Oxford and New York; painfully, he tried again.
His story is that of every modern man longing for enlightenment, stumbling, worrying and — just occasionally — glimpsing what he hardly dares to look for.
The Cannes film festival
Bonjour les Français!
CANNES
A GENUINE European cinema still exists, untainted by the blandishments and violence of contemporary Hollywood: and this year's Cannes festival has proved it.
The French industry easily led the field with a huge panorama of most of the 100 or so films made during the year, ranging from the work of new directors (such as Eric Rochant's ‘Aux yeux du monde’, a taut thriller about the kidnapping of a school bus) to those little comedies and histoires d'amour, so beloved by the French, which never seem to get exported.
The older generation was particularly well represented, with films by Agnès Varda and Jacques Rivette (who both pre-date the original nouvelle vague).
Miss Varda's entry, ‘Jacquot de Nantes’ was a poetic, affectionate evocation of the childhood of director Jacques Demy, her late husband, who was brought up in Nantes.
Delicate period details of the 1940s show how Demy's infatuation with cinema developed; the film even includes some of his apprentice efforts.
Mobile location shooting all over the town is intercut with brief clips from his greatest successes, including ‘Lola’ and ‘Les Parapluies de Cherbourg’.
Miss Varda has succeeded in making a film without false nostalgia or sentiment, and the glowing black-and-white images (with an occasional burst of colour) have a sustained rhythm and elegance which correspond to Demy's own infatuation with song-and-dance films.
Demy himself, looking dangerously ill, adds commentary to part of the film.
Several international critics shied away from the prospect of Mr Rivette's four-hour ‘La Belle Noiseuse’, which won the Special Jury Prize.
They missed a near-masterpiece, his best work since ‘Céline and Julie go Boating’.
A painter (Michel Piccoli) decides to re-create an abandoned portrait of a famous courtesan and employs a new model (Emmanuelle Béart) who soon reveals a strong will of her own.
Much of the film shows the painter simply going about his task, first scratching outlines on parchment and then on to the canvas.
Mr Rivette's control over these lengthy scenes is phenomenal.
He also achieves a subtle contrast between the sensuous country exteriors and the darkened studio — every camera movement is beautiful and necessary and the playing fastidious, with Mr Piccoli virtually becoming the obsessed artist before the viewer's eyes.
It is difficult to find another film with which to compare it; Mr Rivette virtually hypnotises his audience.
At first glance, it seems hardly necessary to make another film about Van Gogh; but Maurice Pialat, who began his career in the late 1960s, has found a new approach by showing the artist not as a great figure of his times but as a tormented, talented painter living in a village among ordinary folk.
Mr Pialat's rejection of some famous episodes, such as the artist cutting off his ear, puzzled some members of the audience; so did the relatively unhysterical depiction of the relations between the artist and his brother.
But Mr Pialat's feeling for la vie quotidienne and languid afternoons on river banks, contrasted with the bustle and frenzy of the Paris scenes, amply compensate for a lack of historical detail.
Mr Pialat also shares with Mr Rivette a capacity for shaping and controlling long sequences.
The final sections of ‘Van Gogh’ are particularly masterly: as the painter painfully dies in the little village inn, his friends lament his passing for a moment and then get on with the business of the day — shopping, washing clothes, preparing for work.
C'est la vie.
These and other impressive works from Cannes, including the new Kieslowski and Angelopoulos films, will be seen at the next London Festival.
It is a pity that Britain, now supposed to be a fully paid-up part of Europe, cannot seem to produce auteurs of anything like this calibre.
AMERICAN SURVEY
Phoenix
Rising from Kuwait's ashes
PHOENIX, ARIZONA
FIVE years ago the only things that Phoenix and Kuwait city had in common were a desert setting and an urban landscape of glittering modern buildings.
Now that Phoenix has buildings without an owner, and Kuwait has owners without a building, a new link has been forged.
Charles Keating, once a successful Phoenix property developer, has become the bankrupt symbol of the multi-billion dollar savings-and-loan debacle.
But the buildings he developed during his heyday are still there and the federal government is keen to find buyers for them.
They seem to have found takers in Kuwait.
The connection began in the late 1980s.
As Mr Keating struggled to finance one of his most lavish developments — the marble and glass-encrusted Phoenician hotel — the Kuwaitis stepped in to take a 45% stake in the project.
The collapse of the Keating empire, and the destruction of much of Kuwait city by the occupying Iraqis, might have been expected to dim Kuwaiti interest in hotel development in Phoenix.
But the Kuwaiti royal family appears to be made of sterner stuff.
At the beginning of April, Sheikh Saud Nasir al-Sabah, a member of the royal family and Kuwait's ambassador to America, visited Phoenix in order to reacquaint himself with the Phoenician.
He then met members of the Resolution Trust Corporation, which is charged with disposing of the property of bankrupt thrifts.
Although Kuwait, without oil revenues and faced with a tremendous rebuilding task, is said to be short of ready cash, the ambassador made it clear that his country is keen on buying the RTC's interest in both the Phoenician and Crescent hotels (another Keating project).
According to the RTC, negotiations between the two parties are underway.
The connection between Phoenix and Kuwait is likely to extend well beyond the fate of these luxury hotels.
Phoenix has a lot of under-employed property developers and Kuwait has a lot of re-building to do.
During his spin around Phoenix, the ambassador remarked that the climate and surroundings reminded him of home.
By the end of his visit he had met the owners of several Phoenix-based construction companies and a trade delegation is to visit Kuwait.
America West Airlines, which is based in Phoenix, is rumoured to be thinking of starting a service between Phoenix and Kuwait.
It is hard to imagine a large demand for this extraordinary flight — not from holiday-makers, certainly.
The potential customers are hungry Phoenix developers and construction workers heading for the battered remains of Kuwait city.
Tale of a letter
MOSCOW AND WASHINGTON, DC
HOW did Grigori Yavlinsky, an economist who works as informal adviser to Boris Yeltsin, come to play so large a part in the aid-for-economic-reform debate?
The story starts in Moscow in April, when he received an invitation from the ‘G7 Council’ to a conference later that month in Washington.
Though the conference was to take place at the State Department, the council is a purely private body, the brainchild of Johnson Smick International, a firm of Washington consultants.
Before leaving, Mr Yavlinsky contacted Yevgeny Primakov, the member of Mikhail Gorbachev's national security council responsible for economics.
Mr Primakov asked him to remind the meeting that the Soviet Union wanted to attend the G7 summit in London.
Mr Yavlinsky did so, and for good measure outlined a programme for radical reform supported by western aid.
During the conference (big cheeses from the State Department were dropping in and out all the time) Mr Yavlinsky was told that, if his request were serious, it would need the imprimatur of both Mr Primakov and Mr Gorbachev.
Mr Yavlinsky asked David Smick, of Johnson Smick, how he might get his ideas taken seriously.
Mr Smick, no slouch, suggested that he write an article for the International Economy, a magazine that Johnson Smick publish, in the form of a letter to the G7.
In Moscow Mr Yavlinsky and a team worked round the clock on the details of the programme.
Within three days he and Mr Primakov had written the letter to the G7: that is, the article for Mr Smick's magazine.
It promises that the Soviet Union will pursue ‘a rigid fiscal and monetary policy…liberalisation of prices…an extensive programme of privatisation and demonopolisation’.
In exchange it asks the G7 to draw up an aid programme, to reschedule Russia's foreign debt, and admit the country into the IMF and the World Bank.
On May 4th the letter was faxed to Mr Smick.
On May 5th Mr Yeltsin told Mr Yavlinksy that ‘if that's so, all the [Soviet]republics will have to pool their efforts’— in effect putting the weight of the republics behind the programme.
Mr Yeltsin telephoned Mr Gorbachev and 90 minutes later Mr Yavlinsky and Mr Primakov were in the president's office.
Mr Gorbachev endorsed the letter, giving Mr Yavlinsky the authority to negotiate a new reform plan with western aid.
The next day Mr Gorbachev met François Mitterrand, the first western leader to hear of the plan.
On May 11th he called George Bush, recovering from a wobbly heart, to sound him out.
In Washington, meanwhile, Mr Smick struggled to have the five-page letter translated.
A copy found its way to Robert Zoellick, the under-secretary of state for economic affairs.
In Moscow Mr Yavlinsky met Jeffrey Sachs and Graham Allison, two Harvard professors with close links to the administration.
By May 20th all three were back at Harvard, to flesh out Mr Yavlinsky's plan (which, according to Mr Allison, is based on a study conducted last December by the IMF and the World Bank).
On May 21st Mr Yavlinsky and Mr Allison came to see Mr Zoellick, who was once a student of Mr Allison's.
Mr Smick, who had created one of the scoops of the year, was left cursing that his magazine comes out only every two months.
Baying at the rules
SEATTLE
EACH year in King county 16,500 stray dogs and cats are officially put to death.
Ron Sims, a county council member, has had enough of this slaughter.
He has therefore proposed that pet-owners should be obliged to sterilise their dogs and cats unless they pay $100 per animal for a breeder's licence.
In this way, he hopes, the county, which contains the city of Seattle, can control its exploding pet population.
Mr Sims's idea has got the county yapping.
Animal-breeders, who accuse him of trying to drive them out of business, organised a protest on May 8th, when hundreds of people sent Mr Sims bits of dog-food.
His supporters are no less shrill.
Animal-welfare activists published a brochure with a photograph of a dewy-eyed puppy and fluffy kitten on the cover; the same two animals are shown inside, dead after euthanasia.
People are upset because there is a growing problem with unwanted pets.
Each year about 15m dogs and cats are destroyed in America.
Professional breeders blame irresponsible pet-owners.
But the Humane Society of the United States says that nearly 40% of the animals that wind up in shelters are pure-breds or their mongrel offspring.
Pure-bred dogs are flooding into pet shops from ‘puppy mills’ in the mid-west, where a farm with 50 bitches can produce upwards of 1,000 puppies a year.
Even expensive and exotic breeds — such as the loose-skinned Japanese shar peis which sell for $1,000 — are often seen in shelters.
The reluctance of pet-owners to be ‘educated’ has led to an outburst of sterilisation schemes.
San Mateo county, south of San Francisco, is polishing the wording of a sterilisation ordinance passed in November.
A similar rule may be proposed in New York city.
Oregon has a dozen bills pending that have to do with cutting down the number of pets.
But the legality of a sterilisation order may be questionable, and it would certainly be hard to enforce.
Perhaps it might make more sense to restrict people to a fixed number of pets.
A licence then would be required to exceed that number, or to advertise animals for sale.
Civil libertarians would be up in arms but it would mean fewer animals whose final romp is into a killing-room.
Gathering nuts in May
WASHINGTON, DC AND MOSCOW
The Soviet Union's overriding need for money has made Mikhail Gorbachev try to end the chill in his relations with the West
THE gleam in President Gorbachev's eye is no less than a new Marshall Plan to reorganise the Soviet Union's economy, financed by the world's seven leading industrial countries, the G7.
Short of this, he wants the Soviet Union tied more closely into the western economy, even as the ending of the cold war tied it closer to western diplomacy.
But in Washington these overtures, which happen to have been delivered in a thoroughly unorthodox way, are being sniffed at most gingerly.
The lobbying of America has been a curious off-the-books exercise (see box on next page).
On the Soviet side, the main figure is a young economist, Grigori Yavlinsky, who has no formal job in the Soviet government but was the originator of the ‘Shatalin plan’ for radical economic change.
He has now drafted a programme of economic reform backed by aid from the West.
Mr Gorbachev has endorsed both the plan and the idea of soliciting western aid.
So in the past few weeks Mr Yavlinsky, Vladimir Shcherbakov, the Soviet minister in charge of economics, and Yevgeny Primakov, an aide to Mr Gorbachev, have all visited America trying to work out the terms of an aid-for-economic-reform package.
The Americans helping them, or listening to them, include a mixture of officials and academics, particularly from Harvard.
Jeffrey Sachs, a Harvard economist who has advised the Polish government, has suggested that an aid package of $30 billion a year for five years might be in order.
The State Department has responded cautiously to Soviet lobbying.
Its view is that any help from the West for the Soviet economy must be ‘catalytic’: that is, it must ensure genuine radical reform.
The Americans now await a final version of the Yavlinsky plan, at present being drafted at Harvard by a joint Soviet-American team of academics.
One idea in the wind is that Mr Gorbachev should be present at the mid-July meeting of the G7 in London.
The Americans are not rushing to welcome him, worrying lest the very presence of Mr Gorbachev might bounce the West into agreeing to an aid package before it could be sure that economic reform was locked into place.
The Germans sound no less discouraging: Mr Gorbachev should not be invited, they say, if no aid is likely to be offered to him.
One damn thing after another
Soviet-American relations have been going through a bad patch since the beginning of the year, troubled by the crackdown on the Baltic states, differences in the Gulf war and an arms-control quarrel.
On all three issues conservatives in the Soviet Communist Party and army have been trying to reverse the combination of change at home and co-operation with America abroad.
But the conservatives' influence has lately seemed on the wane.
The new overtures, reflecting the country's overriding economic troubles, point to a further lessening of their sway over Mr Gorbachev.
One difficulty between the two countries is the date of the next Soviet-American summit.
Expected early in the year, it had been postponed, ostensibly because of the Gulf war.
In fact the Americans have gone cool on the idea.
They are annoyed by Soviet attempts to fiddle last year's treaty on conventional forces in Europe (CFE).
The Soviet Union has reclassified three army divisions, all with heavy equipment, as naval forces, and has claimed that they are thereby excluded from the terms of the treaty: a trick the West calls cheating.
The row shows some signs of being settled.
General Mikhail Moiseev, the Soviet chief of staff, visited Washington this week for talks aimed at narrowing the difference between the two sides.
Unless this business is settled, the Americans are unlikely to agree to a Bush-Gorbachev summit.
Americans were bothered not only by the Baltic crackdown in January but by the Soviet reaction to American complaints about it.
These complaints were pretty mild, and aid was not suspended.
But the Soviet foreign minister, Alexander Bessmertnykh, called America's reaction to the bloodshed ‘purely emotional’, and gave warning that Soviet-American relations were in a fragile state.
In March Mr Gorbachev himself remarked on this supposed fragility.
This was pretty clearly an attempt to nudge the Americans towards saying yes to an aid programme for the Soviet Union.
The curiosity is that the programme would give western hands much power over the reshaping of the Soviet economy.
The Baltic states featured in a Senate debate on May 15th on a Soviet request for $1.5 billion-worth of food credits.
This debate can be taken as something of a dry-run of the political battle should a formal request for really massive aid be delivered.
Farm-state senators, led by Robert Dole, a Republican from Kansas, argued for granting the credits, albeit with strict conditions.
On the other side were both conservatives such as Jesse Helms, a Republican from North Carolina, and liberal Democrats such as Paul Sarbanes from Maryland.
Bill Bradley, a Democratic senator from New Jersey who probably knows as much about the Soviet economy as anybody on Capitol Hill, led the opposition to the credits.
He argued that aid would betray the Baltic states, and, just as important, would remove the Soviet Union's incentives to put its house in order.
Mr Yavlinsky, talking to The Economist, conceded that Mr Bradley's doubts on the capacity of the Soviet economy to distribute aid were valid.
But the way to get things right, he argued, was to adopt his plan, under which the Soviet authorities and the G7 countries would implement the reforms together.
In this way, he said, western critics could assure themselves that the terms of such a package were being met.
The Americans, cautiously encouraged by the weakening of conservative influence, are waiting to see what happens next in Moscow.
as if in response, the Supreme Soviet passed a new emigration law on May 20th.
If the fine print turns out to be okay, this will eventually clear the way for America to grant most-favoured-nation trading status to the Soviet Union.
But that would seem a trifle if a request for something like $150 billion of western aid were soon to appear on the G7's table.
Utah
More than Mormons
SALT LAKE CITY
THE first Mormon migrants made the long trek west to what would become Utah in the 1840s to escape religious and political persecution.
Today's newcomers are as likely as not to arrive from the opposite direction: businessmen seeking to escape the pollution, water shortages, high taxes and labour costs of southern California.
The south-western desert states (Arizona, New Mexico, Nevada and Utah) have largely escaped the current recession, having suffered theirs five years ago.
They now compete for the modern migrants.
All four need the skills, and the new jobs they bring, to wean their economies from their reliance on mining and ranching.
None is having more success in diversifying than Utah.
Utah, in particular, needs all the new employers it can find.
Its population has grown by two-thirds since 1970; it now stands at 1.7m.
Immigration has a lot to do with this, but so do the social mores of a state that is still 60% Mormon.
The Church of the Latter Day Saints abhors divorce and abortion as much as it does alcohol and caffeine.
Utah has the highest fertility rate in the country, and the biggest and youngest households.
Mixed with an old-fashioned respect for education, this means that tens of thousands of new jobs have to be generated each year to keep up with the prodigious output of mothers and universities.
The state's long-established mining and energy industries no longer provide enough work.
Companies such as Geneva Steel and Kennecott Copper are now shrinking, not expanding.
Utah's natural-resources boom of the 1970s was stopped in its tracks, first by the recession of the early 1980s and then by the oil bust later in the decade.
Utah's economic planners want aerospace, bio-medical and computing firms to take up the slack.
They use a sophisticated cost-benefit computer model to work out how far they should go in luring any given company with tax breaks or grants of land.
Attracted by the lion's share of a $10m industrial assistance fund, a bit of McDonnell Douglas has already arrived, bringing with it more than 1,000 jobs.
Utah's computer industry is starting to tempt firms out of southern California.
So far it is still largely home-grown.
The state has the largest agglomeration of computer companies in America after Silicon Valley and Route 128 in Massachusetts.
Brigham Young and the University of Utah have excellent computer-science schools.
Yet, like other places, Utah has to turn to low-tech services to soak up its growing numbers of literate job-hunters.
Salt Lake City has become the telemarketing capital of America for mail-order firms and reservation services.
Credit-card processing provides lots of jobs.
Tourism, too, is a growing industry, which the state hopes to boost if Salt Lake City is awarded the winter Olympics in 1998.
Much of southern Utah is rugged national parkland that the federal government would like to preserve as wilderness.
This is where old and new Utah come into conflict.
Upstate city-dwelling environmentalists are not much welcomed by conservative and strongly Mormon southerners who have mined, logged and ranched the land for decades.
They would need a lot of convincing before accepting that tourism is a better bet.
Solarz, the name they know elsewhere
SITTING in the antechamber to his congressional office, Stephen Solarz, the loquacious representative for New York's 13th congressional district, is taking a five-minute lunch break and wondering whether to run for president.
Mr Solarz concedes that ‘some people have been urging me to run’.
Pressed for names, he mentions his father.
Mr Solarz is unlikely ever to be president.
Yet he already has an international reputation.
He is living proof that an individual congressman with energy and knowledge can turn himself into a foreign-policy entrepreneur.
He will be giving a demonstration of this art in the days running up to June 3rd, by when George Bush must decide whether to renew China's trading privileges, known as most-favoured-nation status.
Mr Bush is keen to make the renewal of MFN unconditional; Congress would like to make it conditional on China improving its human-rights record.
If Congress and the administration are to avoid a head-on clash, and a presidential veto, a compromise must be struck.
This, characteristically, is where Mr Solarz comes into the picture.
As head of the Asia and Pacific subcommittee of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, he has arranged hearings on American-Chinese relations for the week before Mr Bush must announce his decision.
Mr Solarz's knack for generating publicity, his network of contacts in Asia, his influence with the administration and his reputation for knowing what he is talking about — rare enough among congressmen who spout on foreign affairs — give him clout.
If he gets his way, MFN will be renewed with a few ‘achievable’ conditions attached.
In the right circumstances, Mr Solarz has been able to give a nudge or two to history.
His long interest in the Philippines made him pivotal in preparing American opinion for the abandonment of Ferdinand Marcos (President Corazon Aquino later hailed him as ‘the Lafayette of the Philippine revolution’).
When the Cambodian peace talks in Paris broke down in 1988, it was Mr Solarz, along with the Australian foreign minister, Gareth Evans, who pushed successfully for an expanded UN role in the transitional peace settlement.
These were well-known issues.
Congressman Solarz also beavers away on the duller stuff that most of his colleagues see little point in pursuing.
By slipping a neat little amendment into an aid bill, or pressing the State Department to take notice of human-rights violations, the two or three people in Congress who take an interest in an ‘obscure’ part of the world can be disproportionately influential — and be sure of making headlines in the country concerned.
Mr Solarz is celebrated in Hong Kong because he argued for (and got) more American visas for anxious would-be emigrants.
He is notorious in Islamabad because he argued for the cut-off in American aid to Pakistan, implemented last autumn.
At home the action that has drawn most attention in the past year was his vote in favour of war in the Gulf.
Not only did Mr Solarz support a war that most liberal Democrats regarded as an invitation to disaster, but he actively pushed for confrontation with Iraq — linking arms in the process with such unlikely conservative allies as Richard Perle and Jeane Kirkpatrick.
Mr Solarz's supporters would say that his courage in the Gulf war was typical of a politician willing to buck the conventional liberal wisdom when the facts demand it.
His opponents would demur.
They would suggest, or insinuate, that Mr Solarz, who is Jewish, is part of Israel's ‘amen corner’— to use a phrase made famous by a conservative columnist, Pat Buchanan.
There is certainly a protective touch about Israel in Mr Solarz's public utterances on the Middle East.
For a man who was leading the campaign for sanctions against South Africa, when that was still a hopeless liberal cause, he has been notably diffident about such things as collective punishment and detention without trial in the Israeli-occupied territories.
In part this is simple pragmatism.
Mr Solarz's Brooklyn district is one of the few districts in America where Jewish voters form the majority.
It would require suicidal altruism to take up the cudgels for the Palestinians.
Yet an unsuccessful war in the Gulf might have left Mr Solarz vulnerable to the charge that he had put Israel's interests above America's.
As it is, he emerged as one of the few Democrats to have had a ‘good war’.
He is still regularly mentioned as a possible secretary of state should the Democrats regain the White House.
Know your own bridges
That is a plausible, if distant, goal.
By contrast, a ‘Solarz for President’ campaign sounds improbable: the congressman has spent much more time in Asia than in Iowa.
The only part of the United States in which he seems to take a consistent interest is Brooklyn.
Even there his grasp sometimes seems a little shaky.
Mr Solarz was once involved in a debate about the collection of tolls on the Verrazano bridge that links his district to Staten Island.
It is the sort of dull nitty-gritty subject believed to be vital for the survival of any self-respecting congressman.
Mr Solarz, it turned out, did not even know which side of the bridge the tolls were collected on.
He lost the vote heavily.
For most politicians, this kind of thing is the route to swift oblivion.
But a little local vagueness may not harm Mr Solarz.
He thinks that his district, which contains many recent immigrants to America, takes pride in having a congressman who cuts a figure on the world stage.
Where to be a bum
WASHINGTON, DC
WITH the approach of Memorial Day, the official start of summer, all right-thinking Americans are looking forward to long days at the beach.
Stephen Leatherman, director of the Laboratory for Coastal Research at the University of Maryland, has done them a favour, ranking America's beaches for beauty, water temperature, quality of sand and the like.
Most of the American east coast is unlike anything found in Europe.
Where the ice-age glaciers affected the Atlantic coast — only as far south as northern New Jersey — there are cliffs, headlands and sandy coves, as in Europe.
But from New Jersey all the way round to Texas, the hinterland of the coast is dead flat and the beaches stretch for many miles.
Sand dunes are often the highest elevation not just on the coast but for miles inland.
This huge stretch of coastline is dominated by offshore barrier islands built by the surf out of drifting sand.
On the Outer Banks in North Carolina, for example, there are about 300 miles of sandy beaches.
The islands are fragile, with a topography constantly changed by wind, wave and hurricane.
Development on a third of the barrier coast has been controlled by law since 1982; no federal flood insurance is available for building on controlled beaches.
Unless replenished, many beaches gradually disappear as their sand is carried away into deep water.
The beach at Ocean City, Maryland, has to be continually re-made.
By 1980 Miami beach had all but totally eroded, and with it the town's tourist business; sand was then sucked from the sea-bed and the beach rebuilt.
The tourists are now back.
Mr Leatherman's own favourite stretch of sand is Kapalu beach on Maui, in Hawaii.
He knows whereof he speaks.
In 20 years, he reckons, he has examined 650 separate American beaches.
It's a tough job, but somebody has to do it.
The economy
Choose your yardstick
SHORT and shallow is still how most economists like to describe America's current recession.
So why does it feel deep and steep to many businessmen and consumers?
Look more closely at the numbers.
Real GNP fell by only 1.1% between the third quarter of last year and the first quarter of this.
Even if output continues to decline at a similar pace in this quarter before it picks up in the next (as most forecasters expect), the total peak-to-trough decline will look much shallower than the 2.7% average drop in GNP during the eight recessions since the second world war.
Other economic indicators, however, paint a gloomier picture.
Although the classic definition of a recession is two successive quarters of falling real GNP — implying that the recession started in the fourth quarter of last year — the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), America's official business-cycle watcher, uses a different yardstick: the monthly indicators for employment, industrial production, real business sales and real personal disposable income.
After whizzing these numbers through its computer, the NBER reckons that the economy peaked in July of last year.
This makes the recession already ten months old.
So short of an immediate recovery, this recession will be longer than the 11-month average length of recessions since the war.
Geoffrey Dennis, an economist in the New York office of James Capel, a British securities firm, has tried to gauge the depth of this recession compared with previous ones, using the monthly indicators instead of GNP.
The chart on the next page shows how industrial production has fared since last July compared with the past three recessions.
In each case, the beginning of the recession is set equal to 100.
The 1973–75 and 1981–82 recessions both lasted 16 months; the 1980 recession, triggered by new credit controls, just six months.
Industrial production fell 4.8% between last July and April (the latest figure available).
This was more than it fell during the same stage of both the 1973–75 and 1981–82 recessions, but less than the short, sharp fall in 1980.
Looking at the other indicators, employment dropped 1.4% in the nine months to April.
This was much more than in the same period of 1973–75, slightly more than in 1980 and similar to the decline in the first nine months of the 1981–82 recession.
Business sales have also fallen more sharply than at the same stages of the 1973–75 and 1981–82 recessions.
Conclusion: so far, the economy is contracting at a pace that is remarkably similar to America's two deepest post-war recessions.
One reason that the monthly indicators look worse than the figures for total GNP, is that industrial production and business sales exclude certain factors that bolster GNP.
One of these is that stocks have been only modestly run down compared with previous recessions; another is the boost to government spending from the Gulf war.
However, Mr Dennis also reckons that the current GNP numbers (still subject to revision) may be under-estimating the true steepness of the current downturn.
For this recession to equal the previous record of 16 months it would have to drag on for another six months.
That is unlikely; indeed, the worst seems to be over.
In April industrial production rose by 0.1%, the first increase for seven months; retail sales fell by only 0.1%, after a big upward revision for March which transformed a 0.8% fall into a 0.4% rise.
In the same month housing starts rose and the unemployment rate fell from 6.8% in March to 6.6%.
On a gloomier note, employment continued to decline and car sales remained depressed.
The sharp drop in America's trade deficit this year reflects the weakness of domestic demand.
In March America had its smallest monthly trade deficit for almost eight years: $4 billion compared with a monthly average of $8.5 billion in 1990.
The decline was mainly due to lower non-oil imports, which fell at an annual rate of 14% between the fourth quarter of 1990 and the first quarter of this year.
Figures for America's total current account (to be released next month) may even show a small surplus, or at least a rough balance — thanks partly to payments by foreign governments towards the cost of the Gulf war.
J. P. Morgan, a New York bank, is optimistically forecasting that the current account for the year will be in balance, compared with a deficit of $99 billion in 1990.
Other forecasters are looking for a deficit of around $50 billion.
But do not expect American protectionists to give up: next year, as domestic demand revives, the deficit will surely widen again.
Civil rights
Don't quota me
WASHINGTON, DC
CONGRESS is about to make another bid to reverse the Supreme Court's latest rulings on discrimination in hiring and firing.
Twenty years ago liberal justices on the court laid down a series of laws against discriminatory employment practices.
But the balance on the court changed and conservatives took over.
In half-a-dozen cases during 1989, the court made it much harder for blacks, Hispanics and women who were seeking compensation for job discrimination.
In one case, Wards Cove Packing Co v Atonio, the court ruled that the onus lay with the plaintiff to prove a precise case of discrimination.
Last October George Bush was asked to sign a bill that tried to restore things to the more liberal way they were between 1971 and 1989.
The president vetoed the bill — and the Senate failed by a single vote to override his veto.
Republican opponents of the bill had managed to raise terror among businessmen that they would end up having to adopt hiring quotas in order to avoid costly discrimination suits.
At last November's election in North Carolina, Senator Jesse Helms showed how emotive an issue quotas could be among white voters.
He beat off Harvey Gantt, his black Democratic challenger, with television commercials suggesting that whites were losing jobs to less qualified blacks.
Enraged at seeing their cause thus mugged, Democratic leaders in Congress were willing to perform political somersaults to get some sort of civil-rights legislation through.
In an attempt to grab the Republicans' ‘hot-button’ issue, the Democrats are now dressing themselves up as the anti-quota party.
They emphasise that the latest civil-rights bill explicitly forbids the use of quotas — which, in any event, have been established as illegal.
The bill also bans another common practice that seems set to become as emotive as quotas: ‘race-norming’, in which the score on federal employment aptitude tests is adjusted upwards for blacks and Hispanics.
The bill accepts the administration's demand for a $150,000 limit on the punitive damages that women may seek from companies that practice discrimination (although there is no limit on compensatory damages).
This measure, says Don Edwards, a Californian congressman who is one of the bill's sponsors, has won over 15–20 southern Democrats who had been worried about the crippling effect of punitive damages on small businesses.
With those southerners on board, Mr Edwards believes Congress may have a chance of overriding another presidential veto.
And, since this new bill is in essence the same as last October's, a veto is what it will probably get.
A new civil-rights law, in whatever form, is bound not to address the ingrained attitudes that still work against blacks.
Just how prevalent these are has been demonstrated in a new survey by the Urban Institute.
It arranged for groups of identically qualified white and black applicants to apply for the same jobs in Chicago.
It found that in 20% of the cases the white man advanced further than the black.
Blacks were given the edge in only 7% of cases.
START OF ASIA SECTION
In Congress with the family
FROM OUR DELHI CORRESPONDENT
SINCE Indian independence in 1947, the main question before Indian voters has been whether they were for or against the Nehru-Gandhi family.
The Congress Party and the dynasty have gradually merged, as the family has undermined yet sustained the party.
Congress once had an independent existence.
During the struggle against British rule, spearheaded by Congress, the party threw up dozens of notable leaders.
But after 1947, Nehru began to assert his supremacy and sack party chiefs who opposed him.
Even so, several titans of the independence movement survived him and one — Lal Bahadur Shastri — succeeded him.
Shastri died in 1966, and Indira Gandhi staked her claim.
Party bosses, nicknamed ‘The Syndicate’, decided to make her prime minister, expecting to manipulate her while using her name to get votes.
But she won at their game, splitting the party in 1969 to assert her supremacy over the bosses — and she was vindicated when voters gave her a huge majority.
After this, few colleagues dared oppose her and the once-proud party became a bunch of family retainers.
When she lost the 1977 election because of the ‘emergency’ imposed in 1975–77, some party bosses decided to kick her while she was down.
Once again she split the party and proved in subsequent elections that the people regarded her family as the real Congress.
After that, any chief minister daring to build his own political base stood in danger of being turned out.
In one interview a chief minister of Karnataka, Gundu Rao, heatedly denied the suggestion that he had any political base in his state at all.
He said his only political base was Indira Gandhi.
After successive purges, the party ceased to have any pretension to ideology.
Mrs Gandhi's eldest son Sanjay, later killed in an aeroplane crash in 1980, helped her in the running — and the destruction — of the party.
Crooks signed up to enjoy the benefits of corruption and to lend their power.
In his first year as leader, Rajiv Gandhi threatened to throw out the thugs.
But he soon found it expedient to use unsavoury characters to control even nastier ones further down the party line.
Mr Clean became Mr Congressman.
When the chief minister of Maharashtra became uppity earlier this year, Mr Gandhi arranged for dissidents to mount a campaign to get rid of him, and relented only after the chief minister ate humble pie.
Congress was stained during the 1980s by the Bofors case, a scandal which suggested the party had received millions of dollars from the Swedish gun manufacturer as part of a $1.2 billion deal for howitzers.
The impulse to appoint Rajiv's Italian-born widow, Sonia, in his place was surely another sign of a family business in distress.
She sensibly said no.
Japan
Those devious Europeans
FROM OUR TOKYO CORRESPONDENT
THE trade warriors of Japan and America understand each other, even though their battles may be fierce.
No such understanding exists between Japan and the European Community.
‘Inadequate, distant, even indifferent’ is how the Community's ambassador in Tokyo, Jean-Pierre Leng, describes their relations.
Such was the background to the four-day visit to Japan starting on May 22nd by Jacques Delors, the Community president, and its trade commissioner, Frans Andriessen.
The Europeans are getting anxious about Japan's rising trade surplus with the Community.
After shrinking slightly over the past few years, the gap grew to nearly $10 billion during the first four months of this year, up from a little over $6 billion for the same period in 1990.
For its part, Japan is becoming increasingly nervous about protectionist trends in Europe.
Japanese firms fear they will be locked out of— or at least restricted from freely entering — what, from January 1993, is planned to be the world's largest single market.
Japan believes the key to better relations with the Europeans is to discuss political issues rather than trade problems.
The Gulf affair gave the two sides something interesting to talk about.
Both Japan and Europe could have a part to play in President Bush's ‘new world order’.
Japanese officials noticed that politics, not trade, was mostly discussed when Mr Delors visited Washington in April.
They had rather hoped that political questions would take up at least as much time as trade problems during this week's visit to Japan.
Mostly they have been disappointed.
One disappointment is over a proposed joint declaration by Japan and the Community.
This would be similar to the one the Community signed with America covering political and cultural co-operation as well as trade.
The Japanese would like such a declaration to involve regular summit meetings, perhaps as often as twice a year, between the Japanese prime minister and the Community president — like the informal meetings that Toshiki Kaifu has been having with President Bush.
Mr Delors and his colleagues did show guarded enthusiasm for the proposal.
But the declaration is going to take longer to work out than the Japanese had hoped.
It may be signed just before, or even during, the London summit meeting of the Group of Seven leaders in July.
Before signing anything, the Community negotiators boringly want to see some ‘results oriented’ agreements on trade matters.
Top of their list are Japanese car exports.
The Community wants Japan to agree to limit its car sales to no more than 16–17% of the market by 1998.
In 1990 Japan had 12% of the car market in Community countries, and its share is expected to rise.
The limitation sought by the Community includes Japanese cars made in European countries.
Japan says this makes a mockery of the heavy investment by Japanese motor manufacturers in Europe.
The Japanese negotiators are particularly worried by the increasing influence of protectionist French and Italians in the Community.
With Europe in recession and fears about unemployment, Britain and other countries which could previously be relied upon to put the case for a freer market (and a bigger share for themselves of Japanese investment) are no longer being heard.
Diplomats in Tokyo see the British in retreat over computers and electronics as well as cars.
The French and the Italians had ICL — the Britain-based computer maker recently bought by Fujitsu — thrown out of a number of collaborative projects financed by the Community.
The Japanese see France's new prime minister, Edith Cresson, as the biggest threat to closer political and cultural as well as economic ties with the European Community.
This may be unfair on her, but it probably helps the Community to have Mrs Cresson threatening to block Japanese exports if ‘reciprocal access’ is not given to European goods in Japan.
American negotiators have opened the Japanese market for a variety of goods by threatening to let loose the protectionists in Congress.
The Community has rejected the notion of linking ‘reciprocal access’ to negotiations on Japanese car imports, but it talks menacingly about the ‘balance of mutual interests’.
In his discussions with Mr Kaifu this week, Mr Delors made much of the ‘spirit of reciprocity’ and the need for ‘fairness and balance’between Japan and the Community.
Foreigners are not supposed to talk in such Japanese-like riddles.
Life would be a whole lot easier, mutter government officials in Tokyo, if the devious Europeans would only behave more like the tough but plain-speaking Americans.
Well, perhaps.
The American vice-president, Dan Quayle, arrived in Japan on May 20th for two days of talks that touched on everything from Japan's closed market for car-parts to its total ban on rice imports.
It has been a hard week for the trade warriors.
ONE OF Japan's greatest sumo wrestlers of all time, Chiyonofuji, bowed out of the ring for good last week, defeated by an 18-year-old called Takahanada who promises to become the youngest yokozuna (grand champion) of all time.
Two days after his downfall, the 35-year-old Chiyonofuji (known as ‘The Wolf’ to millions of admirers) announced the end of an illustrious career with the ritual cutting of his hair's top-knot.
Chiyonofuji was the Muhammed Ali of the sumo ring.
Small by traditional standards, handsome and far too athletic-looking, he used pure muscular strength allied to unnerving concentration and flawless technique to compensate for his lack of body weight.
In his 22 years in the ring, Chiyonofuji racked up a record 1,045 wins and 31 Emperor's Cups — just one short of the record held by his celebrated predecessor, Taiho.
His example inspired a new generation of muscular young wrestlers to train hard with weight-lifting and press-ups instead of just eating.
Already sumo experts are calling the equally athletic and handsome Takahanada a worthy replacement.
A gracious Chiyonofuji noted that Takahanada, in his deep attachment to each bout, was totally different from other sumo wrestlers.
Another ‘Wolf’ in the rearing?
Boat people, delivered daily
FROM OUR HONG KONG CORRESPONDENT
WHAT number comes next in the following series: 179, 558, 344, 148, 291, 80?
Hong Kong officials dread to think.
These are the daily arrivals of Vietnamese boat people in the British colony, beginning with Friday May 17th.
Those who sailed in this week brought the population of Vietnamese in Hong Kong to more than 50,000.
So far Hong Kong is coping, just.
A holding camp designed for 480 boat people has been brimming with more than 1,000.
Around 4,000 places are still empty in the more permanent camps.
At present rates the vacancies will be gone by mid-June.
All this has come as an unpleasant surprise to Hong Kong's officials.
Hong Kong's people wonder why the Vietnamese are housed and clothed, while illegal immigrants from China are sent packing.
Last year 6,652 boat people landed in Hong Kong, down from more than 34,000 in 1989.
In the first 20 days of May this year, almost four times as many Vietnamese arrived as in all of May 1990.
The total so far for 1991 already surpasses the figure for all of 1990.
No one has a convincing reason for this.
Some say it is because no boat people have been returned home against their will since December 1989.
Why it should have taken more than a year for this to soak in is unclear.
Others speculate that a bad harvest around Hanoi may be to blame (though the new arrivals do not seem to be starving).
Some even point to the ‘encouragement’ offered by the batty suggestion of an American congressman that boat people should be sent to help rebuild Kuwait.
Whatever the explanation, many people in Hong Kong have had enough.
Legco, the largely toothless legislature, has vowed not to authorise spending for new camps.
One Legco member says that, if forced repatriation is not resumed, Hong Kong might have to stop offering boat people first asylum (it might, that is, push the refugees back out to sea).
Clinton Leeks, the colony's top refugee official, is to meet the Americans next month in an effort to soften their adamant opposition to mandatory repatriation.
The trouble is that small boats make headway a lot faster than big governments.
Hong Kong
Sky's the limit
FROM OUR HONG KONG CORRESPONDENT
A CONSTRUCTION project, even a huge one, does not normally become a point of constitutional principle.
But that is what has happened with the airport Hong Kong wants to build as part of a $16.3 billion infrastructure programme.
China, which takes over the British colony in 1997, refuses to bless the undertaking — and thus open the way for private financing of part of it — until it has wrung several concessions from the British.
Because these concessions would in effect make China a partner in running Hong Kong before 1997, the British say no.
Meanwhile, the site for the airport is yet to be reclaimed from the sea off Lantau island; and Hong Kong's confidence in its future, which the project was meant to bolster, sags still further.
The latest episode in this depressing process ended in Beijing on May 22nd.
Teams of officials from Britain, Hong Kong and China had spent five days haggling over the many points of disagreement left over from the visit of Douglas Hurd, the British foreign secretary, to China last month.
Optimistic leaks had it that the negotiators were making good progress on a statement of ‘principles’.
In the end, they agreed only ‘to take stock and keep in touch’.
If the British were indeed talking about principles, it was a mistake; it is a mistake to negotiate with the Chinese about generalities.
China's own demands are said to be precise.
If Britain guarantees that the Hong Kong government's financial reserves will be above a certain level come 1997, and if the airport's costs are below a certain level, and if Hong Kong neither raises taxes nor issues debt to pay for the airport, and if China has a say not just on the airport but also on other franchises Hong Kong grants and, come to think of it, on other ‘important’ matters — if all that is conceded, then Hong Kong can have its airport.
Britain has been resisting much of this, but none too skilfully.
With the airport, it was not defending strong ground in the first place.
The estimated cost of the project, which includes a port and transport links as well as the airport proper, took everyone's breath away, not just China's.
Several Hong Kong businessmen question the price, and an opinion poll last month found that the man in the Hong Kong street also had his doubts.
The behaviour of the Hong Kong government did not help matters.
After years of assuring everyone that China could be trusted to carry out the 1984 British-Chinese agreement on Hong Kong in good faith, the colonial administration found itself after Tiananmen Square presiding over a population which knew that China could not be trusted at all.
In October 1989, as a ‘confidence-building measure’, Sir David Wilson, Hong Kong's embattled colonial governor, announced the airport project — but did not tell China beforehand.
The Chinese may have been cavalierly treated since then.
They claim to have received information late and in fragments.
Last October, just before a visit to Hong Kong by a Chinese team of experts looking into the airport, the Hong Kong government suddenly announced that a bridge that is a big part of the project would be paid for entirely with public money; before, it had said the bridge would be private.
The Chinese were deeply insulted.
Mr Hurd, whose trip last month to Beijing was ill-prepared, paid the price.
No agreements had been laid out beforehand.
He talked tough on his way to Beijing (the message was that ‘if China doesn't agree to reasonable terms, the airport project will be scrapped’), then retracted when there.
Worse, he wanted to discuss principles.
Worse yet, the British foreign secretary, the highest-ranking western visitor since Tiananmen, found himself negotiating with Chinese messenger boys.
The mistakes would matter less if China had good intentions, which it does not.
It is likely that Li Peng, the prime minister, still tastes the personal gall of 1m people in Hong Kong taking to the streets after Tiananmen to call for his ejection from office.
China is using every negotiating device, and it is master of them all, to carve out as big a place for itself as it can in pre-1997 Hong Kong.
Britain knows it has to preserve Hong Kong's autonomy.
It is not so good at knowing how to do it.
It has to tell China where it will not give way, and then start (as Mr Hurd first threatened) to walk away.
Otherwise, expect more scenes, like this week's, of unknown officials engaged in incomprehensible negotiations — and no airport.
Vietnam
Will success spoil the party?
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
HANOI
THE 101st anniversary of the birth of Ho Chi Minh on May 19th got only a muted celebration in Hanoi.
But at least it gave the 13 septuagenarian members of Vietnam's ruling Politburo, most of them groomed by Ho, another chance to contemplate their uniqueness.
They pulled off the seemingly impossible by defeating the French, the Americans and the Chinese.
They might even do it again, this time by rebuilding Vietnam's economy without in the process being forced to relinquish the Communist Party's grip on power.
The party's efforts to save its skin will be tested on June 17th, when its delayed seventh congress is due to start.
The congress, which will last between seven and ten days, is supposed to chart Vietnam's future to the year 2000 and beyond.
The party has learnt from past mistakes.
At the sixth congress, in 1986, irate delegates rejected a ridiculously optimistic programme that had been drafted in secret by Le Duan, the then secretary-general.
This time it has circulated for public comment drafts of five documents.
So far, the central committee has received more than 10,000 letters suggesting how these documents could be improved.
Most of the criticism has been pretty tame, though one dissident, Colonel Bui Tinh, a revolutionary hero, waited until he got to Paris to say he believed the draft documents were ‘totally out of contact with reality’.
The colonel is now an ex-party member and would be unwise to go home.
The key document is a report on the past five years and proposals for the future.
It is in its 14th draft, and has been ‘improved very much’ by public criticism, according to Le Dang Doanh, an economic adviser to the central committee.
It has shrunk to a third of the original draft's 120 pages.
Its broad outlines are clear.
Most important, the party knows it must improve the country's living standards if it is to stay in power.
This means that doi moi, the policy of economic renovation launched at the previous congress, cannot be reversed.
The IMF has, rather fulsomely, praised Vietnam's economic policies as an ‘exemplary reform programme’.
The missing bit in the programme is investment.
Soviet subsidies to Vietnam ended in late 1990, and the American embargo — which includes a veto on IMF loans to Vietnam — looks set to stay for the immediate future.
Vietnam will want to get cash from as many foreign countries as possible, to avoid becoming dependent on a single new big brother.
This leads on to politics.
It is necessary to improve the quality of the party's leaders, and to separate the functions of party and state.
The National Assembly, due to meet in July, is to draft a new constitution, the main aim of which will be to shift the blame for future mistakes from the party to the state apparatus.
‘Lively discussions’ are expected in the congress on what can be done to help the casualties of economic reform.
About 1.7m people are reckoned to be unemployed in Vietnam, and the pay of 1.2m civil servants is stuck at an average of 80,000 dong ($10) a month.
Almost every employee must moonlight in second, even third jobs simply to subsist.
The pace of reform, to avoid too much further hardship, will also be debated.
The potentially most divisive argument will be about who should be in charge during the dangerous period ahead.
The party newspaper Nhan Dan reports that at least two-thirds of the next 124-strong Central Committee, to be elected at the end of the congress, will be under 60.
Most of its present members are over 60.
In the Politburo Nguyen Van Ling is expected to stay on as secretary-general, even though he is 75 and said to be in poor health.
He is seen as the only man who can keep the peace between those who want to slow the pace of reform and those who want to speed it up.
What of the people?
Do they want to continue to be ruled by communists?
‘Eastern Europe can cope with two to three bad years; we are on the edge of starvation,’ says Do Duc Dinh, a Hanoi economist.
The government-run newspapers tell of instability elsewhere in the communist world.
Flirtation with multi-party politics would bring chaos to Vietnam, they say.
In the north, the party can count on fairly widespread support.
In the south, those who reject communism seek to escape, preferably to America through the ‘orderly departure programme’.
About 10,000 people are leaving each month in this way, and the government is granting exit visas faster than America can admit them.
Dissent is discouraged by the presence of the security forces and the army.
Yet the party is nervous.
‘Only as long as people see their life improve each year will they accept the leading role of the party,’ says a Central Committee member.
That is realistic.
Officials take heart that the economy has not collapsed since the withdrawal of Soviet aid.
When America does lift its trade embargo, they believe that Vietnam will receive help from the IMF and massive Japanese investment.
The question then might be: can the one-party system steer its way to economic triumph?
Optimists in the party point to Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia, which have managed rapid rates of growth while the same party has stayed in power.
Singapore's People's Action Party is particularly admired.
It was, of course, presiding over a capitalist economy.
Have the Hanoi optimists thought of that?
South Korea
The sacrifice
FROM OUR SOUTH KOREA CORRESPONDENT
ACCORDING to the rules that govern South Korea's annual outbreak of student protests, it should be just about time for petrol bombs to give way to more agreeable activities.
But the unusual intensity of this year's protests has left both the students and the government wondering about the price of peace.
One  sacrificial lamb has been offered.
The prime minister, Ro Jai Bong, submitted his resignation on May 22nd after more than a week of public roasting.
Other government ministers may be on the way out.
The past month has seen more violence and death than any of the student groups had anticipated.
Seven students have died after setting fire to themselves.
Their ‘martyrdom’— in student eyes — followed the death of a student beaten by police.
Another student, also beaten, is said to be in a coma.
Although the students have won converts to the notion that the riot police use excessive force, they have yet to win much support for their demands.
Chief among them is that the ‘undemocratic regime’ of President Roh Tae Woo should be toppled.
The students say the formation in 1990 of the ruling Democratic Liberal Party — actually a coalition of parties — was a crime against democracy.
But most Koreans do not agree.
The vast middle class seems bored with the notion of taking to the streets when the government is still offering gestures of conciliation.
This does not mean that all is well for the government.
Mr Roh and his alliance of squabbling factions are worried by stories in the newspapers hinting that officials in the government's security organisations are jockeying for power.
Such people are more interested in civil order than civil rights.
Mr Ro earned the boot for failing to detect the public's sensitivities on this point.
In an aggressive television appearance on May 9th he denied there was any ‘national security powerbase’ in the government.
Koreans expect their statesmen to behave with calmness, even when questioned closely.
During the week before Mr Ro's resignation, many leading members of the ruling party made public comments backing his departure.
The problem for President Roh is finding a suitable replacement for Mr Ro and possibly other ministers.
Mr Roh's advisers had urged him to delay any cabinet reshuffle to avoid the impression that he was simply responding to the students' demands.
He had also hoped to use any cabinet changes as a basis for offering policy announcements timed to boost the ruling party in the second round of local elections due to be held towards the end of June.
This strategy was scrapped when it became apparent that the government needed to take some action before the students revved up again for another outbreak of violence.
Even with Mr Ro's departure, the conflict is likely to recede only slowly.
A tale of two workers
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN HANOI
MANY of the 180,000 Vietnamese working in Eastern Europe have lost their jobs following the collapse of communist regimes there.
Do they carry home hopes that Vietnam's Communist Party will suffer the same fate?
Apparently not.
Take two examples.
In April 1987 Neuyen Chi Hoi started work in the canteen of an East Berlin shoe factory.
He was paid 700 ostmarks a month ($385 at the official rate) and given free lodging in a three-room flat shared with seven other Vietnamese.
Every two months he was allowed to send 20 kilos of goods home to his family.
Mr Hoi returned home in August 1990, much to the relief of his family, who had read in the newspapers that Germany was in chaos.
Yes, he says, he does meet fellow Vietnamese workers who used to be in Germany but, no, they do not discuss politics.
A severance payment of DM3,000 ($1,740) has enabled Mr Hoi to buy a house and spend the past nine months as a man of leisure.
He is thinking of opening a small shop.
Pham Hong Khang, an engineer, had a less happy time in Bulgaria.
In April 1988 he was sent there as leader of a team of 400 construction workers.
‘The one thing I learned is that no one does any building during times of political instability.’
His men stopped being paid, and there was nothing to buy with the money they had.
Their sordid dormitory was attacked by hooligans.
Most of the Vietnamese were glad to be sent home.
‘Bulgarians used to ask, ‘Don't you want to take our demonstration home with you? '.
I came back and saw that most Vietnamese workers don't care about politics.
What they want is a job.’
Mr Khang hopes the Communist Party will ‘blow some new wind into our lives’.
Neither he nor Mr Hoi intends to make a public fuss if it does not.
Death among the blossoms
FROM OUR DELHI CORRESPONDENT
FLOWERS always decorate Indian election campaigns.
The heat sweetens their smell.
Rajiv Gandhi, his car bouncing towards a rally in Sriperumbudur in southern India, was covered in garlands by hands that reached through the open window.
He was determined to be accessible during the campaign: in the past he had been accused of being too aloof.
As they arrived, he asked the local candidate, with whom he was travelling, what he should speak about.
The candidate thought village development the most suitable subject.
Gandhi walked towards a platform to begin his speech and was blown to pieces by a bomb, along with 14 other people.
The bomb may have been concealed in a bouquet of flowers.
Gandhi was killed on May 21st, the day after the first of three days of voting in the general election.
The electoral process stopped abruptly with the death of the man most likely to be prime minister.
As the army was deployed to keep order, the remaining two polling days were postponed until June 12th and 15th.
The expected violence broke out at the news of his death.
Supporters from his Congress Party burned buses, cars and shops and attacked police stations.
Police fired on protesters.
At least eight people were killed and many more injured; but things could have been much worse.
After his mother's assassination, in 1984, some 3,000 Sikhs were killed in Delhi.
Part of the reason there has been so little bloodshed is that nobody yet is certain who killed Mr Gandhi or why.
The Tamil Tigers, a separatist group in Sri Lanka, are suspects, since Mr Gandhi had complained that they were becoming a parallel government in Tamil Nadu.
He used this as an excuse to force the prime minister, Chandra Shekhar, to sack the pro-Tiger state government earlier this year.
One theory is that the bomb was detonated by remote control, a method used to kill Ranjan Wijeratne, Sri Lanka's defence minister, earlier this year.
Another possibility is that a woman had a bomb wired to her, and that it went off as she gave flowers to Mr Gandhi.
The Tigers have denied responsibility; but they usually do for their atrocities.
Sikh terrorists killed Gandhi's mother, and had vowed to get him too.
During this election campaign, they have killed an average of 15 people each day in Punjab, including eight candidates, and have tried to kill two prominent candidates in Delhi.
But Gandhi had plenty of enemies who would like to boast of his murder: a group like the United Liberation Front of Assam, separatist terrorists in the north-west of the country, could equally well be the culprit.
A caller to a newspaper claimed responsibility on behalf of the ‘Commander of the Combined Forces’; but this is reckoned to be a hoax.
It is clear, though, what killed him: the current of political violence that runs from separatist terrorism to the small-time brutality of local hatreds.
Around 200 people were killed in the six weeks of election campaigning, and nearly 200 on the first day of voting.
Over the past year, some 2,000 people have been killed in Hindu-Muslim riots, and about 150 in protests against job reservations for particular castes.
Illegal arms and bomb factories have been set up in many parts of northern India to fuel the conflicts.
The violence fills the void of modern India: the institutions on which independent India was proudly built no longer work.
The state is seen as corrupt and callous, incapable of delivering justice or prosperity to the people.
India's old-style intellectuals, who preach democracy, secularism and Fabian socialism, are falling silent, belatedly aware of their impotence.
Violence is both cause and effect of this failure.
Hoodlums hired by virtually all parties use arms and muscle at election time, partly to capture polling booths, partly to repel attempted captures by rival parties.
Booth-capturing is no longer seen as an outrage and has become a normal part of electoral strategy, particularly in lawless Bihar.
In booths where the presiding officer reports a capture, a second poll is made.
But in many booths the presiding officer is in cahoots with the capturers, or may be too terrified of local toughs to protest.
Hoodlums have longer arms than the law.
The current Indian election was spread over three days to enable security forces to move from one area to another; but even so the chief ministers of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar are reported to have used musclemen to capture booths in the first round of the election.
The election commission has therefore countermanded voting in several seats and ordered a re-poll in more than 1,000 booths.
Never before has there been such open abuse of power by those who are supposed to set standards for the people.
The police and civil service are seen as oppressors and terrorists.
The law courts are venal and can take decades to decide a case.
The rule of law does not seem to work in settling people's grievances.
What seems to work is violence and money, and all political parties are engaged in a mad race to maximise the use of both.
Indians believe that nothing much happens to bandits any more since so many of them have links with politicians, and some have even become ministers.
The army, long seen as standing above the fray, dirtied its reputation in Kashmir earlier this year.
Sent in to suppress separatism, its behaviour has only fostered the movement.
Stories of torture, murder and mass rape are widespread.
Indians' disillusion with the state is compounded by the failure of successive governments to deliver economic growth.
Politicians cling to the rhetoric of socialism while supporting a system which delivers great riches to few businessmen, and profitable cuts to the civil servants and politicians who hand out licences.
Indira Gandhi swept the 1971 election crying ‘Garibi hatao’— end poverty — and Indians, still poor, feel cheated.
Most Indians have no chance of bettering themselves.
They live in little rooms and spend their days on overcrowded streets.
Nerves fray easily.
On the pavements, pedestrians bump into each other rather than step aside, and small offences turn quickly into shouting matches.
Among frustrated people, violence sparks easily.
Amid this moral decay, religious, ethnic and caste crusades have a growing appeal.
People find a purity in them which they do not find in secular, national parties.
And an increasing number of people are willing to kill in the name of causes which they find holier than the discredited law of the land.
Hence the burgeoning popularity of the Bharatiya Janata Party: a fringe party of Hindu extremists only a few years ago, it looks as though it could be part of a government after the election.
As institutions weaken, individuals take over.
So Congress, clinging to the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty as the country's only stable political landmark, elected Sonia Gandhi, Rajiv's widow, as party president.
That decision exposed the party's bankruptcy: with no leader of stature to replace Mr Gandhi, they turned to a woman whose only political asset was her name, which, the party hoped, would bring in the sympathy vote that swung Rajiv into power after his mother's death in 1984.
Sonia Gandhi, however, has shown an extreme distaste for politics.
When Rajiv was persuaded to go into the family business by his mother in 1980, Sonia was against it.
She was happier being the wife of an airline pilot.
Sonia refused the party presidency, not surprisingly; and the stock markets, which had plunged at the news of Rajiv's death and risen at the news of her election, plunged again.
Her decision has left Congress headless and embarrassed at having exposed its weakness.
The party is unlikely to give up on Sonia.
It is worth remembering that, when Indira asked Rajiv to go into politics after his elder brother's death in 1980, he put out a statement saying that he had no such intention.
Sonia might be persuaded to keep a seat warm for her daughter: Priyanka is only 20 (the minimum age for a seat in the lower house is 25) but is said to be sharp and keen on politics.
After all these years, a non-family member will have little authority.
One possibility, P.V.
Narasimha Rao, is a former foreign minister whose ill-health means he cannot hope to become a permanent head of the party.
For that reason, he might be acceptable as a temporary chief.
Sharad Pawar, chief minister of Maharashtra, is by far the strongest Congress state leader.
Narain Dutt Tewari of Uttar Pradesh could be a contender if he wins the state election being held alongside the parliamentary one; but he may be beaten by the BJP.
There is some talk of a collective leadership, but that would not last.
Congress might still garner sympathy votes.
Before the assassination, opinion polls gave the party 225 to 310 seats out of 537.
Votes have been cast in 40% of the seats.
Congress might just be able to form the next government alone; if not, it would try to split bits off other parties.
If that did not work, a coalition would have to be built.
One possibility, given the strong showing of the BJP and the equally strong antipathy to its views amongst other parties, is a secularist line-up.
Indians of many parties have been terrified by the prospect of escalating Hindu-Muslim violence, highlighted in Meerut in Uttar Pradesh during the first round of voting, when 19 people were killed.
Such an alliance would bring together Congress, the breakaway Socialist Janata Dal run by Chandra Shekhar, and the Janata Dal of V.P. Singh.
The Communists, implacable enemies of the BJP, would give their support.
That prospect may be less depressing than a future dominated by the BJP, but it leaves little room for optimism.
Coalitions have never worked in India, which is why the country has always returned to the comforting but damaging embrace of Congress and the Nehru-Gandhi family.
INTERNATIONAL
The man who killed millions
AT THE bitter end the dictator ran for it.
President Mengistu Haile Mariam, who misruled his country for 14 years, fled on May 21st to Zimbabwe, where his retreat was prepared.
The rebels, whose advance had brought them within 50 miles (80 km) of the capital, Addis Ababa, were undecided whether to fight on.
Mr Mengistu handed over the reins, ad interim, to Lieutenant-General Tesfaye Gebre Kidan.
He commanded the government troops in Eritrea, and chaired the court martial in 1989 which disposed of 12 of his fellow-generals for plotting an anti-Mengistu coup.
Yet he passes for a moderate within the fierce revolutionary council, the Dergue.
His appointment as vice-president in April was intended to buy time.
If the rebels were prudent they would hold the line where it is, and take advantage of the peace talks that the American State Department has by steady diplomacy arranged for them in London.
But they are divided.
The junta is dominated (as Ethiopia has always been) by men who speak Amharic.
The main rebel movements represent other regions.
The Eritrean People's Liberation Front stands for secession (following a referendum) of its own relatively developed region.
The Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front, whose leaders are Tigreans, wants autonomy and elections, but no votes for feudalists and capitalists.
The smaller Oromo Liberation Front, which also favours devolution rather than secession, speaks for the people outsiders call the Galla, the second-largest of Ethiopia's many peoples.
(A smaller complication is the presence near Addis Ababa of nearly 20,000 Falashas, black Jews whom the Israelis may now be tempted to rescue in an Entebbe-style commando raid.)
The failure of the Mengistu regime is shown by the success of this uneasy coalition.
Ethiopia's army is immense, with some 430,000 men; but they are mostly unwilling conscripts, and the Soviet Union has cut off their supplies.
By some accounts front-line soldiers on both sides have lately taken to doing local deals with each other, so fewer people die than the officers report.
The chief victims are, as usual, civilians.
The harvest has been bad.
With fighting on the highways, it is harder than ever to shift food to where it is needed.
Earlier this year the World Food Programme was reckoning that some 5m people were at risk of famine in the north of the country; if so, some 1.2m tonnes of grain would be needed to feed them, of which a bit over half has been pledged by donors.
As the rebels advanced, the roads were blocked to civilian traffic.
Food, whether as aid or as normal trade, could not be moved from the ports to the people who needed it.
The aid agencies were starting to sound panicky, as well they might.
The horrors of the Ethiopian famine of 1984–85 are too vivid to be easily forgotten.
As long as President Mengistu held on, there was a real chance that it might all happen again.
If the Americans with their peace talks do get the parties together, their first business will be to arrange a truce so that food can move.
It is hard to see how such a regime could have survived for so long, after bringing such unexampled disaster on its people.
Ethiopia, fortunately, is a special case.
The junta that overthrew the old Emperor Haile Selassie in 1974 brutally eliminated the tiny, rich and greedy elite around him.
That left nobody who could run anything.
Soviet ministries were ordered to fill the gaps, and sent their discards.
Ethiopia became a punishment station for rejects from one the world's most incompetent bureaucracies.
Under that influence the Ethiopian soldiers tried, literally, to imitate Stalin; to jump a multi-ethnic feudal state, with no transition, into communism.
They slaughtered kulaks, and transformed vast, unproductive private estates into vast, unproductive state farms.
Farmers who stored food from a good harvest were shot for hoarding.
Merchants who bought food in surplus areas for sale in drought districts were shot for profiteering.
Provincial discontent, however justified, was met with repression.
Soviet aid for the army was not matched by aid for civilian development.
By the end the regime was spending more than 70% of its revenue on weapons, and practically nothing on roads, water supplies, schools and the rest.
Pressure from western governments, unwilling to contemplate another famine on their domestic television screens, forced the junta last year to loosen up control of farms and trade; but too late.
Other African countries find natural sponsors in the West, in the form of their former colonial masters.
Ethiopia's period under colonial rule, by the Italians in the late 1930s, was too short to earn much salutary guilt from the ex-colonists.
If Ethiopia falls apart, nobody outside will weep for it; nor, if it holds together, will any outsider pay the vast bill for putting it to rights.
Iraq
The man they hate to love
SO LONG as Saddam Hussein is still around, George Bush repeated this week, Iraq can expect no mercy on trade sanctions.
At the same time the Americans, like others involved in the Kurdish operation, are crossing their fingers in hope of an agreement between Mr Hussein and the Kurdish leaders negotiating with him in Baghdad.
If he, and the authority he carries, were not there, an accord might be impossible.
Scepticism about the value of his word has been laid to one side; western governments want a respectable, and reasonably fast, way out for their troops in Kurdistan.
An agreement on Kurdish autonomy would bring the Kurds back to their towns and villages, rendering a western military presence superfluous.
The reports drifting out of Baghdad suggest that an accord of some sort is on the way.
Masoud Barzani, who leads the Kurdish delegation, says the two sides have managed to agree on most of the 20 points at issue, but are still arguing on the exact limits of the autonomous zone.
Other reports suggest, plausibly, that the hottest argument now is about money, in particular what proportion of oil revenue should go to the Kurds — and, perhaps, which Kurds.
If it pays reparations, Iraq will not have much oil money left.
The history of autonomy agreements and their non-implementation is lamentable.
Mr Barzani's father, Mullah Mustapha, fixed a splendid agreement in 1970 that came to nothing, helped to extinction by treachery on both sides.
(Mr Barzani was thick with Mr Hussein's Israeli and Iranian enemies; Mr Hussein probably tried to get Mr Barzani assassinated.)
There is theoretical discussion of some kind of international guarantee to ensure that what is agreed now will be implemented later, but no sign of what form this might take.
The Kurdish delegates, to underline the point that they too are Iraqi, speak up against any violation of sovereignty; they may also be proposing that the Kurdish guerrillas be somehow absorbed into the Iraqi armed forces as a local militia protecting the autonomous zone.
All this alarms the non-Kurdish Iraqi opposition (although the Kurdish package is said to include promises on a free multi-party system).
The Kurdish refugees want to see Saddam's promises enforced by American power; some of the 500,000 who fled to Turkey have drifted home, but not the 1m who fled to Iran.
Yet the confusion in Dohuk, a Kurdish city left empty by the flight of refugees, shows how all decisions hung on an autonomy agreement.
The Americans and British, intent on not getting stuck in the town, wandered in and out talking of electricity and sanitation, then said they would send a few soldiers for a short time.
The United Nations, having agreed with the Baghdad government that some 500 UN security men can be stationed in Iraq, sent ten guards in five white Land-Rovers from its Geneva office.
Iraq's soldiers retreated a few miles from the town; its policemen were still there masquerading as traffic cops.
To prepare for the Great Return, Iraqi workmen were this week assiduously painting zebra-stripes on the deserted streets.
EUROPE
European defence
All dressed up, but not ready to go
FROM OUR BONN, MADRID, PARIS AND ROME CORRESPONDENTS
Even if Europeans could agree on which institution to rely for their future defence, would Europe's armies be ready for a fray?
ONE of the great virtues of the Soviet armed forces was that for 40 years West Europeans and Americans could agree that they were the main threat to NATO.
That feeling of certainty has gone.
NATO's politicians and defence planners are struggling to agree on what threats Europe now faces and on what sort of common defences it should have in future.
While they argue, those whose task it is to make sure the troops will be there on the day have to get on with more practical jobs.
Though the current talk is about establishing multinational units and of creating a European rapid-deployment force that could be sent off at short notice to cope with unexpected contingencies, Europe's armies have too many of the wrong sorts of forces, doing the wrong jobs.
Not only is the chief enemy of old melting away, the chief ally is doing likewise.
Of the 300,000 or so American troops based in Europe until the start of the Gulf crisis last summer, perhaps only 100,000, maybe fewer, are expected to remain.
The days when Europeans could idly theorise about ‘burden-sharing’ with America and building a ‘European pillar’inside NATO are over.
The burden is now suddenly upon them.
The pillar to support it, however, is looking decidedly shaky.
Europe has no shortage of citizens in uniform.
The armies of Britain, France, Germany, Italy and Spain — the core of any new European defence force — number close to 2m (although cuts and reorganisations are on the way).
But legal restraints, plus the political difficulty in today's Europe of sending conscripts off to far-away fights, leads to the obvious question: would they fight?
During the Gulf conflict most attention in America and Britain was directed at Germany's constitutional inability (some would say unwillingness) to commit any troops outside NATO territory.
But others were constrained too.
Unlike Britain, which has an all-professional army, France is hampered by a law that prohibits conscripts, though not volunteers, from being sent off to foreign wars.
Any conscript who may have wanted to go to the Gulf would have had to volunteer or to join the Foreign Legion, the paratroops or the naval infantry — units which are all made up entirely of volunteers.
In the event France sent 10,000 ground troops (compared with Britain's 45,000).
Despite having an army of 285,000 (to be cut to 250,000 over the next three years), France would have been hard-pressed to do more.
Italy likewise has a clause in its constitution banning the use of its armed forces ‘to settle international disputes’.
Italy got around this by declaring the Gulf operation an ‘international constabulary measure’.
But Italy's contribution — ten Tornado aircraft, two frigates and two naval auxiliary ships — was still small, compared with the size of its armed forces.
That has increased pressure to move to a more professional army.
The Italian army chief of staff, General Goffredo Canino, also wants an all-volunteer rapid intervention force composed of five brigades with, in all, 30,000 men.
According to a study by Italy's joint chiefs of staff, a manpower shortage may lead to the army being cut by up to half over the next 20 years.
The idea of a professional army is increasingly popular in Spain, too.
A poll taken earlier this year showed 80% support for abolishing conscription.
Even then Spain's army might not turn up when needed.
Another opinion poll, published in the magazine Cambio 16, found that only 8% of those questioned were prepared to die for their country.
If it's not money, it's philosophy
Even if they were razor-keen to fight, not all of Europe's armies are well enough organised or armed.
Italy's and Spain's lack the training and much of the arms to play a credible part in a future European force.
Spain in particular, with its relatively large, shambling army (a relic from the Franco era) cut off behind the Pyrenees, has been under pressure from NATO to put more money into its air force and navy.
But with defence spending already falling away (this year's defence budget is 7–8% in real terms below last year's), the chance looks bleak.
Of the other two big continental powers, Germany is busy absorbing the former East German army and cutting the new all-German force to a promised limit of 370,000 men, as agreed to in the European conventional arms-control treaty in Paris last November.
Once this is done, it will have one of the strongest and best organised military forces in Europe.
Germany's chancellor, Helmut Kohl, is determined that, despite opposition from the left, his country should then pull its proper weight.
Last month extra German troops were sent to Iran to help cope with the refugees flooding in from Iraq.
That is a start.
But until a majority of Germans, and not just their chancellor, decide how far Europe's interests are worth defending, the Bundeswehr will be hobbled.
France has other worries.
Ever since de Gaulle pulled France out of NATO's integrated military command in 1966, there has been a remarkable national consensus behind defence policy.
This may be about to change.
France's nuclear weapons swallow up almost a third of defence spending.
That was sustainable so long as France faced an unquestioned nuclear threat from the Soviet Union, and needed to respond with only small-scale military operations overseas (in Chad, for example, or Gabon).
Until the Gulf war it had never had to contemplate a high-tech non-nuclear war.
In the Gulf, France's lack of modern heavy armour pushed it into a glamorous, but marginal, job on the flank.
Although he insists there will be no change in France's basic strategy, President Mitterrand has called for a national debate on defence.
Money complicates matters.
The slow but steady rise in France's defence spending has begun to turn down this year.
In addition to the cuts in its ground forces, some military orders have had to be postponed.
The nuclear arsenal is to be remodelled around submarines and aircraft, and land-based missiles phased out.
But the real difficulty for France, as might be expected, is philosophical.
Although it has kept NATO's military command at arm's length all these years, France does not want to see the Americans, still the basis of Europe's security and stability, pull out completely.
Yet it wants to emphasise the Europeanness of any future European defence collaboration.
With both France and Germany in two minds about how and where Europe should be defended, even remodelled European armies will find it hard to march in step.
At the moment of creation
Political power in the Soviet Union is like matter at the beginning of the universe.
The dense mass known as the Communist Party is splitting into a bewildering variety of elements.
Our Moscow correspondent offers a cosmic guide
THE drag of tradition may yet cause the Soviet Union's big bang to collapse back on itself.
But through the confusion, the outline of a multi-party system can already be picked out.
There are two key distinctions.
One is between ‘centralisers’ and ‘regionalists’: those who want control to remain in Moscow and those who want it to spread down to republics and localities.
The other is between ‘authoritarians’ and ‘democrats’, the classic struggle between the advocates of a strong state and the believers in popular sovereignty.
Democrats tend to be free-marketeers (known, confusingly, as the left), authoritarians tend to be central planners (who are known as the right).
But democrats are not necessarily for de-centralisation.
And some thorough-going Communists, such as the Ukraine Communists and the so-called Centre Block, want more powers for the republics.
A big test for all these groups is the election for Russia's president, due to be held next month.
This pits the incumbent, Boris Yeltsin, who is moderately democratic and for the republics, against Nikolai Ryzhkov, an orthodox Communist.
A third candidate, Vadim Bakatin, is the closest of the three to Mikhail Gorbachev.
As the chart shows, Mr Gorbachev is — or tries to occupy — dead centre on both the democrat-authoritarian and the regionalist-centraliser lines.
The Communist Party is still the only organised political group with both money and power.
It has five main groups within it, a sign, some members say, of its democratic character.
The first three overlap.
These are:
1.
The Communists of Russia.
These are old party bosses who believe in strong central government, not least because it confirms their own power.
Their leader, Ivan Polozkov, has backing from local officials across the Russian republic.
They have about a quarter of the seats in the Russian parliament.
Boris Yeltsin's victory at a recent session of the parliament has weakened them.
2.
The Marxist Platform.
These are mainly party intellectuals who still profess communism, but want it to be less centralising and more democratic.
Their leader, Alexander Buzgalin, wants some co-operation with reformers.
3.
Soyuz (Union).
This, strictly, is a pressure group of more than 500 deputies in the Soviet parliament, rather than a faction of the Soviet Communist Party itself.
But nearly all its members are Communists.
They have acted as parliamentary cannon fodder for the ‘black colonels’, Nikolai Petrushenko and Viktor Alksnis, who want a nationwide state of emergency.
Prodded by its chairman, Yuri Blokhin, Soyuz is beginning to edge away from the colonels and towards the reformers.
It has also now taken the first steps towards setting up a country-wide party.
4.
Communists for Democracy.
These are reform Communists.
Their demands are much like those of the ill-fated Democratic Platform — reformers who quit the party but failed to organise themselves into a workable opposition.
Their chief aim is to transform their party into an ordinary election-fighting group rather than a semi-official civil service.
5.
Entrepreneurial Communists.
Odd as the label sounds, this group has influence beyond its size.
Under Pavel Bunich, these Communists for Business, as they might be called, want to reconcile entrepreneurship and planning.
When two or more members of the ‘democratic opposition’ meet, one leaves to form a new party.
The largest, the Democratic Party, claims 25,000 members.
It split at its second congress in late April.
Gary Kasparov, the world chess champion and head of the party's Moscow branch, accused the party's leader, Nikolai Travkin, of insufficient hostility to Mr Gorbachev, and quit.
One organisation, Democratic Russia, unites most of these groups.
It can bring hundreds of thousands of people into big-city streets in support of Mr Yeltsin.
Their favourite, however, belongs to no party.
Another problem for Democratic Russia is that it, too, is splitting.
Its radicals, who dominate the leadership, want no truck with Mr Gorbachev.
Its other wing might be called ‘coalition builders’.
This includes the mayor of Moscow, Mr Gavriil Popov, who recently quit the leadership.
His group hopes to gather together reform Communists such as Edward Shevardnadze and Mr Bakatin (both former ministers) and the Communists for Democracy.
What might come out of this cosmic turmoil?
Mr Gorbachev last month signed an agreement with nine republics which, amongst other things, proposed elections to a new Soviet parliament sometime next year.
If that agreement is carried through, new alliances may form as the election nears.
A widely shared dream is for the Communist party to split, leaving its old-guard (the Communists of Russia, Soyuz and the Marxists) to form a socialist party and the reformers (the Entrepreneurial Communists and Communists for Democracy) a social-democratic one.
This might just be led by President Gorbachev, in alliance with Democrats who, in turn, had shed their radical wing.
Inside an ancient quarrel
FROM A SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN CROATIA
IF ONLY it were a battle of flags.
Croatia's towns and villages are flying their opposing banners and their referendum posters, which both proclaim: ‘for’.
Croat posters demand a ‘for’ vote for a ‘sovereign and independent’state.
Croatia's Serb villages demand a ‘for’ vote for union with Serbia.
Both have now been endorsed, with massive majorities, by their respective electorates.
Croatia's rebel Serbs live in a string of southern villages in an area called Krajina near the town of Knin, and in another string of villages in Slavonia to the north.
Their ancestors defended these old border regions of the Austro-Hungarian empire from the Turks.
Today they have their own militias, guns and roadblocks.
They fly the flags of the republic of Serbia, Yugoslav flags and historic flags adorned with the initials of the motto: ‘Only Serbian unity will save the Serbs’.
Amongst their gunmen are Chetniks, named after Serbia's wartime anti-communist resistance, who come from Serbia proper.
In Knin, Croat-owned shops have been smashed and looted.
Some of Croatia's 600,000 Serbs (out of a population of 4.6m) have seen an independent Croatia before.
Tens of thousands of their fellows were murdered by the forces of Croatia's wartime fascist state in the most bestial way.
Ruined churches still stand as testaments to the women and children burnt alive in them during those years.
Serb villagers egged on by propaganda from Serbia fear the nightmare is returning.
Mad rumours circulate about Croatian doctors determined to murder them.
Most Croatian Serbs do not live in Krajina but are scattered through the republic.
The behaviour of Serbs in Krajina and Slavonia is turning their Croat neighbours against them.
‘Most of Zagreb's Serbs probably came out to vote in Croatia's referendum because they were scared,’ said a Serb historian.
‘They just wanted to be seen as loyal citizens.’
Many of them are losing their jobs, but they cannot move to Serbia because its economy is in even worse shape than Croatia's.
Instead of outrage at last week's blocking of the succession of Stipe Mesic, a Croat, as Yugoslavia's new president, officials in Zagreb smile at the propaganda coup handed to them by Serb politicians in Belgrade.
It helped make up the minds of waverers on the question of independence and it sent a signal about Serbian intentions to the outside world.
‘For too long the international community has swallowed the Serb propaganda line,’ said Zvonko Lerotic, an advisor to Croatia's president, Franjo Tudjman.
For months Croatia's politicians have said that, if a looser Yugoslavia were not soon formed, they would have to go it alone.
Politicians in Belgrade have tried to call their bluff.
But with the hardening of the mood in Krajina and shootings in Slavonia something far worse is emerging.
The federal army has been called in to act as a buffer in areas of high tension.
Politicians in Zagreb have no trouble in imagining them as the advance guard of a new patrol on the frontiers of a greater Serbia.
No city could look more normal than Zagreb.
Its smartly dressed citizens go about their business as if nothing was happening.
But fear lurks beneath the surface and is beginning to paralyse normal life.
One Serb said: ‘The problem is that no one knows what will happen.
Serbs are being isolated and isolating themselves.’
One Croat student said: ‘On the day of the referendum I was woken up very early in the morning.
There were people in the street shouting the name of Croatia's wartime fascist state.
It made my flesh creep.’
Croatia's referendum was a joyless affair.
Over the last few months the republic had been buoyed by waves of euphoria.
Depression has now set in.
‘We want our own state, we want our flag,’ said a museum curator, ‘but in this situation we cannot plan anything.
We think about where to send the children abroad if there is war.
All we want is for things to go back to normal.’
Yugoslavia
The lookers-on
GEOGRAPHY lessons in Yugoslav schools used to start with the teacher pointing out that the first letters of the names of the states surrounding Yugoslavia added up to the word brigama, ‘worries’.
Now it is the turn of Yugoslavia's neighbours — and nations beyond — to do the worrying.
Ideally, they would like a united, democratic Yugoslavia.
Overlook secession in Yugoslavia and who knows what precedent this might set.
But they are no longer sure what they can do to prevent a break-up if it comes.
Yugoslavia is going to be a problem, in bulk or in bits.
The main issue for its western friends is becoming how to limit the damage.
Rivalries between Serbia and Croatia, Yugoslavia's two largest republics, seem to be near breaking-point.
To nudge Serbia, which can be blamed for much of the recent trouble, towards better conduct, and to discourage any thought of an army coup, the United States earlier this month cut off aid to Yugoslavia.
The Nickles amendment, passed by Congress last November, gave Yugoslavia until May 6th to end the repression of ethnic Albanians in Kosovo, on pain of losing about $5m worth of technical aid in the fiscal year 1991.
This is small change, even by Yugoslav standards.
But the amendment also obliges the United States to oppose ‘by word and vote’ any further lending to Yugoslavia by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
There was dismay in Belgrade.
The federal prime minister, Mr Ante Markovic, rang up President Bush earlier this week pleading for the administration's help.
The president promised Mr Markovic, whom he had backed on previous occasions, that he would give it.
In Washington, the administration has now let it be known that it will work for the softening of the amendment's consequences, provided — and forgetting Kosovo for the moment — that Stipe Mesic, a Croat, is no longer obstructed by the Serbs from taking up the post of chairman (for one year) of Yugoslavia's eight-member presidency.
Mr Mesic should have done so on May 15th, in line with a procedure used since the actual adoption of the rotating presidency in 1980.
But Serbia, with the provinces of Kosovo and Vojvodina, which it controls, voted against and Montenegro, Serbia's ally, abstained.
Mr Mesic had the votes of Croatia, Bosnia, Macedonia and Slovenia, which were not enough for a majority.
The Serbian action angered the Americans, who had been assured by Borisav Jovic, the previous chairman-president (a Serb), and Slobodan Milosevic, Serbia's leader (an old-style communist), that Mr Mesic would not be opposed.
The blocking of Mr Mesic's appointment could push Croatia and Slovenia into secession before the end of June.
By then these republics want agreement on making Yugoslavia a confederation of sovereign states.
Otherwise they will break away.
Slovenes voted for this last December; in Croatia on May 19th 94% of those voting (in an 83% turnout) opted for a sovereign Croatia (see box on previous page).
The Bush administration hopes that the message will have got through, both to Serbia, which is in an economic mess, and to the Yugoslav army.
Many army officers dislike the thought of Mr Mesic as their supreme commander (one of the jobs of the presidency's chairman).
But they also want their salaries paid.
The Americans hope that the installation of Mr Mesic would bolster Croats and Slovenes who hang back from independence now; that Mr Markovic and his economic reform would win a reprieve; and that time might be gained for Serbian opposition to Mr Milosevic to grow.
For President Bush and James Baker, his secretary of state, the break-up of Yugoslavia would not be as alarming as that of Iraq.
Yet they reckon it could set a bad example elsewhere in Eastern Europe (Czechoslovakia) as well as in bigger, more important places (India and, when their worries turn that way, the Soviet Union).
Others lower down the administration share this concern but doubt whether Yugoslavia can hold together in its current form.
Many European diplomats feel the same way.
European politicians continue to plead, sincerely, that Yugoslavia should endure.
But behind the scenes some countries have (unlike the Americans) already begun planning for a different outcome.
They are, as one senior British official puts it, ‘adapting to new realities without necessarily encouraging them’.
…and unto Poland, what is God's
FROM OUR WARSAW CORRESPONDENT
DURING his most recent visit to his native Poland in 1987, crowds chanting ‘Down with communism’ greeted Pope John Paul II.
Since then, communism has fallen, and his once-faithful compatriots will no longer welcome him with the same fervour when he arrives for his fourth visit on June 1st.
He may even meet some Poles who demonstrate against him.
While nine Poles in ten call themselves Roman Catholics, they are discovering, with the help of a free press, that they disagree, sometimes violently, over the Catholic church's role in their public life and private morality.
It may come as a shock.
That the end of communism could also prove to be the end of the Catholic church's unquestioned moral authority in Poland was the last thing the church hierarchy expected when the Solidarity leader, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, himself a long-time Catholic activist, became the first non-communist prime minister in 1989.
The triumph of Solidarity was seen by many as a triumph for the church, which had preached against communism, harboured Solidarity activists, and paid for underground presses throughout the dismal 1980s.
The pope himself may even have hoped that the fall of communism might inspire decadent Western Europe to renew its faith, and help spread Catholicism into the Soviet Union.
The first difficulties began to appear last year after the Mazowiecki government, without consulting the public or the parliament, decreed that children should be taught religion in schools, in effect making Catholicism close to a state religion.
Many who did not object to this in principle disliked the high-handed way it was adopted.
Questions were raised about the power of a shadowy ‘Government-and-church Council’, headed by Mr Mazowiecki and leading members of the episcopate, which had considerable influence over many government decisions.
The crack widened recently after the Polish primate, Cardinal Jozef Glemp, announced his desire to end the ‘communist-inspired’ separation of church and state.
Several newspapers and magazines opened their pages to a full-fledged debate, complete with angry letters, editorials, and articles with headlines like ‘Are we ruled by clergy?’
For the first time since the end of censorship, the Polish press (long plagued by communist traditions of slanted reporting) conducted a public argument neutrally and eloquently.
Meanwhile, a group of Catholic senators was trying to push through parliament a bill banning abortion and granting ‘full human rights’ to the foetus in time for the pope's visit.
This set off another heated debate.
Cardinal Glemp objected to a proposal to hold a national referendum on the issue.
‘There are certain eternal values which cannot be put to referendum,’ he announced.
Poll on poll has suggested that over half the population believes abortion should be legal as a matter of course, and that nearly 90% say it should be legal in certain cases.
Last week, parliament finally decided not to vote on the bill, effectively putting off the decision until after parliamentary elections in the autumn — and perhaps forever.
Not everyone is surprised by the changing mood.
The western image of Poland as a highly orthodox Catholic nation was always slightly amiss.
Poles flocked to churches during the darkest years of martial law partly because the church was the only legal form of opposition to communism.
Anti-clericalism is as deeply embedded among Polish peasants as is faith in the Virgin Mary.
Now that it is no longer traitorous, popular antagonism towards the Catholic church has become open.
Insults that Poles once directed at ‘reds’(communists) are now aimed at ‘blacks’(priests).
Churches have been vandalised and an altar built for the pope's visit was burned down.
President Lech Walesa has played a curiously neutral role in this debate.
Though he describes himself as ‘pro-life’, he did nothing to push the anti-abortion bill through parliament.
His visit to Israel this week had a double purpose.
One was to answer the commonly held feeling abroad that he and many of his countrymen were anti-Semitic.
During his speech to the Israeli Knesset, he asked forgiveness from Jews who may have suffered in the past at Polish hands.
The other aim was to promote the argument for religious toleration among Poles.
Mr Walesa has now apparently decided to stress the more open-minded traditions of Polish patriotism — Poland was once a central European melting pot — and to distance himself from the foreigner-hating sort of nationalism to be found among some Polish politicians and churchmen.
This loud public debate is part of a larger change in Poland.
It is one sign among many that the country is at last moving away from post-communist politics and towards modern European democracy.
The change began with the anguished division of the old Solidarity opposition into warring factions last year.
That split ended an era, but brought about the birth of real political parties.
For a politician to proclaim faith in Solidarity and a Catholic God is no longer enough to win votes.
Grassroots organisation, posters, advertisements and arguments are needed too.
More change is coming.
This week the Solidarity trade union — the workers, that is, bereft of old leaders who have gone on to other things — led a two-hour nationwide protest strike.
Other strikes (notably among Warsaw's transport workers) have called for a loosening of the government's tight monetary policy and an end to wage control.
After a long fight to beat inflation, the government does not feel sympathetic to these demands.
Class divisions have reappeared: private entrepreneurs grumble that ungrateful workers have forgotten how bad things were a year ago.
Once, the fight against communism seemed to unite the nation beneath the Black Madonna of Czestochowa, the Polish white eagle, and the memory of the martyrs of World War II and Stalinism.
No longer.
France
As you were
FROM OUR PARIS CORRESPONDENT
IN THE words of the Gaullist leader, Jacques Chirac, France's eagerly awaited new government has turned out to be the former Rocard government minus Michel Rocard.
Or more or less.
There may be a few more Mitterrand loyalists, a few less Rocard supporters and non-Socialist centrists, and one more woman (seven out of 46 ministers, including the new prime minister, Edith Cresson).
But all of the most powerful posts — economy, foreign affairs, defence, interior, justice, education — are filled by the same old faces.
Mrs Cresson's appointment is being taken as a shift to the left, particularly in view of the exclusion of seven of the centrist ministers, and as a shift towards protectionism, with the departure of Roger Fauroux, the old cabinet's loudest free-trader.
But this has yet to be reflected in policy.
Mrs Cresson is more interventionist than her predecessor and has made cutting unemployment a priority.
But economic policy will remain in the competent, liberal hands of Pierre Bérégovoy.
He heads a new ‘super-ministry’, covering industry, foreign trade, post and telecommunications, commerce and the budget, as well as economy and finance.
Lack of cash leaves little room for manoeuvre on social policy.
(Lionel Jospin, education minister and the titular number two in the government, turned down the social-affairs ministry for that very reason.)
Defence and foreign policy, including Europe, remain under the direct control of the president.
Like Mr Rocard in 1988, Mrs Cresson decided not to call for a vote of confidence on her new government's programme, outlined to parliament on May 22nd.
The Socialists' meagre ranks, already 16 short of a clear parliamentary majority, have been further depleted by the appointment of a fresh bunch of nine Socialist deputies to the government.
French ministers must give up their seats to substitutes, who then have to wait a month before they may vote.
The six former Socialist deputies dropped from the government — including Mr Rocard — cannot automatically reclaim their seats but, having persuaded their substitutes to stand down, must win a by-election.
Mrs Cresson has already several times hinted that parliament may be dissolved if the conservative opposition tries to block government bills.
However, her warnings are aimed less at the right than at the Communists and their 26 deputies, who would fare badly in an early general election.
A poll of voting intentions — published on May 21st, but taken before Mrs Cresson's appointment — indicated that the two main right-wing parties would easily win a general election with 40% of the vote, giving them around 336 seats (47 more than an absolute majority).
The Socialists would come a poor second with 26.5%; the Communists could expect no more than 7%.
Mrs Cresson's appointment may have helped the Socialists somewhat but cannot have done much for the Communists.
It is little surprise that they are saying that for the time being they will give Mrs Cresson the ‘benefit of the doubt’.
Mrs Cresson will nevertheless need all her negotiating skills to steer her bills through parliament.
Communist support cannot be counted on for the tough measures needed to balance the social-security budget, reform state pensions and increase government revenues.
Further cuts in government spending will be needed to give a promised new boost to industry.
Despite the reduction in the number of centre ministers, Mrs Cresson knows she will still often need the abstentions, if not the votes, of the 39 centre deputies.
As she herself has said, ‘One always needs to govern more in the centre than one wants.
Compromises are sometimes necessary.’
BRITAIN
Bouquet of barbed wire
THE annual Chelsea flower show, mecca for gardening England, opened this week.
Among the sea of sweet old ladies giving hints on pruning roses is a police stand, with two members of the constabulary dispensing advice on an equally prickly issue: garden theft.
Judging by the interest shown so far, their display could become a fixture of the show.
The police can only guess at the scale of the problem, for stealing from gardens is not treated separately in station crime-books.
A survey last August by the Consumers Association suggested that one garden in 20 had been burgled in the past two years, and that the average value of each theft was £130.
These amount to rich pickings, given that more than 20m British households have a garden.
Garden criminals range from gnome-snaffling pranksters to professionals who swoop on country houses at night armed with a crane and a lorry, ready to snatch everything from £20,000 orchids down to the last £700 Koi carp in the pond.
Garden machinery is the most popular swag — a grass-cutting tractor costs over £1,000.
Ordinary tools and plants are next into the bag.
Most of them find their way back to garden centres to be re-sold.
A raid on a centre in Northumberland last year netted £200,000-worth of loot.
At the flower show, Constable Offer and his colleague are trying to persuade gardeners to be more security-conscious, and security firms to be more garden-conscious.
They are also dreaming up gadgets.
Their breakthroughs include a burglar-proof hanging basket, an anchoring system to keep tables and chairs from wandering and a coded ignition button for lawn-mowers.
Their blueprint for a sort of gun-rack for spades and hoes has been taken up by one manufacturer.
Chelsea's crime-fighters prescribe a combination of fencing, trellises and prickly plants.
Floodlights help, too, as do perimeter alarms.
Gardeners might also fork out £2,000 for a statue-alarm — now commonplace in gardens owned by the National Trust.
Every gnome should have one.
Is London turning?
DESCRIBING a slow arc past the grand but desolate-looking County Hall, once home of the Greater London Council (GLC), the good ship Natitia noses down the green, greasy Thames.
At its prow Neil Kinnock grins at a firing-squad of cameramen.
The Labour leader is on his way to launch his party's manifesto for London, ‘A World Class Capital’.
Just too small to be noticed from the boat, a graffito on County Hall reads ‘Come back, Ken’.
Ken Livingstone, now a humble Labour backbencher, was leader of the GLC and guru of those who believed rainbow-coalition politics was coming to Britain.
Then Margaret Thatcher spoiled their fun by abolishing the council five years ago.
He remains a potent symbol.
One Tory MP, musing on a possible slogan for the capital, warned of ‘red tape, red ink and Red Ken’.
Labour, which says it will create a Greater London Authority to fill the hole left by the ‘spiteful’ destruction of the GLC, promises the new body will not be a re-creation of Mr Livingstone's power-base, but a leaner, hungrier outfit.
The GLC's high-spending, snook-cocking leftism made London politics exciting.
But the explosion of post-1960s Marxism inside the London Labour Party, of which it was a symptom, became steadily more unpopular and venomous during the 1980s.
The last hard-left council, Lambeth, now close to organisational and political collapse, still sends shivers down voters' spines across the capital.
Even now, according to internal polling, Labour is doing worse in London — some three points behind — than in the rest of the south.
Yet London contains around 25 Labour-winnable marginal seats.
If Mr Kinnock is to make it to Downing Street, the party needs to win almost all of them.
As a region, London matters much more to Labour's ambition than Scotland or Wales does — or even both together.
The new manifesto, with its lists of promises for a better urban environment and less-congested transport system, enjoyed a good reception — including a laudatory front-page endorsement from London's only daily newspaper, the strongly anti-Labour Evening Standard.
This is partly because Labour has picked up a mood of unease about the city among its residents, fearful of Frankfurt taking over its role as Europe's financial capital, and jealous of Paris's self-confidence and infrastructure.
A poll suggested 46% of Londoners would leave if they could.
(Though the city has never been a paradise, especially in warm weather.
Swift cursed 280 years ago, ‘May my enemies live here in summer!’)
More prosaically, Labour hopes to benefit from the extra pain of high mortgages and from the southern recession.
The city's jobless rate is already 7.3% and rising — compared with 2.6% in the 1980 recession and 9.3% in the worst month of the 1980s, July 1986.
There are more unemployed Londoners than unemployed Scots (though the rate in Scotland is higher).
Labour's employment spokesman, Henry McLeish, was startled to find that male unemployment in London marginals like Streatham, Hornsey, Lewisham West and Dulwich was worse than in his own Fife seat and in some of the grimmer parts of Glasgow.
The Tory counter-attack will be to remind London voters that, since they tend to earn above the national average, more of them will suffer from higher Labour taxes.
But so far Labour is better organised to get its message over.
Its London frontbenchers work as a team, backed by a campaign committee which was set up under the chairmanship of the shadow Commons leader, Jack Cunningham, after bad local-election results in London a year ago — and which produced the London manifesto.
Though the Tories are less organised, they still have plenty of ammunition.
Londoners may agree with Labour that their city ‘is losing the confidence of the people who live and work there’ because of its dirt, noise, congestion and crime; but they are probably not yet convinced that voting Labour will provide the remedy.
Lambeth — whose leader, Joan Twelves, resigned this week — has been run notoriously badly by a Labour-controlled council and is almost a byword for filth and incompetence.
Though the Tories will savage Labour's local-government record, some Tory London MPs argue that will not be enough.
John Bowis of Battersea would like to see London get its own government department, like Wales and Scotland.
James Arbuthnot, of Wanstead and Woodford, argues that if the Labour-run Association of London Authorities and the Tory-run London Boroughs Association were to merge, they could provide the ‘voice for London’ its voters still apparently hanker after.
Other Tory MPs admit privately that an elected authority for London makes sense; they fear Mr Kinnock has stolen a march on them.
But it takes a long time to regain trust.
If Ms Twelves is an image of the past that Mr Kinnock wants London to forget, the Oscar-winning actress Glenda Jackson is how he would prefer Labour to look.
Miss Jackson, who stood grinning with Mr Kinnock as their vessel churned down the river, is the Labour candidate for Hampstead and Highgate, one of the Tory marginals.
Though some local followers complain that she spends too much time in West End theatres and not enough in party meetings, Miss Jackson seems well-informed about her part of London, down-to-earth and fully committed to becoming a Labour MP.
She may well succeed.
Whether enough other Labour hopefuls win through in the ring of nondescript suburban and outer-London seats may ultimately depend on whether voters are more impressed by Labour's dismal record in the city, or by its attractive and well-packaged promises.
At the moment it seems that Labour is poised to pick up a good swathe of its targets — but not, yet, quite enough of them to put Mr Kinnock safely into Downing Street.
As the main parties ponder the fateful nature of the developing contest in the capital, London and its doings will climb steadily up their agendas.
If Labour fails to break through, Mr Kinnock could rightly blame Ms Twelves and her like.
It would be the final revenge of Lambeth — where John Major was once a councillor, as was Mr Livingstone.
The visionary hymn ‘Jerusalem’, sung by generations of Labour people dreaming of a socialist paradise, was written by another Lambeth resident, William Blake.
A good omen for Mr Kinnock?
Perhaps.
But Blake also wrote that ‘Jerusalem fell…from Lambeth's vale’.
Engineering
Leaner but no fitter
The government has launched yet another initiative to help boost manufacturing industry.
But nothing seems to stem the decline of engineering
THE recession of 1980–81 was the worst anybody in the engineering business had seen; now plenty of people think the current recession is causing still more grief.
The Engineering Employers' Federation (EEF) reckons the industry, which employs 45% of Britain's manufacturing workers, will shed around 100,000 jobs this year.
Few areas of engineering have escaped.
The consumer goods that engineers make tend to be the kind of things that people buy when they move house, like cookers and fridges.
Demand has wilted with the collapse of the housing market.
These goods are also expensive, so people defer buying them when they are hard-up.
Towards the end of 1990, volume sales were running 20% below the levels of 1988 and 1989.
The car market has been similarly hit by deferred purchases: car sales in April this year were down 24% on April 1990.
Capital goods depend on industrial investment; and businesses, like consumers, cut spending as interest rates rose.
In the previous recession electronics were to some extent protected from the slump by companies' enthusiasm for replacing old technologies with new.
This time around, the computerisation curve has flattened out, so the electronics industry has been hit as hard as any.
As bad luck would have it, the only industries in which Britain has clung to a world-lead — defence and aerospace — have both been affected by politics as well as economics.
Defence spending, untouched by the previous recession, is falling as the cold war thaws.
The extent of British defence cuts is still anyone's guess, even in Whitehall; but the Defence Manufacturers' Association reckons real annual spending will fall to about 75% of 1990's figure within five years.
The export market has not taken up the slack, so redundancies are coming thick and fast.
Rolls-Royce and British Aerospace have also been feeling the slump in civil aviation: the hangover after a spending boom, the post-liberalisation troubles of the American airline industry and the hiccup over the Gulf war have all cut into demand for new aeroplanes.
Going down and staying down
Engineering tends to emerge late from recessions, and the EEF sees no upturn before the second half of next year.
Still, all these markets (except perhaps defence) will eventually recover.
The big worry for British engineering companies is that this recession, like the previous one, will increase the rate at which their share of world markets is shrinking.
Britain's engineering industry went into trade deficit in 1983 for the first time (see chart).
The industry did not shriek too loudly: the strength of demand over the next few years kept everyone reasonably happy.
Now that the bad times are back again, people inside and outside the industry are wondering why, after all the pain of the 1980s, it remains so weak.
The previous recession sorted out two fundamental problems: overmanning and troublesome unions.
Plenty of others remain, not least the shortage of engineers — not so much of graduates as of technicians.
The industry blames successive governments' lack of interest in vocational training; perhaps the new training plans announced by the prime minister this week will help to fill the gap.
But there is little incentive to become an engineer in Britain.
According to Egor, an employment consultancy, an experienced engineer in Britain earns a net 21,700 ecus (£15,500), compared with 29,600 ecus in Italy, 33,400 ecus in France and 42,500 ecus in Germany.
The big oddity is why pay remains low for skills that an industry needs but cannot find.
A related weakness has been the lack of effective co-operation between industry and higher education.
The industry secretary, Peter Lilley, has just announced a government initiative to address this problem, as part of a wider drive to improve all manufacturers' handling of technical innovation and to push forward what Mr Lilley calls a cultural revolution in British business.
Measures like these sound wearily familiar, just like solutions to that traditional bugbear, the City's short-termism.
(Mr Lilley's package has a treatment for that, too: more publicity for companies' spending on R&D — as though City analysts might be persuaded by the civil servants to give research more importance.)
Another standard complaint of engineers is that too much government R&D money goes into defence — nearly half, compared with 36% in France, 13% in Italy, 9% in Germany and none in Japan.
And Britain's state aid for industry generally falls far short of the sums seen in other countries.
According to the EC, in 1986–88 the Italian government spent 3,136 ecus per employee, the French 1,456, the German 1,135 and the British 806.
The single brightest area of engineering at the moment is the car industry, largely as a result of investment by Nissan, Honda and Toyota.
The Japanese are coming to the rescue in other areas, too.
This week Sony announced a big expansion of its Bridgend television plant.
At 60% of the price of a German worker, the Briton evidently has his advantages — so long as he is trained, managed and financed by foreigners.
Just as well, perhaps, that Mr Lilley has also announced plans this week to send more engineers off to be tutored in Japan.
Foreign policy
But can we opt out of the EC?
SIX months ago, the Tory party was riven by disagreements over Europe.
The issue was one big reason for Margaret Thatcher's downfall.
Her successor, John Major, was thought to be a pragmatist who would heal the split on Europe.
Yet so far Mr Major has been the most European-minded prime minister since Edward Heath.
Most Tories are delighted.
The Euro-sceptics argue that Mr Major has established himself as a good European merely to carry credibility when he vetoes monetary union.
But Mr Major is not so Machiavellian.
The signs are that he is prepared to sign up for the emerging versions of both political and monetary union.
If he does, the row in the Tory party could re-ignite.
Mr Major has already asked Chancellor Helmut Kohl and other EC leaders to delay any decisions, at least until the EC summit at Maastricht in early December: presumably he expects to call an election this autumn.
He has been assured that the old EC custom of never embarrassing member governments just before an election will still apply.
There will be no attempt to force the pace at the Luxembourg summit next month.
Some old Euro-hands doubt whether anything will really be decided until the Lisbon summit in June 1992.
Even so, alarm bells are beginning to sound at Westminster.
The European Reform Group, led by Jonathan Aitken, a longstanding Euro-sceptic, now has 72 Tory MPs in its ranks and is increasingly active in harrying the government in late-night debates.
This week Bill Cash persuaded 105 other Tory MPs to sign a motion congratulating Mr Major for resisting the latest proposals for political and monetary union.
It was clearly intended as a warning to Downing Street.
Mr Cash is a leading Euro-sceptic, who was elected chairman of the Tory backbenchers' European committee in a surprise coup last December.
Europhile Tories shrugged off those 106 signatures.
They claimed that Mr Cash had told MPs his motion had the personal support of Mr Major.
(In fact, Mr Major had remained studiously neutral.)
But the Euro-sceptics got support from an unexpected source on Monday evening.
At a dinner organised by the Conservative Philosophy Group, David Owen, the Social Democratic leader, launched a broadside against both monetary and political union.
He argued that Britain ought to use its veto and ‘draw a line in the sand’.
His stance could further embarrass Mr Major.
It also, incidentally, sits oddly with the widely peddled idea that Dr Owen is seeking a place in the Major cabinet.
The Foreign Office reckons no veto will be needed on monetary union because the latest deal proposed by Jacques Delors, the present of the EC commission, would not commit Britain to adopt a European currency until the House of Commons wanted to.
The realisation that Britain would not be obliged to accept a single European currency may dampen the opposition at Westminster.
Indeed, some Tory Euro-sceptics like Teddy Taylor now see such a deal as the harbinger of a two-tier Europe in which Britain would be able to ‘opt out’ of policies it did not like.
But opting-out of a political-union deal would be impossible.
Although the Foreign Office may say that the mooted treaty on political union would have only a marginal impact on the EC, it would clearly diminish national sovereignty.
The Community's authority would be extended to many areas, like health and education, where it now has no legal remit; majority voting in the Council of Ministers would be reinforced; the European Parliament would be given extra power to block laws it does not like; and a small step might be taken towards a common EC defence policy.
Mr Major clearly intends to fight hard to minimise any constitutional changes.
The French may help him.
They are proposing a scheme for keeping foreign, defence and home-office issues out of the hands of EC institutions and subject to control by European summits.
If this is accepted, Mr Major will be able to present it as a step away from supranationalism.
And he should be able to claim some success for British ideas, too.
The treaty will probably include a clause on ‘subsidiarity’, the principle that the Community should act only on issues where it is inappropriate for decisions to be taken by national governments.
And it may endorse the British idea that the EC Court of Justice should have sanctions to enforce its judgments on reluctant countries (one bit of supranationalism that Britain backs).
None of these points will mollify the biggest Tory sceptics.
They are prepared to vote against the government, even at the cost of a damaging row just before an election.
The case for an autumn poll rests, m'lud.
There's a lot of it about
HEALTH-SERVICE reform is in fashion.
At the moment 18 of the 24 OECD countries are either planning or implementing a major shake-up.
Most reforming governments are using one or more of the three principles that underlie the reorganisation of Britain's national health service (NHS): separating buyers of care from providers of care; forcing the providers to compete for contracts from buyers; and making money come with the patient.
Britain may be odd in spending such a low percentage of its national income on health.
But it is in the mainstream in using managed competition to secure value for money.
In insurance-based health systems, the purchasers (public or private insurers) are in theory separate from the providers.
In practice the relationship between the two has been all too cosy.
Since the mid-1980s governments have tried to make a reality of the division.
The aim has been to make purchasers much more prudent and to force providers to compete for business.
In Holland the Dekker reforms of 1987 obliged purchasers to choose between providers, and encouraged people to shop around among insurers.
The Germans are asking their ‘sickness funds’(which collect payroll taxes and arrange for care) to cancel contracts with inefficient hospitals and are obliging hospitals to publish details of their costs.
In Bavaria doctors are being offered budgets to help make them more choosy about patient-care.
In the United States, Health Management Organisations were introduced in the early 1970s to hold down the formidable costs of American medicine by encouraging more competition between providers.
Several governments that had no division between purchasers and providers are busy creating one in order to encourage managed competition.
In Sweden the county councils (which are responsible for health care) have started awarding contracts to those health centres and hospitals that provide the right services at the right price.
One county, Kopparberg, has handed over most of its budget to family doctors and made them responsible for buying services from competing providers.
In Finland local authorities are being turned into the purchasing agents — with a range of powers and responsibilities that look remarkably similar to those being assigned to the district health authorities under the Tory reforms.
Most countries have discovered the benefits of money following the patient.
The Swedish reforms give patients more freedom to choose who treats them and make the resources allocated to doctors (including their pay packets) dependent on the number of patients they can attract.
Medicare — the American programme for the old — pays hospitals for each patient they treat.
Even in Leningrad, hospitals are financed according to the number of patients they treat.
These reforms have a common aim: to control escalating costs by improving efficiency rather than cutting patient care.
They also have a similar impact, shifting resources from hospitals to primary care.
In Dublin, for example, two teaching hospitals were closed in 1987.
Throughout Europe vested interests in the medical profession, supported by opposition parties hungry for votes and journalists eager for copy, have mounted vigorous protests in favour of the status quo.
Courageous governments have preferred better patient care to a quiet life.
It's hurting, but is it working?
Inflation is proving more stubborn than the prime minister says — despite a much deeper recession than he ever thought likely
ON ANY sensible measure’, John Major told the annual dinner of the Confederation of British Industry this week, the government is winning the battle against inflation.
That was not a lie, perhaps, but it was terminologically inexact.
Measures of inflation have proliferated this spring, so a figure can be found to support virtually any position.
Awkwardly for the government, however, the most sensible measures are the gloomiest: according to some of them, inflation is still rising.
And yet the recession, whose task is to drive inflation down, is anything but an illusion.
Indeed it is so severe that the fabric of the economy is beginning to suffer long-term damage.
The ‘headline rate’ of inflation is tumbling nicely: it fell from 8.2% in the year to March to 6.4% in the year to April.
But this was due to a variety of special factors — especially lower mortgage-interest rates and the net effect of the recent changes in the poll tax and value-added tax.
To find the underlying rate of inflation, it is necessary to look past such distortions.
Underlying inflation was 7.4% in the year to April (according to the economics team at Goldman Sachs in London), virtually unchanged from the year to March.
But remember the advice of Robin Leigh-Pemberton, governor of the Bank of England: the 12-month inflation rate reflects what happened a year ago as much as what happened last month.
Underlying inflation during the past three months gives a more up-to-date reading.
On this basis, inflation stands at more than 7% (at an annual rate) and has actually crept up since January (see chart).
The evidence is undeniably muddled.
Inflation in producer prices (as opposed to retail prices) has risen in recent months; surveys of business opinion suggest that inflation in manufactured-goods prices is falling sharply.
Only this much is clear: the battle against inflation is far from won, and is proving bloody.
Many businessmen are complaining that this recession is even worse than that of the early 1980s (especially in engineering — see next page).
The figures say the recession is bad, if not quite that bad.
Output has fallen more slowly this time, and unemployment has risen less fast.
Admittedly, the claim that things are better than in 1980–81 leaves a lot to be desired as a pre-election boast.
Even so, the autumn might be a plausible time for the election.
The decline in output seems to be coming to an end, so the economy is at or near the trough.
Unemployment will still be rising this October (and for months after that)— but output should be expanding.
Headline inflation, further distorted by changes in interest rates, could be as low as 4%.
Underlying inflation will be falling by then, too.
The economy will look a lot fitter, but it will not emerge from the downturn without injury.
Recessions cause firms to scrap equipment; they also discourage new investment, all the more so if interest rates are high.
As a result, the economy's stock of capital grows more slowly, or even shrinks.
This, in turn, reduces the ability of companies to supply any later upturn in demand, so inflationary bottlenecks are encountered at lower levels of economic activity.
Measuring physical capital makes measuring inflation seem child's play.
Official figures for manufacturing show a capital stock that increased gently but persistently throughout the 1970s and 1980s.
However, these figures do not capture the effect of scrapping.
Estimates by Bill Martin of UBS Phillips and Drew take scrapping into account and show, plausibly, that the stock of capital fell sharply in the early 1980s.
Mr Martin predicts that plant capacity will shrink by 3% this year (compared with a fall of 8% in 1980).
This will worsen the outlook for employment, and force the government to keep monetary policy tight for fear of a renewed upsurge in inflation.
The Treasury has few options.
If sterling were not in Europe's exchange-rate mechanism (ERM), the chancellor, Norman Lamont, might be tempted to cut interest rates, let the pound slide and worry about the inflationary consequences later.
In fact the ERM does not preclude a small cut in interest rates soon, because sterling has lately been strong.
If the calls of the CBI and others for such a cut had not been so loud, the pound would probably have been stronger still, making it possible to cut rates even sooner, and by more.
All this leaves Mr Major, like so many of his predecessors, earnestly trying to talk down wages.
Hopes that the ERM would make such exhortation unnecessary have so far been dashed.
Pay settlements are still running at more than 9%.
Smaller wage rises would make it possible to have lower inflation at a higher level of output — a combination that clever manipulations of macroeconomic policy (interest rates, exchange rates and budget deficits) have always failed to achieve.
So Mr Major is urging industry to drop the practice of the automatic annual pay-rise.
Fat chance.
Ask the governor of the Bank of England, another great believer in wage-cost discipline and exhortation.
The Bank's annual report, published this week, shows that his annual ‘emoluments’ went up 17% last year.
Sloppy rules and soppy songs
ON MAY 22nd the Radio Authority accepted bids for Britain's first national commercial-radio franchise.
Because the new station will not be allowed to broadcast what it wants, only three small companies were interested in the offer.
The winner will be announced in two months' time.
In theory, there should be lots of pent-up demand for commercial radio in Britain.
Since the BBC's four stations carry no advertisements, radio takes only 2% of Britain's total advertising spend.
In America, which has many more stations, radio takes 7%.
Spotting that gap, the government decided to auction licences for three new national commercial-radio stations.
It was the music station, dubbed INR1, that was auctioned on May 22nd.
All good free-market stuff.
Except that, under the Broadcasting Act, passed last November, not more than a quarter of the music INR1 broadcasts can be ‘pop’.
As defined by the House of Lords (rockers all), that meant music with a ‘strong rhythmic element and a reliance on electronic amplification’— ie, almost anything using a microphone.
Last month the Radio Authority, headed by 71-year-old Lord Chalfont, tightened up the definition to cover all singles that hit the charts after 1960.
So Elvis Presley's ‘Love Me Tender’, which came out in 1956, will not count towards the pop quota, but Luciano Pavarotti's ‘Nessun Dorma’, theme tune to the 1990 World Cup, will.
Potential bidders were disappointed.
The new formula rules out the sort of easy-listening rock channel, aimed at 25-35-year-olds, that advertisers would prefer.
‘Since INR1 has been made off-limits to baby-boomers it has become a lot less attractive,’ says Tim Schoonmaker, head of radio at EMAP, a magazine publisher once expected to bid.
Other big potential buyers, like the Daily Telegraph and Carlton Communications, a video-duplication firm, agreed, and decided not to bid either.
So whichever of the three small bidding groups emerges with the franchise will get it relatively cheap.
Short-changed on the sale, the taxpayer is going to get some bland programming too.
Showtime Radio, a group of private investors led by Sir Peter Parker, ex-chairman of British Rail, wants to broadcast musicals and TV theme-tunes.
Classic FM, a consortium led by GWR Group, a local radio-station owner, plans to offer ‘classical music in a pop format, ie, no more than 45 minutes at a time’.
Radio Clyde, the third bidder, would run INR1 on the same lines as Melody Radio, a London station that it operates for Hanson — ie, lots of the Carpenters and Frank Sinatra.
Their lordships will love it.
BRITAIN THIS WEEK
Embattled
The political parties warmed up for a general election by bickering over whether the new health trusts remain part of the national health service.
William Waldegrave, the health secretary, rejected nurses' demands that he delay the government's NHS reforms because patients (they said) are suffering.
An outcry over the savaging of a six-year-old girl pushed the government into announcing emergency legislation banning fighting dogs.
About 10,000 American pit-bull terriers could be destroyed.
Breeds like the pit bull and the Japanese tosa ‘have no place in our homes’, said Kenneth Baker, the home secretary.
John Major told the Confederation of British Industry that interest rates will soon fall because the government is winning the battle against inflation.
Next day the CBI's director-general, John Banham, suggested the next cut could not come soon enough.
Out of 100 Conservative ministers and backbenchers interviewed by the Independent, 77 thought the party had been right to get rid of Margaret Thatcher.
Even so, a Commons motion attacking a single European currency and independent central bank (both Thatcherite bogies) attracted the signatures of more than 100 Tory MPs.
Names and addresses
Two white papers on further and higher education included a proposal to abolish the distinction between universities and polytechnics.
Other recommendations: more status for vocational qualifications, and training credits for every 16-year-old school-leaver.
Neil Kinnock launched another Labour manifesto, this time setting out the party's plans for London, centring on a new elected authority.
The Greater London Authority would have strategic powers over transport, big building developments, and the police and fire services.
Best of all, it would (allegedly) pay for itself.
House prices will rise by only 2% over the rest of the year, thanks to rising unemployment and the large number of house repossessions, said UBS Phillips & Drew, a firm of stockbrokers.
A 10% price increase was predicted for 1992.
The right address could bring in the buyers.
According to a survey of property valuers, 25% of those searching for a new home would prefer to live in an Avenue, while 20% would like a Lane.
Nobody likes gritty urban-sounding titles like Terrace and Street.
The prime minister re-defined the responsibilities of the Tory chief whip.
Richard Ryder is now a ‘trouble-shooter’, licensed to chide those who cause party splits in the run-up to the general election.
Law and order
The police risk losing control of the streets to lager louts, vandals and drug dealers, the Police Federation conference was warned.
Ian Westwood, head of the federation's Manchester branch, blamed the demise of the traditional bobby on the beat.
His successors now carry body armour in their patrol cars.
The Bar Council, the governing body of barristers, approved plans to ensure that at least 5% of its members and pupils will come from ethnic minorities.
It also asked large company clients to make sure that black and Asian lawyers get at least 5% of their work.
Scrap the monarchy, abolish the House of Lords and get a written constitution — a few of the proposals in the Commonwealth of Britain Bill presented to the Commons by Tony Benn, a Labour MP.
No harm in trying, anyway.
The Law Society recommended the appointment of a minister of justice to end the ‘shambles’ caused by half a dozen Whitehall departments having responsibility for administering the judicial system.
Counting the cost
Liquidations have reached their highest level for over 20 years, according to a survey by Peat Marwick McLintock, a firm of accountants.
Company failures in the first quarter of 1991 were up 77% on the same period last year.
A City businessman who swindled investors out of millions of pounds to finance his search for a perfect gambling system was jailed for four years.
Nicholas Young laid over £10m-worth of bets in five years — at least a third of it with other people's money.
Ten students at Kent University admitted taking part in a £400,000 telephone fraud.
They were caught using an electronic tone pad to bypass call charges at kiosks on their campus.
The tendency for too many people to take automatic pay increases came under fresh fire.
The prime minister called for more restraint, in the wake of an article in the Bank of England's Quarterly Bulletin noting the continued problem.
Then the Bank revealed that its governor had been given a 17% salary rise last year.
BUSINESS
Productivity pick-up
AMERICA'S recession may have a silver lining.
A productivity shake-up appears to be taking place that could boost the economy in the 1990s.
This would be good news: America had the worst productivity record of the seven big industrial economies in the 1980s, with average growth of only 1% a year — less than half that in Europe or Japan.
On the face of it, the 1990s look no better.
Non-farm productivity rose by an annual rate of 1% in the first quarter of this year, barely offsetting a fall in the fourth quarter of 1990.
But look again.
Productivity usually collapses in the early stages of a recession because firms are slow to lay workers off.
The 0.1% productivity rise in the first six months of this recession compares with an average fall of 1.2% (at an annual rate) in the same period of the past four recessions.
Stephen Roach, an economist at Morgan Stanley, an investment bank, sees these productivity gains as evidence of the impact on American companies of stronger global competition.
In this recession firms have been much quicker to trim their fat.
Indeed, instead of waiting for demand to slump, manufacturing firms cut jobs by 2% in the year before the recession took hold, lifting productivity by 4% in the year to the third quarter of 1990 — four times the typical gain in efficiency at that stage of the cycle.
Better still, by delving deeper into the figures Mr Roach finds that the biggest gains are in America's inefficient service industries.
In the past two quarters manufacturing output per man-hour fell by an annual rate of 1.1%, roughly the same as in previous recessions, but non-manufacturing productivity — a good proxy for services — rose by an annualised 1.2% compared with a typical decline of 1.5% in past recessions.
Analysing productivity figures may sound duller than predicting the depth of the recession.
But here lies the key to America's competitiveness well beyond the recovery.
Is Tinseltown about to meet its Terminator?
LOS ANGELES
By any standards, being a big Hollywood studio ought to be a remarkably good business.
But it remains an industry to work in, rather than invest in
THIS Memorial Day holiday weekend marks the start of America's summer movie season.
By Labor Day, on September 2nd, Americans should have shelled out $2 billion on cinema tickets — close to half the annual box-office take.
The names in lights will include Arnold Schwarzenegger in Carolco's ‘Terminator 2’, which may have cost $90m by the time it hits the screen; Kevin Costner as Robin Hood; and Julia Roberts in ‘Dying Young’, a Fox weepie.
The rumour mill, however, is full of likely failures.
If Hollywood gossips are correct, then ‘Hudson Hawk’, a $40m romp starring Bruce Willis and released by Tri-Star, may be one of the early victims.
This time last year the studios proudly produced an expensive list of star-packed sequels only to see their audience disappear to cheap films like Paramount's ‘Ghost’ and Disney's ‘Pretty Woman’.
All this marked the start of a dreadful year for Hollywood.
After a boardroom tussle at Paramount, its studio chief, Frank Mancuso, quit.
Columbia, now owned by Japan's Sony, has become as well known for the high spending of its management team, Peter Guber and Jon Peters, as its films; Mr Peters has now taken a back seat.
Two mini studios, MGM-Pathe (see also page 111) and Orion, have lurched from one corporate drama to the next.
Even Disney, the most successful studio of the late 1980s, has had a tough time launching Hollywood Pictures, the baby sister of its Touchstone studio.
Last year, thanks to costly stars, the average film cost $26.8m to make and a further $11.6m to launch — plus, say, another $10m for overseas marketing.
Only 30 out of the 410 films launched last year raised more than $20m at the American box office (half of which goes to the cinema owner anyway).
Even ‘Batman’, supposedly one of the most successful films of all time, has not officially made a net profit — partly because it paid around $50m to Jack Nicholson.
Piles of pessimistic reports from stockbrokers suggest that Hollywood is set for a crash.
Yet Tinseltown remains the undisputed home of an industry whose revenues are growing (in real terms) at around 7% a year.
In 1990, says Jeffrey Logsdon, an analyst at Seidler Amdec in Los Angeles, American box-office receipts accounted for only $2.5 billion of the industry's $7.8 billion in domestic income; overseas markets added a further $6 billion.
New technology, like video discs, or new politics, such as the opening up of Eastern Europe, have delivered new audiences.
If Hollywood is about to crumple, then it is its own fault.
Tinseltown is a three-tier society.
On the top level are six big studios: Warner, Disney, Columbia/Tri-Star, Paramount, Fox (which is part of News Corporation) and Universal (Matsushita).
They own their studios, distribution systems and libraries, and have sister television companies.
Mr Logsdon reckons Warner and Disney's filmed-entertainment operations will probably produce $440m in operating cash flow this year (before paying interest).
Fox, helped by the success of ‘Sleeping with the Enemy’ and ‘Home Alone’, looks set for a record year.
Universal and Paramount may do less well than last year.
Only Columbia, which has launched a costly film schedule, looks likely to call on its parent for cash.
The second group of ‘minor majors’ includes MGM and Orion, which do not own studio lots and which have much smaller distribution systems and libraries than the majors; Carolco, which does not distribute its films; and New Line, which makes smaller movies.
The third group is a mixed bag of smaller companies, including some distributors, such as Miramax, and some talent-based producers, such as Imagine (which is based around one director, Ron Howard).
Most published figures about film profits are meaningless.
Films usually prepare four sets of accounts.
The most truthful one is a simple cash-in/cash-out ledger the studios keep for themselves.
Accounts are also kept for shareholders, but American accounting laws allow studios to guess how well a film will do in each of its markets (an invitation either to claim profits early or to put off losses); for the tax man (ditto); and for various stars who have been promised shares of a film's net profit — a figure which a studio wants to keep as low as possible.
Take, as a hypothetical example, the fairly successful film shown in the table on the next page.
Despite grossing $100m at the box office, the film, which cost $30m to make, has lost $10m.
Yet the studio has charged itself a ‘distribution fee’ of $20m.
That is on top of the main costs of releasing a movie: advertising and printing the film.
Most of the distribution fee, which can be around 30% of the film's rental income, goes to the studio.
Thus it is a fair guess that if Carolco's ‘Terminator 2’ brings in over $120m at the American box office, its distributor, Tri-Star, will make $20m.
Such distribution profits are one of the three historic advantages that the big studios have inherited.
The second is their enormous libraries of films, which usually produce enough money to cover their overheads.
If a big studio has a bad patch, as Fox did until a year ago, then the library can carry the studio.
By the same token, the easiest way for a big studio to commit suicide is to sell its library — as MGM has.
The last cushion the big studios can rely on is sheer size.
Even with the advantages of other income sources, studios depend on a few hits to pay for a large number of duds.
A decent portfolio of 15 films costs over $400m a year to produce.
The films may not be released until the following year and probably will not break even (including interest costs) until three years after that.
‘It would take at least $1 billion to start a studio from scratch’, reckons one mogul who adds that ‘even then it would need a lot of luck.’
Conversely, the same rules stack the odds against small production firms.
They either have to take too much of the risk themselves, or give away too much of their potential reward.
After a few hits most brag that they can compete (Britain's Goldcrest is a famous example) and then find that one big failure (‘Revolution’) destroys them.
New Line, the most interesting independent, is taking a different tack.
According to its chairman, Robert Shaye, it ‘mimics the financial structure of big studios without competing with them.’
It will release a dozen or so films this year with an average cost of $5m, all aimed at audiences too small for the big studios to chase.
New Line has ploughed its profits from ‘Nightmare on Elm Street’ and ‘Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles’into buying other firms' film libraries and setting up a distribution system.
Income from the library almost covers New Line's overheads of $14m a year.
Your bill, Mr Morita
By and large, most businesses would give their hind legs to be in an industry which was growing at 7% a year and where there were huge barriers to entry.
But the big studios' weakness is the cost of talent.
Shortly after each new market is discovered, actors demand more money.
Last year costs climbed faster than revenues; this year they may well do so again.
Despite appeals from studio bosses at Disney, Warner and Columbia for restraint, this summer's line-up shows scant sign of cost-control.
‘Terminator 2’ is the most expensive film yet made — and has prompted worries about the health of Carolco, even though pre-sales to distributors seemed to have covered all the film's costs.
Studio bosses insist that next year's pictures — currently being negotiated — will be cheaper.
There will be fewer big action pictures and more romantic comedies.
Less cash will pour into marketing.
And, although stars will still receive hefty cheques, the supporting cast will be less expensive.
‘If Warner made ‘Bonfire of the Vanities' today it would have just one big star not three’, argues one insider.
Michelle Pfeiffer was expected to be cast alongside Michael Douglas in Carolco's forthcoming ‘Basic Instinct’; in the end a less-costly actress, Sharon Stone, was chosen.
Whether such modest dieting is enough remains to be seen.
Hollywood has plenty more fat to lose.
But, it also has a well-proven knack of persuading outsiders to foot the bill for its excesses.
Carolco recently raised close to $100m from several European investors, including Giovanni Agnelli of Fiat.
Columbia's recent spending spree has partly been paid for by Sony.
And Disney's current production run is being financed partly by $200m given by a group of Japanese investors on terms that make other studios green with envy.
Compaq
A star is fallen
ALAS, poor Compaq.
Once everybody's favourite fledgling PC maker, the firm — now fully grown with annual sales of $3.6 billion — is starting to suffer the same ills that it used to lampoon in its big bad competitors.
Having posted shining results for years, Compaq recently warned that its second-quarter sales will be 15% down on 1990's figure, and that profits will tumble by close to 80%.
Some shareholders are suing the firm for not warning of poor results earlier.
Rod Canion, Compaq's chief executive, sold most of his own shares in the company, about $10m-worth, back in February.
What went wrong?
Founded in 1982, Compaq built its reputation by beating IBM at its own game.
Compaq's PCs were more powerful (and portable) than IBM's, but ran all the same software, at the same price.
Backed up with lots of advertising aimed at upmarket buyers, the formula worked like magic.
Net profits climbed from $3m in 1983, when the firm was floated on the stockmarket, to $455m in 1990.
As the company grew, smaller clone-makers, also building to IBM's software standard, started trying the same tactics on Compaq itself.
In 1986, when Compaq launched the first PC using Intel's powerful new 80386 chip, it was months ahead of its competitors.
But last October, when the firm launched a notebook-sized computer using Intel's even more advanced 80386SX, several other manufacturers had already announced similar machines.
Today, the computer industry's most exciting products are workstations — powerful, big-screened computers used by scientists and stock traders — and ever-smaller portable computers.
Ordinary PCs, Compaq's bread-and-butter, have become fairly standardised.
‘If you're looking for something really new, like pen-based computers or multi-media, Compaq doesn't stand for that,’ says Stewart Alsop, editor of PC Letter, a trade journal.
As Compaq's products become more like other firms', they are starting to look overpriced.
Last year Dell Computer, a Texan maker of IBM clones, launched a withering series of advertisements comparing its machines with Compaq's dearer models.
In one, Dell's laptop computer, priced at $3,899, is dubbed ‘the lap of luxury’; Compaq's equivalent, at $6,799, the ‘lap of lunacy’.
Compaq is seeking an injunction to force Dell to tone down the ads.
In April, partly in response to Dell's campaign, Compaq cut its prices by up to a third.
More cuts may follow.
This year the American PC market is forecast to grow by less than 10%, a far cry from the 20% annual growth that computer makers are used to.
To keep market share, IBM has just cut prices on its PCs for the third time this year.
California's Apple Computer did the same thing in a bigger way last October, when it halved the price-tag on its popular Macintosh model.
Although volume sales of the Mac almost doubled as a result, Apple's margins slumped.
On May 20th the firm said it was cutting its workforce by a tenth.
Battered by PC price wars, Compaq would like to escape into other, faster-growing markets.
In 1989 it launched the moderately successful SystemPro server, a machine used to move information about between PCs.
Next year the firm may come out with a workstation.
But Compaq's unusual distribution system is making the transition from PCs to bigger machines hard.
‘When you enter this kind of environment, after-sales service and training are just as important as the product itself,’ says Gian Carlo Bisone, head of Compaq's European marketing.
But unlike many computer-makers, Compaq makes all its sales through dealers, rather than by using its own sales force.
That is a good cheap way to sell PCs, but many dealers cannot cope with bigger, more complex machines.
Inside ICI
Knife-sharpening
AS BOSS of ICI, the besieged British chemicals giant, Sir Denys Henderson has a lot to be worried about.
The news that Hanson may be preparing to bid for ICI has been met by a united front on the ICI board.
But this follows a year of debate about strategy during which some senior ICI board members appeared unhappy about the way Sir Denys has been running the firm.
On all boards, disagreements are the stuff of which decisions are made.
Yet the past year's debate at ICI contains clues about how the firm might now run and reshape itself — even if Hanson leaves it alone.
Sir Denys, a 58-year-old Scot and a lawyer by training, took over from Sir John Harvey-Jones in 1987 (who is now chairman of The Economist but was not consulted for this article).
His succession was unchallenged.
ICI's chairmen have traditionally been picked from its cadre of executive directors (now nine).
The two other potential candidates, Ronnie Hampel and Tom Hutchison, who joined the board in 1985, were deemed to have had too little boardroom experience.
While Sir John tended to favour a consensus style of management, Sir Denys has been more authoritarian, taking more direct responsibility for decisions.
None of ICI's board members, however, has been ungentlemanly enough to express differences in public.
Nor has there been any direct challenge to the chairman.
In February it was unanimously agreed that Sir Denys should continue as boss until he reached the retirement age of 62, making him the longest-serving chairman since Sir Paul Chambers, who ran — and dominated — the company from 1960 to 1968.
Since early last year, when it became clear that sales and profits were falling, the board has been pondering how ICI should be rationalised.
In 1990 the company saw its pre-tax profits drop by 36% to £977m ($1.7 billion) on sales of £12.9 billion.
Three months ago the firm announced a £300m reorganisation, sorting the group into seven different areas.
Every business, it was pledged, would be scrutinised; unpromising ones would go.
But there was no haste about it: apart from that reorganisation and one major disposal, the fertiliser business, little has yet been done.
During the past year there have been some differences between Sir Denys and other members of the board.
Although all ICI's board members have endorsed the reorganisation (which they all claim to be a radical one), it seems that both Mr Hampel and Mr Hutchison initially favoured a different course for ICI.
Though both may now be too old to aspire to run the company (they are 59 and 60, respectively), they clearly remain ambitious.
Mr Hampel, who is on the firm's takeover-defence team, hides a strong will beneath an affable exterior.
He is seen as the visionary on the board, and has worked in a number of the company's divisions.
Mr Hutchison is more direct and earnest, and has spent nearly all his career in ICI's bulk-chemicals business.
He was responsible, under Sir John, for cuts and closures in the group's petrochemical and plastics divisions during the early 1980s.
David Barnes, who joined the board in 1986 and is the only obvious successor to Sir Denys, has also argued for a different approach.
With a background in ICI's pharmaceutical and paints operations, he told The Economist a year ago that a case could be made for hanging onto the jewels and getting rid of the tarnished tinsel.
As yet, there is little sign of this happening.
All three directors would probably have liked ICI to narrow its broad span of interests to just two: a bulk commodities business and a value-added specialties business.
If that were to happen, the large volume-plastics business, including polypropylene and EVC, the firm's PVC joint venture with Italy's EniChem, would have to go.
So would ICI's caustic-soda and chlorine business, which supplies raw materials to EVC — a throwback to ICI's vertically integrated days.
All in all, around £3.5 billion of the company's annual turnover might be chopped out.
In avoiding such disposals, Sir Denys undoubtedly has the support of the managers who head ICI's industrial business units.
The industrial-chemicals division gives a host of reasons why it should stay with ICI: synergies with other parts of the group; benefits from research (after the second world war the by-products from the dyestuffs industry became, by chance, raw materials for the pharmaceuticals business); the strength of the ICI name; and so on.
But nowadays only a small fraction of raw materials is supplied internally, and drug innovation is far less a matter of luck.
Ironically, the specialties business, which ICI unanimously wants to retain, sees its connection with ICI more as a hindrance than a help.
It guards its independence and tries to avoid wasting time with ICI's corporate matters.
So far ICI has not revealed what its defence against takeover would be.
One theory has the company entering into a series of joint ventures; an unlikely suggestion has ICI's pharmaceuticals business merging with Wellcome, a British drugs firm.
But what would happen if Hanson pulls out?
One prospect being touted is that institutional investors, who at the end of 1990 held 73% of ICI's shares, will insist on splitting the job of the group's chairman and chief executive in two.
That approach has recently been recommended for all listed companies by Britain's Institutional Shareholders Committee.
Sir Denys would then take the role of chairman, while Mr Hampel would become chief executive — and push through a radical restructuring plan?
Japanese car parts
My home, my car
OSAKA
LET'S Enjoy Your Car Life’ is the slogan written in big English letters to lure customers into Autobacs Seven's 300 or so service stations.
Osaka-based Autobacs, Japan's equivalent of Britain's Kwik-Fit, is a specialist retailer with an estimated 30% share of the car-accessory market.
It is a Kwik-Fit with a difference.
About two years ago Autobacs cleaned up its oily-rag image.
Car owners needing their wheel or battery changed are now greeted by men clad in bright orange uniforms and natty caps.
At each outlet there is swanky retail space, used to sell every imaginable kind of car accessory, from compact-disc players and car televisions to designer car seats, sporty steering wheels and even perfume to make leather seats smell sweeter.
This makes sense in Japan where (because of stellar house prices) most young single professionals still live at home with their parents and have cash to spend, and where people do not make a habit of throwing bricks through car windows and stealing things.
Consequently, for lack of a better alternative, the car has become the favoured means of personal expression, or as an Autobacs Seven director, Kenzo Kido, puts it, ‘the equivalent of life space.
The car is most young people's house.’
The abundance of mobile living rooms is clear from the firm's own client base.
Mr Kido says that almost 70% of the company's customers in the Tokyo area are under the age of 29.
This specialist market is set to boom in Japan, even though the market for new cars is mature.
There may be 32m cars on the road in a country of 123m people — but, as yet, only 6% of them are fitted with compact-disc players.
Autobacs, which made a pre-tax profit of ¥7.3 billion ($51.7m) on sales of ¥110.4 billion in the year ended March 31st, has the means to finance further expansion.
Shareholders' equity of ¥44.6 billion represents nearly 60% of total assets.
Margins are high, because 30% of sales are the company's own brands.
Autobacs' batteries are half the price of those sold in an ordinary garage.
So confident is Autobacs that since April last year new franchisees have had to pay the firm a commission of 2% of sales.
The next biggest competitor, Royal, charges no commission.
About 260 of Autobacs' outlets are franchised and about 25% of the goods sold at these stores are own brands.
This is a sign of strength, since franchisees are under no obligation to sell the firm's brands.
The company plans to have 500 branches in Japan by 1994, and hopes to repeat its success internationally.
In the past year it has set up outlets in Singapore and Taiwan.
With the company's founder, Toshio Sumino, still acting as chairman and president, and owning 16% of the firm, Autobacs is the sort of entrepreneurial company investors like.
This is why its share price has nearly quadrupled since it went public in March 1989.
But with a price-earnings ratio of 62 using next year's official earnings forecast, the company's shares are hardly cheap.
Manufacturing
Less is more
SUCCESSFUL firms are easy to spot but hard to explain.
Management gurus have done their best, picking over the bones of ‘world-class’ firms in the hope of coming up with the Magic Formula.
The result: a fad for every season.
McKinsey, a consultancy, has taken a different approach.
It studied a big selection of firms from a single industry — machine-tool making in western Germany — in an attempt to discover what makes the sheep sheep, and goats goats.
In all, the consultants pored over 39 firms, which had an average of 4,200 employees and annual sales of DM900m ($520m).
The companies were ranked on various measures of corporate success (ranging from returns on sales and equity to rates of growth of sales and profits), and were then split into three groups: top performers, average firms and laggards.
Overall, the annual sales of the top performers grew at 4.5 times the rate of the underperformers; their returns on those sales were 2.5 times higher.
At the heart of this success was simplicity.
The best-performing firms made a narrow range of products — one for every DM100m-worth of sales, compared with four per DM100m in the less successful companies.
The best firms' products also used up to 50% fewer parts than those made by their less-successful rivals, so they were faster, simpler and cheaper to manufacture.
That, in turn, meant that quality came built-in: though they had fewer workers looking after quality control, the best companies had fewer defects and less waste.
Oddly, the most successful firms spent proportionately less on product development.
That, says McKinsey, is because they spend money where it is needed rather than on grand castles in the air.
The best firms favoured continuous, incremental product improvement, with new developments passed rapidly on to customers.
Product development was seen as a ‘joint venture’ with both customers and suppliers.
(The most successful companies had, on average, far fewer of each, but nurtured closer and longer-term relationships with them.)
New products developed by the best-performing machine-tool makers tended to start their lives with ‘fuzzy’ specifications, allowing for significant design changes before they reached the customer.
Compared with their less-successful rivals, the best-performing firms had fewer managers, shorter lines of communication and a higher proportion of skilled workers; they also spent six times more per employee on education and training.
Unsurprising, then, that their labour productivity was far higher than their less-successful rivals.
The productivity of their capital equipment, however, was lower: the top firms spent money on technology (like flexible-manufacturing systems) designed to get the most out of employees, rather than trying to replace men with machines.
One of the biggest differences between the best and worst firms in the industry was in their attitude to the future.
The least-successful machine-tool manufacturers were preoccupied with quality assurance and service — in effect, with making amends for shortfalls in their products.
The most successful firms were far more worried about the calibre of their product designs and materials — with, as McKinsey puts it, ‘designing instead of repairing’.
The moral: success is never having to say you're sorry.
How Hanson holds the reins
Hanson, say its detractors, is no more than an artful asset-stripper.
Its admirers say it is the consummate manager.
ICI would like to know which is right
CORPORATE governance’ may be an ugly phrase, but it is a hot topic.
Managers, the argument runs, should put shareholders first; and shareholders should be more involved with managers.
The corporate-governance lobby reckons that the best way to bring this about is to boost the powers of non-executive directors.
But mention Hanson to those same lobbyists, and they will mutter about ‘corporate vandals’ and ‘asset-strippers’.
This is odd, for Hanson in many ways behaves as the model non-executive director.
The corporate-governance issue emerged strongly in the 1980s as investors found that bosses talked of putting shareholders first while pursuing their own dreams at shareholders' expense.
But shareholders were not free of blame.
Often they lacked day-to-day knowledge of the firms they had invested in, and had a tendency to sell their shares the instant a firm hit trouble.
Hanson's style tackles these problems, according to a study* by London Business School.
There are two quite different sorts of manager in Hanson, argues the study, written soon after the firm bought the Imperial Group in 1986.
The bosses of each of the individual businesses within Hanson behave like any executive manager, running the firm's day-to-day business, planning, budgeting and so on.
Hanson's head-office managers, however, have no day-to-day managerial role: instead, they fix the business managers' sights on shareholder returns, and reward or penalise them as their performance varies.
In other words, they do what an effective non-executive director would do.
It is the tension between these two roles that gives Hanson its strength.
The problem of business managers pursuing their own ends while shareholders foot the bill is tackled head-on.
Managers must dream — that is how they get good ideas — but their dreams must be profitable.
Each year business managers draw up a budget and suggest a series of financial targets.
These are then agreed with head-office managers.
Results this year are expected to be better than last.
In most firms, financial planning is seen as a nasty chore, and nobody really believes that the numbers agreed will actually be achieved.
In Hanson, the budget, once agreed, is a contract between business managers and headquarters.
Each month's results are picked over in the business's board meeting, with a head-office manager present in a non-executive role.
Any shortfall must be explained.
If headquarters is uneasy with the excuses given, it sends a ‘flying squad’ of accountants to check it out.
Headquarters motivates managers to meet targets in time-honoured style: carrot and stick.
There is a generous stock-option scheme, and performance-related pay that can, in some cases, double basic salaries.
Failure, on the other hand, leads to fairly swift dismissal.
In most firms, top management incentives are thinly disguised executive perks: not in Hanson.
It works
This management style appears to have paid off in the long and short terms.
Ever Ready, a battery maker, was losing market share to Duracell and made pre-tax profits of only £4.2m when Hanson bought it in 1981.
Hanson promptly sold its R&D activities to Duracell.
By 1990 the firm's profits had reached £47m, thanks partly to the launch of a long-life battery to rival Duracell's.
Imperial's profits from cigarettes surged to £225m last year, while its market share remained buoyant.
SCM Chemicals, another Hanson buy and one of the world's top titanium-dioxide suppliers, moved into ‘green’ products faster than its rival ICI — itself now in Hanson's sights.
All this works only if Hanson's headquarters performs well in its non-executive role.
Lord Hanson makes a virtue of this.
‘We aim’, he says in the LBS study, ‘to invest in good basic businesses, producing essential products for which there is a clear continuing demand.
We avoid areas of very high technology…[and]businesses which are highly capital intensive and where decision-making has to be centralised.’
Most bosses think they can run virtually anything; Hanson is far more modest.
Hanson buys firms either because it believes them to be under-managed, or because it believes the firms' existing managers have over-extended themselves.
Hanson's most striking acquisitions — like those of Imperial and Ever Ready — displayed both failings.
This simple notion can make huge profits.
After buying Imperial for £2.5 billion, Hanson promptly sold off the group's Courage and Golden Wonder businesses, as well as various smaller bits.
That raised £2.3 billion — so businesses worth £1.4 billion cost Hanson almost nothing.
How Hanson's profits are split between its deal-making and its stable of businesses is hotly debated.
County NatWest calculates that in the first half of the year to September 1991, Hanson made £150m interest on its cash pile and £60m-70m from selling a subsidiary — in all, 37% of its total pre-tax profits of £588m.
The Hanson style can, of course, go wrong if headquarters misjudges a business and pushes its bosses to pursue targets that are too demanding.
Little in Hanson's track record suggests this has yet happened; but the best defence strategy against Hanson is for its target to demonstrate that its business is volatile, capital-hungry and high-tech.
Hanson is likely to add value to any business in which there is a mix of activities that Hanson can run, and those it cannot.
As all Hanson businesses are for sale at all times, why should headquarters asset-strip a good long-term business for short-term gain?
As Anthony Alexander, the group's chief operating officer in Britain, put it, ‘If we think we can get more for them than they are worth to us, we will sell.’
The only real worry is that, to finance a strategy driven by buying other firms, Hanson keeps a large cash balance — £7 billion at the last count.
The longer this lies unused, the more reason shareholders have to ask whether they might prefer to invest their money themselves.
So, the argument runs, Hanson is under pressure to make a big acquisition, soon.
Lord Hanson will not want to ruin a fine track record by acting in haste.
More likely, he will sit on the cash until a good chance turns up.
But, as a good non-executive director will know, sometimes the best thing to do with shareholders' money is give it back.
Team spirit
NEW YORK
BUSINESSES usually celebrate booming demand.
Why then are the firms selling clothes and other goods imprinted with the logos of American sports teams so po-faced about their fat export order-books?
Overseas business could hardly be better.
Sales of products licensed by Major League baseball clubs, for instance, look set to increase 30-fold in Europe this year, to $60m.
The puzzle is solved by Bob Fellice, international sales manager at Starter Sportswear of New Haven, Connecticut.
Like other firms licensed to market these products by American colleges and professional ball-clubs, Starter Sportswear worries that, after rising like a rocket, exports could drop like the stick.
American sports, Mr Fellice notes, are becoming far more popular overseas.
Television coverage has won American football a big following in Britain.
Basketball stars from the United States have helped promote the sport in Italy and Spain.
But most overseas buyers of the clothes are not sports fans — they are slaves to the fashion for Americana.
Such fads have a nasty way of evaporating.
The 26 Major League baseball clubs share these worries.
Americans wear T-shirts emblazoned with the names of teams that are successful.
When a baseball team does badly, so do domestic sales of its products.
But most foreigners could not care less about a team's performance.
They buy the clothes for their designs and fetching colours.
Australians are put off by the gold-and-green of the Oakland A's baseball team.
These are Australia's national colours and so lack the prized all-American look.
Nothing, however, could be more American than the name and image of the New York Yankees.
The team's products easily outsell those of other American baseball clubs overseas, even though the Yankees have had a mediocre record on the field in recent years.
Japanese buyers are the exception.
They are keenest on clothes imprinted with the logos of sports teams of American colleges which have a high academic reputation.
Places like Harvard, Yale and Princeton — where brains, in theory at least, beat brawn.
Hot air over Germany
OBSTRUCTION and protectionism do not stalk only big companies.
Small firms can be more vulnerable because trade wars can turn into costly and time-consuming dog-fights — as Don Cameron, a British manufacturer of hot-air balloons, has found.
Mr Cameron's company, Cameron Balloons, is a world leader in its field.
It makes standard pear-shaped hot-air balloons for enthusiasts, and specially shaped ones for advertising or big egos — like the hot-air balloon it made for the late Malcolm Forbes in the shape of the American publisher's French chateau.
Cameron Balloons exports three-quarters of its balloons.
Until recently Germany accounted for a fifth of its total sales.
Along with the nylon balloon itself, the company also supplies components such as willow-and-cane baskets, burners to heat up the air inside the balloon, gas cylinders and control valves.
But in the past year German authorities withdrew approval for certain components which Cameron and some other hot-air balloon manufacturers have been using worldwide for the past 20 years.
Mr Cameron claims there is no reason for this other than to favour Germany's balloon makers.
Take Cameron's stainless-steel gas cylinders.
It took a five-year tussle with the Luftfahrt Bundesamt, the German body which sets aeronautical regulations, before the cylinders were approved for use in hot-air balloons.
Yet they are still grounded.
The reason is that a different body, the Technischer Überwachungs Verein (tüv), has to approve gas cylinders that are transported by road.
And hot-air balloon cylinders do travel by road — between flights.
The tüv, though, will not give approval.
When the tüv did not reply to his letters, Mr Cameron visited it in Essen.
But he claims his request for details of the regulations was refused on the ground that they are ‘very severe’ and that Cameron Balloons would find it impossible to meet them.
Meanwhile, says Mr Cameron, almost identical stainless-steel cylinders produced by a German competitor and developed under a government subsidy have been approved by the tüv.
Mr Cameron has now complained to the EC — which is meant to have created an EC-wide 1992 regime for pressure vessels.
An official at the tüv said an offer had now been made to help the British company meet its rules — the ones Cameron thinks it already meets.
Grumman
Shooting star
BETHPAGE, LONG ISLAND
GENERAL Norman Schwarzkopf's praise for the JSTARS battle-management aircraft in the Gulf war has managers at Grumman glowing.
The electronic wizardry of Grumman's JSTARS helped turn the land battle for Kuwait into a ‘turkey shoot’.
The company could use a little good news.
Along with Northrop and McDonnell Douglas, Grumman is among the most financially-stretched of America's big defence contractors.
And it has suffered an extraordinary series of mishaps over the past decade.
The well-publicised success of JSTARS may help the company to survive, but its future is still far from rosy.
Grumman veterans bear the scars from the company's many setbacks, especially the export triumph Grumman scored when it sold lots of F-14 Tomcats to Iran under the shah.
That became a public-relations disaster when anti-American mullahs grabbed power there.
As Robert Myers, Grumman's laconic president, says now: ‘I guess that sale wasn't too good a move from the State Department's standpoint.’
The attempt Grumman made in the 1970s to reduce its dependence on Pentagon and NASA contracts produced an excellent delivery truck for the post office.
Hardly anybody has noticed.
Instead, attention has centred on the poor performance of the 851  Flexible buses that Grumman sold to New York's Metropolitan Transport Authority in 1980.
They broke down so often and so grievously that they were all withdrawn from service within three years.
The president of the transport authority called the buses ‘junk’.
Grumman finally coughed up $40m in 1988 in settlement of the legal claims against it.
By then the company seemed set to make a fresh start under a new broom.
John O'Brien became chief executive in 1988 and proved an impressive and popular boss.
But Mr O'Brien had to resign abruptly last summer when he became the subject of a grand-jury investigation into possible illegal loans from a military sub-contractor.
After such stumbles, Grumman is understandably thrilled by a belated and unambiguous triumph: the success of JSTARS.
The electronic gadgetry, integrated by Grumman into a modified Boeing 707 aircraft, is the air-to-ground equivalent of the air-to-air AWACS air-surveillance system.
The machine flies over friendly territory, but its huge side-looking radar can pick out enemy ground targets up to 200 miles away, allowing it to direct air, artillery or missile strikes against them.
A military historian has compared the advantage JSTARS conveys to playing a game of chess in which you can see your opponent's pieces but he cannot see yours.
General Schwarzkopf demanded that JSTARS be rushed into service for Desert Storm after he had seen the system tested in a NATO exercise.
His foresight was vindicated.
In the final stages of the war JSTARS allowed allied forces to detect and destroy the convoys of Iraqi vehicles fleeing Kuwait.
Even if this persuades Congress to agree to the 22 JSTARS the Pentagon wants to buy and also helps the company to export the aircraft, Grumman will still have to cut its workforce further.
It has already reduced it from a peak of 36,000 to around 26,000.
Grumman's speciality is naval aircraft, mainly the veteran A-6 ground-attack aircraft and the F-14 Tomcat fighter, both designed to operate from aircraft carriers.
Grumman's order-book, however, is thinning.
No relief is in sight, according to George Shapiro, an aerospace-defence analyst at Salomon Brothers, a New York investment bank.
The Pentagon's procurement budget has fallen from $97 billion in 1985 to about $67 billion in the current fiscal year and further cuts are in prospect.
Grumman cut its capital spending to $50m last year, or under half the $105m it charged to depreciation and amortisation.
To try to climb out of the hole it is in, Grumman has come up with a plan to turn its F-14 fighter into a ground-attack aircraft.
The idea is that this aircraft could fill the gap in the navy's procurement schedule caused by the recent cancellation of the A-12 stealth machine that the navy was developing.
Despite the fact that the navy will now need a new aircraft of some sort to fill the gap until a brand-new attack machine, so far called only the AX, can be produced, the outlook for Grumman is bleak.
The F-14 is based on elderly technology, and it would be extremely expensive to produce a workable bomber from it, something on the order of $50m a copy.
The navy reckons it can buy updated versions of the McDonnell Douglas/Northrop A-18 for around $35m each — less capable, perhaps, than Grumman says its F-14 derivative would be, but with the defence budget under tremendous pressure, the ‘sticker price’ makes all the difference.
Few seasoned observers believe the Grumman scheme has a chance.
Before the success of JSTARS, the manufacturer of the Wildcats, Hellcats and Avengers that helped America win the second world war looked likely to fade away.
Barring another honourable war, that may yet be Grumman's fate — if slightly delayed.
START OF FINANCE SECTION
Funny, money
HONG KONG
THE latest version of The Economist's rough-and-ready guide to relative currency values, our annual Big Mac index, published in April, showed that the Hong Kong dollar was the currency most out of line with the American dollar.
A Big Mac in a Hong Kong McDonald's costs half as much as one bought in a big-city McDonald's in the United States.
Since Big Macs are the same the world over, the Hong Kong dollar must surely be much undervalued against the greenback — and even more so against many other currencies if, as seems likely, America's dollar is itself still generally undervalued.
Hong Kong's dollar has been yoked to America's at the rate of 7.8 to 1 since 1983.
The link was put in place to provide some stability at a time of political turbulence in the British colony.
Weightier things than hamburgers suggest it is now time for a realignment.
Hong Kong's inflation rate, around 14% in the year to April, is more than twice that of the United States.
This is consistent with the view that the currency is undervalued: Hong Kong's goods and services, unnaturally cheap in dollar terms, are being pulled up in price toward international levels.
A better way to get the same result, you might think, would be to adjust Hong Kong's currency, not its price tickets, by vigorously upvaluing the Hong Kong dollar against the American one.
The Hong Kong government fears the market may be thinking the same way: in late April it announced legislation to formalise the power of local banks to pay negative interest rates on Hong Kong dollar deposits (just as Swiss banks did at one time when the Swiss wanted to discourage an inflow of foreign money into the Swiss franc).
All folly, says John Greenwood, the chairman of G.T. Management (Asia), a fund-management company.
Mr Greenwood, who was the main architect of the currency link, thinks the present rate is about right.
Compare the unit prices of Hong Kong's export goods with wholesale prices in America, he says, and you will find that both have risen since 1983 by about 3.5% a year.
So if the rate was right then (many doubt it), it is now.
If the currency is not misaligned, why is Hong Kong's inflation so high?
One answer is rising wages.
These have been driven up, first, by a labour shortage, brought about by the ending of free immigration from China in 1980, and now by increasing emigration from Hong Kong; and, second, by the colony's swift move up-market as manufacturers have relocated low-wage factories to southern China, leaving higher-paid jobs in Hong Kong, where their influence has pulled up wages in what would otherwise be poorly paid jobs.
This has not undermined Hong Kong's competitiveness, however, because Hong Kong's overall labour productivity is still rising faster than America's.
From this point of view, Hong Kong's inflation ‘problem’, argues Mr Greenwood, is really no problem.
So why bother with corrective measures?
Not everyone agrees with the dollar link; some would prefer the Hong Kong currency to be tied to a basket of currencies.
But the link has worked.
After the Tiananmen Square massacre, when the Hong Kong stockmarket fell by a quarter, the Hong Kong dollar did not flicker.
With more political troubles looming, the authorities will defend the link, at its present rate, ferociously; since the market believes that, they may not have to.
And what about the Big Mac index?
A reasonable measure, say Hong Kong critics, among the currencies of countries of similar structure and similar wage levels.
But in Hong Kong the hamburger faces tough low-cost competition from older kinds of speedy foods.
Even Big Macs at times need to be taken with a pinch of salt.
American credit cards
The non-banks muscle in
NEW YORK
ASK an American banker to point out the bright spots in his beleaguered industry, and he will probably point to credit cards.
While other ventures such as property lending faltered, American consumers piled up credit-card debt and tolerated interest rates three to four times the rate of inflation.
That generated a bonanza that kept many troubled banks afloat.
No more.
Sobered by recession, Americans are kicking the plastic-debt habit.
Many have decided that the eight credit cards which, on average, they carry, three of them issued by banks, are more than enough.
Banks are competing fiercely for a share of the slower-growing market.
The bank-controlled Visa and MasterCard networks, with more than 75% of the general-purpose cards market between them, are fighting a discount war with American Express to keep shops and restaurants loyal as recession slows their billings, while fending off powerful non-bank competitors, led by AT&T and Sears Roebuck, who want to join their networks.
Margins — at last— are being squeezed.
While consumer-loan interest rates fell by six percentage points in the decade, those on bank-affiliated credit-card balances stood pat at almost 20%.
Yet Americans kept on borrowing.
They charged $366 billion to general-purpose credit-cards last year, more than five times as much as in 1980; outstanding credit-card debt rose sevenfold to $177 billion over the decade.
This was manna for the banks.
Their return on equity in credit cards was three or four times that in any other line.
At Citibank, America's biggest issuer, three-fifths of consumer-banking profits last year came from cards.
Fat and happy, banks saw no point in competing for customers with lower fees or interest rates.
Instead, they competed on service.
Citibank, for example, will refund the difference if a customer finds he has not bought his goods at the best advertised price.
Travel insurance and other services that once came only with cards like American Express's gold card became commonplace.
Then last year AT&T launched its Universal card, shattering the banks' complacency.
It charged no entrance or annual fees to its first card-holders, and a variable interest rate on outstanding balances which worked out at .5-.75 of a percentage point below the bank cards' average.
AT&T has become one of the top seven card-issuers, at least in the number of cards issued if not in charge volume.
Its introductory offers, plus a discount on long-distance telephone calls, have now been dropped, as the company seeks to wring profit out of the 9.8m cardholders it has bought itself.
Bank issuers have responded to the non-bank challenge with a blaze of publicity about how they are cutting their own fees, which are typically $20–40 a year, or waiving them for new card-holders in the first year.
Interest rates have edged down, and more banks are switching to variable interest rates pegged to their prime lending rate.
That can lower rates by two or three percentage points.
The Universal card is such a threat to banks because, unlike Sears' six-year-old Discover card, it has been linked to the Visa and MasterCard networks from the outset.
To achieve this, AT&T formed a partnership with Universal Bank, a small bank from Columbus, Georgia, which formally issues and handles the cards, although the telephone company handles all the marketing.
Bearing the Visa or MasterCard logo is the key to making big money, because so many outlets accept them.
Nearly 2m merchants accept Visa cards in America and some 7m worldwide.
Sears' Discover card is accepted by 1.2m; not bad for a network built from scratch since 1985, but clearly still short of critical mass.
According to the Nilson Report, a Californian publication that follows the industry, Citibank's Visa/MasterCard and Sears' Discover cards have roughly the same number of holders (20.4m and 21.6m respectively), but Citibank's card brought it $600m in net revenue against Discover's $117m last year.
This was mostly because the $40.3 billion charged to its cards was far ahead of Discover's $19.4 billion, and because Citibank had built up three times as much outstanding debt as Discover.
Sears is yet to recoup its investment in Discover.
Joining the Visa network would give it the leg-up it needs.
It has bought a dud Utah thrift, MountainWest, which was already a Visa card-issuer.
On this, it plans to piggy-back a new version of Discover, called Prime Option.
If it could merge this with its store account customers, it would become America's biggest card-issuer.
The banks are unthrilled by such ideas.
They want to keep the more-lightly regulated non-banks out of Visa and MasterCard.
Visa has (since 1989) a rule barring issuers of rival cards, such as Sears and American Express, or any affiliates.
Sears is challenging this in a case now before a Denver appeals court.
If it wins, other non-banks, such as General Motors' finance arm and the Bell telephone companies, are likely to launch their own Visa cards.
Visa's rule-book bristles with other conditions that keep non-banks at bay.
Visa has final say over the artwork on Visa cards.
Members may not put a second account number on a card.
This would stop, say, Sears putting on a Prime Option Visa card its own store account numbers or numbers for other financial services that it offers through its Dean Witter subsidiary.
Visa has recently closed a loophole that let AT&T put a telephone number on its Universal cards.
Another newish rule forces most of a card's receivables to be held by the issuing company, not its parent.
This hampers the small banks that the non-banks use as a conduit for their services.
These do not have the capital to carry large volumes of receivables.
The rule also pushes up costs, since a non-bank cannot route all its card business through its main finance department.
Such rules are already starting to raise antitrust eyebrows at the justice department.
The kindness of chapter 11
America's chapter 11 bankruptcy is too kind to a troubled company's existing managers and shareholders, and too harsh on creditors
AMERICAN firms with serious money troubles have two choices — formal bankruptcy through chapter 11 of the 1978 Bankruptcy Reform Act, or an informal rescheduling of their debts, known as a ‘workout’.
Chapter 11 is not cheap — often lasting for years, with fat legal fees to pay — compared with workouts.
So you might think few firms would opt for the formal route.
You would be wrong.
A new study* by academics at the London Business School and the University of California at Los Angeles finds firms choosing chapter 11 and workouts in roughly equal numbers.
This is no surprise, reckons the study.
The bosses of a troubled firm and the shareholders that appoint them choose between chapter 11 and workouts.
Both do nicely from chapter 11; other creditors do not.
Chapter 11 works by allowing top management to get the firm out of trouble by drawing up a rescue plan that can involve restructuring the firm and writing down creditors' claims on its assets.
After all, reckoned America's lawmakers, these bosses know most about what needs to be done — never mind that they got the firm into trouble in the first place.
Workouts do the same, but with much less legal tussle.
Chapter 11 is different from British ‘receivership’, where the courts mostly sack existing management and put a finance — but, some would say, not a business — expert in charge.
For managers, the nice thing about chapter 11 is that it protects the firm from its creditors until a rescue deal is sorted out; and the firm can stop paying its interest charges.
This protection seems sensible enough; firms need a breathing space if they are to recover.
But it also sets up a fight between a firm's shareholders and its other creditors.
Without chapter 11, if a firm were shut down and its assets sold off, the spoils would go first to senior creditors — banks and others that had lent the firm money.
Only when senior creditors were paid in full would junior creditors, and after them preference shareholders, get some cash.
When all these are paid, ordinary shareholders get what is left, which is usually not much.
This all changes under chapter 11.
Shareholders, who know they will get peanuts if the firm is wound up, want the firm to keep trading in the hope that it will come good.
Creditors, on the other hand, can be damaged every day that the firm trades without a rescue package.
They may lose both because of missed interest payments and because of the legal fees that have to be paid from the firm's shrunken assets.
Managers have two good motives to avoid a deal with creditors for as long as they can: they keep their jobs longer, and they work for shareholders, who do not want a deal either.
Senior creditors must battle not only with shareholders, but also with junior creditors.
Under chapter 11, two-thirds of creditors, of preference shareholders and of equity shareholders must separately back a deal before it can go ahead.
If junior creditors account for more than a third of the creditors, they can force concessions from their senior partners.
What happens, reckons the study (which looked at 88 big, troubled firms, 41 in chapter 11 and 47 in workouts, between 1983 and 1990), is that creditors give up some of their seniority rights as a carrot to get management to agree to a deal.
The study compared what each type of creditor — holders of debt, preference shares and equity — would have expected to get if strict legal priority had been applied with what they actually got.
The 41 chapter 11 deals gave some $878m to claimants that was not, by the terms of loan agreements, due to them (see chart).
Shareholders, arguably entitled to nothing, got around a third of the benefit.
Junior creditors got just over half, and preference shareholders the rest — all at the expense of senior creditors.
This was on top of much bigger write-downs of creditors' claims under chapter 11 deals — on average 47% of pre-deal face value, compared with 23% in workouts.
Workouts take the battle between creditors and shareholders a step further.
As chapter 11 is so bad for senior creditors, management and shareholders have a big advantage.
If the senior creditors refuse to make a deal it likes, the firm will simply file for chapter 11 protection.
So in workouts, too, creditors may be willing to give up their seniority rights.
This, the study finds, is the case.
In fact, senior creditors give up even more in workouts than in chapter 11 deals, although the write-downs of their claims tend to be a lot less.
Of the $1.7 billion shifted from losers to gainers in workouts, senior creditors gave up $1.3 billion.
This is less odd than it looks: it pays creditors to avoid the delays and legal costs of chapter 11.
In effect, then, chapter 11 says it is better to keep a firm running than to honour debt agreements.
This is fine for managers and employees, who (or many of whom) keep their jobs, and for shareholders, who would otherwise face large losses.
It is also good for politicians, who are spared having to explain job losses, and, as ever, for lawyers.
Yet it may be bad for other firms, even sound ones, since lenders will become increasingly wary, and may charge higher interest rates overall to make up for their higher risks.
One answer would be for the judges ruling on applications for chapter 11 to get tough in backing creditors' claims against the firm.
There is some sign of this.
The academics had earlier studied chapter 11 between 1978 and 1984; the amounts gained by shareholders at the expense of senior creditors were even higher then than in the more recent cases.
Alternatively America could move towards a more British system of receivership, which puts creditors before shareholders, and is more likely to end in the firm simply ceasing to trade.
That is not as bad as it sounds.
Worthwhile parts of the firm will be bought by some other firm that can make use of them — perhaps better use than the existing management.
Taxing Britain's building societies
Double standards
THE British government has just refused to undo, by retrospective legislation, a decision of the law lords that invalidated all interest-rate swaps conducted by local authorities.
It is now trying to ram through retrospective legislation to undo a decision of the law lords that ought to save Britain's building societies from what they consider double taxation.
The tax saga — and the would-be retroactivity — goes back to 1985.
At that time the tax that banks deducted from interest payments to depositors was passed on to the taxmen each quarter.
But building societies paid only once a year.
The government decided to level the playing field: the societies also must pay quarterly, from April 1986.
The snag was that their accounting years often did not coincide with the April-March tax year.
If a society's year ended in, say, September, it passed on the tax the following January.
So — the taxmen argued — in the new system, tax due on interest payments in the gap from October 1985 to April 1986 would get stuck in the society's pocket.
So special rules were made to deal with this.
Unfair, cried the societies.
Their January payment, whatever accounting year it was based on, met their full tax liability for the ongoing fiscal year.
They would not escape tax for October 1985 to April 1986 at all; the special rules meant double taxation.
The rules were reworded in 1986.
One society, the Woolwich, then challenged them in court: won, lost on appeal, then won again before the law lords last October, and retrieved £91m ($160m) of tax and interest thereon from the Inland Revenue, plus another £6m due after a further appeal-court victory of detail this week.
Victory came, ultimately, on a technicality, not the double-tax issue.
But the law lords did pronounce, obscurely, on that.
They seem to have accepted both that (a) some interest payments had indeed — but for the special rules — stood to escape tax; yet (b) the normal January 1986 tax payment covered liability for that fiscal year ‘including tax on interest paid after the end of a society's accounting year’— which was, ‘in a sense, to tax [those sums]twice’.
Not so, the Treasury still insists.
Take the (extreme) example of a society which, during the gap months, had paid ten times as much interest as usual.
Its tax bill, but for the special rules, would not have reflected that — which suggests the gap was a real one.
Whatever justice may say, the whoopee in the building societies' camp was soon cut short.
Claiming that it is merely cleaning up a technicality, the government, in clause 50 of the current finance bill, is cheerily trying to rewrite the law, retroactively, five years after the event.
Whether or not this succeeds — some senior Tories are in revolt — the Woolwich can still laugh: by bizarre custom, the new clause would let it, having won in court, hang on to its winnings.
Others, from the Leeds, claiming £57m, plus interest, to the tiny Greenwich (£1.9m) are not amused.
At least the government can answer those who say its attitude to retroactive legislation is inconsistent.
Not at all.
One decision will save local authorities at least part of the £500m they owe banks on contracts which they freely entered into.
The other will save the Treasury £250m (£400m, interest included) screwed out of unwilling building societies.
In both cases the government's beneficiary is itself.
The Federconsorzi affair
Fiasco italiano
IT IS a rare event — in the industrialised world, at least— for a state-owned enterprise to go bust, leaving banks with billions of dollars' worth of bad loans.
Something like that is about to happen in Italy.
Federconsorzi, a state-run agency that provides financial services to farmers and owns large chunks of Italy's food-processing industry, was taken over by government administrators on May 17th with debts of 4.2 trillion lire ($3.3 billion).
Among its creditors is the hapless Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL), which has loans and other exposure to Federconsorzi worth 430 billion lire.
BNL owns one-quarter of a factoring company headed by Luigi Scotti, who just resigned as president of Federconsorzi.
BNL last made headlines in 1989, after revelations that an American branch of the bank, in Atlanta, Georgia, had extended unauthorised trade credits to Iraq worth some $3 billion.
Italy's other big state-owned banks have also lent money to the bust group.
Most at risk, according to Michele Pacitti, of a British investment bank, County NatWest, are Italy's small farmers' banks, the casse rurali.
It is unclear how much of the group's debt, if any, is covered by government guarantee.
Federconsorzi's slide toward insolvency is a saga of patronage, corruption and excess.
Italy's monarchy set up the agency 100 years ago to provide services to some 90 regional consortia that helped farmers and food companies sell their output and buy supplies.
Initially, the system worked well: Federconsorzi used its national clout to bid up the price of farmers' crops and bargain down the cost of their supplies.
With the advent of democracy after the second world war, however, Federconsorzi, like many of Italy's state agencies, became a tool of party politics.
The Christian Democrats used it to win the votes of farmers.
The agency began to make loans to farmers and food companies against their production and to hold back on demanding payments for goods it supplied.
When customers unsurprisingly got into trouble, it obligingly increased its advances.
It rarely pushed a non-paying customer into bankruptcy.
Instead, it would take over some assets, often the least valuable ones.
Thus Federconsorzi found itself owning some unprofitable bits of Italy's food industry, such as a milk and cheese producer called Polenghi Lombarda and a jam company called Massa Lombarda.
It also owns an insurance company, Fata, and has a stake in an ailing private bank.
Farmers, officials and the Mafia found other, illegal, ways to siphon money out of Federconsorzi's regional affiliates.
One scam entailed boosting the weight of produce by soaking its wooden or paper containers in water.
Another used Federconsorzi to defraud a state scheme that paid farmers to destroy their surplus output.
Farmers took several payments for each load of produce and inflated their yield reports.
(One orange-growing region in Sicily was so productive, on paper, that California sent agronomists to discover how.)
About ten years ago the agriculture ministry, which runs the agency, made a half-hearted attempt to staunch its losses.
It hired a competent manager from the private sector, Silvio Pelizzoni, but gave him little power.
Mr Pelizzoni worked hard to restructure the group, by selling its industrial stakes and turning the property owned by the regional consortia into a chain of stores.
This plan alone would not have restored the group's fortunes.
But the Christian Democrat politicians on the agency's board repeatedly blocked even these modest plans.
Now there is reason for hope.
Italy's new agriculture minister, Giovanni Goria, unmasked the Federconsorzi's frightful financial and appointed a troika to administer the group.
The next, more difficult step will be to clean up the mess.
Mr Goria plans to liquidate Federconsorzi's assets in order to pay off some of the group's debt (although he is unlikely to force the group into formal bankruptcy).
The banks would be forced to absorb large losses.
Mr Goria wants banks to give the group a discount on interest payments for 1989 and 1990 and to forgo interest for 1991.
That could cost the banks some 700 billion lire.
Whatever the outcome, banks are sure to suffer from their ill-judged business with Federconsorzi.
Do not assume they are necessarily innocent victims.
Franco Piro, president of the finance commission in the lower house of Italy's legislature, plans to investigate the banks' role in the Federconsorzi fiasco.
London's securities firms
Better can mean worse
STOCKBROKERS have picked up the airline habit: flying merrily on heedless of a leakage of cash.
In 1990, say the latest numbers in the London Stock Exchange's quarterly review, they lost a collective £350m ($625m).
But Wall Street also lost money (for the first time) in 1990, so perhaps London is just part of a wider trend.
Not entirely so.
The London firms' revenues plummeted by a third from 1989's level.
But this was not just the effect of slower markets and smaller volumes on commission and fee income.
Thanks to big one-off dealing losses at certain firms, overall profits from equity trading slumped by over 50%, to less than £400m.
Meanwhile, for all the gloomy talk of tight budgets and an end to City lunches, the London firms managed to shrink their costs in 1990 by a mere 3% — less than Wall Street managed.
Never mind, say market optimists: the first quarter of 1991 promises to make up much lost ground.
Equity turnover shot up in February and March.
Earnings from the recent spate of rights issues and flotations will be fat.
Dealing spreads, pared wafer-thin after Big Bang, have widened a bit.
Even the government's re-entry into the gilts market as public borrowing has risen is seen as a sign of hope.
The optimism looks misplaced, even though 1991 will probably prove a better year than 1990.
(Two words of warning: the past few years have revealed an odd seasonal pattern of a good first quarter followed by three bad ones; and, true to form, April and May this year have proved less rewarding than earlier months.
Also, a possible Labour government would mean no nice little privatisation earners.)
The industry is still stuffed with excess capacity, mostly taken on for Big Bang and the freak year of boom that followed (until the 1987 crash).
Though some firms have pulled out, there are still too many market-makers in both gilts and equities, which holds down everyone's earnings.
And though bonuses have all but disappeared, basic staff salaries remain too high — and staff numbers have yet to fall below pre-Big-Bang levels.
Other costs seem equally hard to cut (staff costs account for less than a third of the total).
With masterly understatement, the Stock Exchange report says that, compared with 1986, firms now have ‘higher and possibly more rigid cost structures.’
Nor has much been done to attack the soft commissions (payments in kind) given to fund managers to attract their business.
Even for those firms that are managing to wash their faces, the return on the capital employed in the markets, itself much more than before Big Bang, is puny.
For most of the time since 1986, many parent companies would have done better putting their money safely in a bank deposit than risking it in the securities markets.
No wonder they are losing patience.
In February the chairman of National Westminster Bank, Lord Alexander, warned his investment-banking arm, County NatWest, that it had to become profitable within two years or face possible closure.
Branch bank managers, tired of cross-subsidising overpaid, loss-making City yuppies, applauded.
This points to the real worry about 1991: not that it will not be good enough, but that it will be too good.
At the start of the year, several firms were steeling themselves for the tough, face-losing decision to pull out of some markets — or out of the securities business altogether.
Now they have been given a fresh lease of life, inviting the (wrong) conclusion that the need for a further shake-out is past.
A bright future for London's securities firms would, oddly, be nearer if in the next few months they once again lost oodles of cash.
Swedish krona
Basket case?
AFTER staying single for 14 years, Sweden has again hitched its currency to others in Europe.
On May 17th the krona was pegged to the ecu, within 1.5% either side of a central rate of SKr7.40.
Sweden used to be part of the ‘snake’(predecessor of the European exchange-rate mechanism), but quit in 1977, so that it could keep control of its own economic policy.
That ‘control’ was not wisely used: of the 13 countries that The Economist follows each week in our statistical back pages, Sweden has by far the highest inflation, 10.9%.
The ecu link may provide a firmer anchor for inflationary expectations.
Since a 25% devaluation in 1982, Sweden's central bank has in fact kept the krona stable against a mainly trade-weighted basket of 15 currencies, including seven non-ERM ones.
But the dollar's weight, 21.9%, was double what it would have been on a purely trade-weighted basis, so its slide between 1985 and 1990 dragged the krona down against ERM currencies.
Between 1985 and early this year, the krona lost about 25% against the D-mark.
Though its timing caught out the markets, the krona/ecu link has been on the cards for some months.
In October sterling joined the ERM, and Norway tied its krone to the ecu.
Britain is Sweden's second biggest trade partner, Norway its fourth.
Until October, ERM members took about 40% of Sweden's exports; add in Britain and Norway, and that becomes more than 60%.
Secondly, Sweden, once against joining the European Community, has said it will apply for membership in June.
The ecu link is a first step towards membership of the ERM.
A wisely modest step too.
The ERM provides for ‘non-member countries with strong economic and financial ties with the EC’ to become associate members.
But when Norway and Austria (the schilling is pegged to the D-mark) applied for associate membership last year, they got a cool reception.
New members, it seems, are currently an unwanted distraction.
Though announcement of the link allowed short-term interest rates to fall by a percentage point to 11.4%, and pushed Swedish share prices up 3.5% in a day, it caused chaos in the lucrative Stockholm business of ‘basket arbitrage’.
In this game, investors borrowed dollars and other currencies according to their share in the krona basket, converted them into krona, and re-invested in Swedish securities with bigger returns than the cost of the borrowed funds.
At one point last autumn, when Swedish rates rose to 17%, such deals yielded a net annualised return of 8%, with little exchange-rate risk.
No longer.
The switch to an ecu link left basket players owing billions of dollars, with no predictable relationship between the krona and the dollar.
Rushing to buy the dollar (mainly by selling D-marks) to cover their dollar loans, they pushed it up four pfennigs within an hour.
Gone with the wind?
LOS ANGELES, PARIS AND CANNES
IT COULD make a great movie.
Backed by a powerful French state-owned bank, a little-known Italian businessman buys a famous Hollywood film studio.
After a brief and unsuccessful career as a mogul, he is suddenly ousted by the bank.
A stake in the business, which has come near to bankruptcy, is put up for sale.
If a buyer cannot be found fast, rumour goes, the bank may lose hundreds of millions of dollars.
Worried French politicians demand an investigation into the bank's links with the Italian.
This story, though, is true.
In May 1990 Crédit Lyonnais helped Giancarlo Parretti, the Italian chairman and chief executive of Pathe Communications, to finance Pathe's $1.3 billion acquisition of MGM.
In April this year, however, the bank forced him to step down as head of Pathe, after its film and television business, MGM-Pathe, narrowly escaped bankruptcy.
This month Crédit Lyonnais gave Pathe (of which Mr Parretti and his family control 80%) until December 1st to sell a 40% stake in itself, or in MGM-Pathe, to cut its debt.
If that target is not met, the bank will have the right to sell 51% of Pathe or MGM-Pathe.
At the film industry's annual jamboree in Cannes, the MGM affair was a hot topic of conversation.
Mr Parretti, it seems, has been no Sam Goldwyn.
He sold many of the rights to MGM's film library to help finance his takeover.
The studio got little cash to pay for new films.
He gave his 22-year-old daughter Valentina a prominent role in the finances of the company (she, like his wife, is now a director).
Films had to be delayed for shortage of money, and some cheques bounced.
Fed up with waiting for $15m, one group of creditors filed a petition in an American court in March to force MGM-Pathe into liquidation.
It was saved by a $145m loan from Crédit Lyonnais.
The state-owned bank's involvement has raised eyebrows among French politicians.
Some wonder why the bank stuck with Mr Parretti, even though his attempt to take over a French cinema chain in June 1990 was blocked on the grounds that it would ‘threaten public order’.
François d'Aubert, the centrist vice-chairman of the French National Assembly's finance committee has asked for details of the bank's dealings with Mr Parretti.
The bank has stalled a public inquiry by pointing out that the relationship was handled by Crédit Lyonnais Bank Nederland (CLBN), a Dutch subsidiary over which the French authorities have no control.
CLBN became a big provider of film finance in the early 1980s.
Georges Vigon, chairman of its executive board, encouraged Frans Afman, a senior manager, to expand movie lending after the bank's property and commodities businesses ran into trouble.
Mr Afman built up a profitable portfolio of loans, mostly to small, independent film studios and heavily secured.
Only a few of these loans, including one of $50m to the Weintraub entertainment group, have since turned sour.
One of CLBN's clients was the Cannon group, controlled by two Israeli producers, Yoram Globus and Menahem Golan.
They introduced Mr Parretti to CLBN in 1987, presenting him as a potential investor in their company.
Mr Afman was unwilling to lend to him.
Mr Vigon then took over the Cannon account himself.
By the end of 1987 CLBN was making loans to companies controlled by Mr Parretti.
Unhappy, Mr Afman resigned from the bank in July 1988, though he was retained as a consultant until the end of last year.
How much Crédit Lyonnais is owed by Pathe remains a mystery.
A spokesman for CLBN refuses to say, though describing suggestions of $1.5 billion as ‘ridiculous’.
What is known is that the bank has lent Pathe $250m to finance the MGM purchase, plus an undisclosed sum linked to the sale of some of the rights to the studio's film library.
There is also the $145m loan to protect MGM-Pathe from bankruptcy.
A small clue is the 40% of MGM-Pathe that the bank wants sold.
Mr Parretti paid $1.3 billion for MGM.
If — most improbably — that figure still holds good, 40% would mean around $500m.
The bank says the sale would leave it owed $125m.
Add the two to reach $600m-plus.
Of course that simple arithmetic may be wrong.
Rather less simply, some people close to Crédit Lyonnais think it may also have lent money to Florio Fiorini, a Swiss-based Italian associated with Mr Parretti.
Some of this may have been channelled into Pathe, where Mr Fiorini is still co-chairman.
What is surprising is that alarm bells within the bank did not bring action earlier.
Given the size of the loans to Mr Parretti, Alexis Wolkenstein, the head of the bank's international division, and Jean-Yves Haberer, the bank's chairman, can hardly have been unaware of its growing involvement with him.
The same applies to Mr Vigon at CLBN.
In July 1988 Mr Vigon replaced Jean Naville, a director of Crédit Lyonnais in Paris with responsibility for, among other things, Western Europe.
Mr Naville retired and subsequently joined one of Mr Parretti's companies.
The bank is now keeping its fingers crossed that its $145m emergency loan will be enough to turn MGM around.
It may not be.
First, about half of it will be used to pay creditors and to meet legal fees connected with the bankruptcy proceedings.
Second, the studio must still meet heavy interest payments until it can reduce its debt.
Third, although Alan Ladd, the highly respected chief executive of MGM-Pathe, thinks he can release 13 films this year, costing an average of $8m-10m each, their prospects must be open to question.
Most films cost $20m-$30m.
True, one real blockbuster could solve MGM's problems.
But the studio's recent record of new releases has been dismal.
‘Rocky V’, for example, was expected to gross over $100m at the box office.
In fact, it took in roughly $40m.
MGM-Pathe may have to be sold.
Even then, would it bring in enough to repay Crédit Lyonnais's lending?
Happy endings rarely happen off-screen.
The bank has one consolation.
Tomorrow is, as Vivien Leigh said, another day.
Japanese property companies
One saved, dozens to go
TOKYO
PROPERTY companies continue to go bust in large numbers in Japan.
The authorities have so far managed to prevent a chain reaction.
Until when?
The latest test came with confirmation that Asahi Juken, Japan's second biggest condominium developer, is in trouble.
A private, Osaka-based company with over 1,500 employees, it owes ¥570 billion ($4.1 billion).
But it is too big to be allowed to fail.
The snag is that it has no main bank behind it.
Instead C. Itoh, a trading company, has been forced to lead a support operation.
C. Itoh is said to be the largest creditor, having lent Asahi Juken around ¥50 billion.
It will now have to lend another ¥30 billion.
Only on this condition have four creditor banks, the Industrial Bank of Japan, the Long-Term Credit Bank, Mitsui Taiyo Kobe Bank and Nippon Credit Bank, and five creditor non-banks agreed to lend an additional ¥27 billion.
This will pay some bills for now.
But it is unlikely that C. Itoh will take over other creditors' debts, the traditional role in Japan of a main bank.
So Asahi Juken's fate hangs in the balance.
It hopes to sell properties (mostly land, because condominiums are fetching only distress prices) worth ¥100 billion-200 billion to reduce its borrowings.
This will not help a property market under pressure.
According to Teikoku Data Bank, in the first four months of this year bankruptcies, mostly property-related, totalled ¥2.6 trillion, ¥855 billion of that during April.
This exceeds the annual total in any of the past four years.
More will follow.
The data bank's research shows that 45% of Japanese property companies have debts greater than two years' worth of their sales and 32% have debts greater than three years of sales.
THINK-TANKS
The carousels of power
‘Those who desire to win the favour of princes generally endeavour to do so by offering them those things which they themselves prize most, or such as they observe the prince to delight in most.’
Niccolo Machiavelli
WHEN Machiavelli sat down to write ‘The Prince’, he was feeling anxious.
Unemployed after many years in government service, he wrote his handbook of advice to new rulers in an attempt to win a job with the incoming Medici administration.
The Machiavelli problem would be instantly recognisable to hordes of would-be and once-were government officials in today's world: ‘policy intellectuals’, as Americans call them.
They would not recognise his workplace.
Displaced from power, he had to toil in a humble farmhouse outside Florence.
Today he would sit in a think-tank, cosseted by secretaries and flattered by a stream of calls from talk-show producers.
The ‘policy intellectuals’ still strive to present their conclusions as impartial expertise.
But, like Machiavelli, they are forever tugging at the sleeves of politicians.
Think-tanks, sitting uneasily half-way between government and universities, are institutions that embody this ambiguity.
Societies in which a broad consensus dominates political thinking — such as Germany and Japan today and the United States in the late 1950s and early 1960s — tend to respect the think-tanks' claim of neutrality.
But when consensus breaks down, as it did in Britain and the United States in the late 1970s, think-tanks become more avowedly ideological.
Their new role is to challenge conventional wisdom.
They can articulate the instincts of dissidents in the language of the academy, and suggest ideas that bridge the gap between instinct and policy.
Many American think-tanks, such as the Washington-based Institute for International Economics, still cling to an aura of academic detachment.
But an increasing number, typified by the conservative Heritage Foundation, define themselves above all by the fact that they hold a coherent body of ideas, and want to spread them.
Think-tanks sprout in America to an extent undreamed of elsewhere.
A recent book —‘The Idea Brokers’, by James Smith — identifies over 1,000 private ones, around 100 in Washington alone.
They range from the Brookings Institution, with its vast battleship of a building on Massachusetts Avenue, to tiny lobbying outfits with offices the size of a doctor's waiting room.
They thrive in America for two good reasons.
First, a lot of rich foundations are ready to pay good money to people to sit and think.
Second, the American system of government is peculiarly open to such chosen thinkers.
Each new administration in Washington appoints not only the heads of its departments, or ministries, but also a lot of people further down the departmental ladder.
Groups like the Council of Economic Advisers and the State Department's Policy Planning Staff — government think-tanks, in effect — absorb more outsiders.
The two houses of Congress employ a bureaucracy with a huge appetite for independent research.
Plenty of work here for thinkers who can catch the political tide.
The revolving door between government and think-tanks is well-established.
Both Zbigniew Brzezinski, who headed the National Security Council under Jimmy Carter, and Robert McFarlane, who did the same job for Ronald Reagan, joined the Centre for Strategic and International Studies on leaving office.
Brent Scowcroft, now head of the NSC, once worked there.
When Ronald Reagan took office, no fewer than 20 of the research fellows at the neo-conservative American Enterprise Institute (AEI) joined his administration.
Now that Mr Reagan has left power, many of his appointees, such as Jeane Kirkpatrick and Richard Perle, are working at AEI.
Every American think-tank director has a dream and a nightmare.
The dream is to house the next administration; the nightmare is to house the last one.
AEI seems to have managed both in the course of a decade.
The first lot of American research institutes, just before the first world war, was more politically innocent.
It was not until the 1960s, when ‘think-tank’ entered the popular vocabulary, that these bodies became a natural bridge between universities and government.
In those days think-tanks were intoxicated by the new sophistication they could apply to their work by way of computers, games theory and other novelties.
The Rand Corporation, based in Santa Monica in California, pioneered the application of ‘systems analysis’.
Like the Urban Institute, founded in Washington in 1968 after racial riots across America, it thrived not on private philanthropy but on research contracts from the government.
The rise and fall of technocracy
With a sociologist, Daniel Bell, proclaiming ‘the end of ideology’, technocrats were in vogue.
To President Kennedy the great issues related ‘not to basic clashes of philosophy or ideology but to ways and means of reaching common goals — to research for sophisticated solutions to complex and obstinate issues.’
It was up to the politicians to define the ends: an end to urban poverty, victory in Vietnam.
The think-tanks would provide the means.
Failure both in Vietnam and in the war on poverty discredited technocracy.
Conservatives, in particular, argued that the ‘liberal establishment’ and the think-tanks it favoured — Brookings, the Rand Corporation, even the grand old Council on Foreign Relations in New York — embodied a stifling and wrong-headed orthodoxy.
They set about building what Sidney Blumenthal, a journalist, calls a ‘counter-establishment’.
Because the old think-tanks were dominated by liberals, conservative alternatives were required.
During the 1970s the AEI expanded, and new organisations such as the Heritage Foundation and the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research were founded.
The latter was created by William Casey, who became Ronald Reagan's campaign director and then head of the CIA.
The conservative think-tanks set about the prevailing wisdom on welfare policy at home, detente with Russia abroad.
By 1981 much of the intellectual spadework for the Reagan presidency had been done.
Their apparent success prodded Democrats to start building a counter-counter-establishment.
The Progressive Policy Institute was set up by the Democratic Leadership Council, which is on the right wing of the Democratic Party.
The Economic Policy Institute, born in 1986, is a bit further left: like the Heritage Foundation, but the other way round, it sees itself as a rebel fighting conventional wisdom.
Britain's gadflies
The shift from an above-it-all ‘objectivity’ to an open confession of partisanship took place in Britain too, at around the same time.
Thatcherism, like Reaganism, drew heavily upon the work of bright neo-conservatives outraged by the ‘years of stagnation’ in the prime ministerships of Harold Wilson and James Callaghan.
There were British think-tanks before Margaret Thatcher became prime minister.
But, with the notable exception of the free-market Institute of Economic Affairs (widely regarded in the 1960s, by people who now wish they hadn't, as a home for impractical crackpots), they were guardians of the chalice of consensus.
The big three — the Royal Institute of International Affairs (Chatham House), the Policy Studies Institute and the National Institute of Economic and Social Research — still see themselves as purveyors of well-researched common sense.
The director of the Policy Studies Institute, Bill Daniel, acknowledges a belief that consensus is attainable if you ‘establish the facts and get people of good will together.’
To Britain's neo-conservatives that was, at best, naive.
Together with Sir Keith Joseph, Mrs Thatcher founded the Centre for Policy Studies (CPS) in 1974.
Its current director of studies, David Willets, says the CPS started by assuming that ‘a lot of the research put out by established think-tanks had a basic bias in favour of increased government spending and an essential belief in the rationality of government.’
With a tiny staff (currently seven, including secretaries), the CPS sponsored pioneering work on many of the ideas that came to define Thatcherism — privatisation, the ‘enterprise culture’, a monetary explanation for inflation.
Its close links to the policy unit in the prime minister's office (staff members swapped jobs between the two places) ensured that its arguments were heard.
As in America, the success of Britain's neo-conservative think-tanks prompted imitation from the other side.
In 1988 a group of left-wing luminaries, led by Lady (Tessa) Blackstone, launched the Institute for Public Policy Research.
This is formally independent of the Labour Party, but has close links with its leaders.
The fall of Mrs Thatcher seems to leave Britain's neo-conservative think-tanks out on the end of a creaking branch.
Bill Daniel sees them as ‘gadflies who flourished while their princelings were in power’, and foresees a steep decline in their influence.
The CPS, seeking to prove him wrong, has installed Britain's new prime minister, John Major, as its patron.
But sticking with the Conservative establishment may mean that the CPS loses its claim to radicalism.
The organisation's uncertainty is shown by its decision not to have any particular point of view on the future of the European Community: a decision that makes more jaws than Mrs Thatcher's drop.
Oddly, the think-tank that seems closest to catching the next intellectual wave is the one whose collapse seemed most logical a year ago.
The Social Market Foundation was set up to serve David Owen's Social Democrats, a party that no longer exists.
But its name contains the latest buzz-word.
The Conservative Party's new chairman, Chris Patten, has told Marxism Today of his interest in the German idea of a ‘social market’, which believes it is possible to unleash capitalism's efficiency but also to keep it under the supervising eye of society: to combine the engine of individualism and a communal conscience.
Mr Patten even mused that the Conservative Party might set up a think-tank on the lines of Germany's Konrad Adenauer Stiftung, the research arm of the governing Christian Democrats.
If Germany is indeed to be the model, British think-tanks may soon be scrambling back towards technocracy and the politics of boring old consensus.
No ideology please, we're German
At first sight, it is surprising that German think-tanks should be notable for unideological pragmatism.
The biggest institutes — the publicly financed research departments of the Konrad Adenauer foundation and its Social Democratic equivalent, the Friedrich Ebert Foundation — are, after all, the offspring of political parties.
Partisanship should be their middle name.
In fact, their relations with the parties they serve sharply restrict their ability to tackle controversial topics.
Conclusions, even subjects, embarrassing to the party are unlikely to be pursued.
Immigration is a pressing and difficult issue.
It would naturally commend itself to an American think-tank.
The party ones in Germany are reluctant to consider so awkward a matter: almost anything you say is liable to embarrass the particular group of politicians you have to worry about.
Asked about research into immigration quotas, Josef Tiessing of the Adenauer foundation shifts uneasily on his leather sofa.
‘This is a political question,’ he says, ‘it is not a scientific question.’
Those tempted to wander over that dividing line can be forcefully reminded of it.
One research project, into who would control Soviet nuclear weapons if the Soviet Union broke up, was abruptly abandoned last year.
Too political.
The distinction between ‘scientific’ and ‘political’research is not just a dodge to help the big German foundations avoid embarrassing their patrons.
It is observed, almost as carefully, by the think-tanks that are not dependent on party money or approval.
Something German is at work here.
There is a tendency to insist that a researcher's work should be ‘value-free’.
This reflects two German habits: an old one, an academic tradition that takes the ‘science’ bit in social science very seriously; and a newer yearning for consensus, for believing that all sensible people really agree with each other.
Since 1959, when the Social Democrats embraced capitalism, German politics has been a large clustering around the centre, with only a few dissenters on the margins.
Meinhard Miegel, once a Christian Democratic politician, who heads the Institut für Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft (Institute for Economics and Society) in Bonn, could think of no influential German think-tank — even the one run by Greens — that did not accept the basic tenets of the social market.
Mr Miegel set up his think-tank in 1977.
He was not out to break the mould, just to collect better data.
He recalls thinking: ‘This is crazy, we are trying to run a party without facts.’
His institute works on issues ranging from demography to labour shortages.
Inevitably, given his background, its research has found its most appreciative audience among Christian Democrats.
But its deliberately non-partisan approach is no pose: it helps to shape the institute's choice of research subjects, the way its conclusions are presented, and so, indirectly, the whole tone of debate in the country.
In Germany interest groups like to present their views as the product of exhaustive research rather than of a distinctive philosophy.
Will German think-tanks ever go the way of some of their English-speaking counterparts, and plunge into the deep waters of ideology?
Some see signs of a tendency in that direction.
They look in particular at the appointment in 1988 of Michael Stürmer, a conservative historian with a philosophical bent, as head of the Stiftung für Wissenschaft und Politik (Foundation for Science and Politics) in Ebenhausen, near Munich.
This institute, with over 150 researchers, does a lot of work for the federal government: it specialises in data, not policy recommendations.
The appointment of Mr Stürmer, a friend of Chancellor Kohl and a man often seen on television, made some of the staff fear they were going to be ‘politicised’.
So far, they seem to have feared wrongly: Ebenhausen stays in the good, solid German tradition.
The Germans have not yet created what Americans and Britons would call a real think-tank.
That requires the revolving door.
People with bright ideas must not only carry their opinions out of politics and into the research institutions, but must regularly move back the opposite way when the call comes.
In Germany, so far, the door separates two largely distinct worlds.
East is east but Moscow is west
If American think-tankers would find Germany odd, they would be floored by Japan — but would cock an interested eyebrow when they went to the Soviet Union.
In Japan, as in Germany, love of consensus and the absence of a revolving door leave little room for unorthodox views peddled by independent institutes.
The main think-tanks are offshoots of big firms or finance houses: the Nomura Research Institute, the Daiwa Research Institute, the Mitsubishi Research Institute.
These bodies produce voluminous reports crammed with data on subjects that interest their sponsors.
They are good at description, less so at analysis, which might disagree with the boss's views.
The research arms of Japan's securities firms have been relentlessly bullish throughout a 48% decline in the value of the Tokyo stockmarket.
The curious processes of Japan's decision-making reverse the usual relationship between government and ‘policy intellectuals’.
In America and Britain, even to some extent in Germany, think-tanks set out to influence the government.
In Japan the government tends to see academics as a useful way of influencing public opinion: how handy if they can be persuaded to open public discussion of a policy change the politicians want to make.
In the Soviet Union, on the other hand, there is no longer any pretence that academics can be above the tumult of political conflict.
If consensus breeds academic complaisance, chaos does the opposite.
Many members of the Moscow research institutes have hurled themselves into politics, as advisers to Mikhail Gorbachev or Boris Yeltsin or as politicians in their own right.
The big think-tanks are still the state-financed offshoots of the Soviet Academy of Sciences.
These include the Central Economic and Mathematical Institute (TSEMI) and the Institute of the World Economy and International Relations (IMEMO).
But, since glasnost, they have lived in a different world.
Compare the role of TSEMI under Brezhnev and Mr Gorbachev.
In the mid-1960s the Kremlin, seeing that the economic system was not working, briefly flirted with the idea of changing it.
TSEMI was given the job of producing an alternative to the ideas of the state planning agency, Gosplan.
But the Kosygin reforms, as they came to be known, were ditched.
TSEMI dutifully fell quiet.
A quarter of a century later, when Mr Gorbachev was feeling reform-minded, it was a head of department at TSEMI, Stanislav Shatalin, who drafted the ‘500-day plan’, a proposal for sweeping free-market reforms.
They eventually proved too sweeping for Mr Gorbachev.
But this time the TSEMI man kept on talking, and threw in his lot with Mr Yeltsin.
Most of the Moscow think-tanks have now aligned themselves with Mr Yeltsin.
The revolving door has begun to rotate.
When Edward Shevardnadze resigned as foreign minister, he at once set up the first privately financed think-tank in the Soviet Union, the Foreign Policy Association.
This is expected to be a ginger group for ‘new thinking’ in foreign policy.
The oddity is that, just when the Soviet Union is discovering the merit of think-tanks engaged in ideological combat, the American scene has gone quiet.
It was Michael Dukakis who said that what matters is ‘not ideology, but competence’.
Yet it is George Bush who seems to have adopted that numbing proposition as a personal creed.
In today's Washington, where ideology is a murmur of distant guns but technocrats have not quite recovered their old authority, the think-tanks seem at a loss; many of them are cutting the size of their staffs.
The dog-days will not last.
The United States of the 1990s has a manifest need for independent thought.
The great issues of domestic policy — the budget, the proper handling of welfare, education, race relations — stay unsolved.
That grand-sounding ‘new world order’ is still a phrase in search of a meaning.
Modern Machiavellis have plenty to think about.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Particle physics
Man overboard
THE physics of tiny particles tends to attract the big: big machines, big budgets and big personalities.
America's Superconducting Super Collider (SSC), to be built in Texas, will be the largest and most expensive machine in the world.
One of the biggest names in the field, though, will not be there.
The SSC's director, Roy Schwitters, has decided that he can do without the participation of Samuel Ting, from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who wanted to develop one of the two huge experiments that will make use of the machine.
Dr Ting, who has won one Nobel prize (for a particle he named after himself) and would dearly like to win another, has something of a reputation.
He affects a certain disinterest in theory, preferring extremely precise experiments that will pick up whatever is going on to those designed with a particular new discovery in mind.
He is determined to get authoritative results, and demands that his associates be similarly single-minded.
An experiment run by Dr Ting is not a casual affair; to say that he is strict is, he agrees, an understatement.
He can be charming.
He can also be ruthless.
He has more than his share of enemies.
At present, Dr Ting is running L3, the largest of the four experiments on LEP, the biggest accelerator at CERN, Europe's particle physics laboratory near Geneva.
L3 is a collaboration between institutes and universities from a dozen countries, with more than 600 physicists taking part.
Like all the four LEP detectors, L3 has produced excellent results.
It has not, to Dr Ting's disappointment, produced any shocks.
Only one of the detectors has hinted at finding something new, but the evidence is thin and the experimenters are keen not to make any premature fuss.
Dr Ting's proposal for the SSC was like L3 but bigger.
He called it L*, pronounced el-star, in homage to its hosts in the lone-star state.
On paper, L* looks just the ticket for the SSC — an ambitious experiment with a good pedigree, run by a famous physicist with an international set of collaborators.
The SSC is sometimes keen to be seen as a laboratory for the world, though at other times it remains America's bid for leadership.
Last January, when Dr Schwitters chose an American team to build one of the two detectors for the SSC, he put off his decision on L*.
An advisory committee had voiced doubts about L*'s management and cost — likely to be more than $700m, of which the SSC would pay only $250m.
He asked Dr Ting to set those doubts at ease.
One of the problems perceived in Dr Ting's autocratic management was that it does not endear him to the more easy-going American physicists; and there were few large American institutions taking part in L*.
The people who end up with detectors on the SSC will be benefiting from a huge American investment (attempts to raise money abroad are meeting with little success) and they will be in a position to dominate American particle physics for a decade, so such considerations carry some weight.
Another worry was that, if something happened to Dr Ting, the team he held together would fall apart.
In fact, that was already happening.
Institutes in Germany and Switzerland withdrew from L* amid some acrimony, which increased doubts about paying for the project.
The SSC also apparently got differing accounts of the project's finances; the participants in L* did not always say the same thing as the management.
A restructured management failed to convince Dr Schwitters and the committee that Dr Ting was loosening up.
So Dr Schwitters decided not to pick L*.
The SSC will hold a meeting in June, when all sorts of would-be participants will try to come up with a new detector.
In part because the other detector is already looking more expensive, there will be a lot of pressure to keep this new one cheap.
Many of the collaborators in L* have been invited — making it clear that the quarrel was with Dr Ting, not his colleagues.
Not all of them will go.
An angry Dr Ting will now concentrate his considerable skills and energy on building a detector for a new machine at CERN, called the LHC.
The LHC will do some, though not all, of what the SSC will do.
If CERN's members give it the go-ahead, it will be ready sooner than the SSC, for which it will be the only competitor.
If Dr Ting climbs on board in Geneva, the competition may well become a grudge match.
The uses of diversity
ARMED with microscopes, miniature drills and an infinite capacity for taking pains, a few palaeontologists have redrawn their profession's picture of early life.
For several decades they have been studying superbly preserved fossils from the rocks of the Burgess shale, found in the Canadian Rockies, which are among the earliest fossils of complicated organisms.
The creatures had previously been forced into convenient taxonomic pigeon-holes, whether they fitted or not.
The result was to hide their variety.
When the revisionists looked into the pigeon-holes without preconceptions, surprising novelties stared back at them, some with five eyes, some with none.
Many of these animals, rather than being simple precursors of sophisticates yet to come, were quite unlike anything ever seen elsewhere.
To some, the huge variety of life in the Burgess shale has been an inspiration.
Stephen Jay Gould of Harvard, a friend of the Burgess revisionists, wrote a popular book about their bounty, ‘Wonderful Life’.
The history of life, he argued, could have followed all sorts of paths.
The weird anomalies of the Burgess shale could have gone on to found evolutionary dynasties while the distant forebears of humanity perished in the ooze.
Others, though not denying Dr Gould's point about the contingent nature of evolution — no true Darwinist can — are less enamoured of the diversity.
They feel that there is a danger of being dazzled by it and thus of missing a unique opportunity to make sense of the early history of animal evolution.
The debate centres on taxonomy, the classification of creatures.
A phylum is a group of species which share a basic body plan and thus, presumably, a common ancestor.
Today there are 30 phyla around, more or less (some borders are a bit murky).
According to work done in the 1970s and 1980s, there could have been up to 32 in the rocks of Burgess shale alone, including many never seen anywhere else.
By comparing the number of phyla, one can say, as Dr Gould does, that there was a wider range of life in one little patch of sea floor than in all today's oceans — though that conclusion ignores the fact that today's oceans contain whales, jellyfish, barnacles and octopuses, whereas the Burgess sea contained only little creepy-crawlies.
The Burgess animals have been taken from established phyla in which they did not fit and put into new ones.
So new phyla were created to accommodate a few bizarre animals.
However the fossils can also be reinterpreted to fit back into old phyla:
Wiwaxia looks like a small Belgian chocolate covered in scales, with some bigger spikes pointing out here and there.
Simon Conway Morris of Cambridge University, who played a big part in the first reinterpretation of the Burgess animals, thinks Wiwaxia has no living relatives, but is probably related to other fossils he and his colleagues have found in northern Greenland.
Nick Butterfield of Harvard, though, thinks Wiwaxia is related to a scaly worm, part of a known phylum, which is also found in the Burgess shale.
His view is based on similarities he sees in the scales.
The question is not yet decided, one way or the other.
Hallucigenia is one of Dr Conway Morris's greatest finds, an aptly named creature that balances on 14 stilts and waves seven tentacles in the air.
However, in last week's Nature new fossils found in Burgess-like rocks from China were described by Lars Ramskold from the Swedish Museum of Natural History and Hou Xianguang from the Nanjing Institute of Geology and Palaeontology.
The fossils appear to be relatives of Hallucigenia, with flat scaly plates reminiscent of its spines (though not leg-like) and similar tentacles.
If they are relatives, then Dr Conway Morris's Hallucigenia is the wrong way up: its tentacles, not its spines, were its legs.
Dr Conway Morris has always said there could be other ways to make sense of Hallucigenia, and agrees that the new interpretation may be better.
Hallucigenia's tentacles appear to be singletons; if they are in fact legs, they should come in pairs.
Dr Ramskold has found traces of extra tentacles on one of the only two really good specimens of the species there are, at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, DC.
He is not allowed to dissect the fossils, though, since they are at present irreplaceable.
The new interpretation seems to push Hallucigenia, the Chinese fossils, and some other species around at the time (including another of the Burgess oddballs, Aysheaia) into the arthropod phylum, with insects, crabs and trilobites.
It may be that they are in fact onycophorans, a group of arthropods now represented by caterpillar-like velvet worms that burrow through dead wood in Australia.
Anomalocaris is the biggest predator among the Burgess animals, and one of the hardest to interpret.
For a long time some of its parts — its mouth and its eating appendages — were classed as separate animals.
Once a definitive picture of it was produced, it was given its own phylum.
Des Collins, of the Royal Ontario Museum, doubts that it deserves quite such an honour.
Dr Collins has the great advantage of being allowed to go out and get new fossils from the Burgess site — everyone else has to make do with what is already in museums.
He has found several different types of Anomalocaris; from studying the whole lot, he thinks he can make a case for saying that it belongs with the arthropods, not out on its own.
Putting the Burgess  weirdos into more conventional groups whittles away at some of the shale's apparently huge diversity.
A more thorough-going approach is to revise the way taxonomy is done.
Today's way of grouping things into phyla reflects today's world.
It is hardly surprising that it is a poor fit for animals removed from the present by hundreds of millions of years of evolution.
Enter Derek Briggs, of the University of Bristol: along with Dr Conway Morris and under the tutelage of Harry Whittington, also of Cambridge, he did much to prise the Burgess fossils from their original mistaken pigeon-holes.
Dr Briggs and Richard Fortey (of London's Natural History Museum) have been looking at new ways of classifying the various arthropods in the Burgess.
Their approach, instead of valuing the unique, seeks out the common.
Using their shared characteristics, the animals can be arranged into a sensibly small number of groups, joined by the common ancestors with whom the shared features began.
The approach allows researchers to see how the diversity — still large and exciting — came to be, rather than simply marvelling at it.
It also shows that, if classed in groups natural to them, rather than in groups based on their remote descendants, the Burgess arthropods are not such a disparate lot.
It is possible to do this sort of analysis only within the arthropod phylum, because only that has enough species, with enough measurable features.
But what holds true within one phylum may well hold true across them.
In the end, the answers will come as they always do — from the ground.
When Burgess revisionism started in the 1960s, the site in Canada was unique.
Now Burgess animals and their relatives are found in Greenland, China and elsewhere, as well as at other sites found by Dr Collins near the original one.
As more fossils are found, the sense of wonder will no doubt be stirred again, but the systematic research aimed at providing a more complete picture will continue.
The message of the Burgess shale — that there has always been variety, and no one can say in what forms it will survive until it has done so — remains.
The fascinating details of how it came to be are still waiting to be found.
Diabetes
Sweetmeat solution
THERE are two big drawbacks to transplant surgery — the propensity of the body's defences to reject foreign tissue, and the shortage of donors with organs to give.
Scientists in America claim to have found a way round both.
They take tissue from an animal and wrap it in plastic before transplanting it.
The animals have little choice about being donors, and the plastic prevents the transplant from being recognised and rejected.
If the promising results of animal experiments are borne out, this technology could be used to cure diabetes.
Although diabetes is usually caused by a pancreas unable to do its job, it is not treated by replacing the offending organ.
The proximate cause of the symptoms of diabetes is normally a lack of insulin, a hormone produced in the pancreas to control the body's sugar levels.
To alleviate the symptoms, about one in five diabetics in rich countries injects himself regularly with insulin.
This makes up for some of the failings of the pancreas, but it leaves the diabetics reliant on an insulin supply, and unable to fine-tune the level of insulin in the way that a healthy pancreas would.
Pancreas transplants have been tried, but the surgery is complex, the tissue delicate and the danger of rejection always there.
The operation rarely succeeds.
A refinement is to transplant only the so-called beta cells of the Islets of Langerhans, the picturesquely named nodes of tissue which actually produce the insulin.
Although this simplifies the surgery, it does not overcome the rejection problem.
Besides, there are nowhere near enough dead people with healthy pancreases, nor families willing to give permission for transplants, to provide for all the millions in need.
The new artificial pancreas has been developed by an American company called Biohybrid Technologies, and the Harvard University Medical School.
The Biohybrid pancreas consists of beta cells from animals wrapped up in a patented acrylic plastic and implanted under the skin or in the abdominal cavity.
Cells from dogs and cattle have been used so far, but pancreases from any slaughterhouse would probably do.
The implant is about the size of a saucer, 3.5 inches (9cm) across and an inch deep.
It is connected to an artery and a vein, so that blood flows through it and supplies the beta cells.
The holes in the plastic membrane are small enough to keep out white blood-cells, the parts of the immune system which recognise and reject foreign tissue.
Other chemical signals carried in the blood can get through, though.
These, which are common to all animals, tell the beta cells how much insulin to make.
William Chick, president of Biohybrid Technologies, says his device has been tested in diabetic laboratory dogs.
Several have been kept alive for up to eight months.
Their blood-sugar levels stayed virtually normal.
He thinks that when he goes on to test the device in human patients, it should prove successful over long periods.
If not, the device can always be recharged with a syringeful of living beta cells.
In the next year and a half Dr Chick expects to apply to America's Food and Drug Administration for permission to test his device in people.
In about five years, if things go well, Biohybrid pancreases could become widely available.
Animal tests have shown no harmful side-effects at all.
One cause for concern is that blood flowing through artificial organs tends to clot, which can lead to a stroke or to coronary heart disease.
The plastic membrane is treated to prevent this, and animal trials have shown no increased risk of clotting.
The same approach could be used to make other animal tissues into useful transplants.
Dr Chick is working with a chemicals firm, W. R. Grace, on an artificial liver.
Such ‘organs’ may alleviate problems which are caused by malfunctioning cells.
They might supply things that are missing, or clear up things in over-supply, detoxifying the blood.
They are less likely to solve problems when the structure, not just the chemical function, of an organ needs to be provided.
Illuminating manuscripts
MONKS and scribes were the data-processors of the Middle Ages, gathering, copying and disseminating information.
The fruits of their labour now attract scholarship as much as, over the centuries, they have attracted dust.
But how to wring new information from a few old pieces of vellum and papyrus?
One answer, according to two scholars at the University of Illinois, is to use modern data-processing.
James Marchand studies Gothic, the oldest teutonic language with any written remains.
It sheds light on the origins of modern English, German and the Scandinavian languages.
Unfortunately, only one Gothic text, the Codex Argenteus, a piece of the New Testament written in silver ink on purple parchment, survived the downfall of the Goths.
Dr Marchand is undaunted by this shortage of raw material.
Just as computers overwrite out-of-date files on their disks, monks used to scrape useless manuscripts clean and recycle them.
Such overwritten parchments, called palimpsests, often bear traces of the old beneath the new.
The monks of Bobbio, in northern Italy, wrote many of their books on looted Gothic bibles.
Dr Marchand has devised a technique for reading the texts they got rid of.
First he takes black and white photographs of the parchments in ultra-violet light.
This makes the ink on the parchment, including the faint traces of the original Gothic, fluoresce like a white shirt in a disco.
Then he feeds the pictures into a computer, which cuts each picture into 1m tiny elements and records the precise shade of grey of each one.
The later text, much darker in the picture than the earlier one, can then be edited out of this digital image.
The earlier text thus revealed can be made more legible by a program that enhances the contrast, picking out the Gothic letters from the surrounding gloom.
So far, Dr Marchand has recovered nine biblical fragments in Gothic.
He has also revealed notes written in the margins of Latin manuscripts by Gothic hands and then rubbed out by later owners.
From these sources he is piecing together the vocabulary and grammar of Gothic.
Rather than recovering lost languages, John Friedman is recovering lost lives.
The scribes he studies worked in the 14th century — 800 years after Dr Marchand's Goths had relinquished Italy.
He is trying to trace their careers through their handwriting.
Identifying handwriting is normally a tortuous and time-consuming job, not to be undertaken lightly.
If it could be computerised, anonymous documents could be sifted to find those with the same author.
Dr Friedman has put parts of 200 manuscripts from northern England into his computer.
The machine can be made to look for common letter groups and then display them, massively magnified, together on the screen, helping a human expert to decide if they match.
Dr Friedman wants to make the computer more than just a clever magnifying glass.
By using a statistical technique called cluster analysis, he hopes to teach the machine how to make the matches for itself.
Quill-written characters consist of a series of more-or-less straight strokes, simple enough for a computer to turn into numbers and analyse, but complex enough to vary from scribe to scribe.
With the aid of rare signed texts, Dr Friedman is programming his computer to recognise the shapes of strokes in the hands of various writers.
It can already distinguish the signed texts of a single author from those written by other scribes.
When it, or its descendants, learns to classify anonymous documents, the copiers of the Middle Ages will be revealed by the data-processors of today.
TYPOGRAPHY BRIEF
TYPOGRAPHY BRIEF
The changed face of type
This week The Economist appears for the first time in its own new type-face — known as Ecotype.
It could never have been designed but for a revolution that has shaken up one of the world's oldest industries
TYPOGRAPHY was once an arcane discipline, with its own system of measurement, its own language and a technology that depended largely upon pencil and paper.
But the computer has revolutionised the art.
Within the past six years, the business of making text presentable has become everybody's concern.
The authors of reports and memoranda are now expected to decide how what they have written should appear to the reader.
Page make-up and graphics programs allow anybody able to use a computer to change a type-face or its size, to paste in pictures and to lay out the text in almost any manner.
In a trice, office machines can set the type and print it out in fine detail.
Technical standards unite this cottage industry of desk-top publishing with the presses of newspaper and magazine publishers.
This means that, to an author sitting at the keyboard of, say, an Apple Macintosh, the biggest of printing presses has become no harder to instruct than a laser-printer down the corridor.
The programs that have brought typesetting to the desk top have also made it less laborious and costly than ever before to design an entirely new type-face.
Moreover, it will not be long before common-or-garden programs can vary the weight and shape of letters instantaneously, as well as setting them on the page.
This was once a world reserved for specialists.
In the new anarchy, the author is becoming both compositor and type designer too.
The conservative radical
The technology of printing now has virtually nothing in common with the wooden presses and lead type of 15th-century pioneers like Johannes Gutenberg or Nicolas Jensen.
Yet, curiously, the science that has changed the presentation of text has brought it back under the control of a single person, just as it was when the first presses printed.
The revolution in printing has remained invisible to most people.
This is partly because its product, type, must be familiar if it is to be legible.
That makes readers naturally conservative, sometimes to the point of absurdity.
In 1479 Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere, later to become Pope Julius II, asked his scribes to copy out by hand a printed text of Appian's ‘Civil Wars’.
Gutenberg tried to mimic the gothic calligraphy of his own time when he invented modern printing, because anything else would have been hard to read.
Gothic type remained widely used in Germany and Austria until the 1930s.
Similarly, when designing type-faces in Renaissance Venice for new editions of classical literature, Jensen and Griffo (who worked for Aldus Manutius, the first modern publisher and editor) both used the hand-written roman letter-forms of the humanists as their models.
Legal, medical and religious texts, however, were still printed in gothic faces.
Italic type came from the rapid, flowing writing of chancery scribes.
Thus calligraphy was the source of the ornaments which still decorate most type-faces, despite efforts earlier this century to dispose of them (see box).
These earliest faces and the French versions of them, which were derived during the first half of the 16th century by type-founders such as Garamond, remain the models for most type-faces.
The question is not why readers should be conservative, but why type-founders should have found so many excuses to redraw the alphabet.
There are at least 10,000 type-faces in existence; nobody knows exactly how many.
No more than a few hundred of these are used with any frequency.
Fewer than 50 are used outside advertising — and most of these bear strong resemblances to each other.
It is no accident that the explosion in the number of type-faces began towards the end of the 19th century when advertising and branded goods came into their own.
You need only to look at commercial copy or displays to see how powerfully a type-face complements the message it is conveying.
A sign warning trespassers printed in the copper-plate script normally reserved for wedding invitations would inhibit nobody.
The need to catch the attention of browsers and quickly to tell them that Parker pens are elegant, or that Toshiba personal computers are high-tech, has spawned most of these ‘display’ faces.
They tend to be be used sparingly, because they are tiring and distracting to read.
Type and technology
Technology is a more subtle spur for change.
New ways of printing make unforeseen demands upon an old face, while at the same time giving the typographer scope to design problems away.
This applies particularly to those types, like Ecotype, which are meant for  continuous reading.
For example, some of the finer type-faces are corrupted by cheap, popular computer printers.
Bits of some letters are lost; the strokes of others become uneven; spaces are filled in by toner, making an e, say, indistinguishable from an o.
Such difficulties are not restricted to desk-top publishing.
At one time The Economist was printed in England and shipped around the world.
It is now sent by facsimile, every Thursday, to each of our four (soon to be five) printing sites in three continents and distributed from there.
Our former type-face, called Goudy Old Style, was designed in America in 1915, before the facsimile had been dreamed of.
Even a sophisticated fax can corrupt its letters.
Hence the unevenness of some of our issues.
Fortunately, technology often brings solutions to its own problems.
The technical trick that has made cheap laser-printers possible has also brought type design and typesetting to a far wider market.
It was commercialised in California by two entrepreneurs called John Warnock and Charles Geschke, who formed a company in 1982, called Adobe.
But before looking at the idea behind this revolution in printing, consider its consequences.
The previous generation of photo-typesetters cost anything up to $300,000 each.
Today, because the personal computer and laser-printer are mass-produced and work using cheap electronic components, anybody can publish text of almost professional quality for an investment of only $3,000.
Adobe reckons that by the end of 1990 more than 40m copies of its type-faces were in use.
This year alone 3m laser-printers will be sold, according to BIS Strategic Decisions, a consultancy.
Each machine comes with a standard set of at least 35 different type-faces.
More faces can easily be loaded on to a machine, like stocking a larder with exotic ingredients.
Far from banishing paper from the office, the computer and its attachments have made memos, brochures, reports and forms simpler and cheaper to produce.
The advantages for the printing industry have been enormous.
True, the actual business of typesetting has been lost by printers to desk-top publishers.
Against that, though, each type-face that a software company has title to stands to be widely licensed, and the demand for professional printing from computer-owning desk-top publishers has become much greater.
If this revolution has a name, it is PostScript, the technical standard that Adobe invented, which many competing computer makers, laser-printer makers and the publishing industry have settled on.
And if PostScript has a leading light, it is Pierre Bézier, a French mathematician.
Mr Bézier was the first to realise how to write a description of a curved surface that did away with lists of cumbersome mathematical co-ordinates.
It was a piece of pure mathematics that could easily be applied to letters and pictures on a page.
Better with Bézier
Imagine laying a piece of graph paper over an enlarged copy of a character and making a list of all the squares which it covers.
Computerised composition and the previous generation of photo-typesetters, which came into their own during the 1970s, described characters in this way, known as ‘bit-mapping’.
The trouble with bit maps is that they are inflexible and expensive.
This was partly because each brand of typesetting machine tended to have a different way of preparing the bit-map, but it also had to do with the very nature of the technique: rotating the letters, making them larger or smaller, or altering them in any way involved a new bit-map.
Mr Bézier saw that a shape — any shape — could be described as a set of mathematical equations to fit the series of curves which formed its outline.
These equations can be scaled up or down, rotated, or anything else, without having to redefine them.
Computer programs can take care of the mathematics, as long as the designer tells them what shape he wants.
What is more, a technical standard for representing letters which uses Bézier curves does not depend on any characteristic of the machine which is doing the printing: the same set of curves can be used to drive a professional typesetter or a cheap laser-printer (though most fonts have to include ‘hints’ which help coarser machines interpret the curves).
Type designers also benefit.
The development of new fonts used to be the business of companies like Linotype and Monotype, which built typesetters with proprietary technology.
These type-faces encouraged customers to buy a particular make of machine.
Now there is an open technical standard.
Anybody can buy type-design programs like Fonto-grapher and FontStudio off the shelf and create new type-faces, confident that his design can be sold to the owner of almost any laser-printer or typesetter.
The design process is also more simple too.
A designer need only draw on a computer screen the letter forms that he likes and the machine will convert them automatically into Bézier curves.
Laser-printers can instantly show him how his efforts appear in print.
Ten years ago Eiichi Kono, a Japanese designer based in London, spent 18 months redrawing the face used on the London Underground.
Every letter had to be drawn, photographed, reduced, revised and photographed again.
He reckons that today the same job would take only three months.
Six years ago The Economist thought about introducing a face called Excelsior Insertio into the paper.
It would have cost $110,000 to produce the appropriate bit-maps for our former typesetter.
Because of PostScript, nine fonts of an entirely new type-face, Ecotype, were produced for roughly half of that cost (see box).
Soon PostScript (and one of its rivals, called TrueType, which is the brain-child of Apple and Microsoft, two suppliers to the personal-computer market) will be added to the nuts and bolts of computers so that their screens accurately display the page about to be printed.
Already programs are being written that will automatically define the amount of white space each character of a new type-face needs in which to breathe, if it is not to look cramped (at the moment this time-consuming procedure is done by eye).
Meanwhile, the price of laser-printers halves every four years or so, and their resolution and speed continue to improve.
Colour-printing will soon become almost universal.
Typewriter script, which became the world's most familiar type-face between 1867 and 1985, will have taken less than a decade to change from a staple into a mannerism.
Anatomy of a letter
TYPE design still reflects its origins as a craft.
The first typographers were silver- and goldsmiths: their skill working with metals was needed to produce moulds from which lead characters could be cast.
Even though letters are no longer cast, type-setters still talk of the ‘leading’(white space) between lines.
The top row of letters shows an example of the early 15th- and 16th-century seriffed faces, which were the model for many later type founders.
‘Modern’ type-faces, first designed in the 18th century by men like Bodoni and Baskerville, emphasised the contrast between the thick and thin parts of a letter.
In the 1920s and 1930s designers dispensed with ornamentation.
This led to sanserif type-faces, like Gill Sans.
Though many people find sanserif faces attractive, almost every experiment suggests that text set in them is harder to read than serif faces.
How to get a face lift
HE first letter that a typographer designs is the o.
The slope of the o determines the character of the rest of the face: the more it leans towards the left, the less room the letter takes up and the denser the face as a whole.
The designer uses the o to help design the other letters: first to define the shoulder of the n; from that, the h.
Join up the bottom of the h to make a b, and then flip it over to make the d, the p and the q.
Next the designer moves on to the exceptions, such as a and s, all the while bearing in mind the axis he established with the first letter he designed.
Because programs can store any segment of any letter, this process is far less laborious than it once was, though it still took around three months for the nine fonts which make up the Ecotype family.
Another eight months was devoted to working out the spacing between characters.
Then came all the fine-tuning and the test runs, which took roughly three months to complete.
No typeface suits all uses.
Ideally a page should look evenly grey, so that the eye glides over it with as little distraction from the writing as possible.
Ecotype is designed with the newspaper in mind.
It is more robust in form than many faces, which will help it withstand facsimile transmission.
Because this newspaper commonly uses numbers, italics and small capitals (in which abbreviated names, such as UN, appear), special care has been taken to make these unobtrusive.
BUSINESS THIS WEEK
Opportunity costs
The United States widened its rift with the World Bank when it rejected a compromise on a capital increase for the International Finance Corporation, the arm of the Bank that deals directly with the private sector.
America wants the Bank as a whole to shift its attention to private enterprise.
The Federal Reserve's Alan Greenspan said the Fed would do what it could to ease America's credit crunch.
Along with other agencies, it would try to remove rules that impeded increased bank lending.
Five South American presidents signed an accord to resurrect an Andean free-trade zone by the end of 1995, more than 20 years after it was set up.
Responding to other free-trade zones that have been set up in the region, Bolivia, Colombia, Venezuela, Peru and Ecuador will progressively reduce tariffs and other regional trade barriers.
Lunchtime O'Business
Western Germany tops the European league for business spending at $31.9 billion.
The average British businessman doesn't stint on wining and dining, spending £1,940 ($3,370) a year.
Though they stay at good hotels ($2,150 a year), Britons prefer not to travel abroad.
Going for a mere $50m, the Empire State Building is up for sale.
King Kong's climbing frame is not such a bargain though; complex leases will keep any new owner's hands off the property until 2076, America's tercentenary.
Faced with having to raise cash to reorganise, LTV, under protection from its creditors, is to sell off its Dallas-based aerospace and defence subsidiary for at least $500m.
Martin Llowarch, chief executive of recession-hit British Steel, resigned after more than 20 years with the company.
It had been widely assumed that he would succeed Sir Robert Scholey when the chairman steps down.
British leisure group Brent Walker, in debt to its banks to the tune of £1.2 billion ($2.1 billion), announced a year-end loss of £256m, with further losses to come this year.
But the company is confident the banks will keep it from bankruptcy by accepting a reorganisation plan.
Intent on reducing costs by around $400m, Apple Computer is considering sacking around a tenth of its 15,600 workers.
Sharp cuts in its prices in the autumn doubled its market share, but lowered profits.
Bucking the chemicals-industry trend, and in its first full year since demerging its textiles businesses, Britain's Courtaulds announced an 11% profit increase to £186.3m ($344m) for the year to March.
It made a hefty restructuring provision, indicating more disposals.
Germany still has the world's most expensive industrial electricity, with Italy not far behind.
Italy's prices went up 14% last year, more than twice the rate of inflation.
Wings and wheels
The profits of British Airways plunged for the year ending in March.
Recession and the Gulf war wiped 62% off pre-tax profits, reducing them to £130m ($240m) from 1989's £345m.
With higher-fare payers slow to return, BA expects further losses in a normally buoyant first quarter.
The dispute between Nissan Motor of Japan and Nissan UK, its privately owned British distributor, must be settled by arbitration in Japan, the British high court ruled.
The Japanese car maker has cancelled Nissan UK's sole right to distribute Nissan vehicles in Britain.
In the first year-on-year increase since last July, West European car sales rose for April by 8.4% to 1.3m, compared with April 1990.
The demand for new cars in unified Germany is strong.
Renault and Volvo, partners in a carmaking alliance, announced poor quarterly results.
Renault's market share is shrinking; Volvo's car business is still losing money.
City limits
Takeo Masuno, president of Japan's Kyowa Saikama Bank, resigned.
The bank lent money to a speculator charged with extortion.
London securities houses had their worst year ever in 1990, with 3,000 job cuts and losses of £353m ($630m), compared with a £500m profit in 1989.
To help the New York Stock Exchange's slipping share of global trading in equities, the Securities and Exchange Commission is to allow after-hours trading for a two-year trial period from June 13th.
Jersey-based bank, TSB Channel Islands, 51%-owned by the TSB Group, called in the police after discovering ‘irregularities’ linked with foreign-exchange dealings.
The London stock exchange has announced that Taurus, its new and overdue paperless settlement system for shares, will be launched in May 1992.
Dial for profit
BT, Britain's biggest telecommunications company, saw a 14.2% increase in pre-tax profits to £3.1 billion ($5.7 billion) for the year to March 1991, on sales of £13 billion, thanks, it says, to better cost controls.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL INDICATORS
OUTPUT, DEMAND AND JOBS
Britain's real GDP fell in the first quarter, the third drop in a row, leaving it 2.5% down on a year ago.
Its industrial output also fell, by 3.5% in the 12 months to March.
Over the same period French industrial production rose 1.9%, but Sweden's output fell 2.1%.
The number of jobless in Britain rose in April for the 13th consecutive month, bringing the unemployment rate to 7.6%.
Holland's jobless rate fell to 4.7% in March.
British retail sales plunged 3.5% in April, a fall of 2.4% from a year earlier.
PRICES AND WAGES
Britain's 12-month rate of consumer-price inflation fell to 6.4% in April, its lowest for more than two years.
In the same month Sweden's inflation rate rose to 10.9%, the highest in our table; Holland's rate remained at 2.6%.
Japan's wholesale prices edged up by just 0.1% in the year to April, and Swiss producer prices fell 0.1%.
British workers received a 9.0% pay rise in 12 months to March, equivalent to a real increase of 0.7%.
HOUSEBUILDING A good leading indicator of economic activity is residential construction.
As interest rates rise, housing starts fall, signalling a downturn; later, a revival of housing starts usually precedes the recovery.
In all four countries shown in the chart, starts fell in the last quarter of 1990.
In America, slow population growth means that housing starts have been falling for years.
Even so, the figures show no end to the recession: starts fell by 36% during the past year, and are still dropping.
Britain's figures, belying most other recent indicators, are less gloomy: though hugely down on 1988, its housing starts touched bottom months ago.
Japan and western Germany are in much better shape.
Starts in both those countries are at levels close to those of a
IRELAND
The Irish economy has achieved an impressive hat-trick in recent years: strong growth (real GDP grew by an average of 5% in 1989 and 1990); low inflation (now less than 3%); and a current-account surplus.
The black spot is its unemployment rate of 14%, which is more than double the OECD average.
The Irish government has reduced its borrowing requirement from 19% of GDP in 1980–84 to 3% of GDP last year.
Its public debt has fallen to 111% of GDP from a peak of 131% in 1987, but this is still the second highest (behind Belgium) of any industrial economy.
The OECD, in its latest review of Ireland, forecasts that growth will fall by more than half this year, to 2.2%; and it worries that the government's hard-headed policies are going soft.
COMMODITY PRICE INDEX
The worst may soon be over for Australian wool farmers.
The government has been forced to release 100,000 bales of wool from its 4.7m stockpile to cover a shortfall in supplies at auction following a recent surge in consumer demand.
Australian wool prices have jumped 17% in two weeks and are now only 18% below the reserve price of A$7 a kilo that was abandoned in February.
(Prices then plunged 40% in the first free-market auctions for 17 years.)
Last week 96% of the 60,000 bales on offer were snapped up; Japanese buyers accounted for 35%.
Since February buyers have taken up 1.5m bales, double the amount in the same period last year.
CURRENCIES
The best way to measure shifts in a country's exchange rate is to use its trade-weighted (or ‘effective’) exchange rate.
This is an index of the average of all its bilateral rates, weighted by the pattern of trade with other countries.
For instance, other EMS currencies account for 72% of the French franc's trade-weighted basket, and the dollar accounts for 44% of the yen's.
As EMS currencies are pegged to each other and account for a big part of each other 's baskets, the stability of the trade-weighted values of the French franc and the D-mark compared with the dollar and the yen is no surprise.
Despite its recent rally, the dollar's trade-weighted exchange rate is still 34% lower than in 1985.
The yen has been the strongest currency over the past six years: its trade-weighted index is about 35% higher than in 1985.
TRADE, EXCHANGE RATES AND RESERVES
America's visible-trade deficit narrowed to $4.0 billion in March, thanks to lower imports; it was the smallest monthly deficit for nearly eight years.
Canada's 12-month trade surplus rose in March to $9.9 billion, three times its size a year ago.
Sweden's trade surplus also rose, to $4.5 billion in the year to April.
The yen's trade-weighted value gained 1.0% during the week.
MONEY AND INTEREST RATES
America's broad-money growth slowed to 2.2% in the year to April.
In the same period Japan's broad money supply grew by 5.1%, compared with growth of 13% a year earlier.
Australian banks cut their prime lending rates from 15% to 14.25%.