

LEADERS
Should trade go green?
How to stop protection for the environment becoming protectionism in trade
DEEP-green environmentalists are nervous of free trade.
They see in it a threat to the right of each country to protect viridian quirks: quaint old farming practices, bottle-recycling schemes that depend on local breweries or milkmen.
In fact, freer trade can be a friend to greenery.
If third-world countries could export more textiles, their need to sell their timber would be less desperate; if Europe's farmers were not protected, land values would be lower, so they would have less incentive to farm intensively.
But, as next week's meeting of OECD environment ministers will acknowledge, as some countries grow greener the interests of the environment and the interests of freer trade may seem to diverge.
The line between protecting the environment and protectionism of a more familiar kind can indeed be worryingly thin.
If, say, Dutch voters want a tax on non-refillable drinks containers, surely they should have their way — even if, in effect, such a tax favours local bottlers.
But what if America bans wine containing traces of a pesticide banned there but used in Europe?
Or if Japan penalises large cars, which are mainly foreign-built?
Such exceptions to the essence of free trade need careful monitoring, by a body like GATT.
Some guiding principles are beyond doubt.
Damage to trade will be minimised if many countries agree to harmonise their environmental rules.
Those rules should anyway be non-discriminatory — so if a government taxes imported gas-guzzlers, it should tax home-made ones, too.
And ardent environmentalists should keep a sense of proportion.
It would clearly be wrong to restrict all imports from a country which broke one particular environmental agreement.
Beyond that, the going gets tougher.
Should governments be free to ban imports of things they fear will become extinct?
Before doing so, they ought to ask whether a well-policed market could bring better results.
If countries with dwindling elephant herds were allowed to sell a small quantity of ivory each year, they would earn foreign exchange, and thus have an incentive to conserve their herds.
And what about imports of toxic waste?
It is not obvious that governments should always be free to ban them.
As companies grow cleverer at finding new uses for the by-products of industrial processes, today's toxic waste becomes tomorrow's chemical feedstock.
If chemistry changes faster than legal definitions, an international agreement designed to protect a country's citizens may end up protecting its manufacturers.
Harmonising green penalties on manufacturing processes will generally be wrong.
If one country's chemical companies face tough standards for water discharges, that is no reason to penalise imports of chemicals from other countries that impose weaker standards.
Different standards may be environmentally appropriate: a smoking chimney in the Australian outback does less harm than one in the Ruhr valley.
Free trade or free riders
More and more, the environmental harm that ministers discuss is global or regional, not national.
Acid rain and marine pollution hurt neighbouring countries; ozone depletion and global warming threaten the entire planet.
Just after the environment ministers return from the OECD, their officials go to Washington to start negotiating a treaty on climate change.
Their toughest problem will be that of free riders (see page 71): countries that want to enjoy the benefits of an agreement without curbing their own output of global-warming gases.
Free-riders risk damaging not just their own climates but, perhaps irreversibly, the climate of every other country — indeed, the very existence of some tiny countries.
On ozone depletion, which harms everyone, the Montreal agreement accepted that trade sanctions could be used against free riders.
It provided for a ban on imports of ozone-gobbling chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), of products containing CFCs, and of products which used CFCs in their manufacturing process.
Extended to a climate-change agreement, however, such a rule would be far trickier.
The main global-warming gas, after all, is carbon dioxide, given off mainly by burning fossil fuels.
If some countries agree to curb the fossil fuels they burn, ought they to penalise the energy-intensive products of free-riders that do not?
Only in the last resort, under careful international policing and after all other attempts at persuasion have been exhausted.
Without those heavy caveats, greenery will become one more excuse to foul up trade.
Futures in the money museum
The growth of the global Zero Overspending Organisation has brought low a once proud species
PITY those poor currency dealers.
The signing, in the ZOO framework, of the World Monetary and Banking Assimilation Treaty (WOMBAT) has written them out of history.
Like Russian aristocrats after the revolution (and, of course, before the restoration), many now drive cabs or wait in restaurants.
Some have adapted, with commendable ease, back to their ancestral profession, and sell fruit from market barrows.
They were doomed from the day — admittedly belated — in 2007 when the European Community's economic and monetary union (EMU) became reality and its 29 currencies merged in the ecu.
Soon America was clamouring for the dollar to be let in: its burden of debt to oil-rich countries, which since the late 1990s had refused payment in dollars, had become too great.
Then the yen joined the queue.
It had survived Japan's notorious propensity to consume and the idleness of its workers, with the huge trade deficit in cars and electronics that these had brought.
But it could not resist the collapse of business confidence after leading politicians were found to have refused corporate bribes on moral grounds.
In 2015 the Treaty of Atlantic and Pacific Investment Regions (TAPIR), cooked up by the EC's crafty Turkish president, duly brought the dollar and the yen into the ecu, and thus, automatically, the shekel and the tael of the Chinese Imperial Republic.
Some 4,000 of the 13,000 currency dealers who had flourished in the 1980s struggled on, trading the remaining independent currencies.
There was still money to be made arbitraging between the rial and the pula, the cedi and (until Argentina and Britain signed the bilateral Puerto Stanley AUK accord) the austral.
But their days were numbered.
One by one, governments gave up sovereignty for stability and acceded to the TAPIR.
By 2040 only a handful of currency dealers remained, huddled in tatty offices in Tirana and Ulan Bator, trading the lek against the tugrik.
The rest had left finance, bar a few who retrained for the burgeoning futures markets in right-to-pollute certificates and manual-job options.
Remember those?
Last week Frankfurt finalised the WOMBAT negotiations with Albania and Mongolia, and their currencies were absorbed into the Global Numismatic Unit (GNU), so named because one specimen was ‘minted’(made in metallic hard-copy form) into what our grandmothers used to know as a ‘coin’.
But the currency traders will not be forgotten.
In a corner of the London Museum of Financial History — blue-rinsed heads will remember it as the Bank of England — stands a glass case.
It contains a striped shirt, one towelling sock, now grubby, but still recognisably white, and several decayed strips of red material, thought to have had some connection with men's trousers.
Whatever trousers may have been.
Or indeed men.
Reform in year two
South Africa's President de Klerk must resist the temptation to by-pass the disorganised ANC
THIS time last year he unbanned black parties, suspended the death penalty and went on to free Nelson Mandela, the world's most famous political prisoner.
On February 1st, at the opening of South Africa's no-blacks parliament, President F.W. de Klerk will deal some more blows to what remains of apartheid.
He will probably announce the scrapping of residential segregation, and an end to blacks' exclusion from most South African land.
The world will applaud, and rightly press on with the lifting of sanctions.
But a glance at the Soviet Union should be enough to remind Mr de Klerk that it is far easier to dismantle his predecessors' oppressive structures than to build a new democracy in their place.
All last year the government promised that talks on a new constitution would start in early 1991.
It had every reason for haste.
Political violence was rampant, and still is: it cost at least 3,000 lives in 1990.
The longer the bloody transition is drawn out, the more damaging the effects on potential investors in South Africa.
Besides, many of the government's constitutional ideas are remarkably similar to those of Mr Mandela's African National Congress (ANC): both would apparently be happy with universal suffrage, proportional representation, and an independent judiciary to enforce a bill of rights.
Yet 1991 has arrived.
Unless Mr de Klerk's speech concedes more than expected, talks remain months away.
Rise above the muddle
The government and the ANC are bickering over the preconditions for negotiation — matters such as the bringing home of exiles and the release of political prisoners.
Mr de Klerk's people say the Congress is dragging its feet because it is too disorganised to talk.
After years of inactivity in exile, the ANC has difficulty doing anything fast.
It is unsure of its policies, and has been slow to recruit members and persuade them that the time for talks has come.
The contrast between sluggish ANC and dynamic ruling party is summed up in the fates of their old leaders, each of whom suffered a stroke in 1989.
Oliver Tambo staggers on as president of the ANC, though he is hardly strong enough to deliver a speech.
His counterpart, P.W.
Botha, was pretty swiftly dumped.
To keep morale up, the ANC plans to do what it does best: organise ‘mass action’, including demonstrations next Friday, when Mr de Klerk announces his latest reforms.
This provocation contains a temptation for the president.
With foreigners applauding him, he may wonder whether he needs to worry about the disorganised ANC.
He may continue to insist that, if the ANC's exiles are not to be prosecuted when they come home, they must list their past crimes — even though this condition is delaying their return, and therefore the talks.
Why not, he may wonder, carry on with his unilateral reforms while letting the drive for give-and-take negotiations on the constitution fall into second place?
Because that would plunge the country deeper into violence.
With a meeting between Mr Mandela and Chief Buthelezi, the leader of the rival Inkatha Freedom Party, now in the offing, hopes have risen that the township violence may soon be over.
Yet those hopes could quickly be dashed.
Despite its internal disorder, the ANC remains quite capable of spreading chaos to every corner of the land.
White tribalists claim that the ANC lacks support beyond the Xhosa people, who are disproportionately represented at its head.
But polls suggest that it may be the most popular party within all the black linguistic groups; and the fighting in the mostly-Zulu province of Natal between the ANC and Inkatha shows that plenty of South Africa's 8m Zulus take the ANC's side.
To get talks with the ANC started, Mr de Klerk must do everything possible to free political prisoners and bring home refugees.
At the same time he must go on reassuring other parties — some of whom bloody-mindedly reject negotiation — that their views will be heard.
The president's unilateral reforms will achieve little if he does not talk to blacks.
My company, right or wrong
Whether to accept a takeover bid is a decision for shareholders, not for the board
IMAGINE that you buy a car from a local garage.
A few days later someone offers you nearly twice what you paid.
Thrilled, you agree to sell.
Suddenly the garage owner, whom you still employ to maintain the car, hauls you into court to block the sale.
The price is too low, he argues, and the new buyer is not a fit and proper custodian for this precious vehicle.
Sounds absurd?
This is pretty much what Charles Exley, chairman of NCR, is doing to his shareholders.
On December 5th American Telephone & Telegraph (AT&T) bid $6.1 billion for NCR, America's sixth-largest computer maker, after merger talks had turned into a shouting match.
Since then both firms have been stuck in court, while Ma Bell tries to get round a series of legal obstacles erected by Mr Exley and his board of directors.
On January 16th AT&T claimed the owners of 70% of NCR shares had said they want to accept the firm's offer.
On January 21st it forwarded to NCR written requests from owners of 51% of the shares for a special shareholders' meeting, at which AT&T will seek to oust the NCR board.
Nevertheless Mr Exley is determined to frustrate the bid.
In other words, he wants to make it legally impossible for the shareholders, who employ him, to sell their shares to the highest bidder.
This kind of legal legerdemain is one of the most damaging legacies of the takeover binge of the 1980s.
Opposed bids now elicit the emotive vocabulary of combat.
The ‘defending’ firm's use of any legal ploy, including ‘poison pills’designed to make the acquisition indigestible, is cheerfully assumed to be fair.
Too many people have forgotten that a bid, even one opposed by directors, is simply an offer to buy shares, not a struggle to the death.
No one is compelled to sell.
No one should be compelled not to sell either.
Those general truths need to be seen in the context of this particular bid.
Ma Bell can hardly be described as a raider set on rape and pillage.
Indeed it says that it wants to hand its own computer business over to NCR's managers, and has pledged not to close the firm's factories or sack its workers as a result of the merger.
AT&T makes the classic, albeit dubious, argument that telecoms and computer businesses fit together strategically.
Mr Exley has some good counter-arguments.
He points out that AT&T's computer business has repeatedly failed, something which even AT&T admits.
Combining it with the well-run NCR could merely produce a bigger failure.
Perhaps NCR's shareholders should agree with him.
But most of them do not — which is their right.
This makes Mr Exley's position distinctly odd.
He argues that AT&T's $90-a-share bid is ‘grossly inadequate’: strong language for shares that were trading for only $48 before AT&T's interest became public.
He claims the shares are worth $125, though how he chose this number is a mystery.
Not content with putting his case, he is threatening to use NCR's poison pill to increase drastically the cost of the bid and to invoke an anti-takeover law in Maryland, where the firm is incorporated, that would freeze any bid for five years.
So AT&T is trying to oust Mr Exley and his board, which includes some of the people it once hoped would run its own computer business.
Let the owners decide
Mr Exley is behaving as if NCR's directors, not its shareholders, are the real owners.
This is in character.
He has been a vocal champion of the occasionally fashionable view that a company should be run in the interests of ‘stakeholders’— its employees, suppliers and customers, and the regions where a company operates.
In the long term, he argues correctly, this is in the shareholders' interest too.
But shareholders own the firm: the decision should be theirs.
Most of NCR's owners want to sell the company to AT&T.
Besides, the only stakeholders with an indisputable interest in stopping the sale are NCR's top managers, who were careful to get the board to boost their own severance packages on the day Ma Bell made its bid.
The only other clear winners from a protracted contest would be both firms' lawyers.
The Yeltsin factor
How the reformers in the Soviet Union might still regroup and win
NO EMPIRE has ever shrunk without a fight.
Mikhail Gorbachev's Soviet Union had once seemed the enlightened exception, but now only proves the bloody rule.
The street battles of Vilnius and Riga show a brutal determination to keep the Soviet empire together.
Yet eventually, like other empires that outlive their time, from Charlemagne's to the Habsburgs', shrink it will.
The attempt to hold it together at gunpoint may succeed only in blowing the Soviet Union apart more violently.
Thus more is at issue than whether the Lithuanians, Latvians and Estonians should be allowed to go or be made to stay.
The struggle for control over the Baltic republics is rapidly being overtaken by a bigger struggle for power in the Soviet Union.
Although he has military might on his side and a readiness to use it, as reformist push meets reactionary shove the newly reactionary Mr Gorbachev is by no means certain to win.
This is not the first time Mr Gorbachev has shown his brutal streak.
But every time he has used force in the past — as in Azerbaijan a year ago — he has been able to portray himself as defender of both law and order.
This time it is different.
Whether he gave the command to open fire in Vilnius and Riga or is cynically refusing to condemn the thuggery of his troops in order to put pressure on the Baltic republics, he has taken the side of order against law, acting in defiance of those republics' legally elected parliaments.
If he can do it in the Baltic lands, he can do it elsewhere.
Now he talks of revoking some of the freedoms, including a freer press, that the Soviet parliament brought into being last year.
He may yet suspend parliament itself.
In the past, whenever he has erred on the side of too much order, the judgment inside the Soviet Union and outside has been that ‘Gorbachev is as good as we'll get’.
The likeliest alternative always seemed to be worse.
But now Mr Gorbachev has made himself the unpalatable alternative.
Supporters from his reforming days have deserted him; some have denounced him.
In the past few months he has sided with those in the party and the army who have long wanted a crackdown.
Yet it is not clear how firmly they have sided with him.
It was Mr Gorbachev, after all, who got them into this mess.
Worse for them, whether they go on backing Mr Gorbachev or opt for some other tough guy, the rattle of gunfire has not had the intended effect.
In the Baltic republics it has pushed determined but otherwise peaceable people to defend themselves as best they can.
And it has galvanised others, such as Russia's president, Boris Yeltsin, to stand by them.
Mr Yeltsin is not everybody's idea of a hero.
Like Mr Gorbachev, he was once a party apparatchik.
He is a populist who is unfussy about which grievances he exploits to get attention.
Alongside some respectable advisers, he seems to attract a rabble of supporters more loyal to the man than to the cause.
And he has made a lot of easy promises that he has not yet had to keep.
Even so, Mr Yeltsin seems determined to keep the reformers' colours flying.
He has shown courage in coming to the defence of the Baltic republics.
He has stuck by radical plans for economic reform in Russia.
If a deal is eventually to be wrung out of a reluctant Kremlin to break the deadlock over the Baltic republics, much will depend on how much support Mr Yeltsin can muster.
The sort of Soviet Union we can do business with
Thanks to Mr Gorbachev's reforms, the reformers have some muscle.
Not only the Baltic republics but all the others too stand to lose from a crackdown.
They may not all want to leave the Soviet Union (indeed, whatever shape it takes in the future, Mr Yeltsin's Russia will expect to be leader of the pack), but neither do the union's supporters want to hand back the new economic and political freedoms that they have won.
Four republics — Russia, the Ukraine, Belorussia and Kazakhstan — have already agreed to negotiate a limited union treaty among themselves, which other republics can join if they wish.
Between them these four represent 80% of the Soviet people, a solid core of a new union.
But it is one thing to thumb your nose at Mr Gorbachev over the Kremlin wall, as many thousands did in a demonstration in Moscow last weekend.
Or to jeer at the discredited Baltic Communists who rode in behind the thugs, proclaimed themselves in charge in Lithuania and Latvia and then scuttled for cover.
It is quite another to stand defiantly in front of the guns and hold your ground.
The Yeltsin coalition is new and untested.
Its supporters in the streets may melt away at the first sign of trouble.
That is why it needs quickly to be made clear just how high the cost of a crackdown might be.
Neither party nor army is solid.
There are plenty of army officers, by no means all of them supporters of radical causes, who think the army should not be used to settle political arguments with the republics.
A determined show of political resistance from Mr Yeltsin and his supporters in other republics might help convince many old-fashioned Russian nationalists that hanging on to the Baltic republics is not worth a fight.
Western governments cannot intervene directly to support the reformers.
Neither should they encourage Soviet people, in the Baltic states or elsewhere, to take risks that they would not otherwise take.
This is an argument that the Soviet people must settle for themselves.
But if President Bush decides to go to Moscow next month for his planned summit meeting with Mr Gorbachev, he can deliver America's condemnation of the violence in person.
He can also make a point of talking to Mr Yeltsin and other republican leaders to offer them moral support.
Meanwhile the West can add to the cost of a crackdown.
The billions of dollars in aid promised to the Soviet economy should still be on offer: but only to a leader prepared to take the army out of politics and keep the promise of reform.
At home and abroad, Mr Gorbachev has an awful lot to lose from a fight.
Who's winning?
WARS in the Middle East do not finish after six days any more.
Yet, at the end of a week of alternating euphoria and gloom, the sober verdict so far must be that the military side of this war is going well for the allies.
The likeliest thing to go wrong is the politics, and even the politics is manageable unless the war drags on too long.
Why so confident?
On the military front there is still time for the war to turn bad, particularly when the ground battle is joined in earnest.
But the first week was one-sided.
Allied casualties amounted to a score of airmen killed or captured.
Although Iraq's losses are harder to assess, there is no doubt that the American-led coalition has dumped a huge tonnage of bombs inside both Iraq and Kuwait.
Not every bomb has hit its target, but in Baghdad — the only place western journalists have been able briefly to observe — many clearly did.
Even if progress is slower than expected, and it may not be, nothing that has happened so far gainsays General Colin Powell's claim after six days of fighting that the allies, unopposed in the air, are systematically dismantling Saddam Hussein's ability to wage war, and doing so at remarkably small cost to themselves.
A good beginning does not rule out a calamitous ending: that is the way of war.
Indeed, there are already some setbacks.
Hardly any Iraqi combat aircraft have been destroyed, which means that they may still try to intervene in the land battle, or to hit harder than Scud missiles can at Israel and Saudi Arabia.
But, outclassed and outnumbered, most will be destroyed as soon as they take to the air; and if they do not take to the air they do not matter.
As for Mr Hussein's chemical weapons, they could still inflict horrible injuries on the allies if they are used.
But at least they will take nobody by surprise.
They have been known about, and planned against, since the first allied troops started arriving in Arabia.
The allies' biggest visible flop at the outset of this war has been the failure to knock out the launchers of Iraq's Scud missiles.
General Norman Schwarzkopf rightly describes the military value of these missiles as negligible.
A week after he first lobbed Scuds into Tel Aviv, Mr Hussein had managed only to kill three elderly women.
Thus far, with help from its friends, Israel has shown impressive restraint.
Still, the Scuds matter.
The attacks on Israel — and the war in general— are making a deep impression on Iraq's neighbours and could yet detach the Arab members of the alliance.
The most direct risk of an Arab exit is an Israeli entry: the very response that Mr Hussein has been hoping for.
So far the Israelis have resisted the provocations, and maybe the alliance could stand it if even if their forbearance fails.
While the war continues, the danger of the Arab regimes on America's side changing sides is smaller than many outsiders fear.
The ruling families of Saudi Arabia and the smaller oildoms of the Arabian peninsula have staked their futures on American power.
They know that, if America fails, their own days are briskly numbered.
Egypt and Syria have a smaller stake in the war, but they also have sound pragmatic reasons for seeing off a rival.
Although some popular sentiment may go Mr Hussein's way, both regimes are efficiently repressive enough to keep public opinion buttoned up.
But the bombardment of Tel Aviv has exposed another split, one that could, in time, prove just as dangerous to the allies: the division between Arab governments and the people they govern.
Many Arabs, including many who are nominally members of the anti-Saddam coalition, cannot conceal their glee at the attacks on Israel.
The defence minister of Syria, which has sent a division of tanks to help Saudi Arabia, admits to having felt ‘overwhelming joy’ at the missile attacks on ‘occupied Palestine’.
Tens of thousands of Jordanians and Algerians say they are eager to join the fight on Iraq's side.
Even Egyptians, whose soldiers may well be sent in on the allies' side, hate the spectacle of a fellow Muslim, a defier of Zionists, being shot up by America's whizz-bang weaponry.
They want Mr Hussein to lose, but do not want his army to crumble ignominiously, as their own did in 1967.
That would look too much like another Arab defeat at the hands of the West.
The world v Saddam, not America v the Arabs
All this is evidence, if any were needed, that the allies must tiptoe as carefully as possible in this region of broken pride and prickly sensitivities.
The trouble is that tiptoeing is desperately uncomfortable when you are trying to win a war at the same time.
It becomes virtually impossible when your enemy is trying to inflame every atavistic passion in order to defeat you.
Mr Hussein, previously secular, has now ordered the words Allahu Akbar (‘God is great’) to be embroidered on the Iraqi banner.
Not content with that, he has declared a jihad (holy war) against the infidels and asked all of the world's Muslims to join in.
Will they?
Probably not.
Because governments in the Middle East have a habit of declaring holy war at the drop of a hat, their people have learnt to give cautious answers to the call to arms.
Mr Hussein may declare Iraq's war against the allies to be a jihad, but Saudi Arabia returns the compliment, and has organised a fatwa (religious decree) to prove it.
The danger is in the longer run.
Americans, with no colonial history in the Middle East, tend to see the war against Mr Hussein as a police action against an international thug.
They are right, but they should expect no gratitude after it is over.
Even now the post-war Arab myth that this was a titanic clash of cultures and religions, of high-tech rich against low-tech poor, is taking root across the region.
The war needs to be won, and surely will be.
The worry is that it could release a host of uncontainable resentments.
That is a risk that has to be taken to defeat Saddam.
But the West should know that, however long it takes to end the battle against the Iraqi tyrant, it will take much longer to end the bitterness he has tapped in the unhappy Middle East.
START OF LETTERS SECTION
Gun-happy
Your article on crime in America (December 22nd) suggests that laws severely restricting access to firearms would somehow have the happy effect of bringing peace and tranquillity to the United States.
You note that the American murder rate is consistently four or five times worse than that suffered by West European countries and that 60% of American murders are committed with firearms.
Using the FBI's figures for 1989 of 8.7 murders per 100,000 citizens, the West European rate would be between 1.7 and 2.2 murders per 100,000.
The 40% of American murders committed without firearms scars the United States with a non-gun murder rate of 3.48 victims per 100,000, exceeding the total European rate.
You argue that either luck or strength is needed to kill without firearms — yet, in 1989 alone, 3,458 Americans were cut, slashed, or stabbed to death, and another 1,128 were bludgeoned to death.
More than 1,000 others were murdered with what the FBI calls ‘personal weapons’; ie, hands, feet, fists.
Perhaps America is simply a more violent society after all.
Kennesaw, Georgia STEPHEN MCKELVEY
Little evidence supports your conclusion that ‘Reducing the number and use of handguns is the surest possible way of reducing the amount of violent crime.’
In 1989, according to the FBI, Washington, DC, had 17 homicides per 100,000 population; New York city had 22.7.
By contrast, Burlington, Vermont, had 4.6, and Nashua, New Hampshire, just 3.4.
Both New York and Washington have far stricter gun controls than either Vermont or New Hampshire.
You state that ‘without a gun, the row in the bedroom would not end with a corpse.’
Yet, in 1989, according to the FBI, only 15% of all murder victims were related to their killers; 39% were ‘acquainted’ with their murderers, but this figure would include, say, a drug dealer killed by a fellow gang member, or even a police officer murdered by a suspect whom he or she had once arrested.
Better schools and housing, and more jobs would all help America's crime  problem .
So would more police, speedier courts, and better prisons and drug-treatment programmes.
Some gun control (competence tests, licences for carrying handguns) makes sense.
But it will have little impact on crime and if it serves merely as a pretext for disarming honest citizens, it will prove a serious mistake.
New York ADAM KASANOF
You omit the influence of the coroner.
In England a death is reported to the coroner if a doctor is unable to certify that he is sure that death was caused by some disease.
The coroner orders an investigation, usually including a post-mortem examination and sometimes an inquest.
The coroner issues the death certificate, usually ascribing death to a disease found during the post-mortem examination.
This makes it difficult for a murder to go unrecognised and discourages those planning murders.
In Canada and the United States there are coroners, but they are rarely used.
It is much too easy to fail to recognise a murder for what it is.
Breadsall, Derbyshire D.A.
HOWELL
Selling Rushdie
Your leader about Salman Rushdie (January 5th) says: ‘His publishers fell into panic, most bookshops caved in.’
This is incorrect.
All our bookshops continued to sell ‘The Satanic Verses’ and, with only a few exceptions where serious threats had been made, the book was always on display.
To my knowledge, the book was on display in nearly all independent bookshops.
It is quite inaccurate to say the publishers panicked.
They continued to keep the book in print and supply it.
‘The Satanic Verses’ was readily available and on display in bookshops, and remained a bestseller for many months.
London SIMON HORNBY Chairman W H Smith Group
The value of devaluation
Your article ‘When devaluation breeds contempt’(November 24th) gives a misleading impression of adjustment programmes supported by the World Bank.
First, the Bank does not advocate devaluations that lead to undervalued currencies.
Large real depreciations were needed during the 1980s to bring exchange rates back to equilibrium.
Second, the Bank has long recognised that adjustment takes time.
The change in relative prices brought about by devaluations may harm output in the short term, but this is offset by faster growth in the longer term.
The only alternative to devaluation is to make deeper cuts in domestic spending, which would result in higher social costs.
Third, the Bank emphasises that devaluations must be accompanied by other policies.
These include strict fiscal and monetary policies to avoid inflation; deregulation of domestic goods markets; reform of the trade regime; measures to remove constraints on factor employment, saving and investment, and to strengthen private and public institutions; and steps to protect the poor during the transition.
Your concern about the ability of commodity exporters to adjust in this way is understandable.
But remember that many of the East Asian ‘dragons’ were commodity exporters.
They successfully diversified their economies through structural reform and sound macroeconomic management.
They also prevented their currencies from becoming overvalued.
Washington, DC JOHANNES LINN Acting vice-president The World Bank
Polish joke
On a recent visit to Warsaw I found that many of the street names had been changed during the past year.
Generally, names of various ‘socialist heroes’ have been replaced by those of Polish patriots.
A somewhat more creative approach, however, was demonstrated in renaming the former ‘Street of the Red Army’.
It is now ‘Sesame Street’.
New Brunswick, New Jersey ALAN GOLDMAN
START OF BOOKS SECTION
The best listening
PARIS
APPROPRIATELY enough, Mozart-year sees the largest recording project in the history of the industry.
The Mozart Record Edition, in 45 volumes by Philips, will put into print all the master's works, even fragments previously unrecorded.
It includes performances by such great Mozartians as Sir Colin Davis and the late Belgian violinist, Arthur Grumiaux.
But by emphasising the newest recordings with the latest sound techniques by younger artists (who can thus effectively be marketed in the future), other great Mozartians like Clara Haskil and Igor Markevitch must languish in the back of the catalogue.
Decca is offering a more modest Mozart sampler of about a dozen compact discs.
Its publicity concentrates, as Philips's does, on artists who have recorded complete cycles of works: Christopher Hogwood's set of the symphonies, for example, or Vladimir Ashkenazy's complete piano concertos.
Apparently lost in the shuffle are the violin sonatas recorded 15 years ago by Radu Lupu with Szymon Goldberg, an astonishing violinist.
As a teenager, Goldberg was leader of the Berlin Philharmonic under Furtwängler in the 1920s; in the 1970s he was still in fine form, and his recordings should surely have been re-released on this occasion.
Even more patchy is Deutsche Grammophon's ‘Mozart's Masterpieces,’ another set of reissues where the unwary consumer may find himself with the superb piano artistry of Maurizio Pollini for one concerto, but the rather less impressive playing of Friedrich Gulda for another.
The ‘Requiem’ and ‘Coronation Mass’are heavily-laden late performances by Herbert von Karajan, a strange contrast with the splendidly vigorous treatment of other works by John Eliot Gardiner and Leonard Bernstein.
The best general advice for the consumer is to buy the masterpieces as Amadeus wrote them: one at a time, and with loving care.
Interested listeners might look to the less renowned record labels, such as Capriccio in Germany, which has issued a superb recording of Mozart songs by Mitsuko Shirai, a soprano, and her pianist-husband Hartmut Hoell.
And, last but not least, they might re-read the scores while listening.
Perhaps the most laudable project of the Mozart bicentenary is the publishing by Baerenreiter Verlag in Kassel of the complete musical scores in paperback, a 20-volume set at a reasonable price.
Unlike any interpretation, however persuasive, the notes on the page are, after all, what the man wrote.
What makes a European?
EUROPE: A HISTORY OF ITS PEOPLES.
By Jean-Baptiste Duroselle, translated by Richard Wayne.
Viking; 424 pages; £25
‘COMMITTED’ history is not something Jean-Baptiste Duroselle believes in, or so he says.
All the same, he has written a book committed to proving that Europeans ought to unite.
Their shared experiences over the past 2,000 years, he argues, bring them together more than their conflicts force them apart.
Published simultaneously in eight European languages (as part of a European initiative backed by Frederique Delouche, a banker), it is clearly intended to serve a purpose.
Europe is a peculiar continent.
Defined by its filigree shoreline to the west, its eastern limits are somewhat arbitrary if you accept, as Mr Duroselle appears to, de Gaulle's vision of a Europe stretching ‘from the Atlantic to the Urals’.
Many of its countries are relatively small and it is geographically more diverse than any other continent.
Its peoples, the book argues, were from the earliest times a mish-mash of white races.
Long before there was any conscious thought of unity, there was shared experience.
In pre-historic times megalith-builders from Portugal to Denmark erected huge stone structures in place of simple burial grounds: symbols both of similar beliefs in some form of after-life and evidence of an extraordinary capacity to organise.
Later, the continent benefited from the culture of Greece and the political efficiency, law and administration of Rome.
The Judaeo-Christian influence introduced the notions of a single God and of man's equality in the eyes of that God.
Missionaries travelling throughout Western Europe established Latin as the lingua franca by the end of the seventh century.
Europeans, by contrast with the peoples of other continents, were to become noticeably more curious and impatient with the world as they found it, and more inclined to tamper with its workings.
For four centuries after the Renaissance, Europe — and only Europe — developed modern science, despite having once lagged behind the Arabs and the Chinese.
Europe was first to establish networks of cities, to set up universities, to allow discussion about reason versus faith, to reject both Caesaropapism and theocracy, to develop the idea of the balance of power, to introduce habeas corpus and the jury system.
The French Revolution left Europe with new notions of liberty and equality which, however, America took far more seriously than Europeans did.
Europe was first to industrialise and thereby throw up the indigent urban proletariat, who in their turn founded the first labour organisations which spawned Marxism and fascism, both truly European ideologies.
But Europe was split by nationalism, and by its own internal rivalries as local space ran out and European powers rushed for the colonies.
(In fact, Mr Duroselle seems almost to believe that the worst aspect of colonialism was the way it divided European nations that might otherwise have come together.)
And Europe was split by the attempts of those who sought to unite it by force.
Napoleon and Hitler gave European unity a bad name.
As a term, ‘Europe’ was first used in 732 at the Battle of Tours, when the armies fighting the Saracens were no longer made up simply of Christians.
But it was not until 1693 that William Penn first proposed a form of European union.
Others followed, among them Castlereagh, Victor Hugo, Nietzsche and a French foreign ministry memo of 1930 which referred to the ‘European Community’.
(Ironically, the idea was rejected at the time by almost everyone, fearing for their sovereignty.
The enthusiastic ones included Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia which, a mere 18 years later, found themselves on the wrong side of the Iron Curtain to be eligible for membership.)
Post-war America was in favour of a united Europe to stand more firmly against the Soviet Union, and successive American administrations grew irritable with the Europeans for failing to believe that unity in Europe could be as simple as it was in America.
Mr Duroselle is cataloguing, first, a tendency for Europeans to be more similar than they are different, although their very diversity is what marks them out; and second, the various aspirations — if not actual attempts — to bring Europeans into conscious, and voluntary, union.
He makes a convincing case for links of various sorts and degrees between West European countries going back as much as 5,000 years, but his thesis has one weakness.
The book calls itself a history of the European peoples.
All the European peoples.
But there are moments when one is not sure whether Mr Duroselle has really made up his mind who belongs with the Europeans and who does not.
There is one noticeable omission in the cavalcade he has lined up to speak for Europe: Mikhail Gorbachev and his ‘common European house’.
In November 1983 Milan Kundera wrote an essay for Le Débat, in which he argued that Russia could never really be considered part of Europe because it had for so long been dominated by Caesaropapism, where the civil emperor is also the supreme religious leader.
Western Europe had wriggled out of that one by the end of the 11th century.
Mr Kundera was strongly attacked for his view, and Mr Duroselle appears to be avoiding the issue.
He does not begin to describe what the effect was on Russia of by-passing the Reformation, the Counter-reformation and the Enlightenment; instead, in an effort to be friendly, he mentions things Russian from time to time.
He must have started writing his book a long time ago.
The final chapter is no more than a scrappy addition with rather a lot of photographs of by now familiar faces from November 1989.
Where do these newly liberated countries (East Germany apart) fit into the picture?
With each other?
With Western Europe?
Or only on the fringes, allowed in after promises of exemplary behaviour?
And, once again, what about the Russians, whose literature and music have always been welcomed as thoroughly European?
For the sake of the stability of the continent, ‘bona fide’ Europeans ought to be sure what they think.
Central America
The enduring conquest
THE HERITAGE OF THE CONQUISTADORS.
By Samuel Stone.
University of Nebraska Press; 241 pages; $35
LONELY among the Indians whom they had subjugated, and whom they therefore feared, the Spanish squireens who settled in Central America almost five centuries ago kept themselves to themselves, and married their children to those of their friends.
The descendants of those alliances still run the region, and Samuel Stone (from Costa Rica) has the genealogical tables to prove it.
He argues, too, that the resolve of the settler families to keep control can help explain why Central America is a political, economic and cultural mess.
The conquistadors' descendants have often been challenged — from outside by British and then North American capitalists, from within by (to use the author's formulation)‘the Communist Party or Arab and Jewish minorities’.
Mr Stone argues that they have repelled both foreigners and foreign ideas; that liberalism was junked before it was given a chance to work, socialism implanted without a bourgeoisie, communism introduced without a proletariat.
It is more complicated than that, of course.
In Guatemala and Honduras there were large Indian populations, which the settlers coerced to clear and cultivate large estates.
Government relied on force, not justice, and still does so.
Farther south there were few natives to enslave.
Costa Rica's settlers had to till their own land, which limited the size of their estates.
Unthreatened by a brown majority, they developed the peaceable and democratic little state that Mr Stone is proud of.
Yet all but one of Costa Rica's 38 presidents, since it became independent in the 1840s, shared descent from a single conquistador, Cristobal de Alfaro; he was also a progenitor of seven presidents of next-door Nicaragua, two of El Salvador, and one each of Guatemala and of Honduras.
Most of these men, by intermarriage, were also descended from other conquistadors.
Alfaro's descendants in next-door Nicaragua include the Somoza family that ruled from 1933 to 1980, displacing their cousins, the Lacayos and the Chamorros, who had provided ten previous presidents.
The chain was briefly broken in the 1980s, when Nicaragua was run by the Ortega brothers, upstarts (on the wrong side of the blanket) from the post-Conquest ‘new aristocracy’.
But it is back to normal now.
Since the election of 1990 the president is once again called Chamorro, her chef de cabinet (and son-in-law) Lacayo.
Outsiders behaved as if the Nicaraguan revolution were about ideology.
For its main participants it was more of a family row.
Mr Stone seems fond of the bizarre dynastic arrangements he studies, tending to deplore the rise of the Arab families who are transforming politics in Honduras (and, for that matter, in Ecuador and Argentina and Brazil).
He thinks it is a waste of time for foreigners to try to help change things in Central America.
If educated people without conquistador bloodlines can never rise far, it is no use giving scholarships.
Foreign aid to the public sector will be grabbed by grandee ministers; aid to the private sector will mostly help the grandees who run it.
But change is creeping in all the same.
Fundamentalist missionaries challenge the settlers' church.
Schools excite the ambitions of the Indians.
Elections have to be less bogus when supervised by Yankee foundations with cash and counsel.
Only one descendant of the conquistadors now runs a genuine, old-fashioned Latin American absolutism.
His name is Fidel Castro.
Wolfgang-san
TOKYO
COUNT on Japan to offer something a little different to the memory of Mozart.
One piece of memorabilia is a bottle of sake, ‘Mozart K.001’, fermented to the strains of the master's music; the other is an unfinished Mozart symphony completed by a Japanese composer.
Back in 1987, the Mozarteum in Salzburg asked Shigeaki Saegusa whether he would like to complete Mozart's score for the ‘Sinfonia Concertante in A for Violin, Viola, Violoncello and Orchestra’.
Mr Saegusa's first instinct was to refuse; he thought he could not do it justice.
Mozart had written only 50 of a proposed 415 bars of music, and had sketched in the outline of the melody for the next 80 bars.
The heart of the work was missing.
But the foundation asked him again, and he agreed to complete it.
Mr Saegusa calls the finished piece ‘an ode to Mozart from the Orient,’ explaining that the new music is his own, rather than a supplement to Mozart's.
Those who have seen it — it will not be heard until a concert in Salzburg in December — agree that it is a hybrid between Mozart's incomplete score and Mr Saegusa's style, based on principles of Japanese music.
In the new middle section a violin, a cello, and a viola play Mozart's melody while strings and a harp suggest the oriental music of the koto, an ancient stringed instrument, and the bamboo-reed sho.
Those unable to get to Salzburg — where an estimated 300,000 Japanese will be bound this year — may eventually listen to Mr Saegusa's mélange in the Wave, a glossy modern building in the fashionable Roppongi district of Tokyo.
The Wave is dedicated to selling music.
On the fourth floor is Mozart House, a room which features 3,000–4,000 Mozart CDs, portraits of the maestro on the wall, and an Empire couch to sit on to listen to his music being played continually.
Everything but the couch is for sale.
What an anniversary should do for Mozart
From child to man
SALZBURG
ALMOST a year remains before the 200th anniversary of Mozart's death on December 5th.
Yet for months the world's promotions industry has been busy marking — and marketing — the event.
All is not lost; the mania is not an epidemic: this weekend (January 27th) is the 235th anniversary of the composer's birth, and only Britain's Radio 3 went overboard on it.
But throughout the year — grandly proclaimed as ‘Mozart Year’ by some kind of promotional General Will — the world will be in grave danger of suffering from surfeit.
It will be more difficult than ever to see the composer as he really was, and is.
Mozart is being promoted all over the world as the bewigged darling of the gods, the product of a golden age of innocence and delight.
The composer's father, Leopold, unwittingly started the rot over two centuries ago when he took the six-year-old Mozart to market, as it were, on the celebrated tour of Europe's courts and palaces.
To this day the world sees him that way.
His very name (zart is German for tender, delicate, graceful, even ethereal) adds fuel to the legend.
Although all epochs have helped themselves to this or that aspect of Mozart, all have over-emphasised the ‘charm’.
The reason is clear: it sells products.
The image weighed on Mozart even during his lifetime.
At the age of 22 he wrote to his father from Paris: ‘What annoys me most is that these idiots in France still think I am seven years old, because that is when they first knew me.’
It was an image that spread and took root everywhere, bringing with it a tradition of atrocious performances — sloppy, flat and prettifying — that lasted throughout his lifetime, for the entire 19th century and for too much of the 20th.
Eighteenth-century audiences were quite happy to be fed agreeable background music; it was their equivalent of muzak, played uniformly and without criticism.
In the 19th century a pall of dullness settled over the limited Mozart repertoire that was performed.
It was further weighed down when German literature seized on the ‘demonic’ in Mozart and press-ganged him into its own camp, and by a tendency to put a romantic sheen on performances, which replaced uniformity by even worse distortion.
But condescension was the general attitude.
Nietzsche summed it up: ‘Mozart, a delicate and lovable soul, but quite 18th-century, even when he is serious.’
It was Gustav Mahler and Richard Strauss who had the insight and courage to start, at the turn of the century, the long process of discovery and purification which is leading to a redefinition of Mozart.
And yet, with honourable exceptions, the syrupy brand of Mozart still stalks (or rather, minces around) the concert halls and opera houses of the world.
To his credit, Sir Thomas Beecham never put up with it; nor did Karl Böhm, nor the Glyndebourne pioneers before and after the second world war.
But the 150th anniversary of Mozart's death in 1941 brought only eulogies of the standard old-fashioned kind (as well as some Nazi-inspired pan-Germanic accretions), and Mozart was still on his ornamental pedestal for the commemoration of his 200th birthday in 1956.
Yet something was stirring.
Wolfgang Hildesheimer's biography, which was one of the studies marking a sea-change in perceptions of Mozart, was published in 1977.
By that time, scholars in various countries were throwing new light on the composer's music, life and times, providing performers with new insights — and also making way for the populist boom that began with Peter Shaffer's play and film ‘Amadeus’.
Milos Forman's film presented a new Mozart, foul-mouthed and barely sufferable; but still, essentially, a child.
The bicentenary year is an opportunity and a challenge, as well as a danger: an opportunity to take stock and to hear and see Mozart at his best, a challenge to clear away the sentimental cobwebs and let Mozart speak, but a danger that the world will be engulfed in mass-marketed whimsy.
The Austrian authorities in Vienna and Salzburg are at pains to contain the worst excesses, but there is no stopping the Mozart T-shirts, socks, toasters, puzzles, bottle-openers, Swatches, mayonnaise, cheese, scent, a Köchel cook book, a hamburger called Mozart and well over 100m marzipan-filled ‘Mozartkugeln’.
A chamber-pot is said to be on offer with Mozart on the  outside and Salieri inside; and in the bookshops, serious biographical and analytical works are well hidden under a catch-crop of sugary Mozart nostalgia.
As for commemorative musical events, some promoters jumped the gun by a year; others have been so keen not to be upstaged that January has already seen dozens of concerts.
Hundreds more will follow, prompting Mr Hildesheimer to suggest that the best commemoration would be not to perform Mozart at all until next year, so that everyone could realise what they had been missing.
Small hope of that.
The Lincoln Centre in New York plans to perform every note Mozart ever wrote; in Switzerland Lucerne is vying with Vienna to put on all his church music, spread over 46 events; Geneva will hear all his piano concertos in seven concerts.
Vienna's trump cards include concerts in the palaces where Mozart made music.
Apart from the well-known operas, to be given in full in all the main opera houses, the early ones will be appearing, notably in Nice but also elsewhere; in London the Barbican Centre's ‘Mozart 200’ promises an imaginative variety of events, including a billiards tournament.
And everywhere there are to be seminars on Mozartian themes and exhibitions, the most ambitious in Salzburg and Vienna.
Over the past 30 years, musicological, historical and biographical research have all led towards a new Mozart.
They have been helped by the spread of a non-reverential way of thinking.
The result is cleaner, brighter performances, often on contemporary instruments.
Although these are sometimes slavishly historical, or played at a frenetic tempo (as if over-eager to cast off the stately past), the benefits of such experiments are clear.
The best of today's Mozart (not easy to come by) sacrifices none of his classical elegance, but also contains the robustness and vigour that come from within the music.
Is it too much to hope that, in spite of the worst excesses of this year, Mozart will at last be allowed to grow up?
Japan and America
No yes-man
THE JAPAN THAT CAN SAY NO: WHY JAPAN WILL BE FIRST AMONG EQUALS.
By Shintaro Ishihara.
Simon & Schuster; 158 pages; $18.95
GIVEN that Japan is America's closest ally in the Pacific, there is a remarkable amount of suspicion, contempt and even downright hatred between the two countries.
Into that briar patch in 1989 dropped a book, published in Japan and called ‘No’ to ieru Nihon’(‘The Japan that Can Say No’) by a politician, Shintaro Ishihara, and the chairman of Sony, Akio Morita.
Calling on Japan to stand up for itself when dealing with America, the book was a huge success, selling more than 1m copies.
But in Washington it caused a nasty row.
The Pentagon made an unofficial translation, which did the rounds on Capitol Hill.
The book was treated like a declaration of war.
That notoriety explains why Simon & Schuster paid $275,000 for the translation rights, the highest sum ever paid for a Japanese book.
It also explains why Mr Morita hastily withdrew his chapters of the book, for fear of the damage it might do to Sony's sales.
That left Mr Ishihara with just half of what was already a short book.
So, for the English edition, he has added five new chapters, consisting mostly of advice to America to balance his previous advice to Japan.
And it explains a painfully careful translation: to avoid accusations that the English version has been gelded, all changes have been marked with square brackets.
What remains puzzling is why the book should have been notorious at all.
Mr Ishihara is no more than an entertaining distraction in Japanese politics: a member of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party, but one with no power base and whose views count for little.
He made his name in the 1950s as a prize-winning and rather racy novelist.
As such he is popular, but not as an ideologue: with his late actor brother, Yujiro (known as Japan's James Dean), he formed one of the country's most glamorous families.
Perhaps it was Mr Morita's name that gave the book its bite?
This, too, is unlikely, for Mr Morita has long been a noisy critic of America and was saying nothing new.
Moreover, to any serious reader the book seems fourth-rate, at best.
The original part consists of a string of factual claims, many of which are quarter-truths or plain wrong.
He claims, for instance, that American missiles depend on microchips made in Japan: the truth is that although many are bought from Japan, they are a basic sort and thus replaceable.
He also claims that a dispute between the two countries in 1988–89 over a new Japanese fighter plane, the FSX, arose because America was afraid it would be too good and might be able to shoot down American aircraft.
In fact Americans (wrongly) wanted Japan to buy their fighters to narrow America's trade deficit.
There were also fears that Japan planned to do just what America does: use defence spending and research to help build a civil aerospace industry, and thus beat Boeing.
Yet to focus on the facts is to miss the point.
Mr Ishihara writes as a politician, giving his hunches rather than the fruits of real research.
These are that Japan now matters as much to America as America does to Japan, and that it would do both some good if Japan acted accordingly.
Unsurprising, perhaps, but in a country that for 40 years has acted like a poodle it is striking to find a Japanese suggesting that it now has the strength of a rottweiler.
It is also uncomfortable for those in range of the teeth.
Soviet history
Country boy makes half-good
KHRUSHCHEV REMEMBERS: THE GLASNOST TAPES.
Translated by Jerrold Schecter.
Little Brown; 219 pages; £14.95 and $19.95
IN THE early Gorbachev years every public mention of Nikita Khrushchev's name was a thrill for thinking Russians and western Kremlin-watchers.
Not only had Khrushchev denounced Stalin's crimes; the new warriors of perestroika, including Mikhail Gorbachev himself, were for the most part the Khrushchev generation, whose youthful idealism had coincided with that small post-Stalin thaw.
Yet this book, filling in the gaps Khrushchev left when the bulk of his reminiscences were smuggled out to the West in the early 1970s, is the most depressing reading for Mr Gorbachev.
Time, these past 30 years, might just as well have stood still.
‘There is apparently some great defect in our system,’ concluded Khrushchev from his pensioner's park bench as he compared what he saw of the capitalist West with the shoddy goods, poor food and massive waste of the supposed workers' paradise.
If only he could find the switch to throw or the knob to turn that would liberate the real potential of communism.
In power, it never occurred to him, just as it did not occur to Mr Gorbachev until it was too late, that it was the system itself that was rotten through and through.
The Soviet economy has gone from bad to chaos.
The memoirs, like the man, are a mixture of the comic, the naive and the knowing.
The Marx brothers might have shown more tolerance than Karl Marx for Stalin's antics: throwing food at guests unwise enough to nod off at table during his interminable late-night dinner parties, or racing round in meetings ‘cursing like a cab driver’.
Khrushchev survived to recount his disgust in part because he was a self-taught country boy.
Stalin never imagined Khrushchev could succeed him.
That was only one of Stalin's mistakes.
Khrushchev could never forgive him for the cruelties and stupidities that brought Russia so close to defeat by Hitler.
Even as German troops attacked, orders came to forge swords from knives and to prepare petrol bombs to meet the advancing Wehrmacht; there were no rifles.
Those men who might have planned sensibly for the inevitable war with Germany had all been shot.
Marshal Voroshilov, the man who helped Stalin cut the Soviet army to pieces in the 1930s, is described as ‘the biggest bag of shit in the army’.
Most extraordinary of all, in 1942 a despairing Stalin even offered to trade the Ukraine, Belorussia and parts of Russia itself for peace.
Hitler never bothered to reply.
Most of Khrushchev's political career was covered in the first two volumes, but some good titbits have been saved till last.
During the Cuban missile crisis, Fidel Castro wanted the Soviet Union to fire its nuclear weapons at America.
But, says Khrushchev, Mr Castro failed to understand that all the Soviet Union was trying to do was to deter America from invading Cuba.
Was it?
Nobody will know until glasnost unlocks more of the Soviet archives.
And anyway, after all those years as a non-person, who can begrudge Khrushchev his gloss on history?
Surrealism
Dali World
FOIX
SALVADOR DALI was a genius at self-promotion.
In Figueres, his Catalan hometown, he set up his own museum (which has also become his mausoleum since his death two years ago), with its own foundation to administer it.
Not even Dali, however, thought of designing a surrealist town and naming it after himself.
Others may be doing it for him.
Until the artist's death, the foundation consisted mainly of international personalities and members of his entourage, all named by him.
Pending a new appointment, its secretary is Francesc Vergès, his former bank manager, who advised the ageing ‘Senor Dali’‘to spend his money but not to sell a painting unless he had to’.
Thanks to this shrewd advice the Spanish state, the sole beneficiary of Dali's will, has inherited 183 paintings and hundreds of drawings, photographs and other objects — besides his house in Portlligat and Pubol castle, which he had bought for his wife Gala.
Of the 183 paintings, 56 are for Madrid's Reina Sofia Centre for Contemporary Art.
They include ‘Atomica Melancolica’, ‘Invisible Man’, ‘In Search of the Fourth Dimension’ and ‘The Great Masturbator’, which the mayor of Figueres unsuccessfully tried to keep for his town.
The remaining works will be displayed alternately in Barcelona and Figueres.
The heart of Dalilandia will continue to be that ‘gigantic surrealist whole’(to quote the artist), the ‘Teatre-Museu’.
The museum was designed ‘to foster universal recognition of his genius’; but behind the facade, adorned with eggs and loaves of bread, the paintings show the painter's particular love for the local landscape and coastline.
As Dali once said, ‘Where else but in my own town can the most extravagant and solid facets of my work endure?’
Visitors seem to agree.
Numbers have risen from 135,000 in 1975 to 640,000 in 1990.
To cash in on this pilgrimage, the foundation is considering including the Portlligat house and Pubol castle in ‘Dali tours’.
But the most ambitious financial venture is a project to build on the Catalan coast a holiday resort called Cosmo Dali, complete with a yacht harbour and leisure park.
The architecture is to be reminiscent of Dali's floppy watches, Venuses with drawers and rubber pianos, while other surrealist props that crowd his paintings will inspire sculptures and park entertainments.
Financing is expected to come from foreign investors, and the project is backed by the Catalan government.
Could Dali be the Catalan answer, at last, to Mickey Mouse?
AMERICAN SURVEY
Communal living
Get together
SEATTLE
THE American house is a domestic fortress, protected by garage doors that snap shut like a clamshell when the occupants come home each evening.
No house built in the past four decades has a front porch (verandah, for Britons); Americans prefer the private world of their expansive back lawns.
Here they re-live the life of a pioneer in the wilderness, when the nearest living soul was 20 miles away.
This is not cheap: housing costs eat up 44% of a typical wage-earner's income, as opposed to 14% in the 1950s.
A few brave souls are about to try reversing the trend, through ‘co-housing’.
The idea is that people band together to buy property, then design and build a cluster of single-family homes.
The goal is to save money and recapture a way of life.
The first co-housing project in America, in Washington state, will break ground soon.
The project will house about 45 adults and 25 children near the town of Winslow on Bainbridge Island, a 30-minute ferry trip across Puget Sound from Seattle.
The island's isolation and woodsy beauty have made it wildly popular in the past few years; prices for many single homes have jumped above $300,000.
Families in the co-housing group will be able to buy a two-bedroom house for about $160,000.
The project's 30 houses will be built in clusters and spread over a five-acre site.
Co-housing might seem to carry the ideological baggage of communes from decades past.
But most of the people in the Winslow group are professional and middle-class — doctors, teachers, executives.
Many have already played the traditional American housing game.
What seems to be driving them is a desire to create the small-town feeling that is fast disappearing in America.
Frequent moves, combined with the anti-social nature of the American home, have created suburbs full of people who scarcely know one another 's names.
Co-housing proponents envisage a setting where people agree to assume local responsibilities.
To that end the residents of the Winslow group will share cooking chores in a central ‘common house,’ as well as helping with childcare and maintenance.
Co-housing is not an American invention.
It has its roots in northern Europe, particularly Denmark, where more than 120 co-housing projects have been built since 1972.
Co-housing groups in other parts of America are watching the Winslow project closely.
But the idea of staking a claim to a piece of land is deeply rooted in the American psyche.
Americans successfully resisted a push towards cluster housing and common open space when those ideas were in vogue 20 years ago.
A chicken in every pot
DALLAS
AT THE beginning of the 20th century Texan lobbyists could get more or less what they wanted so long as they kept politicians supplied with the three Bs: beefsteak, bourbon and blondes.
Things have not changed all that much.
Texas still has about the weakest campaign-finance laws of any big state, and some of its politicians still rely on lobbyists to pay for everything from trips and meals to golf tournaments.
So Ann Richards's first act as governor was to call for the adoption of an emergency ethics law ‘with some teeth in it.’
The current push for reform started in 1989 with ‘Chickengate’.
A wealthy Texan chicken magnate, Lonnie ‘Bo’ Pilgrim, walked on to the floor of the state Senate and handed $10,000 cheques to several legislators during the debate on a bill about compensating workers for job injuries.
Although this is a legal thing to do in Texas, an uproar over the shameless display of influence-peddling prompted most of the recipients to return the money (mostly only after they had cashed the cheques).
The fuss died down, but has now surfaced again.
The Democratic speaker of the Texas House of Representative, Gib Lewis, was indicted in December for failing to report a gift from a local law firm.
Mr Lewis and the law firm, Heard Coggan Blair and Williams, say they did nothing illegal and defend the payment as a business agreement.
Mr Lewis admits he also took a trip to a Mexican resort with members of the law firm, but denies reports that a female employee was provided to entertain him.
The speaker has, in the past, paid a fine for not disclosing fully his property ventures with lobbyists.
Since 1970 three out of five Texan speakers, and a couple of dozen other lawmakers, have been indicted.
Mrs Richards says it is high time to rid Austin, the capital city, of practices that critics say stink as much as Mr Pilgrim's chicken-processing plants.
The question is not whether a reform bill will pass but how strong it will be.
Politicians, uncomfortable in the spotlight, publicly back some sort of reform package that might take away a few of their perks.
According to a study by the new lieutenant-governor, Texas stands alone among the ten biggest states in its lack of power to enforce its rules on ethical behaviour.
Not that there is much to enforce.
Texas puts no limits on campaign contributions by lobbyists, or on spending by candidates.
Any gift or campaign contribution is legal so long as it is reported.
Lobbyists are barred from contributing while the legislature is in session; the savvy Mr Pilgrim worked the Senate floor during an emergency meeting.
Lobbyists must report contributions without specifying whom they gave them to.
In 1989 lobbyists spent $2.2m entertaining anonymous politicians.
Texan lawmakers, who are paid only $600 a month for their public service, argue that they cannot afford to live in Austin.
So they take advantage of a rule that permits them to spend money left over from their campaigns on themselves.
They are supposed to report gifts over $250, but often do not.
Reform groups have called for drastic measures, perhaps following California's lead in limiting the number of terms a politician can serve in office.
Unlikely.
George Bush's critics
A PROPHET is not without honour, save in his own house.
Washington has not yet made up its collective mind about George Bush.
Some of his achievements are cheered by all, or nearly all: the way in which he stitched together an international coalition against Saddam Hussein; the way he managed to use the United Nations to prosecute American policy; his courage.
But he has not convinced his hometown audience that the larger goal of the Gulf war — the crafting of a new world order — amounts to more than a string of words.
And some go on to accuse him of tunnel-vision, saying they doubt whether he ever really wanted a peaceful settlement in the Gulf; whether he now has a view of what American policy after the war should be; and whether his single-minded determination to win the war is blinding him to other dangers.
Part of the problem is that Mr Bush is not a character with whom cynical Washingtonians feel comfortable.
Whatever else he is (part mean-spirited political campaigner, part Texas oilman, and more) he is indisputably a Yankee patrician, with an abiding sense of noblesse oblige.
He was a war hero.
He came to political maturity when the world was wrecked; he sees himself as a man who can put back together what others have broken.
Less than two days after the bombing started, he talked about America's post-war ‘healing’ mission.
He holds some old-fashioned values to be self-evident, and they have informed his view of Iraq's actions.
‘This’, he has said, ‘is black and white, good and evil’.
Few Washingtonians talk like this, perhaps because few of them are Yankee patrician war heroes, perhaps because politics has rubbed the gleam off them.
And Mr Bush, unlike John Kennedy, who came from a not dissimilar background, has found it difficult to communicate his beliefs to others.
Perhaps his parents taught him that sounding gushy is bad.
And ‘vision’ is something vulgar Reaganites had.
His speech to the country on January 16th on the outbreak of war proved yet again that the president is no orator.
For people already inclined to be critical of Mr Bush, it is easy to leap from saying that he cannot articulate a policy to saying that he does not have one, or that such policy as he has is flawed.
Was there a choice?
His fiercer critics argue that from November 8th, when he announced a doubling of American troops in Saudi Arabia, Mr Bush was obsessed with the need for war against the man he had demonised.
After the UN Security Council vote on November 29th he was trapped by a timetable: war had to be fought after January 15th.
A cooler customer, it is suggested, would somehow have sought and found a diplomatic solution.
To some extent, this charge is unprovable, either way.
Though the world's press has done its best, huge gaps remain in public knowledge of the road to war.
The details of diplomatic manoeuvring — what messages other Arabs took from Washington to Baghdad, what the Russians did, how the American chargé d'affaires in Baghdad kept busy for five months — remain unknown.
Either nothing happened that did not happen on CNN, or, more likely, much that happened stayed under wraps.
That caveat notwithstanding, those close to Mr Bush insist that there was an effort to get a non-military solution, and that if Saddam Hussein had reached out for it he could have walked away from Kuwait with something gained from his adventure.
From the time of Mr Bush's speech to the UN General Assembly in October to the last-minute pleas of Javier Perez de Cuellar, the UN secretary-general, an array of sweeteners was on offer.
That Iraq never once even nibbled at the goodies has convinced the administration that diplomacy was always doomed, because Mr Hussein meant to hold on to Kuwait no matter what.
But did the administration misjudge Iraq's military power of resistance?
Too early to know, say officials, and anyway that question really has a different target: it was the press and Wall Street that got euphoric in the early days of war, and then came down with a bump, not the administration.
Another charge is that Mr Bush has given too little thought to the nature of a post-war settlement.
Officials find this criticism maddening.
The National Security Council, they insist, hums with meetings on just this, but the meetings cannot get very far until more is known about how the post-war world looks.
For a start, they argue, America has already told Jordan that it wants to be friends again (watch to see if America leans on Israel to be more accommodating to Jordan's need for water).
The most pungent criticism of the president may be that so much of his attention is on the Gulf, and so little of it elsewhere.
This is understandable, but it is still dangerous.
Above all, the administration has barely responded to Mikhail Gorbachev's swing to oppression in the Soviet Union.
Neither Mr Bush nor James Baker, his secretary of state (who talks about Lithuania and Latvia with the visible enthusiasm of someone who has just sucked a lemon), can yet bring himself to think anything but the best of Mr Gorbachev, so helpful last year in Europe, so kind this year in the Gulf.
This could indeed be a weakness in Mr Bush's determination to defeat Iraq.
Women
Breaking through
WASHINGTON, DC
POLITICAL marriages have their uses.
On January 14th the unlikely figure of Bob Dole, the Senate Republican leader, took time off from the Gulf to call for a statutory commission to find out why women have not broken through the ‘glass ceiling’ that keeps them from top management jobs.
The reason for his interest?
Could it be that his wife Elizabeth, who was secretary of labour until three months ago, wanted another push in the campaign she launched last May?
Many men (but few women) deny the existence of subtle impediments that make it particularly difficult for women, blacks, Hispanics and even those talented Asians to make it to the top.
They now have to contend with a survey of corporate America conducted jointly by an executive-recruitment firm, Korn/Ferry, and the University of California at Los Angeles.
In 1989 only 3% of top American managers were female and only 1.5% were from a racial minority.
The proportions had barely changed since 1979.
The score for American women is also strikingly lower than the 8% reached by their British sisters.
Overt sex or race discrimination is illegal.
But the impediments are often so subtle that they fall foul of no law.
And few of the people who hit the glass ceiling are inclined to go through the additional pain of a complaint to the government or a court case.
This is why Mrs Dole got the Labour Department to look at the personnel records of nine big companies around the country.
The results should appear in March.
Officials expect them to show that there is indeed an obstacle at middle-management level.
They hope also to learn what part is played by each firm's promotion procedures, training, pay structures and family policies.
Nobody can object to collecting and analysing such information (despite a few worries about confidentiality).
The arguments come over what to do about it.
Some claim that the numbers are bound to improve now that more than half the country's workforce is female or from a minority.
But they have been saying that for 20 years.
The Labour Department can cajole companies to break the ceiling themselves before someone does it for them.
It can also threaten to cancel federal contracts with any firms that refuse to change.
This would hurt, since a quarter of American firms have such contracts.
Businesses are worried lest pushing things too fast leads to the adoption of quotas for women and minorities.
The spectre of quotas was the reason that businessmen gave for opposing the civil-rights bill the president vetoed last October.
Congress is likely to reintroduce this bill soon.
The administration's left hand may continue to fight it as a quota measure, while its right comes close to endorsing quotas to break the glass ceiling.
Terrorism
High anxiety
WASHINGTON, DC
DETROIT'S mayor publicly muses about imposing a state of emergency in his city.
Rumours circulate of bombs in New York's subway system, and the poisoning of water wells.
Army surplus stores report a stream of buyers for gas masks, water-purification tablets, survival knives — even combat boots.
American businessmen and tourists are busy cancelling their trips to Europe.
American students, unlucky enough to be studying in that endangered continent, are warned by their embassies not to talk loudly in public.
Saddam Hussein threatened that it was in his power to sponsor terrorist attacks on the countries ranged against him.
Once war broke out, the security measures at the White House and the Pentagon, already stricter than nearly anywhere else in America, were stepped up.
On Capitol Hill the number of policemen on active duty was doubled.
In nearly every government building coats and briefcases are thoroughly searched (as never before), credentials checked and rechecked by nervous guards.
At airports all over the country passengers who fit the ‘profile of potential terrorists’ have been questioned; sniffer dogs sniff away.
Officials at the Super Bowl, to be played on January 27th in Tampa, Florida, have announced that no portable cameras, radios or televisions (de rigueur for football fans) will be allowed inside the stadium.
Americans, threatened by nothing more bellicose to their north and south than Canada and Mexico, are not accustomed to thinking they are in a battle zone.
When travelling in Europe, they are shocked to see uniformed men, toting automatic weapons, roaming through airports and train depots.
Saddam's threats, combined with the memory of the destruction of Pan Am Flight 103 over Scotland, have caused a huge reduction in travel.
TWA has cancelled half its international flights.
Staying at home is not that reassuring either.
Nearly 30% of Americans all over the country surveyed by the Washington Post said they feared their city would be subject to a terrorist attack.
The jitters are worst in the capital, where 61% of people are fearful.
Kids' stuff
WASHINGTON, DC
THREE teenage boys were arrested last May for throwing 15-pound landscaping stones off a bridge over the main motorway that runs around Washington.
Police suspected that the boys, whose fun and games hurt a lot of people, were on drugs.
Now two of them have been convicted and sentenced to nearly 40 years in prison.
And the form of drug they had indeed been taking — a legal drug, as it happens, called alcohol — is under attack from the surgeon-general.
They had been drinking Cisco, a fruity, wine-based fluid that smells and tastes like a mixture of cough syrup and bathtub gin.
Its appeal, however, lies not in its fragrant bouquet but in its potency: some teenagers call it ‘liquid crack’.
Though packaged to look like a low-alcohol spritzer — all soft lines and pastel colours — a 12-ounce bottle of Cisco is as intoxicating as five shots of 100-proof liquor.
Since Cisco first appeared in shops last year, local hospitals have reported an unusual number of teenagers (who tend to like the relatively weak ‘wine coolers’) checking in with alcohol poisoning after drinking the stuff.
Hearing such complaints, the National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence began a public campaign against Cisco's manufacturer, the Canandaigua Wine Company of New York.
It says the company's marketing of Cisco is dangerously deceptive; it induces unsuspecting teenagers to guzzle it as if it were a standard spritzer.
On January 9th Antonia Novello, the surgeon-general, joined in.
Though the company has already muted Cisco's marketing (dropping the slogan: ‘It takes you by surprise’), Mrs Novello says it must do more — perhaps change the bottle's shape and colour.
If Canandaigua refuses, she says she may ask the Federal Trade Commission to force it to.
Echoing the logic of the gun lobby (‘guns don't kill people; people kill people’), the company's chairman argues that the problem is not with his product, but with under-age drinking.
This is not without its glimmer of truth.
Teenagers are not as stupid, or as innocent, as Mrs Novello and her well-meaning allies would make out.
In all likelihood, most teenagers drink Cisco precisely because it is a cheap ($3 a bottle) way to get drunk quickly.
Texas
More spirit than power
HOUSTON
TWO and a half years after she made national headlines with her searing attack on George Bush at the 1988 Democratic national convention, Ann Richards was inaugurated as Texas's 45th governor on January 15th.
Narrowly victorious in a mudslinging campaign, Mrs Richards — a divorced mother of four — became the first woman to hold the office since 1935.
She promised ‘a new Texas…where opportunity knows no race, no gender, no colour…
Government must stop telling people what they want and start…hearing what the people want.’
Fine, but Mrs Richards inherits a lot of problems.
Texas faces a budget deficit of over $4 billion, with more in prospect — and is bound by a pay-as-you-go statute.
Mrs Richards was quick to declare that education is her highest priority.
But a week later the Texas supreme court greatly complicated her task by unanimously declaring Texas's new law on school finance, laboriously agreed upon after four special sessions, to be unconstitutional.
Compared with her fellow-governors in California and New York, Mrs Richards's power is limited.
One thing she can do is to make appointments to the state's numerous policy-making commissions and boards.
She used this power to pay off some political debts and to make a political statement by appointing Alison Walton Leland, a Houston stockbroker who is widow of a much-liked congressman, Mickey Leland, to the Texas A&M University board.
Mrs Richards views her new office as a bully pulpit.
Her first target was the state's car-insurance industry, which is seeking its largest rate increase in 32 years; she reckons this is unjustified.
Other battles loom.
Texas has no company or personal income tax, and the former, at least, may soon be seriously discussed.
Already there is talk of a Richards-for-vice-president movement in 1992.
That is wildly premature.
But she is starting with spirit.
The law
How close to your client?
LOS ANGELES
FEW lawyers think it right to have affairs with their clients, but should the law prohibit it?
California's state bar is considering a proposal that would ban attorneys from having sex with their customers, unless they are married to them or the relationship began before they became clients.
The ban, the first of its kind, would affect 120,000 Californian lawyers — and cause havoc for the scriptwriters of ‘LA Law’.
The ban is one of four draft rules the bar is currently looking at.
The others are less fierce, but still prohibit any relationship that might affect a lawyer's ability to handle a case properly.
Last December an appeal court ordered the retrial of a convicted murderer when it was revealed that his wife had had an affair with his lawyer.
The debate is the result of a campaign by Lucille Roybal-Allard, a Democratic assemblywoman from Los Angeles.
Miss Roybal-Allard originally wanted the ban to apply only to divorce, probate and child-custody cases.
She introduced a bill in 1989, obliging the bar to consider a ban, after a case in which two women accused Marvin Mitchelson, a big-cheese divorce lawyer, of sexual assault (he denied the charges and settled out of court).
Miss Roybal-Allard argues that a lawyer who is sleeping with a divorce client may not try too hard to reconcile husband and wife.
The state bar would prefer to set a blanket rule governing all types of lawyers.
It has argued that a total ban on sex may be unnecessary; it would prefer to have rules that prevent a lawyer from bullying a client to have sex.
The Los Angeles bar — home to 26,000 lawyers — reckons that its existing rules, which ‘prohibit sexual relations with a client when such relations would impair the parties' decision-making abilities’, are sufficient.
A total ban might also be opposed as an unconstitutional invasion of privacy.
If the state bar decides against a complete ban, Miss Roybal-Allard may introduce a new bill requiring it to have one.
It could go through: people are impatient with lawyers and their charges.
Doctors already have a rule against having sex with their patients, and it is illegal for American psychiatrists.
There are even whispers that such standards should apply to journalists.
Arab-Americans
The perils of hyphenation
LET us have no patience with the enemy or anyone whose veins carry his blood.’
That sentiment, expressed early in the second world war by a journalist called Henry McLemore, epitomised the attitude of many Americans when war broke out in 1941.
The decision to intern 110,000 Japanese-Americans was a wholesale violation of civil rights.
Their fate is an uneasy memory for the 2.5m Americans of Arab descent.
Albert Mokhiber, president of the Arab-American Anti-Discrimination Committee (ADC), does not believe that anybody in the government wants to intern Arab-Americans.
But the unease remains.
Within days of the outbreak of war, prominent Arab-Americans were being visited by the FBI and asked about their knowledge of international terrorism.
True, the FBI can help protect Arab-Americans: there have already been some scattered incidents of violence.
But Mr Mokhiber fears that pointed questions from the FBI could help to turn Arab-Americans into ‘a suspect class’.
‘Two worlds have collided and both of them are ours,’ says James Zogby, director of the Arab-American Institute.
Suddenly in the spotlight, Arab-Americans are torn between the urge to stress their loyalty and the alarm they feel about the latest turn in Middle East events.
They are represented both in the armed forces and in the peace marches.
Their organisations were split over the original decision to send troops to the Gulf: the National Association of Arab Americans (NAAA) supported the build-up, while the ADC, a larger organisation, opposed it.
This diversity of opinion was to be expected.
Arab immigrants to the United States have been drawn from all over the Middle East.
The first wave, mainly from villages in Lebanon and Syria, started to arrive in the 1880s.
Like other immigrant groups, they tended to congregate in certain areas, Detroit and nearby Dearborn in particular.
Many became prosperous and assimilation was quick.
But by the 1970s it had again become respectable to stress ethnicity: Arab-Americans, like blacks, Poles, Italians and Jews, became more interested in their roots.
And, as the second and third generation of Arab-Americans began to look back across the Atlantic, they were joined by a new wave of immigrants from the Middle East, many of them Lebanese, Palestinians and Iraqis displaced by the political upheavals in the region.
The mingling of new and old immigrants (both groups well-educated) strengthened the growing sense of connection between Arab-Americans and the Middle East.
There was a darker side to the growth of Arab-American consciousness.
The oil shocks of the 1970s, and the widespread sympathy for Israel in the United States, led to a new sense of vulnerability.
The NAAA and the ADC were formed with a dual purpose: to provide legal protection for Arab-Americans against discrimination, and to lobby for a change in America's policy towards the Arabs and Israel.
Ranged against the far more powerful pro-Israel lobby, the groups have so far had little impact on policy.
But Mr Zogby of the Arab-American Institute believes that the war in the Gulf, far from setting the cause back, may be a moment of opportunity: ‘The United States’, he says, ‘now knows that it will need to build bridges to the Middle East.
Arab-Americans are a national resource that needs to be utilised.’
Battling for an oil policy
WASHINGTON, DC
TELLING Americans about the outbreak of war, George Bush conspicuously omitted one word: oil.
The war, the president insists, is about higher principles than control of a grubby liquid in the ground.
Only up to a point: without oil Saddam Hussein would not have invaded Kuwait; nor would his invasion have threatened the West's security.
There has been little talk of America's dependence on oil imports — or its missing energy policy.
The conventional wisdom on energy policy is that it is better not to have one.
Americans, it is said, are profligate consumers of energy.
They will not accept higher energy taxes or any restrictions on their right to drive.
Jimmy Carter's doomed efforts to launch a war against the country's dependence on imported energy will always be associated in the public mind with queues at petrol stations.
This shows that Ronald Reagan was right: Americans' preferred energy policy is no policy at all.
As usual, conventional wisdom may not be wholly right.
Americans certainly use lots of energy, but less prodigiously than they once did.
In 1985 their consumption was roughly the same as in 1973, even though real GNP had increased by a third.
Thanks to low oil prices, that pattern was broken after 1985, when energy use once again rose in line with GNP.
However, dependence on oil has fallen: its share of energy consumption is now just over 40%, down from 47% in 1973.
Opinion polls have revealed that, while Americans are reluctant to pay more for energy, they dearly want to be less reliant on imports from the Gulf.
Hence Mr Bush's decision in 1989 to edge away from pure Reaganism by asking his energy secretary, James Watkins, to put together a national energy strategy.
Admiral Watkins submitted the result of his consultations on December 21st.
This turned out to be a list of policy options from which Mr Bush was to choose — with luck in time to unveil a complete plan in his ‘state of the union’ message on January 29th.
Officials refuse to talk openly about the options.
But the war has clearly derailed the timetable.
Mr Bush has had only one meeting to discuss energy strategy, on January 8th.
His White House advisers are said to be worried that the Energy Department is still too keen on conservation and regulation.
Domestic oil interests, mindful of Mr Bush's background as an oilman, would prefer there to be more emphasis on encouraging domestic production.
Others want to push harder for a revival of nuclear energy.
And Mr Bush's economic advisers fear that any extra regulation could further damage an already weak economy.
Now a new factor looms: soft oil prices.
For several months it has been obvious that the oil market is, as Joseph Stanislaw of Cambridge Energy Research Associates puts it, long on crude.
Demand has fallen; stocks are high; tankers are full; thanks to extra Saudi pumping, production is back to the level of last August.
With the outbreak of war, the administration has belatedly agreed to tap its strategic petroleum reserve.
For the next six weeks America, Japan and Germany will between them sell more than 2m barrels a day.
Though the markets remain nervously responsive to war news from the Gulf, they now seem to discount a serious threat to Saudi production.
Barring disasters, thinks Mr Stanislaw, the price could soon be $15 a barrel or less, not the $40-plus that was once feared.
That would be a welcome boost to the American (and world) economy.
But as Phil Sharp, chairman of the House of Representatives Energy Committee, gloomily acknowledges, it would also remove the pressure for an energy strategy.
America is running out of its own oil.
Despite intensive drilling, production has steadily fallen from its 1973 level of 9.2m barrels a day; the government's energy forecasters think it could be less than 6m b/d by 2000.
But the world is not running short.
So if prices after the war stay low, there will be a strong temptation to keep using the stuff as before — even if America's dependence on imports rises, as the forecasters predict, to 55% of oil consumption from today's 42%.
Two groups may act to stop such complacency.
First, the environmentalists.
The Natural Resources Defence Council is co-ordinating a green energy strategy that will cite the clean-air act, the risk of pollution and the threat of global warming as arguments for reducing the use of fossil fuels.
The second group is, surprisingly, congressmen.
Mr Sharp plans legislation.
So does his opposite number in the Senate, Bennett Johnston of Louisiana.
Congress is not at its best when trying to reconcile the special interests that flock round energy bills.
What might it consider doing?
Measures to boost supply are not particularly promising.
Even if America's coasts, and the Arctic National Wildlife Reserve, were once again opened to drilling, the results would not offset the decline in production.
Reviving the moribund nuclear industry would be tough and unpopular, and could take many years to produce more power.
Many congressmen are keen to revive research into renewable energy sources like solar and wind power.
It is striking that federal spending on research and development into energy was halved in the 1980s; R&D into renewable energy alone fell from $700m in 1981 to $115m in 1989.
The most hopeful source of extra energy could be natural gas.
America and Canada have masses of it, and burning it does little environmental damage.
Michael Baly, president of the American Gas Association, reckons that within ten years gas could be a substitute for 2 billion barrels of oil — an eighth of current American oil consumption.
Now that gas prices have been been freed from control, he says, the industry can guarantee supplies to utilities and industrial users.
Congress and state regulators could speed up the construction of pipelines.
And more cars and lorries are switching to liquefied natural gas.
The most contentious part of the energy agenda remains conservation.
Not that anybody (even in the oil industry) opposes it.
But there is plenty of dispute over how to encourage it.
Higher taxes, the most sensible route, are probably out — both for the usual political reasons and because this year nobody wants to reopen last October's budget agreement.
The administration would like more states to follow California's lead in allowing electricity companies to reap profits from their customers' investments in conservation.
But it is firmly against heavy-handed regulation, such as a sharp increase in mandatory fuel efficiency for cars.
There are more imaginative regulatory ideas that harness the price mechanism and market forces.
Jessica Mathews of the World Resources Institute is pushing a ‘sipper-guzzler’ fuel-economy plan that would impose a levy on new cars whose fuel-consumption rate was below a set figure — say 27 miles to the gallon — and use the proceeds to offer rebates for cars above it.
Another idea is a ‘feebate’ scheme under which levies on petrol would be linked to car-insurance premiums.
The result would be that those who drive more would pay more for their insurance.
Last year's clean-air act, which Mr Bush proudly signed in November, introduced the idea of tradable pollution permits as a regulatory measure that embraced market forces.
Something similar might be done for energy, if higher taxes remain off-limits.
But the first requirement is for Mr Bush, who has the best bully pulpit from which to push for change, to show that whatever happens to oil prices he remains serious about fashioning an energy strategy.
After fighting a war at least partly because of the Gulf's oil, he certainly should be.
INTERNATIONAL
Chile
Trust the general
FROM OUR SANTIAGO CORRESPONDENT
DICTATORS' offspring often disappoint their parents.
The elder son of Chile's ex-dictator and (still) army commander, General Augusto Pinochet, may be a case in point.
A congressional committee has been inquiring into why Augusto Pinochet junior, who calls himself an international arms adviser, received cheques worth nearly $3m from the army, apparently for his share in a rifle factory, and whether the old general knew his son stood to benefit.
Mr Pinochet junior, asked if he used his father's name to get business, replied: ‘One does not invoke the name of God.’
Relations were already tense between the generals and the elected government of President Patricio Aylwin, which took office last March.
Just before Christmas all troops were recalled to barracks for 24 hours.
Publicly, officers called this a ‘routine liaison exercise’.
In private, they said it was a warning that they stood four-square behind their chief, and that they would not accept behind-the-scenes pressure on him to resign.
Three weeks later the high command again said hands off, with a reminder that it could still mount a coup.
The case of the ‘pinocheques’ is not the only case of apparent corruption that has come to light since the general left power, though it is the one that may touch him directly.
A Santiago judge is investigating allegations that senior army officers ran a large illegal banking operation known as la cutufa, army slang for a raffle.
Investigations are also going on into the state holding company, Corfo, the housing ministry and a state-owned bank where new officials have uncovered high-handed property transfers and loans made either to the army as an institution or to individual officers.
It seems, for example, that the army simply took over a presidential residence-cum-bunker, built in Santiago for General Pinochet.
It is further alleged that the last-but-one head of the secret police quietly sold to his wife and family a mansion which the service had commandeered and used as a torture centre in the 1970s.
These allegations have shattered the army's image, not least in its own eyes, as a band of seagreen incorruptibles, brutal perhaps, but honest.
From this high moral ground the army had expected to challenge the record of human-rights abuses during its 17 years in power that has been compiled by a ‘commission for truth and reconciliation’ made up of seven lawyers from across the political spectrum.
The commission has been collecting evidence about the torture and ‘disappearance’ of the military regime's political opponents, from victims and their families and from the armed forces.
The commission's report, due to go to the president by early February, will eventually be published.
It will name only the victims, not their torturers.
Leaked accounts say it finds that army units were far more deeply involved in the repression than were the navy, the air force or the police, whose chiefs have all taken command since the coup of 1973.
The allegations of corruption, too, have not so far touched the other three services, which have kept quietly clear of the row between the army and the government.
President Aylwin has been careful to keep the issue of military corruption quite separate from that of human-rights offences.
The common factor could be General Pinochet himself.
At the age of 75, he is the last of the four leaders of the original military junta, the last to talk still of the high crusade against communism.
He looks and sounds ever more of an anachronism.
But he still commands the army, and the loyalty of many of its officers.
Liberia
Presidents galore
FROM OUR WEST AFRICA CORRESPONDENT
MONROVIA
AFTER a bloody year, Liberia's mayhem shows no sign of letting up.
Troops from five West African nations have managed to bring peace to the capital at least.
But bands of armed rebels from sundry factions still extort food from villages, some of them across the border in neighbouring Sierra Leone.
Despite the mess, lots of Liberians long to take charge.
On January 20th Harry Moniba became the third man to lay claim to the presidency.
A fourth rival stood down recently in the interests of the public good.
Mr Moniba is a freemason and one of Liberia's many PhDs.
He lost his old job as vice-president in July after suggesting that his boss, Samuel Doe, should resign to stop the country's civil war.
Doe tried to kill him, and persevered as president until he himself was killed.
The civil war went on anyway.
Mr Moniba and other Doe cronies, for want of anything better to do, have spent the past five months in Sierra Leone plotting their comeback and slandering their rivals.
These include the interim administration led by Amos Sawyer, a medical doctor whom the West African peacekeepers back.
He has achieved little since November besides getting to know the gadgets in the presidential motor cars.
Neither he nor the exiles have done anything to help the starving people who wander the streets of the capital, Monrovia, looking for food and a future.
Every month, say officials of the UN's World Food Programme, less than half the required 6,000 tonnes of rice arrives in the city; Médecins Sans Frontières reports that 20 children die of starvation in the city's hospitals each day.
The rich in Monrovia are better served.
They welcomed the recent reopening of a nightclub — the first since fighting in the city ended in December.
The club is owned by Eddie Dunn, protocol chief to Dr Sawyer's interim government.
Mr Dunn brought in beer, spirits and mixers on a United Nations relief flight, insisting this was a minister's right.
Gifts of rice and oil from the Jehovah's Witnesses were left behind on the tarmac in Sierra Leone to make room for the booze.
The nightclub, called ‘Lipps’, sells the beer at $20 a can, and claims to be the cheapest place in town.
There are plenty more villains.
Prince Johnson, the rebel who sliced off Doe's ears before (according to Mr Johnson) forcing him to eat one while Mr Johnson chewed on the other, has given up asking to be president but is now surrounded by a team of ‘advisers’.
They say the interim administration is failing because ‘they are too poor, they are all school teachers, and they are not rich enough to be politicians’.
Only the rich stay above corruption in Liberia.
The Johnson camp has come to prefer Charles Taylor, the third self-proclaimed president and a man Mr Johnson was once keen to shoot.
Mr Taylor controls most of the countryside, and Mr Johnson plans to meet him soon.
Two days before he tortured Doe to death, Mr Johnson hugged and embraced his future victim, and told him that they should join sides.
Mr Taylor should not let Mr Johnson get too close.
Africa's imploding dictatorships
IN ANGOLA and Mozambique, superpower disengagement gave peacemakers new hope.
Elsewhere in Africa, the end of foreign patronage may also mean the end of the corrupt leaders it has sustained.
The Russians and the Americans should be glad when they finally drop Ethiopia's President Mengistu and Zaire's President Mobutu.
Unfortunately, their countries may collapse with them, certainly if they follow the examples of Liberia and Somalia, where superpower disengagement has brought the opposite of peace.
Aid, given on condition that it is spent on genuine development, can till the soil for home-grown growth.
But aid given to governments purely to buy strategic services, without any sensible economic conditions attached, merely keeps bad rulers in office.
America lavished $1 billion on Liberia in the 1980s, partly because it provided the freed slaves who settled the country last century, mainly because Liberia gave a home to a Voice of America transmitter, a navigation beacon, a relay station for diplomatic communications, and a huge airfield where arms could be discreetly trans-shipped.
The sponsored regime stole the aid money, until Americans and ordinary Liberians were equally fed up.
Last year the president was killed by rebels whom the Americans did not try to stop.
Chaos ensued.
Somalia, similarly, enjoyed handsome presents.
Its dictator, President Siad Barre, ditched the Russians for the better-heeled Americans.
They bought the chance to use the naval base at Berbera, and to balance Soviet influence in Ethiopia next door.
In the capital the Americans built a vast embassy, with restaurant, swimming pool, tennis courts and so on.
As in Liberia, they did not buy much development.
Mr Barre's charms faded with the communist threat.
Last year the Americans did not bother to renegotiate access to Berbera when their lease expired.
As American interest shrivelled, so did the government.
Last month rebels fought their way into the capital, and wrecked it.
Government soldiers helped.
The army blew a hole in the barrier round the Americans' fine embassy, and sacked it.
Zimbabwe's land
Families' value
FROM OUR ZIMBABWE CORRESPONDENT
IN THE muddy red fields of Musengezi, a lesson in land reform is on display.
On one side of the road the cotton plants stand knee-high in well-tended rows; on the other they are besieged by weeds and reach to just above the ankle.
The healthy cotton is grown on family plots, the neglected crop on land farmed by co-operatives.
There are signs that the lesson is being learnt: like other land reformers before him, Zimbabwe's President Robert Mugabe is trading collective ideology for private efficiency.
With a bit of luck, his example may impress fellow black nationalists across the border in South Africa.
Since independence in 1980, white landlords have freely sold the government enough land to resettle 52,000 black families on projects like the one at Musengezi.
Last year, when the constitutional ban on forced purchase expired, Mr Mugabe promised to buy up half the remaining white farmland at prices he would set.
His motive was political: to reward the peasants who fought his independence war against Ian Smith's white government, and to relieve the crowding in the communal lands where blacks had been herded.
But Mr Mugabe wants resettlement to be efficient, too, and is absorbing the Musengezi lesson.
The Commercial Farmers Union, which speaks for the 4,300 white farmers, says that too much resettlement could endanger Zimbabwe's special status as an African country that can feed itself.
It estimates that by forcibly buying 6m hectares (15m acres) from whites the government will cause national farm production, currently at Z$2.2 billion ($840m), to drop by Z$500m.
Exports, at Z$1.5 billion, would fall by nearly a third.
The government disagrees, pointing out that recent studies, including one by the World Bank, show that Zimbabwe could get along fine with a commercial farming industry half its current size.
Labour-intensive crops like maize and cotton are sometimes more efficiently produced by humble farmers with lots of children than by rich ones with smart machines.
The government has decided to back private ownership.
Officials laugh ruefully at the miserable performance of collective farming, and suggest it may be phased out.
They also aim to resettle promising farmers, whereas in the early 1980s it was the poorest, not the most successful, who were given newly purchased land.
The most radical new idea would allow resettled farmers to purchase title deeds, payable over 20 years.
That would help the government to recoup some of the cost of resettlement, while giving farmers an incentive to improve their own plots.
Making the best of Cuba's bad job
FROM A SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN HAVANA
THE government's emergency food programme, according to a joke doing the rounds in Havana, is like God; everyone talks about it but nobody can see it.
As Fidel Castro's revolution entered its 33rd year this month, shortages of food and consumer goods were the most obvious of the many challenges to Cuba's Caribbean version of socialism.
Almost all food is now legally available only to those with ration books.
The state markets where food could be bought off ration have been shut down.
Cubans used to eat a lot of meat.
This year their new year's dinner was not the traditional pig, but 12 ounces of frozen chicken a head and three bottles of rum to a family.
To persuade the population that austerity falls upon rich and poor alike, the interior ministry has begun arresting people for ‘economic crimes’.
The political effect is increased by tasty rumours that the children of senior officials are among those detained.
As a communist nation that is also part of the third world, Cuba finds its economy in double trouble.
Its trade with capitalist countries, like that of its Latin American neighbours, was squeezed in the mid-1980s, when it had to re-negotiate payments of hard-currency debts.
Its trade with the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe therefore climbed to 85% of the total.
Now their trade organisation, Comecon, has crumbled.
Last October Mr Castro declared a ‘peacetime special period’— a kind of economic state of emergency, or survival programme for Cuban socialism.
It involves drastic measures to cut the use of energy and materials: 750,000 Chinese bicycles are on order, factories have been shut down.
Workers who lose their jobs are sent to farm camps, along with bureaucrats doing two weeks' hard labour.
The idea is that recruits from the towns will weed the crops.
It is harder to defeat the chronic low productivity of the state farms, and the frailties of the distribution chain.
These Cuban weaknesses have long been veiled by imports of grain and tinned meat.
For foreign exchange, the government hopes to develop the tourist business and its chief pride, biotechnology.
For years foreigners have been unable to make up their minds whether Cuba's showpiece investment in genetic engineering is an expensive folly or the foundation of a high-tech economy.
Cuba's investment, and its scientists, have at least been taken seriously.
The doubt has been whether Cuba could sell its products in hard-currency markets without subjecting them to years of tests.
The Russians seem ready to buy untested products.
Mr Yuri Petrov, the astute Soviet ambassador in Havana, says that this year, as well as the usual nickel, citrus fruit and 4m tons of sugar, his country plans to buy Cuban pharmaceutical products worth $730m, including in particular the hepatitis-B vaccine developed at Havana's Biotechnology Institute.
In return, Cuba is promised the Soviet oil that provides 90% of its energy.
Mr Petrov says oil shipments in 1991 will be ‘not less’ than in 1990; at 10.5m tonnes, that was barely enough.
The new agreement with the Soviet Union is for one year, rather than five as in the past.
All Cuba's trade is under new rules.
From the beginning of 1991, prices for everything except sugar are meant to be set at world market rates, whatever they may be.
The balance of trade with the Soviet Union is to be paid in dollars, though loans are promised to cover that.
Most government-to-government purchasing is over; Cuban agencies must negotiate with hundreds of Soviet firms.
And all deals could be off, unless there is a government in Moscow that chooses to keep its promises.
Trade with other former members of Comecon is to be in hard currency, if it takes place at all.
Many of the East European firms from which Cuba obtained machinery have shut down, or turned to more lucrative business.
The Cubans hope to make their own spare parts and replacements; lest that should fail, the state has set up a breeding-station for draft oxen.
Mr Castro seems to have drawn three political lessons from communism's demise in Eastern Europe.
The first two are that bureaucrats and Soviet imperialism are unpopular.
The third is that small reforms lead to big ones.
So, while playing up anti-Yankee nationalism, he has streamlined the Communist Party's secretariat, sacking petty officials.
Later this year the party will hold a congress, only the fourth Mr Castro has convened in three decades.
The preliminary debate has already started.
When it seemed to be getting out of hand, he insisted that its aim was to improve the system, not to change it.
The debaters, for fear of being called dissidents, fell into line.
Unlike Eastern Europe's fallen leaders, Mr Castro was once a genuine revolutionary.
Many Cubans still like and respect him.
Others want more political openness, but value their health and education services.
Perhaps only a minority would like to see their island taken over by the Miami exiles.
But unless Mr Castro can cut the grumbling food queues, the Cubans' Caribbean patience could run out.
ASIA
The dwindling Japanese
FROM OUR TOKYO CORRESPONDENT
JAPAN'S young women, like their sisters in other rich countries before them, are now marrying later, putting off having their first child longer and then choosing to have fewer children in all.
The statisticians' dry figures are beginning to reflect these flesh-and-blood decisions.
In 1989 the Japanese fertility rate fell to a post-war low.
(The fertility rate is the average number of children a woman would have if she lived to the end of her child-bearing years and bore children at the prevailing rate for each age during that period.)
It was 1.57 children per woman in 1989, well below the 2.1 that is needed to prevent the population from eventually declining.
It was a shade below even the 1.6 recorded during the ill-omened year 1966 — on the ancient Chinese calendar, the Year of the Fire-Horse.
Any girls born that year would, by tradition, have been fated to make men unhappy, and would thus have been hard to marry off.
Many would-be parents decided not to risk it, and waited until 1967.
Today's decline in the fertility rate does not have as superstitious, or short-lived, a cause: it has been going on steadily since 1970.
If it continues, Japan is in for a shock.
Until now Japan has been the rich world's youngster: people 65 and over still account for only 11.5% of the population.
But Japan is about to creep ahead of America in its share of old people.
By 2000 it will have passed both France and Britain, and will be nosing up on the real geriatrics, Germany and Sweden.
The nightmare of officials is that Japan's fertility rate might keep going down until it hits western German levels — 1.28 at present.
If Japanese women were to continue having children for the rest of this century at their 1989 fertility rate of 1.57, Japan's population would inch up from today's 123m to 126m in 2005.
Thereafter it would fall, reaching 115m in 2025.
But if, beginning in 1990, the Japanese began reproducing at western German rates, Japan's population would peak earlier, at 125m in 2003, and fall more sharply, to 112m in 2025.
Japan's government is already fretting over the economic consequences.
From April, child benefits are to be raised in the hope of encouraging parents to produce a few more babies.
For the government, pensions are the biggest worry.
Every retired person in Japan today is supported by 5.3 people of working age.
By 2000 this figure will have shrunk to 3.8.
Everything else being equal (which it won't be, of course), payroll taxes and social-security contributions would have to increase by as much as 40%.
In less than a decade Japan could have moved from being the most lightly taxed OECD country to being one of the most heavily taxed.
Officials agonise: will the Japanese then become as eager to shirk work as the Swedes are?
Some economists at Sanwa Bank take an even gloomier view.
The conventional guess, based on the ups and downs of the business cycle, says that Japan's GNP will grow by 3–4% in 1991, then bounce back to 5% or so for years thereafter.
The Sanwa economists, looking instead at Japan's contracting labour force, the decline in the savings rate as the population ages, and the heftier welfare bill that will soon start coming due, think that GNP growth will average only 2–3% for the rest of the 1990s and may fall lower still after that.
This is a perfectly respectable analysis, based on the idea that an economy's long-run growth cannot exceed the growth in its labour force.
In practice it overlooks two things.
One is the effect of technological progress on productivity growth.
The other is that Japan has, for the next decade anyway, an easy way of expanding its labour force even though population growth is slowing down.
How?
Forget about immigration.
Japan's ruling Liberal Democrats would no more dare sanction an open-door policy for Asia's migrant workers than would Britain's Conservatives risk letting in thousands more from Jamaica or Pakistan.
One way the labour force can keep growing is if the retirement age goes up.
That will happen to some extent (and will also take some pressure off pensions).
But Japan will enjoy a different spur to growth.
Its share of women in work is higher than most rich countries' (see chart), but their work tends to be in more menial jobs.
Sooner or later, the social practices that keep Japanese women out of good jobs will be swept away by economic circumstances.
The upgrading should give Japan a decade or two before the big problems of an old workforce have to be faced.
Bougainville
Peace in prospect
FROM the earliest days of European conquest in the Pacific, the people on the island of Bougainville were regarded as stubborn and easily provoked.
But the Germans admired them for their toughness and energy and in 1898 persuaded Britain, which then ran Bougainville, to swap the island for some German possessions elsewhere in the Pacific.
The British were glad to dispose of these ‘Huns in black skins’.
Germany added Bougainville to its territory in what is now Papua New Guinea.
When, in 1975, PNG won its independence from Australia (which had been running the place since 1949), Bougainville formally became part of the new country.
Resentment about the link has continued ever since; it is the main cause of the present rebellion in Bougainville.
In an effort to bring peace to the island, PNG held talks with the rebels last August on board a New Zealand warship moored off Bougainville.
They came to nothing.
This week the two sides met again, this time in Honiara, the capital of the Solomon Islands.
On January 24th they announced the signing of the ‘Honiara accord’.
This proposes that a force made up of soldiers from Pacific countries be invited to Bougainville to restore peace.
Papua New Guinea will end its blockade of Bougainville.
PNG soldiers will stay out of the island and the ‘Bougainville Revolutionary Army’, which has led the rebellion, will be disbanded.
The accord will be reviewed every six months.
If either side dishonours it, the accord will be scrapped.
Sir Michael Somare, PNG's chief negotiator, called the accord an ‘important and historical document’.
However, it does not deal with the central point of the rebellion: Bougainville's desire for independence.
By treating the rebels as equals, PNG appears to be conceding it in all but name.
Despite the blockade, Bougainville has been managing quite well as a self-proclaimed independent country.
Most of the 300,000 people live off the land and no one has gone hungry.
A few luxuries have been smuggled in by canoe from the Solomons, which Bougainville is geographically and culturally close to.
Medical supplies are scarce, but as a prelude to this week's talks PNG allowed some to come in from Australia.
No country has so far recognised Bougainville's claim to independence.
Any that might would be warned off by Australia, which takes a protective interest in its former colony.
Australia would be happy if the accord led to the reopening of the Panguna copper mine, one of the world's biggest.
It was closed because of the rebellion.
When it was operating, the mine was managed by an Australian subsidiary of Britain's RTZ.
Bougainville is in a strong position to demand concessions in the talks that will follow the accord.
One demand is for compensation for damage done to the land by open-cast mining.
But many of the islanders are against any deal with PNG.
They believe they would be better off on their own.
Tourism, neglected by PNG, has potential.
For one thing Bougainville, the scene of some of the fiercest fighting in the second world war, is a largely untouched museum of wrecked warplanes.
Somewhere in the jungle, awaiting the homage of patriotic Japanese, is the remains of the aircraft of Isoroku Yamamoto, who planned the attack on Pearl Harbour.
Australia
Keating's turn?
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN SYDNEY
IT IS an old joke, but it sums up the present mood in Australia.
If you had only two bullets, who would you shoot among Saddam Hussein, Yasser Arafat or Paul Keating?
Answer: Paul Keating, twice.
His bluntness, often amounting to personal abuse, has won Australia's treasurer (finance minister) few friends.
Add this to the state of the economy — production down, unemployment up and interest rates still high — and it is hardly surprising that he is deeply unpopular.
Yet Mr Keating continues to believe that he will be Australia's next prime minister.
Even more alarming for some Australians, this could come sooner rather than later.
Although Bob Hawke says he intends to lead the Labor Party into the next general election, due by 1993, the toppling of Margaret Thatcher has shown that even the mightiest are vulnerable.
Like Britain's Tory Party before Mrs Thatcher fell, the Labor Party is way down in the opinion polls.
It is 18 percentage points behind the Liberal-National coalition.
As in Britain last year, there is plenty of speculation about changing the leader.
In some remarks at the National Press Club in December, Mr Keating gave credence to this speculation by saying, in effect, that he would make a better prime minister than Mr Hawke.
The remarks were supposed to be private, but they were too juicy for the journalists to keep to themselves.
There, though, the comparison between Britain and Australia ends.
Why would the Labor Party exchange Mr Hawke for someone even more unpopular?
Still, some observers say that Mr Keating already leads the party.
He is its intellectual driving force.
His supporters say that if, in the end, he decided to quit, it would be a disaster for the economy.
He has made mistakes, but nobody is more committed to opening up Australia's still-stuffy economy.
Mr Keating's main mistake was to loosen monetary policy by too much after the 1987 stockmarket crash, fuelling an unsustainable boom.
But he was not the only finance minister in the world to do that.
He is still respected in the financial markets, even though voters disagree.
Could Australia get out of recession in time for the next general election?
It could, easily.
A lot of the figures are grim.
Real GDP fell in three of the four quarters in the year to September, with output down 6.4% at an annual rate in the third quarter.
Unemployment has already risen to 8.1%, from 5.9% in late 1989.
Slow growth abroad is depressing commodity prices and the government will need to keep monetary policy tight for some time to avoid re-stoking inflation and the current-account deficit.
The Reserve Bank (the central bank) has cut its interest rate by six percentage points over the past year, yet it is still 12%.
Even so, there has already been one triumph: inflation fell to 6% in the year to the third quarter, the lowest rate for 18 years apart from a brief spell in 1984–85.
Growth could well have picked up, and unemployment fallen, by the time Labor has to face the voters again.
Whether as finance minister or prime minister, Mr Keating will still have plenty to do.
Top of the list is labour-market reform.
Back in 1983 many economists were sceptical about the wage accord negotiated by the Labor government with the unions.
Yet it has restrained pay.
Real wages in Australia have fallen by 5% over the past seven years; in Britain they have risen by almost 20%.
The trouble is that the system cramps productivity gains.
In the 1980s Australia's labour productivity was one of the lowest in the OECD.
The accord might also act as a floor to wages during the recession.
The total wage rise of 6.25% built into the 1990–91 accord looks too high.
A weak labour market offers Mr Keating a chance for reform, if only Labor and the unions would let him.
Many Labor politicians, believing deregulation has failed, hanker after old policies.
They like a recent report by the Australian Manufacturing Council, which calls for the government to support industry and promote exports.
The Labor Party might learn something from New Zealand.
Its new National government plans to abandon compulsory unionism and centralised wage fixing.
New Zealand's previous Labour government found itself unable to complete the job of economic liberalisation, and its members bickered among themselves.
Voters got fed up and threw Labour out.
The lesson for Australia's Labor Party is clear: be bold under Mr Keating or prepare to bow out.
Ordeal of an honest cop
FROM OUR SOUTH-EAST ASIA CORRESPONDENT
BANGKOK
JANUARY has not been a distinguished month for the Thai police.
An attempt was made to blow up a police chief.
Another police chief was sacked.
And some pro-Iraqi terrorists apparently escaped arrest.
The terrorists first.
On January 19th the American embassy in Bangkok told the police that weapons and explosives had been moved out of‘an embassy of an Arab country involved in the war’.
The Americans refused to confirm publicly that the embassy was Iraq's.
Westerners in Bangkok were advised to keep their heads down for 48 hours.
The assumption was that the police had been given enough information to pick up the terrorists quickly.
But they were not nabbed, and the warning was extended by a week.
At buildings considered potential targets soldiers took over from police.
Diplomats expressed no more than disappointment at the lack of progress (but that's why they are diplomats).
For their part, Thai officials reject the suggestion of a link between the failure to get the would-be bombers and the sacking of the national police chief, Police-General Sawaeng Thirasawat.
But he was under a cloud anyway after his men failed to find who had placed a bomb in the office of Major-General Seri Temiyaveh, the head of the Bangkok police department's crime-suppression division.
Right after the explosion, on January 8th, the prime minister said the bomber had to be found within two weeks.
By midnight on January 21st no leads had been uncovered.
General Sawaeng was sacked two hours later for ‘ineptness’.
General Seri has a reputation of being an honest copper.
On taking office last year he told his men they must drop their ‘vested interests’— a polite term for rake-offs from gambling dens, short-stay hotels and other sinful activities in Bangkok.
The Siam Rath Weekly, a Thai-language magazine, claimed that junior police officers in the division could make 50,000–60,000 baht ($2,000–2,400) extra a month from these sources; for senior officers, it could be as much as 5m baht a month.
General Seri's predecessor as head of the crime-suppression division, and his leading opponent within the police force, is one of the graduates of the Chulachomklao Military Academy who now run the Thai armed forces.
Thus the problems in the division became yet another battleground between the civilian government and the military.
Faced with a loss of income, General Seri's officers attacked him in leaflets and graffiti.
They lampooned him on the division's radio station.
Newspapers speculate that the 1lb of TNT that went off 25 minutes before the general arrived in his office was the next stage of this campaign.
The public breakdown of discipline in the crime-suppression division has at last destroyed the faith of many Thais in the police.
Organised crime and corruption have grown along with the rest of the economy.
Local gangsters field private armies; intimidation and assassination of business rivals are commonplace.
There are signs of increased activity in Thailand by the Japanese yakuza, Chinese triads and now by international terrorists as well.
The appointment of General Seri was supposed to show the government's resolve to fight the criminals.
It has shown instead how deeply entrenched the ‘vested interests’ have become.
A quarrel in a far-away country, of which Asia knows nothing
Practically all the governments and most of the people in Europe and North America back the alliance against Saddam Hussein.
At the least, they understand something big is at stake.
It is different in Asia.
Our correspondents throughout the region report
SADDAM HUSSEIN has fewer detractors in Asia, the American-led operation against him fewer sympathisers.
Mostly, though, Asians find the whole thing an embarrassing distraction that they wish would just go away.
Seoul's English-language Korea Times caught the mood.
Its interview with the Iraqi ambassador, published on January 16th just hours before the allies attacked, was dramatically headlined: ‘Economy vital sector for Iraq-Korea ties’.
Like it or not, however, Asian countries are inevitably being drawn into the conflict.
The economic consequences are impossible to ignore.
For the poor countries of the Indian subcontinent and for the Philippines, the loss of remittances from the hundreds of thousands of workers in Iraq and Kuwait pinches badly.
For everyone in Asia, higher energy prices hurt even more.
Petrol prices are up nearly 30% in South Korea, and supplies are down by perhaps half in India.
The Philippines has succumbed to war fever.
Shops in Manila have been stripped bare in panic buying, there have been runs on banks, and the government has advised city-folk to grow vegetables in their gardens and to stop ironing clothes to save energy.
The terrorism that the West dreads has already struck in Asia.
The Iraqis sent two of their own men to plant a bomb in an American-run library in Manila on January 19th.
It went off prematurely, leaving half of one of the Iraqis on a nearby roof and the other under arrest.
It worries Thailand that the bombers were carrying air tickets to take them back to Bangkok, which they had left for Manila in December.
The day after their attack, the American embassy in Thailand gave warning that it knew of a ‘credible threat’ to American, British and Australian interests in Bangkok.
The Thais suspect that Japan's Red Army Faction, which has old ties to Middle Eastern terrorism, may be involved.
Asia's governments have responded to the war with varying degrees of enthusiasm, discomfort and cynicism.
Top of the cynics is China.
The Chinese have given just enough support to the allies to bring themselves back into favour with the western governments, particularly America's, that had spurned them after the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989.
At the same time they have kept their support tepid enough not to threaten their pose as the Palestinians' champion.
Thus China backed the Security Council's moves against Iraq until the resolution authorising force, on which it abstained.
It calls on Iraq to leave Kuwait but also opposes the allied attack.
As usual with Chinese foreign policy, this suits the government — though not necessarily the Chinese in the street.
The American embassy in Beijing is said to have received envelopes containing a few yuan as contributions from ordinary Chinese to the war effort; and young would-be volunteer fighters have offered their services at the Kuwaiti and Saudi embassies.
Probably, such gestures say more about the Chinese people's view of their own government than about their solidarity with Kuwait.
The stoutest backing for the allies has come from Australia, Singapore and the Philippines.
Last August Australia sent three naval ships to the Gulf; Bob Hawke, the prime minister, made it clear in December that they would be put under American operational control and could well see combat.
This week parliament gave his policy its strong support, and most Australians are with Mr Hawke too.
A Gallup poll published on January 15th showed 57% in favour of using force to expel Iraq from Kuwait, and 54% for Australia joining in the fighting under American command.
Singapore is sending a 30-man army medical team: a token of its long-standing conviction that aggression has to be punished wherever it happens.
Even Corazon Aquino, the Philippine president, has opted uncharacteristically for firmness.
She has backed the allied attack on Iraq ‘without reservations’, and the Philippines has a medical team in Saudi Arabia.
Yet forthrightness is far from most Asian leaders' minds.
Mahathir Mohamad, the Malaysian prime minister, dreamily says he wants the bombs to stop falling on Iraq and also for Iraq to leave Kuwait.
New Zealand, which used to have a habit of joining up with its main western allies in other people's fights, has ruled out sending soldiers.
The neutralist and anti-American feelings let loose during the prime ministership of David Lange in 1984–89 have taken their toll: nearly two-thirds of New Zealanders like this stand-offish attitude.
India knows its quest for peace talks through the Non-Aligned Movement will bear no fruit, but it is in keeping with the popular mood.
Indians tell the poll-takers that their country should stay clear of the whole business.
Hindus blame George Bush and Saddam Hussein equally for the war.
Three-quarters of Indian Muslims blame Mr Bush, and 45% of Muslims think that Iraq will actually win the war.
South Korea, which has a large and tough army, also has bad memories of its experience in contributing soldiers to America's effort in Vietnam.
It is relieved that the most the Americans now want (apart from money, naturally, of which the Koreans are putting up $220m) is for Korea to take over more of the job of defending itself, thus freeing American troops and equipment based in Korea for duty in the Gulf.
Two countries that have sent fighting men to the Gulf — Pakistan (with 10,000 soldiers in Saudi Arabia) and Bangladesh — are twisting and turning over their decision, mainly because it is so unpopular.
Reverential pictures of Saddam Hussein are on display in Pakistan's big cities.
Nawaz Sharif, the Pakistani prime minister, is under particular pressure from within his own party.
To reduce the criticism, he is spending this week touring Middle Eastern capitals on a showy ‘peace mission’.
Nobody, however, is squirming more than Japan's government, whose indecision and vacillation since the Kuwait saga began have irritated everyone, the Americans above all.
The government's efforts to get a bill through parliament allowing soldiers to be sent to the Gulf in non-combat roles came to nothing.
The long dither that preceded the commitment of $4 billion to the alliance took the shine off the contribution.
The Americans have been pressing for much more money.
One rumour is that they are asking Japan to kick in 20% of the cost of fighting the war.
Once again this week the government of Toshiki Kaifu was manfully trying to agree on something — and once again hesitating.
A press conference Mr Kaifu had scheduled for Wednesday evening to explain what the government had decided was called off at the last minute.
By next day, though, the government confirmed that Japan will contribute $9 billion more to the Allies, a figure that had already been leaked.
The figure, a generous one, neatly fits the American demand.
If the war is indeed costing the $500m a day that the Japanese say the Americans are estimating, then a 20% Japanese contribution would amount to around $3 billion a month.
A three-month war equals a $9 billion bill for Japan.
The money can be raised by higher taxes, a government bond issue or a combination of both.
Higher taxes could well sink Mr Kaifu with the voters: a 3% consumption tax in 1989 lost the ruling party the upper house.
One course being considered is to issue short-term deficit-financing bonds and to increase taxes on oil and oil products, an idea that Japan's oil industry has already begun lobbying against.
Any proposal will be in trouble if it has to be approved by the upper house of parliament as well as the lower house.
The upper house is controlled by a Socialist opposition totally against both the war and Japan's having anything to do with it.
The opposition will be particularly upset by a proposal, also announced on Thursday, to send Japanese military aircraft to the Middle East to move refugees, which it calls ‘evacuees’, to Asia.
This would be the first time that Japan's ‘self-defence’ forces had operated far from home.
Even if Mr Kaifu can deliver a package, he will probably be doing so in the teeth of public opinion (especially if a tax increase is involved).
A telephone poll conducted by TV Asahi on January 17th found only 25% in favour of the war and 53% against.
Non-white man's non-burden
Why do Asians see the Kuwait affair so differently from Europeans and Americans?
In much of Asia one answer is Islam.
Anywhere there are sizeable Muslim populations the war against Iraq is being portrayed by the devout as an attack by the West on Islam, however poorly this squares with the facts.
Those Pakistani pictures of Saddam Hussein show him at prayer.
India's Shia Muslims, who were antagonistic to Mr Hussein over his war against Iran, have rallied to him with surprising haste.
Mr Abdul Halim Arshat, the secretary-general of Malaysia's leading Islamic political party, has claimed that ‘support for Iraq is necessary as the real motive of the US is to kill off the Muslims in Baghdad and to destroy the city.’
His party has appealed for volunteers to help Iraq in non-combat roles; 20 gung-ho young men have stepped forward.
West v Islam shades imperceptibly into West v East.
There is an undercurrent of feeling all across Asia, even in the rich parts, that this is a white man's war, a new outbreak of old-fashioned colonialism.
Anti-colonialism is a powerful theme in modern Asia.
Japanese who admit their country was wrong in its aggressions of 1930–45 nonetheless point out that in part they were trying to rescue Asia from western colonialism.
This appeal has been known to override other considerations.
During the second world war Burmese and Indonesian nationalists allied themselves with the Japanese, finding them a useful lever against the colonial power and in some ways preferable to it.
In India at the same time Subhas Chandra Bose collaborated first with the Germans and then with the Japanese against the British Raj.
He was widely seen by Indians as a hero then, and still is.
The biggest reason for Asia's sceptical eye on the Gulf, though, is that not many Asians are convinced the fight makes any difference.
Yes, it is too bad about the Kuwaitis; but oil is a commodity and Iraq will have to sell it just as Kuwait did.
If it does not, the stuff can easily be bought elsewhere.
Yes, Saddam Hussein is a bad man, but that is a problem for his neighbours, especially the Israelis, not us.
Behind the indifference is the assumption that the basis of Asian security will not be affected.
America will win, it is thought, and win handily enough that it will not want to withdraw from Asia: so China, Japan, whoever, should pursue its own interests and wait for things to return to normal.
Some disagree with this line of thinking — notably Ichiro Ozawa, the secretary-general of Japan's ruling party, who has been arguing for Japanese soldiers to be sent to the Gulf in a non-combat role — but they have not had much luck making their case.
The result?
If they were not told the embarrassing source of these words — and perhaps even if they were — most Asians would give a vigorous nod of approval to the sentiments expressed by Neville Chamberlain when Germany annexed the Sudetenland in 1938: ‘How horrible, fantastic, incredible it is that we should be digging trenches and trying on gas-masks here because of a quarrel in a far-away country between people of whom we know nothing.’
EUROPE
Comme vous étiez
FROM OUR PARIS CORRESPONDENT
ONE war, at least, is over.Six weeks after battle was joined over the proposed ‘rectification’ of French spelling, the resistance fighters appear to have won the day.
The Académie Française, that illustrious guardian of the French language, set up by Richelieu in 1635, last week in effect buried the very reform for which it had voted unanimously nine months earlier.
By 23 votes to six, the Academy decided that the changes in spelling rules — proposed by a working party of the government-appointed Conseil Supérieur de la Langue Française under the chairmanship of the Academy's own permanent secretary — should not be enforced in any way (not even through school circulars or inclusion in new dictionaries), but should be made subject to the ‘test of time’.
The Academy has ‘reserved the right to confirm or annul’ the changes after an undefined ‘period of observation’.
A happy precedent already exists: three years ago the Academy agreed to abandon a series of spelling changes that it had proposed in 1975, but which had never found their way into common usage.
This time the spelling changes had the backing of the government as well as of the Academy.
But the government is unlikely to press ahead with what the Academy has disavowed.
So it looks as if cameramen (rather than the proposed cameramans) will be able to get on with their work in the Gulf; the beloved accent on abîme will not fall into the abyss; and the whole affair will have been a non-événement.
Reform in Eastern Europe: Poland
Look on the bright side
FROM OUR WARSAW CORRESPONDENT
Bad news about Eastern Europe is drowning out the good news.
Wrongly.
In a series of articles, we aim to start redressing the balance
GLOOM and doom are all the rage in Eastern Europe.
Poland, one year after starting a strict anti-inflation programme, is said to be a particularly terrible place.
Statistics are cited to prove the depth of popular misery: falling real wages, rising unemployment, a catastrophic drop in production, a general collapse of living standards.
But look more closely at the statistics, look at what is really happening on the streets and in the shops, look at how people's lives are changing, and it becomes clear that things are not nearly as bad as they are painted.
True, the Polish reform has had its faults.
Privatisation has been too slow.
The dominant state industry still awaits a proper shake-out.
Inflation remains 5% a month, a big improvement on a year ago but still worrying.
Yet all these faults suggest that the reform, far from being too bold, has not been bold enough.
The government reckoned that Poles were having to cope with about as much economic pain as they would tolerate.
Life has certainly been tough in Poland over the past year.
But has it really been tougher than before?
Official figures greatly exaggerate the drop in industrial production (which is said to have fallen by almost a third last year).
One reason is that previous years' figures were bloated by communist managers with an interest in padding their production numbers to get bonuses or promotion.
Performance was measured against the plan, not the market.
Now, in contrast, managers are tempted to under-report their performance, to avoid taxes.
If some factories are now producing fewer feet-breaking shoes and unusable machines than they were a year ago, so much the better.
And if others are producing smaller amounts of goods that people actually want to buy, fine.
One steel factory in Silesia found that it could no longer afford to make the heavily subsidised, high-quality steel it used to produce before the new budgetary regime, so it began to make smaller quantities of low-quality steel, which it found could be exported to Germany at a profit.
Factories reducing production in order to change their technology or improve quality — even factories going bankrupt — are excellent signs of industrial restructuring.
Many economists say bankruptcy figures in Poland are still too low.
But what really distorts the official statistics is that they are based almost entirely on the state economy.
They fail to account for the boom in private enterprise.
Any visitor to Poland immediately sees what the figures fail to reflect.
Every Polish town now has its street market, where everything from imported toothpaste to once-unavailable Polish ham can be bought.
Queues have virtually disappeared.
Some estimates of the size of the private sector do exist.
The Polish government's statistical office believes that the output of private industry (excluding farming) grew by 50% over the past year, and that it now accounts for 18% of national income, up from 11% in 1989.
The number of people employed in private enterprise, the government's statisticians guess, grew by more than 500,000 in 1989, bringing the total to between 1.8m and 2m people.
Keeping it private
But much of Poland's private industry goes unrecorded.
Private traders, plumbers, carpenters and truckers under-report their income, fearing Poland's high taxes.
Average income in the private sector is probably about three times that in the state sector, but no one knows for sure.
What about the ‘30% drop in the standard of living’ so often referred to?
This number comes from comparing the figures of 1990 with those of 1989 — a year of hyper-inflation, when wages grew astronomically.
A comparison of 1990 with 1987 yields a drop in real wages of only 2–3%.
Even this fails to account for some unmeasurable changes.
Polish housewives no longer have to spend two hours a day in queues, and they can choose between 15 brands of mineral water, when once only one diesel-flavoured Polish brand was on offer.
Another seldom-mentioned change in the Polish standard of living is the increase in dollar purchasing-power brought about by the newly stable zloty.
At the black-market rate for the dollar, the average Polish monthly wage in October 1987 was $40.
In October 1990 it was $131.
This means that, though many foreign goods are still way out of reach for most Poles, others are suddenly at fingertip-end.
Psychologists speculate that much of the current dissatisfaction with the economy is caused by the presence of previously unattainable consumer products like VCRs, which are now available but still too expensive for most Poles.
The most misleading figures are those on unemployment.
Commentators, both in Poland and abroad, are fond of repeating that unemployment went ‘from zero to 1.2m’ in the past year: up to about 7% of the labour force.
But ‘zero’ refers to the communist era, when unemployment officially did not exist.
When the government first began to register the jobless and offer unemployment money, thousands of people, including housewives, who had never held jobs signed up.
Traders and other private entrepreneurs also signed up in order to supplement their unregistered incomes.
The ministry of labour suspects that about half of the unemployed have indeed been laid off, but other evidence suggests that at least in some parts of the country the proportion is much lower.
In most big cities advertisements for workers, from plumbers to car mechanics, go unanswered for weeks.
If the news is really not so bad, why hasn't the government said so?
Partly because for the past year the finance minister, Leszek Balcerowicz, and the former prime minister, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, stuck to a policy of preparing the nation for the worst.
The current government wants to change this approach, which helped Mr Mazowiecki lose last month's presidential election.
Yet it still finds that the official statistics-gathering system is designed to measure the state economy, but not the rapidly growing private one.
It is also true that public complaining, impossible under the old regime, has grown enormously with the advent of a free press.
Things may well have been a lot worse five years ago.
But back then there was no open way to blame the government, and no way at all to vote it out.
No surrender in Vilnius
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT IN LITHUANIA
TO BE in the Baltic states is to be in the West.
Vilnius is an image of Europe before modernisation.
In the old town, streets barely altered since the 18th century circle the university.
From the old town a broad boulevard, called Gedimino (formerly Lenin Avenue), leads to the parliament building.
Before it gets there a barricade of grey concrete blocks daubed with ‘Free Lithuania’ and ‘Independence for Baltic Countries’has been drawn across the street.
Behind it lies a scene out of a medieval siege.
The parliament building sits in a square like the keep of a castle.
At the heart of the square, 24 hours a day, old women sing hymns to a statue of the Virgin, below which hangs a list of the 14 Lithuanians killed by Soviet troops on January 13th.
Portable kitchens dispense free cups of tea.
People cluster around wood fires to keep off the night chill.
Classical music — Handel and hymns — fills the square with reminders of the western values at stake.
Barbed wire and every lump of building material that the Lithuanians could lay their hands on have been commandeered for self-defence.
These serve as billboards for symbolic displays.
Text books are impaled on the barbed wire: ‘A history of the Communist Party’, ‘An Introduction to Marxism-Leninism’.
Every inch of the wire is festooned with cartoons of Mikhail Gorbachev as Stalin, Hitler or Saddam Hussein.
But the defences have no military significance.
Tanks would roll over them in moments.
Inside the parliament building Lithuania's last redoubt is being prepared.
The building is as bland as a modern concert hall: a place of marble floors, wide foyers and sweeping staircases.
Last summer, strolling down the steps, Lithuania's deputy president remarked that: ‘Yes, it's a fine building but difficult to work in.
We prefer something with historical resonance.’
The Lithuanians believe that their history will soon be made in it.
The parliament has become a garrison.
Sandbags block the entrances.
Sleeping bags are piled on windowsills.
On top of them lie hunting rifles and gas masks.
At night — when an attack is most likely — the temperature falls below freezing because the heating has been switched off.
People sleep on the floor or huddle round television sets.
Some 300 young men are waiting in the parliament to be killed.
Like the barricades outside, the Lithuanians' hunting rifles are military toys.
The building cannot realistically be defended.
If Soviet soldiers get in to the parliament there will be a bloodbath.
The army may have been holding back because it is reluctant to make martyrs.
By resorting to guns, even toy ones, are the Lithuanians forfeiting the rights of democrats and putting themselves on the same level as the Soviet troops?
The Lithuanians reckon the moment has arrived for defending their country with every means they have.
The nation is haunted by what happened in 1940, when it metaphorically came out with its hands up as Soviet tanks rolled in while world war was raging.
The young men in the parliament have taken an oath of allegiance to the Lithuanian state, swearing to defend it to the death.
France
Rebellion on the right
FROM OUR PARIS CORRESPONDENT
TWO conservative rebels are set to test public support for an upheaval within France's ailing right-wing opposition.
The rebels deliberately provoked the parliamentary by-elections to be held on January 27th by resigning last month both from their parliamentary seats and from their party, the neo-Gaullist Rassemblement pour la République (RPR).
Michel Noir, the dashing young mayor of Lyons, and Michèle Barzach, an ex-minister of health and a former protégée of Jacques Chirac, the RPR leader, are standing for re-election as independents against official RPR candidates.
It is the fourth time since Mr Chirac's humiliating defeat in the presidential election three years ago that the discredited yet seemingly immovable leadership of the right has been challenged.
Until the unexpected Socialist victory in 1981, the right had held undisputed sway in France for quarter of a century.
Conservatives had come to believe that they were the rightful rulers of the country.
With François Mitterrand's re-election for a second seven-year term in 1988, they had to face the demoralising prospect of being out of power for 14 years.
Many, particularly among the younger deputies, were convinced that something radical had to be done.
But what?
One persistent idea has been that the two main moderate right-wing parties, the Rassemblement pour la République and the Union pour la Démocratie Française, must get together if they are to have any chance of regaining power.
But each time this has been tried, it comes up against the apparently irreconcilable rivalries of the three figures who have dominated the French right for the past 15 years — Jacques Chirac, Valéry Giscard d'Estaing and (to a lesser extent) Raymond Barre.
Past attempts to remove the old leaders have all failed.
Mr Noir and Mrs Barzach are counting this time on the growing public irritation with the leadership squabbles and on general disillusionment with party politics to boost their cause.
Opinion polls suggest that the two rebels have attracted a lot of sympathy.
Mr Noir's popularity rating has jumped 12 points since his resignation, making him the person on the right whom the French would ‘most like to see playing an important role in the future’.
Much of his new support has come from the left, however.
Among right-wing voters, he still ranks only fifth in popularity (Mr Chirac comes top).
He is nevertheless expected to have an easy win in the Lyons constituency he has represented for the past 13 years.
The interest lies in the size of his victory.
Mrs Barzach will have a much more difficult time retaining her seat in the 15th arrondissement of Paris, which she has represented for only the past three years and where she is standing against the well-established local RPR mayor (and deputy mayor of the capital).
A victory for her would be regarded as a particularly bitter blow for Mr Chirac, who has been campaigning in support of her rival.
Mr Noir, Mrs Barzach and a third rebel RPR deputy, Jean-Michel Dubernard (who is standing for re-election against Mr Noir's son-in-law in Lyons), claim they have no desire to form a new party, despite their launch this week of a glossy 35-page ‘Contract for a New Democracy’, which bears all the hallmarks of a party manifesto.
It diverges widely from the RPR's official line on many points, notably in its wholehearted support for European political and monetary union.
If elected, the three dissidents say they will continue to sit in the opposition as independents.
They will nevertheless be eagerly awaiting signs of defections to their ranks among other right-wing deputies.
Many will be tempted; few are likely to take what still looks like a suicidal step.
Setting up shop
FROM OUR BUCHAREST CORRESPONDENT
THE lights are going on in Bucharest.
For years its shops have been empty and dark (they had no bulbs).
Today a shopping revolution is taking place in the Romanian capital.
Every day new private shops and kiosks open selling a range of goods simply never seen before, from pineapple juice to fax machines.
With astonishing speed prime spots in streets known for fashionable shopping before the second world war are being snapped up.
People who want to open more shops complain that it is becoming ever harder, and more expensive, to find and bribe the correct official responsible for allocating premises.
Every month the authorities are issuing up to 14,000 new business permits, many of them for shops and stalls.
Foreigners are interested too.
An Italian entrepreneur has taken over a whole department store to sell western goods in Romanian currency.
He plans to use the money to build holiday homes for Italians on the Black Sea.
Bucharest's shops are supplying a population deprived for years of everything but the poorest-quality basics.
But there is a snag.
Many will sell only for hard currency and all are expensive.
Since the leu is not yet convertible, shopkeepers have no choice but to pass on their hard-currency costs to the customers.
Few of the goods available in the new shops are made in Romania.
So far the shopkeepers are surviving, because demand is so great, but few are yet admitting to doing anything other than breaking even.
The shops are supplied by a variety of means.
Either their owners travel abroad or, increasingly, they can buy from Bucharest wholesalers (many of whom are Arabs).
Some shopkeepers have foreign partners who supply them.
Others have asked to have their shop classified as a consignatie, or ‘commission’ store.
In these, people who have been abroad bring foreign goods for sale.
The shop takes a commission on sales and the seller has helped pay for his trip.
Despite the high prices, goods are moving.
A kilo of bananas costs the equivalent of a day's wages.
Since bananas have not been seen in Romania for years and many children have never eaten one before, they sell quickly.
So do other goods, such as batteries, which are rarely found in state shops.
Alcohol and western cigarettes are best sellers.
Many of the new shops look a mess.
They jumble together shampoos, toys, chocolate, clothes, electronic goods and hair slides.
The owners say that they are so new to the game that for the moment they are selling everything because they do not know what will eventually prove profitable.
The rest of the economy remains in deep trouble, with the government hesitant to introduce painful reform, especially in subsidised state industry.
The government is happy to see visible signs in Bucharest's new shops that at least something is changing amid the general economic gloom.
But it is not overjoyed that so many shops are concentrating on whisky and cigarettes.
‘At first I was upset by this development,’ said one official, ‘but then I realised that with so many places selling the same things either they would go bust or they would have to channel their efforts into other, more necessary things.’
Not yet.
But the prices of some goods are coming down.
For the first time in the lives of many Romanians, they can ‘shop around’.
EC farm reform
That's the way the money goes
FROM OUR BRUSSELS CORRESPONDENT
IN REAL markets, oversupply causes prices to fall.
Production drops and supply and demand return to balance.
In the Alice-in-Wonderland world of European agriculture, farmers are paid more to grow more even when nobody wants to buy what they produce.
Further, the EC's common agricultural policy (CAP) seems virtually reform-proof: efforts over the years to undo its worst nonsenses have had little success.
Now, under the internal threat of unmanageable surpluses and external (mainly American) demands for cuts in its export subsidies, the Community is trying again.
American pressure by itself will not succeed in reforming the CAP, as the deadlocked GATT talks on trade liberalisation clearly show.
But the piling-up of EC surpluses of beef, dairy products and cereals could — up to a point.
The thrust of the reforms being prepared by the farm commissioner, Ireland's Ray MacSharry, and his colleagues is to reduce guaranteed prices and to pay more income support to farmers.
Europeans pay twice for the Community's farm madness: as consumers and as taxpayers.
Consumers pay inflated food prices because their market is insulated by levies from lower-priced imports.
Taxpayers pay the subsidies needed to dump overpriced EC surpluses abroad.
For example, although they do not know it yet, EC taxpayers will probably end up paying $580m on a cut-price sale of 200,000 tonnes of butter to the Soviet Union which is currently being completed.
The EC price for a tonne of butter is the equivalent of $4,000; the Russians are to pay $1,100, and the EC budget will cover the difference.
The deal is not affected by this week's decision to slow down part of the emergency aid agreed upon by the Twelve in December because of the repression in the Baltic republics.
The Community could signal displeasure by refusing to do any other special deals with Moscow.
The trouble is that no other country is prepared to pay even as much (ie, little) as the Russians for surplus EC butter; much of it would go rancid in the Community's cold stores.
Each minor modification of the CAP has been hailed by its authors as the definitive reform.
The introduction of a timid levy on milk producers 12 years ago was supposed to end dairy surpluses: ‘A new start for the CAP’, said a European Commission document at the time.
In 1986, with the Community still awash with milk, production quotas were imposed on dairy farmers.
Guaranteed support was also cut for beef.
Britain's farm minister at the time, Michael Jopling, said this agreement was ‘probably one of the most important reached since the inception of the CAP’.
In 1988 ‘stabilisers’ were introduced limiting the amount of cash paid for each type of product.
All to little avail.
Costs have continued to rise (see chart).
The current dip in farm spending as a proportion of the total EC budget merely reflects higher outlays on the Community's regional and social programmes.
Dairy surpluses exceed 500,000 tonnes; a near-record 700,000 tonnes of unsold beef are in EC storage.
Excuses abound: world markets have collapsed, diet-conscious Europeans are eating less red meat, some people in Britain fear it will give them mad cow disease.
Mr MacSharry wants to lower milk quotas and to cut guaranteed prices for dairy products, cereals and beef.
These cuts would be offset by a variety of direct payments to farmers.
But some would get more than others.
At present 20% of Community farmers receive 80% of CAP cash.
These are the big, efficient producers who need less protection against price cuts.
Mr MacSharry's plan, therefore, is to direct income support towards smaller farmers.
He also wants to push farmers to take land out of production and to pay them grants if they tend their non-productive land in an environmentally-friendly way or use less chemical fertilisers and pesticides on their crops.
Many of these schemes have been tried before in small doses.
This will be the most comprehensive reform package yet, if Mr MacSharry can get it past his commission colleagues later this month and adopted in the spring by farm ministers.
EC members are already reacting informally to the MacSharry plan.
If the need for reform is unquestioned, his approach is not.
Cost is one problem.
A switch from price support to income support comes dear.
Budget costs would rise further, not fall.
Governments are picking out the bits of the plan they do not like.
Officials in Britain, Holland and Denmark find Mr MacSharry's bias in favour of small farmers unacceptable because it would discriminate against their large producers.
In Ireland and the south of the Community, where farms tend to be small, governments generally back Mr MacSharry.
Nor do these countries object to spending more EC money, which comes mainly from their richer northern neighbours anyway.
Germany, deferential (as always) to its farm lobby, is against price cuts.
It would prefer to limit production through a greater use of quotas and the withdrawal of more land from production.
France does not know which way to go.
It has large and influential cereals and sugar barons in the north, but it has many small livestock farmers as well.
Whom should it favour?
It will probably not have to choose.
By the time farm ministers are through, the cutting edge of the MacSharry reform will be blunted.
To get ministerial approval it will need to contain something for everybody, in the best tradition of EC compromises.
As Germany dreams
FROM OUR BONN CORRESPONDENT
AN EARLY casualty of the Gulf war has been the idea that the European Community can act as a unified power.
The widely differing behaviour of EC members has prompted Britain's prime minister, John Major, to say that a common foreign policy must go beyond mere words and extend to action, and that the Community is clearly not yet ready for that.
Britain, always cool about the Community's ambitions, might be expected to say told-you-so.
But even Jacques Delors, the president of the European Commission, has called the Community's response ‘ineffectual’.
‘Ineffectual’ is an understatement in the case of the EC's most powerful member.
Germany's response to the Gulf war so far has been a week of hand-wringing and of big, mainly anti-American demonstrations.
This may be a relief for those who feared that a bigger Germany would be a militarily pugnacious Germany.
But it has given rise to two main worries among western diplomats in Bonn.
One is that the Americans, already cutting their forces in Germany sharply, may decide to pull them out altogether.
The other is that efforts to forge a European foreign and security policy (loudly backed in principle by the Germans) may be doomed.
Some thoughtful Germans, such as Volker Rühe, general secretary of the ruling Christian Democrats, argue that now more than ever the Europeans should speed moves to form a multinational force that includes German soldiers.
But in light of the German response to events in the Gulf, and to a lesser extent in the Baltic, allied diplomats give this scheme little chance.
Even if the Germans were to join, it is argued, they would probably hedge their participation with so many conditions that the force would be useless.
Is this a temporary over-reaction by Germany's friends, sour because their support for German unity seems to have brought them little solidarity now?
Well, the Bonn government has put up DM3.3 billion ($2.2 billion) to help the countries struggling to put things right in the Gulf, and it says it will raise more, but this still leaves it well behind Japan.
Some demonstrators have turned out to support Israel and Lithuania.
The Frankfurter Allgemeine has drummed home the case against Saddam Hussein.
Atlantik-Brücke, an outfit that fosters German-American ties, has launched a campaign to help families in Germany of allied servicemen sent to the Gulf.
But these things stand out because they go against the trend on the streets — and in parliament.
While allied airmen risk their lives in the Arabian desert, politicians in Bonn squabble over whether Germany is bound by treaty to aid Turkey, a NATO partner, should it be attacked by Iraq.
The opposition Social Democrats even urge the recall of the 18 elderly Alpha jets already sent by Germany to Turkey, and demand a Gulf ceasefire.
The Turks are understandably angry.
‘I think Germany has become so rich that it has completely lost its fighting spirit,’ said Turkey's President Turgut Ozal on German television.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl is said by aides to favour stronger backing for the allies but feels constrained by empty coffers and by a constitutional provision which arguably bans the use of German forces outside the NATO area.
Never much of an orator, Mr Kohl has not sounded convincing in his calls for solidarity with the Gulf allies; and his reaction to Soviet bullying in the Baltic has been inept.
The Balts, he argued, should take 100 small steps to independence, not ten big ones — odd advice from the man who quick-marched Germany to unity.
Naturally, Germans are sensitive about war after their own defeat and destruction, followed by decades of division.
And when Mr Kohl speaks in a way he hopes will not antagonise the Kremlin, he does so with an eye on the 350,000 Soviet troops still sitting in Germany.
But would it not seem natural for the people who were helped to escape from Hitler now to help those who are resisting Saddam Hussein, and to understand the desire for liberty of the Balts?
After Auschwitz, would you not expect Germans to take every conceivable care to stop German arms filtering through to where they could threaten Israel?
Yet Iraq has been acquiring German weapons for years and Germany is now pledging, for the umpteenth time, finally to block the holes in its arms-export controls.
Many Germans seem to have convinced themselves that by ‘taking Gorbachev at his word’(to borrow a phrase of the currently almost speechless Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the foreign minister), they could ensure that things went well in the Soviet Union; and that Saddam Hussein could be shifted without war.
With both illusions shattered, they are reacting irrationally.
That is bad for their allies and themselves, but it is hardly new.
As the poet Heine put it in 1844 in ‘A Winter's Tale’, the land belongs to the French and the Russians, the sea to the British, but the Germans ‘are the unchallenged rulers of the kingdom of dreams.’
The two sides of the Soviet barricades
FROM OUR MOSCOW CORRESPONDENT
THE bloodshed in the Baltic states has polarised the Soviet Union.
On the one side are democrats, economic reformers and secessionists.
Their leader is Boris Yeltsin.
On the other, supporters of order, of economic conservatism and of keeping the union together at all costs.
Their leader — or puppet?— is Mikhail Gorbachev.
President Gorbachev continues to behave as if the middle ground were still there, because without it he is nothing.
He built power by playing off left against right, searching for compromises.
But compromises no longer look possible in the wake of the killings in Lithuania and in Latvia, where four people died on January 20th when pro-Moscow ‘black berets’ attacked the republic's interior ministry.
Policies emerging from the Kremlin look increasingly desperate.
Events in the Baltic states are one sign.
The first act of the new prime minister, Valentin Pavlov, is another.
This was a currency reform, by which 50- and 100-rouble banknotes stopped, at a few hours' notice, being legal tender.
Soviet citizens were given three days to exchange them for lower-denomination notes.
And no longer will they be allowed to take more than 500 roubles a month (about twice the average monthly wage) out of their bank accounts.
The idea is to mop up some of the surplus spending power that is causing inflation.
But bank deposits will not be affected by confiscation.
And cash savings may not be cut by as much as the government hopes.
Citizens cannot exchange more than 1,000 roubles each.
The idea is that only rich people who have saved more than 1,000 roubles in high-denomination notes will be hurt.
But almost everyone will know someone who can help them get round the limit.
Economically, the main consequence of the reform will be to destroy people's confidence in the banking system — hardly a desirable outcome.
It will also hurt co-operatives (semi-private businesses), which handle large sums of cash and are the only truly dynamic sector of the Soviet economy.
Politically, however, the reform is easy to explain.
Confiscating savings has long been a demand of the most reactionary groups who think that all private business is conducted by ‘the mafia’, which the confiscation is supposed to hurt (actually, the most criminalised businesses hold much of their savings in dollars and gold).
Bowing to their demands puts the new government squarely on the side of the anti-reformers.
That it was going in this direction anyway had already been signalled by the resignations — often amid recrimination — of every one of Mr Gorbachev's top economic advisers: notably Stanislav Shatalin (who gave his name to the rejected ‘500-day’ plan to convert the Soviet economy to capitalism) and Nikolai Petrakov (who was the president's personal economic guru).
Civil war?
Economic reform is dead.
The Soviet constitution is discredited.
The centre ground has vanished.
If this is a prelude to the final struggle over reform — even to civil war — then what are the forces on each side?
Overwhelming power lies with Mr Gorbachev and his allies.
The army has 4m men.
Its high  command is dominated by authoritarians who have fought off arguments that conscription be ended and Communist control over the army be scrapped.
The Communist Party, it is true, has retreated into the background.
But for a time in 1990 it seemed likely to split apart.
Not only did it emerge largely intact, it has been busy setting up shadowy ‘national salvation committees’ in whose name the army has been operating.
The KGB has survived and is even taking on new tasks, such as distributing western food aid.
As for the government and the civil service, virtually all of it is loyal to the president.
The only significant exception seems to be the foreign ministry, whose former chief, Edward Shevardnadze, resigned because ‘dictatorship is coming’, and whose current minister is a fellow ‘new thinker’.
True, some of these institutions are divided.
Junior army officers support the idea of a volunteer force and one of their leaders, Major Vladimir Lopatin, is now an adviser on military affairs to Mr Yeltsin.
The interior ministry is split between local police forces loyal to republican parliaments and the ‘black berets’ controlled by the interior ministry in Moscow.
If one of these groups were to go over to the other side — as the army did in Romania — the balance of forces would be altered.
But so far, divisions in the army and police seem not to have hampered their operational abilities.
Or have they?
The Baltic crackdown has been hesitant.
This may be partly because neither the president nor the high command is confident that parts of the army might not rebel.
Stories circulate about regiments that refused to go to Vilnius, and of officers who refused to fire once there.
The army is mindful of its prestige, and the strength of public feeling was shown by the huge turn-out (over 300,000 people) for an anti-military rally in central Moscow on the first Sunday after the killings in Vilnius.
Among the supporters of what can be called, for want of a better term, the democrats are three important groups.
First, the Russian Orthodox church, which regularly shows up in opinion polls as one of the most respected institutions in the country.
The head of it, who in December was urging his flock to respect law and order, called the military operation in Vilnius ‘a sin’.
The second is the press.
To run a proper dictatorship, you cannot afford to have newspapers denouncing your actions.
But that is what the most popular newspapers are now doing.
The third is the loose grouping of leaders of republics and nationalist parties.
One of the most significant results of the repression in the Baltic states has been to recreate an alliance between Russian radical politicians and Baltic nationalists.
In 1989 and early 1990, they worked together through the so-called Inter-Regional Group of deputies.
The group fell apart in the spring of 1990 when the Balts began to stay away from the ‘foreign’ Soviet parliament, while Russia's democrats squabbled among themselves.
By flying to Estonia immediately after the army's attack on the television tower in Vilnius and uncompromisingly condemning it, Mr Yeltsin swung Russia's democrats behind the Baltic nationalists.
It is tempting to say that this will make no difference.
But the alliance, if it holds, would reduce Mr Gorbachev's options in one crucial respect: he would find it hard, if not impossible, to close down the Baltic parliaments without extending the crackdown to Russia itself.
And that would mean tackling the hugely popular Mr Yeltsin himself.
BRITAIN THIS WEEK
A deep breath
Senior ministers did their best to dampen ‘it'll all be over soon’ fever.
The prime minister warned MPs that the Gulf war would not be ‘an easy or painless business’ and readied them for ‘difficult news’to come.
Labour's leaders backed Mr Major's rejection of a ceasefire during which peace talks might, just might, start.
Television pictures of captured British airmen intensified calls for Saddam Hussein's removal to be added to the list of war aims.
Mr Major hoped other Iraqis would deal with their leader; ‘I will not weep for him,’ he added.
Tom King, the defence secretary, demanded proper treatment for prisoners of war.
The prime minister appealed for international financial help for the Gulf conflict.
He expects Germans, Japanese and anyone else who has not sent forces to contribute to a ‘war chest’.
Norman Lamont, the chancellor, warned that the cost of the fighting could limit scope for tax cuts in his March budget.
It was reported that the first four days of the war had cost Britain £100m in ammunition and lost equipment.
Home front
Weekend opinion polls showed strong public support for the government's Gulf strategy.
A poll for the Sunday Times found that 80% support British military involvement and 60% believe Kuwait's liberation is worth British lives.
British Muslims meeting in Bradford attacked ‘British- and American-led aggression’ in the Gulf and demanded the immediate withdrawal of non-Muslim troops.
Hardliners threatened to fight back if other Britons took violent exception to such views.
Food importers said supermarkets were stockpiling tinned supplies and gave warning that there would be shortages of pilchards and corned beef within a few weeks.
Frightening figures
Deeper and deeper was the basic recession message in the British Chambers of Commerce quarterly economic survey.
Manufacturing and service industries recorded a drop in home orders; and 21% more manufacturers expect to shed jobs than increase them.
The government reported the biggest fall in manufacturing output since 1981.
The Central Statistical Office celebrated its 50th birthday (seasonally adjusted, of course).
It was originally set up by Churchill, who wanted better statistics to manage the war economy.
The government is still waiting.
With the going rate for pay settlements running at 9–10%, average earnings will remain stubbornly high, said a research organisation's report.
Income Data Services predicted that only lower inflation is likely to slow settlements down.
Real incomes for farmers have not been lower since the second world war, according to the Ministry of Agriculture.
Family farmers have been worst hit; their incomes fell by 14% last year, and almost 6,000 left the land for greener pastures.
More of the same
A £950m scheme to build an east-coast motorway linking the north-east with the Channel tunnel was proposed in a report sponsored by the European Commission, local councils and private companies.
Supporters claim the new road would give the north-east better access to European markets and help create 60,000 new jobs.
A new government scheme will try to help London's homeless by pumping £3m into provincial projects to help people before they even get to the capital.
Virginia Bottomley, a health minister, said many of the 3,000 people sleeping rough in the city might have stayed at home had they been given enough attention earlier.
Senior Tories pressed Michael Heseltine, the environment secretary, to discuss radical changes to the poll tax.
The home secretary, Kenneth Baker, launched a £4.5m campaign to recruit thousands more special constables.
The government aims to field 25,000 of these part-time policemen, dubbed ‘hobby bobbies’ by derisive full-timers, by 1994.
Sons and keepers
Nicholas Mosley, the son of the 1930s fascist leader, Sir Oswald Mosley, won the £22,000 Whitbread Book of the Year award with a novel called ‘Hopeful Monsters’.
A park keeper was ordered to pay £800 compensation to the owner of a £1,000 model yacht he sank.
The official was convicted of criminal damage for ramming the craft with a motorboat, then whacking it with a shovel.
All because it had ventured on to a lake where models were banned.
BRITAIN
Making the munitions
THE Americans call them ‘load, assembly and pack’ factories.
They are the heavyweight addresses of the defence business: the places where all the complex components of a standard modern weapon are assembled.
The one responsible for putting together the JP233 since July 1985 has been Royal Ordnance's Glascoed site: 1,000 acres of low-lying ground, with an obliging screen of hills on every side, deep in the countryside of mid-Gwent.
It has been turning out bombs and shells since 1939, and the Gulf war has already begun to embellish a colourful history.
On the Saturday night after the outbreak of war, the general manager of Glascoed got a telephone call from the Ministry of Defence.
It had suddenly found itself desperately short of a special washer — waxed and made of felt — that is a vital bit in the detonation process inside the RAF's latest 1,000lb bombs.
Next morning a team of Royal Ordnance workers was specially assembled for the job.
The washers were made by early afternoon and a site manager drove with them in his car to an RAF service depot in southern England.
They were fitted into bombs in the Gulf on Monday — without a shred of ministry paperwork intruding at any point.
Glascoed has been steadily gearing up its operations in bigger ways, too.
The output of 120mm shells for the British army's tanks has been doubled.
Two crash programmes in December and January have boosted production of 81mm mortar bombs for both the British and the American forces — and the British design has been adapted to make it fit the slightly different mortar used by the Americans.
The site's workforce has been cut from 1,600 to about 1,000 over the past three years.
The huge improvements in productivity have borne up well in recent months.
To keep existing contracts on schedule while meeting emergency requirements from the ministry, the site has moved from a five-to a seven-day week, and working hours since early November have more or less doubled.
The management at Glascoed says scope exists for output to be pushed a lot higher.
During the second world war the plant kept 19,000 people busy (assembling, among other things, Barnes Wallis's bouncing bombs for the dam-busters).
Today Glascoed's external appearance is largely unchanged and its scale is as awesome as ever.
Black steam-pipes criss-cross the 1,000 acres as they always have done, hissing here and there through open valves.
Ageing railway wagons continue to run along old lines, now turned orange with rust.
A few special projects, like the JP233, have merited tailor-made concrete bunkers.
But elsewhere neatly swept asphalt pathways still connect hundreds of modest brickwork sheds, built in the 1940s and nestling within protective earthen ramparts where generations of rabbits have nibbled the grass to a close trim.
Inside these workshops, the impact of modern technology is rather more evident.
Sealed chambers and closed-circuit televisions are on hand for weapons that must bring together electronic gadgetry, steel casings, perfectly packaged propellants and warheads of high explosive.
Crates bristle with numbered codes and sinister acronyms.
Visitors are courteously chaperoned through a world of euphemisms, where fearsome killing devices are always ‘stores’, explosives are ‘energetic materials’ and accidental bangs are ‘events’.
It is still possible to open a door and find a dozen women sitting quietly round a bench sewing small squares of silk, with all the cloistered intensity of medieval seamstresses.
Not every component of a modern tank shell is made by computer.
Whatever the mix of capital investment and labour, new designs only rarely emerge from Glascoed: each has to have survived the tortuous processes of ministry procurement and the logistical rigours of subcontracted production — often involving half a dozen other factories, sometimes more.
The gestation period from first inquiry to first completed shipment is rarely less than a couple of years.
In normal times, that is.
On January 7th the Ministry of Defence asked Glascoed and its sister factories in Royal Ordnance whether it might be able to produce a new marker-version of its 155mm artillery shell.
Twelve prototypes were delivered within a fortnight and successfully fired in trials on January 21st.
Earlier this week the management was confidently expecting firm production orders within a matter of days.
British Muslims
Trouble at the mosque
The Gulf war reveals the growing determination of Britain's Muslims to find a political voice.
It also reveals their divisions
A COUPLE of miles away from Westminster, the Gulf war is being debated with even greater passion than in the Commons itself.
In Brick Lane, east London, the mosques are broadcasting fierce denunciations of infidel aggression; the newspaper-stands bristle with titles fulminating against American imperialism; youths in the street shout support for Saddam Hussein.
And their shouts find echoes in the industrial towns of the Midlands and the North.
Christian Britain may be reconciled to war; Muslim Britain is in uproar.
On January 21st Muslim leaders from all over the country gathered in Bradford to denounce ‘military aggression against Iraq’.
After calling for non-Muslim forces to be withdrawn from the Gulf, they cursed the Saudi Arabian government for inviting them there in the first place, and took a side-swipe at Israel for having occupied the West Bank in 1967.
They agreed to set up a Supreme Council of British Mosques to consider how British Muslims should respond to Saddam Hussein's call for a holy war.
Mr Sher Azam, convener of the meeting and president of the Bradford Council of Mosques, said the government had shown a ‘total disregard’ for British Muslims when it decided to go to war.
‘If the government continues to ignore us and deny our presence in this country,’ he asked, ‘what right has it to demand 100% loyalty from us for action?’
Even moderate Muslims agree that Mr Azam's question will become increasingly difficult to answer if the war drags on for months and if the allies damage some of the holy sites of Shia Islam in Iraq.
They fear a backlash from the war.
Rightly: arson attacks on mosques in Surrey and West Yorkshire suggest something like that may already have begun.
Fast coming of age
Muslims started to arrive in Britain in large numbers about 30 years ago.
Today there are about 1m in the country.
Two-thirds are of South Asian origin: over 400,000 from Pakistan, perhaps 12,000 from Bangladesh, up to 100,000 from India and another 100,000 or so from East Africa of South Asian descent.
The rest are Middle Easterners or black Africans.
Concentrated in the cities — London, Birmingham, Bradford, Rotherham and Glasgow in particular— Muslims are the fastest-growing religious group in Britain.
This growth owes more to the birth-rate than to evangelism: Muslims are younger than the rest of the population (half the South Asians are under 16) and usually have large families.
Over the past decade Muslims have learnt to stand up for themselves.
To some extent they have been driven to this by brutal economics.
Generally less well-educated than other ethnic groups, and more likely to lack jobs and live in grim houses, Pakistanis and Bangladeshis have been hit by the closure of run-down Bradford mills and ancient Birmingham factories.
But religious righteousness has been a more potent force than economic despair.
For many British Muslims, resurgent Islam is now vying for their sympathies against secular liberalism.
The Salman Rushdie affair is a vivid example.
The Rushdie business drove a wedge between secular society and Muslims; it also strengthened the hold of religious leaders over their flock.
When Bradford Muslims burnt copies of ‘The Satanic Verses’ and effigies of its author, right-thinking liberals cringed; when the government refused to ban the book as blasphemous, even moderate Muslims felt insulted.
Since then young Muslims have been abandoning bars and clubs for mosques and Islamic study groups.
Reforming the blasphemy law is only the first item on a lengthening Muslim agenda.
They insist that Muslims should be subject to Islamic rather than British family law — a privilege they enjoyed in India under the Raj.
And they demand a wide range of special arrangements for their children: single-sex schools for adolescents, special school-uniforms and halal meals, and science courses which eschew references to Darwinism and evolution.
Muslim children, they argue, should be excused art, music and dance.
Most Middle Eastern governments approve of this politicisation of British Muslims.
They have been contributing generously to the upkeep of the 800 mosques in Britain; all they ask in return is a say over the appointment of the imam.
The most generous patron, Saudi Arabia, has invested more than £50m over the past decade.
Even Iraq has done its bit.
Saddam Hussein contributed £2m to a mosque in north Birmingham, and his name is still emblazoned in giant letters on the front of the building, startling motorists speeding past on the Birchfield fly-over.
Plenty of silent minorities
Politicised Islam has inevitably thrown up a new type of politician.
Mr Kalim  Saddiqi , the head of the pro-Iranian Muslim Institute, is perhaps the most adept at grabbing the headlines.
He publicly endorsed the death sentence on Salman Rushdie — an act which oddly failed to get him charged with the crime of incitement to murder — and wants to set up a Muslim parliament.
A Siddiqi speech usually includes a few references to the ‘corrupt bogheap of western culture’.
But it is a mistake to think that Mr  Saddiqi speaks for the majority of Muslims.
He does not — and neither does anybody else.
Muslims are just as divided as Christians: by ethnic origin (they hail from areas as far apart as Turkey and Nigeria); by language (as well as Arabic, their native tongues include Urdu, Bengali, Hausa, Swahili and Farsi); by doctrine (three-quarters are Shias and the rest are Sunnis); by money (Kuwaiti bankers do not usually invite Bradford textile-workers to their Knightsbridge dinner parties); and by politics.
The 15 or so parties that claim to speak for British Muslims are constantly at war with each other.
While the Muslim Institute is a platform for the loud-mouthed Mr Siddiqi, the Association of British Muslims is studiously moderate.
The Islamic Foundation is a vehicle for the Jamaats, a Saudi Arabian-financed sect.
The Islamic Party of Great Britain is the invention of politicised white converts.
Even ethnically united communities are deeply divided on points of doctrine.
Pakistani-dominated mosques are riven by violent squabbles between Deobandis (who are religious purists but political moderates) and Barelvis (who are political activists but doctrinal eclectics).
Mr Rushdie succeeded for a while in obscuring these inter-Muslim differences.
Saddam Hussein is likely to exacerbate them.
Textile workers in Bradford and Brick Lane may regard Saddam as a liberator: the metropolitan middle classes despise him as a thug.
Zealots may feel their blood quicken when they hear calls for a holy war; many of the imams who denounce the presence of infidel troops on Islamic soil know they owe their livelihoods to Saudi money.
Brown separatists and white mosque-burners may exploit the Gulf conflagration in the next few weeks or months.
But perhaps the new assertiveness of British Muslims should be seen as a sign not of isolation but of integration.
Cherishing the dream of returning to their homelands, the first generation of Muslims held themselves aloof from British politics.
Today they are asking to be heard — even on such an explosive subject as the war in Arabia.
A nation on the alert
WAR, not for the first time, has brought the best out of Britain.
Since the bombing raids began over Iraq, Britons have flocked to join the army (inquiries in London have quintupled); to give blood (in Plymouth alone, more than 1,600 people volunteered in the first few days, and 110,000 followed suit across the country); and to say their prayers (Winchester Cathedral reported that the congregation for Matins last Sunday was up by a half on the usual number).
On the grimmer side, the national health service, which only weeks ago was apparently closing down vital wards, said this week that it was fully prepared to look after thousands of war casualties.
Voluntary organisations up and down the country, from the Samaritans to the Women's Royal Voluntary Service, were standing by to help bereaved families.
Support for the war has been strong.
An opinion poll in the Sunday Times showed that 80% of the population backed Britain's military involvement, and 60% thought it was worth the loss of British servicemen's lives to regain Kuwait.
So far, this war is more popular than were those in Korea, Suez or the Falklands at the outset — though that may simply reflect the fact that casualties have so far been so light.
Naturally, everyone is helping the war effort as they see best.
The Sun newspaper has asked pretty girls to volunteer as pen-pals for ‘our boys’ in the Gulf.
By Tuesday, January 22nd, more than 2,500 had offered their epistolary services.
The local council in Aldershot ruled that soldiers serving in the Gulf would not have to pay poll tax; but Whitehall refused to follow America's example of allowing the troops in the Gulf not to pay income tax.
Although the government reported that the first four days of the war had cost Britain £100m in ammunition and equipment, the cost is so far proving light for Mr Average.
Queues formed at petrol stations before the war started.
Then it turned out there was a glut of oil; within a week, petrol prices had fallen back to pre-August levels.
The Lloyd's insurance market opened for trade on a Sunday for the first time in its 300-year history.
Flagmakers were reported to have increased their output by 50%.
The threat of Iraqi terrorist attacks has prompted some elaborate security precautions.
Tanks and policemen armed with submachineguns have been deployed at airports; members of Parliament have been issued with special badges to identify themselves inside Westminster.
But the most nervous people in London, it is unkindly said, are the policemen outside the still-functioning Iraqi embassy in Kensington.
The media have quietly rejoiced at the economic impact of war.
Newspaper circulation has soared: by between 50,000 and 100,000 for most national papers, a welcome rise at a time when advertising has slumped.
The papers have vied to meet ever-later deadlines: The Times produced two 6am editions which were sold to commuters into London.
The city's Evening Standard produced its first Saturday paper in 16 years.
Radio and television have done even better.
The audience for the BBC's nine o'clock news doubled to 13m on the day war broke out, and that for ITN rose by a third.
Dozens of extra news bulletins were transmitted and Radio-4 FM launched a continuous war-news service.
Executives at the BBC were delighted by something John Major said in the Commons.
Just after the war began the prime minister was asked by a Conservative backbencher to condemn the BBC for announcing that it would avoid calling British troops ‘our troops’.
(In fact, the corporation had been wrongly reported on this score and had issued no such edict at all.)
Instead, Mr Major praised the corporation's ‘remarkable’ reporting and noted the need to keep a proper balance ‘precisely because so much of the world listens to the BBC.’
The government has already promised extra cash to pay for longer transmissions for the BBC's World Service in Arabic and Persian.
On the down side, domestic broadcasters decided to ban any songs or plays that could cause offence.
The BBC blacklisted 67 pop songs, including John Lennon's ‘Give Peace A Chance’.
Even popular television war comedies were taken off the air, for fear of jarring too awkwardly with endless hours of Gulf coverage.
Meanwhile, other entertainments paled.
Cinemas in central London showing ‘Air America’, a new film about the war in Indochina, were almost empty.
Camels in London
IF BRITISH foreign policy in the 20th century has anything to teach the world, it is how to win important wars and lose the subsequent peace.
This time, though Britain is a junior partner in the Gulf war, the Foreign Office is working overtime to do better.
In their great mock-palazzo in Whitehall, FO ministers and mandarins are brainstorming about a possible Middle East peace conference and a post-war security structure for the region.
The first fruits of their mental endeavour are a sobering awareness of the likely complexities of the post-war Middle East and an unease about the meagre quantity of strategic thinking going on in other European and Arab capitals.
But some decisions have been reached already.
Despite the urgent desire of some of the smaller Gulf states to return to a 1950s world where their security was assured by British soldiers, the foreign secretary, Douglas Hurd, is determined that there will be no return to an ‘East of Suez’ policy.
Britain might take part in naval manoeuvres or keep military supplies in the region, but will refuse any request to station troops there.
Since the Foreign Office believes there will be a similar reaction from Washington (where thinking about inevitably hazy post-war possibilities is also going on, but is impenetrable to outsiders), this leaves the potential for a serious power-vacuum.
A vital British policy objective, therefore, is to persuade the Saudi government to finance Egypt as the regional policeman, since Egypt has a large army and population but little money.
Though the diplomatic courtship is at an early stage, the Foreign Office is optimistic about such a marriage of convenience.
Despite tough talk about holding Saddam Hussein and his officers accountable for any war crimes, there is little enthusiasm in London for seeking jurisdiction inside Iraq after the war, or pursuing a defeated Iraqi president through his country.
The prime minister, John Major, has neatly sidestepped questioning from the Tory right about making Saddam a target.
The thought of being forced to invade and administer Iraq is nightmarish.
Aside from that, the thorniest post-war issue is pretty clear: how to persuade Israel to discuss a withdrawal from the occupied territories?
At this point, conspiracy theorists start asking whether the recent upheavals in British politics will affect foreign policy.
The Foreign Office has always been deeply pro-Arab, or ‘Arabist’, and remains so — a matter partly of culture and partly, perhaps, of guilt about the past failures of British policy in the region.
Mr Hurd himself is mildly pro-Arab, but the key Arabists are the head of the diplomatic service, Sir Patrick Wright (who has served in Beirut, Cairo, Damascus and Jeddah), and David Gore-Booth, head of the Middle East desk.
In the old days Margaret Thatcher, who was instinctively pro-Israeli, kept the Arabism of the Foreign Office under her thumb.
After the 1986 Hindawi affair (which involved the attempted bombing by a Syrian agent of an El Al jet in London), senior Foreign Office men were opposed to breaking diplomatic links with Syria; Mrs Thatcher insisted.
In 1988, when a Conservative backbencher, Robert Adley, tried to get diplomatic relations restored, Foreign Office ministers briefed him on British preconditions.
Mr Adley persuaded the Syrians to agree to these.
He returned triumphantly; but Downing Street undermined the mission before it started — and ignored it afterwards.
When Mr Adley, along with Mr Gore-Booth and others, was asked to help restore relations with Syria last year, before the outbreak of war, he and the Foreign Office asked for a specific promise that Mrs Thatcher would not intervene again — and got it.
(President Assad told him on that occasion that Saddam Hussein was like a chain-smoker: ‘He cannot help lighting another one before he has finished the first.
Only with Saddam, it is wars, not cigarettes.’)
Mr Adley has since had a letter from the deposed Mrs Thatcher, welcoming the eventual restoration of relations with Syria.
But the point remains: Mrs Thatcher was a lot less Arabist than the Foreign Office.
Without her, British government attitudes could change.
Mr Major sounded chilly in his first meeting with the Israeli prime minister, Yitzhak Shamir, and Mr Hurd was rudely snubbed during his visit to Jerusalem in October, after the Temple Mount killings.
So, goes the conspiracy, the Foreign Office can now give free rein to its instinctive Arabism.
Since it is also instinctively pro-European, as well as pro-Arab, Britain will adhere to a tougher European line on Israel after the war, even at the risk of offending the Americans.
It sounds a convincing theory.
It is being discussed on the diplomatic circuit and it will no doubt bubble up at Westminster.
But it is incomplete, and probably wrong.
First, Mr Hurd himself is sceptical — and amused — about the aspirations of some other EC countries which, while taking no part in the war, dream of a grandiose role for themselves in creating peace conferences afterwards.
He believes there must be a conference, and that it should probably include the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council.
He also believes that Israel, and the Soviet Union, are among the countries that could be addressed by a joint Euro-foreign-policy.
But beyond that, Mr Hurd is unpersuaded that flocks of Eurocrats will be much help.
And he knows that nobody can just order Israel to attend, or sign on other people's dotted lines.
Second, though some senior men at the Foreign Office are Arabist, there are other officials who balance their influence.
The number two there, Patrick Fairweather, is no Arabist (to the extent that, after winning a point at one Foreign Office meeting, he exclaimed: ‘Great to win one over the [expletive deleted]camels!’).
Nor is Stephen Wall, the Foreign Office man who has been picked to replace Sir Charles Powell as the foreign-affairs adviser at Number Ten.
So British policy is unlikely to lurch.
A settlement of the Arab-Israel dispute would be a great prize, but a cool even-handedness would be needed to grasp it.
Meanwhile, as ministers' eyes glaze over at the thousand ‘what ifs’ thrown up by war, they would do well to remember Lord Salisbury's deflatingly modest dictum from more than a century ago: ‘The first object of a treaty of peace should be to make a future war improbable.’
Drawing blueprints for defence
The Gulf war will revive a debate about where to draw the line between commercial sense and military prudence
THE British defence industry has taken a battering from the government over the past decade.
In the early 1980s came competitive procurement — the idea that officials should shop around the world for arms, rather than restrict themselves (like officials in most other western countries) to buying from domestic suppliers.
Then in 1987 the Royal Ordnance factories, responsible for well over half the total needs of their owner, the Ministry of Defence (MOD), were privatised — and pitched, in the process, into a root-and-branch reorganisation.
Most recently of all, the industry was shaken by signals from Whitehall last year that the size and shape of the armed forces might be transformed.
The Gulf has exposed all these initiatives to the biggest test of all.
With a real war now happening, do the changes imposed on the defence industry (or under active consideration) still look sensible?
Or will they need reassessing, given their importance for Britain's entire defence strategy?
The possibility of a dramatic reduction in the size of the armed forces has been examined in ‘Options for Change’, a paper prepared for Margaret Thatcher last year by Alan Clark, the defence-procurement minister, and still covered in secrecy.
Within the industry, the war has made little difference to most people's expectations: the reduction, they say, is going to happen.
Just before Christmas, Sir Peter Levene, the head of procurement at the MOD, sent a letter to all defence industry suppliers asking them to postpone sending invoices to the department for a month: officials needed to remedy a £400m ($780m) overrun on their year-to-date budget.
The fighting in the Gulf will lift this financial pressure only temporarily.
As defence-industry consultants try to work out the consequences, some predictions are unchanged.
For example, annual purchases of ammunition seem likely, by the mid-1990s, to be at least 25% down on 1989 levels.
But the main goal of the 1990s could be to transform a big, heavily armed standing army into a more flexible force, capable of rapid deployment around the globe.
Here the Gulf war has jolted assumptions.
Flexibility may need redefining, if armies are going to combine smallness with the punch needed to go on the offensive against countries like Iraq equipped with lots of state-of-the-art T-72 tanks.
In this sense the present conflict is going to underscore the greatest danger of any strategy that implies a substitution of firepower for manpower — the risk that the demobilisation day will arrive but the new weapons will not: weapons like the new multiple-launch rocket system that the British army was originally scheduled to start receiving in 1984.
It had ordered 54 of them — but second thoughts on the sourcing postponed their arrival by five years, so only 12 are ready for use in the Gulf.
One business that would certainly hope to benefit from any extensive re-equipping of the forces is Royal Ordnance, the subsidiary of British Aerospace that bought the MOD's factories.
In 1987 it had 16 sites and 15,000 workers; now it has 11 sites and 11,000 workers.
With output in almost all areas either steady or up on pre-privatisation days, the company already looks hugely more efficient in the private sector.
But is Royal Ordnance still able to serve the country as it used to?
In September it was asked by the MOD how much scope it had to lift ammunition production (it provides about 45% of the ministry's total purchases).
The answer was mixed: virtually no scope at all for 155mm artillery shells (which sent the MOD scurrying off in search of extra supplies on the world market); but plenty for 120mm tank shells.
The company also made it clear that it would stretch every resource to meet ministry demands, regardless of its new commercial status.
It seems fair to say it has (see box on next page).
There is no disguising one powerful constraint on Royal Ordnance, however.
For many types of work, its maximum production capacity is well below the level of ten years ago.
And in the struggle to turn the company into a lean commercial outfit, some lines have been discontinued altogether.
It no longer makes 9mm rounds for small arms, or Giant Vipers, a weapon that may play a vital role in opening up Iraqi minefields during an allied offensive.
No doubt the army has lavish stocks of both; but no capacity has been retained in Britain to make more of them at short notice.
The same even goes for the JP233, arguably the most useful offensive weapon of the war so far.
This is the 4.5-ton ‘pod’, two of which are strapped to the belly of every Tornado aircraft sent out to disable an Iraqi airfield: the pod disgorges high-explosive bombs that leave craters, as well as anti-personnel bombs to complicate the task of clearing up the damage.
About a year ago the MOD told the main contractor, Hunting, that it had all it needed.
That may be enough to see the RAF through the present war.
But only export orders have kept the production lines going since then.
Now the export contracts have been met, so those lines may soon be abandoned.
If they are, JP233 production would again require a 2.5-year lead-time.
And just as the MOD has chosen to let such production lines be closed down, rather than pay contractors for the cost of mothballing them, so too has it cast a cold eye on the plight of domestic defence electronics companies.
Competitive procurement seems to have beached several British firms.
Plessey and the biggest bit of Ferranti have been swallowed by GEC; Racal appears to be retreating from the market; Thorn EMI last year put its defence business up for sale.
Only when it comes to the nuclear deterrent or matters of top intelligence-gathering is the short-term commercial approach deliberately shelved.
And on the various powerful but unseen committees that sit in contemplation of Britain's future defence policy, the consequent evaporation of any strategic productive capacity in less glamorous areas is causing unease.
If the government ever agreed to return to its old uncommercial ways, there are, in theory, three ways it could do so.
It could aim to copy the Pentagon's example, devoting a portion of the MOD's budget to looking after a mothballed version of any production line judged a strategic asset.
Critics of this idea say it would be ludicrously expensive.
Second, Britain could aim for a mini-version of the American policy, selecting just a few vital weapons.
In effect, this is the policy of the French, Germans and Italians.
Or, third, Britain could conclude that modern weapons are simply too costly for any single country of its size to make them on its own — and could stick to international joint ventures in future.
But with which countries?
As the MOD has shopped around Europe for additional supplies of 155mm shells, some of the responses have done little for any future spirit of co-operation.
The Belgians abruptly rebuffed a request for free stores; the Dutch and the Germans eventually agreed, but on sale-or-return terms.
Meanwhile, British and American servicemen have been busy inspecting each other 's kit out in the Gulf.
Did someone say Westland?
BUSINESS
The cost of keeping cool
The key to a successful world-climate treaty will be the balance between winners and losers
OFFICIALS from the world's environment ministries meet in Washington, DC, early next month to start work on a treaty on global climate change.
The aim: to persuade countries to reduce their output of greenhouse gases, which are thought to be warming the world faster than ever before.
The prospect of a convention has drawn economists into unfamiliar fields of international politics.
Global warming, unlike the sort of pollution that economists have traditionally thought about, does not arise in, and cause harm to, a single country.
It is not analogous to sewage dumped in a river or to soot from a smoking chimney.
Greenhouse gases, produced by every country on earth in varying amounts, may change the climate of every country.
In the case of a polluted river, the remedy lies in the hands of a national government.
In the case of global pollution, no world government exists to make polluters pay.
Ultimately, an effective greenhouse treaty will need the voluntary co-operation of sovereign powers.
Why should they co-operate?
They are likely to do so only if the perceived benefits exceed the expected costs.
By co-operating, countries can increase the benefit they receive, relative to the cost.
For an individual country, acting alone, huge efforts will make little difference.
To take one example, if Britain stopped burning fossil fuels altogether, the world's output of carbon dioxide — some 6 billion tonnes a year — would fall by only 160m tonnes.
The prospective reduction in global warming — and thus the benefit to Britain's climate — would be correspondingly small.
But a cut of ten times that amount in the whole world's output of carbon dioxide, shared among all countries, would not only cost Britain far less: it would bring bigger benefits in climate stability.
Although no country has an interest in individual self-sacrifice, every country will have an interest in cheating —‘free riding’, as economists call it.
A climate treaty is peculiarly vulnerable to free riders.
The governments going to Washington next month understand that; and in working out what to sign up for, they will know more about the likely costs of taking action than about the benefits.
Scientists still know little of the regional impact of global warming, and of its effect on agriculture.
Some countries (like the Soviet Union) hope that warmer weather, more rain and the fertilising effects of extra carbon dioxide will boost their farm output.
If so, why worry?
Some scientists argue that nastier outcomes are more likely; and that wise countries will insure against the incalculable risk that the consequences of climate change might be catastrophic.
More is known about the possible costs of curbing output of carbon dioxide, the main greenhouse gas.
A survey* of studies of costs has just been published by the OECD's general economics division (which shows how mainstream economists are being drawn into what was once a green ghetto).
All studies assume that unchanged policies will lead to a rise in carbon-dioxide output.
So policies to cut gas output below the current level will imply a larger and larger reduction below projected levels as years go by.
Not surprisingly, most studies expect that such policies will result in a cut in the growth of global GDP (none expects an increase).
Projected slowdowns vary from study to study, but are mainly between 0.1% and 0.3% a year.
Even such apparently small reductions in GDP growth imply big cumulative differences in the long run.
The main growth in carbon-dioxide output will be in developing countries.
So they risk losing most potential economic growth if a climate treaty sets ceilings on emissions.
But without the co-operation of developing countries, the growth in their output of carbon dioxide would swamp any cuts by industrial countries.
An important point to emerge from one of the studies reviewed is that policies vary a good deal in the effect they will have on trade patterns and terms of trade — and thus on both the overall loss of global welfare and the regional distribution of that loss.
One recent study** looks at four ways in which a treaty might, over the next 40 years, cut global emissions to 50% less than the levels they would reach without a change in policy.
Such measures would need very high rates of carbon tax, raising revenues that would be roughly equivalent to a tenth of world product.
The paper shows that global welfare losses may be lowest (see table) if a carbon tax is levied by energy-consuming countries and kept by them.
Losses would be twice as high if energy producers imposed a carbon tax and kept the revenues for themselves, or if a tax were levied by a world agency which then shared out the revenue in proportion to each region's population.
Losses would be highest with a per-person ceiling on emissions, so third-world countries could expand greenhouse-gas output as their populations grew.
Much energy-intensive industry would then decamp to the third world.
How awkward
The best treaty will aim for the smallest loss in world welfare.
It will also face the fact that those who lose least may have to compensate those who lose most, if free riding is to be checked.
Apart from wielding the stick of trade sanctions — a worrying measure — the main option will be the carrot of cash transfers.
Will the gainers be happy to hand money over to the losers?
Such a transfer is difficult to achieve at the best of times.
In this particular case, note one disturbing implication of the table: the biggest losers from a consumption tax will be the oil exporters.
Their support for a tax will need to be bought — and they include countries like the Soviet Union and Saudi Arabia.
Aid for them anyone? * ‘A survey of studies of the costs of reducing greenhouse-gas emissions’, by Peter Hoeller, Andrew Dean and Jon Nicolaisen.
Working Paper 89, OECD.
** ‘The international incidence of carbon taxes’, by John Whalley and Randall Wigle.
University of Western Ontario.
Europe's way with chips
First in an occasional series on the idiocies of trade protection
WITH saviours like the European Community's bureaucrats, the electronics industry of Europe hardly needs enemies.
European prices for memory chips, a key component of computers and other electronic equipment, are about to rise by 10–15%, according to estimates by Dataquest, a firm of analysts.
Memory-chip prices are falling in most other parts of the world.
Thanks to the gnomes of Brussels, Europe now has an economics-defying arrangement which raises European chip prices as demand falls.
Early in 1990 the European Commission began setting minimum prices for Japanese memory chips sold in Europe.
Because Japanese firms supply the vast majority of the world's memory chips, these prices are in effect a floor price for all memory chips.
To prevent the Japanese from ‘dumping’, the commission estimates Japanese production costs every quarter and then forces the Japanese to price above these estimated costs.
Herein lies the rub.
Most of the costs of producing a memory chip are fixed, because of the elaborate factories and equipment needed.
So when the Japanese cut production in a slumping market, as they are doing this year, these high overhead costs are spread over fewer chips.
Normally the Japanese would have to accept the squeeze on profit margins resulting from higher costs per chip and lower prices — and indeed memory-chip prices are falling in most markets as producers chase slumping demand.
In Europe, however, the commission's cost-based price-fixing formula nonsensically forces prices up.
Jim Eastlake, an analyst at Dataquest, reckons that most chip consumers were (sensibly) expecting memory-chip prices to fall by 5–10% in the first three months of 1991.
Instead, European buyers could pay some $23m more than the $200m their chips would probably have cost them if the market had been left to itself.
America is abandoning a similar price-fixing arrangement for memory chips after suffering just such nasty shocks.
Has nobody in Brussels noticed?
America's robot industry
The lonely and the brave
DETROIT
AT THEIR giant Hamtramck assembly plant in Detroit, employees of General Motors give the robots they work alongside typically American names like Joe or Bob.
But the robots carry more formal titles painted on their sides, like ABB or Kawasaki.
These are anything but American.
Despite once dominating the industry — and even controlling the basic patents that forced foreign competitors to licence their technology — America's robot makers are a vanishing breed.
They may soon be extinct.
There were once more than 60 American makers of robots, but only a few remain.
In September 1990 the last top American producer of large robots fell into foreign hands when Cincinnati Milacron, a machine-tool company, sold its industrial-robot division to ABB, a Swedish-Swiss engineering giant.
Yet apart from strong foreign competition, the dwindling number of American robot producers is also partly the result of over-ambitious expectations and bad planning.
Westinghouse's flirtation with robotics is typical.
In 1983 it bought Unimation, a company credited with inventing the industrial robot.
Unimation's hydraulic robots could once be found in most American car plants.
But Unimation stuck with complicated and leak-prone hydraulic technology, whereas foreign rivals switched to simpler and more reliable robots driven by electric motors.
In 1988 what remained of Unimation was sold to Staubli, a Swiss company, which also makes the Puma range of robots.
Because domestic firms backed the wrong technology, American customers bought imported robots rather than home-made ones.
Another problem was that they bought too few, regardless of their origin.
‘American companies have not been good at putting robots to work’, says Fred Sitkins, a specialist on robots at Western Michigan University.
The figures seem to suggest otherwise: robot orders by American firms reached a record $514m in 1989 and — despite a softening American economy — they were at roughly the same level in 1990.
That is still a lot less than the $2 billion of robot sales once forecast for 1990.
The reason that sales have not boomed is that many customers have been disappointed at what robots do for them.
Eli Lustgarten, an analyst with Paine Webber, claims much of the blame lies with American customers themselves, who saw robots simply as a way to replace labour.
The best way to use a robot is to help an existing workforce improve manufacturing reliability and quality.
Though Japanese firms have used robots to ease their labour shortage, they have stressed most their use in boosting quality.
An embittered Joe Engelberger, the founder of Unimation, believes the reason for America's robot failure is that ‘we have bean-counters running our companies.
The Japanese have engineering and manufacturing people.’
When Mr Engelberger appeared on television in 1967 with one of his earliest robots, the only calls he got from Americans were from showbiz agents trying to book his ‘act’.
The Japanese paid his way to Japan to explain his invention.
The Japanese reckon that there are currently 275,000 robots operating in Japan.
Applying a stricter American definition, the number of Japanese robots is probably closer to 175,000, says America's Robotic Industries Association.
Either figure dwarfs the 37,000 robots operating in American factories.
And while half of all American robots are making cars or trucks, Japan's robots are performing a much wider variety of jobs.
Three-quarters are outside the car industry, doing everything from handling food to bottling cosmetics.
Among the surviving American robot makers is GMF, which is a joint venture between General Motors and Japan's Fanuc.
There is also Adept Technology, a firm that specialises in small assembly-robots.
Adept has produced about 3,000 robots since it was founded in 1983.
‘We have never met the expectations of analysts, but a lot of industries haven't,’ says the company's sales director, Peter Mills.
Adept may not remain independent for long.
Bert Thorvaldsson, the manager of robot development at ABB, describes small American robot companies like Adept as ‘excellent takeover targets.’
The Tribune Company
Big Apple bites back
PRESIDING over the collapse of one of America's largest newspapers has been a humbling experience for the Tribune Company, a Chicago-based media group that is proud of its reputation for tough management.
When the company announced on January 16th that it would close the New York Daily News within 60 days if it could not settle a crippling strike at the newspaper, Wall Street breathed a sigh of relief and the company's share price soared.
No one disputes that the Tribune Company, publisher of the Chicago Tribune among other papers, had to do something about the decade-long trickle of losses at the Daily News, America's oldest tabloid and New York's largest-circulation newspaper.
But the company reacted clumsily to the unexpected strength of union resistance.
A strike, declared on October 25th, has pushed losses to an estimated $1m a week.
In the last three months of 1990, the Tribune Company recorded its first quarterly loss since going public in 1983.
Most disturbing is the fact that the company spent an entire year preparing for the strike, convinced that it had to end overmanning and weaken the unions' grip on production if the newspaper, despite a circulation of 1.1m, were ever to become a money-maker.
The Tribune Company had already won a similar battle in Chicago in 1985 and seemed confident that it could repeat this profitable victory in New York.
Though the Daily News has continued to publish without its workers, managers did not expect that the unions would persuade news-stands, sometimes with strong-arm tactics, to stop selling the paper.
As a result circulation has fallen by half, and big advertisers have drifted away.
Union officials speak scornfully of the Tribune Company's assumption that tactics which worked in Chicago would succeed in New York.
While other media groups relied on acquisitions for growth, the Tribune Company concentrated on wringing more profits out of existing properties in its newspaper, television and entertainment empire.
For the past decade this has worked.
Since 1983, the company's revenues have climbed from $1.6 billion to $2.5 billion in 1989, and profits have tripled to $242m.
But after the company's debacle in New York, ‘sweating’ assets much further may prove impossible.
Asked to describe their company, Tribune executives talk soberly about a belief in basic management skills and the heartland virtues of thrift and common sense.
Striking workers at the Daily News are unimpressed.
They describe the same company as ruthless and stupid.
Unable to impose their idea of common sense on the Daily News's unions, Tribune managers are now intent on either selling or closing the paper.
Various buyers, including Britain's Robert Maxwell, have been mooted.
But a paper that has lost half its readers and most of its advertisers, while retaining its cantankerous and costly unions, is unlikely to be an attractive proposition in the middle of a recession.
Perhaps ruthless and stupid is a good way to describe the paper's unions.
Beckoning, not begging
LEIPZIG
AFTER a slow start in 1990, eastern Germany may attract more companies and investors this year.
According to a recent survey, industry in western Germany aims at least to triple its investment in the east to about DM10 billion ($6.7 billion).
Throw in the financing planned by service firms as well as public spending on eastern telecoms and railways, and the 1991 total could exceed DM50 billion.
Better, but not yet good enough.
Some experts reckon that up to DM1 trillion will be needed to bring the ramshackle east up to western scratch.
Siemens, an electricals group, is one of the biggest investors in eastern Germany.
It already has a labour force there of 15,000 and plans to double that over the next year or two, investing around DM1 billion.
Volkswagen and Daimler-Benz are building new car factories in the east, at a cost of DM5 billion and DM1 billion respectively.
Big western German utilities, stores, banks and insurance companies have also established operations there.
Officials of the Bonn government and the Treuhandanstalt, the Berlin-based agency given the task of privatising thousands of state-owned firms, are keen that non-German companies move into eastern Germany too.
Of the 400 state-owned firms which the Treuhand sold last year, netting DM2.5 billion, almost all went to western Germans.
Yet foreigners — the French and the Austrians are showing most interest — may be playing a bigger role than these official statistics suggest.
Many foreign firms are investing through their western German subsidiaries.
One example is Opel, part of General Motors, which is building a new vehicle plant in the east costing DM1 billion.
Others include Unilever, BP, Coca-Cola and RJR Nabisco.
Asea Brown Boveri, the Swedish-Swiss engineering group, has bought an electrical-equipment maker and plans joint projects with a score of other eastern firms.
Much of the business will be funnelled through ABB's large unit in western Germany.
Suing drug companies
Take two pills and lie down
IF HISTORY is anything to go by, the legal action being brought in Britain by 3,000 patients against Wyeth (a subsidiary of American Home Products) and Switzerland's Hoffmann-La Roche will either be dismissed or settled out of court for a pittance.
The case is one of the biggest suits ever brought against the drug industry.
Claimants allege that the two firms failed to warn doctors about the addiction patients say resulted from prolonged use of Ativan and Valium, prescribed to treat anxiety.
After a few highly publicised cases such as Britain's thalidomide scandal in the 1960s, product-liability laws were strengthened everywhere to make it easier to sue drug companies.
 Nevertheless , most people still find it harder to get compensation from drug firms for errant products than from almost any other type of manufacturer.
Whether in Britain, litigious America or anywhere else, it is hard to prove that a single drug is responsible for causing harm, especially if patients are being prescribed a cocktail of medicines.
Years can pass before the unwanted effects of a drug are spotted and, even then, they may occur in a tiny fraction of patients.
Sometimes a drug's side-effects resemble the symptoms of the disease being treated.
Patients taking Ativan and Valium for long periods may suffer acute anxiety when they stop.
The irony is that the costly approval-procedures which drug firms so regularly complain about can be their best shield against liability claims.
To win approval, drugs must first go through a series of animal and clinical tests which are reviewed by government drug-approval agencies.
This has turned drug regulators into unwitting protectors of drug companies.
There are other obstacles.
Because so few drug-liability claims have ever been decided in court, no one is clear what responsibilities drug firms should bear.
If a drug company receives letters of complaint from a few reputable doctors who have prescribed its product, should it then withdraw the product or warn other doctors of the problem?
The drug industry points out that either course could harm more people than it helps, particularly if thousands are  benefiting from the treatment.
The problem is made worse because consumers are rarely told of the risks associated with drugs: most, not unreasonably, expect their medicine to do them good.
A survey of 56 different painkillers conducted recently by Britain's Consumers' Association found that instructions accompanying most products were inconsistent, inadequate and unclear.
Only three out of 26 aspirin bottles carried warnings against use by pregnant women.
The European Commission recently drafted legislation requiring drugs firms to supply more details to consumers.
Better-informed people might be more cautious about the pills they take — and even less able to sue if things go wrong.
Etak
Rupert Murdoch's map maker
LOS ANGELES
STRAPPED for cash, a beleaguered Rupert Murdoch has promised his 150 frustrated bankers that he will sell bits of News Corporation to reduce its $8 billion of debts.
On the block is likely to be one of Mr Murdoch's stranger diversifications: Etak, a maker of electronic maps.
Like so many of Mr Murdoch's gambles, the potential pay-off of his stroll into California's Silicon Valley is enormous — but too far away to help pay his debts today.
Etak, which derives its name from the Polynesian word for navigation, was founded by Stan Honey.
He sketched out its original business plan on the back of a napkin in 1983 (a time when napkins were home to many new ideas).
In 1985 Mr Honey launched the Etak Navigator, a $1,400 in-car navigation system, which could guide a driver to any address he punched into the system.
Yet the Navigator may end up as a ‘how not to’ in a business-school marketing class.
Though Mr Honey's detailed computer maps got rave reviews from specialists, fewer than 3,000 were sold.
Mr Murdoch bought the firm for $25m in 1989 and convinced Mr Honey that what he had inadvertently built was a publishing company, not a maker of high-tech electronics.
So Etak stopped making Navigators and instead opted to sell a software map which runs on hardware made by other firms.
The maps have been a big hit with government departments and firms with large vehicle fleets, a market once considered of only peripheral interest by Mr Honey.
Also promising are electronic versions of the Yellow Pages and other directories, complete with thousands of computerised maps.
Mr Honey may yet crack the private-car market too.
General Motors, which owned the exclusive licence to build the technology in its new cars, recently gave permission to Etak to license other car makers.
On January 10th Bosch/Blaupunkt, a German car stereo company, launched Travel Pilot, basically an updated version of the Navigator which uses Etak software.
Priced at around $3,500 — expensive, but still less than 5% of the cost of a new Mercedes Benz sports car — it is more likely to be seen in Beverly Hills than in Baltimore.
With Bosch's name behind it, Travel Pilot may sell where Navigator failed; if so, mass-market systems cannot be far behind.
Eventually, portable devices may even be used by pedestrians.
Of such stuff are entrepreneurial dreams made.
Mr Murdoch may not have the time or the money to wait.
Etak could become somebody else's gamble.
Investment in eastern Germany
Socialist paradise full of serpents
LEIPZIG
ECONOMIC union between the two Germanies last July was supposed to produce an investment boom: western businesses would pour money across the border to make use of skilled workers in the east and grab a share of a growing new market.
So far this has not happened.
Though some big firms have boldly marched eastward, investment in the former East Germany has been slower than expected.
The reasons for the disappointment can be seen from the struggles to survive of three once-successful companies based around Leipzig.
This was the commercial heart of the former East Germany, and once the site of Eastern Europe's biggest trade fair.
Forty years of communism have left Sternburg, one of eastern Germany's biggest breweries, with a jumble of crumbling buildings that house decrepit machines fuelled by filthy lignite coal.
Since July nearly 60 western competitors have invaded Sternburg's market.
Saddled with debt, the company cannot compete.
After producing beer for more than seven centuries, the brewery is likely to go out of business soon unless it can find a rich western partner.
Janetzki, a maker of electronically-controlled centrifuges for hospitals, once exported to 45 countries.
Since July the bureaucrats of the foreign-trade monopoly who knew how to sell its products abroad have been sacked.
Sales at home have collapsed, because hospitals in the former East Germany cannot afford expensive gear.
Mansfeld, a metal products and processing group, has ruthlessly cut its staff in half, to 23,000, chopped unprofitable businesses and signed up sales partners in the west.
But it cannot raise the DM550m ($367m) it wants to invest without a government guarantee.
It is fighting government efforts to sell its healthiest businesses, arguing that the rest of the group may collapse if they go.
All three firms are crushed by debts built up under the communists.
Unless German taxpayers allow the Treuhandanstalt, a trust set up last year to privatise eastern Germany's 8,000 state firms, to write off many of these debts, none of these companies has much chance of surviving.
Eastern firms are burdened with debt now calculated at DM100 billion.
Any solution in sight?
Some firms will be told to sell off non-essential assets to cut their debt.
The government is determined not to forgive all the debts, but most experts reckon that some relief will eventually have to be granted.
Yet plenty of other problems are also hampering investment:
More than 1m Germans, in both parts of the country, have claims on property expropriated by the communists.
This has put off many potential investors fearful of being entangled in the courts for years.
The government thought it had solved the problem by ruling that, in disputed cases, ‘important’ investment needed to create jobs should be allowed to proceed and that former owners would have to accept compensation.
But the law has too many loopholes to reassure nervous investors.
There are not enough people qualified to help sort out the mess left by the communists.
For example, the Leipzig office of the Treuhand, one of 15, has only 43 people to deal with 800 companies queuing to be privatised.
Local authorities are packed with officials lacking any knowledge of a market economy and swamped by paperwork as thousands of property claims are made.
A communist old-boy network of managers and officials is still at work, shunting influential jobs to old comrades and hindering the break-up of old empires.
A desperate Treuhand dumped 15 old-guard regional directors last year, replacing them with people from western Germany.
But there are not enough westerners available to run thousands of eastern firms.
Cleaning up eastern Germany's disastrous pollution could prove ruinously expensive for many businesses.
Switching to oil or natural gas, cleaner than indigenous lignite, will prove costly for firms like Sternburg, Leipzig's struggling brewer.
As a result western companies have been especially reluctant to buy eastern chemical plants and other polluting or energy-intensive businesses.
Most investors in any industry have preferred to build new factories rather than take over existing businesses.
A dismal picture, especially when eastern Germany's crumbling transport network and malfunctioning telephones are added to the list of woes.
Even so, the flow of new money into eastern Germany is expected to grow this year (see box on previous page).
Many experts believe the flow could become a torrent if the government ever comes to grips with the debt and property problems still hanging over the east.
Pan Am fights for its life
WASHINGTON, DC
WHEN Eastern Air Lines, which had flapped along in chapter 11 bankruptcy for nearly two years, finally shut down on January 18th, one of the concerned onlookers was Pan Am's boss, Tom Plaskett.
It is not that Pan Am minded a rival going under; indeed, Pan Am may now be able to raise ticket prices on east-coast routes where Eastern had offered big discounts.
The problem is that Pan Am is also in chapter 11 and some people are wondering if the airline that pioneered many of America's routes across the world will soon follow Eastern into liquidation.
Pan Am insists not.
Its ‘business as usual’ slogan has helped to get passengers accustomed to flying on bankrupt airlines.
But the people who were stranded by Eastern's closure may now think twice about that.
Still struggling, Pan Am convinced its creditors at a meeting on January 22nd that it should be allowed to continue operations.
Britain's Civil Aviation Authority had just recommended approval of the sale of Pan Am's routes out of London's Heathrow airport to United Airlines.
Pan Am says more than a sale is involved; it has a new marketing deal with United that will help prop up its other operations.
Yet some of the creditors, including Boeing, General Electric and the federal Pension Benefits Guarantee Corporation (PBGC), were also creditors of Eastern.
They had pleaded with the bankruptcy judge to close down Eastern last autumn, but instead he allowed it to remain airborne and continue to run down its cash resources.
There is now little left for the creditors to salvage from the airline's wreckage.
These creditors will be determined not to let the same thing happen to Pan Am.
The airline's safest route remains a merger or takeover.
One difficulty is its unfunded pension obligations, which the PBGC says amount to some $800m.
That has not discouraged a rival, TWA, from offering to buy the airline.
Pan Am has rebuffed TWA's first advances.
With a change in the rules over foreign ownership of domestic airlines now likely (see main story), there may soon be more bidders.
Anyway, TWA is not an attractive partner because big debts are forcing it to sell assets too.
TWA's domestic network, based on a hub in St Louis, would help fill gaps in Pan Am's route structure.
But two weak airlines do not make a strong one.
Perhaps the biggest obstacle in any merger would be the personality clash between Mr Plaskett and TWA's boss, Carl Icahn.
Business in Thailand
Empires in the east
BANGKOK
A booming economy in Thailand has not reduced the domination of the country's powerful Chinese families
SINCE the second world war, a handful of Chinese families have reigned over Bangkok's economy, which accounts for over half of Thailand's output.
As the Thai economy boomed over the past three years, becoming the fastest-growing in the world, many commentators predicted that these great families were bound to lose their grip.
Large investments in Thailand by multinationals, and torrid family squabbles, suggested that their influence was on the wane.
Yet Thai business remains as much a family affair as ever.
The fortunes of some families have, indeed, grown no greater, or even diminished.
But other powerful families have thrived in Thailand's boom years.
Most of the leading Thai-Chinese business empires are still controlled by their founders, many of whom started life at the bottom and have assumed Thai names.
Take Chuan Ratanarak.
Born in southern China in 1920, he first came to Thailand with his family at the age of six.
At the end of the second world war he was working as a docker in Bangkok's harbour.
By the early 1950s he had his own firm, loading ships.
Today he controls the Bank of Ayudhya, Thailand's fifth-largest bank, and Siam City Cement, the country's second-largest cement producer.
Mr Chuan's progress from trading to banking to manufacturing is typical of the breed, says David Scott, the Bangkok representative of W.I. Carr, a stockbroker, and author of a study of Thailand's nine top families.
Although banking remains important, the most profitable area for expansion in recent years has been manufacturing.
Another family, the Chokwatanas, have established one of the most impressive manufacturing empires.
Thiam Chokwatana, the founder, opened a shop in 1942.
From this humble beginning the family has built the Saha Pathana group, a collection of over 60 companies, 18 of which are now listed on the stockmarket.
Despite its size, Saha Pathana remains a family concern — each of Mr Thiam's eight children controls at least one of the listed companies.
The third son, Boonsithi, is being groomed to take over when his father dies.
With the help of Japanese partners, the group competes successfully in everything from detergents to lingerie against the likes of Unilever, Procter & Gamble and Colgate.
The group had a net profit margin of 30% last year.
Or so it claims.
The truth is that most Thai-Chinese business empires are so complex that no outsider, including bankers and minority shareholders, can ever know their real state of health.
Such complexity also thwarts any over-ambitious family member.
A good example is a recent struggle for control of the Sophonpanich empire.
Until his death in 1988, Chin Sophonpanich was the undisputed father-figure of Bangkok's Chinese community.
The empire he created was based around Bangkok Bank, South-East Asia's largest, and included palm-oil plantations and hospitals among other things.
After his death seven heirs, by two wives, could not agree on the group's future.
Mr Chin had foreseen this difficulty and made sure that no child had majority control of any of the family companies.
Eventually the squabbling died down.
Chatri Sophonpanich, the second son, has now assumed his father's mantle.
Sometimes, however, even the most tangled arrangements cannot contain a Chinese family quarrel.
The Tejapaibuls (banking, brewing, distilling and property) used to be the most powerful family in Thai business.
Disagreements between the founder's ten sons, most of whom have had two or more wives and so lots of their own children, nearly tore the group apart.
For each family on the way down, there is one on the way up.
The Chearavanont family's Charoen Pokphand group (poultry, animal feed, petrochemicals and, most recently, a joint venture with British Telecom to triple the number of telephone lines in Thailand) is Mr Scott's favourite to ‘become the dominant business empire in Thailand by 2000’.
Another contender may be the emerging empire of Thaksin Shinawatra, who began by distributing IBM computers in Thailand, set up the country's first cable-television operation and has now received permission to establish his own cellular-telephone network.
Over the past two years his workforce has increased tenfold.
What really sets Mr Thaksin apart is that he comes not from southern China but from Chiang Mai in northern Thailand.
Pirelli and Continental
No thank you
IN BRITAIN and America, hostile takeovers are often nasty affairs.
In most of continental Europe they are not only rare, but conducted with such exquisite politeness that the adjective ‘hostile’ seems inappropriate.
On January 21st, after three months of discussions, the managers of Continental, a German tyre maker, gave up trying to convince Pirelli, an Italian competitor, to drop its plan to merge the two firms and rejected any further talks.
Nicely, of course.
Continental says it does not need the hassle of a complex merger.
Instead, it has vaguely proposed some form of co-operation or alliance with Pirelli.
But making tyres is a commodity business in which economies of scale matter a lot.
The industry is dominated by Michelin, Goodyear and Bridgestone, each two to three times the size of either Continental or Pirelli.
Small wonder that the Italian company is keen on merging.
The two smaller European producers' chances of staying competitive against much larger rivals are slim.
Pirelli first approached Continental last September to propose a transfer of Pirelli's tyre operations to Continental.
In return, the Italian company wants a controlling stake in the merged firm.
To reassure worried German managers, Pirelli stresses that Continental would remain a German company and would keep control of its own brands.
Though Pirelli insists its approach is ‘friendly’, it also claims the support of a majority of Continental's shareholders.
Horst Urban, Continental's boss, is unimpressed with Pirelli's elaborate scheme and rightly sees it for what it is: a takeover.
He remains determined to fend off the Italians.
The deadlock may be broken by Alberto Vicari, a German despite his Italian name, who represents a group of shareholders who control 5% of Continental's stock.
On December 12th Mr Vicari called for an extraordinary general meeting to clear up the uncertainty over the firm's future.
Faced with a shareholders' meeting in Hanover on March 13th, Mr Urban and his managers are on the defensive.
Continental's managers and supervisory board urged shareholders to vote against several of the resolutions proposed by Mr Vicari.
Among them is one that would lift restrictions on the voting rights of shares.
Another resolution would force Mr Urban to come up with a merger proposal involving Pirelli's tyre business in time for Continental's annual general meeting in June.
Continental gives several reasons for rejecting Pirelli's advances.
Few are convincing.
It maintains that a merger will do more harm than good because the merged group would lose orders from German car firms worried about depending on a single supplier.
But a merged group might limit such losses by arguing that Pirelli and Continental do not sell the same type of tyres.
The German firm also argues that Pirelli is heavily dependent on risky markets like Brazil, Argentina and Turkey.
Yet Continental plays down the benefits that the merged firm might get from expanding sales in America and Europe, the world's two biggest tyre markets.
It also makes no mention of the value of the Pirelli brand name, which is associated with fancier, higher-margin tyres.
Continental is worried that, after a merger, Pirelli would also seek large job cuts in Germany.
With tyre firms around the world laying off thousands of workers, Continental may end up cutting even more workers if it remains independent.
Ground control, we seem to have a problem
The world's airlines are facing their biggest-ever shake-out
AIRLINES all over the world are losing frightening sums of money.
Some are going broke.
In a desperate bid to stay airborne, most are laying off staff, cancelling services, and selling routes and aircraft to anyone with ready cash.
On top of that, regulators are changing the rules of the game almost every week: in the latest move, on January 23rd, America decided to relax its rules on the foreign ownership of its airlines.
Many airlines are so confused or battered that they no longer have anything resembling a clear business strategy.
What has gone so badly wrong?
Barely a year ago investors were swarming around the airline business like bees around a honeypot; airlines were forging grand global alliances.
The war in the Gulf has not helped.
But the troubles of the industry began well before Iraq's invasion of Kuwait sent the price of jet fuel from 60 cents a gallon to more than $1.30.
Airlines everywhere have expanded too rapidly.
In America they were encouraged to do this by over-eager lenders and a scramble to assemble nationwide route-networks after the industry was deregulated in 1978.
Transfixed by what they saw in America, airlines elsewhere expanded to get ready for the increased competition expected in their own skies.
Meanwhile, wage costs, maintenance bills and interest charges grew more rapidly than the number of passengers.
When recession began to cut traffic in America last year, many airlines were too weak to cope.
Now the fortunes of non-American carriers may be about to nosedive.
America is the biggest single air-travel market, accounting for more than 40% of all the world's airline passengers.
Passenger numbers in America more than doubled in the decade after deregulation, and fares (adjusted for inflation) declined by a fifth.
Scrambling for growth, America's airlines changed the way all airlines operate.
They built hub-and-spoke route systems based on a few large airports, rather than a web of direct, non-stop flights.
Though this makes many passengers change aeroplanes, it is highly efficient for the airlines themselves.
Equally efficient are the powerful, computerised reservation systems developed by American carriers.
These not only sell flights but also juggle capacities and fares in order to squeeze the last cent of revenue out of every aircraft seat.
Both the reservation systems and the hub-and-spoke networks pioneered by American carriers have been copied by airlines elsewhere.
As airlines grew, their large cash flows were used to justify huge borrowings for takeovers and expansion.
Growing competition sent smaller carriers, many of them start-ups after deregulation, to the wall.
By last year nine airlines were carrying more than 90% of domestic passengers in America, compared with 15 airlines in 1984.
Now it is the turn of some of those big boys to suffer.
While the strongest (American, United and Delta) have been getting stronger, the weakest (Pan Am, Continental and Eastern) went bankrupt.
Pan Am (see box on next page), Continental and Eastern have been able to stay aloft only under the protection of creditors provided by chapter 11 of America's bankruptcy laws.
On January 18th Eastern's court-appointed manager grounded the airline.
Eastern never recovered from a crippling strike in 1989 and now faces liquidation.
Continental, Eastern's sister airline in the former Texas Air group assembled by Frank Lorenzo — once the industry's most aggressive wheeler-dealer — is struggling with $2 billion of debt.
Other carriers are in trouble.
TWA is heavily in debt and is slashing its European services by almost half.
The debacle among the weaker airlines is producing easy pickings for America's big three.
TWA is selling its London services to American.
Pan Am is selling its London routes to United.
Delta has increased its dominance at Atlanta, the world's busiest airport, by buying some of Eastern's gates.
American and United get their strength from strong route networks which draw in huge numbers of passengers.
Possessing the two biggest computer-reservations systems in the world does no harm either.
Delta benefits from a modern fleet of aircraft with low operating costs.
But even these giants are having trouble.
American Airlines made a $215m loss in the fourth quarter of 1990, while on January 23rd Delta reported that it went $208m into the red during the same period, the biggest quarterly loss in its history.
If America's airline industry continues its present rate of consolidation, it could soon be dominated by American, United and Delta.
This is the opposite of what deregulation set out to accomplish.
Sam Skinner, the American transport secretary, believes that even if there are fewer airlines in America ‘robust competition will continue’.
But in order to try to keep some of America's weaker carriers in the air he has decided to increase the limit on the stake a foreign investor can hold in an American airline from 25% to 49%.
It may be too late.
Although some airlines, like British Airways, have been keen to invest in an American carrier, it is a difficult time for any airline to go shopping.
The entire industry is scaling back.
Air Canada is selling its headquarters building in Montreal.
Germany's Lufthansa and Scandinavia's SAS are trying to make huge savings in their operations.
Even Asian carriers, based in the world's fastest-growing travel market, are worried about declining numbers of passengers from America and Europe.
Singapore Airlines, usually one of the world's most profitable carriers, reckons the outlook is ‘grim’.
Airlines are also not sure what their global plans should be, because the rules keep changing.
On January 22nd Britain's Civil Aviation Authority called for the rule that stops new airlines from using London's Heathrow airport to be scrapped.
This rule is stopping American and United from taking over their ailing rivals' services.
Mr Skinner's decision to increase the limit on foreign investment in American carriers is seen in the industry as an exchange for Britain allowing American and United into Heathrow.
British Airways, which dominates Heathrow, was supposed to have a marketing agreement with United to share passenger traffic.
Now they will compete directly instead.
There is even a possibility that the United States and the European Community will trade the rights for their respective airlines to operate within each others' internal markets.
The European Commission is trying to deregulate the European airline market, but it wants to stop short of America's ‘open skies’ policy.
Europe's competition authorities are also keen to avoid the consolidation seen in America.
They want to give new competitors more of a chance, even if it means intervening in the market to do so.
Earlier this month Britain's Civil Aviation Authority took the unprecedented step of ordering British Airways to surrender some of its slots at Tokyo's Narita airport to Virgin Atlantic, a small British competitor.
With governments around the world privatising airlines and opening routes to competition, the industry's old cartels are crumbling.
But airlines are also trying to retrieve some security, and reduce competition, with alliances and mergers.
Air France, for instance, has gobbled up its main French rivals, Air Inter and UTA.
Some alliances have come unstuck.
On December 31st a plan by British Airways and Holland's KLM to take a 20% stake each in Belgium's Sabena, and then to develop Zaventem airport in Brussels as a European hub, was abandoned.
Amid all this turmoil and red ink, the aircraft manufacturers (America's Boeing and McDonnell Douglas, and the European consortium, Airbus Industrie) together with the jet-engine makers (America's General Electric and Pratt & Whitney, and Britain's Rolls-Royce) are nervously sitting on the biggest backlog of orders in their history.
Some 3,000 aircraft are scheduled for delivery.
America's airlines alone have more than $130 billion-worth of aircraft on order.
Many of the orders were based on over-optimistic plans for expansion rather than the replacement of existing aircraft.
Many of these aeroplanes may now never be built.
With so many airlines strapped for cash and with costs increasing, passengers should not expect many more fare-wars.
Indeed, Mr Skinner reckons there is not an airline in America that is now covering its costs.
Airlines will start pulling out of unprofitable routes rather than fighting for market share.
In March British Airways will stop flying the ferociously competitive London-to-Dublin route, after 44 years of service.
When competitors pull out, get taken over or go bust, fares go up.
At eight of America's big hub airports where one airline commands 75% or more of departures, air fares are more than 18% higher per mile travelled than the national average.
The only certainty in this airline shake-out is that, ultimately, it is going to cost the traveller a lot.
BRITAIN'S MOST ADMIRED COMPANIES
Top Marks
With the help of Loughborough University's department of management studies, we asked 1,800 of Britain's businessmen and financial analysts to name their corporate heroes
BUSINESS buffs spend many a dull hour poring over balance sheets, share prices and financial ratios in search of the best-performing firms.
But crunched numbers do not mean everything.
Solid profits and a strong balance sheet help make a great company, but they may not be enough to make it admired.
Admiration counts.
If they like you, your customers will buy more, your employees and suppliers will work harder and your shareholders will be more loyal — which is useful to fend off predators.
This is the second survey commissioned by The Economist to discover which are Britain's most admired companies; the first was published in September 1989.
Participants were sent a list of publicly quoted firms in their industry, chosen on the basis of market capitalisation.
In all, 230 companies in 23 industries (a slight change from our previous survey) were covered.
Those polled were then asked to rank firms in their industry (except, for businessmen, their own company) by eight criteria: quality of management; financial soundness; quality of products and services; ability to attract, develop and retain top talent; value as a long-term investment; capacity to innovate; quality of marketing; and community and environmental responsibility.
In all, 64% of those polled responded to the survey.
This subjective appraisal produces three separate categories of winner: leaders on each of the eight criteria, 21 sectoral stars, and an overall top 20 of Britain's most admired companies.
The three tables show the results.
The strength of this method is that managers give their views on their peers — in other words, on firms they should know something about.
But is it right to aggregate sectoral views to produce an overall national ranking?
The alternative is subjectively to rank all-comers: so participants were also asked to assess British companies in any industry, not just their own, by the same eight criteria — a question not asked in 1989.
The same trio of firms that occupied the top three overall places in 1989 took the honours again this time (see table 1).
The order of merit, however, has changed.
Last time Shell Transport and Trading came first, Glaxo was second, and Marks and Spencer came third.
This year Marks and Spencer has leapt to the top slot, Shell is now second and Glaxo third.
The scores for the top 20 are remarkably close: less than 11 points separate Marks and Spencer from Wessex Water in 20th place.
Outside the top three, change has been more drastic.
Gone from the top 20 are BP, Carlton Communications, Grand Metropolitan, M&G and Pilkington; so, thanks to a stalled property market, are Greycoat, Rosehaugh and Tarmac.
In come Allied Colloids, Rentokil (both chemicals companies), Reuters, RMC (a building-materials group), United Biscuits, S.G. Warburg, Wellcome and recently privatised Wessex Water.
ICI, in sixth place last time, has fallen to 12th: still heavily dependent on commodity chemicals, ICI's restructuring has not made it as immune to the industry's boom-bust cycles as it had hoped.
Rolls-Royce has risen from 14th to fourth; our participants rated it Britain's most innovative firm, and the one with the highest-quality products.
Why is Marks and Spencer so admired?
Partly because it is profitable: its pre-tax profits have tripled over the past ten years, to £604m ($980m) on sales of £5.6 billion (in some 30 countries) in the year to March 1990.
Its balance sheet is rock solid.
But the firm is more than just a money-maker; it is the consummate all-rounder.
In six of the survey's eight categories it took one of the top three places; it took top place (see table 3) in its ability to attract and retain the ablest employees, its long-term investment value and its community and environmental responsibility.
Marks and Spencer started being nice to its employees, customers, suppliers and neighbours decades before it was fashionable to do so.
In the 1890s Michael Marks, the firm's founder, put wooden platforms behind his market stalls to keep salesgirls' feet warm; these days the company pays for everything from in-house dentists to local community projects.
All this results in a rare phenomenon: Marks and Spencer is a company people are fond of.
This does not make it immune from recession: this year Marks and Spencer will restructure (ie, cut) its head-office staff.
The survey also pointed to two weaknesses: marketing (where it failed to make the top ten) and capacity to innovate (where it came seventh).
In fact the firm is an innovative retailer — it pioneered sell-by dates and cash refunds, and has one of the most sophisticated in-store credit-card operations in the business.
It just does not shout about it.
Much the same is true of Shell Transport and Trading.
Quietly, Shell invests in its businesses at the rate of some $10 billion a year — a level which Sir Peter Holmes, its chairman, says will not change, Gulf war or not.
Shell never fights costly bid battles, but spends $1.5 billion a year steadily buying oil and gas assets.
It has no net debt, and $6 billion in the bank.
Odd that our participants rated its financial soundness below that of Land Securities, one of Britain's few financially secure property companies.
Our survey rates Shell most highly for its management quality, where it took first place (see table 3).
Managers often view a job at Shell, where they are given plenty of decisions to make early on in their career, as an alternative to taking an MBA.
The company seems to have been forgiven for its oil spill in the Mersey estuary in 1989; it came third in ‘community and environmental responsibility’, only one place down from last time.
Of the three most admired firms, Glaxo may have to struggle hardest to keep its place.
In awe of Zantac, an anti-ulcer treatment that is now the world's best-selling drug, our participants awarded Glaxo top-three places for innovation, product quality and marketing.
The firm recently introduced Serevent, an anti-asthma drug, and will this year launch Imigran, a new migraine treatment, in Europe.
Sales of each could top $1 billion a year.
Not all is running Glaxo's way.
Zantac makes up an ominously high 50% of the company's revenues.
Two recent scientific studies suggested that Glaxo's two new drugs could have harmful side-effects.
And doctors and governments alike are debating how to curb the excesses of drug promotion.
One of their targets could be Glaxo.
What of our second question, which allowed a vote for any firm?
Here Hanson, which makes just two appearances in our tables (sixth in management quality, eighth in financial soundness), cleaned up, with a quarter of respondents voting it Britain's best firm.
Marks and Spencer was second with 14% of the vote, Glaxo third with 11% and Shell a distant sixth with just 4.1%.
In the free vote's individual categories, Hanson was rated first for management, financial soundness and long-term investment value.
So why did its industrial-sector peers only award Hanson fourth place, which left it out of our overall top 20?
One reason is that its rag-bag of products is hard to evaluate; another is that Hanson appears to have a poor image on community and environmental responsibility.
But there may be a baser reason: fear of Lord Hanson's £7 billion war-chest.
Full results
The data underlying this survey are available as a report from The Economist, price £15 ($30).
To order, please contact Linda Denli on 071 839 9104 or write to her at 25 St James's Street, London SW1A 1HG.
Please make cheques payable to The Economist Newspaper Ltd.
THE GULF WAR
Battered, hunkered down, but Iraq's army is undefeated
OUR strategy to go after this army is very, very simple.
First we're going to cut it off, then we're going to kill it.’
With those blunt words about the fate of Iraq's army, General Colin Powell, America's top soldier, briefly revived the faith of Americans in Operation Desert Storm.
The reassurance, at a Pentagon briefing on January 24th, was welcome, and well timed.
After a week of fighting, the war that had begun with a thunderous high-tech blitzkrieg in the skies over Baghdad had not yet delivered visible proof of victory.
By any statistical measure, the first week had gone the alliance's way.
Its aircraft and cruise missiles have pounded installations throughout Iraq and Kuwait by day and by night.
These attacks have inflicted widespread and in some cases irreparable damage in preparation for the ground offensive.
But hopes of a quick and cheap victory, raised by the seemingly unblemished success of the first surprise attack on the night of January 16th-17th, are fading.
The air campaign has not been an unqualified success in any of its missions.
The first strikes concentrated mainly on command-and-control centres, Scud launching sites, military supply lines, support installations and plants working on nuclear and chemical weapons.
A big effort was mounted against airfields, radars and anti-aircraft batteries in an attempt to gain air superiority.
The elite Republican Guard, the best trained and equipped of the Iraqi ground forces, are deployed along the northern border of Kuwait.
They were hit early on, and on January 21st the allies announced that they were shifting more of their attacks to the dug-in ground forces.
Little is known publicly about the effects of the air raids on supply lines and ground troops, except that Iraq's anti-aircraft guns and missiles have continued to fire.
General Powell admitted that the Iraqi command network, linking President Saddam Hussein with his battlefield commanders, was still functioning, as were five of Iraq's original 66 air fields.
Iraqi chemical-weapons factories had suffered ‘considerable damage’, but much of Mr Hussein's existing chemical stockpile was dispersed and could still be used in bombs, short-range rockets and artillery shells.
The most striking Iraqi achievement so far has been the saving of its air force, a feat that owes more to engineering than combat.
According to the Americans, a handful of dogfights during the first week produced a lopsided result: nearly a score of the most modern Iraqi French- and Soviet-built fighters shot down in the air for the loss, possibly, of a single American fighter.
Most of Iraq's 800 or so aircraft have spent the war on or under the ground in well-protected shelters and hiding places.
The Americans put the first-week total of Iraqi aircraft destroyed, on both air and ground, at 41; the British estimate is gloomier.
Allied spokesmen make light of the fact that so many enemy aircraft remain intact.
While they are on the ground, it is argued, they pose no danger; if they fly, most will be shot down.
General Powell admits to their ‘latent capability’ but insists the allies now have ‘air superiority’.
The morning after the general's briefing, Iraq brought its latent air capability out of hiding, and tried to hit allied warships in the Gulf.
Two Mirages, said the allies, were shot down — both by the same Saudi fighter.
The threat from the air
Further raids can certainly be expected.
The Iraqis possess a number of Sukhoi SU-24 ground-attack aircraft, similar in quality to the British Tornado.
If a group of these took off and penetrated Israeli or allied air defences they could each wreak more destruction — with chemicals or high-explosives — than a flock of Scuds.
Moreover, the survival of Iraq's aircraft has meant that allied pilots keep having to return to Iraqi airfields to crater the runways.
This has taken a heavy toll of British Tornadoes, which pass low over the airfields to deliver their JP-233 runway-busting mines and bombs.
The Scuds themselves have been a nuisance, the allies having under-estimated both the number of Iraq's launchers and the ability of the Iraqi crews to conceal them.
In addition to the launch vehicles provided by the Soviet Union, Iraq has apparently invented a makeshift disposable launcher of its own.
The Scuds fired so far have done no direct military damage, but the hunt for their launch sites has diverted many allied aircraft from other jobs.
Although these missions may be scaled down if the alliance's Patriot missiles continue to destroy almost every incoming Scud, a fear remains that Iraq might be able to replace the conventional warheads with chemical ones.
The Americans claim that Iraq's two surviving nuclear reactors (unlike the one Israel knocked out in 1981, these were small research reactors) have been completely destroyed, along with many of Iraq's chemical and biological weapons plants.
From videofilms shown to reporters in Saudi Arabia, and the reports of the few journalists who spent the first days of the war in Baghdad, other successful hits can be independently verified.
They include the headquarters building of the Iraqi air force, power stations, communications towers, telephone exchanges and various hangars and hardened bunkers.
Most Iraqi cities are reported to be without electricity or telephones.
So far the war's great unknown is the impact of the allied air offensive on Iraq's main ground forces.
About 12,000 sorties were flown in the first week — about half of them bombing raids, the rest involving air refuelling, reconnaissance, fighter cover and the like.
It was claimed early in the campaign that the Republican Guard had been ‘decimated’ from the air.
That claim has not been repeated, despite reports of many bombing runs against the Guard by America's gigantic B-52s.
For the bulk of the allied forces — those on land and sea — the war has not yet started.
On land there was minor skirmishing: on January 18th American marines came under artillery fire near the east coast of Saudi Arabia, hitting back with aircraft, helicopters and artillery.
On January 23rd American and Iraqi patrols collided on the Saudi-Iraq border just west of the westernmost tip of Kuwait.
Almost certainly, other border skirmishes have gone unreported; allied helicopters and American A-10 tank-busting aircraft regularly patrol the frontier attacking ground targets inside Kuwait.
At sea the American navy has fired more than 100 cruise missiles from a battleship, cruisers and at least one submarine.
Many air sorties have come from American carriers in the Mediterranean, the Red Sea and in the dangerously restricted waters of the Gulf itself.
On January 21st allied forces destroyed some Iraqi anti-aircraft batteries operating from oil rigs in the northern Gulf; the next day American  aircraft sank two Iraqi ships, one a minelayer.
Awaiting the real war
It takes two to tango, the United Nations secretary-general observed after pre-war talks with Saddam Hussein.
The commanders of Operation Desert Storm are beginning to feel the same way.
After a week of fighting, Mr Hussein's war machine has done virtually nothing but hunker down and wait to be attacked.
Attacked, promises General Powell, it will be — once its supply lines along the Euphrates valley have been severed and its men and equipment softened up from the air.
The question nobody seems able or willing to answer is when the ground attack may come.
General Norman Schwarzkopf, the American commander in Saudi Arabia, says he is in no special hurry: as the war goes on the Iraqis become weaker, the allies stronger.
But as the air war progresses, new targets become harder to find.
The allied commanders must also consider how long they can continue the air campaign without wearing out their airmen.
Until now the allied air forces have been going to enemy positions; once the ground forces move in, the enemy air force will have to come up to fight.
At that point there will be a different air war to fight, for which crews must be kept fresh.
At the outset of the campaign, allied spokesmen suggested the air-only phase was expected to last about ten days.
But there have been delays.
Bad weather has hampered the bombers that lack modern night-attack equipment.
Clouds and fog have made it difficult, sometimes impossible, to conduct reconnaissance.
This argues for extending the bombing campaign.
On the other hand, it is becoming apparent that air attacks alone are not likely to win the war.
Public support for the war could wane if no visible progress is made towards the main goal of ejecting the Iraqis from Kuwait.
Making 'em pay
FROM OUR WASHINGTON CORRESPONDENT
THE fighting on the ground may be nothing compared with the fighting over who pays the bill.
Congressmen by the dozen are demanding that Japan, Germany, Saudi Arabia — indeed anyone but America — should be tapped for the costs of Desert Storm.
At the Group of Seven meeting in New York on January 20th-21st, Nicholas Brady, America's treasury secretary, asked his Japanese and German colleagues to dig deeper into their pockets.
The table shows the latest numbers for contributions so far, set roughly against ability to pay and interest in the Gulf measured by reliance on imported oil.
One problem with the burden-sharing debate is finding out what operation Desert Storm is costing.
The Pentagon is cagey.
Before fighting broke out, Congress was talking of an annual cost of some $30 billion.
Now the cost is thought to be in the range of $500m-1 billion a day.
On January 22nd Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, suggested that it would be at the low end of that range largely because much of the equipment being used would not be replaced.
In effect part of the war is being fought from stocks.
Mr Greenspan also said it would be wrong to pay for the war with a tax increase or surcharge.
Congress will continue to demand more help from the allies.
Turkey
One eye on the sky, one on CNN
FROM OUR TURKEY CORRESPONDENT
AS WAR broke out, Turkey tiptoed.
Was it going to war?
‘I don't know,’ said a senior foreign ministry official, agreeing that the question was the right one.
‘Not yet,’ said the government's official spokesman.
On reflection he advised consulting the foreign ministry.
Nobody, least of all the press corps plane-spotting outside Incirlik air base, believed the first official tale: that the waves of American aircraft returning with their bomb pods empty had been off on a training exercise.
In the days that followed, the government tried to make things clearer.
Turkey was not in a state of war and would not open a second front against Iraq unless its own territory was attacked.
Headline writers, pointing to Incirlik, declared the front already open.
The government still insists that allowing Turkish air bases ‘a more comprehensive role’ is a far cry from the dispatch of Turkish armoured columns over the border.
Some Turks, nervous about Scud missiles and chemical warheads, suspect one thing might lead to the other.
On the first day of the war the prime minister, Yildirim Akbulut, asked the national assembly not only to sanction the use of the bases for American bombing raids but also to allow the Turkish armed forces themselves to go on the offensive.
Rather oddly, Turkey's cardboard neutrality won the approval of Iraq's ambassador in Ankara.
It was not until the bombing had been going on for almost a week that the Iraqi foreign minister issued a protest.
There is really no mystery about this contradiction.
Iraq does not want yet another enemy.
And NATO's secretary-general, after all, has reminded Iraq that an attack on Turkey would be an attack on all the allies.
The calculation of Turkey's president, Turgut Ozal, is that Iraq will not attack Turkey and that Saddam Hussein will soon be out of a job.
‘I am not a gambler,’ the president told a television interviewer, ‘I am an engineer.’
Turkey has committed itself to its friends, in the expectation that its commitment will be rewarded.
Television goes along with this.
Much of its coverage consists of retransmissions of CNN with simultaneous translation; yet when CNN reported that people were leaving Adana, the city near the Incirlik base, state-run television showed a film about sailing holidays.
The political opposition, on the other hand, is not convinced.
Turkey, it says, has gone to war and thereby surrendered to the Americans.
Suleyman Demirel, leader of the right-wing opposition (who faced similar criticisms in his day), has accused Mr Ozal of turning Turkey into the USS Saratoga.
The left-wing opposition argues that Turkey has undone in a moment decades of diplomacy in which the country presented itself as a force for Middle Eastern stability.
The government, it says, is letting Turkey's fate be decided by the way the war turns out.
If the war goes on for long, the anxieties will increase.
By Thursday no Iraqi missile had fallen on Turkish soil, but the debris of a misfired Patriot anti-missile missile had, and air-raid sirens had gone off in Adana.
The country has made few preparations for civil defence.
In Istanbul, a universe away from any front, telephone calls now often go unanswered, bills are left unpaid, business life is affected.
One anxious socialite complained that five of her dinner invitations had been cancelled.
The Turkish people are sitting tight, watching the skies and CNN.
Boots, boots, boots
FROM A CORRESPONDENT IN DHAHRAN
IF TRUTH is the first casualty of war, boots are the second.
Most armies march into new wars wearing the boots designed, too late, for the previous ones.
The commander of Desert Storm hopes, like Wellington, to solve this problem and leave a bootprint in history.
General Norman Schwarzkopf rose through the army ranks on his feet, as an infantryman.
For 35 years, he says, he has had his feet abused by regulation army footwear that was always redesigned a little too late.
When the American troops arrived in the Saudi desert last August they were mainly shod in 1960s canvas-topped ‘jungle boots’, unchanged since Vietnam.
In the searing Saudi heat the steel plates in the boots, designed to protect soldiers from stakes in the jungle, heated up like a blacksmith's anvil.
Two holes along each instep, meant to let water from Vietnam's swamps run out, merely let sand seep in.
The black leather bits that cover the toes and heels absorb heat and bake the soldiers' feet.
Supply sergeants scouring Saudi shoe-shops came up with a bewildering variety of non-regulation footwear: zippered beige Saudi military desert boots, Omani army boots, Israeli army desert boots, even imported hiking boots.
It took General Schwarzkopf to restore order.
Reviving a battle he had begun two years ago with military-equipment designers, he insisted that his men needed boots of beige suede with speed laces, ankle-supports, lightweight nylon material, a sand-blocking closure and arch-support.
When army designers sent him prototypes, he sent them back.
He designed his own pair of boots and test-walked them in the desert.
With luck the Schwarzkopf desert boots will start arriving in May.
With luck, they won't be needed.
Egypt steadfast
FROM OUR CAIRO CORRESPONDENT
MUSLIMS!
Your brothers are being annihilated.
Hurry to aid Iraq in its heroic steadfastness!’
The anti-government weekly with this banner headline sold out in Cairo within hours.
As war approached, most Egyptians remained solidly anti-Iraqi.
As hostilities began, some of them began to waver.
Egyptians like an underdog; many of them privately admit to thinking that, whatever his faults, Saddam has guts for standing up to Uncle Sam.
Opposition parties, the Muslim Brotherhood and the spokesmen of some significant professional associations want Egyptian troops pulled out of Saudi Arabia.
They contend that the original objective — to protect the holy places of Islam — has been hijacked by the war-mongering regime of President Hosni Mubarak.
Fundamentalists and Arab nationalists applaud the missile attacks on Tel Aviv.
Concerned about possible unrest, the government has extended the mid-year university recess and cancelled public sporting events.
Still, Egyptian officials are confident that the rightness of their cause, bolstered by a non-stop barrage of anti-Saddam verbiage from the state-controlled media, has eliminated serious obstacles to Egypt's Gulf policy.
The president himself has quashed rumours that Egypt has been pursuing an Arab peace initiative, and rejected the idea of any ceasefire until the Iraqis have promised to withdraw from Kuwait.
He has said Egyptian troops would remain in the Gulf until they complete their mission, which he describes as aiding Kuwait under joint Arab defence agreements.
Western diplomats have no doubt that Egypt's 32,000-man contingent is ready to fight.
Unless Israel unleashes disproportionate retaliation for the missile attacks, Egypt has no intention of shaking the alliance.
Asked about his country's likely reaction to an Israeli counter-strike, the Egyptian ambassador in Washington said simply, ‘Don't worry about us.’
More than anything, public opinion is confused.
Egyptians have recent memories of being beaten at the hands of western-backed armies.
Bitter experience prompts many Egyptians to feel that Saddam Hussein is repeating the mistakes of Gamal Abdel Nasser, whose sabre-rattling brought disaster in the 1967 war.
They recall the wisdom of Sadat, who chose to seek an armistice in 1973, saying that he could fight Israel but not the United States as well.
Pragmatism rules, but for how long?
‘Time is the key,’ says Fahmy Huwaydi, an authority on Islamic movements in Egypt.
He believes that the radical opposition's shrillness is merely an effort ‘to ring bells to attract attention.’
But if the war drags on too long, and the Iraqi people suffer too visibly, more people will grow angry that Egypt is involved.
Whether the radicals' anti-western rage takes wider hold depends on the outcome of the war.
It is only 20 years since, to general relief among Arabs, America and Britain closed their bases in Libya and the Arabian peninsula.
Egyptians, wary of historical backsliding, would not like to see them reopen.
They are afraid, too, that Israel might expand into the space left by Iraq's collapse.
If the West is not careful to attend to such concerns, it could foster the fury that has not come.
The Maghreb boils over
‘TREMBLE Jews, the army of Muhammed has returned.’
Thus cried the legions of Islamic fundamentalists in Algiers this week.
Israel has a public-relations problem in North Africa.
Iraq's Scud attacks on Tel Aviv brought delirious joy, while governments struggled to contain the emotions.
Algeria called up reservists and sent troops to guard government buildings and western embassies.
King Hassan of Morocco closed schools and banned street rallies.
Mauritanian police used tear gas to stop pro-Iraqi demonstrators reaching foreign embassies.
The Tunisian government replaced scheduled television programmes with news and solemn music.
Mauritania is one of Iraq's few remaining allies.
The other governments of the Maghreb are dangerously out of step with the mood of their people.
Most have condemned both Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and the presence of western troops in Saudi Arabia; Algeria and Morocco were prominent in the fruitless search for an ‘Arab solution’.
Popular support for Mr Hussein grows with each bomb that falls on Iraq.
The governments, nervous, are playing for time.
Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia have made announcements vaguely sympathetic to Iraq and critical of the allied bombing.
But Morocco's opposition parties want King Hassan to bring home the 1,500 troops he sent to join the multinational force.
Algeria's biggest opposition party, the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) says the government should train volunteers for Iraq.
Like many Islamic parties, the FIS used to get its money from Saudi Arabia, and criticise the barbarous treatment Mr Hussein meted out to his own Islamic opposition.
But once it became clear that most Algerians supported Iraq, the FIS quickly did the same.
A pro-Iraqi demonstration on January 18th mobilised a crowd of some 400,000.
Tunisia's main Islamic party, Ennahdha, was expected to exploit the conflict in the same way, but has been strangely absent from the streets.
Its leaders say it does not want to be responsible for any disturbances.
More to the point, perhaps, around a hundred of its most active members were arrested last month.
The regime most sorely embarrassed by the war is that of King Hassan of Morocco.
He is pro-western, and has had generous aid from the Saudis and Kuwaitis.
But most Moroccan newspapers have come out for Iraq, praising its missile attacks on Tel Aviv.
The opposition parties support Iraq, and so does the Constitutional Union, which is in the ruling coalition.
The American attacks on Iraq, it said, were intended to ‘bludgeon the Iraqi people and the Arab world, to force them to submit to Israeli arrogance.’
The Arabs
The Saudis' world asunder
The war against Iraq is the biggest trauma for Arabs since the six-day war of 1967.
We report from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan and North Africa
MISSILE attacks on Saudi Arabia at unsociable hours have left the place bleary-eyed and jittery.
Not much work gets done.
People talk about the news and the government more critically than they did before.
War has brought to the surface things that are normally hidden.
For a start, people would like to know more.
Before January 20th Saudi television, with un-Saudi openness, was broadcasting CNN live.
But the news broadcast after the first missile attack failed to mention it.
Now CNN material is recorded and edited, omitting such details as pictures of the missile attacks on Saudi Arabia and anything to do with Israel.
Rich people with satellite dishes can get CNN live.
Others listen to British, American or Israeli radio.
Many Saudis have left the Eastern Province and Riyadh; the road from the capital to Jeddah is jammed with traffic.
Expatriate workers are nervous.
Those without gas masks sit out attacks holding napkins to their mouths.
The country would come to a halt if its 4m expatriate workers left.
Yet Saudis, a security-conscious lot, fear that those who stay may exploit the disorder if Riyadh is badly damaged.
They know that the foreigners have no love for a country that pays them and despises them, and they fear looting and riots.
A high-ranking Saudi, carrying a gun for the first time in his life, said it was for use not against Iraqis but against ‘certain other nationalities’.
The Saudis themselves are increasingly of one mind.
The early opposition to the presence of foreign troops seems to have receded, partly because the soldiers have kept out of sight: with no bars or visible girls, there is no way of turning Dhahran into Saigon.
According to an office worker, ‘some of these people in the mosques are preaching against the Christians, and some people are listening.
But mostly now the Saudi people only want to kill Saddam.’
Bazaar rumour has it that as many as 100 of these anti-American clerics have been locked away; but the government has taken no public stand against them.
Businessmen are enjoying their first boom for ten years.
Accommodating the exiled Kuwaitis has given a boost to the depressed property market, especially in the Eastern Province, where rents have tripled in the past year.
Flats empty for years are now occupied.
Refrigerators, cookers and furnishing materials are sold out.
Conservatives and liberals are both having a field day, taking liberties on the assumption that the government is too concerned with avoiding trouble to suppress them.
The religious police (mutawa) were recently pricked into action by the horrifying sight of Saudi women demonstrating for the right to drive.
Since then the mutawa have infuriated westernised Saudis, who prize their freedom to drink whisky in private, by busting into people's houses.
The government has done little to stop them.
The liberals, for their part, drew up a petition asking King Fahd for a consultative assembly, modernisation of the legal system and controls on the mutawa.
The petition was never delivered but the muttering about it has persuaded the king to promise a consultative assembly once all this is over.
He made the same promise nine years ago, during the siege of the Grand Mosque at Mecca.
A building for the assembly was indeed built, but now stands empty.
The government is plainly trying to generate a sense of nationalism, previously absent in this tribally divided country.
The royal family does not go in for oratory, so the policy is evident mostly in endless American- and British-made videos on television, boasting of Saudi Arabia's military and industrial prowess.
Even sceptics admit that there is a greater consciousness of national identity than in the past.
Nationalism may fill the gap left by the crumbling of old shibboleths of Arab and Islamic unity.
People are now saying what they think about their fellow-Arabs.
There is much criticism of the way foreign policy has been run.
‘We thought we could pay people off,’ says a businessman, ‘and look who we paid most: the Iraqis, the Yemenis, the Jordanians, the Palestinians.’
People expect that the cheque-book will be opened more discriminatingly in future, that the alliance between the Gulf states will be strengthened, and that Egypt will be the principal regional ally.
Defence policy, too, has come in for complaint.
Some Saudis were shocked to find how small their army was.
But it could be argued that the policy of spending on bases rather than on troops has paid off since Saudi Arabia has been able to accommodate, with astonishing ease, a multinational army 20 times the size of its own.
Now there is talk of a 180,000-strong army.
That could be hard: Saudis prefer desk jobs in air-conditioned offices.
It could also be dangerous.
The government kept the army small in the past mostly because it had noticed that autocratic regimes with large armies are vulnerable to military coups.
And even with a larger army, the Saudis do not seem to think that they would be able to protect themselves.
Nobody says so officially, but many people believe the Americans have come to stay.
‘This is an international zone,’ says a businessman, ‘we need international protection.’
There would be some opposition to American bases, he said, but most people face the prospect with equanimity.
It would, of course, do wonders for local business.
Israel
Keeping out
FROM OUR ISRAEL CORRESPONDENT
A MEETING of Israel's war cabinet on January 23rd, the day after an Iraqi Scud missile hit a block of flats in Ramat Gan killing three people, ended in a rare and thunderous silence.
Israelis, used to instant retaliation, do not like being sitting ducks.
America's Patriot anti-missile batteries, hastily airlifted to Israel from Germany after the first two Scud attacks, failed to stop a third attack but worked well the following night.
Israel's decision not to respond, at least for the moment, makes perfect sense.
American and allied aircraft are already pounding away at the fixed and mobile missile launchers concealed in the desert of south-western Iraq.
Israel, justifiably proud of its military prowess, has had to admit that it has nothing special to offer.
Its contribution to the war is to stay outside, cheering from the sidelines, absorbing the occasional painful jab from Saddam Hussein.
Vengeance has to wait.
Any military response would have to be closely co-ordinated with the allies.
And, according to some sources, America has withheld electronic identification codes, without which Israeli pilots flying over Iraq would risk clashing with allied aircraft.
If there were an Iraqi missile strike so serious that Israel felt it had to retaliate, an air corridor would have to be cleared by the American command in Saudi Arabia to allow the Israeli raid.
It is an unfamiliar situation for the Jewish state.
Benefits for Israel, in gratitude for its restraint, have been quick in coming.
The Iraqi missile attacks have provoked a wave of rare sympathy for a country that has been cast as the regional baddy.
The failure to attend to the Palestinian problem was put aside as Israel stood its ground with dignity.
Images of London's wartime blitz were conjured up as children taught their parents how to use gas masks.
‘Internationally,’ the Jerusalem Post noted, ‘Israel suddenly finds itself in a glare of warm light as excruciatingly awkward as it is refreshingly flattering — a position of strength based almost entirely on passivity.
Oddly, perhaps ominously, the war has in many respects gone better for Israel to date than for any other single party (with the possible exception of CNN).’
Israel felt emboldened to ask America for massive extra economic aid to pay for the damage caused by the state of emergency, the prolonged military alert — and the arrival of hundreds of thousands of new Soviet Jewish immigrants.
It already has the Patriots (deployed round the country's main cities and manned by American crews until Israeli servicemen can be trained to use them) and the almost permanent presence of America's deputy secretary of state, Lawrence Eagleburger.
Before the invasion of Kuwait George Bush and Yitzhak Shamir had barely spoken.
Now, it seems, they are seldom off the telephone.
The fragile rules of war
THE faces were grey and bruised, the voices faint; the eyes stared desperately, like actors seeking a prompt.
‘I think this war should be stopped so we can go home,’ said Flight-Lieutenant Adrian Nichol; ‘I don't agree with this war.’
He was one of seven captured allied airmen shown on everybody's television on January 20th.
The British secretary of defence, Tom King, said he had ‘the gravest suspicion’ about how their statements had been obtained.
Possibly their bruises were simply the effect of ejecting on to hard sand from a fast aircraft.
Parading captives on the screen is now a routine part of war.
American soldiers (and, to a lesser extent, British ones) are given orders on how to deal with a televised interrogation.
They may disclose only their name, rank, date of birth and serial number ‘or equivalent’; if bullied, their best technique is to send up the unseen questioner.
One American pilot mocked his captors' accents, others gave wooden answers.
But they looked miserably cowed, a sight calculated to dispirit their colleagues who must fight on.
The Geneva Convention of 1949 sets the rules on treatment of ‘victims’ of war.
Each side claims a closer reading than the other.
The convention, invigilated by the International Committee of the Red Cross, cannot much mitigate the horror of war.
But it can make things a lot better for the sick, wounded and prisoners, as it was meant to.
(Islam, incidentally, has almost identical rules covering the decent treatment of victims of war.)
Article 13 of the Third Geneva Convention, specifically on prisoners of war, repeats the limits on the information they may be required to give.
They may be questioned, but must be ‘at all times protected, particularly against acts of violence or intimidation and against insults and public curiosity.’
If torture was involved in the pilots' remarks this week — and many remember the UN investigations of Iraq's treatment of prisoners during the war with Iran — the rules were broken.
If not, Iraq's television show was not technically worse than the photographs that same day in western newspapers, showing the backs of Iraqi prisoners, forlorn beside a fence.
On January 21st, however, the Iraqis said they were placing prisoners of war near ‘scientific and economic targets’, liable to air attack.
That is explicitly contrary to Article 23 of the third convention, whereby the presence of a prisoner may not ‘be used to render certain points or areas immune from military operations.’
He is to be afforded shelter from bombardment ‘to the same extent as the local civilian population.’
President George Bush announced immediately that using prisoners as shields was a war crime, for which Saddam Hussein would be held accountable.
America's war aims may now be expanded to include Mr Hussein's capture and trial.
War-crimes trials remain controversial, not least because the winners sit in judgment; even Nuremberg left a bad taste in the mouth.
But the concept of war crimes was new then, and the categories vague.
The Geneva Convention has clarified them; but the Iraqis say that the allies are themselves committing war crimes by attacking civilians.
Jordan in the middle
DEJECTION, elation and worry followed fast on one another 's heels.
Jordanians were dejected by the beating Iraq was getting, elated by the news that Iraq had made good its threat to strike Israel with missiles, worried lest Israeli retaliation drag Jordan into the war.
King Hussein's biggest fear is that Jordan — wedged between Israel and Iraq, and with an army that is no match for either — should become a killing ground.
Having failed to stop the war, the king's main aim is to keep Jordan out of it.
Since that can best be done by bringing the war to a speedy end, he has begun a new round of diplomacy aimed at a ceasefire and peace negotiations.
He has appealed for a halt to the fighting, warning anybody who will listen that the Arab world is headed ‘for a period of turbulence like never before’.
Jordan's foreign minister, Taher Masri, has asked ambassadors from several non-aligned states including India, China and Yugoslavia to help end the carnage.
He is planning to go to Tehran to initiate peace moves through the Islamic Conference Organisation.
Some of the Palestinians in Jordan put their hopes in a wider war.
The failure of diplomacy to win them a homeland has left them hoping that Israeli retaliation against Iraq will split Syria and Egypt from the anti-Iraq alliance and open a new Arab-Israeli conflict.
Jordan's parliament, where the pro-Iraq Muslim Brotherhood is strongly represented, also seems less interested in peace than in joining forces with Iraq.
In an emergency session on January 18th, it praised Iraq for playing ‘its historic role in resisting the great Satan who is threatening every Arab country.’
Yet King Hussein is still perceived as one of the most moderate leaders in the region.
On January 21st President Bush held out an olive branch: some of the Arab countries supporting Iraq, he said, still had an important role to play in the future Middle East.
This understanding from the ‘Great Satan’ will do the king little good at home, but his position may be stronger than it looks.
His support for Iraq has won him backing from all quarters, from western-educated intellectuals to Muslim Brothers.
And the growth of an emerging democracy over the past two years provides an outlet for his critics' denunciations.
FINANCE
Big-bank mergers
Lead, California
NEW YORK AND LOS ANGELES
IF ONLY.
On January 22nd Security Pacific, America's fifth-largest bank, confirmed a newspaper report that it had held merger talks last year with 11th-ranked Wells Fargo.
The result would have been a Californian bank second in size only to New York's Citicorp.
A pity, say analysts, that it did not come off: America's biggest-ever bank merger could have led to a barrelful of such deals — and not before time.
America is awash with banks, 10,000 of them.
If the system is to return to profitability, some must merge (or fail).
Few, though, have the strength for any but the most modest mergers.
Any spare capital, regulators have insisted, must be committed first to strengthening balance sheets weakened by unwise lending, or to takeovers of the rump of the thrift industry.
The consolidation of banking that started in the 1980s has paused for much of the past year.
Yet several big mergers will be needed, if some of the large money-centre and super-regional banks are not to risk following Bank of New England down the hole.
The risks would be less if Congress were to act quickly on reform proposals provided by the administration, which could attract new capital into banking from outside, and break down the barriers that have hampered the growth of strong banks.
But Congress is going slow.
Mergers, if they come, will not embody lofty dreams of expansion.
The aim is to cut costs enough to scrape through today's recession.
Some savings would come from job cuts and closures of geographically competing branches.
Far more would come from combining computer systems.
Though banks have proved inept at merging, big ones in the same market should be able to achieve 30% cost savings.
For a pair like, say, Chase Manhattan and Chemical Bank, that would free more cash than the two's combined profits of the past five years.
For all their logic, big-bank mergers have proved tricky to arrange.
On January 23rd Citicorp's chairman, John Reed, said the bank would have to raise its capital by a half because the Fed thinks it is under-capitalised.
That will mean $3 billion-4 billion, only half of which he plans to get from further cost-cutting.
Where will the rest come from?
Mr Reed says Citicorp will not consider a merger for at least six months.
Regulators worry that mergers of two large, weak banks might just create one weak giant bank.
And who is to run the result?
Especially in New York, few bosses would favour a merger that left them as number two.
Security Pacific and Wells would have got round that by letting Wells's 59-year-old chairman, Carl Reichardt, head the merged bank for a couple of years of fierce cost-cutting, a Reichardt trademark, before handing over to Security Pacific's chief executive, Robert Smith, who is four years younger.
Banks being lemming-like institutions, many analysts believe that, once one big merger is pulled off, others will rush to follow.
And though Security Pacific says its talks with Wells Fargo were discontinued and that ‘no further talks are currently under way or contemplated,’ most bank analysts like to believe that they will be picked up again at some point — unless the banks find other partners first.
California's banking market is relatively strong.
Only 3% of all Californian banks' $260 billion in loans are problem ones, as against 6.4% of New York banks' $480 billion.
The four big banks — Bank of America and First Interstate complete the quartet — have 70% of the market.
Compared with the New York retail giants, they look paragons of banking virtue.
That owes much to the long prosperity of California's economy and its (until now) robust property market.
Both are today showing signs of weakness, but they are still far short of the east-coast mess.
California will allow out-of-state banks to enter its market from this year, so its big banks have for several years sought to concentrate on growing bigger in the local retail market through buying smaller banks and thrifts.
The original aim was to beat off Citicorp's expected arrival.
Now strong regionals, such as Banc One, Bancorp Hawaii, NBD and NCNB are the rivals.
The weaker of the big four are the two from Los Angeles, Security Pacific and First Interstate.
The latter was hurt by bad property loans in its Arizona and Texas subsidiaries.
But it is picking up; provided its core Californian property portfolio does not spring any unpleasant surprises, First Interstate could be an attractive buy.
Soon after its talks with Wells Fargo fell through, Security Pacific announced that it was cutting back its international operations, once a big growth area, because of bad loans in Britain and Australia that had contributed to a $230m fourth-quarter loss.
It will now concentrate on retail lending in California and across the Pacific.
With more scope left to cut flab, a slimmer Security Pacific must remain attractive to a would-be cost-cutter.
Of the two stronger banks, both from San Francisco, Bank of America, now well recovered from its flirtation with oblivion, has signalled its national ambitions by expressing an interest in parts of what is left of Bank of New England.
At home, it will probably content itself with continuing to fill gaps in its branch network by buying thrifts.
Wells Fargo is the enigma.
Under Mr Reichardt's knife, it has cut its international operations to concentrate on California, and earned a reputation as one of America's best-run banks.
Yet doubts remain about its heavy lending to property developers and over-borrowed companies.
Mr Reichardt's admirers say that if any American banker knows how to lend to property developers it is he — he was once one himself — and where better to do it than California?
Yet he could hardly finesse or cost-cut his way out of a serious downturn there.
If it has not already come, First Interstate should be expecting a telephone call soon.
American municipal bonds
You too?
NEW YORK
ACROSS America, state governments are preparing budgets for their coming financial years.
At least 34 states expect to be spending more than they collect.
Though all but Vermont are required by state law to balance their budgets, many will cheerfully borrow to plug the gap rather than raise taxes or cut spending.
This might look like good news for the huge municipal-bond market.
It would be — if the deterioration in credit quality gnawing at the financial system had not reached this market too.
Borrowing looks an odd route to a ‘balanced’ budget, but it is mostly within the letter of the law.
The discipline of the credit markets is meant to keep states from straying too far from the spirit of it.
So it does — up to a point.
After repeated downgradings, the bonds of New York, which has run a deficit in six of the past eight years, are now rated barely above junk-grade.
New York is planning for another deficit this year.
Like Massachusetts and Arizona, two other free-borrowing states whose credit is barely investment-grade, it will probably have to pay at least one percentage point more on new bonds than highly rated states.
How state governments approach the budget deficits now facing them will determine whether the coming year sees a further round of downgrading of public authorities' credit ratings.
States escaped relatively unscathed last year; not so cities and counties, which are less constrained by the law in matters of budgetary irresponsibility.
Last year Standard & Poor's lowered its ratings on a record 474 issues of municipal bonds, worth $48 billion.
True, many were housing issues, hit because the banks and insurance companies supporting them, such as Citibank and Executive Life, had been downgraded.
But even if such issues are excluded, there were far more downgrades than upgrades, and many more than in 1989.
Defaults tell a similar story.
Last year 91 municipal issuers defaulted on $1.3 billion-worth of bonds, according to the Bond Investors Association.
That is not much in an outstanding total of $800 billion — three times the size of the junk-bond market — but it was still the third-worst year, by value, since the association started to keep records in the 1950s.
Little wonder that municipal-bond insurance is a growing business.
Market-watchers are talking of an approaching crisis, as recession spreads from east to west.
The states face a combined budget deficit of upwards of $30 billion, on the basis of Federal Reserve figures.
Many cities and counties are little better placed, as each layer of government passes down the spending obligations but not the money to fulfil them.
Philadelphia has been on the brink of going bust for months.
Its paper is now junk-grade.
New York city is reviving unhappy memories of its near-crash in the 1970s.
Its A-minus rating has been put on probation, out of fear of ballooning deficits; it might indeed have met sterner treatment had 1989 not been a mayoral election year.
The pressures that brought about last year's downgradings will intensify, says Vickie Tillman, Standard & Poor's managing director responsible for municipals.
Recession is eating into the growth in revenues from sales, corporate and personal income tax, which on average account for 70% of state revenues.
Slowing property markets, especially in the east and north-east but now spreading west, are hurting property taxes and associated fees.
Federal aid is shrinking.
Meanwhile, state reserves are at their lowest in decades.
At the same time demand for spending is increasing.
Recession and rising unemployment have increased welfare demands.
States and local governments are having to shoulder more of the cost, much of it, such as environmental provisions and Medicare, under federal mandate.
Notably in New England and California, the adjustment between old expectations of ever-better social services, paid for by an ever-growing economy, and the new recessionary reality is a large one that will have to be made quickly.
The municipal-bond market has only just got over the jolt it received from federal tax changes in 1986 that removed tax breaks for some large buyers of new issues, notably banks and insurance companies.
In 1985 new issues topped $200 billion; in 1986 they were halved.
By last year they had crept back only to $113 billion, and that mostly thanks to some hefty refinancing of old high-coupon issues from the early 1980s to take advantage of lower interest rates.
At Moody's Investors Service, Daniel Heimowitz, executive vice-president for public financings, reckons that — assuming only a mild recession — new issues may reach $130 billion this year.
He thinks some states and cities will resort to pump-priming their economies with spending on things like roads, airports and waste-management.
But at what price?
Those governments that borrow short-term to cover their immediate cash-flow problems, without moving to put their finances on a sound footing, are likely to be given an even harder time by investors and credit-raters alike.
And even if that does not happen at once, it will in the coming years, when there will be fewer workers and new-property owners to pay taxes, and more elderly in need of welfare services.
Bonds away
NEW YORK
ALTHOUGH the bond market generally has been yo-yoing with the fortunes of the Gulf war, one issue is selling like hot bagels.
The day after the first bombs hit Baghdad, Israel aimed a $100m deep-discounted zero-coupon issue at small investors in North America.
The bonds will return only around 7% a year, but $21m-worth had been sold by January 23rd.
That is a blistering pace, given that the typical investment is a modest $2,500.
The chief executive of State of Israel Bonds, Meyir Rosenne, says that he expects the issue to sell out in two weeks, something that would take him ten weeks in normal times.
Most of the sales have been in New York, where the bonds are being promoted with a radio advertising campaign —‘So our dollars can pay for war, your dollars pay for peace.’
Daily newscasts about the Scud attacks on Tel Aviv provide potent free advertising.
The money will help Israel to provide housing and jobs for immigrants.
The country's biggest usual source of foreign exchange, tourism, has dried up since August.
Having raised $766m last year from dollar-denominated bonds, it aims for $1 billion this year.
It will probably get that and more, with Saddam Hussein as a salesman.
Swiss banking
Goodbye, cartels
ZURICH
A RUDE shock has hit Switzerland's bankers.
They are being forced — by politicians, if you please, as if politics were something serious like money — to compete.
Jean-Pascal Delamuraz, Switzerland's economy minister, is sweeping away some of the 20-odd price-fixing ‘conventions’, a Swiss euphemism for cartels, that have stifled competition in the domestic market for the past half-century.
In September he backed the federal cartel commission's attack on the ‘fidelity’ clause.
This stopped banks in the bond-underwriting syndicate run by the country's big three — Union Bank of Switzerland (UBS), Swiss Bank Corporation (SBC) and Crédit Suisse — from taking part in issues organised by other banks.
The clause was abolished at the end of 1990.
So too were fee-fixing agreements covering securities dealing.
This has already led to stiffer competition among private banks.
Rather than charging clients commission on account transactions, some firms like Bank Julius Baer — one of the biggest private banks, specialising in fund management — and Morgan Stanley have introduced fixed management fees.
Not all bankers are convinced of the need to change.
Of the big three, only Crédit Suisse has inched towards a new fee structure; UBS and SBC prefer to wait and see.
Not that they can afford to wait for long.
A new generation of canny investors who have inherited family fortunes will quickly switch banks if they think they are getting a raw deal.
The cold wind of competition is blowing down the Bahnhofstrasse, Zurich's bank-strewn high street, just as the bankers' other problems were growing anyway.
With stock and bond markets in the doldrums, their trading operations have been badly hit.
Julius Baer recently announced that its profits fell by nearly a fifth last year, to SFr35m ($28m), thanks largely to lower commissions on share deals.
The banks have been stung by rising Swiss interest rates.
Several years ago they could offer mortgages at an interest rate of roughly 4%, fixed for an initial period of four years.
But then short-term interest rates rose unexpectedly, and customers shifted money from low-interest savings accounts to high-interest deposit accounts.
That left the banks paying more for funds, but unable, for a long time, to raise the cost of mortgages to compensate.
Many fixed-rate mortgages are now being refinanced at interest rates of around 8%.
Not all, of course, is gloom.
Making money out of the misfortune of others has long been a speciality of Swiss banks.
The country's reputation for political stability and banking secrecy still brings in footloose cash from trouble-spots around the world.
On some estimates, perhaps another SFr15 billion was added to the existing SFr1.5 trillion hoard during the first month of the Gulf crisis, and more has no doubt followed.
America's banking troubles have also brought in business: Swiss banks have been flooded both with deposits and loan requests from blue-chip American firms.
Yet, for the moment anyway, the bankers have lost their Midas touch.
Faced with fierce competition, many of the country's 380 or so small and medium-sized banks will merge or be taken over.
On January 15th Hentsch & Cie and Darier & Cie, two Geneva-based private banks, tied the knot, and more will no doubt follow.
UBS has been getting an average of one inquiry a day from small banks looking for a bigger uncle.
Unless business picks up soon, some of the 245 foreign-owned banks in Switzerland may have to shut up shop.
The big three banks too are suffering.
Most analysts reckon their profits fell by 10–20% last year.
And they too are having to respond.
Just before Christmas SBC announced that it would cut 500 jobs in Switzerland as part of an economy drive.
Shocked clockwatchers at other banks in Zurich are turning up to work earlier, and leaving later, in a bid to avoid the chop.
As well as cutting costs, Swiss banks must also revise their pricing policy: while they over-charge for some services, others, such as payment transfers, are still surprisingly cheap.
The big banks must also learn to innovate.
Cautious by nature, they have missed money-spinning opportunities in new businesses like portfolio insurance and financial derivatives.
New markets should help them to catch up.
Switzerland already has a two-year-old automated futures and options exchange for blue-chip stocks called SOFFEX.
Now it is the stockmarkets' turn for electronic treatment.
Later this year, three of Switzerland's seven bourses — Zurich, which handles two-thirds of all business, Geneva and Basle — will be linked by the Swiss Electronic Exchange, which will allow computerised trading in some stocks.
That still leaves Swiss banks with a handicap: an indecisive government, still dithering over the reform of a stamp tax of up to 3% on some transactions.
Since total taxes on financial services bring in over SFr9 billion a year in revenues, politicians are reluctant to vote for change.
If they do not change, tax revenue may fall anyway, as business leaves for friendlier haunts.
The dollar's flight path
Where will the dollar head when peace breaks out?
DURING the two months or so before the first shots were fired in the Gulf, the dollar rose.
It gained 10% against the yen and 5% against the D-mark from its lows of October and November.
As war got nearer, so it rose further.
Many people expected that, if war broke out, it would rise further still as investors sought safe havens.
In fact, once the fighting began, the dollar lost 3% against the yen and the D-mark overnight.
The obvious explanation is that the first reports of allied successes suggested that the war would be short.
Yet the dollar did not move strongly up again when the gloomier reality sank in.
Perhaps because its safe-haven credentials already looked shaky: it had also fallen when Iraqi tanks first rolled into Kuwait.
One factor which investors look for in a safe haven is liquidity.
In times of trouble, therefore, they tend to keep a bigger share of their portfolio at home and sell some foreign assets.
If so, currencies of net debtor countries would be expected to fall (as more is pulled out than returns home); those of creditor countries to rise.
In previous international crises, America was the world's biggest creditor; today it is the biggest debtor.
This may be why the dollar slipped.
More immediately, the war could, on some estimates, increase America's monthly budget deficit by two-thirds while it lasts.
Whatever the impact of the Gulf, America's deteriorating economy suggests that the dollar could fall further in the short run.
Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, is worried about the sharp slowdown in monetary growth.
The broad measure, M3, grew by only 1% in the 12 months to December, and actually fell for the last three months of 1990.
The Fed has cut its target for the federal-funds rate five times in the past three months, to 6.75%.
Even though this is barely above the rate of inflation (6.1%), it stands ready to cut rates again.
So dollar deposits are already earning less — and, on top, the Fed looks less worried by inflation than other central banks.
The Bundesbank, by contrast, remains obsessed with inflation (Germany's current rate is a ‘horrific’ 2.8%).
It has been threatening to increase interest rates if the German government does not raise taxes to trim its widening budget deficit.
There were fears that this might cause frictions at the meeting on January 21st of the finance ministers and central bankers of the Group of Seven (G7) big industrial economies (America, Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy and Japan).
Higher German interest rates would not only put downward pressure on the dollar, but also worry those other members of the European exchange-rate mechanism (ERM) whose economies are slowing, or — in Britain — actually in recession.
As it turned out, events in the Gulf seem to have encouraged the Bundesbank to put international concerns first.
The final G7 communiqué referred to the conditions in which global interest rates would be cut, not raised.
But anybody expecting the G7 to meet the Gulf war with a bold plan to stabilise currencies was disappointed.
The G7 members did no more than reassure the financial markets about their readiness to intervene to curb volatility.
Exchange-rate targeting and economic-policy co-ordination are, it seems, out of fashion.
This is partly because the G7 had other matters on its agenda, such as how to share out the burden of paying for the Gulf war and the issue of debt relief for Egypt and Poland.
But currency stabilisation has been pushed to one side for another reason as well.
The three big economies are at different stages of the economic cycle: while America is struggling with recession, Japan and Germany are still fighting inflation, giving rise to differences in interest-rate policies and attitudes towards the risk of inflation.
Changing course
Although the dollar remains risky in the short run, most economists reckon that it will rally in the medium term.
Why?
It looks cheap.
Goldman Sachs, an American investment bank, reckons that the dollar is undervalued by an impressive 35% against the D-mark and yen.
The bank estimates that its purchasing-power parity (ie, the exchange rate which would equate the prices of a similar basket of goods and services in the two countries concerned) is ¥203 (its current rate is ¥132) and DM2.25 (DM1.49).
Goldman Sachs forecasts that the dollar will be ¥142 and DM1.75 in a year's time.
The gap between American interest rates and those abroad could soon start to narrow.
Interest rates on D-mark deposits are currently almost two percentage points higher than those on dollar deposits, despite Germany's much lower inflation.
But by mid-year American interest rates should have bottomed as the economy starts to recover, while rates in Germany and Japan could by then be falling, as their economies slow.
Japan is likely to cut first.
Its broad money growth has slowed sharply, from 13.2% in the 12 months to May 1990 to 8.6% in the year to December.
The Bank of Japan has already nudged down overnight rates; if the spring pay round shows wage rises to be moderating, it could then cut the discount rate.
Current-account imbalances are shrinking rapidly.
This year America's deficit and Germany's surplus are forecast to be less than half as big, as a percentage of GNP, as they were at their peak; Japan's surplus may be only a quarter of its peak level.
This will undermine the idea that the dollar needs to stay cheap.
Three reasons for buying the dollar before the war is won.
Unfortunately, there is no reason why economists should be any better at predicting that date than they are at predicting currencies.
British local-authority interest-rate swaps
Rotten boroughs
HUNDREDS of millions of pounds are at risk.
So is the City of London's good name, and the creditworthiness of Britain's local-government councils.
And court cases could drag on for years.
Prepare yourself for these laments now that Britain's law lords, its highest court, have ruled that interest-rate swaps between councils and banks, related to billions of pounds of underlying debt, are unlawful.
Seventy-eight British and foreign banks stand to lose £500m-600m (about $1 billion) from the decision.
One of the most active swap peddlers, the TSB, has already set aside £76m.
Other banks caught in the market are Barclays, Midland, and a crowd of American, European and Japanese banks.
They plan a political and legal blitz to undo the decision's effects by new legislation.
At the height of their activity, local councils accounted for perhaps one-third of a £30 billion market in sterling interest-rate swaps.
They had blue-chip credit standing, and were among the few counterparties with plenty of fixed-rate interest payments to swap for floating-rate ones.
The banks' best customer was the London borough of Hammersmith and Fulham.
It graduated from simple swaps to new-fangled instruments, such as options on swaps.
All told, the borough conducted 592 swap deals, related to some £6 billion of underlying debt, far more than the council had actually borrowed.
When the borough treasurers went on holiday, say City folk, so did the money brokers who brought all this business to the banks.
In 1988, as interest rates rose, so did the burden of the floating-rate payments that Hammersmith had swapped into.
It began to lose money, and would now owe banks some £250m-300m if its contracts were enforced.
Hammersmith's auditor has argued in three courts that the deals are not enforceable, since councils had no power in law to engage in such deals.
Its woes wrecked the thriving swaps business between banks and local authorities.
Under instructions from the Audit Commission, which oversees local-government finances, all councils suspended payments to the banks in November 1989.
On January 24th the law lords annulled not just Hammersmith's swaps, but more than 1,000 others arranged between banks and 130 councils over the past nine years.
Banks are aghast.
Both the Bank of England and the Audit Commission had blessed swaps as tools for managing interest-rate risk.
There had been some hope that the law would distinguish between such deals, part of normal prudent treasury management, and others, essentially speculative, as if the council were in the finance business itself.
An earlier appeal-court ruling had made that distinction, but the lords did not.
Now, say the banks, no deal is sacred in the City.
Several French bankers stormed out of one meeting, grumbling that Britain's legal standards had sunk to the level of Venezuela's.
But the banks have no monopoly of principle.
While they chased the business of a few gambling councils, some City lawyers were already arguing that councils could enter into swaps only to hedge interest-rate payments on normal borrowings.
Most councils were doing just that.
But the caps, floors, collars and other fancy products traded by Hammersmith had little to do with the council's debt: they were sheer punts on interest rates or, indeed, evasions of central-government borrowing limits.
Now banks and councils have to sort out the mess.
A negotiated settlement is out of the question: the councils have no legal power to pay banks money on open contracts annulled by the lords' decision.
The banks want legislation that would provide that power.
So, it seems, does the Bank of England, fearful that the fiasco will drive financial business from London to upstart continental centres.
And banks say that John Major's Treasury and local-government ministers have given them a more sympathetic hearing than Margaret Thatcher's.
Most of the councils would like to fulfil their contracts.
Few gambled as Hammersmith did, and they can afford the small sums they owe.
If they are not allowed to pay, credit will become more expensive: by a full half percentage point, suggests one local-government official.
Yet the government cannot easily undo the damage wrought by the courts.
It will be reluctant to propose a law to make banks £500m richer at the expense of local taxpayers.
And there are few precedents for the sort of retroactive legislation the banks want.
Even if these obstacles are overcome, just which deals should be deemed legitimate (or at least open to settlement)?
All, or only ‘normal’ ones?
In practice, that distinction would be hard to define.
Any legislation might have to allow, somehow, for the special problems of Hammersmith.
If the government does not back legislation, banks will demand restitution: the unwinding of both open swap positions and hundreds of past deals too.
That could involve a flood of lawsuits against reluctant councils.
Some banks also have a hit list of people whom they threaten to sue for damages.
Targets include brokers who brought the swaps business to the banks, accountants who approved councils' financial statements, and the councils themselves.
In the end, banks would probably come out slightly ahead.
Lawyers, of course, would grow rich.
Leaking at the seams
The Corporation of Lloyd's, London's peculiar insurance market, is three centuries old.
Can it keep afloat even another ten years?
HAUNTED by catastrophes past, Lloyd's of London faces a bleak future.
Some wonder whether, in any recognisable form, by 2000 it will even be there.
This matters to more than just those smooth scions of the British upper class who work in this singular insurance market, or to those who pledge their wealth, as ‘names’, to back the market's underwriting syndicates.
Though this collective of co-operatives pulls in only as much premium income as some of Britain's big insurance companies, Lloyd's is synonymous with British insurance.
An enfeebled Lloyd's would harm the City of London's international standing.
It was this thought that held the British government back from putting Lloyd's firmly under its thumb during the fraud-ridden years of the late 1970s and early 1980s.
The market has since done much to polish up its self-regulation, though it is still far from squeaky-clean.
Today, however, the biggest problem that faces David Coleridge, who took over this month as chairman of Lloyd's, is not one of scandal, but of profits.
In the next couple of years these will prove uniformly bad, underscoring the steady loss of competitiveness from which Lloyd's has suffered recently.
The market's share of world premium income was 2.2% in 1983, but only is only half that today.
The latest published figures for Lloyd's show £575m ($950m) of pre-tax profit in 1987 (Lloyd's syndicates close their accounts only after three years), down slightly on the record profits of 1986.
That was before a blast of natural and man-made catastrophes in 1988–90 sent insurance claims pouring into Lloyd's: the fire on the Piper Alpha oil platform, the spillage from the Exxon Valdez, the San Francisco earthquake, Hurricane Hugo and a spate of European gales.
Worse, these disasters coincided with falling premium rates in almost every one of the market's businesses.
Today Chatset, an independent consultancy, reckons Lloyd's will post a meagre profit for 1988 (see the chart overleaf) and a loss of more than £850m for 1989, the first loss since 1967.
Many of the 26,500 names would therefore love to follow the 6,000 who have already shaken the dust of Lloyd's from their feet these past three years.
Yet half the names could not leave even if they wanted to: they are locked into the 58 (out of a total of 401) Lloyd's syndicates that have been unable to close one or more of their past annual accounts, so unquantifiable are the liabilities stacking up against them.
Many of the resultant 92 ‘open years’ have to do with old American liabilities — for asbestos-related risks, for example, and pollution — whose scale was undreamt-of when the insurance (or, more usually, the reinsurance) policies were underwritten.
The most notorious case concerns the 1,600 names on 31 Outhwaite syndicates.
These face losses, mainly on asbestosis claims, of up to £1 billion; since Lloyd's names have unlimited liability, many will be bankrupted.
A case that looks set to rival Outhwaite in notoriety concerns two Feltrim syndicates, where at least £200m of losses are emerging on ‘excess-of-loss’ insurance in 1987–89.
Nor do the market's commercial troubles end there.
Other unsuspected ‘long-tail’ claims are now hitting it, notably untold billions of coming dollars for professional negligence.
Most visible are the claims arising out of the gross mismanagement during the 1980s of America's savings-and-loan institutions.
Open years are proving to be open wounds for Lloyd's.
Upsets unlimited
Those names in the worst-hit syndicates — and the members' agents who are meant to represent them — are squealing.
They want some kind of ‘market’ solution — by which they usually mean spreading losses around to other, unaffected names.
In the past the ruling council of Lloyd's has refused to contemplate anything that would appear to mutualise names' losses.
That, it rightly argues, would defeat the whole notion of risking individual wealth for individual gain.
Yet many names do not believe that the losses for which they are being asked to stump up were incurred just through bad luck.
Many suspect individual cases of fraud or negligence; some think that the conflicts of interest that run deep at Lloyd's prevent proper self-regulation.
By forming action committees, names are starting to fight back.
If, as expected, the 1,700 aggrieved names on the Feltrim syndicates appoint solicitors at the end of this month, then some 15% of all names would be part of such action groups.
That is a statistic that ought to alarm any Lloyd's insider.
There are signs that the council of Lloyd's is starting to listen to the names' cries.
It has asked the Department of Trade and Industry for approval to set up a vehicle to provide names with a way of getting out of open years.
Due to start in March, the vehicle, dubbed ‘Leopardcover’, would be backed by the market's central fund.
Names on open years would, on payment of a premium meant to reflect commercial conditions, be granted unlimited cover for future liabilities.
In the past Mr Coleridge is said to have sworn (‘over my dead body’) that he would not countenance such a guarantee fund.
But he later changed his spots enough to insist on Leopardcover as a condition of accepting the market's chairmanship.
Not that the new fund would come cheaply.
At a best guess, a name on an Outhwaite syndicate would have to cough up some £750,000 in premiums to clear an original exposure of £30,000 to the syndicate.
That comes on top of the tens of thousands of pounds in claims that the name will already have had to pay.
These high premiums, once paid, will only hasten the departure of names from Lloyd's.
Shoot the albatross
That is why Lloyd's now needs to question its hallowed notion of unlimited liability, which makes names liable down to the last button on their boxer shorts.
Unlimited liability is said to underpin the integrity of a Lloyd's insurance policy.
Now that names no longer get the tax breaks that were long the market's main attraction, it is an outdated nonsense.
Introducing limited liability would change Lloyd's beyond recognition.
It would bring in outside capital, mostly from corporate members, now barred.
That capital and experience would give Lloyd's a bigger, global strength, as it became dominated by fewer, larger groups.
These would be better able to market its strengths (which are being shown to advantage during the Gulf war, for which Lloyd's is putting together imaginative war insurance where other markets fear to tread).
Though private names could still co-exist in this new world, they would soon be the minority.
Many members' agents, and many syndicates that rely on those agents for business, would perish.
Hence the fierce resistance among the professionals to limited liability.
Mr Coleridge inherits a market that has made some sensible moves to improve its competitive edge.
Previously the world's largest user of punch-cards, Lloyd's switched to an electronic network at the start of this year.
Until this year, syndicates had to decide which of four market divisions to operate in — marine, non-marine, aviation or motor.
Now syndicates can offer tailor-cut policies that cross those lines.
Yet much more needs to be done.
A cumbersome bureaucracy has grown up at Lloyd's that panders to the market's parochial interests rather than to its wider good.
By arguing, amongst other radical things, for limited liability, the new chairman could change that — and he is already making the right noises.
Whether Mr Coleridge wants to crown a successful career by pulling down the edifice in which he has enjoyably spent his working life is another matter entirely.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Supply and command
ONE problem with a high-tech war is that it requires so much technology.
Millions of parts and supplies must be got to the right place at the right time, which is something American military forces have not always been able to do.
In the Spanish-American war of 1898, troops arrived in Florida with only winter clothing.
(The British had cornered the khaki-drill market for the Boer war.)
Heat-stroke caused casualties before the enemy fired a shot.
Operation Desert Storm, by contrast, seems so far to have been supplied without a hitch — thanks to computers.
Like its industry, America's armed forces spent much of the 1980s automating their warehouses and distribution systems.
Much of the equipment — and many of the management techniques — now supplying troops in the desert are the same as those working in factories back at home.
The air force, for example, keeps track of its stock on a $200m system built under contract by Computer Sciences Corporation in El Segundo, California, using IBM mainframe computers and off-the-shelf database software from Computer Associates in New York.
One obvious difference between military and commercial systems is the built-in security.
A bigger one is sheer scale.
A factory might manage a few thousand kinds of parts; the air force has to cope with over 6m.
Part of the trick of managing such diversity, as many businesses have learnt, is global specialisation.
The air force divides responsibility for spare parts among seven centres.
One is Hill Air Force Base in Ogden, Utah, which is in charge of parts for F-16s.
Technology links these centres into a network capable of shipping parts quickly to wherever they are needed.
If a bomber in Saudi Arabia breaks down, a technician requests parts from a computer in his repair bay.
If the computer cannot find the part at the local air base, the request is automatically forwarded, via satellite, to the right place back in America.
The computer in Ogden, or wherever, finds the supply nearest to where it is needed.
In most cases it can then tell automated warehouse equipment to fetch the part from the shelf and send it to the shipping area.
At every warehouse, computers monitor stock levels and re-order from the factory when they fall below a minimum.
That minimum level can be adjusted by other systems that predict the need for parts, given past maintenance patterns and expected operations.
Though about 95% of orders are placed without human intervention, people can, of course, monitor and override any of the system's decisions — eg, to ensure that it is not ordering $2m missiles because of a statistical fluke.
More important, forces on the ground can track the progress of an order — so commanders know exactly how long they will be waiting for spares and can plan accordingly.
The uncontested arena
THERE is one sphere of battle in which America has always had supremacy: the one that surrounds the earth.
Iraq has launched a rocket into space but it has never put a satellite into orbit.
America's satellites have the high ground to themselves.
Some are communications and weather satellites not unlike their civilian brethren.
Others are more specialised.
According to John Pike, an analyst with the Federation of American Scientists, there are six optical-reconnaissance satellites in the ‘Keyhole’ series currently thought to be in orbit.
Three are straightforward KH-11s, of which one has been up for more than six years; three are advanced KH-11s.
These satellites carry photomultipliers, which amplify the light they receive, and infra-red cameras, which can see at night.
They have telescope mirrors comparable in size to the one on the Hubble space telescope — but, one hopes, not afflicted by the Hubble mirror's distortions — and produce images good enough to make out an object the size of a paperback book.
Such pictures can be transmitted to ground stations anywhere in the world, mainly by means of SDS relay satellites.
The KH-11s may be able to transmit directly to the allies' command centre in Saudi Arabia.
Whether it goes through computers in America or in the desert, the information can be with commanders in the field in a matter of minutes.
As well as these visual-reconnaissance satellites there is also a radar-imaging satellite, at one point called Lacrosse (its name may have changed).
This uses synthetic-aperture radar, which exploits the fact that the radar is moving to build up three-dimensional images of the terrain below.
The technique requires lots of data and lots of computing.
The data get to the ground-based supercomputers through the TDRSS relay satellites, which can cope with more data than the SDS.
Lacrosse can focus on a small area and resolve details down to perhaps a metre, or sacrifice clarity to cover a larger area.
It can see through clouds, which over the past week have stymied satellites using visible light, and even penetrate the soil.
It can probably spot moving targets, and give their speed and direction.
Because metal, wood and stone reflect radar waves differently, Lacrosse may also be able to spot the difference between real targets and elaborate mock-ups.
Also looking down, but from a much higher orbit, is a Defence Support Programme satellite (DSP).
Its orbit takes it around the world once every 24 hours, so it appears to stay at one point in the sky.
From there it looks for the infra-red ‘signature’ of a rocket's exhaust.
When it sees one, it informs the troops on the ground.
Near the DSP satellite, and in lower orbits as well, there are signals-intelligence satellites that can monitor radios and radar.
Together with snoopers in aircraft and on the ground, these satellites helped form a picture of Iraq's command and control network and air defences.
Lower down are the 15 satellites of the Navstar Global Positioning System (GPS).
These transmit coded signals containing information from highly accurate atomic clocks on board.
If there are four satellites visible, a military user on the ground with a portable receiver can use the discrepancies between their time-checks to get a measurement of his position accurate to well under ten metres.
Civilian users cannot decipher as much information from the satellites' signals and thus get fixes that are less precise.
There are thousands of receivers on tanks, ships and aircraft in the Gulf.
Unfortunately, to guarantee that four satellites will always be visible would require 24 of them — and there will not be that many around for another few years.
It is thought that in the Gulf at the moment the GPS provides full cover only at night.
The microchip war
OUR nation has pursued for decades the policy that has substituted machines and technology for human lives.
I think especially in this environment we will continue to pursue that policy.’
His suggestion that America should make Saddam Hussein the target of its attack cost General Michael Dugan his job as air-force chief of staff last September.
But what he said about the role technology would play in the war seems to have been as accurate as the laser-guided bombs shown on television.
The technology that has been substituted for human lives on the widest scale is that of the microprocessor.
Just as microchips have infiltrated the home and office, so they have invaded the battlefield.
The differences between today's weapons and those of the second world war are not unlike those between a 1940s gramophone and a compact-disc player, armed with a laser and stuffed with chips.
It does the old job much better and some new jobs too.
Although microchips give machines only a smidgen of intelligence, that can go a long way when sensibly applied by human masters.
In some cases, the microchip takes a man's place in facing danger.
A Tomahawk cruise missile does the job of a bomber.
It is programmed with a flight plan telling it how to get from a nearby ‘way-point’ to its target, and with a set of pictures of how the terrain it will pass over should look to its radar altimeter.
It can thus check that it is on course.
These map programs take a fair bit of work, and cannot be drawn up on the launching ship; the sailors load a ready-made map into the missile, and tell it how to get to the initial way-point.
When the missile nears its target, it stops relying on radar and turns on a more acute guidance system.
This compares what the missile sees through a light-sensitive sensor in its nose with pictures of the target stored in its memory.
As missiles go, a Tomahawk is supremely gifted.
But it can only carry one 1,000lb (455kg) warhead, or a set of 166 bomblets which can be dropped in three batches.
An F-15E, America's newest fighter-bomber, can carry a weapons load of up to 24,500lb (11,113kg).
The Tomahawk also fails fairly often.
Of the 104 launched on the first day of the war, it seems, 10–20 fell from the sky.
The Tomahawk cannot change course, choose alternative targets, fight off opposition or bring back pictures of the damage done.
If a commander thinks it essential to destroy something right away, he will still send bombers.
For difficult but less vital tasks, a disposable $1m Tomahawk is a cheap alternative to a bomber and its crew.
No cleverer than it ought to be
Most military chips do not replace men.
They protect them and improve their ability to cause damage.
The obvious benefits have been seen in videotapes showing missiles and bombs hitting targets with extreme precision.
This, in theory, saves lives on the other side — a concern that has been rare in recent wars, but seems to carry some weight in this one.
Much of the precision comes from laser guidance.
This trick has been used since the last few years of the Vietnam war, and does not rely on any particularly outlandish circuitry.
Its success comes from its determination to do one thing as well as it can.
Such monomania has been useful to warriors since long before the silicon age.
Laser-guided bombs have a small sensor in their nose, and little fins.
The two are linked via a microchip.
If the sensor is pointed straight at something reflecting the light of a laser beam — distinctive in its brightness and colour — the bomb's tiny mind is happy.
If the laser light wanders off centre, the bomb uses its fins to change its direction and angle of fall until the light is once again centred.
Such simple circuits control many types of missile — radar seekers and heat seekers, for example.
The innovation of the laser-guided bomb is that you can aim at anything: just point the laser at it, and the bomb will fall on it if it can.
During night missions inside Iraq, the laser shines from the belly of the bomber, and is kept on target by the pilot or the weapons officer, with the help of electronics that compensate for the aircraft's movements.
Lasers may later be used by troops to mark out tanks for attack.
Most missiles with pretensions to cleverness are brighter than a laser-guided bomb, but not as clever as a Tomahawk.
Some weapons home in on infra-red sources, some on radar, others just go where they are told.
Some, like the Stand-off Land Attack Missile, SLAM, or the Israeli-produced Have Nap, can be ‘flown’ by pilots looking through the missile's television eye, while sitting at a safe remove in aircraft.
In getting the bombs to where they can be used, air crews are helped by extensions to their senses — infra-red vision, light amplification and radar for night flight — all of which rely on electronics.
‘Avionics’ circuits help them manoeuvre.
They are protected by electronic countermeasures (ECM) which confuse enemy radar by sending out electronic noise and spurious signals.
Just as missiles can be guided from aircraft that did not launch them, so jamming can be done by someone else on the bomber's behalf; division of labour pays off in battles, too.
The extra range provided to sensors and accurate weapons by modern electronics allows some jammers and bombers to ‘stand off’— another way in which technology saves lives.
The possibilities of linkage
Microchips also let things happen at inhuman speed.
The Patriot missile system is a good example.
At its heart is a sophisticated ‘phased-array’ radar, a stationary gridwork of tiny radar transmitters controlled by computer.
By putting the elements in the radar out-of-step with each other to various degrees, the computer can use the array to make a radar beam that can flit across the sky and track a number of targets almost simultaneously.
When the system picks up an enemy, alerted by a DSP early-warning satellite (see box) or an AWACS aeroplane, the radar starts tracking it.
When it comes into range, the system launches an interceptor.
This missile is not particularly clever, but the computers that control it and the radar are.
As the interceptor streaks up, the radar tracks it as well as the incoming target.
The radar beam which tracks the Patriot missile carries instructions updating it on which way to go to head off the enemy.
When the interceptor gets close to its target, it is used as a second radar receiver.
Beams that bounce off the target are received by the interceptor, which passes the information back to the ground.
The computers then use it to check the guidance instructions.
If the target uses ECM — Scuds do not, but aeroplanes can — then the relatively powerful computers on the ground can have a good crack at sorting out information from disinformation.
The Patriot is a complicated system of launchers, radars, communications and control.
The assembly of weapons into systems, spread wide in space but linked by little strings of data, typifies microchip warfare.
Machines can keep the disparate parts of such a system co-ordinated much better than men can.
An as-yet-unproven system called J-STARS, getting its baptism of fire in the Gulf, illustrates the point.
J-STARS uses large air-borne synthetic-aperture radars to create images of the terrain 100 miles (160km) or more away, and identify moving objects like tanks and trucks.
That information is sent to tactical computers in control stations to produce guidance for artillery and missiles — the American army's new tactical missile system has been designed to operate as part of such a set-up, hitting targets more than 100km (60 miles) off.
Not all computers are in the front line.
Some are tacticians and some are back-room boys, dealing with logistics (see box above) and military planning.
Desert Storm, with its thousands of sorties a day, could have been planned without computers (the Schlieffen plan launched the first world war with sweat and brainpower, little more); but computers allow the plans to be fine-tuned and to be altered quickly.
And some computers find their niche as boffins, designing ever-fancier gadgets.
The F-117A, the ‘stealth fighter’, is a product of computers.
Much of its stealth comes from a design that minimises the chance of radar waves bouncing back the way they came.
In the 1970s, when it was designed, computers were hard put to work out how to minimise the radar reflected from curved surfaces — so the F-117A is made up of flat ones.
The more modern B-2 bomber is more rounded.
The F-117A's shape also makes it unstable; without on-board electronics constantly helping the pilot, the stealth fighter would be almost impossible to fly.
Your bill, sir
Microchip warfare is undeniably impressive, but it is clearly not flawless.
It is always at the mercy of the people who design and use it.
It can have faults in its design, or it can be used incorrectly (correct use needs trained skills).
It can also be betrayed.
Information from the French, American and Russian experts who helped set up Iraq's air defences will have helped in their defeat or circumvention — a jammer which knows how the enemy radar ‘thinks’ has a great advantage.
The high-technology route is extremely expensive; the sophistication of America's weapons and the plaintiveness of its calls for burden-sharing are directly related.
The cost of weapons often means they are in potentially short supply, all the more so because once commanders find that a weapon works, they want to use it for everything.
The weapons are expensive partly because they are made of expensive components, but also because they are time-consuming to develop.
The ‘new’ systems being used in the Gulf have all been more than a decade in development.
The long gestation comes from the fact that, although mechanical and chemical engineering hold few surprises — if the design looks all right the thing will probably work — electronic engineering carries no such assurances.
All programs have bugs, and need endless refinement.
High-tech weaponry has certainly kept down casualties during the air war (it will have less ability to do so on the ground).
Whether it allows the exercise of force to be more controlled and effective has yet to be seen.
There are still no accurate assessments of damage available.
It is clear, and unsurprising, that Patriot missiles sometimes fail.
It is easy to deduce that other systems do, too; many targets are being hit again and again.
The pictures of precision attacks provide only anecdotal evidence of effectiveness.
Smart weapons can clearly produce a dazzling display.
Whether they can win wars has yet to be proved.
BUSINESS THIS WEEK
The long road
World stockmarkets reacted with relief and optimism at the start of the Gulf war, but some of the gains were wiped out when the first hopes of a quick victory faded, and the Soviet Union turned violent again.
Finance ministers of the Group of Seven industrial countries agreed to intervene in financial markets if need be.
The group also rewarded Egypt for its part in the Gulf alliance by agreeing to write off more than a third of the country's debt to foreign governments.
Poland, in the forefront of reform in Eastern Europe, may soon be relieved of a similar proportion of its $45 billion debt.
Oil prices fell sharply, then rose a little on renewed fear of war damage.
Saudi Arabia cut production by at least 10% because the world is awash with oil.
The Uruguay round of trade talks cannot restart until Japan's position on agricultural reform shifts more, America's State Department said.
Most people had thought Europe was the problem.
Air turbulence
Britain's Civil Aviation Authority recommended that Heathrow airport, closed to new entrants since 1977, be opened to more airlines.
If this is approved, British Airways, which holds 38% of the available slots, will suffer.
But the way will be clear for American Airlines and United Airlines, to buy the London services of TWA and Pan Am.
Faced with an airline industry desperate for cash, America's transport department is to relax restrictions on foreign investment in American airlines.
The ceiling of 25% ownership is to be raised to 49%.
This will allow Holland's KLM to keep a big investment in Northwest Airlines.
With bookings down dramatically in reaction to the Gulf war, TWA is to cut European flights by nearly half and lay off 2,500 people.
In chapter 11 for nearly two years after labour problems, and crippled further by the Gulf war, America's Eastern Air Lines at last closed down after 62 years in the air.
Pass the buck
America's largest commercial bank, Citicorp, plans to lop $1.5 billion a year from its annual operating costs, twice the amount it announced in December.
The move will add thousands more redundancies to the 8,000 already announced.
A future merger is not ruled out — but will not be explored just yet.
Two of America's biggest banks, Security Pacific and Wells Fargo, admitted that they discussed a possible merger last year, a move that would have produced the second-largest bank in America.
They insist that all talks are now off.
Salomon Brothers, a big investment bank, was fined $1.3m by the New York Stock Exchange.
An employee cooked its program-trading books to defraud six clients in 1987.
America's Congressional Budget Office called on the Federal Reserve to cut interest rates.
Gearing up
France's state-controlled car maker, Renault, got a capital boost of FFr10 billion ($2 billion) from the government and from Volvo, a Swedish car maker with a 20% stake.
The European Commission, which last year made Renault start repaying FFr6 billion of state aid, did not object.
The European Commission did object to aspects of a proposed link between Fiat, Italy's big car maker, and Alcatel-Alsthom, a French electronics giant.
The alliance could be anti-competitive, the commission said.
Meanwhile the Fiat group announced a drop in operating profits of more than half, to 2.1 trillion lire ($1.7 billion).
A range of ozone-friendly coolants for air conditioners and refrigerators, designed to replace CFCs, was unveiled by the Delaware-based Du Pont chemical company.
The range will compete with one already produced by ICI, but General Motors wants Du Pont to supply a coolant for its 1994 cars.
Business as usual
Britain's monopolies commission decided that a state-owned Finnish company, Kemira, should not be allowed to buy ICI's fertiliser business.
It would have reduced the number of manufacturers in Britain from three to two.
ICI says it may now have to close down the business.
A big British tobacco and insurance group, B.A.T, moved into the East European cigarette market.
It has set up a joint venture with Hungary's state-owned producer, which makes 40% of the country's cigarettes.
About £20m ($39m) will be spent on modernisation and expanding production.
Illegal tender
The law lords, Britain's highest court, ruled that hundreds of swaps transactions between banks and local governments are unlawful.
Eighty-odd British and foreign banks stand to lose £500m-600m on open swaps positions.
The Soviet Union ‘reformed’ its currency by simply cancelling its 50-rouble and 100-rouble banknotes (worth $2.50 and $5 apiece at the street exchange-rate).
The aim was to prevent hyperinflation.
The predictable result was chaos.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL INDICATORS
OUTPUT, DEMAND AND JOBS
Britain's industrial output fell by 2.8% in the year to November, the sharpest year-on-year fall since June 1981.
In the same period France's industrial production fell by 0.8%, and Sweden's by 4.2%.
Germany's retail sales soared by 9.2% in the 12 months to November.
The ranks of Britain's unemployed grew by 80,000 in December, the biggest monthly increase for ten years; the unemployment rate rose to 6.5%, its highest level since June 1989.
Australia's jobless rate eased to 8.1% in December, down from 8.2% in November.
PRICES AND WAGES
Britain's consumer-price inflation slowed to 9.3% in the year to December, helped by falling petrol prices.
In the same period Canada's inflation rate stuck at 5.0%, while Sweden's slowed to 10.9%.
Japanese workers received a pay rise of 5.1% in the year to November, equivalent to a real rise of 0.9%.
Britain's workers received an increase of 9.8%, which was wiped out by inflation.
Germany's wholesale prices edged up 1.5% in the year to December.
ECONOMIC FORECASTS
Our monthly round-up of economic forecasts is now based on the averages of 170 seers polled by Consensus Economics, up from 150 in the past; it also, for the first time, looks at prospects for 1992.
The forecasters are growing gloomier.
America, Canada, Britain and Sweden are all now expected to see a fall in economic output this year; America's GNP is forecast to shrink by 0.4%.
In 1992 the forecasters think growth will recover, rising by an average of 2.7% in the 13 countries — an optimism that may wane as this year wears on.
Inflation is forecast to average 5.1% in 1991, falling to 4.1% in 1992.
Sweden is expected to stay bottom of the league this year and next — though its growth is forecast to resume, and its inflation to fall, in 1992.
COMMODITY PRICE INDEX
World sugar prices have fallen 40% in the past nine months to under $220 a tonne for raw sugar, the lowest since May 1988.
The world sugar surplus is expected to climb to 1.9m tonnes in the current season, putting prices under further pressure.
The slowdown in the world economy and higher prices in Eastern Europe because of subsidy cuts have both squeezed demand, and the Gulf crisis accounts for a loss of some 350,000 tonnes of sales to Iraq and Kuwait over the past six months.
Sugar production is likely to be a record 110m tonnes in 1990–91.
Brazil expects to export over 1m tonnes, twice its estimate a few months ago.
India's output also looks set to top last year's record.
TARNISHED GOLD
The price of gold plunged 7% in a single day immediately after the Gulf war broke out — evidently on hopes that the war would be brief.
This took the price back to where it was before Iraqi tanks rolled into Kuwait last August.
Gold seems to have lost its old role as a safe haven.
In December 1979 and January 1980, by contrast, when the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan, the gold price leapt from $470 per ounce to $850 within a month.
Investors who bought at the peak have lost heavily; today the price is only around $380.
Central banks are the biggest holders of gold.
World official gold reserves are worth about $350 billion at today's prices.
The biggest official gold hoarder by far is America, which holds 27.9% of the world's central-bank gold reserves.
Germany is in second place with 10.1% of the total.
Japan, surprisingly, has only 2.6% of the pot.
TRADE, EXCHANGE RATES AND RESERVES
America's visible-trade deficit narrowed to $9.7 billion in November, down from a revised $11.0 billion the previous month.
Canada's trade surplus widened to $1.1 billion in November, while Sweden's fell to $249m in December.
In trade-weighted terms the yen gained 1.4% on the week and the D-mark 0.5%.
Sterling was unchanged, while the dollar was down by 2.1%.
WORLD BOURSES
Most stockmarkets rebounded after the start of war in the Gulf.
Stockholm enjoyed the second-biggest one-day rise ever, which left it 7.3% up on the week.
New York gained 4.5%, and Paris 4.4%.
Tokyo finished the week almost unchanged.
MONEY AND INTEREST RATES
In the year to December Japan's broad-money growth slowed to 8.6%; in the same period Britain's narrow-money growth slowed to 2.7%.
Canadian banks lowered their prime rates by half a point to 12.25%; America's federal-funds rate eased to 6.25%.