

Family Silver
A few months after I joined the Department of Transport in 1979 I was presented with an issue which had baffled governments for well over a hundred years.
I had called a meeting in my office, by now decorated with a number of pictures from the Government's own art collection including a marvellous study of the railway cutting at Acton by Lucien Pissarro.
The subject of the meeting was the Channel Tunnel.
The Channel Tunnel project had first been seriously mooted at the start of the nineteenth century.
Over the years since then, the debate on whether it was better to cross the Channel by tunnel, bridge or ferry had raged to and fro.
Solutions had ranged from the ingenious to the bizarre.
One Victorian scheme was for a tunnel lit by candles, where horses would draw passengers across in special vehicles, pausing only at an artificial island in the middle of the Channel for everyone to come up for air and water.
Another project was for a submerged tube.
Gothic turrets would provide ventilation shafts and the two ends would be marked by lighthouses.
By 1876, planning had reached such a point that France and Britain signed a protocol laying down the basis of a treaty governing the construction of the tunnel and a start was made on either side of the Channel.
It was not to be.
Public and press opinion turned against the whole concept, with Queen Victoria pronouncing it ‘objectionable’ and The Times declaring that ‘the silver streak is our safety’.
For the next eighty years the argument that a tunnel under the silver streak of the Channel would pose a major security problem held sway, although a tunnel would have been of great advantage to Britain during the First World War.
As the twentieth century progressed the debate limped on, but it was not until the early 1960s that the tunnel became a serious prospect again.
In 1961 the British and French governments agreed to set up a working group to consider the merits of the rival proposals and at the beginning of 1964 Ernest Marples, the British Transport Minister, and his French counterpart announced that the two governments would go ahead with a tunnel.
In 1973 a  start was actually made, but the following February the Heath Government fell.
Labour inherited three major public spending projects: the third London airport to be built at Maplin, the supersonic Concorde aircraft and the Channel Tunnel.
Labour wanted economies and the first project to perish was Maplin.
But that was not enough for the new Chancellor, Denis Healey.
In effect there was a choice between Concorde and the Channel Tunnel.
Concorde (which was to be partly built in Bristol) benefited from a strong local lobby including a local MP, Tony Benn, who had now become a member of the Labour Cabinet.
More to the point, it would cost more to cancel Concorde than the relatively paltry £17 million it would cost to go back on the Channel Tunnel.
The result was that on 20 January 1975 Harold Wilson's Government, to the dismay of the French, formally cancelled the project and all work on the tunnel stopped.
In 1979 the issue came to me.
It could scarcely have come at a worse time.
No one was under any illusion that Margaret Thatcher was in the business of building expensive prestige projects — a category into which the Channel Tunnel was wrongly put.
Public spending was being reined back and the Cabinet was getting down to the series of bruising public-spending battles which characterized our first few years of office.
Nevertheless, Peter Parker and British Rail were anxious to get the project back on track and I strongly sympathized with their position.
The tunnel was a long-overdue link with Europe as well as a new opportunity for the railways.
But I also realized that I would be exceedingly lucky to keep my existing road and rail budgets, let alone add massive new expenditure.
At the first meeting in the department I did what every other Transport Minister appears to have done over the previous ten years: I hired Professor Sir Alec Cairncross to advise me.
There was no question that a tunnel was technically feasible, but 1 wanted to know what the economics would be.
What would be the likely traffic?
What would be a sensible forecast of revenue?
I particularly wanted to know Sir Alec's views now that British Rail had submitted a scaled-down plan.
Poor old British Rail were between the devil and the deep blue sea.
The Labour Government had cancelled their previous and more ambitious scheme for the tunnel and now the next Conservative Government was wondering if their  current one was ambitious enough.
Nevertheless, the questions were fundamental.
The British Rail scheme would certainly cost less than the old plan as it now proposed a single-track tunnel, not a twin tunnel.
This meant obvious limits on capacity and above all it meant no cars and no lorries which were the most lucrative traffic.
It seemed too modest to be profitable.
What really concerned me was how to finance a tunnel project of any kind.
I realized I would get no help from the Treasury and, indeed, I suspected that they could not understand why the department was wasting its time on this issue at all.
In my view there was only one hope, and that was to build the tunnel using private venture capital.
On Wednesday 5 March 1980, I explored the practicalities of this course at a meeting in the department and on 10 March I minuted the Prime Minister.
I said that I believed it would now be right to give some indication of the Government's attitude to the building of a tunnel.
I continued:
I see no advantage in adopting the Labour Government's negative stance and ruling out all possibility of a link being built.
If private capital can be attracted — and I believe it could to the right project — it seems to me entirely right that we should do what we can as Government to create the right climate for a successful link to be built.
In essence I proposed that rather than having public investment we should substitute private investment without any Government guarantee.
That basically meant that Government would not stand behind the project.
We would do whatever Government had to do, like negotiate a treaty with the French, but we would not be financially responsible for the project.
The policy was cleared over the next few days and on 19 March I told the House of Commons that
The cost of any scheme would be very large and I should make clear now that the Government cannot contemplate funding expenditure on this scale from public funds.
However, if a scheme is commercially sound I see no reason why private risk capital should not be available.
The marks of the Treasury were all over my short statement of  policy.
They had conceded that the project could go ahead, but very few bets were being taken in Whitehall that the century-old logjam would be shifted.
There was a general belief that our terms would not attract many takers and there was a suspicion that the Government did not really have its heart in the project in any event.
Over the next months, rival consortia considered how to finance the new investment while at the Transport Department we could do little more than wait.
Then, eighteen months later, we had an exceptional stroke of luck which entirely transformed the position.
In September 1981 the newly elected President Mitterrand came to London.
He brought with him, among others, the new Communist Transport Minister, Charles Fiterman, whom I had met the previous week.
We had talked over transport issues, including the tunnel.
All the predictions were that the meeting at Downing Street between newly elected political opposites would be difficult.
In fact it proved surprisingly genial and Margaret Thatcher's transparent ability (later to impress another political opposite, Mikhail Gorbachev) had its effect on François Mitterrand.
There was, however, one problem.
Pleasant as the round of meetings had been, there was next to nothing that could be agreed as a common objective for the final communiqué.
It was at this point that the Channel Tunnel at last came into its own.
President Mitterrand shared the traditional French enthusiasm for the tunnel and, socialist or not, was prepared to concede private investment.
Margaret Thatcher, too, realized the potential of having this major capital project financed by the private sector.
It has been claimed that Margaret saw the tunnel as some sort of monument to her and her period of government.
I never once heard her even hint at such a view.
Her position as expressed to me was that if the private sector wanted to use its own money for the tunnel then we should certainly not stand in the way.
The result of the Downing Street meeting was an enthusiastic statement committing the two leaders to the project.
It was the crucial turning-point because from that moment on the tunnel had not just the support of the Transport Department but the backing of Number 10.
Cabinet ministers may be equal, but Prime Ministers are more equal than others.
To get the backing of the British  Prime Minister and the French President was a good day's work.
Much of the debate today about the Channel crossing concentrates on the rail link on the British side.
My involvement with the tunnel did not extend to the rail link which was decided after I had left the department.
But that debate should not obscure the fact that private investment was the key that unlocked the Channel Tunnel door.
The project had been cancelled by Labour for lack of public funds.
Had we waited for the position to change, so that public investment or private investment with public guarantee could go ahead, we would still be waiting.
Yet the conventional wisdom in the transport world of the 1970s was that all progress depended on public investment, public controls and, of course, public ownership.
Everywhere I looked the Government was involved.
It even had a shot at controlling motorway service areas, provoking a debate which encapsulated many of the attitudes of the time.
The service areas, with their awful tea and rubber sandwiches, had become a music hall joke.
It seemed to me that although competition on site was difficult, it was at least possible to have competition between sites.
To do that, however, you would have to allow the operators to advertise.
There were already signs that told the motorist he was approaching, say, the Newport Pagnell or Watford Gap service areas.
Surely there could be no objection to telling him in advance which areas were run by Trusthouse Forte and which by Granada?
Not a bit of it.
One of my civil servants solemnly objected, arguing that such advertisements could present a potential safety risk.
The theory was that on seeing the sign motorists would be so surprised that they might drive into the verge or the car in front.
That policy was overturned in two minutes flat but it is worth remembering that it had held sway since the inception of the service areas fifteen years earlier.
Advertising, however, turned out to be only the tip of the iceberg.
Although each site was controlled by the operator, they were supervised and inspected by the Department of Transport.
That meant the Minister of Transport was answerable for them in the House of Commons.
In Opposition we had had great fun pursuing Bill Rodgers on the standard of the baked beans and the quality of the fried cod.
We hounded him to such effect that he responded in the classic 1970s way and set up no less than an official  committee of inquiry to consider the whole position.
The committee carried out a range of fascinating research and confirmed what the public knew already, namely that the ham sandwiches available in motorway cafeterias had a tendency to be ‘thin, tasteless ham in soggy bread’.
Bill Rodgers having set up this committee, it now fell to me to decide what to do with their report.
I had no intention of answering a Parliamentary question on soggy ham sandwiches and I could not see why Government was involved in the commercial operation at all.
The obvious solution was to sell the leases to the operators and for them to decide what investment was required if they were to attract new business.
When I put this to the operators there was an astonished silence.
No one had previously considered this proposal and there was therefore no prepared group response.
One or two operators immediately saw the attractions, but others still hankered after the old world.
The meeting broke up with mixed feelings, but after a few days it became clear that we were in business.
I put up for sale the service areas on new long leases, retaining some controls only to ensure that the areas were safe stopping places for motorway travellers.
My experience with motorway service areas confirmed my belief that far too much of transport was either in state hands or run under state control.
Rather than concluding that I had been too radical in Opposition, I fast came to the view 1 had been too cautious.
Everything I saw in Government suggested that the right place for the National Freight Corporation was in the private sector and that deregulation of the bus and coach services could provide great public benefits.
But I now saw other opportunities.
The nineteen ports owned by the British Transport Docks Board were basically old railway ports and had come into Government control with the nationalization of the railways in 1946.
The Docks Board was the biggest company in the ports industry and with its Southampton operations and its Humber and South Wales ports had secured about a quarter of the market.
But nationalization had brought the board few obvious advantages.
As part of the public sector it was subject to the usual Treasury controls on investment and borrowing, but it was also restricted in another way.
Because it was publicly owned, its activities were restricted  so that it did not compete unfairly with the private sector.
The result was that the board was confined to the business of handling ships and cargo but required ministerial consent if, for example, it wished to develop the land attached to the sites.
The obvious solution was to give the board commercial freedom and control of its own destiny in the private sector.
The board itself saw the advantage of this course but the chairman, Humphrey Browne, was worried that privatization would lead to a crippling strike.
Personally I thought the fears overdone, but nevertheless I sought to find a way of transferring the operation to the private sector which would minimize the risk of industrial action.
I proposed that the Government should initially retain a 51 per cent stake in the new company.
In other words, the new company would start life structured in rather the same way as BP, with a Government shareholding but without the Government taking any part in the business.
That stake was later sold and the privatization of the ports was completed without any industrial action and with many of the dockers buying shares in the new company.
British Rail's subsidiary companies, like the hotels and the cross-Channel ferry company, Sealink, were another area ripe for change.
These companies had traditional links with the railways and their raison d'être had been that they were a natural extension of the business.
They were there for the convenience of rail passengers.
But times had changed.
The railway connection no longer dominated the operation and most of the customers for both hotels and ferries came by road.
Both businesses had been starved of investment for more than thirty years.
The hotels were dingy and British Transport Hotels had added only one new building to their stock since the end of the Second World War.
The ferries were safe but too often they were outdated and uncomfortable.
In part this was due to the public-sector controls on investment, but it was also because of the natural priorities that had operated year after year inside British Rail.
What the public wanted was a good rail service and not surprisingly successive generations of British Rail managers put their major effort into achieving that.
In competition for new investment, hotels and ferries came way behind the main business and these two potentially successful concerns were not getting the  management or main board attention they deserved.
Nor was there any reason to believe they would get it over the next thirty years, either.
After talks with BR's Chairman, Peter Parker, we agreed that the sensible way forward was for a new company, British Rail Investments, to be formed and for the subsidiaries to be transferred to the private sector, with the proceeds going to British Rail.
In transport, then, Margaret Thatcher's first Government extended privatization far beyond what we had thought possible in Opposition, but there was no doubt what was the jewel in the crown.
Some commentators and businessmen have suggested that the successful privatization of the National Freight Corporation was a foregone conclusion.
It certainly did not seem that way at the time.
We were not inundated with offers for the company from the private sector and our financial advisers doubted whether we could sell the business at all.
The parcels side was still losing money heavily and by 1980 the world was running into recession.
No country was worse hit than Britain, where an economic gale tore through companies which were already dangerously weak.
Unemployment went up and investment came down.
In the West Midlands you saw factories where the roofs had been removed to avoid rates on the empty building.
Among the industries affected, transport was badly hit.
There was over-capacity in road haulage as the amount of goods to be transported went down and prices were cut.
Even the inner-city property sites of National Carriers did not look very tempting once it became clear there was an abundance of that kind of property on offer.
It was against this background that Peter Thompson, the chief executive of NFC, together with his chairman, Bobby Lawrence, came to see me in my small office on the Cabinet floor of the House of Commons on 18 May 1981.
At an earlier meeting, Bobby Lawrence had asked me for my initial reaction to the management buying the company.
Peter Thompson now explained that he wanted to go beyond the concept of a management buy-out and to involve all the staff who wanted to buy shares.
He feared that a management buy-out would leave things on the shop floor very much as before with the ‘them’ and ‘us’of workers and managers.
Employee ownership would open the door to involving all the staff in the company.
My reaction was, if anything, more enthusiastic than before.
It seemed the ideal way for the NFC to go into the private sector.
Bad industrial relations had been the curse of the country for as long as I had taken any interest in politics; although the reform of trade union law was essential, further steps were also needed.
I hoped that the NFC would be a pioneer not only in privatization but also in improving employee relations.
The 1980 Transport Act took all the action necessary to transfer the National Freight Corporation to the private sector and reform the Traffic Commissioner system so that new inter-city and commuter coach services could develop, together with other new services like car-sharing.
With the momentum of privatization established, I was able to argue successfully for further legislation.
The 1981 Transport Act enabled private investment to be introduced into the subsidiary companies of British Rail and effectively denationalized the British Transport Docks Board.
Of course, critics of privatization in transport abounded.
Labour spokesmen competed with wild phrases about ‘cut-throat competition’ and ‘rip-off’.
But the most damaging criticism of the privatization process came some years later, and not from a Labour politician but from one of the most distinguished Conservative leaders since the war, Harold Macmillan.
Macmillan likened the privatization programme to the reaction of individuals or estates when they run into difficulties.
They dispose of ‘all the nice furniture that used to be in the saloon and then the candelabra’.
In short, they sell the family silver.
Macmillan saw privatization as an ideological approach to the problems of industry motivated by a simple desire on the part of Government to make some quick money.
I entirely dispute that.
The transport companies which have been denationalized are now successful and are trading profitably.
This provides the best possible security for their workforces but it means something more in terms of the ‘family silver’.
Rather than paying out subsidies, the Government now receives substantial annual taxation receipts.
Company profits mean income for the Government.
Without that income, promises of better public services — that is, publicly financed services — are pure fantasy.
To take just one example: Associated British Ports (the former British Transport Docks Board) has paid over £60 million in corporation tax over the last  five years.
The taxpayer received not only a capital sum when the companies were sold but now also receives a substantial annual dividend.
Any estate owner who achieved this might be thought to have made a notable bargain.
There is no doubt that investment in the companies which have gone private has increased, sometimes substantially.
Total investment in the NFC in the years since privatization has totalled almost £700 million, whereas in state ownership investment never exceeded £25 million a year.
In Associated British Ports investment in the business approaches £200 million.
In the motorway service areas, Trusthouse Forte alone have invested over £80 million since they were allowed to purchase their leases.
The areas have visibly improved, with new restaurants and new hotels.
As for employee involvement, it is certainly greater than it ever was in the years of nationalization.
The claim for nationalization was that public ownership would mean more commitment to those industries by the people who worked for them.
It never worked out that way.
Nationalization in the transport industries produced neither outstanding industrial relations nor employee commitment.
Privatization has produced much more hopeful results.
The NFC has been the outstanding example where for seven years the company was owned entirely by the workforce.
Even now that the company has gone public, some 40 per cent of shares remain in the hands of staff or former staff.
Annual General Meetings are attended by several thousand employee shareholders and (in contrast to the normally sedate company AGM in some discreet City hall) NFC has to take over the National Exhibition Centre in Birmingham or the Winter Gardens at Blackpool.
Privatization has also allowed good managers to manage and succeed.
There are the well-known stars like Peter Thompson and James Watson of NFC, and Keith Stuart of Associated British Ports, who came with their companies from the public sector.
But the process goes way beyond the top managers.
It reaches right down into the companies themselves.
As one senior manager said: ‘Employees now expect managers to take decisions on a commercial basis and recognize that their interests as employees — and in many cases shareholders — demand it.
This is in marked contrast to the position prior to privatization when the commercial objective  was accepted by senior management but not by the bulk of employees.’
Above all, the result of privatization in transport has been a better service to the public.
Coach services have increased and are provided in modern, comfortable vehicles at competitive prices.
Commuting by coach has prospered.
The hotels which used to belong to British Rail have improved substantially.
Gleneagles, for example, is now open all the year round rather than just in summer and autumn following a major investment in all-weather sport and leisure facilities.
At the motorway service areas petrol prices are now nearer the off-motorway prices and competition has benefited the motorist.
As Rocco Forte said:
After the changes the consumer could see what he was buying before committing himself to leave the motorway.
There was a real incentive for operators to provide a quality service which built consumer loyalty.
In short, the consumer called the tune and the operators who prospered were those who best identified the needs of the consumers and met them at the right price.
Privatization has achieved better ways of running the transport industries and there is today no serious movement in any of them to return to state control.
A similar position can be found in many of the later privatizations of the Thatcher Government.
Certainly some, like British Telecommunications, gas, electricity and water, produced spectacular financial results, but the lasting impact has been on the businesses themselves.
Privatization means giving businesses the chance to flourish; the process of deregulation means the Government getting out of the way.
The Government provides the opportunity, but it cannot guarantee success.
The most ministers can do is to argue the case for change and enable the changes to be made.
The eventual success of the venture depends not upon ministers but upon the managers and the workforce in the companies themselves.
The significant feature of privatization has been that the transformation has usually been carried out by broadly the same teams that had worked under nationalization.
Throughout the privatized businesses, attitudes to the customer have improved and the bureaucracy of State industry  has been removed.
It is essentially for reasons like these that the governments of the new democracies of Eastern Europe look to privatization as a way forward.
It is for the same reasons that I would now support the denationalization of British Rail.
Some argue that this is impossible, given that some rail services will be unprofitable.
Yet there is no reason why Government cannot enter into contracts with privatized companies whether privatization is on a regional basis or takes place in some other way.
Privatization would not mean the end of support for the railways.
It would provide better value for both the taxpayer and the passenger.
The potential gain from rail privatization would be a more commercial railway and a better service for the public.
When I was at the Transport Department, my aim was a good rail service for the public and as efficient a service as possible.
That meant continuing to support British Rail financially while at the same time fighting to make the industry more productive.
Manpower had come down over the years from 470,000 in 1960 to 215,000 twenty years later, but the business was still over-staffed.
Everyone knew this, but we faced the same problems in increasing efficiency and productivity as in all the other traditional industries like coal and steel.
Our challenge on the railways was to win change — but without, in Peter Parker's words, ‘bringing the roof in’.
At the time, the two dominant rail union leaders were Sid Weighell of the National Union of Railwaymen and Ray Buckton of the drivers' union, ASLEF (the Associated Society of Locomotive Engineers and Firemen).
They were a contrast in styles.
Sid Weighell was tense and cautious.
Negotiations were long and painful.
He was always looking for the catch.
When he agreed, however, the agreement stuck.
Ray Buckton was a much more extrovert character.
He was always available to the press for an instant comment and was a politician in his own right.
On the other hand, he was extremely difficult to pin down to any conclusion.
He gave the impression that he was constantly looking over his shoulder at his executive which contained some hard and prickly characters.
One other point about the two union leaders was abundantly clear.
Whenever they came to meetings at the department they sat at opposite ends of the table.
Whatever reservations they  had about dealing with me were as nothing compared to the reservations they had about dealing with each other.
On one point, however, they were united.
They wanted to see a positive statement from the Government which demonstrated our commitment to the future of the railways.
With the election of Margaret Thatcher, the assumption among some lobbyists had been that we would institute a new round of ‘Beeching cuts’.
In the early 1960s Dr Beeching, the chairman of the railways, had cut out some of the most unprofitable rail lines and the fear was that I would do the same.
Indeed in November 1979 the Guardian had published a wholly imaginary story about 900 miles of railway being under the axe.
For all its note of fantasy, however, the article was widely read and well timed.
It appeared on the day that I was answering questions on transport on the floor of the House and there was a question on the future of railway services on the order paper.
As I rose to answer there was a roar of laughter from the Labour benches.
I looked behind me to see what appeared to be a solid forest of standing Tory MPs from county constituencies anxious to ask questions about their own particular rail lines.
I repeated that I saw ‘no case for a further round of Beeching cuts’ and that there had been no secret talks or plans.
The House settled back more or less reassured.
The only occasion when rail closures were raised in my time at the Transport Department was in the spring of 1981.
The issue arose when I took to Cabinet committee my proposals on railway electrification.
British Rail's diesel stock was coming up for replacement and we needed to decide whether to reinvest in diesel equipment or to invest in electrification.
The overwhelming advantage of an electric railway was that it was cheaper to run and maintain.
It would also reduce dependence on oil, which was a sensible strategic aim, and the regular orders for the British railway manufacturing industry could help to win more export orders for electrified systems overseas.
In February 1981 the Transport Department and British Rail published a joint report which concluded that a substantial programme of main-line electrification would be financially worthwhile: it would show a real return on capital of around 11 per cent and it would cut oil consumption.
At the end of March, I circulated a paper which enthusiastically backed electrification.
A meeting was set for mid-April but, just before it, the whole policy was challenged by an adviser to the Government, Professor Alan Walters.
Walters had two main points.
First, he argued that the railway system should be reduced.
Many experts, he said, believed that we should aim for a smaller, more concentrated and more efficient network.
Second, he challenged the forecasts on electrification and said that competition from cars, the newly deregulated coaches and the airlines could all erode rail traffic.
The case for widespread electrification was not plausible, he thundered.
It was based on assumptions which were not credible.
I strongly disagreed with both arguments.
I did not believe that there were large savings to be made simply from reducing the size of the rail network.
Over two-thirds of the cost of the railways was the cost of labour.
The obvious policy to follow was one of improved productivity, and I proposed, with the agreement of British Rail, a reduction in the workforce of 38,000.
With electrification I could achieve this goal.
If I simply concentrated on reducing the network, I would involve myself in a long and profitless public, political and industrial row.
There would be public inquiry after public inquiry — for the law ensured that no closure could be made without one — and many areas would be deprived of valued rail services.
I believed the case for electrification to be overwhelming.
And although my department and British Rail had produced a joint report, this did not mean we automatically accepted BR's views.
We needed to be persuaded of the case and we had gone through the BR figures line by line.
When the case came to ministerial colleagues, it was these arguments that prevailed.
There was no support for reducing the network and the position that I had set out in 1979 remained the Government's policy.
The Central Policy Review Staff were asked to examine the case for electrification.
In June 1981 the CPRS reported back that there was indeed a commercial case for electrification but that the programme should be endorsed route by route rather than in some all-embracing fashion.
As far as I was concerned, that merely represented a different path to the same goal and so on 22 June I told the House of Commons that rail electrification was going ahead.
On the same afternoon I met with  the rail unions and (loyally supported by Peter Parker) put the position to them.
Both Weighell and Buckton would have preferred more, but the statement persuaded them that the Government did have its heart in the future of the railway system.
The scene was set for progress towards a modern network.
My chief regret in my stay at Transport was that we were not able to do more in combining private and public investment in partnership projects.
In particular, we could have done more to use private investment in the road-building programme.
We are all deeply schizophrenic about roads.
Held up in a jam on, say, the M25 we curse the planners for not having the foresight to have built a five-lane motorway joining up to other five-lane motorways.
Comfortably seated in a television studio or before a television set, we tend to forget that experience and offer pious hopes that public transport will improve to such an extent that in some miraculous way new roads will be unnecessary.
At the beginning of the 1980s, road building was not a notably popular cause.
You could usually win support for bypasses from unhappy communities who had been pounded by heavy traffic on roads quite inadequate for the purpose.
But on some parts of the M25 we were more likely to be met by demonstrators protesting against the road itself.
I cannot remember any public movement to get five lanes.
At times I reckoned we were lucky to get three.
Delay was written into the whole system of road planning.
The procedures took so long that much needed links were not built until years after they were required.
The M40 motorway was a case in point.
A motorway connecting Oxford (and thus London) to Birmingham and the Midlands road network had been needed for at least two decades.
I went to see the proposed route of the M40 in my time as Transport Minister, but the full motorway was not opened until 1991.
I had another serious battle getting approval for the M54 to Telford — the only road I know of finally settled at a full meeting of a Cabinet committee.
Nor did the Government's means of analysing the need for roads always help very much.
The Treasury had a system called COBA — cost-benefit analysis.
Ken Clarke was my minister of roads and I remember him coming back on more than one occasion with steam coming out of his ears.
The analysis had shown that the cheapest option was to build a particular road in a straight line.
The mere fact that this took the road through a school and a housing estate was of secondary interest.
When I took over, it was evident that the need for new roads vastly outstripped the likely supply.
Could not private investment fill at least part of the gap?
Toll roads were one solution but I was less keen on them than on another idea we developed in the Transport Department.
The idea was that the private sector would build and finance a number of roads and the department would pay a rent for them on the basis of how much traffic used them.
The Treasury did not like this plan at all.
In their view it was nothing more than delayed public spending in instalments.
Some might think a little delayed public spending on roads would not have been a bad idea at that time.
Nowhere has the failure to build much needed roads been more obvious than in our cities.
The result is that the city environment has deteriorated.
The number of cars has increased and the roads are all too often inadequate to take them.
Birmingham is one of the few cities where any attempt at sensible provision has been made.
London, however, is pounded by commuter traffic and the only policy option which promises relief is determined action to exclude or price out the one-driver commuter car.
There is now no other course.
We face the vastly increased traffic projections for the twenty-first century with roads adequate to deal with the conditions of the nineteenth.
No road-building scheme can bring relief to London in the foreseeable future.
Almost all of us value the freedom that the car gives, but life is about balancing freedoms.
There should be no absolute freedom for any motorist to drive into the middle of already congested cities free of charge.
I spent my last months at the Transport Department preparing a third Transport Bill whose aim was to reform the traffic laws and to introduce the ‘points’ system for disqualification.
This followed my 1981 legislation which had introduced the first road-safety measures for fifteen years and was used (as I knew it would be) to introduce compulsory seat-belts.
But I now felt the time was coming to move on to another department.
At the beginning of 1981 I had been promoted from Minister of Transport to Secretary of State.
This meant very little to me apart from a salary increase and a move from my position at the extreme right of the Cabinet table to the extreme left.
I took over the chair previously  occupied by Angus Maude, who since 1979 had carried out the impossible job of overseeing Government information.
When things are going wrong the Government's supporters call it a failure of presentation and everyone trots out the old excuse that ‘we are not getting the message across’.
In the wider political world outside transport that excuse was much in use in 1981.
Turning Point
One of Margaret Thatcher's most famous maxims was ‘you don't have problems — you only have challenges’.
In 1981 we had one challenge after another.
In 1979 we had won the election with 44 per cent of the poll.
By early 1981 our support had fallen to below 30 per cent and as the months went by it plummeted even further to reach 23 per cent at the end of the year.
Even in the ‘poll-tax’ dominated months of 1990 we did not quite reach that point.
The Conservative Party was cast in gloom.
For much of 1981 we were running not only behind Labour but also behind the alliance formed by the Liberals and the newly created Social Democratic Party of David Owen, Bill Rodgers, Shirley Williams and Roy Jenkins.
The SDP's aim was to create a real third force in British politics and their hope was to take votes from both parties.
They believed they could win votes in Sunderland just as surely as in Mid-Sussex.
We Tory MPs were not so sure.
The SDP were likely to be a far greater danger to us, as disgruntled ex-Conservative voters who would never have voted Labour in a million years turned to a cosy middle party.
It had to be admitted that there was plenty for the voters to be disgruntled about.
The country was in the middle of a world recession with unemployment well above two million and looking set to break the three million mark, a prospect that a few years before would have seemed unthinkable.
Inside the Government the gloom was widely shared.
Cabinet was an unhappy place.
There were leaks everywhere and well-reported battles between the so-called ‘dries’ who were the outright supporters of the Government's economic policies and the ‘wets’who were the sceptics.
In fact the grouping was never much more than a rough guide.
It was certainly correct to put Jim Prior, Peter Walker and Ian Gilmour firmly in the ‘wet’ camp and Keith Joseph would go down as an undoubted ‘dry’, but for most of the rest of us our opinion depended upon the issue.
Nevertheless, no one could claim that it was a united Cabinet and this was made worse as the everyday issues of government started to go wrong.
In February 1981 we were badly holed in a dispute with the  National Union of Mineworkers.
The National Coal Board wanted to close some uneconomic pits and their advice was that this could be achieved by local talks.
Although the NUM executive had decided to recommend a ballot on industrial action, the board thought that there was no need to panic and no prospect of an immediate ballot while local negotiations continued.
That was the advice on Monday 16 February.
On Tuesday, the NUM was not only threatening strike action but taking it.
On Wednesday David Howell, the Energy Secretary, was forced to withdraw the threat of pit closures and on Thursday we woke up to a dreadful press accusing us of ignominious surrender.
Clearly there were comparisons with 1974, but the charge that really hurt was that the Government had been caught unawares (which we had) and was not in charge (which we were not).
But then the Government does not run the nationalized industries.
Any minister must rely on the operational advice he is given by the managers on the ground.
The fact was that the board got it wrong and we took the blame.
The choice for us was whether to take a strike unprepared or to live to fight another day.
Wisely, Margaret Thatcher decided to withdraw.
This hardly won instant acclaim, but it was both a wise decision which in 1985 was fully vindicated and the decision of a strong leader.
Strength does not mean joining every battle that comes along.
As John Biffen remarked on weekend television following the débâcle, ‘I did not come into politics to be a kamikaze pilot.’
Swiftly following on from coal there came trouble in the steel industry.
Again the issue was how to manage change in a traditional industry.
Demand for steel had slumped throughout Europe and there was no way we could sustain the industry at its existing size.
The trouble was that to create a slimmer and more efficient industry, the Chairman of British Steel, Ian MacGregor, needed money to help with investment and redundancies.
It was a sensible policy, but it looked as if the Thatcher Government had simply executed a U-turn and baled out a loss-making nationalized industry.
Labour joy was multiplied when it fell to Keith Joseph, the Trade and Industry Secretary, to make the rescue statement.
He was greeted with massive and ironic cheers from the Opposition and listened to in almost total silence by our own benches.
The press trumpeted another defeat  for the Government.
No one could foresee that over the course of the next few years the steel industry would be successfully reorganized and taken into the private sector.
But if February was dreadful, it was as nothing compared with March.
On Tuesday 10 March at 10.30 a.m. we trooped into the Cabinet room at Number 10 to be given a summary of that afternoon's Budget.
Geoffrey Howe's plan was to increase taxes on petrol, alcohol and cigarettes; to raise national insurance contributions; and, worst of all, not to increase personal tax allowances, so in effect increasing personal taxation.
It is always difficult for a Cabinet minister to know just how much to say before a Budget statement.
You have the privilege of knowing the contents several hours before everyone else, but at this stage in the proceedings it is too late to influence the outcome.
Everyone is aware that the Chancellor has a difficult ordeal to face a few hours later and no one wants to make the occasion even worse.
However, there was no such self-denying restraint in 1981.
When the summary was finished, virtually everyone around the table at Number 10 gave their view.
These were faithfully reported in the press a few days later so that readers knew the position of every member of the Cabinet.
Jim Prior considered it a disastrous Budget which would do nothing to reduce unemployment.
Ian Gilmour and Peter Walker were deeply unhappy.
It was even reported that Humphrey Atkins was the only Cabinet member not to speak.
The only point the press reports missed was that Jim Prior was so unhappy that he almost threw in his hand and resigned.
To a number of us the crucial omission was any help for industry, which was going through an appalling time.
I was not alone in wanting to get private investment into public-sector industries.
It was an unhappy and tense discussion and can have done absolutely nothing for Geoffrey Howe's morale as he prepared for the afternoon.
Not surprisingly, he came under intense fire in the House of Commons.
Michael Foot was not a good Leader of the Opposition.
He never had the substance for a leader and Labour would have done much better with Denis Healey.
But Michael Foot was a formidable orator and on occasions he could coin a phrase which captured the mood perfectly.
It was, he said, a ‘No Hope Budget’— and so it appeared to many Conservative voters.
Over the next months we lost just about every election we contested.
We lost the Greater London Council to Labour and ultimately to Ken Livingstone, and we managed to lose safe Parliamentary seats at both Crosby and Croydon.
There were few predictions of a Tory victory at the next general election and even some concern that the country might topple over into serious civil strife.
There were riots in Brixton in April and in Liverpool in July.
The inner cities came seriously on to the political agenda and Michael Heseltine made a brave attempt to introduce new policies to tackle the undoubted deprivation.
By this stage Labour should have been riding high.
However, they were preoccupied with their own internal squabbles and Michael Foot was scoring low personal ratings in the opinion polls.
The beneficiary was the SDP-Liberal Alliance.
The Warrington by-election was held in mid-July, and that night I went with Neil Kinnock and David Owen to BBC Television Centre to await the result.
We talked first about the Toxteth riots and then came the declaration.
It was a sensational result with Labour almost losing one of their safest seats to the SDP leader, Roy Jenkins, who from virtually nowhere secured an incredible 44 per cent of the poll.
Neil Kinnock advanced the extraordinarily lame and inaccurate excuse that it was always difficult for Oppositions in mid-term, but no one was really deceived.
Labour had done very badly, though we were in no position to gloat.
Our vote had collapsed to a paltry 7 per cent and the alliance of the centre now seemed capable of taking everything before it.
By this stage in the Parliament we were deeply unpopular and had allowed ourselves to be painted as a government forcing through doctrinaire policies.
Labour appeared intent upon returning to fundamental socialism with the shadow of Tony Benn hovering over the whole party.
The political ground could not have been better for a new middle party and many, including myself, thought that they could well achieve the breakthrough they sought.
The political commentator Hugo Young identifies the nadir of our fortunes as the Cabinet meeting on Thursday 23 July 1981 which he describes as ‘perhaps the most memorable meeting of the Cabinet in the whole decade of the Thatcher Government’.
It was unquestionably the worst Cabinet meeting that took place in our first period of office.
A major reason for that was the timing.
The oldest rule in the Westminster book is that you do not try to reach difficult decisions in the last week of July.
Ministers, Members of Parliament, civil servants are hot, tired and exhausted of argument.
They want to get away; they want to forget about politics; they want to reintroduce themselves to their families.
If that was the argument in a normal year, it came in spades in 1981.
Yet in spite of all this, a Treasury paper was circulated which sought further public spending cuts that would affect every government department.
Not surprisingly there was a collective explosion.
What would such a policy do for unemployment?
What would it do to improve morale inside the party?
Whenever these arguments showed signs of running out of steam, we turned to complain about the inadequacy of the supporting papers.
Geoffrey Howe wanted public spending economies.
Vast subsidies were going to uneconomic nationalized industries and local government was heavily overspending.
Far from reducing taxation, as we had been elected to do, we would have to raise it — and raise it at a time when local councils were already pushing up rates.
But there was an additional argument.
If the market took the view that the Government's determination to control public spending was weakening, then we would see the pound fall and inflation increase.
To have had more public spending rather than less would have been disastrous.
Higher taxes and higher inflation would have been a lethal combination both for the country and the Government, given that there was no prospect of improvements in employment either.
The real lesson of the 23 July Cabinet meeting was that, in spite of all the doubts expressed, Margaret Thatcher and Geoffrey Howe stood firm and gave not an inch.
The partnership between the two was never a comfortable one — as personalities they were chalk and cheese — but politically it was immensely successful and entirely crucial to the Government up to 1983.
Looking back at that period, the crucial difference in Conservative politicians was between those who thought that the last twenty or thirty years had not been too bad, and who were sceptical that anything better could be achieved, and those who hoped that something better could be won and saw the last quarter of a century as a slow but steady decline.
Positions, of course, are never as black and white as that — consolidators have radical streaks; sensible  reformers know when to consolidate.
My own feeling in 1981 was that we should try to achieve something better and that just muddling through was not enough.
You only had to go abroad to see how we were regarded.
I remembered my five-week trip in 1976 to the United States.
The Americans were friendly and polite, but there was no mistaking their view that Britain had gone downhill to the point that we had become an irrelevance.
The position had improved slightly since then but there was a massive distance still to travel.
There were points of Government policy where I disagreed with the official line.
I thought that private investment could have been used more imaginatively in the period of the 1980–1 recession and was not satisfied with the Treasury's replies.
I also thought that our style did not try hard enough to persuade or unite.
I have never believed that consensus is to be spurned.
Fudge is to be spurned, but consensus can be a good goal.
I have always wanted my policies to last.
There is no point in making changes if the next government that comes in simply overturns them.
Above all, however, I wanted to see change and recovery.
My stay in Government had not made me less radical but more so.
If agreement cannot be reached, then decisions still need to be taken.
No one looking back on 1981 would claim that there was consensus on the correct economic policy either in the Conservative Party or outside.
No fewer than 364 economists signed a statement calling for a change of policy and traditional reflation.
Their advice was ignored and the tough decisions taken in 1981 were to lead to the much praised Budget of the next year and, even more, to the economic recovery which took us through both the 1983 and 1987 general elections.
It was also during 1981 that Margaret Thatcher really showed her style of leadership.
It was decisive and at times attracted public support because she seemed to be taking action which the public overwhelmingly thought was right but never thought any government would have the nerve to carry out.
In May the SAS were sent in to storm the Iranian Embassy in London which had been taken over by armed gunmen.
The following night, I was speaking at a transport dinner in London and found myself sitting two or three down from a general.
Before I rose to speak, I was asked by the chairman to express to the general their admiration for the  SAS's action.
The reaction from the audience almost took the roof off Grosvenor House.
Similarly, Margaret Thatcher's reaction to the Brixton and Toxteth riots captured the public mood far more than the analysis of the Opposition.
The first priority was to restore order and she made it plain that she backed the police unequivocally in doing so.
The time for examination was after order had been restored and, rightly, she rejected the simplistic connection between high unemployment and rioting.
Rightly, because there was no easy link to be made and only a few years previously the best criminologists were explaining the increase in crime as an inevitable consequence of prosperity.
Crime rose in line with the golden curve of affluence.
At the same time, other features of her style of leadership were becoming clear.
None was more evident than her grasp of all the issues of Government as she answered questions twice a week in the House of Commons.
It is one of the requirements of any British Prime Minister that every Tuesday and Thursday between 3.15 and 3.30 p.m. he or she should appear at the dispatch box and answer questions from MPs on any subject.
No Prime Minister has enjoyed this twice-weekly brains trust — and Margaret Thatcher was no exception — but few Prime Ministers did it as well or as consistently.
The secret of her approach was care in preparation, and woe betide the department that sent her into battle badly briefed or not briefed at all.
This happened once in my early months at the Department of Health and Social Security.
During negotiations on public spending with the then Chief Secretary, Leon Brittan, I had agreed to change the way of assessing Housing Benefit.
My Minister of State, Hugh Rossi, had announced the change during discussion of a social security bill in standing committee on Tuesday morning change is still unjustly called ‘the Rossi Index’— and the Opposition had protested strongly.
At Prime Minister's Questions in the afternoon Margaret Thatcher was challenged by a Labour MP, Jeff Rooker, on the change and although she managed to deflect the question it was clear she had not been briefed.
It was entirely our responsibility and that evening to well past midnight Leon and I took her through the changes until she was satisfied that she knew the policy thoroughly.
We only broke for the night  on the promise of a further meeting next day together with social security officials.
By the next Prime Minister's Questions on Thursday she knew the policy rather better than we did.
The feature that came through most clearly, however, even in those early days of government, was Margaret Thatcher's stamina.
Even in the worst hours she never gave any public impression that she was on the ropes.
At the centre of her life was her family.
I remember a few months after my daughter Kate was born in 1981 receiving a call from Number 10.
Some problem had blown up and the Prime Minister wanted to see me.
It was a Friday evening and untypically I was in London — and even more untypically I was baby-sitting.
My private office helped out on the baby-sitting very effectively but I am sure quite improperly.
Eventually I arrived at Number 10 about an hour late.
‘Don't worry,’ said Margaret, ‘when all this is over the only thing that matters is your family.’
Those words uttered by some political leaders would sound banal and from one or two others downright phoney.
For Margaret Thatcher they were a simple statement of her position.
In the glimpses I had of her personal life, one feature always came through.
This was the support and affection given to Margaret by her family.
Carol and Mark were ever loyal and proud of their mother, while Denis had a role which would have dismayed a weaker man.
He was the husband of the first woman Prime Minister, but he will go down in history as a wise adviser and a kind man.
Her family gave Margaret Thatcher a security which had an immeasurable impact upon her success and the success of her Governments.
On top of the intellectual stamina there was a physical stamina too.
July 1981 was by any standards a trying and testing month.
In the middle of the month George Thomas, the Speaker, brought all the Cabinet together for dinner.
Margaret Thatcher had been up early that morning — early even by her standards — to visit Liverpool.
She had had a gruelling day on top of a gruelling six months.
By rights she should have been exhausted, but not a bit of it.
It was only a vote in the Commons at 11 p.m. that brought the evening to an end and then she returned to Downing Street for a few hours' work on her boxes before turning in.
In over ten years in her Government, I never heard a complaint that any paper  was held up at Downing Street because the Prime Minister had been too pressed with work to get round to it.
July eventually ground to an end and the steam was taken out of that difficult month by an event which had nothing to do with politics.
It was the wedding of Prince Charles and Lady Diana Spencer at St Paul's on the last Wednesday.
There were memorable pictures: the beautiful Princess with her long train carried by the small page-boys; the debonair Prince; the members of royal families from all over Europe; the world's leaders and statesmen; the small but immaculate figure of Nancy Reagan.
Yet by far the most moving part of the whole day was the reaction of the crowds which lined the streets.
Fiona and I set off from Fulham in our car at about 9 a.m.
By the time we got to Trafalgar Square the crowds were thick on the pavements and cheering anything that moved.
You only had to wave to get a reaction.
The crowd were good-humoured, enthusiastic and often young.
Their spirit stretched right into the Cathedral.
Around St Paul's large television screens had been erected.
The result was that every crucial move made inside the Cathedral by the bride and groom — like the placing of the ring on the Princess's finger — was followed a second or two later by the most enormous cheer from outside.
As Parliament went into its long summer recess, it was quite clear that Margaret Thatcher was going to reshuffle the Cabinet and the betting was that the shuffle would be a major one.
She felt that the appearance of a divided Cabinet was disastrous politics.
And frankly it was.
You cannot expect public support if you do not have the support of your own ministers.
The assumption was that she would bring in a number of new people whose loyalty she could count on.
One night in late July I was taken out to supper by Ian Gow, the Prime Minister's Parliamentary Private Secretary.
Ian was later murdered by a terrorist bomb but nothing can destroy the memory of a unique politician and man.
He had principle, determination and humour.
If you ever asked Ian to keep a debate going in committee (while the front bench caught up) he would do so to order and with a style 1 have never seen equalled.
It was altogether typical of him that his unshakeable beliefs should prevent him continuing to serve in the Government once the Anglo-Irish agreement was signed.
Personal position would not have entered  into his calculations.
Our supper in July 1981, however, was all about the personal positions of other people.
I was asked my views on the reshuffle.
I was also asked my views on the chairmanship of the party.
Peter Thorneycroft had been a notably successful chairman but was now seventy-two.
What did I think of the prospect of an up-and-coming Minister of State called Norman Tebbit taking over the job?
What about Cecil Parkinson?
Had I ever considered the prospect myself?
Ian went away, pondering on my replies — but one thing was certain: major changes were in prospect.
In early September I went to the wedding of Geoffrey Howe's daughter, Amanda.
Another guest that day was Patrick Jenkin, the Social Services Secretary.
As we talked at the reception in the garden behind Downing Street, Patrick told me that, instead of a debate at the Party Conference next month, he and his ministerial team had been asked to answer questions from the floor.
Unkindly, I laughed and told him that that sounded just about the worst idea I had heard for a very long time.
The hall at Blackpool is ideally suited to rousing speeches but is totally wrong as the setting for a question-and-answer session — which proved to be just as appalling as I had feared.
A week later I was called back to Downing Street by Margaret Thatcher and told that I was taking over the Department of Health and Social Security and also the question-and-answer session.
The Cabinet changes of September 1981 were as extensive as any made in the Thatcher years of Government.
Norman Tebbit was made Employment Secretary and Nigel Lawson came in as Energy Secretary.
Cecil Parkinson took over as Chairman of the Conservative Party in what proved to be an inspired appointment.
Mark Carlisle, Christopher Soames and Ian Gilmour left the Cabinet and Jim Prior went to the one job which no politician can refuse, Northern Ireland Secretary.
As he left Number 10, Ian Gilmour sourly summed up the changes by saying they were ‘not much good if you are steering full-speed ahead for the rocks’.
He left unexplained why, if that was his view, he had not gone under his own steam somewhat earlier.
As for myself, I was back where I had begun in Opposition.
Margaret Thatcher had kept her word given over five years before that I would not lose out by my enforced move to Transport and I was now in charge of the biggest  spender and largest employer in Whitehall.
Created in 1968 to give Dick Crossman a new and senior job, the Department of Health and Social Security was responsible for over 40 per cent of all public spending.
It employed almost 100,000 staff directly, mainly in our social security offices, and was responsible for the National Health Service — which with almost a million staff was the largest employer in Europe.
Slowly, very slowly, our political position began to improve, but then came the event which was to transform the Government's public standing.
On Thursday 1 April 1982, my day started early at the Cabinet Office, just round the corner from Downing Street in Whitehall.
A meeting of the Public Sector Pay Committee had been called for 8.45 a.m. — a sure sign that it had been called by Geoffrey Howe who was consistently the earliest ministerial starter.
There was much hilarity when Geoffrey steamed in ten minutes late pleading a mix-up in his diary.
At the meeting I reported on the position of the gathering health service dispute and we then looked at a number of other pay issues.
The Cabinet committee over, we went through the connecting doors to Number 10 itself and a meeting of the full Cabinet.
The main item on the agenda was future policy in Ulster but it soon became clear that another issue had become dominant.
The Foreign Secretary, Peter Carrington, reported that the Argentinian fleet was steaming towards the Falkland Islands.
Until then, the Falklands had been the concern of the Overseas and Defence Committee and had not featured strongly in discussions in full Cabinet.
There had been the curious tale of the Argentinian scrap metal merchants who had landed on the island of South Georgia, where the United Kingdom had exercised sovereignty since it was discovered by Captain Cook in I775.
The story was that the party had landed to remove scrap metal from a former whaling station but their action seemed eccentric rather than threatening.
It was now clear, however, that the position was becoming deadly serious.
The next morning a telephone call came through from Number 10 just before 8.30 a.m. calling a special Cabinet meeting at 9.45 to discuss the Falklands.
Caught by surprise, we used whatever means of transport were available.
I arrived in the family Metro; Quintin Hailsham by bicycle.
Outside Number 10 itself there was  a solitary television camera crew.
Inside most of the Cabinet had made it, even though it was a Friday and the day most members made for their constituencies.
Only Peter Walker, George Younger and Leon Brittan were absent.
We were brought up to date — or as up to date as it was possible to be.
We were told that not only had the Argentinian fleet continued on their route to the Falklands but there was now every reason to believe that Argentinian troops had landed.
This was not confirmed by Port Stanley for the good reason that we were no longer in contact with Port Stanley.
Humphrey Atkins, who was in effect deputy Foreign Secretary and the chief Foreign Office spokesman in the Commons, was to make a statement at 11 a.m.
The question was what should he say?
Clearly he would have to tell Parliament as much as was known.
When Humphrey Atkins made his statement it was listened to with concern but the response was subdued.
The whole proceedings lasted only twenty-three minutes and assurances were given that the House would be kept informed.
During the late afternoon I received another call summoning a further Cabinet meeting at 7.30 p.m.
It was here that we received confirmation that Argentinian troops had landed and had occupied Port Stanley.
The question now was whether a military task force should set sail.
It was estimated that it would take them two to three weeks to get to the Falklands and therefore, theoretically, the decision could be rescinded if there were some kind of diplomatic breakthrough.
Personally I thought this highly unlikely.
Once the task force had been committed, only the withdrawal of the Argentinian troops would justify them carrying out some gigantic U-turn in the middle of the South Atlantic.
I confess my fears were elsewhere.
My thoughts went back to 1956 and Suez when the shambles of lengthy invasion and precipitate withdrawal had destroyed Anthony Eden's whole political career.
That was the kind of crisis the Government and in particular Margaret Thatcher now laced.
I thought we had no option but to send the task force.
The public at home would have been rightly outraged had we not taken this action, while the lessons that would have been drawn by other countries overseas were incalculable.
It was decided that Margaret Thatcher would announce the dispatch of the task force next morning in the House of Commons in a special Saturday morning  debate.
As we left Number 10 that evening, Downing Street had become thick with reporters and cameramen.
I left with Quintin Hailsham.
A brave reporter thrust a microphone under his nose and asked him for his comments.
‘I wish you a very good evening,, replied Quintin.
The Saturday morning debate on 3 April was the first Saturday debate since Suez and was dreadful in every way.
The morning's press without exception had attacked us strongly.
Everyone had been caught unawares.
There had been no sense of impending crisis and few newspapers were seriously featuring the Falklands situation prior to the invasion.
The public mood was one of anger and frustration and that mood was fully reflected in the House of Commons.
Margaret Thatcher rose to half-hearted shouts of ‘resign’ from the Labour benches.
Her speech went as well as was possible, given that it was being made on the stickiest of sticky Parliamentary wickets.
She was followed by Michael Foot who made a strong attack on the Government and ended with the devastating charge that the Falkland Islanders had been betrayed and ‘the whole responsibility for the betrayal rests with the Government’.
From that point on the debate went from bad to worse.
We were lambasted by a bellicose Labour Party and an impressive SDP in the shape of David Owen.
But worst of all we were attacked by our own side.
Edward du Cann, Nigel Fisher and Patrick Cormack were just three who inserted the knife.
Enoch Powell, who although no longer a Tory MP was closely listened to on the Conservative side, recalled that Margaret Thatcher had been called the ‘Iron Lady’ and rather liked the description.
He added: ‘In the next week or two this House, the nation and the Right Honourable Lady herself will learn of what metal she is made.’
The one defender of the Government position, Ray Whitney, a former Foreign Office diplomat, was virtually shouted down.
But the House reserved its worst treatment for the Defence Secretary, John Nott.
Something had gone wrong and the House wanted blood.
John Nott was not the Foreign Secretary, and therefore not responsible for reading the international scene, but he was the next best thing.
He was one of the most accomplished debaters in the Government but nothing would have saved him from the mauling.
He made his speech — or rather sought to make it — against a barrage of noise and calls to resign from the Opposition  and was listened to in stony silence by the Government benches.
It is one of the unappetizing features of politics that often when things go wrong a minister can find himself entirely isolated and without friends.
One Cabinet colleague surveying the scene murmured to me: ‘There is no way that I am going to grow old in the service of this House.’
Suddenly, amid the noise, the Speaker brought the proceedings to a close.
There was no vote and the House of Commons stood adjourned.
The agony of the debate was over — although both John Nott and Peter Carrington next had to appear in a committee room upstairs in front of an unhappy party meeting.
At the end of the Saturday debate we were in more disarray than at any stage since either coming to power or Margaret Thatcher taking over the leadership.
The weekend press was again appalling.
The call for resignations continued both from newspapers and politicians, including Conservative ones.
On the Monday I tried to settle down to a meeting at Alexander Fleming House (the DHSS's headquarters at the Elephant and Castle) with Tony Newton who had joined the department as Parliamentary Secretary for Social Security.
Tony and I embarked on a consideration of Child Benefit but before many minutes had gone by a note was sent in informing us that Peter Carrington had resigned.
After a pause we continued, but in a few more minutes another note came through saying that further resignations were expected.
At that point I abandoned the meeting and tried to find out what was happening.
It transpired that Peter Carrington and his Foreign Office team of Humphrey Atkins and Richard Luce had all resigned, and a little later it was announced that Francis Pym was to take over as Foreign Secretary.
My first reaction to the resignations was that they were tantamount to an admission of guilt when, in fact, the Argentinians could have attacked at any time in the previous fifteen years.
Peter Carrington was a major loss, and although I admired the loyalty of Humphrey Atkins and Richard Luce I thought their resignations unnecessary.
I was wrong.
The resignations defused an extremely difficult political situation.
All attention could now be given to negotiation and to preparing for war rather than continuing the sterile debate on how it had all come about.
The change of mood was clear for everyone to see.
The same  House which had torn into John Nott on the Saturday listened attentively to Francis Pym the following Wednesday.
Francis spoke with force and authority and was able to make his speech entirely without interruption.
As he ended, there was an enormous cheer on our side and I saw one of our backbenchers who had been particularly critical over the weekend waving his order paper in enthusiastic support.
The wind-up speech for the Government was made by John Nott.
In thirty minutes he substantially re-established his parliamentary position and announced a 200-mile naval exclusion zone around the Falklands.
The immediate political crisis had been averted, but there was still a long, long way to go before we could claim victory.
Margaret Thatcher formed a small War Cabinet.
It would have been impossible for the Falklands War to be prosecuted successfully with every decision coming to the full Cabinet of twenty-three members, a state of affairs that would have taken every other item off the agenda.
Both diplomatically and militarily, it was necessary for the Government to respond speedily.
Over the next weeks Alexander Haig, the American Secretary of State, shuttled to and fro seeking compromise.
Yet all the signs were that this was going to be a fruitless exercise.
In Argentina there appeared to be no one with whom Haig could reach agreement, for behind General Galtieri there was an array of powerful army, navy and air force chiefs.
It was in any event difficult to see what compromise could satisfy both Buenos Aires and London.
The only question was how long the talking could continue.
By the last week of April the task force was nearing the Falklands.
The issue now was whether it should attempt to retake South Georgia.
There were those who argued that such action would alienate world opinion and sabotage the chances of a diplomatic solution.
That view was rejected and after a reconnaissance British forces took the island.
Asked for her reaction, Margaret Thatcher gave vent to her feelings about the operation and also, I suspect, about what she saw as ever critical broadcasters who always found something to carp about even after an undoubted success.
‘Rejoice,’ she said, ‘just rejoice.’
Again she was nearer the mass of public opinion than the trendy commentators who criticized this old-fashioned way of expressing things.
It has to be remembered just how perilous and unprecedented the operation  was.
In 1956 the British forces had appeared to take an unconscionable time to get from Cyprus to Port Said.
Here was a task force rapidly put together, travelling almost 7,000 miles and successfully taking an island without a casualty.
Elation, however, was short lived.
On 4 May the news came through that the General Belgrano had been sunk with over 350 Argentine sailors killed.
There was no question that the Government's first duty was to preserve the safety of the task force but the loss of life cast an enormous shadow.
It had now been demonstrated beyond any doubt that this was real war and that any prospect of retaking the Falklands as an uninterrupted triumphal procession was illusory.
This impression was tragically confirmed a few hours later when news came through that HMS Sheffield had been sunk.
From then until the final Argentine surrender the story was one of the skill and bravery of the British forces.
The San Carlos landing, the Battle of Goose Green and the final taking of Port Stanley have all entered the history books.
In purely military terms it was an amazing success reflecting great credit on Britain's small but all-professional armed forces — which were such a contrast to the much bigger conscript forces I remembered from the 1950s.
It was also an undoubted personal and political triumph for Margaret Thatcher.
Those who deny that have only to ask themselves who would have taken the responsibility had we failed.
She would have been held personally responsible and would almost certainly have fallen from office.
The stakes were that high; the pressure on her was that great.
The Falklands crisis tested her as few leaders in recent times have been tested.
Her success marked an important and dramatic political turning-point for the Government.
The conflict also showed features of her approach and style which were later to become familiar.
She was a good leader to go to war with.
She was decisive and she did not vacillate, and once committed she intended to win.
She distrusted the offer of talks which had no other purpose than to string out negotiation.
That was her style in the Falklands and it remained her style in a number of the confrontations that she faced over the next years.
I believe it is a hundred times better to have a leader who wants to go forward rather than one who retreats towards the hills when the going gets rough.
The Falklands established Margaret  Thatcher as a leader of courage.
That was clear from the outset, but what was perhaps not so clear was how professional a leader she had become, able to manage not only the immediate crisis but all the other issues of Government.
A few days after the Argentinian surrender, I saw her for a meeting on health service pay.
I had put a point to the unions concerning long-term pay arrangements on which she had neither been informed nor consulted.
My view was that it was enough to clear it with the Chancellor of the Exchequer and that she had a war to fight.
After some spirited discussion Margaret agreed with the policy but pointed out with some feeling that she had been in the chair of every meeting of the Economic Committee throughout the Falklands crisis.
War or no war, the Government's other business had not come to a halt.
At moments of crisis a nation needs a leader able to lead in the way Margaret Thatcher led then.
In politics there are some very successful makers of deals and some very skilled negotiators.
Those are valuable qualities, but as Enoch Powell suggested a leader needs more than that.
The Falklands showed that Margaret Thatcher had the metal that leadership takes.
The Health Strike
I began 1982 with a series of visits to look at the issues which were facing the health service.
I went first to the Children's Hospital in Birmingham.
The hospital had been built as a memorial to King Edward VII and it had seen better days.
The wards were crowded and even in mid-winter very sick babies had to be wheeled out into the open air to get from one part of the hospital to another.
What really shocked me, however, was the sight of the babies in the intensive care unit.
They were all about the same age as my daughter Kate, and three were fighting for their lives.
They were the victims of whooping cough.
Too young to have been inoculated themselves, the babies had caught the disease from their older brothers and sisters who could have been inoculated but had not been.
Following newspaper and television coverage of the alleged dangers that went with inoculation, the vaccination rate had fallen sharply.
In spite of the best efforts of the health service, we had been unable to persuade the public that by far the bigger danger was of children not being inoculated.
The three little babies (one of whom later died) were the tragic proof of unsuccessful health promotion.
I went on to Birmingham's All Saints Hospital, which is cheek by jowl with Winston Green Prison.
There, many of the patients were old and suffering from dementia.
They sat in rows and watched television or simply stared into the distance.
One old lady sitting upright, prim and wearing round National Health Service glasses, became agitated as I approached her chair.
According to one of the staff, she believed that she was Queen Victoria and did not like anyone encroaching on the space around her throne.
All Saints showed one of the major problems that the health service will face over the next years.
With the increase in the number of the elderly, our demand for services and above all for devoted staff and volunteers will grow enormously.
The following week I went to Rampton Special Hospital which stands isolated in the countryside of north Nottinghamshire.
Rampton began life as a criminal lunatic asylum in 1912 and  today takes men and women who require treatment under special security conditions because of their dangerous, violent or criminal tendencies.
For the visitor, it is scarcely credible that staff can work day after day with such clearly difficult patients.
The noise, the abuse, the grimness are everyday parts of their working life.
Many of the nurses are the sons and daughters and even grandsons and granddaughters of Rampton staff.
Their role has changed from turnkey to nurse but many grew up with the expectation that Rampton would be their career.
An enclosed community guards and cares for an enclosed community and we the public gladly subcontract this duty, hoping that it will be carried out unseen and unheard.
What I saw on my visits in 1982 illustrated just some of the health problems we faced.
None of them was new.
Only a party bigot would claim that they had somehow come in with the Conservative Government three years earlier.
Every health minister faces the same central problem: it is not just a matter of putting right the deficiencies of the past; you also need to keep up with the ever-increasing demands of the present.
Demand is created by medical advance itself.
Hip replacements were once a rarity: now they can be carried out easily and the call for them has escalated.
Somehow you have to provide for these additional demands, and many more, within the annual budget voted each year to the service.
It would be nice to believe that the Health Secretary spends all his time understanding the very latest developments in heart-lung transplants.
Would that this was the case.
Faced with a virtual infinity of demand, your role is to seek new resources and ensure that those resources are spent to best effect.
You battle with the Treasury in public spending negotiations and you battle with the health service to make best use of the resources that are available.
The health service has genuinely noble ideals: it provides excellent treatment irrespective of income.
It also contains some of the most dedicated men and women I have ever met.
Yet for all that, health provides just about the bloodiest battleground in British politics today.
When I took over at the Department of Health and Social Security, I was under no illusion about the difficulty of my job.
Every one of my predecessors as Social Services Secretary — Dick  Crossman, Keith Joseph, Barbara Castle, David Ennals and Patrick Jenkin — had scars to show for their periods in that office.
And the scars of Labour ministers were just as plentiful as the ones on Tory backs.
I had watched Barbara Castle go through contortions as she made massive social security savings.
I had watched her successor, David Ennals, come under withering union fire for cutting back on the hospital building programme.
The central problem of the DHSS is that it is the biggest of the big spenders among government departments.
In any dispute about public spending, you are in the front line.
I faced an additional problem with the health service.
It is an undesirable tradition of the service that complaint provides extra cash and that any change proposed by Government is to be opposed.
The theory is that the only thing that has ever been wrong with the health service is a lack of resources.
If you demonstrate the need, the Government irrespective of party will be forced to pay up.
I do not entirely decry such tactics.
Sometimes it is necessary to campaign for more resources by pointing out deficiencies.
However, the shame is that for some health service insiders it has become a way of life.
They refuse to take credit for the undoubted achievements of the service and retreat into such self-evident absurdities as ‘the health service is on the verge of collapse’.
But what I objected to most was the all too often blanket opposition to change.
Soon after I went to the department I introduced a policy of charging overseas patients for their medical care.
If I, a British citizen, fall ill in the United States I will have to pay for treatment.
It is important to be insured.
I wanted to ensure that foreign visitors who came to this country were also covered by insurance.
The policy caused great indignation in the health service.
Apparently it was all right to receive money from the Treasury in neat health authority allocations, but not for cheques or, worse still, cash to appear over the hospital counter.
Regrettably, this illogical and antediluvian attitude still persists even when we are dealing with nations substantially richer than ourselves.
I simply do not understand why Britain should provide a free international health service or why the health service should not benefit from outside contributions.
Too often, the health debate takes place amid generalized  allegations of ‘cuts’.
In reality the argument is all about whether the government has increased the budget enough.
The claims that appear endlessly in newspaper columns are about whether the government has taken proper account of the expected increase in demand and costs.
Only at times of crisis does the debate turn to the real cause of cuts in patient care.
Over the last twenty years the starkest examples of operations cancelled, lives put at danger and waiting lists increased have been the result of industrial disputes.
Patients suffered in the Winter of Discontent in 1979.
They suffered in the 1989–90 ambulance dispute.
And they were certainly the principal victims of the health dispute of 1982, which proved to be Britain's longest industrial dispute for fifty years.
The 1982 dispute was my baptism of fire.
About 70 per cent of the costs of the health service are the costs of staff.
The health service is given a budget by the taxpayer which covers both the pay of staff and the services provided.
Unless some special addition is made, the result of an over-budget pay settlement is a limit on the expansion of new services.
The only way to avoid that would be for the Chancellor of the Exchequer to give the health service an open-ended budget.
No Chancellor of any party has ever done that in the past and no Chancellor is ever likely to do so in the future.
You cannot run any service on the basis that ‘it costs what it costs’.
At the heart of the 1982 dispute was a so-called pay factor for public services of 4 per cent, which was intended as a marker for pay rises to those working in all public services.
I had inherited my position from Patrick Jenkin.
He would have preferred a special health-service pay factor, but had to settle for an above-average offer to the nurses, who most certainly were the priority group, having fallen badly behind over the previous ten years.
On 8 March 1982 we provided an extra £82 million (mostly from the Government's contingency reserve) and made an offer to the nurses and some other professional groups of 6.4 per cent.
The offer made them a special case but by the same token was condemned by other groups such as the ancillary workers, who protested that they were offered only 4 per cent.
A popular health-service argument was that every one of the million or so staff should get exactly the same percentage increase in pay — as though the recruitment and retention position was the same for all.
Arrayed against me I had both the TUC-affiliated unions and the Royal College of Nursing, the professional organization representing the nurses.
With me I had the two Kens.
The first Ken was Ken Clarke whom I had managed to bring over from the Transport Department.
He illustrates the difficulty of trying to divide Conservative politicians into ‘wets’ and ‘dries’.
Many of his views categorize him as a wet — a European enthusiast; against capital punishment; and in favour of sensible abortion laws.
But just as clearly he is a tough politician who speaks his mind sometimes in a blunt way.
Once or twice we put these qualities to good use.
An aggressive visiting delegation would be dusted down by Ken in his best James Cagney style, leaving me looking untypically reasonable and friendly in bringing the meeting to a conclusion.
Ken Clarke is an exceptional man to have with you in a battle.
He will not compromise to get an agreement he does not believe is justified and is not the least put out by demonstrations.
In 1982 all these qualities looked as though they were going to be urgently required.
The second Ken was my Permanent Secretary, Sir Kenneth Stowe.
In background he was very similar to my generation of politicians, although about ten years older.
His school was the County High School at Dagenham and from there he had won a scholarship to Oxford.
He came down with a First and started his civil service career in the humble surroundings of the National Assistance Board.
His ability took him rapidly up the social security tree and to Number 10 as Jim Callaghan's Principal Private Secretary.
Downing Street is a sure stepping-stone to becoming head of a department but the price that has to be paid is as exacting a life-style as can be found in Whitehall.
With the new Conservative Government in 1979, Ken Stowe moved from Downing Street to become Permanent Secretary in the Northern Ireland Office — not exactly a rest cure — and in 1981 came back to the DHSS.
He arrived a few weeks before me at the Elephant and retired just a few weeks before I left the department after the 1987 general election.
For year after year he worked all hours serving different governments and different ministers.
Like so many Permanent Secretaries, Ken was a substantial politician in his own right and knew every byway of Whitehall, in particular how to process decisions through the government machine.
In short, he epitomized  the tremendous qualities of the British civil service — undoubted ability coupled with unstinting hard work and independent judgement.
There are not many precedents for the same Secretary of State and the same Permanent Secretary serving together for the best part of six years.
In the transient world of politics and government such stability is exceptional, although in the world of business no one would consider unusual such partnerships between a chairman and chief executive.
Since 1979 the other Cabinet ministers (Margaret Thatcher excepted) who have exceeded five years in one department are Nicholas Edwards, the Secretary of State for Wales between 1979 and 1987; George Younger, as Scottish Secretary; Nigel Lawson, as Chancellor of the Exchequer; and Geoffrey Howe, as Foreign Secretary.
Under Labour, the best example is Denis Healey who was Secretary of State for Defence from 1964 to 1970 and then Chancellor of the Exchequer from 1974 to 1979.
But we were very much the exceptions.
Government would benefit if, barring accidents, Secretaries of State remained with their departments for longer.
The first months of the health dispute of 1982 coincided with the Falklands War, but when the war ended public attention returned to it.
During hostilities, the health unions had called three one-day strikes.
They had also instituted a ban on anything other than accident and emergency operations.
In the hospitals, the action was beginning to bite.
Waiting lists started to lengthen as operations were cancelled.
The dispute had also moved against us in another way.
During the spring the recommendations of the Top Salaries Review Board and the Doctors and Dentists Review Body came to the Prime Minister.
They had proposed astonishing increases of 24.3 per cent for the judiciary and 19.4 per cent for senior civil servants.
A 9 per cent increase was proposed for doctors and dentists.
The review bodies are independent but Government has the option of modifying their recommendations.
I believed we should do just that.
With help from Norman Tebbit, then Employment Secretary, I managed to get the awards reduced — but not by enough.
The judges still got 18.6 per cent and top civil servants averaged 14.3 per cent.
I did, however, manage to get the doctors and dentists award down to 6 per cent.
But the total package of  reductions convinced neither the public nor the unions.
As we debated the awards in Government, various colleagues told me that my arguments for reductions were ‘egalitarian’ and that the pay increase for judges would in no way influence the expectations of the nurses and the ancillary workers.
The underlying fear was that if we accepted any connection we would be back to the world of incomes policy.
I did not want that, but I believed that the top salary awards were so out of line with what we were proposing in the rest of the public sector that in the real world of industrial relations it made my job infinitely more difficult.
And so it proved.
The judges' pay increase was hung round the Government's neck like a heavy stone.
The health unions and the nurses could see that others were doing better, and in addition to the top salaries group the miners and the firemen were settling appreciably above the public sector guideline of 4 per cent.
Whatever the position three months earlier, our original offer to the health service could no longer stand.
On 22 June we made a revised offer of 7.5 per cent for the nurses and 6 per cent for the ancillaries and administrative staff.
The Royal College of Nursing agreed to recommend it to their members, but the health unions rejected it outright.
The dispute began to intensify.
The unions stepped up their industrial action and the waiting lists lengthened further.
By the end of July we estimated that the industrial action had added 65,000 patients to the waiting lists in English hospitals alone.
In addition 60,000 operations had been cancelled or postponed and 75,000 outpatient appointments had been cancelled.
There tends to be a Vietnam War factor about health strikes.
During the Vietnam War the public became hardened and accustomed to the horrific scenes on television.
In the health service the initial shock that patients can be denied treatment fades as the public becomes used to the fact that they are.
Yet the impact of such action should never be underestimated.
During July I went to St Thomas's Hospital in Lambeth.
A strike of about twenty-five staff in the sterile supplies stores had dramatically reduced activity, which was already hampered by the union policy of refusing admission to any but emergency cases.
About 1,000 operations had been postponed and even cancer patients were being delayed.
A picket at the hospital claimed that ‘emergency’ services were being  maintained.
They doubtless were, but ‘urgent’ cases were being turned away.
August was even worse than July.
As the dispute hardened, demonstrations became everyday affairs.
Whenever I drove to a hospital my question would not be whether there was a demonstration but how big.
There were demonstrations at Hammersmith; at Rugby where the most vociferous health worker turned out to be a school caretaker; at Bristol; and at Exeter where the demonstrators appeared to have gathered beforehand in the nearby public house.
Throughout the dispute my technique was to go through the front door — I refused to be smuggled in — and then ask for a deputation of the demonstrators to come and talk to me.
Usually that defused the demonstration and the visit could go ahead uninterrupted.
Sometimes the police, however, had other ideas.
At Cambridge, NUPE put a picket around the Union building where I was taking part in a debate and the police wanted to take me in by a side entrance.
When I protested, they assured me that there would be no question of hiding me from the crowd.
A week or two before they had got into trouble when Norman Tebbit had come to Cambridge and in the words of one of the policemen they had not ‘shown him’ to the demonstrators.
They showed me quite successfully but the eggs and tomatoes missed.
Sometimes avoiding action did have to be taken.
On one occasion I went to a hospital in south London to what the police reckoned would be a very rough demonstration.
With a touching faith in our law-abiding qualities the demonstrators had gathered in large numbers with their eggs and tomatoes around the hospital entrance marked IN.
Twenty yards down the road, however, there was an exit marked OUT through which we rapidly drove, successfully avoiding the missiles.
By the time I got to the Party Conference in October, I was under police guard.
One Special Branch man said to me: ‘There is only one other minister who has two police guards and that is Mr Tebbit — but we're armed and they're not.’
As Frank Johnson commented in The Times, my appearance on the short walk between the Grand Hotel and the conference centre provoked uproar from the watching demonstrators.
‘An ordinary hardworking citizen living quietly in the Cabinet’ had become ‘an object of hatred’.
You cannot entirely make light of such demonstrations.
One day, I fear that a demonstration of the kind I faced in 1982 will go wrong and someone will get hurt.
There are people out there who will use any excuse to cause trouble.
I learned that when I went to a conference at Sheffield.
As I left the railway station, the police warned me that there was a small demonstration against Norman Tebbit's recent industrial relations reforms.
That was the plan, but the morning's press was full of extravagant reports of the ‘cuts’ I intended to make in health service manpower.
‘Fowler’ was inserted for ‘Tebbit’on the placards and the demonstration went ahead with a degree of intimidation that made the front page of every national newspaper the next day.
It was not just street demonstrators who were assembled against us.
The nastiest little attack we endured at this time came from, of all papers, the Lancet.
An editorial alleged that the Government would welcome headlines saying that a patient had died because it would swing public opinion against the unions.
It is a curiosity of medical politics that any charge, however gross, can be made against you.
Unfortunately, not all health professionals take the objective standards of their medical training into their public and political comment.
During August I agreed to be interviewed by World in Action in Manchester.
The format of the interview was that I was in a single chair placed to the side of a panel of six sitting in two rows.
It was a classic Perry Mason prisoner-and-jury setting.
In the jury were such well-known ‘independent’ commentators as Rodney Bickerstaffe of NUPE, a Regional Health Authority Chairman I had just replaced, a nurses' negotiator, a consultant who wanted more money for his hospital and an ancillary health worker.
You will be amazed to know that these six good men and true found me guilty, although without the uproar that the producers had rather hoped for.
Travelling back to London by train after the programme, I found that Rodney Bickerstaffe was a fellow passenger.
We talked quietly together for half an hour but there was no point of contact.
Bickerstaffe had taken over as General Secretary of NUPE from Alan Fisher who had been instrumental in the Winter of Discontent.
He was determined to win where Fisher had failed and his members came first.
I saw no prospect of any sensible compromise.
In mid-August I made the great mistake of seeking a four-day break from London to stay with friends in France.
That was roundly attacked in the press and particularly the health press, even though I left Ken Clarke in charge.
After my four days Ken was to set off on his own curtailed family holiday.
As he flew out, I flew in.
We changed over at Bordeaux airport.
When we met in the lounge it rapidly became clear that he was not in his usual good humour.
It transpired that the previous day he had been in Liverpool and given an interview to the Daily Telegraph which had been interpreted to mean that we were about to call in the troops.
At the same time the press had been tipped off that the Health Minister was leaving the country on holiday from Heathrow and half a dozen photographers had literally chased on to the runway to photograph him.
They were only prevented from boarding the plane when the aircraft's captain refused them permission.
Not surprisingly, Ken was apprehensive about the position I might inherit when I touched down.
Indeed the next hours after my return were spent explaining that we had no plans to use either troops or tanks and justifying what a BBC interviewer referred to as my ‘controversial’ four-day summer holiday.
Ironically, a few years later Ken Clarke came under attack on the same issue.
I have never been able to understand this preoccupation with ministerial holidays.
During the month of August ministers cover for other ministers.
No one thinks twice if a minister retires to the country because his department can blandly assure all callers that the minister is ‘working from home’.
But woe betide any minister who does not possess a country seat and sets off across the Channel to ‘abroad’.
Even though air travel means that he can be rapidly recalled in an emergency, he is likely to be pilloried for dereliction of duty.
The press scour whole countries for a sighting of the relaxing politician, and friends who might know where he is are propositioned with both money and arguments such as‘I am sure you will agree that it would be better for us to find him before the Daily Mirror’.
There is no advantage in being governed by a collection of exhausted ministers doggedly sitting at their desks making bad decisions.
At the end of August, we suffered a major setback when the members of the Royal College of Nursing voted to reject our 7.5 per cent offer, despite their negotiators having initially accepted it.
The health unions were given the excuse to call a general one-day strike or ‘national day of action’ for 22 September.
At the Elephant and Castle we looked yet again for a means of bringing the dispute to an end.
We had tried talking across the negotiating table and we had tried talking through the medium of Pat Lowry, the Chairman of ACAS.
There was only one option left and that was for me to talk directly to Albert Spanswick, the Chairman of the TUC Health Services Committee.
Albert Spanswick came from the old school of trade union leaders and I found him a more persuasive advocate for health service workers than Rodney Bickerstaffe.
Industrial relations had not been good in the health service for many years and not all of that was the fault of the unions.
Managers (where they existed) did too little to involve the workforce and there were often great ‘them and us’ divisions between the medical staff and the rest.
In one demonstration my car was stopped at a hospital entrance but it soon became clear that much of the resentment was directed at what were seen as remote hospital authorities ‘up there,.
My approach to Albert Spanswick led to a secret meeting at my house in Fulham just before the TUC Conference in September 1982.
The meeting was friendly and Albert went off to Brighton where he roundly denounced me and all my works — without revealing that he was without his customary hat which he had forgotten and was hanging safely on a hook in my hall.
The TUC Conference over, we had two further meetings at my home at which Albert agreed that a new two-year deal would be enough to get negotiations going again.
I then had dinner with Trevor Clay, who had taken over at the Royal College of Nursing, and he also agreed that such an offer would be enough to bring them back into negotiation.
The plan was that I would invite both the unions and the Royal College to the department on Thursday 16 September.
On the Thursday morning letters were sent inviting both the TUC and the Royal College in for talks.
Trevor Clay immediately accepted but there was silence from the TUC.
Eventually, just before 2 p.m., a small delegation arrived at the Elephant and Castle seeking clarification of what would be on offer.
Albert as chairman asked me a number of questions to which he already knew the  answers for the good reason that we had already gone over them in Fulham.
The delegation left and we continued waiting until 6 p.m. when the news came through that the TUC were holding a press conference.
They announced they were not even prepared to come in and talk.
In the interviews afterwards I lost my temper for, I think, the first and last time in the dispute.
It was clear that Albert had been overruled by his committee who had no intention of being deflected from the TUC's forthcoming national day of action.
The day of action on 22 September brought about 60,000 people on to the streets of London and, according to The Times, it was the ‘biggest revolt for a decade’.
Most of the pits and most of the ports came to a halt and the morning's newspapers also failed to appear.
Nevertheless, behind the crowd scenes that so mesmerized television, the day did not prove an overwhelming success for the TUC.
The vast majority of industry and of the health service went on working.
Even more crucially, the TUC's tactics had turned the press against them and provoked the opposition of the nurses' negotiators.
There was now over £1,000 million on the table and the unions had refused to discuss it.
That was rightly seen as a ludicrously intransigent position.
The unions followed the national day of action with regional days but these were badly supported and attracted little attention.
The TUC unions had shot their bolt.
The Guardian's cartoonist showed one health official saying to another: ‘These regional days of action are so badly organized that Len Murray has to ring up Norman Fowler to ask where they are being held.’
The health unions' refusal to return to the negotiating table proved a major mistake.
Albert Spanswick had been right on that and the hard men of his committee quite wrong.
For the nurses, however, the negotiations proved to be a historic turning-point.
For years nurses had wanted special pay arrangements which recognized that they did not take industrial action in pursuit of their pay claims.
For years different governments had refused to give them.
Inside government we examined a number of options.
My first choice had always been a pay review body and the significant breakthrough came when Geoffrey Howe and Leon Brittan at the Treasury also backed this proposal.
If the nurses accepted it, their pay would be determined in the same way as the  doctors', by an independent review body.
Although Government could alter the proposals, the presumption was that they would not.
There was some scepticism about this solution — given that we had altered the recommendations for doctors and dentists — but it says a great deal for the good sense of the nurses that they accepted the plan.
The result was that they received both a big two-year increase and a pay review body which has since been responsible for a further substantial increase in their salaries.
On 15 December 1982 the health dispute collapsed and the unions eventually consented to a two-year agreement which could have been accepted months earlier.
Their action had failed.
The 1982 dispute was an altogether typical example of industrial action in the health service.
Any Health Minister faces a powerful coalition against him.
He stands alone — as Kenneth Clarke or David Ennals will confirm — and he makes few friends.
Nor can he always rely on the help of those who in any other industry or service you might expect to be on his side.
I remember in June going to Brighton for a meeting of the National Association of Health Authorities.
I was on time but kept waiting for a few minutes so that the assembled Health Authority Chairmen and administrators could pass a motion condemning the Government's offer as divisive.
It is at least worth a footnote to any textbook on handling disputes that few employers have to contend with their management arm solemnly sitting down and condemning the negotiating strategy and then publicly relating their views to the press.
Even worse, we had the Chairmen of the Whitley Councils publicly giving the same message.
The Whitley Councils are the means whereby pay negotiations take place in the health service.
The Government may be the paymaster, but the actual negotiations are carried out by a team of health authority representatives who might be industrial relations experts but usually are not.
Their concern in 1982 was not what was right but what was easiest.
Had we taken their advice the nurses would never have received what has proved for them their biggest breakthrough since the war.
From the point of view of the economy, the outcome of the 1982 health dispute was immensely significant.
As the Daily Telegraph said in a leader:
The Government has won a very important victory.
Apart from the huge expense of acceding to the health workers' demands, defeat for the Government would have brought in its train a series of demands from other workers which it would have found hard to resist.…
It was an uncontrolled public sector which brought ruin on the previous two administrations.
This judgement was surely right.
It was a clear part of the unions' pay tactics that groups with a claim to public sympathy, like the health workers, were put in front to establish a going rate.
It was important that this strategy did not succeed and it was also important that the tactics of intimidation seen in 1979 did not win through in 1982.
The 1982 health dispute served notice that the Government would not easily give way in a strike.
That message was later underlined in the 1984–5 miners' strike.
We had not been prepared to give way to health unions with much public support.
The prospect of our surrendering to Mr Scargill and the NUM was remote.
Yet for all that, there is an additional conclusion.
The health service over the last twenty years has been marred by periodic pay disputes which have disrupted patient services.
The result has been to destroy much of the progress in health care over the years preceding each dispute.
We should not abandon the search for a better way of determining pay for all health service staff.
The best result of the 1982 pay dispute was the nurses' pay review body.
Implicit in that arrangement is a non-strike pledge.
Government recognized that nurses did not take strike action and believed that it was right to have a system of pay determination which meant that they did not lose by that policy.
This arrangement could be extended to any group in the health service prepared to give a similar pledge.
I accept, however, that trade unions see their function to negotiate and they (although I suspect not their members) would fight to prevent this function being supplanted and the strike weapon abolished.
An alternative course would be to introduce general legislation to protect the public interest when an essential service is threatened.
Over the last twenty years in Britain industrial action has affected a whole range of essential services from water, electricity and fire-fighting to the Royal Mail, public transport and health.
In many cases a virtual monopoly service has been involved and the direct target has been the public.
In many other countries, action has already been taken to provide some protection.
In the European Community, minimum periods of notice are often required before a strike in an essential service can take place and a minimum level of service is required during industrial action.
In the United States, a ninety-day notice of a strike in health care is required and the President has the power to impose an eighty-day cooling-off period.
It would certainly be possible for a cooling-off period to be introduced in Britain.
A cooling-off period of, say, six weeks could be imposed by application to the courts and this would allow negotiations and talks to continue.
It would allow contingency plans to be made to protect the public and it would apply just as much to a series of one-day strikes as a set-piece conflict.
It would allow second thoughts and permit (but not require) the parties to use ACAS or any other means to find a solution.
A cooling-off period does not guarantee success, but it offers a degree of public protection which at present is entirely lacking.
Clearly if this question was easy to decide it would have been settled in the years of the Thatcher Governments.
At various stages over the eleven years, statements were made promising action.
The fear must be that if we leave the issue unresolved then there will be other health disputes in the future and, just as certainly, the people who suffer will again be the patients.
Safe in Our Hands
On Thursday 9 September 1982, a paper from the Central Policy Review Staff, the Government's think-tank, came to Cabinet.
Each year there is an annual debate between the Treasury and the different government departments on the size of their budgets, but the aim of this meeting was to go one stage further.
Geoffrey Howe, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Leon Brittan, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury in overall charge of government spending, wanted to look at the longer-term trends and to see how public expenditure could be successfully controlled in the 1980s.
Their fear was that taxes would not only have to remain high but might well have to increase.
The CPRS paper argued that if the Government were serious about reducing public expenditure, the time had come to consider some radical solutions.
The paper looked at education and social security but the most explosive set of proposals concerned the health service.
Basically the paper suggested that we should consider moving away from the tax-financed National Health Service to private health insurance.
There would need to be rebates for low-income families and for long-stay patients but the idea was that the working population would be required by law to obtain health insurance.
The paper also advocated increased charges for the health service and suggested further savings, like charging patients to visit the doctor.
As far as I was concerned the timing of the CPRS paper was disastrous.
I was still in the middle of the longest health dispute since the war.
By any standards it was a sensitive period and about the worst moment that anyone could have chosen to circulate proposals of this kind.
If the proposals leaked they would be dynamite inside the health service, and yet they had come round with only the routine ‘confidential’ security classification.
My guess was that they would find their way into the press and would undermine our efforts to settle the health dispute.
My opposition was, however, much more fundamental than this.
I did not believe that it was a sensible way of making policy.
It may have been the job of the think-tank to think the unthinkable, but  such discussion needed to be on the basis of informed examination.
These proposals had come forward without any consultation with any health minister, and indeed without any of us knowing that such a study was taking place.
This was entirely the wrong way to make policy and a cavalier way of dealing with a popular and effective service.
Worst of all, no one seemed to have remembered that we had already been round this particular course, decided the policy, and rejected compulsory private health insurance.
My predecessor Patrick Jenkin had sensibly asked for an examination of the different ways that European countries financed their health care.
This had been carried out inside the health department and had come up with findings that were easily predictable.
Every country in Europe was facing an explosion in demand for health care; every country in Europe was spending substantial public resources upon health; and in many ways our centrally run, centrally financed system was the most effective in controlling costs.
There was no inherent cost advantage in moving over to an entirely new financing system and it was also clear that whatever system was chosen, taxation would still have to finance a giant share of the service.
The unemployed, the poor, the chronically sick and disabled and of course children would need to be covered by public money.
There were also endless practical questions about private insurance.
The assumption was that insurance would be paid only by those who could afford it while those who could not afford to pay would be exempt.
But where was the line to be drawn?
Would the elderly with the equivalent of average earnings be exempt or not exempt?
Everyone over retirement age is exempt from paying prescription charges and any deviation from the provision of free health care for the elderly would be wildly controversial.
Would health insurance be income-related like National Insurance or would it be genuine private insurance like life insurance or house insurance?
A sensible policy on exemptions and rebates would reduce the possible savings and my guess was that in the end you would achieve surprisingly little in public savings.
The potential for a massive row like that over the community charge was immense.
Months before the CPRS report came to ministers, therefore, we had reviewed the options and indeed in July 1982 I had set out  the Government's position, after consultation with the Treasury.
In a Parliamentary reply I said: ‘The Government have no plans to change the present system of financing the National Health Service largely from taxation and will continue to review the scope for introducing more cost consciousness and consumer choice and for increasing private provision which is already expanding.’
The agreed position of the Government was that we would not move over to private health insurance but would seek to make the health service as effective as possible.
The private sector would remain separate and the public would have the right to be covered by it if they wished — having first paid their taxes to support the general service.
My view (the view of a confirmed industrial privatizer) was that the National Health Service should remain at the centre of our health-care system and that politically we would reap the whirlwind if we could be portrayed as moving away from it.
Change was certainly needed, but I favoured change which would improve the service and for which there was public support.
It was clear that the public wanted above all the assurance that our system of health care guaranteed the best possible treatment irrespective of income.
I did not think much of the CPRS blunderbuss which seemed to be aimed firmly at the Government's feet.
A week later my worst fears were confirmed.
Some kindly soul leaked the contents of the CPRS report to the Economist.
‘Thatcher's Holocaust,’ said the Economist, not intending to understate their scoop: ‘Thatcher's think-tank takes aim at the Welfare State.’
Leaks were a constant hazard of the first 1979–83 Thatcher Government and none did us more damage than this.
Yet the irony was that there was no support in Cabinet for the proposals and they had almost reached the point of rejection when the leak took place.
All the leaker managed to do was to provoke a bogus political row.
It was useless for me to point out that the proposals were not those of the Government but of a group of advisers whose only power was to suggest.
That was, however, the truth of the matter.
The CPRS had been set up by Ted Heath to advise on long-term policy issues.
Its first director was Lord Rothschild and its staff was drawn both from the civil service and from outside Whitehall.
The ‘tank’ had been continued by the succeeding Labour Government during which they carried out their famous inquiry into the  Foreign Office which proposed fundamental changes in the organization of the Diplomatic Service, and they were retained by Margaret Thatcher when she took power in 1979.
Governments were not bound by their proposals and past history — as when Labour threw out the Foreign Office report — was ample proof of this.
Yet for all that, the charge eagerly made against us was that the Government were set on abolishing the National Health Service and ‘privatizing’ health care.
It was a charge that was to dog us through both the 1983 and 1987 general elections, and which did us more damage than any other health issue.
Successive Labour spokesmen tried to establish that the Thatcher Government did not have its heart in the health service.
Yet the truth was that the CPRS report was consigned to the dustbin within a couple of weeks of its first appearing.
At the Cabinet meeting on 9 September, we did not discuss the CPRS paper in any detail.
The general attitude was entirely hostile to the report and we certainly did not agree that on the basis of the report the CPRS should undertake further studies.
Outside Cabinet Leon Brittan argued in a speech that the Government must have the right to look at new ideas, although I suspect that both Leon and Geoffrey Howe must have been appalled at the way the issue had been handled.
The next day, I countered with a speech arguing that as far as the health service was concerned the issue had been settled and that the Government's policy was to continue to make the service as effective as possible.
The issue surfaced again at Cabinet on 30 September when I warned colleagues that the leaking of the CPRS report had caused us damage.
I outlined what my message had been over the past two weeks and would be at the Party Conference — that we stood by the National Health Service and had no intention of moving over to a new system of finance.
At that meeting two of the Cabinet heavyweights, Willie Whitelaw and Quintin Hailsham, intervened to give me support.
Quintin Hailsham told me later: ‘When I first read the report my hair stood on end, and at my age that takes some doing.’
At the Conservative Party Conference two weeks later I set out both the Government's position and my own feelings.
I told the conference that I had not come into politics to preside over the destruction of the National Health Service and repeated  the Government's commitment to it.
I added: ‘The Government is committed to the health service because we want to ensure that everyone in need of treatment receives it.
Taxation will remain, as now, the predominant way of financing it.…
What this Government wants is partnership, not apartheid, between the private and the public sectors.’
At the end of the conference Margaret Thatcher returned to the same theme.
She had been on the platform for my speech but used distinctive words of her own.
The guiding principle for the Government, she said, was that health care should be provided for all regardless of ability to pay: ‘Let me make one thing absolutely clear.
The National Health Service is safe with us.’
The issue was never raised again in the remaining five years I stayed at the Department of Health.
Indeed the real significance of the Welfare State report was that it marked the beginning of the end not for the health service but for the CPRS.
They were as much the victims of the leaking of the report as ministers.
John Sparrow, the head of the think-tank, led an unquestionably bright team but their abilities were not being best used.
They needed to be positioned inside departments' own policy units or inside Number 10 itself rather than stumbling around Whitehall in an unguided way.
Immediately after the 1983 general election the CPRS was disbanded and I very much doubt it will ever be resurrected.
I see nothing to regret in this, not because new ideas should not be examined, but because it can be done better.
Three years later I led a review of social security which was regarded as even more untouchable than the health service.
We did it in an entirely different way.
We were open about the review itself.
We asked the public what they thought.
We used independent experts on the review teams.
We made it clear that what we wanted was a better social security system and not just a cheaper one.
The CPRS way was the wrong way of doing it.
The report was not an impressive document.
It contained no fresh insights.
It simply set out some crude ideas on how public spending could be reduced and suggested that ministers should have six months to come up with more refined views.
It was entirely right that this method of policymaking was thrown out.
Nevertheless in the public debate on health we were saddled  with the CPRS report.
Ministers had rejected the report but politically it took us the next two general elections to repair the damage.
In June 1983, Margaret Thatcher went to the polls for the second time.
It was almost a year before it was strictly necessary and at the time there were voices advising delay.
Unemployment was over three million and one strong view was that we should wait until the autumn when the economic recovery would be more apparent.
Like every other Cabinet minister, I was asked for my opinion.
Influenced by our strong local-government showing in Birmingham and the Midlands, I advised June and that was clearly the majority view.
I do remember, however, another Cabinet minister remarking ‘It doesn't matter when you go, Margaret, you will win.’
At the time I thought that was particularly unhelpful advice.
In retrospect I think it was no more than the truth.
Clearly we were helped by the Falklands factor but, even more, we were helped by the Labour Party.
Michael Foot had put together a series of policies to keep his party together.
The trouble for him was that this manifesto —‘the longest suicide note in history’— had also made his party entirely unelectable.
Labour candidates found themselves pledged to unilateral disarmament, withdrawal from the European Community and an economic policy that would have brought the country to bankruptcy within weeks.
The outcome was never seriously in doubt, although our eventual majority of 144 seats substantially overstated our support.
Our total vote actually went down and in areas hit by high unemployment, like my own constituency in the West Midlands, there was a swing to the Alliance of David Steel and David Owen.
Many people suspended judgement and throughout the West Midlands reduced polls saw Conservative majorities cut.
In the campaign itself there was one awkward moment and that was on the issue of private health.
It showed just how powerful the CPRS factor had become.
On Saturday 4 June, I came in from a morning's canvassing in Sutton Coldfield to find an urgent message to call Conservative Central Office.
I learnt that Roy Hattersley and Gwyneth Dunwoody, who spoke for the Opposition on health, had claimed at Labour's morning press conference that they had a ‘leaked’ copy of a secret Health Department report planning the privatization of the service.
Leaks were  the flavour of the year in 1983, but the trouble was that neither Ken Clarke nor I had the first idea what report this was meant to be as there were no plans, secret or otherwise, for privatization.
Slowly it became clear that what Labour had in mind was a circular we had sent out three months earlier to health authority chairmen for comment, entitled Co-operation between the NHS and the private sector at district level.
The idea behind the circular was the exact opposite of what Labour alleged.
It recognized that there was a National Health Service and a private sector and, rather than arguing that one should be taken over by the other, proposed sensible cooperation between them for the benefit of patients.
The document proposed that, to reduce waiting lists, health service patients should have the opportunity of treatment in private hospitals; and that health authorities should explore the potential of placing contracts with private nursing homes for the care of elderly patients, in order to free hospital beds for other patients.
We also wanted health service patients to have access to underused ‘high technology’ equipment in the private sector.
The aim was to make use of all available resources whether labelled public or private for the benefit of the patient who wanted treatment.
By most standards this was a peculiarly non-threatening document but we were in the middle of a general election.
Michael Foot claimed the document established ‘the most serious attack on the National Health Service since it was originally started’.
Gwyneth Dunwoody stated that we were secretly dismantling the health service and Roy Hattersley muttered about contracting out old people like refuse collection.
It was all the greatest nonsense but the scare ran for a couple of days.
Once we finally identified the leaked document, we countered in the most conclusive way known in politics: we published it in its entirety.
Journalists read it and the clamour quietened.
Throughout the election Gwyneth Dunwoody was my opponent.
She adopted a hectoring tone and continually interrupted in debates.
Our duels were not on the scale of the later Clarke versus Prescott battles, where in the 1987 general election I saw a television chairman leave his chair several times to restore order.
Nevertheless I fear our debates were not much more edifying.
During one television interview, with Dunwoody in London and myself in Nottingham, she again interrupted my replies.
My  patience snapped and I said: ‘Do shut up and just listen for a moment.’
It did me no good.
The next day 1 was canvassing in Sutton Coldfield and a policeman came up to me.
‘I am afraid you have lost my wife's vote,’ he said.
‘You should never tell a lady to shut up.’
In fact my majority was healthy enough at almost 19,000.
I was chased mercilessly about the streets by my campaign assistant, Simon Heffer, who is now the chief leader-writer of the Daily Telegraph but whom I knew in those days as a fellow (but younger) old boy from Chelmsford.
Four years later there was an important postscript to the CPRS affair.
Following the 1987 general election, Margaret Thatcher set up and headed a small committee to examine the health service.
It included my successor, John Moore, who early in his term of office made a speech which was interpreted as meaning that he was prepared to take a different stance towards the health service.
The press was full of stories about fundamental change.
The group also included Treasury ministers, who might be expected to support a change to private insurance if anyone would.
The group went round the course for month after month but wisely came to the conclusion yet again that they did not intend to alter the basis of the health service.
The changes proposed were the ones that Ken Clarke and later William Waldegrave took through.
As I know to my cost, any change in the health service is controversial.
However, one charge that cannot reasonably be made against the Government is that they have privatized the service.
The policy remains the policy that has been followed by successive health ministers from Iain Macleod and Enoch Powell through to Keith Joseph and myself — namely to make the health service as effective as possible.
This is where the real debate is and where the Government have succeeded in taking the high ground.
Labour tend to regard the health service as some enormous trade union.
They look at everything from the point of view of the provider and their only discernible policy is that they are against privatization.
But that is not the issue.
The real issue in health is how to continue to improve a good service for the benefit of the patient.
The trouble with some of those who make much of their support for the health service is that they also oppose any measures taken to make it more effective.
You can argue about the amount  of resources devoted to health but what you cannot sensibly argue about is that the resources devoted to health care should be used to maximum effect.
The history of the past ten years has seen Labour consistently oppose any change inside the health service and, even more regrettably, has often seen groups inside it resist reform on the grounds that their vested interests are being challenged.
Hardly ever do such groups consider the public good.
My time at the DHSS showed that it was impossible to make any significant change without a fierce public and professional battle — even when improvement meant more resources for health care or put right long-standing problems.
In so many ways the health service of the 1980s was admirable and impressive.
Of course there were loud-mouths — the sophisticated ones patronized you; the less sophisticated simply shouted.
But these were the health service politicians and happily they were not typical.
The vast majority from the most senior consultant to the most junior nurse worked long hours and responded to daily emergencies in a way that was an object lesson to us all.
The question was whether their skill and dedication was matched by organization and management.
1 became convinced that with better management and a number of policy changes we could achieve a better service for the patient.
Instead of privatizing the health service, I wanted to modernize it so that it could better tackle the problems of the 1980s and 1990s.
By 1983 the health budget had increased from £9.5 billion in 1979 to £15.5 billion.
I decided to examine some of the services that made up this massive total.
One of the areas I looked at first was the so-called ancillary services — that is cleaning, catering and laundry.
By 1983 these services accounted for almost £I billion of the annual budget and any savings made there could be transferred to the main activity of treating patients.
It is the kind of argument that any businessman in charge of even a medium-sized company would recognize instantly.
In no way did I wish to diminish the importance of these services or the importance of the people who worked in them.
Any hospital needs to be kept clean and the patients need good food.
Nevertheless, there was no reason why the health service should devote unnecessary resources to these jobs.
The first step was to check the cost of the in-house services  against that which could be provided by private contractors.
The health service does not have a monopoly in cleaning, catering and laundry skills in the same way that it does in the skills required to treat sick people.
There are private companies who specialize in these services and who, incidentally, also have dedicated people working for them.
In February 1983 I announced in the House of Commons that health authorities should put their ancillary services out to tender to see whether they would get best value from private or in-house organizations.
Six months later, in September, I followed this up with a circular to health authorities requiring them to put their services out to tender.
They were not forced to use private contractors but they were required to make a judgement on the best value for their health authority.
The policy was met with predictable howls of rage from unions like NUPE, and nor did every Health Authority throw their hats in the air with glee.
It was easier for them to demand money from the Government than argue plans past their local unions.
The health service has its fair share of people who want a quiet life and perhaps more than its fair share of Authority members who, for political reasons, opposed the policy itself.
I suspect that even now there is the potential for greater savings.
Nevertheless, this policy has now freed more than £100 million for use elsewhere in the National Health Service.
If I had trouble with the health unions on contracting out, it was nothing compared with my problems on manpower numbers.
By 1983 the National Health Service was employing more than 800,000 staff — an increase of a quarter over the total in the early 1970s.
With staff costs amounting to about 70 per cent of the annual budget, any moderately competent company would at least ask whether this proportion was justified.
As the Public Accounts Committee of the House of Commons had demonstrated, however, neither the Government nor the health authorities had accurate information on the exact numbers employed or any sensible means of controlling numbers.
Nevertheless we made a start and asked the Regional Health Authorities to produce manpower plans for the next year.
Their plans originally showed an increase of another 7,000 staff.
At the beginning of October 1983 I announced that out of a total staff of 817,633 we would ask for a reduction of 4,837, which would save about £40  million.
Again there was a furious row.
This was the first time that the health service had ever been asked to make staff economies.
Both Ken Clarke and my special adviser Nicholas True made it clear that a good speech was ‘needed’ at the Party Conference in Blackpool.
Fortunately my 1983 conference speech went well and the row started to calm down.
Perhaps the most intense of my health service battles of the mid-1980s was over the selected list of drugs.
For years ministers had been urged to cut the heavy drugs bill.
By 1984 the bill had reached £1.4 billion and we were under both political and professional pressure to reduce it.
The only question was how.
Doctors wished to preserve their clinical freedom to prescribe what drugs they themselves felt were necessary.
The pharmaceutical industry had a legitimate interest in seeing that their own branded drugs were prescribed.
They had devoted the resources to research and development and they wanted a sensible return on that investment.
As a Government, we wanted a good pharmaceutical industry but we also wanted good value for the health service.
I found myself in the curious position of being the sponsor minister of the industry and also the minister ultimately answerable for health service spending.
It was clear that some economies were possible if more generic drugs were prescribed rather than branded drugs.
Generic substitution could be achieved in a number of ways.
One suggestion was that discretion should be left to the doctors and that they should tick a box if they wanted the generic drug.
This system, however, was uncertain in its effect.
1 was attracted by another that I had discussed on a visit to Europe: certain branded drugs would not be prescribed at all when entirely adequate substitute generic drugs existed.
We would not leave it to the discretion of the doctors but, acting on the best medical advice, set down what drugs could be prescribed and those that could not.
In theory it may sound radical to interfere with a doctor's right to prescribe, although it was not the drug that was being withdrawn, only the branded version.
In practice those doubts melt away when you realize just what drugs we had in mind.
Prior to the selected list, doctors could prescribe branded drugs as cold remedies, laxatives, ordinary painkillers, antacids, vitamins, bitters and tonics, tranquillizers and sedatives.
The drugs in these  areas were not at the frontier of medical science and acceptable generic drugs existed.
The new policy meant, however, that popular branded drugs like Mogadon, Valium, Librium, Dalmane and Benylin could not be prescribed under the health service — not to mention Beecham's Pills, Alka Seltzer, Andrew's Liver Salts, Vick's Vapour Rub and even more exotic preparations like Rock Salmon cough mixture and Male Gland Double Strength Supplement tablets.
In retrospect it seems extraordinary that some of these could be prescribed in the first place.
On 9 November 1984 I set out for consultation a list of branded drugs which would no longer be prescribed under the health service.
The reaction was instant.
Predictably enough, the pharmaceutical industry fiercely opposed the proposals but, more surprisingly and entirely to their discredit, so too did the British Medical Association.
There followed as fierce and nasty a little campaign as I can remember in the time I spent with the health service.
The BMA and its Chairman, John Marks, refused even to come to the department to talk about the details of the scheme and vigorously campaigned against us.
The pharmaceutical industry unwisely did the same and instituted an expensive advertising campaign.
The free weekly magazines sent to doctors financed by drug advertisements joined in with a vengeance on the lines that ‘Fowler's drug list ends prescribing freedom’.
Seeing the way the debate was going, the health spokesmen of the Labour Party, Michael Meacher, and of the SDP, Mike Thomas, who had previously been urging me to make economies in the drugs bill, jumped overboard and joined the critics.
The result was that we were dangerously isolated with a strong coalition arrayed against us, but fortunately our opponents overplayed their hand.
The BMA were criticized for their intransigence and the pharmaceutical industry's advertising was criticized for seeking to frighten patients.
One company threatened that replies from MPs to their standard letter would be posted on surgery notice-boards in their constituencies.
I am glad to say that these tactics backfired.
Even in these days of lobbying, Members of Parliament will not be bullied in this way.
When the issue was put to the vote in the House of Commons we had a majority of 127 and the campaign against us was left in ruins.
These, then, were some of the issues that took my time.
However, as month after month went by, I became more and more convinced that the real problem with the health service was a lack of management.
Over the previous twenty years we had become preoccupied with structural arguments about regions and areas when we should have been concerned about how the service was run.
Compared with any major industry our methods appeared amateurish.
Although we were the biggest employer in Britain, we had no serious employee-involvement policies.
There was certainly a multitude of advisers but all too few people who took responsibility for action and for failure.
In early 1983, Roy Griffiths, the Chief Executive of Sainsbury's and one of the most successful managers in the country, agreed to head an inquiry into management in the health service.
His report came six months later in an altogether typical form.
Rather than some forbidding official document, his report consisted of a letter to me with the disclaimer that it was not intended to be a major addition to the already considerable library of the National Health Service.
It was a plan of action.
His diagnosis was clear:
If Florence Nightingale were carrying her lamp through the corridors of the National Health Service today, she would almost certainly be searching for the people in charge.
His solution was also plain.
It was to push responsibility downwards so that, for example , day-to-day decisions in hospitals were taken in the hospitals themselves and not forever referred upwards to some ‘higher authority’.
For this to be effective there was a need for managers.
The managers could be appointed from inside the service or taken in from outside.
They could be professional managers or they could be doctors or nurses.
The point was that they should be managers who took responsibility for securing the best service to the patient and could be held to account if there was failure.
In the summer of 1984 there was an event that tragically illustrated the Griffiths case.
An outbreak of food poisoning at the Stanley Royd Hospital near Wakefield affected over half the 800 elderly patients and caused nineteen deaths.
I appointed a public inquiry into the outbreak.
The crucial message that came back was that we needed more hands-on management.
In the hospital  kitchen there was a gulf between those who were meant to be in charge and those who actually carried out the work.
According to the report, the managers ‘passed through rather than spent time in the kitchen’.
They were punctilious in ensuring that new staff read the hygiene regulations, but the running of the kitchen itself was entirely left to those working there.
Yet in spite of its overwhelming logic, the Griffiths case was hotly disputed.
The most infuriating charge was that the health service was different from business and therefore did not need the benefit of the techniques that had been developed in business and industry.
Of course the delivery of health care is different from producing cars or selling food, but there are a large number of common problems that any manager shares.
He must be concerned with the quality of service, the quality of the product and the productivity of his workforce.
He must motivate and involve all his staff and he must live within and meet his budget.
Regrettably, even today, there are a number of health service insiders who feel that they are an exception to these general rules and look down on the ways of industry with the patronizing assurance of those who know that ‘we are different’.
It goes without saying that the Labour front bench supported all of the most reactionary arguments that could be found to oppose the management reforms.
Yet today no serious figure inside or outside the health service would argue that we should return to the old system.
The management of the health service is now infinitely better than it was and the trend to devolving responsibility downwards has continued apace.
Even so, I found that a curious structure remained at the service's centre.
It was rather like an old-fashioned nationalized industry where all lines led to the Secretary of State.
It was as if the Secretary of State were directly running the railways himself, with no chairman or managing director between him and the service.
We tried to solve this with management and supervisory boards based in the department but they were a long way from the boards of industry.
When Victor Paige became the first general manager of the health service he found himself in a very different job from any that he or anyone else had occupied before.
He was not the chief executive of a big corporation but in an uneasy no man's land between the department and the service.
I regret that he resigned in 1986 but I have to admit that he had a point.
Since then the position has slowly improved but very much the same dilemma still remains.
The health service is financed almost entirely by the taxpayer and will remain so.
The Secretary of State is accountable to Parliament for that enormous budget — currently running at over £30 billion a year — and must remain so.
The question is whether he can discharge that responsibility to Parliament without being in day-to-day charge.
By the end of my stay in health, I had become convinced that it would be possible to create a health commission with its own chief executive or chairman.
Such a commission would have substantial advantages.
Nothing will now take health out of politics but a commission could produce a more efficient service with the potential for advances in training, employee involvement and swifter decision-making.
The advantage would be that ministers and civil servants would not be involved in day-to-day management.
The commission would be given its objectives by the Government and would be accountable to it.
I believe that this would lead to a better service and improved facilities for the public.
Our reforms to the health service in the 1980s went beyond the hospitals.
The primary services — family doctors, dentists, pharmacists — are very much the front line of health care and in 1986 we published a Green Paper which was the first comprehensive review of the services for forty years.
We estimated that on an average working day about 650,000 people saw their family doctor and another 300,000 went to the dentist.
I approached the service from the point of view of the consumer, as we had already done to good effect with the opticians.
In 1984 we had ended the opticians' monopoly and taken off the ridiculous restrictions on advertising which prevented the public from shopping around for the best value.
The changes had met with howls of rage from the profession; a host of cartoons in the press; but above all a reduction in price for the consumer.
We now went further, proposing changes in the way that doctors were paid so that the remuneration system much more clearly recognized the good doctors and the good practices.
We also wanted to give the public more information about local health care and an easier means of changing doctors.
These proposals and many more formed the basis of legislation following the 1987 general election — as too did the model report  from Dame Mary Warnock that I commissioned into human fertilization and embryology.
So was the health service safe in our hands?
My aim was to modernize the health service and I believe that the Government had significant success.
We made better use of NHS resources than ever before.
We raised extra resources for health from common-sense policies like contracting-out, selling surplus land (which alone raised over £1 billion) and controlling the drugs budget.
We introduced modern management, probably the major advance during the 1980s.
We built more hospitals and moved decisively away from the terrible stop-go years of the 1970s when capital budgets were slashed.
Above all, we provided more care.
It is always difficult to measure the exact outcome of health policy but some indicators give the picture.
Between 1979 and 1987 the number of inpatients treated in English hospitals went up by a quarter and day cases by almost 60 per cent.
Another figure I was delighted to see increase was the vaccination rate for whooping cough, which went up from 31 per cent to 73 per cent.
So, yes, I believe the health service was safe with us.
But that cannot mean that the process of change has ended.
Commitment to the health service means constantly striving for better ways forward.
Reforming the Welfare State
Margaret Thatcher reshuffled the Cabinet in June 1983.
After our election victory, Willie Whitelaw moved from the Home Office to become Leader of the House of Lords and his place was taken by Leon Brittan, who in a notable promotion became the youngest Home Secretary since Robert Peel.
The Foreign Secretary, Francis Pym, who had always appeared a rather reluctant supporter of Thatcherite policies, was sacked and his place was taken by Geoffrey Howe.
This left a crucial vacancy at the Treasury.
Press speculation ran Patrick Jenkin as Howe's likeliest heir and not without reason.
Patrick had been Chief Secretary to the Treasury in Ted Heath's Government and had been successful as Secretary of State for both Social Services and Trade and Industry.
His dubious reward was to be given the Department of the Environment.
The post of Chancellor of the Exchequer went to one of the most junior members of the previous Cabinet, the Energy Secretary Nigel Lawson.
According to his critics, Nigel was blunt in argument and had all the subtlety of a Chieftain tank.
If he could roll you over he would.
If he lost an engagement, he would simply regroup and try again.
But such critics (of whom there were many both inside and outside Government) underestimated the new Chancellor.
He was an undoubted intellectual heavyweight; he was a creative minister interested in political ideas; and, above all, he was entirely his own man.
He invariably believed completely in his own case and pursued it relentlessly to the end.
But there was no personal edge to his arguments.
He was neither a plotter nor a courtier.
As I was soon to find, he was a man you could like even when you were joined in battle with him.
From the start of his Chancellorship, Nigel Lawson made no secret of the fact that his ambitions were tax reform and lower taxes.
Almost his first action was a post-election dawn raid in July 1983 on departmental budgets.
The raid netted him £500 million and over the next few weeks he made his strategy clear.
He believed that lower taxes were the route to higher growth and more jobs.
His ambition was to reduce the standard rate of tax to 25p  in the pound by the next election.
But if this was to be achieved then public spending — as a proportion of national wealth — had to come down.
Not surprisingly, given the increase in unemployment and the various crises in nationalized industries, public spending had increased between 1979 and 1983.
Nigel was determined to have none of that during the next Parliament.
All departments would be under close scrutiny, but none more than the Department of Health and Social Security, which was by far the biggest spender in Whitehall.
It needed no great powers of prophecy to realize that Nigel and I were on a collision course.
At a meeting on 21 July the Cabinet approved the Chancellor's strategy.
In the days following, press reports started to appear that I, and indeed Ken Clarke who as Minister of State for Health was still outside the Cabinet, were very unhappy about the new emphasis of policy.
Both the Daily Mail and the Daily Mirror said that we might take our opposition to the point of resignation.
I doubt if Ken's position was much different from my own but he must speak for himself.
My position was this.
I supported the move to reduce taxation.
I shared the view that personal taxation was too high and that one way we could help industry was to reduce the tax burden upon it.
It was, after all, only if this was done that there would be any wealth to distribute to services like health.
But we needed a balanced approach.
The reduction of taxation was not our only objective.
We had other social policy commitments and we also needed to keep to those.
The difficulty of imposing spending cuts across the board was shown by social security.
Benefits were divided into ‘pledged’ benefits like the retirement pension which the Government was committed to uprating each year according to inflation; and ‘unpledged’benefits, like child benefit and supplementary benefit, where there was no such commitment and the Government decided each year whether to increase them or not.
If we reduced by 5 per cent every unpledged benefit we would still, in 1984, have saved only £200 million.
However, we would have provoked a huge political fracas and affected some of the poorest in the land.
I did not threaten to resign but I did make it clear that I would not endorse changes I could not justify.
I took the view that the Cabinet and the Prime Minister should know my position.
I was glad I did.
There were hard fights over the next four years which  I do not resent.
But the result was the balance I argued for.
The Government did manage to bring down the rate of income tax, but at the same time we increased the annual budget for health between 1983 and 1987 from £15.5 billion to £20.7 billion and for social security from £36.7 billion to £48.7 billion.
Yet securing a realistic budget was only one part of making policy in the DHSS.
It was also important to ensure that the money was well spent.
By the autumn of 1983 my plans for health were well under way.
I next decided to set up a complete examination of the social security system.
My first step was the reform of pensions.
In 1963 my father died at the age of sixty-one, four years short of his pensionable age.
He had worked for the same engineering firm for thirty years and he had always set great store by the company pension.
However, he made the great mistake of not living to collect it.
There was no widow's pension — only a return of contributions.
Fortunately my mother was able to return to teaching and to complete the final two or three years which qualified her for a pension of her own.
In 1970 I left The Times on being elected to the House of Commons.
I also had a company pension but I was what, in the pensions trade, is called an ‘early leaver’.
I was given a choice.
I could have my own contributions returned or I could leave my pension where it was and draw it at the age of sixty-five.
The only snag with this last course was that when the pension was paid out in 2003 it would still be at its 1970 value.
It would have been frozen for over thirty years.
In the bustle of adapting to the new life of an MP at Westminster, it had occurred to me that I should look further at pensions.
The only occasions on which I had seen them in operation they had failed lamentably.
Like many people, however, I decided to leave it for another day.
Pensions are hard to understand and surrounded by impenetrable jargon.
Above all, a pension seems so far away when you are in your twenties and thirties.
It is easy to postpone settling down to understand them.
It is perhaps for that reason that the pensions industry had been able to get away with such arrangements for so long.
When I went to the DHSS I vowed to make time for a serious investigation into company pensions.
The more I looked, the more concerned I became.
The kind of company pensions then being  offered were fine for those who joined a company in their twenties and worked through to the age of sixty-five.
They were seriously deficient for people who moved jobs and, often, inadequate for widows.
This was an area which cried out for reform.
In September 1983 I called a conference on pensions at the DHSS headquarters.
I invited the pensions establishment but I also brought in some of those who wanted change.
I opened the conference to the press and the large room was packed.
When I spoke I made it clear that I intended to do something about the position of the ‘early leavers’ and that I thought it right that people should not suffer if they transferred their pension from one job to another.
Some of the industry recognized that change was due and with various degrees of enthusiasm were prepared to go along with such proposals.
What, however, caused almost universal consternation was my suggestion that we should go a stage further and see whether it was possible to introduce ‘portable’ pensions — pensions which you could take from one job to another.
The industry was horrified.
They saw this as a direct threat to their conventional final-salary pension schemes and a challenge to their whole way of life.
Reform was one thing — but this was revolution.
They were right.
Company pensions were the golden handcuffs which chained staff to a company.
Portable pensions could give the individual more freedom and end the penalty on changing jobs.
At the end of November 1983, I announced that I was going to head an inquiry into occupational pensions.
We faced a two-nation position.
One nation had their own pension.
The other nation relied entirely on the State.
My view was that people wanted what they regarded as their own pension and my aim was to ensure an expansion in provision.
Pensions, however, were not the only area which cried out for reform.
The social security system was the legacy of Lord Beveridge and the post-war Attlee Government.
No one had carried out any overall review of the system since then.
But that was not because anyone was very happy with it.
In spite of the vast expenditure on pensions and benefits, the complaints flooded in.
The system was seen as bureaucratic and ramshackle.
It was certainly an improvement on the pre-war system, but I doubted whether the money was always reaching the people who most needed it.
An outstanding example was the Death Grant.
The Death Grant  had been introduced before the war to help families who did not have enough money to bury their dead.
But it was a universal grant, which meant that it went equally to the millionaire's widow and to the widow who had very little.
Because it was universal, the cost of increasing it was very great.
The result was that it had been increased only twice and now stood at the princely sum of £30.
It was pathetically inadequate for the poor and totally irrelevant for everyone else.
In terms of spending, it now cost £12 million to administer an annual expenditure of only £17 million on the grant.
Why then had nothing been done to change this long-standing nonsense?
Both Labour and Conservative Governments had taken the view that change would cause a fierce political storm, so no one did anything.
At the outset of my investigation one of my civil servants said to me: ‘My test of the review is whether you do anything about the Death Grant.’
I knew what she meant.
Like so much of the social security system it had become regarded as politically untouchable.
My experience with the pensions inquiry had already taught me one invaluable lesson.
It is simply not necessary to make all policy behind closed doors.
Indeed, obsessive secrecy can be entirely counterproductive for policy-makers.
It creates suspicion and alienates the public.
With pensions we had been open about holding an inquiry.
We had taken evidence in public and given all the interested parties the chance to have their say.
We had brought in respected experts from outside Whitehall like Mark Weinberg, Professor Alan Peacock, and Marshall Field of the Life Offices' Association to act as assessors.
Our approach had changed the tone of the whole debate.
It was next to impossible for even the most reactionary supporter of the status quo to claim that Government should not even examine the pensions system.
It meant that the industry had to justify, under cross-examination, its policies.
Opponents of changing the rules on early leavers found it difficult to sustain their case.
Rather than having the whole of the public and the press against us, we gained support.
Letters flooded in from people who had often been cruelly affected by the system we were examining.
Journalists like my old colleague Christopher Fildes became notable allies.
Surely, I thought, if we can do this with pensions can we not do the same with social security?
If the absurdity of the present  position of the Death Grant were exposed to the public gaze, would not reform become easier?
I recognized that all would not be plain sailing.
Changing supplementary and housing benefit would be more contentious than reforming occupational pensions.
Nevertheless, I felt that an open inquiry should be the aim.
My resolve to set up an inquiry into the social security system was strengthened by one other important factor.
Like every other Secretary of State who has ever been in charge of social security, I was under pressure from the Treasury.
The department took the largest slice of the Government's budget and each year the Treasury demanded economies.
There was nothing remotely new in this.
My predecessor, Patrick Jenkin, had been pressed for savings and so too had his Labour predecessors, David Ennals and Barbara Castle.
The man in charge of controlling public spending is the Chief Secretary to the Treasury.
In the time of the Labour Government the Chief Secretary had been Joel Barnett and it was he who had forced Barbara Castle into her major and controversial changes.
During my time at the DHSS I met over the table with three Chief Secretaries and, I have to admit, had battles with them all.
My baptism of fire had been with Leon Brittan who was Chief Secretary until the 1983 general election.
Friendship, I fear, counts for very little when the fur really begins to fly.
Ken Clarke, having listened to one of our more heated exchanges, wondered if we would ever speak to each other again.
I also had fierce battles with Peter Rees, while Peter's successor, John MacGregor, maintained that I was the only minister who almost walked out of one of his ‘bilaterals’.
I cannot remember that particular meeting — nor am I very proud of it — but the point illustrates the sometimes passionate disputes which can erupt during the annual public-spending negotiations.
No one should be too surprised at these clashes.
It is an inevitable fact of ministerial life.
The Treasury has responsibility for the health of the economy; the Social Services Department has responsibility for some of the poorest and most vulnerable people in the country.
Certainly I did not regard it as my job to defend the departmental budget just because it was the departmental budget.
On the other hand it most certainly was my job to prevent  indefensible cuts.
No one is going to thank you if you end up making changes which either cause real hardship or bring the political roof in — or manage to do both.
It is, of course, a matter of judgement and your viewpoint will depend on what Cabinet seat you occupy.
Former Chief Secretaries have been known to make spirited claims for additional resources when they move to a departmental job.
Colleagues who one year lecture you at the Star Chamber on how you have more than enough money turn up the next asking for extra themselves.
It is, nevertheless, crucial that such debates should take place.
A similar process happens each year in industry.
No manager, in any half-decent company, is able to get away with claiming that he has made all the improvements it is possible to make.
In the public-spending round of Government it is certainly true that departments overbid on the basis that when it comes to the crunch they can bring the bid down without damage.
Yet it is equally true that the Treasury just as consistently suggest economies that they do not expect to achieve but which concentrate the minister's mind and preferably chill his blood.
It is possible to make light of the process but, be under no illusion, it is a deadly serious affair.
If as Secretary of State you get it wrong, then you — and crucially the people you are serving — live with the consequences for the next twelve months and beyond.
And once changes are agreed, they cease to be the adjustments of the Government.
They become quite plainly your cuts —‘Fowler's cuts’.
You are virtually on your own in defending them, so you had better be convinced of the case before you agree to them.
It is for reasons like these that I crossed out the best part of two months each autumn to devote to the public-spending discussions.
Almost invariably, I ended up each year in front of the Star Chamber of ministers who were set up under the chairmanship of Willie Whitelaw to try to sort out the differences which remained between ministers and the Chief Secretary.
*
I announced the review of social security on Monday 2 April 1984.
Most attention concentrated on the last sentence of my  statement which I had inserted just before I stood up in the House of Commons:
Taken together the various reviews and studies I have set in hand constitute the most substantial examination of the social security system since the Beveridge report forty years ago.
It was no more than the truth.
Since the war, governments had by and large ducked the issue.
There had been a great deal of tinkering but no overall review.
But equally it was true that the circumstances of my review were very different from those of Lord Beveridge.
Beveridge had presented his report in 1942 at a time when it was overwhelmingly agreed that there should be no return to the conditions of the 1930s.
Yet for all their persuasiveness, the Beveridge proposals had not been implemented.
Beveridge wanted a system based on insurance, with the public making insurance contributions to finance benefits like the state pension.
But Beveridge was not a member of the post-war Labour Government.
No one was content to wait for insurance.
Instead, the new system was introduced on the pay-as-you-go basis which has bedevilled social security finance ever since.
Pay-as-you-go means that today s contributors pay for the pension of today's retired people — on the basis that the next generation will pick up the bill for today's contributors when they retire.
There is no invested fund, only promises of how much future contributors will be prepared to pay.
I was reporting in a cold public-spending climate.
Everywhere in the Western world social security budgets were under scrutiny, not to see if they were too meagre but to see if they could be reduced.
British ministers returned from trips to other countries with tales (usually apocryphal) about how budgets were being trimmed.
I had, however, one advantage that was denied to Beveridge.
I was not only able to review social security, I had the opportunity as a politician of implementing the changes — always provided I could get the support of my colleagues, of course, and that was not going to be easy.
Right from the start, there were tensions with Nigel Lawson's Treasury team.
What I wanted to do was to ensure that the social security budget was being spent to best effect.
It was easy to become mesmerized by the size of the budget, but when you looked  at it in detail you found that almost half went on pensions and other payments to the elderly; that 20 per cent went to families with children; 17 per cent went to the unemployed; and that 13 per cent went to the sick and disabled.
The spending may have been great but it was not being devoted to thousands upon thousands of undeserving and feckless claimants.
My view was that we should examine whether the money was reaching those that most needed it and whether the priorities of the system laid down in 1945 were still the same.
In the 1940s the elderly, often totally without pensions, were the first concern.
More and more, 1 became convinced that the priority for the 1990s should be families with children.
I believed that we should assess the future cost of the whole social security system, and make any necessary changes now.
My immediate aim, however, was a cost-neutral reform — and that was going to be difficult enough.
For if priorities are reordered without extra resources then inevitably there are losers as well as gainers.
The conventional political wisdom is that you hear from the losers, not the gainers.
Nevertheless, the Treasury were going to take some convincing that major savings in public spending were impossible.
Their concern was that we should save money.
Of even greater strategic importance to the review was a condition set down by the Chancellor at the very beginning.
Nigel Lawson was not prepared to contemplate any examination of the tax system.
Tax policy may have a profound effect on those on low incomes, but constitutionally any changes are a matter for the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Hence the bulk of the Cabinet know only on the day of the Budget what changes are to be proposed in the afternoon.
Nigel had absolutely no intention of giving up any of his rights, and thus an examination of social security and tax together was impossible.
Inevitably this meant that the tax-credit system proposed by the Heath Government was not on the agenda and nor were some of the more ambitious income-guarantee schemes which inevitably required reform of taxation and social security being taken together.
By excluding taxation we missed an undoubted opportunity.
Only if tax is taken into account can the overall position of any individual be seen.
It is also not easy to say where social security begins and taxation ends.
National Insurance is both a tax to  finance current social-security spending and an entitlement to future benefit.
Yet even without tax, a review of social security was eminently justified on its own account and long overdue.
We paid out pensions to ten million people and Child Benefit to every family in the land.
We employed over 90,000 staff.
Whether tax was covered by the review or not, there were still decisions to be taken on such fundamental issues as the future of the pensions system, support for low-income families, and the special payments system which was breaking down.
There was a mountain of work to be done.
For the next nine months my review teams took evidence.
I continued to chair the inquiry into pensions and later took over family policy when the much liked Minister of State for Social Security, Rhodes Boyson, went off to be the number two in Northern Ireland.
His place was taken by promoting Tony Newton, who was already in charge of the group looking at supplementary benefit.
Tony was one of the undoubted stars of the review and became my invaluable right-hand man.
No one knows social security better and no one has a greater social commitment.
As with the pensions inquiry, we recruited outside experts into the review teams like Jeremy Rowe, the deputy chairman of Abbey National, who took on Housing Benefit.
The whole process was serviced and kept running by as exceptional a staff of civil servants as I ever worked with in over ten years as a Cabinet minister.
We took evidence in public and this went without interruption or serious demonstration.
It proved an invaluable way of putting issues on the table and encouraging serious debate.
When a review of the health service was set up following the 1987 general election, it was claimed that our kind of public review would be too slow.
In fact there was not much to choose between them.
Our advantage, however, was that we allowed the public to have their say on possible changes before proposals were published.
My immediate personal priority was pensions.
By June we had made sufficient progress for me to tell the House of Commons that we intended to move against the ‘frozen’ pension.
We would require by law that the pension left behind by the early leaver should be either revalued each year or transferable to the leaver's new scheme.
By July I was able to set out my proposals on personal pensions.
The case put forward by the pensions industry was less  than persuasive.
I certainly did not want existing company schemes to collapse and saw no reason why this should happen.
I did, however, want to provide the public with new options.
Some people covered by the conventional company scheme might prefer a personal pension.
Even more to the point, a new opportunity should be given to over 10 million people who were covered only by state provision.
The essence of personal pensions was that it extended choice and encouraged personal saving.
In the autumn of 1984 I introduced a bill to bring the first pension reforms into effect.
So far so good — but this still left me with what was to prove the most controversial part of the whole social security review.
No sensible review of social security could avoid the fact that the State Earnings Related Pension Scheme (known by its unlovely acronym, SERPS) was stacking up an enormous future bill for the public.
There were no funds building up.
Everything depended on contributors picking up the bill in ten, twenty or thirty years.
We had, in effect, written a post-dated cheque.
Between 1985 and 2025 the number of pensioners was set to rise from 9 million to over 12 million; and the total cost of pensions for the public would rise from £17 billion a year to almost £36 billion if pensions were linked with prices and to a colossal £50 billion if they were linked, as Labour wanted, to the higher of either prices or earnings.
The bill for the retired population would be borne by the working population, but the ratio of contributors to pensioners would slowly worsen so that by 2025 there would be only 1.8 contributors for each pensioner.
Nor was this simply speculation.
The higher number of births from the mid-1950s and through the 1960s inevitably meant more pensioners sixty years on.
That was one side of the case against SERPS.
But there was also another.
There was an overwhelming case for the State providing a basic pension but less of one for the State providing an additional pension as well.
The second pension could be provided by an expanded pensions industry.
My view was that most people would prefer a pension that was theirs by right rather than being dependent on the decisions of government.
‘A pension of your own’ could have the same kind of appeal as ‘a house of your own’.
The role of Government should be to ensure that such pensions met sensible regulation so that the public interest was protected.
These ideas were confirmed by a special Gallup Opinion Poll we commissioned for the review.
Half those questioned had not heard of SERPS — which might not have been surprising had it not been that most were members of it.
But the crucial finding was this.
The sample was asked about the importance of having an occupational pension additional to the state provision.
Almost 90 per cent who were in schemes, and two-thirds of those not in schemes, said it was important or ‘very important’.
As far as the industry was concerned, the case for SERPS was very simple.
They had experienced the uncertainties of the 1960s and 1970s and they now wanted stability.
Stability had not provided an increase in the number of occupational pensioners, but it had provided a secure environment for the lucky half of the nation who were covered.
As for Labour, they liked SERPS mainly because it was state provision and they could see no reason to allow future governments the freedom to devote public spending to other areas.
In January 1985 all the review teams, the advisers and the civil servants withdrew for a snow-bound week at Wilton Park, a Foreign Office mansion deep in the Sussex countryside.
Everybody was encouraged to have their say and the discussion was both productive and frank.
But in the final analysis the decisions — and the responsibility — were mine.
I still have a note of the objectives for the review I set out at Wilton Park:
First I want to achieve a twin-pillar system — that is, explicit recognition that social security is not just the State alone.
It also means individual contribution.
Second I want to encourage employment.
Nothing is more important than that we should take down the barriers — like National Insurance and pensions — which stand in the way of new employment and job mobility.
Third I want to tackle real need.
Our diagnosis of want shows that it is low-income families with children — the unemployed and low-wage earners — who are worst off.
Fourth I want to eliminate some of the complexity.
The case is self-evident.
Fifth I want to achieve a better delivery system — more cooperation with the tax system and better management.
It was against this background that the debate took place.
By the end of the week the threads had been brought together and the outline of the report decided.
Our proposals were that SERPS should be abolished and that the second pension should come from a variety of new options in the private sector which we would make available.
Child Benefit was to stay and a new benefit, Family Credit, was to be introduced for low-income families in work so that people could no longer be worse off in work than on the dole.
Supplementary Benefit was to give way to Income Support and the much-abused system of single payment was to be replaced by a Social Fund; Housing Benefit was to be reformed so that it did not discriminate against the low-paid in work; and the whole social security system was to be simplified.
Among the benefits to be abolished was the Death Grant, to be replaced by a system which gave full help to families who needed it and none to those who did not.
Public spending savings mostly came from the abolition of SERPS.
There were some comparatively small reductions to the Housing Benefit budget but the major savings — which ran into billions of pounds — were for the 1990s and the next century.
They would allow invaluable policy options for future governments; they demonstrated that our Government looked much further ahead than the next two or three years.
We had devised a new social security system which was intended to last.
On leaving Wilton Park, I went to Sutton Coldfield to write up the Green Paper.
Back in London I had a foretaste of the conflicts that were to come.
A special Cabinet committee under the chairmanship of Margaret Thatcher had been set up to review my proposals and effectively to decide whether they would become Government policy.
Although the final decision was with Cabinet, it would be most unlikely that they would overturn the views of a committee which had spent a number of weeks going through the proposals almost line by line — particularly given that half the Cabinet were on the committee and the Prime Minister was in the chair.
The decisions of the committee would be crucial in determining whether my proposals would be enacted.
Every paper to a Cabinet committee must be cleared by the Treasury.
This is for the sensible reason that the last thing ministers want to do is to listen to an argument about figures being wrong.
If the figures or the financial consequences are in dispute then that must be stated.
The first meeting of the Social Security Committee was set for Wednesday 6 February.
I needed to get my papers round before the weekend so that colleagues would have the opportunity to read them — the usual rule is that papers should be circulated to ministers seven days before a meeting.
For a variety of reasons the rule is often breached, but there would be no excuse for missing the deadline with a report which had taken so long to prepare.
First, however, I needed the Treasury to clear my paper — that is, to agree that it was an accurate description of the issues before the Government.
The draft went to the Treasury and on Thursday 31 January I went over to Downing Street for Cabinet.
Both Norman Tebbit and John Wakeham were now back after the Grand Hotel blast and the opportunity had been taken to arrange a Cabinet photograph.
Just before we were to go upstairs to be photographed, an agitated Nigel Lawson came up to me saying that he wanted a word.
He had seen the draft.
‘It won't do,’ he said.
I had made proposals on National Insurance but that, said Nigel, was a Budget matter.
‘You have no authority to make proposals on National Insurance.’
It was a head-on clash.
There was no attempt to persuade and the result was that I blew up.
I had, after all, been working on the review for the last year.
I said that I had never heard anything more extraordinary.
How could I make proposals on social security without mentioning National Insurance for which I had ministerial responsibility?
No, said Nigel, it was not in the terms of reference.
I replied that if colleagues agreed with him then we could forget about the whole review.
The argument continued up the stairs to Downing Street's reception rooms — where we paused to smile and be photographed — and all the way down again.
As we sat down for Cabinet I told Nigel that we must meet afterwards.
This we did — by which time we had both calmed down a little.
Nigel changed tack and his tone became more accommodating.
He said that he did not mind discussing changes to National Insurance with me, but he did not want to involve the whole Cabinet committee.
I still found the  argument extraordinary, but I also had to take into account the fact that if Nigel retained this stance then the committee meeting would have to be postponed and the whole exercise would get off to a terrible start.
In the end we compromised and deferred the issue for later discussion between us.
As it happened that could not have worked out better.
The aim of my proposals was to reduce the burden on the low paid.
A few weeks later when it came to the 1985 Budget, Nigel set himself the same goal.
We each had different schemes, but we shared a common purpose.
It showed what could be achieved when the Treasury and the DHSS worked together.
The Cabinet's Social Security Committee met in the Downing Street Cabinet room for the first time on Wednesday 6 February 1985.
Margaret Thatcher was in the chair.
Nigel was conciliatory:.
although he would want to return to the question of public spending savings, he said that the report was a very thorough examination and also exceptionally well written.
Even at this early stage it was clear that there was general sympathy for the proposition that SERPS should be phased out.
The only question was what, if anything, should replace it.
We here came to a central issue in all our discussions.
As SERPS was a pay-as-you-go scheme there were no immediate savings from its abolition.
This is the essential dilemma (some would say dishonesty) of pay-as-you-go.
SERPS consists of no more than a promise that future generations will pick up the bill.
There are no reserves or investments to back these promises.
If SERPS is abolished, future generations will certainly be relieved of a burden.
The present generation, however, still has to finance the promises already made.
The savings build up slowly — although over the years their total is immense.
There is no altogether painless way of escaping from a pay-as-you-go scheme, particularly if you want people to make substitute provision.
The one certainty, however, that confronted the Cabinet committee was demographic: if you left SERPS as it was then the eventual bill would become greater and greater as the proportion of contributors to pensioners declined.
My view was that we should bite the bullet, abolish SERPS and encourage substitute private pensions.
In this I had the enthusiastic support of the Prime Minister who believed that the state scheme  should be replaced by individual private pension provision with a minimum compulsory requirement.
This took the issue a giant step forward.
During the review I had been to Switzerland where I had seen a compulsory occupational scheme successfully in operation.
On Wednesday 13 February, we met for the second time with pensions as the agenda item.
The only opposition to replacing SERPS with occupational or personal pension provision came from the Treasury on the grounds of cost.
They were concerned about the cost of the increased tax relief which would inevitably result if the whole working population were covered by occupational pensions.
The savings were major but they were in the future; the costs would arise now.
The prize, however, was that the whole working population would have a pension of their own.
Personal savings would be increased and personal commitment improved.
We had the opportunity to make a fundamental change, and I could not believe that we would allow that opportunity to slip away.
That too was the conclusion of the special Cabinet committee and the decision was taken that SERPS should be replaced.
I now faced difficulties on another front.
On Thursday 14 February the Cabinet had had its annual pre-Budget meeting when Nigel Lawson warned that public spending was still too high.
Several voices were raised on the potential for savings in social security but no decision was taken.
On 25 February, the special Cabinet committee turned its attention to the reform of supplementary benefit but the meeting was inconclusive.
The next day I found out why.
On 22 February the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, Peter Rees, had minuted the Prime Minister saying that the Chancellor and he had come to the conclusion that the Government should aim to save £2 billion from the social security review by 1987–8.
The minute stopped the Cabinet committee dead in its tracks — for the good reason that I was not prepared to go on.
The disagreement was fundamental.
The Chancellor wanted a promise of £2 billion in savings.
1 was not prepared to give it.
If such a total were set down, it would blow the whole review out of the water.
I saw no point in continuing until the point was settled.
I spent the next few days talking to Cabinet colleagues — all of whom  shared my view that the demand was preposterous — and then went to see the Prime Minister.
My case was simple.
If we accepted this entirely arbitrary target, the review would be seen merely as a cost-cutting exercise and not about the reform of social security.
All our work of the last eighteen months would be destroyed.
As at other stages of the review, Margaret Thatcher acted as mediator and the result of the meeting was that no £2 billion target was set down.
The way was open for the Cabinet committee to get back to work.
Our next meeting did not take place until after the Budget in mid-March, but from then on the committee ran reasonably smoothly through to its seventh and last meeting at the start of April.
At the end of this meeting I was where I wanted to be.
The major changes — the replacement of SERPS, the introduction of Family Credit, Income Support and the Social Fund, and the reform of Housing Benefit — were all intact.
The structure for the new social security system was there.
It was as near a cost-neutral reform as was practical.
We had certainly made some fully justified savings in Housing Benefit but these were a very long way from the £2 billion ambitions of the Treasury.
Outside Whitehall there was now intense speculation about what was to happen.
In spite of the best endeavours of a range of correspondents, practically none of our plans had been leaked.
Some of the speculation had been self-cancelling with newspapers predicting that the Government would take quite opposite courses.
Much had been wrong.
Our luck finally ran out on Thursday 18 April when the Daily Telegraph ran a lead story, not from their Social Services or Political Correspondent, but from their Economics Correspondent, Frances Williams.
This predicted with remarkable accuracy that the Government had decided to scrap SERPS and that the task would be transferred to private schemes and companies.
It is idle to speculate on the source of leaks — that I did learn in my years in Government — but what was certain was that the Telegraph story could not have appeared at a worse time.
The proposals were due to be considered by Cabinet ten days later and ministers do not like seeing what they are to discuss plastered all over the press beforehand.
Even more to the point, a leak of this kind simply hands to the Opposition a weapon on a silver plate  and raises fears on your own benches.
And so it was.
Over the next few days the press was busy reporting doubts about the political wisdom of abolishing SERPS among ‘ministers and Conservative MPs’ while the Opposition tabled a censure motion calling on the Government to withdraw its plans to abolish SERPS and its ‘callous dismantling of the Welfare State’.
I was in a hole.
The leak was accurate and I was being forced to the floor of the House of Commons to defend a policy before it had been to Cabinet.
I was also under no illusion that some backbenchers on our side were nervous about the policy.
The forthcoming debate promised to be a highly uncomfortable occasion with my defence alternating between ‘no decisions have been taken’ and ‘wait and see’.
Neither defence was likely to go down conspicuously well in a crowded House.
At this crucial point I was thrown a lifeline by, of all people, the Opposition Spokesman on Social Services, Michael Meacher.
Michael Meacher had entered the House with me in 1970 and, early on, earned a reputation as a conscientious, if rather dull, expert in the social policy area.
As the years had gone by, however, his style had changed.
He was forever denouncing me during Parliamentary Questions in the most lurid terms but the denunciations were invariably so protracted that even his own side lost interest.
Perhaps conscious that he had gained a megaphone reputation, Meacher had settled down to his own social security review.
His plan was to pre-empt my own and it is true that he was first to publish some of his proposals.
The only trouble was that under questioning it became clear that one of his central aims was to abolish mortgage tax relief.
What was more, it was far from clear whether the Shadow Cabinet actually supported, or indeed had been consulted on, this proposal.
The result was the Commons debate became a debate on the Meacher proposals, not the Fowler ones.
Demonstrating that it is not just Government ministers who get neurotic about the media, Meacher desperately blamed ‘malicious and fabricated press reporting’.
But the headlines the day after the debate said it all: ‘Meacher defends benefit proposal.’
’ Meacher gets a grilling.’
And even: ‘Meacher says document is election winner.’
This last headline did not seem fully to express the collective view of the Shadow Cabinet and the next instalments of the Meacher plans  for social security never appeared — much to our disappointment.
But seeing off Michael Meacher proved substantially easier than seeing off the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Cabinet consideration of the social security review was set for Thursday 25 April.
The papers had been cleared by the Treasury and gone round to ministers.
I had reported the results of the committee discussions and, unless an unexpected point was raised at the meeting, the outcome looked set fair.
On the Tuesday night, however, my Private Secretary, Steve Godber, rang me at a dinner to tell me that at the eleventh hour Nigel Lawson had put round a minute which sought to reopen the whole issue of the replacement for SERPS.
It was scarcely credible that this should happen at so late a stage and I asked the department to get the minute to me at once.
The Chancellor's minute maintained that the abolition of SERPS and the introduction of a new scheme would add to public spending.
There would be the cost of additional tax relief and the extra costs for private industry and the public sector.
If we made the scheme cover the self-employed, then their costs would increase too.
Nigel Lawson then proposed we should either scrap SERPS and put nothing in its place or leave the whole issue until the next Parliament.
But what most angered me was the last-minute timing of the intervention.
Most of the points had been raised before and those which had not been raised most certainly could have been.
With less than forty-eight hours before the crucial Cabinet meeting, the Chancellor of the Exchequer and the Social Services Secretary were in fundamental disagreement.
On Wednesday morning I did two things.
First, I told the Cabinet Office I was not prepared to have my paper discussed with this division outstanding.
Whatever the difficulties, I wanted the social security review off Thursday's Cabinet agenda.
To continue would only mean chaos at the Cabinet meeting itself.
Next I went to see Nigel.
I have rarely been angrier than I was that day.
I said that his action was indefensible and even ‘unconstitutional’.
By that I meant that the Treasury had cleared the papers for Cabinet and that agreement on the policy went back several months.
Nigel saw my anger and was obviously surprised that I had taken the review off the Cabinet agenda.
He nevertheless maintained that it would have been irresponsible of him to have gone forward without  warning colleagues of his reservations.
We had reached a position of stalemate — but a position which for the sake of the Government had to be settled.
This time the postponement of the ministerial discussion well and truly made the press.
Accurately enough, the papers portrayed the battle as The Great Lawson v Fowler Row.
The following Monday we met at Downing Street in an attempt to sort it all out.
By this meeting Nigel had come up with a further solution: rather than abolish SERPS, he suggested that we modify it to the point that it could be afforded.
This had always been the fall-back position, but at this late stage in the argument it cut no ice.
The last person to reopen decisions already taken was Margaret Thatcher.
Over the next days we fine-tuned the scheme and made some useful improvements.
The only basic concession we made to the Chancellor was to exclude the self-employed on the grounds that they were not covered by SERPS in any event.
For the rest, the only changes were ones that made the scheme easier to introduce.
Thus we agreed a way of phasing it in that reduced the cost of introduction but provided no disruption for those nearest retirement.
The social security review went to Cabinet in two instalments.
On Thursday 2 May, I opened with a slide show which took the Cabinet through all the changes and complexities of the subject.
Following this we approved most of the detailed proposals.
The next Thursday, after still more work on pensions, we took the abolition of SERPS and its replacement by a compulsory occupational scheme to Cabinet.
That was also agreed.
The only thing that remained was to complete the writing of the Green Paper and the small matter of explaining the proposals to the House of Commons and the public.
The debate in Government had taken longer than we anticipated.
Nevertheless, I was determined that we would publish our Green Paper in time for a proper consultation and the preparation of legislation in the autumn.
Over Whitsun we were on holiday on the Isle of Wight and I dictated the very last corrections to the Green Paper to one of my overworked social security team from a public phone box in Seaview.
Publication was set for Monday 3 June.
The House was crowded for my statement.
The atmosphere was more like the Budget than an announcement on social security.
Most of the Labour front bench, including Neil Kinnock, were in their places and the predictions were that I was in for a stormy time.
Even stout warriors like Ken Clarke felt that all the rows, the leaks and the speculation were going to make my task difficult.
Yet, as often happens in the House of Commons, the predictions of a major confrontation proved false.
Making the statement, I was conscious of the silence in the House as it listened to the proposals.
Then I heard the growls of support coming from our own side for proposals like Family Credit and the ending of SERPS.
I sat down to a great Conservative cheer and then Michael Meacher had his opportunity.
If ever a politician lost his audience with his first sentence it was Meacher.
It was, he said, a ‘new Victorian Poor Law’ which would pave the way for the election of a Labour Government at the next election.
From my side there were hoots of derision while the embarrassment on his own side was clear as Labour members found a sudden fascination in the detail of the Chamber's roof.
It was game and set if not yet match.
For the next few weeks the debate on the reforms rolled on.
Labour demanded that we publish illustrative figures on the effect of the changes on pensioners and claimants.
This we did and, of course, the figures showed losers as well as gainers.
There was nothing in the structure of the new scheme that meant there had to be losers.
But dividing up the existing budget to reflect new priorities meant giving more in some areas and less in others.
We could only have avoided that had we devoted some extra resources to the social security budget.
I had not asked for that and, even if I had, my chances of obtaining them would have been zero.
The consultation period came to an end on 16 September and we then got down to work assessing the reaction.
It is no weakness to take notice of what is being said in such a consultation.
The press always urge you to do so — and then, when you do, immediately write it up as a U-turn.
But there is every reason to try to get as much support for change as possible.
For example, our original proposal was that Family Credit should be paid through the pay-packet.
This had a number of advantages.
It brought tax and benefit closer together, and putting family credit explicitly on the pay-slip showed total new earnings — demonstrating, among other things, the gap between take-home wages and unemployment pay.
But a range of people inside and outside the House of Commons, deliver.
I had to get an already highly controversial bill through both Houses of Parliament and then introduce the new system without serious accident.
It was going to be a major battle and there were plenty of press predictions that the radical changes would cost us the next general election.
It is a good rule for a government entering a battle of that kind to be united.
We were not.
To have taken on the world in that state would have been political suicide.
I was not paid to preside over disasters — however noble the cause.
I had to think again.
One advantage of the Green-Paper debate was that the discussion had moved on.
When I had started to examine pensions, many in the industry were opposed to any change in SERPS and almost everyone was opposed to personal pensions.
Eighteen months later, personal pensions were accepted and the new consensus was that the Government should save money by reducing the benefits of SERPS rather than abolishing it.
Just before Christmas 1985, I published the White Paper which set out the Government's new proposals for legislation.
By a number of changes we reduced the emerging cost of SERPS by an eventual £13 billion, but the crucial part of the proposals were the new options we gave to the public.
It was made easier for companies to set up their own schemes and for the first time everyone would be given the right of a personal pension of their own.
Unit trusts, building societies and banks would be able to provide personal pensions and Nigel Lawson agreed that a 2 per cent National Insurance incentive should be given to those who joined the new schemes.
The expansion of occupational and personal pensions remained a firm objective of the reforms.
The compromise was accepted by industry and the opposition melted away.
There were fierce fights along the way — particularly in the House of Lords — but the concession on pensions took much of the wind out of the Opposition's sails.
The legislation went on to the statute book in July 1986 and the new system was finally introduced in April 1988.
And what has been the effect of the reforms?
Family Credit now provides double the spending power for low-income families than its predecessor scheme and more help is provided for children through the Income Support system.
The Social Fund has been successfully introduced without all the problems nervously  predicted by some of the experts.
The unemployment trap has been substantially eased and the simplification of social security has had major effects.
The whole system is now operating more efficiently.
The time taken to process claims has been reduced; the error rate is down; and claimants are spending less time waiting.
Social security is no longer a jungle of files and paper where only the skilled claimant triumphs.
Yet in many ways the most spectacular success has been the new pension options.
Over four million people have taken out personal pensions.
Over 800,000 people are now covered by new occupational pension schemes.
Contrary to the industry's predictions, existing company schemes have not collapsed.
The public have been provided with more choices, and have shown that they want a pension which is theirs by right.
The social security review made some fundamental improvements, but that should not be the end of reform in this area.
Very rarely can you finish the process of change in one step.
The progressive stage-by-stage reform of trade union legislation shows a more useful model for modern government.
The case for abolishing SERPS altogether and for second pensions to be provided by funded schemes in the private sector remains powerful.
We need to make more progress in achieving a decade of retirement between the ages of sixty and seventy with men and women deciding for themselves when they want to retire.
We need to provide a basic income guarantee for pensioners which will benefit existing pensioners who have retired without the benefit of today's occupational schemes.
Above all, a new review should build on the improvements we made but correct the mistake of 1985 and consider social security and tax together.
According to Beveridge there were five giants on the road of national reconstruction in 1942: Disease, Ignorance, Squalor, Idleness and Want.
By providing income, social security is the most effective means of tackling want.
It may be technical and difficult to understand but no policy area is more important for poor people.
Regular — and open — reviews of how we are meeting the challenge of want should be a feature of modern government.