

THE CHURCH'S YEAR
Justification by Faith and Christian Living To East Midlands Diocesan Evangelical Fellowship, 25 January 1986
‘Justification by faith’ is hardly a common expression these days, even in the Church, and we can very easily misunderstand what it means.
In Galatians 2 Paul tackles the theme of the Law and explores the nature of salvation.
He tells us that God's salvation is not dependent on our good acts, or obedience to any man-made or even God-given law.
‘We…know’, says Paul, ‘that a man is not justified by works of the law but through faith in Jesus Christ…because by works of the law shall no one be justified’(Galatians 2.16).
Paul is declaring that none of the things we boast about, or trust in — intellect, upbringing, orthodoxy, good life, and so on— are vehicles of salvation.
Each is tarnished by sin and, clothed in these acts of righteousness, I am clothed in rags before Almighty God.
Yet, says Paul, what the Law could not do, Christ did: he identified himself with my sin and took my place.
So we have that remarkable verse, Galatians 3.13: ‘Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, having become a curse for us.’
Here we have a wonderful insight.
Christ, in some mysterious way, takes upon himself our folly and failure and makes it his own, so that we may go free.
I say ‘mysterious’, and so it must remain.
Paul Zahl in his book Deliver us from Evil gives a graphic illustration of a bush fire sweeping towards two duck hunters.
The roar of the crackling fire drew near and doom seemed inevitable.
Then the more experienced hunter struck a match and, lighting another fire, they stood on the leeward side of the new fire.
That, too, roared away.
Then the pair of them returned to the place of the burnt-out patch and in the relative safety of that refuge huddled there as the bush fire swept  down on them.
They escaped because where fire had passed fire could not come.
It is a useful illustration as long as we remember that no illustration is exact.
God's judgement is not impersonal.
Nevertheless, Paul is saying that Jesus' death affected him so profoundly that by standing in his shadow he is forgiven and justified.
Paul now adds another element.
Justification ‘by grace through faith’ means that Christ's righteousness is ‘imputed’to me.
‘Abraham ‘believed God, and it was reckoned to him as righteousness’(Galatians 3.6).
Now, how can it be that believing can be ‘reckoned’ as righteousness?
It seems as improbable as a foodless meal!
However, our error is to think of God's Law as though it were a legal system.
Israel's great sin wasn't that it did not do good things — but that it did not obey the Law, the Torah.
It wasn't committed to its God and wasn't therefore committed to his way of doing things.
The point about the story of Abraham, which is a key paradigm in Galatians, is that he obeyed God and committed himself, his family and his future to God.
He left home on the word of promise; he was prepared to sacrifice his son because God said so; and his trust in God was estimated in terms of relationship to God.
God was saying in so many words: ‘Because he trusted in me and put me first I will honour him.
He is my son.’
God's righteousness was, therefore, imputed to him; reckoned as if he were the most holy person of all.
Finally, justification means a new relationship has begun.
We are redeemed, made new.
Christ now takes possession of us.
Galatians 2.20 must be among the most marvellous words of the Bible: ‘I have been crucified with Christ; it is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me; and the life I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.’
That is, the person who is justified is now under new ownership.
A new relationship has begun, with the most momentous consequences for life, and we are going to look at some of those consequences soon.
First we must pull this together.
Justification by faith means that Christ's righteousness is ours; it has been imputed to us.
It does not mean that we have been made righteous as if we are perfect and free from sin, because our daily experience will tell us of the power of sin; but it does mean that we are declared righteous.
God says to us, ‘Yes, you are guilty, unworthy and deserving of punishment but I have provided for your forgiveness.’
That was Martin Luther's great discovery, that salvation comes from God's grace and it is made available through faith.
Luther saw that it was not a matter of his own work but God's work.
‘God so loved the world that he gave his only Son that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life’(John 3.16).
‘When I saw that the Law meant one thing and the Gospel another’, said Luther, ‘I broke through.’
Now this idea came under tremendous attack because the Church of Luther's day thought that he was denying good works and asserting personal experience.
This doctrine of justification subsequently broke the Western Church in two.
Speaking in the Week of Prayer for Christian Unity, it would be all too tempting for Protestants to say to Catholics: ‘This is the doctrine which still divides, and unless you accept this doctrine too, you cannot be saved.’
Let me say a few things about this.
First, there is no denying the tragedy of separated Christians, and I for one long for the Church to be one.
It is a great joy to report that on this doctrine a growing convergence is coming about between Catholics and Protestants as we have begun the demanding task of doing theology together.
Second, no one is saved by a doctrine.
Justification by faith does not save us.
Only Christ does and can.
Justification is a descriptive doctrine; it is a way of explaining what God does for us in Christ.
Third, many will point out that justification is conspicuous in the New Testament by its absence.
It is essentially a Pauline concept.
It is not found on the lips of Jesus, rarely in the Acts of the Apostles and never in John.
Why, some might question, is there such an emphasis on something which is so peripheral to the New Testament?
The answer we readily give is that it is significant because it sums up the gospel.
The word ‘Trinity’ is not a biblical word, but no Christian will want to say that it is insignificant.
It describes God to us.
Justification by faith, similarly, is important only because it goes to the heart of what it is to be a follower of Christ.
We see then that the idea introduces us to a radical gospel which brings an uncomfortable message to our hearts.
It says: ‘You are dead in trespasses and sins, but God is on your side.
He wants you back with him.
Turn to him and the gospel will declare, ‘You are accepted.’
A radical gospel has radical implications, however, and to these we turn.
A radical personal life
One of Luther's great statements about justification was that of our standing before God as simul justus et peccator — that we are sinful and yet righteous before God at the same time.
It was one of those very profound observations which was misunderstood at the time but is now widely accepted by Roman Catholic scholars among others.
Being ‘sinful’ and ‘just’is not the equivalent of having your cake and eating it, but an existential awareness of what it is to be a human being in a sinful and fallen world.
By grace I am saved and therefore Christ's righteousness is attributed to me.
That means, Luther said, God sees me as holy in Christ.
Nevertheless, as long as I am in this world I remain a sinner, still capable of letting him down.
Let me give two illustrations that might unpack this a little more.
When I was a student one of my fellow students was a fairly rude, arrogant young man.
One day after a very difficult time with him, I exploded and said to him: ‘I can't say that the Christian faith has made much difference to your life!’
To this he calmly replied, with more charity than I deserved: ‘Well, you should have seen what I was like before I became one!’
There is a verse from a hymn, attributed to John Newton:
I am not what I ought to be,
I am not what one day I hope to be,
But, praise God, I am not what I used to be,
And I am what I am by the grace of God.
A rather convoluted verse, but how right it is!
The first radical lesson is to stop pretending: you are accepted!
The second illustration came from my parish ministry in Durham.
Tony and Margaret were childless and they befriended Stephen, a boy in a Barnardo's home.
Stephen was a normal boy of seven, full of life and fun and pranks.
Eventually he moved into their home and they prepared to adopt him.
They told him they were going to do this, the papers were  signed and he became their son.
Then one day ‘Margaret came to see me.
They were worried.
It wasn't working out as they had hoped.
Stephen was strung up about something, and was behaving unnaturally.
Margaret explained: ‘Stephen seems to be trying too hard.
He is so anxious about being accepted that he is trying to be extra good and even perfect.’
Stephen's problem, in short, was that he was not living as a son but as a slave in bondage to fear.
So after talking it over with me, Tony and Margaret sat down with him and said: ‘Stephen, look, here are the adoption papers.
You are our son, our child.
We chose you, you belong to us.
We will never send you back.
However naughty you are we will still love you.’
It was as if a great load fell from his shoulders.
In many ways we Christians also need to be reminded of our position before God.
I think it was Professor Thomas Torrance who replied to a question concerning his ‘conversion ‘with the reply: ‘I have been converted three times.
First I was saved in eternity in the plan of God the Father, next I was saved at Calvary through the atoning work of God the Son, finally I was saved on Monday 30 June 19–through the converting work of God the Holy Spirit.’
Here we see the work of the Trinity in our lives.
The equivalent of Stephen ‘s adoption papers is the cross of Christ which blazons abroad ‘This is the place where your pardon was sealed’.
Calvary declares that you are ‘ransomed, healed, restored, forgiven ‘.
The joy of knowing forgiveness
God's intention is that everyone should enjoy the birthright of assurance.
There is no escaping the note of joy in the New Testament about the Christian life.
Read Acts and you will see it appearing again and again.
It wasn't emotionalism; it was the joy of knowing that they were forgiven people, made new through the gift of salvation and the gift of the Spirit.
James Denney wrote:
Nothing is more characteristic of churches than their attitude to assurance and the place they give to it in their preaching and systems of doctrine.
Speaking broadly, we may say that in the Roman church it is regarded as presumption, in the Protestant churches it is a privilege or a duty, but in the New Testament it is simply a fact.
This  explains the joy which side by side with the sense of infinite obligation is the characteristic note of apostolic Christianity.
In a biography about the godly E.B. Pusey, one of the Tractarians of the last century, this is written:
The absence of joy in his religious life was only the inevitable effect of his conception of God's method of saving man; in parting with the Lutheran truth concerning justification he parted with the springs of gladness.
Whether or not the biographer was right, it is true that once you can exclaim ‘Abba, Father!’, joy is the accompanying fruit of the Spirit and it sheds its radiance over life and death.
Indeed it transforms death and gives hope where there was darkness.
A transformed emotional life
Justification by faith means that once I am accepted I can begin to live with myself.
I never cease to be amazed at the damage human beings do to one another.
In my pastoral ministry I have met so many people, some of them convinced Evangelicals, who believe in justification by faith with their heads, yet are condemned by their hearts.
Peter was a very successful academic with an enormous salary, a lovely family and supportive wife.
Yet at the age of forty he still regarded himself a failure because his mother had projected on to him her anxieties to such an extent that he never felt he matched up to her expectation of him.
He was only able to shed that bondage through a charismatic experience which reassured him that he was a child of God.
I would not be surprised if today there are a number of people who, though fully Christian, have never allowed justification by faith to be an experiential reality in their life.
To put it another way, they have never really allowed its truth to blossom into fullness of life.
Certainly Paul's experience expressed in Galatians 2.20 is that of Christ's life and love possessing him fully.
The outworking of the Spirit in our lives
In Galatians 3.2, Paul asks: ‘Did you receive the Spirit by works of the law, or by hearing with faith?’
He concludes that it is by faith.
Now Paul only mentions this incidentally, but it certainly corroborates the testimony of Acts to the working of the Spirit in the early Church.
In Scripture the Holy Spirit works in a twofold way in our lives.
First, he is the Spirit of holiness .
Many have scoffed at justification by faith, believing that it is a fiction only, a make-believe doctrine that has no reality in fact.
But justification is never merely a doctrine.
If it does not result in a changed life, a holy life, there is no reality about it — there is, in short, no justification.
There is, I want to argue, a direct correlation between justification by faith and a holy life.
If you are going to preach conversion — and I hope we shall in many different ways and, skilfully, with many different nuances — you cannot avoid the consequences: it is going to lead to transformed lives.
A girl who became a Christian at university went back home to her sceptical parents.
Before she returned to her college her father said to her: ‘Well, I don ‘t know what to make of your religion — but I will say this, it's made you easier to live with.’
That is a testimony which is often heard.
Christianity affects our lives.
It has a practical outworking in the way we live.
Then, the second work of the Holy Spirit is to make weak people strong .
For too long we have lived with no expectation of renewal, or growth, or power.
The person who is justified, the church which believes this, Christians who believe in a God who changes lives, cannot just simply go through the motions.
The faith not only has an experiential reality, it has dynamic consequences as well.
So, it is not at all surprising that the church which launches out in faith will find the power of God at hand.
I pray that the Church will learn to live adventurously on the frontier of faith.
A radical effect on church life
Just as we individually are simul justus et peccator so is the Church — holy in Christ, yet sinful in itself.
Spurgeon was right to say to that lady who left his church to join a church she felt was perfect: ‘Well, Madam, when you find your perfect church don't join it — you'll only spoil it!’
When we get  fed up with the worship, the vicar, the organist, or other elements of church life, we should remember that justification by faith in the fellowship means accepting that our differences are as important to God as our similarities.
I would like to see justification by faith working its way through our fellowships, enabling us to accept one another on the basis of our fellowship in Christ.
Be on the look-out when Pelagianism sets in: ‘Thou shalt be justified by good works’, by doing the vicar's mall, by the way you read the lessons, by the work you do towards the Christmas bazaar!
Be on the look-out when ordinary people are despised because they don't speak the way you do, or because they come from the council estate.
We have to ask of our church life: Do our structures and our services proclaim this doctrine of acceptance and freedom in Christ?
We have considered a topic which is, perhaps regrettably, not at the centre of Anglican attention.
I don't want to get it out of proportion with other great doctrines of the faith, but this subject goes to the very heart of the gospel and has radical implications for everyday life.
I want to say in conclusion that it has as many consequences for the devout Evangelical as it does for the hardened Catholic.
We have to confess that Evangelicalism has sometimes, perhaps even often, expressed itself in a hard, legalistic framework leading to a dull and often joyless form of Christianity.
This ought not to be the case.
Justification is, as I have said, a declarative doctrine that we are sons and daughters of a heavenly Father.
As Paul says in Romans 5.15–17: ‘When we cry, ‘Abba!
Father!’’ it is the Spirit himself bearing witness with our spirit that we are children of God, and if children, then heirs.’
What a wonderful truth!
Isn't it about time we started living off our inheritance?
fundamentalism — Friend of Foe?
York Minster, I May 1987
It may seem rather surprising to some that the Principal of Trinity College should be giving a lecture on fundamentalism and subjecting it to some criticism.
After all, did not a distinguished predecessor of mine write an important book in the 1950s entitled Fundamentalism and the Word of God ?
I ought to explain that in this talk I am not attacking fundamentalism as such — I am in fact asking what are its strengths, weaknesses and challenges.
Perhaps most importantly of all, I am asking what Anglicanism can learn from this trend in church life.
What is fundamentalism?
I need not tell you how topical this subject is.
Perhaps you saw the two TV programmes on American fundamentalism recently which put the ghastly and unacceptable face of that form of fundamentalism before us.
It is a fundamentalism which imposes an edifice of avarice, deception and patriotism on the claims of Jesus Christ.
We must remember ‘of course, that many fundamentalists wholeheartedly reject that type of Christian behaviour.
It is not typical of fundamentalism.
Fundamentalism at its simplest is the reduction of a faith, a political creed or a way of life to an extreme and recognizable core which dominates that faith.
This core is elevated to the position of an absolute which is inviolable, sacred and undisputed — undisputed, that is, by the faithful.
No criticism is allowed to touch this Mount Olympus of belief; unquestioning faith and obedience is required to keep the believer within the fold of the faith.
This kind of fundamentalism is easily identifiable in the world today.
We see it in the fundamentalism of Shiite Islam, where blind faith sends thousands of people to a pointless war.
We may see it even in political fundamentalism — where the teachings of a reformer are still seen as the crystal  clear teachings which are the pure source of revelation, and from which deviation is heresy.
There is, of course, the fundamentalism of tradition.
When certain assumptions are challenged, such as the ordination of women to the priesthood, suddenly tradition is seen as an inviolable and fixed form of living truth which compels the Church for ever to say ‘no’ to the ordination of women.
When the Alternative Service Book was threatening the absolutism of the Book of Common Prayer a few years ago, the Book of Common Prayer was being spoken of as if it were on a par with Holy Writ.
The story goes that when the House of Commons was discussing this issue, a leading politician was heard to exclaim: ‘If the Book of Common prayer was good enough for St Paul, it is good enough for me!‘
Fundamentalism, then, is a simple expression of a faith which is said to enshrine the sacred tenets of a belief-structure.
It resists criticism and usually stands over against the culture of its day.
Let me now go on from this point to comment on the so-called death of biblical fundamentalism.
The story of biblical criticism has been so well documented and so often told that I will not recount it.
Suffice it to say that after two centuries of higher and lower criticism we just cannot approach the Bible in the way that former Christians did.
This conclusion, I want to argue, does not lead to a rejection of the Bible or to a diminution of its claims or, necessarily, to a weakening of its authority.
I have found criticism to be a deeply enriching, but not always comfortable exploration of the text of Scripture.
Let me share with you two illustrations.
First, I recall that when I was a theological student, having come from a fairly conservative church, I could not square up I Kings with I Chronicles.
They cover the same period of history and yet talk about it in completely different ways.
It seemed to me at the time that this fact did not square with claims that the Bible was inerrant.
I went to see a leading Evangelical Bible teacher.
He listened to my question and said: ‘The difference is easily explained: imagine Kings to be a photograph and Chronicles to be a portrait — both are true.’
He thought that this solved the problem, but it did not — it was a silly, thoughtless and trivial glossing over of the essential differences in the text.
These differences are better explained not by that kind of analogy, but by a recognition of the complex history of the text within the history of an ancient tribe — a history that is sometimes romanticized, sometimes idealized, and in which past and present are sometimes confusingly mixed.
Let me develop that with my second illustration.
In 2 Samuel 24 the account is given of God prompting David to hold a census.
David is consequently punished for this action.
David is compelled to choose between three classical punishments — disasters, famine or pestilence.
He chooses the latter.
While the pestilence is raging, he buys the threshing floor of Araunah for 50 shekels, an altar is built and, after he has made a sacrifice, the pestilence ceases.
If we look, however, at 1 Chronicles 21 where the same story occurs, we will notice some remarkable differences.
It is not God, but Satan who prompts David to his perverse deed.
David, at the end of the story, does not buy the threshing floor, but gives the owner 600 shekels.
The sacrifice is not consumed by the fire David has built, but by lightning from heaven.
Now, how does one handle that kind of difference?
You can, of course, say the stories are not identical — and this is the device of fundamentalist theologians.
To my mind, however, the stories are clearly the same.
The only realistic interpretation is to recognize that the differences are theological.
For the writer of I Samuel, the story is to explain why the temple was built on the threshing floor of Araunah.
David bought the place and his sacrifice was well pleasing to God.
For the writer of Chronicles, it is now impossible for this later Jewish community to say that God sent this punishment — it must have been the devil.
God nonetheless confirms the choice for the temple by the lightning.
This, I think, is a clear example of the way Bible writers filled out the past quite boldly, introducing modifications from their own time.
Now I acknowledge that this kind of exegesis might be disturbing for some, but I believe that it is important for us as modern Christians to feel the force of this criticism which has thrown fresh light on the Scriptures as we have received them.
Fundamentalism, however, refuses to hear this sort of criticism.
It has already made up its mind what kind of literature the Bible is.
Its conclusion is that there are no mistakes  whatever in it, and, if any apparent mistakes are found, this must be due to our interpretation and not to problems in the text.
After all, what the Bible says,God says.
Perhaps that last phrase gives us a clue as to why fundamentalism holds on so tenaciously to life.
It is in essence a theological position which has already decided in advance that the Bible is the pure undistilled fountain of God's clear revelation and that to doubt its veracity in just one particular is to bring the entire edifice to the ground.
The point I am making is that, from the viewpoint of scholarship, fundamentalism is dead, but it won't lie down at the grass roots level.
We still find Christian undergraduates entering universities, and ordinands coming into theological colleges, who have no idea of the tremendous advances that have been made in biblical scholarship and whose first contact with historical criticism is a dismaying and frightening experience instead of, as I think it ought to be, a liberating and wholly enhancing experience.
In the Christian Church, fundamentalism sweeps on.
We see the resurgence in the new nonconformism of the house churches and sometimes in the charismatic movement.
It often appears in General Synod with some unspoken assumptions about the text of the Bible.
For example, without wishing to go into the debate about the Bishop of Durham s well-known views — and I want to say here that on the resurrection and virgin birth I take the traditional teaching of the Church — I am concerned when speakers are ignorant of some of the critical insights which have given rise to the Bishop's well thought-out views.
David Jenkins, on both issues, is giving expression to conclusions widely held by some contemporary New Testament scholars.
By simply shouting him down, the issues will not go away; they have to be faced maturely and rationally, within the context, of course, of faith.
Why, I ask again, do we hear the strident voices of fundamentalism?
Clearly it is a searching for security .
We live in a world of uncertainty, where the politicians, church leaders and others have failed.
‘Let us return again’, they cry, ‘to the source of the faith’— to the purity of Shiite Islam, to a Bible which is safe and secure or to the creed which made our nation great.
The ‘Moral Majority’ in the United States is precisely that kind of quest for security.
The moral decline of the West cries out for a return to the morals of protestant Christianity  which will tell the nation what they must do to be strong once more.
We want to know what to believe, what to do, how to live the godly life.
As well as being a cry for security, however, it is also an assumption that liberalism has failed .
I shall be elaborating upon this point in a short while, but for the moment let us observe that fundamentalism has flowered because it has concluded that liberalism is effete, ineffectual and impoverished.
A return to scriptural authority is the only answer.
Putting these answers together we can see that at the heart of fundamentalism is a longing for a faith which is secure, tangible, successful, simple.
Indeed, one of the strengths of fundamentalism is that its apologetics are within the reach of the average man and woman.
It offers an apparently rational faith which is plausible and coherent.
Let us look now at some problems of this neo-fundamentalism as I have observed them in modern church life.
First,it has an irrational and anti-intellectual basis .
The fundamentalist is afraid to live with questions.
The intellectual exploration of the Christian faith, the careful critical examination of the Bible (however reverently the task is carried out) is not for the ‘true’ Bible student.
Thus, the only way to understand Scripture is to submit to what it is saying at face value.
This means, of course, that the kind of contradiction I mentioned earlier is rarely discovered by the average fundamentalist because their one-dimensional way of tackling the text, a few verses at a time, will not lead them to make these uncomfortable and, I think, liberating discoveries.
They will not be led by preachers at their church to face up to the fact that there are four Gospels, that John is significantly different from the Synoptics, that the New Testament writers do not always speak with the same voice even on essential matters of faith.
Second,fundamentalism is a ghetto-like escape from the world .
I heard a few weeks ago of the formation of an American group called ‘Fundamentalists Anonymous’.
It is an equivalent of Alcoholics Anonymous, that is, those who were trying to escape from frightening fundamentalism which had destroyed their lives.
One girl shared her story of a fringe group, which for ten years had dominated her life.
It had told her what to believe, how to live.
She had to submit the control of  her ambitions, career and money to a group over her who ‘shepherded’ her.
What led her to make the break?
She replied ‘simply: ‘One day reading the Bible I was struck by the simple and loving demands of Jesus on his disciples and the intolerable demands of those who claimed to be Christ for me.
Perhaps over a period of months, even years, the yearning grew to escape.
One day I walked out of the house, leaving all my possessions.
I cannot go back, I know they would reclaim me.’
Groups like that have tremendous power in the United States but they are marginalized on the culture of America, having formidable influence but not respected or trusted.
As a ghetto they create their own lifestyles and moral values and often express theologies that are anti-Christian as well as anti-human — pelagian, Arminian and gnostic.
Third,fundamentalist structures can be demonic in their influence and power .
I have already spoken of the term ‘shepherding’, which is well known in house churches, even in our own country.
I am sure that in the majority of instances the shepherding done by leaders is done very responsibly, but this need not be the case.
You see, the structure of authority is often set up to consolidate the position of the leader.
The Bible, they claim, is authoritative.
It is our only inspired authority, but it is interpreted through our leadership.
No pope in history has ever had as much power over the lives of his flock as some of these self-styled leaders in the Western fellowships.
Again, the two TV programmes I mentioned give plenty of evidence of the power they exercise over the lives of thousands upon thousands.
What is the challenge of fundamentalism?
This is my real concern.
It is a challenge as well as a threat.
Some of you may have read James Barr's books on fundamentalism.
They do not reach the true fundamentalist, because even if he read them, he would be left quite unmoved because James Barr's theology does not give a viable and positive alternative to fundamentalism.
Let me present some of the challenges to us.
The challenge of enthusiasm , Fundamentalists believe in the reality of their message and of the Jesus they preach.
They give time and money to their faith and such giving often shames those of us who claim to be orthodox believers.
The challenge of expectancy .
Fundamentalists believe so  totally in the reality of their message and of the Jesus they preach that they expect lives to be touched and changed.
They expect and they grow.
The challenge of simplicity .
Fundamentalists believe so confidently in the reality of their message and of the Jesus they preach that it is within the reach of the average person.
Of course, as I have already remarked, there is much that is wrong with their approach.
Their very simplicity contains the seeds of its own weakness, because once the intelligent fundamentalist begins to enter into a true dialogue with his faith, he is remorselessly swept away from the simple truths which once satisfied him.
So what is the task of the Church in refuting fundamentalism?
The essence of Anglicanism is that the basis of our authority is located within the nexus of three sources — Bible, Church and reason.
The Bible is for us the primary source of authority but not the only source.
Here is the heart of Anglican comprehensiveness — this is why Evangelical, Catholic and liberal can all claim to have equal shares in the treasures of Anglicanism.
I think, therefore, that as Anglicans we ought to be affirming more confidently than we usually do the freedom this gives to the mind, the heart and the body to be an integrated whole.
Firmness of faith and tolerance of expression is a genuine virtue to offer the Christian.
Others do not often see this as a genuine option, however, so how may we present a more positive image?
We should, I think, show the reality of a godly, reflective yet positively critical approach to the Bible.
We cannot deny the reality of biblical scholarship and this has to be expressed clearly.
Rari Barth once said that ‘the best apologetic is a good dogmatic’.
He meant by this that people are more likely to be convinced of the reality of the faith if our expression of it is coherent, sensible and entire.
I long for Anglican churches to be more confident in their expression of the Good News.
Instead, we squander our unique position in society and nation by often giving the impression that it does not matter what we believe or how we behave.
It is little wonder that fundamentalist sects have a field day welcoming in disillusioned people who have been put off Christianity by forms of Anglicanism which offer so little and demand nothing.
Now, it is important to say that an intelligent expression of  faith will still convey some sense of uncertainty.
That is inevitable and — I repeat — exciting and disturbing.
It is inevitable because we cannot deny what we discover in Scripture.
Let me give a few illustrations.
First,homosexuality .
It is easy to go to the odd verse or two in the Bible and conclude triumphantly that homosexuality is a great evil and homosexual practices can never be condoned.
That argument, by the way, I am not rejecting; it is a perfectly valid response.
The careful exegete, however, will also be troubled by the fact that the Bible hardly majors on this issue, that we do not know the context of Paul's two references to the subject, and that a strong anti-homosexual line is only possible if one has already assumed that such statements are immediately transferable into our situation straight from the biblical period.
Second,divorce and remarriage .
The New Testament is hardly unequivocal on this matter.
Mark, the earliest Gospel, makes it sound as if Jesus does not allow divorce under any circumstance; but Matthew modifies it to allow that some circumstances may make remarriage legitimate.
Paul in 1 Corinthians 7 seems to put another slant on this from the perspective of Roman life in the first century.
Third,ordination of women and the issue of headship .
Paul seems to teach clearly that women should keep silent in church, and should not have authority over men in any shape or form.
When we approach the text, however, the problems mount and the issues become more complicated.
For example, headship is usually used in the context of marriage.
How does this affect ministry?
When Paul (or the writer) in I Timothy 2 tails about women not teaching men he makes this an absolute because he was reflecting Jewish society at the time.
To follow the logic of his thought would mean banning any form of contact between men and women where women have authority over men.
A more fundamental question is: to what extent do we allow cultural elements of the first century to be transferred to our day?
Such things may be seen by some as the inevitable watering down of the faith; that the alternative to fundamentalism is a blurring of the lines and the inability of the Church to address the world.
On the contrary!
I want to submit that it means that we do not go to the world with a watertight  message which demands ‘take it or leave it’.
Rather we go with a gospel of love which invites others to meet a Lord who is merciful, compassionate, and whose yoke is easy.
A friend of mine met up with a keen Christian woman whose life was a mess.
Her marriage was on the rocks, she had had a breakdown, her social life was in ruins and yet when she came to ask for his help she was wearing a sweatshirt which had the slogan on it, ‘Christ is the answer’.
He took one look at it and said to her, ‘Jean, I think you should scrap the idea that Christ is the answer.
He never said that.
He said, ‘I am the way’.
I think that with him you must seek the answer to your problem.’
That man put his finger on something very important.
The Christian life is not a tidy, ready-made road which leads directly, simply and painlessly to the gates of heaven.
Sometimes the road seems to go away from it, sometimes we cannot see where it is going, even if there is a purpose to it.
Sometimes, perhaps often, on that road we have many encouragements; there come signs of God's grace.
Yet it is all so provisional and incomplete.
On the other hand, as we travel on we find that the road does appear to be leading somewhere.
We find it a hard, yet meaningful road to travel because it fits in with our experience of life — the disappointments as well as the joys.
Such an open faith, I believe, has much to commend it.
It holds together in tension the reality of Christ in his Church, but the Christ who is real is not only risen but is crucified as well.
The Church and the Christian live both sides of the resurrection, and woe betide us if we forget that fact.
Fundamentalism — friend or foe?
As you will have picked up, in my opinion fundamentalism is a dangerous enemy which has to be attacked at the level of the mind and of the heart.
It is comparatively easy to put it down intellectually.
It is much more difficult to show that it is a spiritual dead-end which will only end in disappointment, superficiality and naivety.
We must combat it with the weapons of faith by showing that it is possible to have a balanced, intelligent faith which offers hope and healing.
The Anglican Church is being challenged today to put its own house in order, to show that its portrayal of truth need not end in a sterile liberalism or empty liturgical forms, but in a faith ‘Catholic and Reformed’ which, to misquote  Gregory the Great slightly, is ‘a faith large enough for elephants to swim in and little lambs to paddle with safety’.
Is God Green?
To the Green party, Wells Town hall, 20 march 1990
I must begin by rejecting a notion that is circulating at the moment that Christianity has only recently discovered the importance of green issues and has simply jumped on a topical band-wagon.
When the Archbishop of Canterbury made a strong statement last autumn on this subject, voicing his concern for our reckless disregard for nature,The Times ran an editorial entitled ‘The Greening of the Archbishop’.
However, my predecessor, Bishop John Bickersteth, who for many years had been an advocate for issues of conservation, quite rightly protested that the Archbishop was saying no more than the biblical tradition states!
The idea still persists that organized Christianity has only recently stumbled upon these truths.
I will be arguing in this address that we have been as guilty as many other sections of our community in treating it too lightly, or in putting it lower down in our order of priorities than it ought to be; but it has never been entirely absent from Christian thought or theology.
Indeed, as long ago as 1958 the Lambeth Conference of Bishops issued this Resolution:
In relation to God's creation, over which he seems to exercise control, man is in danger of failing to recognize that he is a trustee, a steward, who must render account.
This may be seen in his pollution of air, soil and ocean and in his scant disregard for the balance of nature or the needs of future generations and his tendency, without restraint, to use animal creation for his own ends.
Furthermore, as some of you here know, the diocese of Bath and Wells set up a working party in 1986 to set out our own  policy.
This was published in a useful report,Our Relationship with the whole of Creation (1987).
This has been studied in many parishes and has led to some changes of heart and attitudes.
It is clear despite this that not enough is being done, and the seriousness of the position is still not fully realized by the average person.
Groups in our society such as Friends of the Earth, Greenpeace and the Green party are to be congratulated for the energetic way they are drawing our attention to the issues involved.
Yes, leading politicians may talk about the ‘airy-fairy’ Greens and seek to marginalize groups by such dismissive statements.
Nonetheless, the very fact that no less a person than the prime Minister speaks in such a way is a confession that green issues have intruded upon political life to such an extent that they can no longer be ignored!
Let me now build up my argument.
First, let us look at the Christian idea of creation .
The Christian faith has a very clear ideology of the created order.
It is of nature created and hallowed by a personal God who pours into it his creativity and love.
It is wholly hallowed and consecrated.
The biblical tradition, while taking sin and the Fall seriously, does not consider the universe and the world as things to be exploited, but rather to be treated with respect.
Mankind is charged with responsibility for the care of creation as a steward is given charge over the property of another.
There are, for example, passages in the Old Testament which speak of a ‘sabbath rest’ for nature.
I commend the book God is Green by Ian Bradley which sets out a useful outline of Christian thought on this subject.
It is a mistake, I submit, to go along with the Dominican Matthew Fox in denying the concepts of the Fall and sin.
This appealing and influential writer condemns Augustinian spirituality — with what he believes is its over-concentration on the Fall and sinfulness — in favour of what he calls ‘creation spirituality’.
He believes that Augustinian thought is largely to be blamed for the split between Christian morality and nature.
There is truth in what he argues, but not the whole truth.
We create a wider chasm if the Christian view of humanity's sinfulness, wilfulness and downright evil is ever ignored.
It is all too self-evident that organized Christianity has not always followed the splendid theology which is there at the  centre.
There are probably many reasons for this and I shall mention only a few of the important ones.
First was, no doubt, the over-spiritualizing of life with its assumption that the natural order was of trivial importance to our spiritual relationship with God.
This world with all its concerns was thus seen as but an ‘ante-room’ of heaven.
Thus physical and natural things were denigrated.
A second reason was closely related to this, namely an anthropocentrism which came close to asserting that man could do whatever he liked with creation.
It was tacitly assumed by everyone that every single thing existed for the benefit of humankind — nature was man's convenient larder or leisure bowl.
It was there to be exploited.
Here are some illustrations of that attitude.
Henry Moore argued that God created garden weeds to exercise the industry of man to dig them out!
You may recall that in 1976 a Church of Scotland minister, defending his action in shooting two of Gavin Maxwell's adopted otter cubs as they were playing on the shore, argued that ‘the Lord gave man control over the beasts of the field’.
This anthropocentric attitude is not confined to protestants alone.
Even John Henry Newman wrote this about animals: ‘We may use them, we may destroy them at our pleasure.
For our own end, for our benefit or satisfaction.’
We may well express our enlightened horror at such ideas.
For my part I am not condemning, I am illustrating the fact that the Christian symbiosis between nature and humankind, expressed so well in the Bible, has from time to time been replaced by man's domination of nature with disastrous consequences for both.
This moves me to my second point, the desecration of creation .
We have to face the fact that we are not a nice species.
I recall years ago visiting a nature trail with my then young family.
We saw a sign saying, ‘To the most dangerous creature of all’.
We were curious.
How exciting!
So we followed the sign, and with some amusement found ourselves confronting a huge mirror!
Yes, we are predators; we are consumers on an unprecedented scale in history.
In nature, the numbers of the predator are always fewer than their prey, thus giving nature time and space to maintain control between species.
Human life has achieved such a high density of population, however, and has such domination, that the structure of our environment is  in danger of breaking down under the relentless punishment we are giving our habitat.
The problem comes in many forms, but for the sake of brevity let me concentrate on pollution .
First, pollution caused by combustion.
In spite of the fact that since the Clean Air Act of 1956, pollution caused by smoke has been greatly reduced to the benefit of those who live in the cities, we must not fool ourselves into thinking that there is no longer any problem.
The facts point in the other direction.
The effect of sulphur dioxide emissions by power stations and industrial concerns is a major environmental threat, causing acidification and what is called ‘die-back’ in trees.
Last year, walking in a forest above Lake Geneva, I saw terrible evidence of this as acre after acre of trees seemed to be dying from the top down.
Then we can think of water pollution.
Rivers have always been a dumping ground for man's unwanted waste.
Nature has, of course, tremendous resilience in coping with abuse; even great quantities of waste can be broken down by the bacteria in the water.
But there are limits, and we are told by scientists that those limits are being reached in our own time.
We can easily understand why.
High levels of waste will make it difficult for a river to absorb the quantities involved, reducing its ability to recycle waste, with the result that aquatic life dies and human life is threatened with disease.
Other types of pollution could be illustrated.
In each case the same serious message is coming through — we are poisoning our environment, we are disrupting the interrelating ecosystems that form the background to human existence, we are endangering God's creation.
Now no one pretends that solutions are easy to find.
The intention of this paper is not to blame, but to understand.
I am not saying to the politician, ‘You must get your act together.’
I am not saying to the farmer, ‘You must use fewer insecticides.’
I am not saying to the consumer in all of us, ‘You must eat less, drive less, enjoy life less.’
To quote that well-known politician again, I am not interested in ‘airy-fairy’ solutions; but I am interested in promoting responsible attitudes to life.
So what can we do?
There are people who are convinced that the problem is so acute that lasting damage has already been done.
One well-known thinker is the German theologian Jürgen Moltmann  whose writings on this subject are of importance to anyone interested in issues of creation.
He argues that the danger of an ecological collapse of the earth — what he calls ‘ecological death’— is greater than the danger of a nuclear catastrophe.
He cites in support of this the population explosion.
In 1926, the year of his birth, 2 billion people inhabited this planet.
By the year 2020 there will be 8 billion people living here.
That is to say, within 100 years the human population will have quadrupled.
The needs and waste of humanity have multiplied accordingly.
Whatever we do, argues Moltmann, damage has been caused because of the irreversibility of the development of humanity.
However, while I believe Moltmann's case is unanswerable, it makes no difference to my contention that we are given certain responsibilities to ensure that we do something positive.
The predator must become a repentant steward.
How are we going to start this act of ‘reformation’?
We need to rediscover our symbiotic relationship with the rest of creation.
The key word is co-operation .
The human species is part of nature and apart from it.
The idea that the rest of creation is here for our benefit makes no sense biologically, but the idea is so widespread in society and so deeply ingrained in our approach to life, that it gives rise to an arrogant and destructive ‘hubris’.
This ‘separation from’ approach is the root of such destructiveness because it is of the nature of the ‘outsider’not to care.
Why should he, is the shrugged reaction — I don't belong here, this is not my home.
It may be the approach of the atheist for whom the whole of life is meaningless; it may be the approach of the over-spiritualizing theist for whom this world is irrelevant.
No responsible Christian or, dare I say, responsible humanist could possibly endorse that view, however.
From the Christian perspective we are ‘insiders’, part and parcel of God's design, and woe betide us if we take the position of the Creator.
Yet how do we co-operate?
It is a great idea, we may think, but very hard to implement.
We have to face the fact that economic factors and, all too often, short-term economic factors, shape attitudes to the environment.
The factory, faced by demands from minority groups that it should not discharge its waste into the local river, will be unmoved by such considerations if its productivity and its economic survival  depend upon keeping costs down.
This takes me into another key word and it is education .
I am convinced that it should be the goal of every concerned person to share in that task of educating people to think and behave ecologically.
This is beginning to happen through the exhortation as well as education received from Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace.
I am delighted that our Government has taken this seriously enough to have a minister devoted to environmental issues.
I am glad that universities are running courses on environmental biology.
I am grateful to the BBC and independent TV stations for regular broadcasts which highlight conservation matters.
More can and ought to be done, however.
The educative process has to begin sufficiently early in a person's life for it to have any real effect on attitudes, and I believe the challenge has to have the response of both parents and schools.
The task of parents is to ‘mentor’ their children so that by example and instruction their children may capture a glimpse of the true values of life.
The task of the school is to educate and to influence the growing mind of the child through knowledge.
Frankly, I believe that It begins in an attitude to life which is almost mystical, if not religious, in its orientation and approach.
I mean by this attitudes of wonder, reverence and awe, as we contemplate the beauty of the universe and note the fragility of its life-systems.
‘Knowledge’ is often associated with external forms of knowledge: of objective, dispassionate study which leads to theoretical commitment.
I am arguing for something far more significant than that, and we might call it a case for ecological morality .
Yes, we have all heard of personal morality and social moralities — but this is one that embraces the whole of reality.
Its basis is that all life is to be valued and treated with respect; that the rhythm of life is something implanted by the Creator; that the different ecosystems have to be treasured, even when we regard them as hostile to human life itself.
Their utilitarian contribution to our welfare should not, in other words, be our criterion as to whether they survive or not.
An important element of such an ecological morality will include a style of ecological justice which is vigilant for a symbiosis of humanity and nature.
An ecological reform of our societies will need to take into account, therefore, the compatibility of  our innovations as much for our habitat as for ourselves.
We need a healthy recognition of the fact that we are a rather big-headed little species in a vast cosmos that can do without us, thank you very much!
God did not depend upon us for his creation; indeed, I have heard it expressed rather forcefully that humankind is not one of God's better experiments!
Time may well tell us whether that judgement is correct or not.
For myself, I remain convinced that private morality cannot be divorced from public and environmental moralities and I predict that the politics of the future will have to lay greater stress on this area of life.
Robert Paehlke's recent book Environmentalism and the Future of Progressive Politics is, I believe, an important and real contribution to this.
Finally, this leads me into green disciplining .
This means bringing our behaviour into line with our theories, or, in Christian terms, it means making theology and disciplining one.
I have no hesitation in saying that this implies all of us seeking a simpler lifestyle and making appropriate changes to the way we live, the things we eat, the way we travel, and so on.
We should not assume that this means a retreat from the world into a monastery or a desert — not at all.
But it will mean some form of acceptable lifestyle that will subject us to the discipline of God's world and the needs of his creation.
Now why should we do that?
I have already mentioned the principal reason — that we are predators and our ravishing of the earth's resources, if continued at its present rate, will lead to disaster for our patient planet.
There is also another reason.
We live in a world in which one third of the population consumes two thirds of the world's resources.
The Christian and the caring humanist cannot remain unconcerned for the plight of the people of the Third World who live so close to starvation.
Among them are millions of our fellow Christians; but whether they are Christian or Muslim or whatever, they are fellow human beings and made in the image and likeness of God — and we have a responsibility for them.
So to the question: Is God green?
The answer must be an emphatic and joyful ‘yes’; Greener than you or I will ever be!
He calls us all to that relationship of stewardship which has been our calling ever since homo sapiens tended that first field.
A mature Christian is in no doubt that God's concern for this world is greater than ours.
He who valued life so much to  enter it in the form of a human person must be committed to its survival.
It is in the life and fragrance of that person, Jesus of Nazareth, that we have a pattern of care and love for all things which can be the basis for a discipleship that takes in a holistic approach to life.
Prayer — a Two-Way Conversation Stoke Bishop, 15 February 1987
I have in my hand a wonderful book called Children's Letters to God .
Here are some of the short prayers and letters addressed to God from small children:
Dear God, Are you real?
Some people don't believe it.
If you are, you better do something quick.
Harriet Ann 
Dear God, I love you God.
During arithmetic a dog came in.
Krista 
Dear God, Are boys better than girls?
I know you are one, but try to be fair.
Sylvia 
Dear God, We got a lot of religion in our house.
So don't worry about us.
Teddy 
Although the authors call them letters they are in fact a form of communication we call prayer.
They reflect different types of prayer: praising, thanking, accusing, talking, asking.
In this sermon on prayer, I want us to think about prayer as a two-way conversation in which we talk to God and in which we listen to him as well.
I think it will help us to hold on to what I am going to say if we keep in mind two pictures: a  hallway of a house, and a telephone.
Let us look first at prayer as a hallway .
Have you ever considered how important the hallway of your home is?
It is far more than just an accidental entrance to your home.
It is the place where you greet people who have the right to step over the doormat but no right to go any further.
It is the place which our neighbours find so fascinating that, in spite of our invitation to enter the living room, they say, ‘I won't stay a moment’, but find that they stay thirty minutes!
I am sure you have neighbours like that, too.
The main thing about a hallway, however, is that you cannot go anywhere in the house without passing through it.
It gathers up the movement of the house as we pass from kitchen to living room or dining room, or kitchen to bedrooms.
I find this an illuminating analogy of the real purpose of prayer.
Prayer is far more than a shopping list, or an incidental five minutes at the end of a busy day.
In the life of a maturing Christian it is that space I give in quiet thought, reflection and meditation.
It is that time when I gather up all that has happened in my day, and all that is going to happen today.
Understood in this way, then, prayer is not something I do but something I am.
Just as a hallway has no meaning on its own — after all, you cannot buy hallways without the rest of the building (‘nice hallway to sell, hardly ever used’)— so prayer has no meaning on its own.
Prayer, you see, in this sense, is what we are .
It does not stand alone.
It is the innermost centre of what we are, the place where we are most authentically ourselves.
This form of prayer, then, gathers up all our experiences and takes them to the King of Kings, and we think about them in his presence — all the hurts, all the joys, all that stops us becoming the kind of persons we feel called to be.
I would urge anyone to find space in a busy day to pray in this kind of way.
For some, the morning is the best time; for others perhaps late evening.
Perhaps it is as you travel to work, or as you take the dog out for a walk, or as you walk on the Downs, or when you have that quiet morning cup of coffee.
Perhaps it is when you drive your car — as long as you don't close your eyes!
It is ‘space to be’, when you gather up everything that crosses the threshold of your life and where it is interpreted in the light of your walk with God.
It may be that in your hallway is my second image of prayer, the telephone , that irritating friend whose shrill cry has to be answered.
Perhaps you have had telephone problems of late and you are waiting for the Telecom engineer.
It is good to know that God's telephone never breaks down.
He is always available.
The telephone is my link with the outside world.
We may complain about it many times, but think of its wonderful facility of allowing us to phone that relative in the United States, or a friend a few miles away, or the butcher, or our business, and so on.
On the phone we talk and we listen.
Sometimes our teenagers talk to their boyfriends and girlfriends for hours on the phone.
Mystified parents, who ought to know better, ask: ‘What took you so long?
Surely you didn't have that much to say to one another?
After all, you are seeing him in ten minutes.’
Then they smile because they know you really ought to have known better.
‘Can't you remember, Mum and Dad, what it was like to just talk, and gossip, and say sweet things without saying really anything , and yet saying all the important things?’
Isn't that going to the very heart of prayer — a two-way conversation in which we talk and in which we do some listening as well?
‘Well!’ says someone, ‘I know what you mean by talking to God but what do you mean by listening to him?
Quite frankly, I need a guide because otherwise all I'll be listening to are my hopes and fears and desires.’
Yes, I understand that point of view.
God, however, has given two very important guides to help the Christian as he or she listens.
The first is the Holy Spirit, and the second is the Bible which is his tool.
You see, each of us has to make sure that we are listening to God's voice and not our own fantasies.
So how do we do it?
To some degree we must all find the system best for ourselves, but let me tell you what I do.
I find my listening springs best out of reading a few verses from Scripture.
It does not have to be a long passage, it may only be a verse.
Let me take one from the passage read to us: Philippians 4.
Let us imagine that you are studying this in your room and you read verse 6: ‘Have no anxiety about anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known to God.’
As you start to think about the things that  make you anxious you realize that the passage is telling you not to be anxious but to pray with thanksgiving!
Now what is God saying to me through this passage?…and you find yourself ruminating on the things you are anxious about, and you start to relate this to the person you are.
Is there something here in this passage that should influence your behaviour today?
Let me give you a personal illustration.
About six months ago I was very cross with a colleague who had, in my opinion, acted irresponsibly.
I remember approaching the theological college quite determined to ‘sort him out’.
As I approached the college the phrase from this passage: ‘in everything by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving’ flashed through my mind.
I started to meditate on that verse in relation to my argument with my colleague.
I imagined God saying something like this: ‘So you are going to sort him out, are you?
Begin with thanking me for him; look at him as a person as important to me as you are.’
I did so.
I started to thank God for this colleague of mine and his gifts and commitment.
As you will have guessed, my attitude towards him changed, so that when the frank speaking happened that day it was in the context of love and acceptance of him as a person.
So prayer as talking and listening needs to be an important element in our daily walk with God.
Don't skimp on it, because the experience of great Christians has been that without it we cannot grow into Christian maturity.
Francis de Sales, a great Christian writer, used to say: ‘Half an hour's daily listening is essential except when you are very busy and then a full hour is necessary.’
An interesting thought, because he turns on its head our usual temptation to crowd prayer out when we are busy.
Now the consequences of seeing prayer as a hallway and as a telephone are momentous.
First, we will see prayer as a natural way of talking with God.
It is the language of the heart in tune with its Maker.
It is the place where we gather up all the experiences of life and think about them.
As a hallway, it is the place where I invite the good Lord to step over the threshold and talk with me.
‘Come on in and help me make sense of this life I live.’
In a very real way, I have found, it is the only place where things have been really understood for the first time.
Second, when prayer is seen as a conversation with a very dear friend, we begin to understand prayer as far, far more than just asking God for a hand-out.
We begin to understand Jesus' prayer in the Garden of Gethsemane, ‘Not my will, but thine, be done’(Luke 22.42).
As that little poem puts it:
He answered prayer not in the way I sought, Nor in the way that I thought he ought, But in his own good way, and I could see, He answered in the fashion best for me.
Third, prayer in the light of the Bible and guided by the Holy Spirit will change me: change my attitudes, make me more like the person God wants me to be.
That, surely, ought to be our ambition.
Sacraments in the Spiritual Life To the Irish School of Ecumenics, the Corrymeela Community, Northern Ireland.
Seventh Clergy Conference, 10 May 1988
You will notice no definite article before the word ‘sacraments’ and this gives me a little liberty to begin my address reasonably broadly.
When we use the word ‘sacrament’, what do we mean?
Within the tradition I represent, the classic definition is that of ‘outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace’.
The word ‘sign’, however, needs careful thought.
Do we mean a symbol which only ‘represents’ a reality — like a road sign — or do we mean a sign which actually embodies or conveys, in some shape or form, the reality to which it points?
Paul Tillich was in no doubt, and in a famous phrase remarked: ‘A sacrament partakes of the reality it conveys.’
I have been asked to speak on this subject from the viewpoint of the Evangelical tradition and I am glad to do so, but with the following cautionary note.
While I owe much to that tradition and trust that I am still persona grata within it, in many respects I have gone beyond Evangelical thought on matters to do with the Church and sacraments.
Others, then, will have to judge whether my views expressed here are consonant with that tradition.
I trust they are.
At any rate I am aware that a rising generation of Evangelical students and scholars are in general sympathy with the views I espouse,
My starting point is Christ.
For Christians there is only one primordial and basic sacrament, and that is Christ himself.
In speaking of Christ as ‘sacrament’ I am endorsing the witness of the Church in history which has seen, in the incarnation of God's Son, the sacramental manifestation of God the Father himself.
‘He that has seen me’, Jesus said to Philip, ‘has seen  the father.’
I suggest that all our sacraments are derivative sacraments, because they all originate from the source of God's life in and through his Son.
Our response is, of course, twofold — encounter and worship — and these are inseparably connected.
Let us explore the first of these words —‘encounter’.
How do I encounter God in such a way that I can call the meeting sacramental?
First, I must recall that Christ has first encountered us as Saviour and Lord.
In his life, death and resurrection we are made right with God.
We cannot love God with our whole hearts, souls and minds.
Christ, however, has and does.
It is therefore Christ who presents us to the Father, and our salvation derives from him.
Salvation is not, though, a past event.
Our total experience of life is a firm refutation of that; we know the reality within us of failure, of sinfulness and consequently of the need for forgiveness and restoration.
That is why within the Evangelical tradition there is the emphasis on the believer being simul justus et peccator , simultaneously made right with God but still sinful.
Second, encounter with God never takes place in a vacuum.
In our case it takes place in the family of Christ's body, the Church, the location in which the sacramental is normally expressed.
Now this may sound an anathema to some Evangelical ears because for some the Church is but a secondary fact in Christian truth, coming a long way after personal faith and experience.
For myself I have to reject this way of contemplating the Church because of its individualistic bias.
The New Testament knows nothing of a separation of the individual from the Church; to be a Christian is to belong to the body; to be baptized into Christ is to be incorporated into his people.
I have no hesitation, therefore, in speaking of the Church itself as ‘sacrament’ in the sense that here is this broken body which is called by his name, I meet him and he indwells it.
He is present in its ministry, in its preaching, in its sacraments, in its prayers and in its witness.
Let us now come to the second response, namely worship.
In this Church where I encounter the Triune God I am called to worship with my whole being.
I have a strong feeling that in all our communities our worship falls a long way short of New Testament and patristic practice.
Let me mention just one aspect of worship which I call worship as rehearsal .
For us, worship is merely our duty to respond to God's love by a discipline which, for most Christians, amounts to one visit to the local church a week.
There, in predictable manner, we sing our hymns and say our prayers.
Good; but, I submit, it is not good enough.
Is not worship more than that?
Should it not be in a vital and vivid way a recital and rehearsal of God's plan of salvation?
Should not worship set forth the gospel and proclaim the faith of the Church?
In ecumenical circles of late we have been reminded that ‘remembering’ in the biblical context was far more than simply recalling to mind what God had done in the past.
This word anamnesis meant the past invading the present, so that here the past was relived and appropriated.
Worship, you see, is the action of the entire congregation who together proclaim what God has done and what he continues to do; we feed on his word — sacrament and Scripture — and are strengthened by his Spirit and sustained by mutual fellowship.
Furthermore, although this action takes place in a local congregation, it is the worship of the whole people of God — the living and the dead, the Church militant and triumphant, for together they constitute the body of Christ.
It is in this context of anamnesis (of ‘recalling’ and ‘reliving’the events of Christ's victory) that I wish to talk about the role of the sacraments in the spiritual life.
In its broadest sense, we can talk of the ‘sacramentality’ of life, in that God may be seen, experienced and discovered in the normality of life.
We should be suspicious of any school of thought which separates spirituality from the natural and human as if God comes to people independent of this context.
While it is the Catholic Christian who will most naturally speak in this way, it is not unknown for the Evangelical Christian to make statements which come fairly close to that.
Listen to him talking about his moment of conversion when at a certain event he ‘asked Jesus into his heart’.
That moment and place can never be expunged from his memory.
Similarly, the Evangelical can speak of an encounter with the words of the text of Scripture as though God has spoken directly to him.
On a broader canvas, many of us can think of moments of encounter, of blessing, of poetry, of art, of music, of sunsets and dawns which were to us deeply sacramental.
for us all, however, the two dominical sacraments stand out  from all the rest — namely baptism and Holy Communion.
The former represents the once-for-all giving of spiritual life, and the latter the regular repetition of the saving events of the cross and resurrection.
It is this last sacrament which, by its very nature, is deeply significant to the Christian.
For the rest of this address I will describe its role for me in my spiritual journey.
Hopefully I will be speaking on behalf of Evangelicals and many Anglicans.
First,it is the focal point of forgiveness .
The Eucharist is the sacrament of salvation and, as such, it declares the work of Christ as he fulfils the Father's will and draws all people to God.
Sadly, this representation of our salvation has been the source of the rift between two historic Communions as both have misheard or misunderstood what the other has been trying to say.
The protestant Christian has too quickly jumped to the conclusion that Catholicism regards the Holy Communion service as a work of salvation whereby the priest offers afresh the offering of Christ and pleads for salvation.
The Catholic Christian has perhaps decided that the protestant sees the sacrament merely as a memorial service, witnessing to an event in the past.
Both views, of course, are distortions and we need to listen again to what the other is really trying to say.
In this, the statement by the Anglican-Roman Catholic International Commission (ARCIC) II, ‘Salvation and the Church’, is a major breakthrough because theologians from the Roman Catholic and Anglican Communions were able to state together the ‘once-for-all’ offering of Christ on the cross, and that we are not saved by good works but for good works.
Section 27 expresses it well: ‘This once-for-all atoning work of Christ, realized and experienced in the life of the Church and celebrated in the Eucharist, continues the free gift of God which is proclaimed in the gospel.’
I speak personally when I say that for me the Eucharist represents God's powerful declaration that I am ‘ransomed, healed, restored and forgiven’.
It does not of itself forgive, rather it sets forth what God has done in Christ.
However, since it is more than a mere sign, it partakes of the reality it signifies and is a means of grace through which the atoning work of Christ is made effective in the life of the Christian.
Second, for me the sacrament of Holy Communion is a focal  point of feeding .
I must deny a ‘real absence’.
It is common for Evangelicals to speak as if they are denying a ‘real presence’ but this is far from the case.
Having taught many generations of Evangelical students, I am aware that many come to theological colleges with inchoate views concerning the nature of the Eucharist.
However most of them have a strong sense that in this celebration of the Church, Christ himself is present and feeds with Word and Sacrament those who come to him through faith.
This is the reality for me.
In this sacrament I meet the risen Christ; I feed on him and rely on his promise that, as the people of God meet to recall him in his death and passion, so we are able to take the elements and say ‘This is my body…
This is my blood of the new covenant’.
I don't wish to reopen sterile arguments about the meaning of ‘is-ness’.
Surely, five hundred years of argument have convinced most reasonable people of the vacuity of this debate.
Many of us from experience wish to say something like this: ‘Lord, I do not have the ability to comprehend how you feed me through such simple gifts as this piece of bread or wafer or that sip of wine — but I know you do!’
As the ARCIC I statement on Eucharistic doctrine puts it so well:
The sacramental body and blood of the Saviour are present as an offering to the believer awaiting his welcome.
When this offering is met by faith, a life-giving encounter results.
Through faith Christ's presence — which does not depend on the individual's faith in order to be the Lord's real gift of himself to his Church — becomes no longer just a presence for the believer, but also a presence with him.
(Section 8)
I am aware that there will be those, Catholics and Evangelicals, who will regret the vagueness of such language.
They would prefer the vigour of language which either asserted the fact of ‘real presence’ in words which clothed the mode of his coming with an unmistakable reality, or which spoke of a ‘real absence’in order to preserve the purity of Christ ‘s coming to the heart of the believer in faith.
For myself, both these extremes are unsatisfactory.
Not only because both are unbiblical but because both misunderstand the way language is used  when we grope to make sense of experiencing God.
The theological term for this is analogia fidei ; that is to say, when we talk of eternal verities we have to resort to pictures, stories and other analogical expressions.
The Bible is full of such analogies and pictorial expressions which point beyond themselves.
Yet I must resist both the temptation of identifying word with reality and that of separating word from reality.
All our language is a groping after a reality which we already possess in part.
Perhaps it is in this context that Evangelicals and Catholics have to look afresh at the troublesome problem of speaking of the sacrament as a ‘sacrifice’.
Historically and theologically, of course, it is not and can never be.
As ‘sacrament’ it stands for the sacrifice of the cross through which we were brought near to God.
Analogically the sacrament can certainly be understood as ‘sacrifice’ in the sense that if it partakes of the reality it represents, the ‘once-for-all’sacrifice of Calvary is applied to us as we celebrate the victory as well as the mystery of the cross.
Third,the Eucharist is the focal point of fellowship .
When we come together for worship it is as the body of Christ,to be the body of Christ and to feed on the body of Christ.
In the light of this awesome fact, how can we treat our membership of that body so lightly?
Yet our koinonia (fellowship) so often falls short of the unity Christ desires.
I think of this with particular reference to the local community and the wider community.
The application to the local community is one that I put as a challenge to all: How can we help people to take seriously membership in the Eucharistic community of faith?
If the Eucharist is essential for our spiritual growth, how may we all integrate this most solemn and sacred of sacraments with other vital elements in our experience?
For example, how may Evangelicals integrate it with their emphasis on the word expressed in preaching and Bible study?
How may Catholics ensure that the Eucharist does not become separated from the salvation it witnesses to in Christ?
If the Eucharist is that important, a second question follows: How can we help others to understand its theological significance as well as its mystery to which we subject ourselves in humility?
The application to the wider community brings us to the  purpose of our gathering in this place dedicated to unity.
If the sacrament of Holy Communion is the sacrament of reconciliation, of unity, of God making peace through the blood of his cross, then we must face the fact that this sacrament witnesses to our deep divisions, our brokenness and hurt.
None of our Churches is therefore a ‘whole’ Communion as a result.
We may secretly take pride in our traditions and truth, but we are deficient as long as others are left outside in the cold and unable to share with us the sacrament of the Lord.
I am nonetheless a man of hope.
Jürgen Moltmann once said so memorably: ‘The nearer we come to Christ, the nearer we come together.
‘It is my hope and conviction that as we journey closer to him we shall find ourselves travelling with others and imperceptibly growing together into his beauty and likeness, and away from the ugliness and bitterness which has dogged the history of our Communions.
A Pilgrim at Walsingham in 1988 the Bishop led a diocesan pilgrimage to Walsingham, Norfolk.
He gave the following three talks.
A Home that is Always Open
Here in Walsingham is commemorated the home of Jesus.
In this church we have a striking and unusual likeness of a home.
Are we not being reminded in a very distinctive yet emphatic way that this ought to be the nature of the Church?
A home is the very heart of life.
Nothing can be finer, greater and more influential than a loving home.
However, nothing can be crueller and more oppressive than one without love.
Many of our blessings and our scars emanate from our homes.
Here in this place we are being encouraged to come home to God's dwelling place.
The actual context in which we meet is not important; it is only a symbol of God's dwelling among his people.
Having said that, this place has been made ‘valid through prayer’ and can be seen as a sacrament of God's coming to us through the demands of human life.
God chose Mary to create a home for his Son.
Why Mary?
We don't know; but God never does things accidentally.
He plans and prepares people to receive his grace and love.
I want to let you in on a somewhat embarrassing secret, which is now a secret no longer!
I had been something like eighteen years in the ordained ministry before I preached my first sermon on Mary.
Somehow the protestant part of me could not find it right to speak of her place in God's order of salvation because I was afraid of her obscuring the central place of Jesus Christ in his Church.
What changed my way of approaching things?
Above all, it was the Bible.
If we take Scripture seriously, Mary is there as part of the story.
Without her, or someone like her, the story would have been completely different.
First, I saw that she was chosen , and that for all time ‘all generations will call [her]blessed’(Luke 1.48).
Indeed, the angel hails her, ‘O favoured one!’
(Luke 1.28), and later in the birth narratives Elizabeth salutes her: ‘Blessed are you among women’(Luke 1.42).
It would be wrong, then, to push Mary to the circumference of the Christian story.
Her place is in the centre.
Second, I began to see why she was honoured in this way.
I saw her humility .
She entered into the shame of bearing God's Son and even ran the risk of being called a loose woman.
She entered upon the slow crucifixion of seeing her son take the lonely, sad and inevitable road to his cross.
As the hand-maid of the Lord, most of the time she could only be there, watching helplessly.
I began to see that my fear about Mary obscuring Christ was not soundly based as long as I keep to the parameters of Scripture.
The advice recorded in John's Gospel is always worth following: ‘Do whatever he tells you’(John 2.5).
True Marian theology is truly Christ-centred.
Third, I saw her availability .
She gave her consent to God's will.
She was willing to be used by him and the outrageous request received the obedient, ‘Let it be to me according to your word’(Luke 1.38).
Fourth, I saw her as an example of God's grace .
There is nothing in the biblical account to suggest that Mary was extraordinary in any way.
There is nothing to suggest that she was very clever, very holy, very gifted or very beautiful.
Although tradition has assumed that she was some if not all of those things, we have no way of knowing.
But that only adds to the wonder of the story that God took a willing young woman and poured into her his grace and love.
The best definition I know of grace is: God's Riches At Christ's Expense.
The One who took up his abode in Mary was the One who sustained her, kept her and made her holy.
It was Mary who, with her husband Joseph — also a striking and impressive example of God's grace — made of a simple house in Nazareth a home for the King of Kings.
What does a home signify to you?
Belonging
Observe the difference between the behaviour of children in their own home and that of friends who enter.
Even though we may say, ‘Make yourself at home’, we might be a little taken aback if they took us at our word and kicked off their shoes, lounged around on the settee, helped themselves to our coffee, tea, larder and even our wine!
There is a real difference between those who belong to the home because they have a natural relationship with the parents, and those who don't.
What does that say to us who are Christians, who belong to God by reason of our baptism and our confession?
Let me illustrate this by introducing to you a man whom I shall call Tom, who was a member of my congregation in Durham.
Tom was a very able businessman and a very keen Evangelical Christian.
He was always zealous in good works, always regular at worship and a key member of the church.
At work he was a high flier and his salary was commensurate with his ability.
One day Tom came to see me and poured out a story which told me the other side of his ambitious, over-achieving self.
He was the product of a broken home and therefore a single-parent child.
His mother was ambitious for her boy, and her ambition took the form of constantly encouraging, rebuking and endlessly telling him how he could improve.
As time went on the comments became less encouraging and more accusing, so that at the age of forty-five, in my study, he told me how he felt a failure and as a Christian unable to understand God as a God of love.
God to him was a figure of terror, of impossible standards.
How extraordinary, I thought as we talked together, that this man's theological understanding of justification by faith — in which he believed passionately — had no echo whatsoever in his life.
Then I began to see Tom's sad plight.
The shadow side of his success was that of failure, watered by the constant accusing refrain that ‘You are not good enough; you could do better; you will never get on if you don't try; God will not accept you if you don't try harder…‘
There was no easy solution to Tom's problem.
That meeting was only the beginning of a long series of meetings, retreats and counselling sessions which formed the stepping stones for a return to an authentic Christian experience.
He began to see that God was not a tyrant but a loving Father; he began to see that the Christian life was not a series of impossible demands to satisfy the whims of an unreasonable employer; he began to see that he was welcome because of who he was, and not  on the basis of what he could achieve.
I happen to know that there are many Toms in the Christian Church.
If you would count yourself as one of them, can I suggest that you reflect on the fact that as Christians we are not only welcome in this home but we belong here.
Freedom and discipline
God has no favourites.
We are all special to him, and he longs for each of us to enter into the space and privileges of his home.
The mention of privileges, however, brings together two seeming opposites: freedom and discipline.
We have freedom to enjoy the space that God gives to us in his family.
He gives us that space to grow into the maturity he wants from each of us: freedom to think, freedom to pray in our own way, freedom to worship according to our temperament and inclination.
We must remember, however, that God is never indulgent.
He does not misuse freedom, and he does not expect us to either.
The right use of freedom leads to the Christian discipline that we call ‘holiness’.
Although this is often construed as ‘thou shalt not do this’, or ‘thou shalt not do that’, holiness is really Christian discipline for the service of Christ.
It is accepting the lifestyle of Christ so that we may be usable for God's glory.
It is using our time, our talents and our money for God and his mission.
There is very much a pattern of ‘holy worldliness’ about Christian discipline.
Well did Dag Hammarskjøld say that ‘the road to holiness necessarily passes through the world of action’.
Well did the Book of Common prayer put it succinctly when it spoke of the relationship between us and God: ‘Whose service is perfect freedom’.
This is a perfect picture of responsible parenthood, whether we are talking about human or divine parenthood.
A good parent does not let his or her child do anything; there have to be proper guidelines, firm but loving admonition at times and clear but gentle encouragement.
That is God's way with us, too.
Let us return to our pilgrimage.
What might this theme, ‘a home that is always open’ mean to us?
Because God's home is always open, it means that we are always welcome and there is always forgiveness, God is  giving us space to present himself to our hearts as a God of love but at the same time as a God who wants us to grow into his likeness.
There are things in all our lives that displease him: misplaced ambition, wrong relationships, lack of prayerfulness, slackness in spiritual things, and so on.
We all have a great deal of business to do with our heavenly Father and it is in the security of God's home that we can know that we belong and are special.
Max Warren, the great Christian leader and General Secretary of the Church Missionary Society, wrote of the home in this way:
A home is the treasury of God where purity, beauty and joy are shared, for his purposes, inviolate.
For a home is in itself the triumph of God banishing night and chaos and necessity, indwelling this lifeless clay with the Spirit divine of freedom and joy.
A Well that Never Runs Dry
If you ever get the chance to go to Nazareth you will be shown a well with the sign over it, ‘St Mary's Well’.
It was very possibly from that actual spring that Mary would have made daily journeys to fetch water.
Perhaps, also, as a young boy Jesus himself might have been sent on errands to fill the pitcher.
We might speculate further and say that they probably lived very close to the well because of the importance of water in the life of a Middle Eastern family.
Here at Walsingham there is a well.
Today's theme will serve us satisfactorily as a basis for our meditation, because water has had a long association with such images of healing, blessing and anointing.
Let me tell you of the images that spring to my mind when we talk about water.
The reality of God's blessing
We are not surprised that water became the symbol of baptism  because of its associations with ordinary things like washing and refreshment.
For the early Church, however, water was not just an image, but a dramatic and essential element in the blessing that God was going to give.
Water for the Eastern mind was a very precious gift of God because it spelt the difference between life and death.
Abundance of it represented laughter and joy; scarcity represented suffering and even death.
So here is a good place for us to begin.
Water to you and me is so ordinary.
We take it for granted.
Yet that is where we begin with God: his providential care for each of us and his provision for each of our lives.
I gave you yesterday the analogy of the home, and now we can imagine Mary bustling about the home with water for washing, for cooking and for cleaning.
Each of these is a symbol of a deeper reality for us in the home of Christ.
An aspect of this is found in John 2.1–11.
This familiar story about the wedding feast at Cana of Galilee points to the deeper reality there is to be found in Christ.
Three significant things are to be seen in the story.
First, there is the embarrassment about the wine.
Half way through the feast the wine runs out.
We can all imagine the disgrace this would have caused.
Whatever the reason, it was a most serious problem.
Second, Mary was there of her own right, and the fact that she is mentioned first probably indicates that she knew the family very well.
She it is who mentions the embarrassment to Jesus.
The conversation is curious and rather contrived and, like most of the conversations in John's Gospel, is Christocentric — that is, it points to the mystery and glory of Christ.
‘They have no wine,’ Mary said to Jesus.
‘O woman, what have you to do with me?’ retorted Jesus.
‘My hour has not yet come’(John 2.3–4).
We could paraphrase it to read: ‘Mother, can't you see that this is not the time for my mission and nature to be revealed?’
Like many a mother faced with the apparent intransigence of her child, she ignored the rebuff and gave the servants the best advice any of us could receive: ‘Do whatever he tells you’(John 2.5).
The third significant thing in the story is, of course, the miracle itself.
Jesus takes the water jars, wine is drawn from the village well and the water is changed.
So water for me represents the ordinariness of life which Jesus can take and make very special.
Never despise ordinary things — the ordinary in yourself or in others.
Never cheapen the wonder of the commonplace in life.
God is able to take the common in you and me and make it a sacrament of blessing for others.
Indeed, sacrament is the key word because it is a symbol of the reality to which it points but of which it also partakes.
In a wonderful and mysterious way, when God's grace touches a person's life, the ordinary is irradiated with the glory of Christ making us ‘grace-full’.
God's presence with his people
Our theme is ‘A well that never runs dry’— and it never runs dry because it represents God's presence with us.
When we use the phrase ‘God with us’ we mean, of course, the incarnation .
I want to develop this theme for a while because it is central within this place of Walsingham.
Incarnation means God becoming one of us, born of Mary; but there are some disconcerting features in the story which we need to observe and reflect upon.
First, it is a real incarnation.
This is no pretend story, but one that stresses real earthiness — God's coming to the profane and ending the separation between sacred and secular.
As I have reminded groups before now, the reality of incarnation has been central to Catholic spirituality and practice; that is not so true of other traditions.
As one born a ‘Cockney’ I can tell you of the great Catholic priests who lived among the poor of the East End of London — and loved them into the Kingdom of God.
Like that lovely story about Brother Andrew among tramps and vagrants, leading the singing and picking fleas off his cassock as they sang quite innocently: ‘Count your blessings, name them one by one!’
Even if our ministries do not take that form of living as radically as that, incarnation does challenge each of us to apply the message of Christ.
‘Connect,’ screams the gospel, ‘don't just talk about the faith, live it and die for it!’
Second, incarnation stresses the pathway of weakness and even failure that is the pattern of discipleship.
The incarnational model of Mary and Jesus stresses that it is our very weakness which may become a tool for the Kingdom.
Paul says in I Corinthians 1.27 that ‘God chose what is foolish in  the world to shame the wise’.
While no doubt Paul was thinking of the uncomplicated Christian message compared with the sophisticated philosophies of his day, and of the simple slaves and ordinary people who were joining the Christian family, he might have had the Lord's background in mind as well.
How strange that God chose the Jews, and how extraordinary that he placed the Messiah in an ordinary Jewish home in a backwater place among the yokels of Galilee of the Gentiles!
Between ourselves, I sometimes find myself struggling with the reality of living in a Church which patently does not live out the implications of all this.
Our Church often measures things in terms of worldly success, and not in terms of the humility of weakness and failure.
Acceptance so often seems to rest with what we are and our place in society.
‘Are you a success and with a healthy bank balance?
Welcome!’
‘Are you energetic with lots of ideas?
Welcome!’
‘Are you able to become a youth leader?
Churchwarden?
Then come on in!’
‘Oh, I see, you are poor, weak, you don't have many GCSEs.
I note you are getting on a bit.
Sorry, we cannot find a place for you in the Christian ministry.’
How that contrasts with the message we preach!
Now I am not, of course, challenging the excellence that God requires from us all but I am challenging a tendency to overthrow the radical message of incarnation.
The famous Curé d'Ars would have failed an ACCM on academic grounds and St Paul would have been rejected for other reasons.
Yet I see from Church history the many glorious illustrations of God's weak people.
Take some of the Lord's disciples — Andrew, James, John, and even Peter himself.
Take such people as Gladys Aylward, D.L. Moody, Mother Teresa and many other ‘average’ people whose lives were made remarkable through the grace of God.
John Henry Newman knew his Church history when he wrote:
Few tho' the faithful and fierce the foe,
Yet weakness is aye Heaven's might.
Fellow pilgrims, the wonderful reality of incarnation is a message to us all that God can take the foolish things of this life and make us rich vessels for his use.
The water can still be changed into the wine of his presence.
In my garden at Wells I have a wonderful well — indeed, there are five of them and the city of Wells derives its name from the five springs in the palace grounds.
The extraordinary thing about the place is its ordinariness.
If you were to visit it you would be struck by the quietness of the small pool.
No great torrents of water, no spectacular waterfalls, no deafening roars of waters disgorging their immense might.
Indeed, if you are lucky, on a clear day you might just be able to see the spring bubbling up at the bottom of the pond.
Yet from that very still place immense power emerges.
Thousands of gallons of water per minute flow from underground streams which pour from the tranquil pool to form the moat and run into the gutters of Wells and into the many little streams around, irrigating the fields with their dancing life and wonderful presence.
Surely that is a picture of what God longs to do with your life and mine.
We think of the desert of modern life with the concentration on material possessions and its resultant poverty.
We consider the dryness of the Church as it tends to be too often a shadow image of that world.
Our God can still take the ordinary and make it extraordinary.
He is able to take the weakness of our present experience and say to our hearts: ‘Look, don't despise yourself.
You are special, you are made in my image and likeness.
Let me take hold of that weakness of yours and let me change your water into wine.’
A Fire that will Never Go Out
I don't know about you, but I cannot conceive of a home without a fire.
Even in these days of gas and electric fires it is quite unusual for a living room to be bereft of a fireplace.
It is normally the central point of a home and around it gather the family as we meet for fellowship, fun and general chit-chat.
Although we are not told it, Mary's home would certainly have had a fire in the one and only downstairs room, and there the Holy Family would have met to eat and to share together.
What images spring to your mind when you think of fire?
In the New Testament, fire is a principal symbol of the Holy Spirit, and that is what I want to talk about now.
To begin with, let me remind you that there is a very  profound link between the Virgin Mary and the Holy Spirit.
Right from the beginning of the Christian story we can see the Spirit at work.
He came upon Mary and anointed her to be the mother of the Lord.
There could be no miracle of the virginal conception without the work of the Third person of the Trinity.
He is the unsung and unseen dynamic in the infancy narratives.
That same Spirit, of course, empowered Jesus for his rich ministry and led John the Baptist to tell others of the One who would baptize people with the Holy Spirit and with ‘fire’.
And, as we know so well, the Holy Spirit fell on the day of pentecost with tongues as of fire.
For Mary, however, the coming of the Spirit was not a comfortable experience!
Anyone who has romantic ideas of what it must have been like for great women and men to be filled with God's Spirit should think again if the story of Mary is anything to go by.
The empowering of the Spirit for her took the form of risk, misunderstandings and downright difficulties.
‘The Comforter’, once remarked Cardinal Suenens, ‘is given, not to make us comfortable, but to make us disciples.’
What aspects of the Spirit's work do we see when we explore the image of fire?
Holiness and clarity of truth
I wonder if I may offer some thoughts on this theme as I reflect on the situation facing Catholic Christians in our Church today.
I am keenly aware, as you know, of the many Catholics whose faith and commitment have been badly shaken and disturbed in recent days, particularly over the ordination of women to the priesthood.
I can say this with sympathy and love even though I am, as many know, entirely supportive of the ordination of women.
This stand does not make me blind to the distress others feel or to the disillusionment that this issue causes.
The recent nomination of a woman as Assistant Bishop of Massachusetts, and the remarks of one diocesan bishop that ‘the ordination of women to the priesthood must be achieved at practically any cost’ will cause great despair and lead to grave questioning of all that the Church of England has stood for.
What is going on?
What can be done?
Is the fire going out in Catholicism generally?
It is important to have a wide backcloth when considering these problems.
We in the Church of England are not alone  among Christians in having daunting questions to resolve.
The Roman Catholic Communion has many issues that it seeks to resolve: the urgent problem of falling vocations for the priesthood, the problem of a celibate priesthood, the Lefebvre schism, the tension between local churches and the Roman See, and so on.
Other denominations, too, are wrestling with similar problems, but all of us are, in reality, dealing with the same central problem: What is, in essence, the kernel of Christian truth that is non-negotiable, and what is expendable?
What is a ‘first-order’ issue and what are ‘second-’and even ‘third-order’questions?
There is something about a fire that reminds me of holiness and truth.
A fire burns away the dross; the dirt and old paint are burnt away leaving the sharpness and clarity of the original metal.
Similarly, on retreats such as this one, the fire of the Holy Spirit has an opportunity to burn away the dross of the Church and even of doctrine that may obscure the faith that is central to all we believe and hope for.
The ecclesiasticism that so often gets in the way of the gospel; the temporal concerns of church politics that take up so much time; the fussiness of much of church life; our obsession with ‘churchy’ things — all these and more are aspects of additions that are really secondary concerns.
God has a way on retreats such as this of bringing home to us the challenge of a first-order question: ‘Do you love me in the way Mary loved me and allowed herself to be used for my mission?’
I hope we shall leave here with a deeper love and, if I dare suggest it, a more confident love.
We might say, however: ‘If the fire burns away the dross and leaves the real thing behind, what is the nature of that original?’
I am prepared to answer at once: ‘Why Christ, of course , and our love for him which is fed and watered by the prayers of his people in his Church.’
This has been central to the Catholic tradition as we well know.
Take the famous Curé d'Ars, Jean-Baptiste Vianney.
His is the remarkable story of a young man with hardly any academic ability.
Today we might say that he was a little‘thick’.
There is simply no way he would have been accepted for training in our Church — and that is perhaps a tragedy.
God nonetheless blessed him and used him.
He made the priesthood and exercised a distinguished ministry.
His secret?
He was a man for whom  Catholicity was reduced to its Evangelical essentials — the love of God, a burning desire that people should know and love his Saviour, and a great belief in the power of prayer.
Although a faithful man of his own Church, everything was subsumed under these Evangelical essentials.
The crisis of Catholicism today is a question of direction: Where is Catholic renewal to go from here?
In spite of the many things it has achieved over the last hundred years — and we have all been shaped by that — it has got itself boxed in by one issue.
As I find myself an outsider at this point, I can only put to you another question: Are you really sure that the issue of the ordination of women is so fundamental to the gospel that you would leave your Church and, in some cases, surrender your ministries on that point?
Is that in essence a central datum of Catholicity?
So where is Catholic renewal to go from here?
Only you can answer that.
I would hope that you would see beyond that, and issues like it, the primary claims of Christ in his Church, to love him and to promote him as Lord of the Church.
Confidence in that truth is the seed-bed of growth.
Warmth and enthusiasm
The second thing a fire does is to warm the house and make it inviting.
How does this apply to the life of the Church?
I mentioned at the start of this address that around the fire Joseph and Mary and their children would have gathered for fun and fellowship.
As a matter of fact, from the physical realities of heat and cold have come many of our everyday analogies.
We talk of being ‘cold as ice’, ‘hot blooded’, ‘cold blooded’, ‘on fire’, and so on.
When the fire of the Holy Spirit falls, he warms our hearts for the things of God.
In a word, he enthuses us.
The word enthusiasm comes from a root meaning ‘God-intoxicated’.
Sadly, in some parishes I find more apathy than enthusiasm.
Enthusiasm usually leads to growth, when coupled with sensitivity and knowledge.
Apathy, whatever it is linked with ‘declines into death.
I love the opening words of the Magnificat: ‘My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Saviour’(Luke 1.46–47).
Mary's heart was enlarged with a great vision of God who comes to overthrow the oppressor and rescue the poor.
Service begins with praise.
You priests — let your service for Christ arise from the warmth of your praise.
You fellow Christians — never lose the warm love for your Lord, because that is the very centre of your service for him.
I'd love to see the warmth and enthusiasm of the Spirit spilling over into our worship on Sundays.
Yes, let there be dignity, colour, light and majesty in our worship.
Yes, let there be solemnity and reverence at the high points of our celebration.
Does that have to mean coldness, reserve and a frowning aloofness that drives ordinary people away?
Of course not!
These characteristics have no real place in vibrant Christian worship, whether of Catholic or Evangelical variety.
Let us have warmth as well as dignity, smiles alongside the serious, and joy at the heart of it all.
Power and conviction
Finally, there is something about fire when it is small and controllable that is lovely, but uncontrolled it is unpredictable and rather frightening.
Think of the might of a forest fire or the burning heat of the sun.
There is, we have to say, something unpredictable about the work of the Holy Spirit.
Mary was to find that out as time went on.
She was sent out on an adventure which took her from the Annunciation to pentecost, and the questions and uncertainties built up.
There were times when the ministry of her Son left her feeling cut out of the action, and she was amazed and perhaps frightened at what she had unleashed on the world.
The questions led up to the cross and even beyond it.
On that cross her dying Son said to John: ‘Behold, your mother!’
(John 19.27) There she lost everything that really mattered.
Surely there could not have been a more destructive fire than Calvary; but more was to come.
Through the resurrection the fire scorched forth at pentecost and to the foundation of the Church.
The fire, burning its way through the structures of old Israel, created a new community of faith and love.
I would like to enlarge on this theme, but I dare not because our experience falls far short of what we dimly perceive in the pages of Scripture.
Much as we love our Church, we know it falls far short of its inheritance of faith.
Listen to Alec Vidler:
A great book, a bell-ringing book about the Holy Spirit could be written, though it might be in the form of a poem or a novel rather than a theological treatise.
The reason why this book has not yet been written is that conscious experience of the presence and life of the Spirit among contemporary Christians is so thin and weak and hampered that conditions do not exist in which anyone can write with full-blooded conviction on the subject.
(Christian Belief , SCM 1957).
How may we change those conditions so that the book may be written, or, more importantly, that lives may be changed through that same Spirit of power?
We know that ‘theologically’ only he can do it, but we can play our part.
I dream, I hope and I pray that in our diocese we shall see God ‘s Spirit, the Spirit that fell on Mary, coming to us and doing great things for God.
Won't it be wonderful when it happens that you and I will be able to share a little secret that, in the womb of Walsingham, on our diocesan retreat ‘a prayer was uttered and a commitment determined.
There in 1988 a little vision of God was seen; there we were strengthened by the Spirit of God to go back to our deaneries and parishes more confident ‘more convinced of the truths of our faith, to share him with others in the way that Mary did.
THE CHURCH'S YEAR
Advent: ‘Now is the Acceptable Time’ Mark parish church, Advent Sunday, 3 December 1990
Quite a few years ago now I was at a Family Service on an Advent Sunday, and the young curate began his talk with a question addressed to the children.
‘Can anyone tell me’, he asked, ‘what is the special name for today?’
The answer given by one little boy will always remain with me.
‘Sir,’ he said, ‘today is Adventure Sunday.’
What a good answer!
Of course, that is what Advent is all about — God's adventure in breaking into our history and making it ‘his-story’.
What does Advent mean for us today?
How can we make sense of it?
Let me first introduce you to my text: 2 Corinthians 6.2.
‘Now is the acceptable time; behold, now is the day of salvation.’
In this passage Paul, writing quite soon after the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, is quite emphatic in stating that, because of Jesus Christ, God's time has invaded ours, and this is the moment of decision.
Advent reminds us of the significance of God's time .
I wonder if you are aware that in the Bible there are two words for time and that, generally speaking, they refer to two quite different ideas.
The first word is used to describe ordinary time — past, present and future.
The word used is chronos , from which comes our word ‘chronology’.
So dates like 1066 or Aunt Ethel's birthday all belong to chronos time.
The other word,kairos , is a word that is used a great deal to describe God's breaking into our time and history to bring his salvation.
Through Christ, God has made sense of time, and the moment of his ‘breaking in’ becomes the moment of discovery, hope and salvation.
It was with this meaning in mind that Paul told his readers: ‘Now is the acceptable time (kairos ); behold, now is the day of salvation.’
In a limited way we can understand this, because for all of us certain dates stand out with striking significance.
Let me ask some members of the congregation a few questions:
First, the Vicar: Why is 12 August special for you?
Reply: It's the anniversary of my wedding.
To Susan: Why is 12 December a day you will never forget?
Reply: It was the day my child was born.
To Andy: 12 July is important to you.
Why?
Reply: It was the day I passed my exam.
Days like that are very important to us.
We measure happiness and sadness by momentous things that happened on occasions such as these.
A day passes from being merely ordinary (chronos ) into one irradiated with a special significance (kairos ) because of the event with which it is permanently associated.
Let me give you another example.
I still recall the day John Kennedy died.
I was sitting on the top deck of a London bus when the news travelled from passenger to passenger: ‘The president of the United States has been shot.’
The bus pulled over to the side of the road and the driver rushed into a newsagent's shop to get the facts.
It was terrible news.
This was not the shooting of an ordinary man, but that of the president of the United States.
We were all caught up in the shock and wondered what the significance was.
For the Christian, God's time is Jesus-time: his coming.
By his coming to us as a human being and by his suffering, dying and rising for us, our lives have meaning and hope.
Kairos time has invaded chronos time.
This takes me into my second point:Advent means that through Christ this world has a destiny because God has poured into it his hope .
As we approach Christmas the real tragedy is that the vast majority of our friends — good, sincere people, most of them — will not get within a mile of the real meaning of Christmas.
There will be rejoicing — but at what?
There will be feasting — but for what?
There will be drinking and revelling — but to what end?
Our friends will still be thinking of Christmas as chronos time — just another festival.
The German philosopher Ernst Bloch, who incidentally was a communist, once analysed modern society as suffering from a disease he called ‘death by bread alone’.
He wrote: ‘It is like  a vast supermarket in which absentmindedly, yet intent on what we are doing, we push our shopping trolleys up one aisle and down the other, while death and alienation have the run of the place.’
This ‘death by bread alone’ concept means that people in the West have lost sight of spiritual and eternal values and now only perceive material and temporal aims.
We are like Hans Christian Anderson's tale of the Emperor who believed he was clothed in the finest garments — but all the time he was naked.
For the Christian who is living in the shadow of Advent, this life is no longer a ‘cul-de-sac’ but a road of hope, because God has taken up residence here.
Gerard Manley Hopkins' great poem ‘God's Grandeur’ puts it so well:
The world is charged with the grandeur of God.
It will flame out, like shining from shook foil;…
Hopkins goes on:
And for all this ‘nature is never spent;
There lives the dearest freshness deep down things;
The Christian agrees.
We look at life, we look at the values that Christ has introduced, we look at the unity between the worlds of spirit and matter and we are in no doubt that we abide in God's eternal love.
‘There lives the dearest freshness deep down things.’
Advent signals values: that God loved us so much that he was willing to enter upon an adventure that cost him the death of his Son.
That love continues, and one day will be the reason for his coming as Saviour and, yes, as Judge.
What is our response?
Let me give you two quite different answers.
The first, alas, is all too common.
It is told by Tony Hancock in ‘The Blood Donor’, a classic episode in his wonderful TV series.
In it he boasts of his gifts to charity, all written down in his little black book:
Half a crown to Arab refugees, one shilling and threepence for the lifeboats, sixpence to Christian Aid, five bob to Help the Aged, self-denial week — ninepence.
When the great Audit Day comes and the Great Accountant says to  me, ‘And what did you do?’,
I shall hand him my little black book and say, ‘Ere you are, Mate.
Add that little lot up!’
It's a good story but the ending is wrong, because you and I have nothing to contribute except our brokenness, our helplessness and weakness.
The story speaks as though the Great Auditor is a total stranger.
A far better story and, dare I say it, a more Christian understanding ‘comes from my second illustration.
It happened to me in Watford many years ago.
I was returning from a hospital where I had been visiting someone, and I was last in a bus queue.
It was a very foggy evening and extremely cold.
The other people in the queue had obviously been waiting longer than I and were moaning and groaning.
The bus was so late.
Then we heard the sound of a vehicle.
Excitement changed to despair as people realized it wasn't the bus — only a car, which crawled past us.
Suddenly it stopped, and reversed until it was level with me.
Out of the fog came a voice: ‘George?
George Carey?
Is that you?’
I recognized the voice!
It was a close friend.
Thankfully I accepted his invitation to ‘jump in the back’, and home we sped.
Let's continue the story for just a moment in a ridiculous way.
Let us imagine that, back at the bus stop ‘the other people were furious.
‘What right had he to accept that lift?’ cries one lady.
‘I was in the queue before him.
It's not fair!’
But it was fair.
You see, she did not know the driver.
I did.
That made all the difference.
The story, I believe, goes to the heart of what Advent is all about.
It is about a relationship that changes the way we look at life; it is about a friendship that will take us through life, facing the black moments as well as the good; it is about God ‘s time breaking into our lives, giving them hope and meaning and joy.
‘Now is the acceptable time; behold, now…,
Christmas: a sign of God with Us Wells Cathedral, Christmas 1988
In December 1859 the editorial of a leading scientific journal concluded its survey of scientific achievements with the statement: ‘No significant piece of research or outstanding discovery happened this year.’
What an academic gaffe — that was the year that saw the publication of Charles Darwin's The Origin of Species , a book that was to shake the very foundations of Western thought!
In a similar way, a Roman soldier writing from Palestine to his parents in about 4 BC might well have written: ‘This is an out-of-the-way dump.
Fancy getting posted to this land of war-crazy illiterates.’
And yet, that land of ‘war-crazy illiterates’ was to be the birthplace of Jesus Christ: the person whose words and actions have inspired millions of people down the centuries.
Christmas is for most of us a magical moment in the year when we gather with our families, sing familiar carols and see the delight in the eyes of the children as they open their stockings and presents.
But what makes it most special for the Christian is the celebration of the coming of God's Son into our troubled world.
There can be no disputing the word ‘troubled’ either.
We celebrate this Christmas in the shadow of three awful human tragedies — the earthquake in Armenia in the Soviet Union; the train crash in north London and now, this week, the air disaster in Lockerbie.
How dreadful.
It could also be that for some of you 1988 has also seen some trouble, a bereavement perhaps, that has shaken you to the foundations.
You will be wondering, what is the message of Christmas for me this year in the face of this or that problem?
Listen then to the message of the angel in Luke 2.10,12: ‘I bring you good news of a great  joy which will come to all the people…
And this will be a sign for you: you will find a babe wrapped in swaddling cloths and lying in a manger.’
A sign — and it is important to remember that Christmas itself is only a sign.
A sign speaks of something beyond itself.
All the trappings of Christmas — the decorated tree, lights, the presents we give, the crib, tinsel, crackers, the eating and drinking which make up our celebrations — are only ‘signs’.
The sign or the symbol, however, can be ignored and treated as an end in itself.
For many people, Christmas is a time to have an apocalyptic hangover or binge; the Christian bit is an unnecessary encumbrance to them.
For others, Christmas is a welcome relief from the pressure of work and a time to recuperate.
For busy housewives, Christmas can present itself with other problems — over-excited children and a million and one things to do.
Little wonder then that at this festive season of good will to all people, arguments and friction mock our pretence at peace and sometimes split the family.
So, we have to ask again: What, please, is Christmas a sign of?
It is a sign of God's presence with us.
You see, even at the time it was only a sign.
The baby did not open its eyes and start preaching a sermon.
He did not hand out sayings of Jesus in a little red book, or give them Christmas presents.
The baby was only a sign and could only have been understood later in the light of the life of the person who was to be the Saviour of the world.
Indeed, here is a reminder that Christmas can only be understood in the light of later events, can only be discovered in all its wonderful freshness and life when we discover for ourselves that Jesus is the human face of God.
We also discover at this point the reality of love at the heart of the sign.
Just think for a moment of the way love is expressed in our giving.
All right, I know that one of us will get the inevitable bottle of aftershave, or talcum powder.
There was a time when I could have stocked a chemist's shop with male toiletries!
Yet leaving that aside, our gifts are signs of our love or respect for one another.
Parents know what their children are longing for and will give them what they want, even if every piggy bank in the house has to be broken open.
Love gives.
You see, there are many talkers about: politicians  who want to change society but have not got time to help their next door neighbour; Christians who want to sing their hymns but can't be bothered to get involved in their local church.
It is not love if it is locked up in the vaults of our dreams for a better world and a happier life.
Love has to move from idea to reality, and that is always God's way — the way of incarnation.
That theological word is a wonderful word describing God's action of becoming human for each one of us.
No faith is more materialistic than God's surprising action of sending Jesus into our world for us.
In one of his books, David Jenkins speaks of a cartoon which shows God sitting on a cloud looking very cross and saying: ‘You love one another or I'll come down there and thump you.’
Well, he does come down — not to thump us but to love us in Jesus, to teach us the Christian way, and to take our sins and failures to the cross and to rise again in triumph for us all.
A sign of God with us.
But a sign also of God's commitment to his world.
You see, Christmas is linked with the season of Advent — the season of hope which sets before us the hope of his coming to restore all things and bring all things to a glorious conclusion.
So the angels sang the Gloria : ‘Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace among men with whom he is pleased!’
(Luke 2.14)
Yes, we grieve when tragedy strikes in such awful forms as we have seen recently.
We are heartbroken when death comes in its ugly presence into our homes, and we dislike the unpalatable fact of impermanence.
But the message of Christmas is that God will never leave us and his love will endure for ever, which makes Christmas a real celebration of God's commitment to our world and makes sense of all our hopes and dreams.
This can only be fully understood, however, when we as individuals make our own personal and spiritual visit to Bethlehem.
You may know the delightful story of G.K. Chesterton who was always getting lost.
One day he found himself at Market Harborough but with no idea where he was going.
So he sent a telegram to his wife saying: ‘Am in Market Harborough — where ought I to be?’ and she, being a practical woman, sent a terse telegram with one word: ‘Home’.
That is the message of Christmas: come home.
Come home to his love.
Come home to an understanding of the world which puts God back at the centre of it.
Christmas is not the reality of the Christian faith: it is a sign of God's gracious invitation to celebrate his love personally by welcoming him into our hearts and lives, not just once a year but every day we live.
In the words of the poem by Angelus Silesius:
Tho' Christ a thousand times in Bethlehem is born
If he's not born in thee, thou art still forlorn.
May God bless us all this Christmas time as we make our way to the manger and celebrate the gift of his love and life.
the Epiphany: Strangers Discover Christ The Bishop's farewell address to the Cathedral of Bath and Wells, Epiphany Sunday, 6 January 1991
I am going to talk about the familiar and rich story of the visit of the Magi, the wise men, to the infant Christ, from Matthew 2.1–12.
Epiphany is one of the oldest festivals in the Church, far Older than Christmas.
It introduces a wonderful idea, that strangers from afar find the Christ and discover him to be the Saviour of the world.
Let me mention three things very briefly this morning.
A puzzling question
‘Where is he who has been born king of the Jews?’
(Matthew 2.2) This is an ancient question, but as up to date as the latest computer.
Of course, we might put it a different way today: ‘Can God be known, and is the Christian faith the answer to human needs?’
This, I want to submit, is far more important than many of the material questions and issues that fill our waking hours — questions of food, jobs, ambition and human happiness.
If God is, then it makes all these other things worthwhile.
In other words, if in Jesus Christ I find the answer to the question ‘Where is he?’ then all the transitory questions of life find genuine meaning around this wonderful centre.
So we find these men — were they three in number?
Who knows?— making a long journey.
I saw on a church bill-board recently the familiar statement, ‘Wise men still seek Christ’.
They do, and it is still a quest worth becoming a question: ‘Where is he?’
The firm answer given by the Christian faith is, look no further than Jesus Christ.
He can meet the longings of the human heart.
Go to him, abide in him, trust in him, look to him.
Some of you may have heard me say before that when I was  a young ordinand I met up with a marvellous Canadian bishop, Ralph Dean.
There he stood in the college chapel, grizzled and weather-beaten by harsh Canadian winters.
He came out with a wonderful phrase which has stayed with me over the years.
‘If you feel that God is far, far away, remember this — he has not moved.’
A peculiar place
God pops up in the most surprising of places.
Fancy him turning up in a snivelling little place like Bethlehem.
Of course, today it has romantic overtones.
Go to Bethlehem today, and in spite of the unrest there, it has that undeniable atmosphere of prayer and sanctity poured into it by millions of pilgrims and visitors.
What a holy place — but only insofar as in that place the Saviour became a human person and started his adventure of faith.
Bethlehem means ‘house of bread’, and the One born there became the ‘bread of life’ who becomes our spiritual food today.
Yet Bethlehem the place is no more special, really, than any other place now: because the coming of Christ into our world has sanctified every place, every place becomes holy, where he may be found: your homes, your places of work, and, yes, in a special way, churches like this glorious Cathedral of Wells.
Sometimes bishops get ridiculous letters.
I received a few not so long ago complaining about this place, saying that it does not speak of God; that it is a monument to a man-made religion; that it ought to be pulled down and a block of flats built here instead, and the money spent on missionary work abroad.
Well, the Dean and I took great joy in disabusing that person of that mistaken view.
Indeed, not so long ago I received another letter from an American woman who came to Wells two years ago.
Her marriage was in ruins but here in this place she found peace.
She prayed here and thought about her marriage; she vowed to do something about it.
She lit a candle over there as a silent prayer for her estranged husband and went home.
She wrote to me saying that in this place she found it possible to forgive for the first time and then return home to seek reconciliation.
It is my desire that this lovely place, made valid with all the prayers and hopes of generations of worshippers, will continue to be open, friendly, worshipful, adaptable and meaningful to us all.
A hazardous journey
The Magi had found the answer to their question in a simple child and, in T.S.
Eliot's words: ‘no longer at home in the old dispensation’, they returned home having found and having been found.
No doubt the journey back was as hazardous as it was coming.
That is also a parable of life.
We cannot say that having faith in Christ makes life easy.
Of course not.
Faith is always an adventure of trust and hope.
It is not an easy, cost-free ride, but it is the constant working out of our hopes and fears.
For myself and Eileen as we move on to a ministry which will have its own surprises in the days ahead, we hope that we can lead our beloved Church on.
In spite of the obvious gains in recent years — and no one could be more grateful than I to Robert Runcie and all he achieved — we now need a period of calmness, of peace, to grow and get on with the real work of caring for others and serving Christ in and through others.
The real work of the Church is not done, as anyone in his or her sane mind knows, at General Synod.
The real work of the Church is done in every ordinary place of worship.
You and I have this wonderful mission to share Christ with others, this mysterious treasure who alone can make sense of it all.
I love the rabbinic story of Rabbi Schmelke who lived in Russia.
One day a very poor man came begging at his door.
‘I have nothing and I have five children to feed,’ he pleaded.
Now Rabbi Schmelke and his wife were as poor as the beggar.
But the rabbi was a very kind man and his heart went out to the poor man.
He remembered that his wife had one precious jewel, and he did what no man should ever do — he went and gave his wife's only jewel to the beggar.
No sooner had he shut the door than his wife found him out.
‘But that was a very precious jewel!’ she stormed.
So the rabbi ran after the man and said: ‘I have just found out that the jewel I gave you is more precious than I thought — don't sell it for too little.’
I think there is a parable in that for you and me as we seek to share Christ today.
Lent: The Glory of the Cross Five talks given in Wells Cathedral during lent, march-April 1988
In these addresses we are going to contemplate the cross of Jesus from five different angles.
We will consider its mystery as well as its glory.
Before we begin, we need to take on board the mystery, a word which will follow us through the five sessions.
I do not claim to be able to unravel the complexities of atonement.
If I am able to offer a small flicker of light, that will give me great joy!
The cross is a mystery.
Indeed, I will go further.
In the New Testament period it was obviously an embarrassment.
For the Romans, crucifixion was a penalty reserved for criminals and for outcasts.
For the first Christians to claim this as the heart of their faith was a scandal of the first order.
Now it has to be said that the people of that period could at least understand such notions as ‘sacrifice’, ‘propitiation’ and ‘atonement’.
For us that entire world-view has disappeared.
We are not used to such notions and there are few world religions that still offer ‘sacrifices’.
We do not believe that it is necessary to placate God in such a way.
Indeed, it may be argued that the success of Christianity in establishing the finality of the cross in dealing with sin ‘once and for all’ has removed from our minds its roots in the common experience of our lives.
So our problem is understanding why it should have ever occurred to God that we needed redeeming, saving, restoring, in such a radical way.
Why was it necessary?
Why couldn't God let bygones be bygones?
Why did God choose that particular form?
Not all the notions concerning sacrifice are entirely absent from our lives.
We speak of the ‘sacrifices’ we make for one another— that notion rings many bells.
We speak of a mother  sacrificing her life for her children.
We are used to evil men demanding a ransom before their victim can be released.
Terry Waite languishes in Lebanon — but it is possible to believe that if our Government came up with a suitably attractive offer, he would be released.
So the ideas are still very meaningful in our world, but what we are saying about the cross is this:that in this particular way and through this particular person, God chose to redeem humankind.
It was final, it was full and it was free .
Let us distinguish between the two words ‘atonement’ and ‘salvation’: atonement refers to a past event, but salvation speaks of it continuing into the future.
We might like to have that distinction in mind as these lectures continue.
The problem is clear.
Christians claim that what happened on Good Friday was decisive for humankind — it was of such a definitive, absolute nature that it split world history in two and it declares that the many strands of human experience (hope, joy, peace, human fulfilment) run through the crossroads of the cross.
That is quite a claim!
I am now going to offer you five ways of interpreting the cross.
Towards the end of each I will describe a recent example of a person who lived and suffered in such a way.
Jesus — Our Example
In I Peter 2, the writer looks at Jesus from the viewpoint of suffering Christians and says: ‘Yes, I know all that you are enduring…look at Jesus…follow him.’
It was certainly the case that in the first centuries the example of Jesus must have been a tremendous model for living and for dying.
Consider Jesus; keep him before you as your icon.
He suffered for you, so suffer for him.
In life, no doubt all of us have been inspired by the example of others — parents, teachers, friends.
Sometimes it has been a case of seeing something done really well and it inspires us to do it even better.
An artist friend once remarked: ‘I saw this chap make something out of an ordinary piece of wood — he fashioned it into an exquisite work of art.’
He was so inspired that he became an artist too.
Yet the idea of Jesus as our example did not become a theory of atonement until the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and I  want to introduce you now to our first theologian — Peter Abelard.
That particular period of history saw the rise of some wonderful thinkers — Bernard of Clairvaux, Thomas à Kempis, Meister Eckhart.
It was an age dominated by new ideas, new discoveries and particularly by mysticism based on love.
Peter Abelard himself was a fascinating and unusual man.
Some of you may have read the book by Helen Waddell about him and his love for Héloïse.
Peter was a monk, a scholar with a brilliant, innovative mind.
There was a tragic, brief love affair which was doomed to fail, and it is not our concern here.
What is our concern, though, is the notion of love which he saw was at the centre of understanding the work of Christ.
He had inherited a view of the cross which saw it as the place where Christ did something which changed God's mind about human beings.
It satisfied God's honour — a price had to be paid and Christ paid it.
The analogies at the time were very crude and based upon feudal understandings of barons and servants and themes of honour, respect and dignity.
Peter Abelard rejected these crude and often absurd ideas which seemed to lower the dignity of God.
In their place he substituted a psychological theory which is almost modern in its understanding and penetration.
He saw the power of love to inspire and transform.
In his opinion, the cross of Christ did not change God, or our relationship with God at all, but it changes us.
The cross does not affect God because he has always been loving and desiring our repentance; it affects us by presenting us with an example of love and sacrifice which overwhelms us because of its outrageous generosity.
Let us now dig a little deeper into this theory and try to appreciate Abelard's thought from within.
For him the power of love is paramount.
For Abelard there is a transforming energy in love which can change people.
Perhaps that came from his own experience of human love — we don't really know.
We have all seen love change things.
Look what the love of another human being does to human behaviour.
Look at what the love of literature, art, sport, does to people's attitudes and patterns of life.
For Abelard, then, the cross was an act of love which, though past, still has immense capacity to create.
Listen to him writing to Héloïse about the power of the story of love:
Put yourself in the position of one of the bystanders on the path of Christ's passion: Are you not moved to tears of remorse by the only Begotten Son of God, who for you and all mankind, in his innocence, was seized, dragged along, blindfolded, mocked, spat upon, crowned with thorns, finally hanged between thieves on the cross?…
Keep him in mind.
Look at him going to be crucified for your sake.
Be one of the crowd, one of the women who wept and lamented over him…
In your mind be always present at his tomb, weep and wail with the faithful women…
Prepare with them the perfumes for his burial.
Let me now mention two particular ideas in Abelard's theory of the power of love.
First, the one I have already drawn attention to — love is infused in us by revealing love.
The cross, in his view, is like a gigantic visual aid which shocks, horrifies and draws our pity and our concern.
So, Abelard says, consider, look, keep him in mind.
Second, Abelard concentrates upon the action of salvation.
He does not narrowly concentrate on the last week of Jesus' life; the entire life of Jesus was an example of sacrificial love.
Christ ‘illuminates’ us by his teaching, by his prayer life and all the deeds of his incarnation.
The death of Jesus was its tremendous climax.
So what do you and I make of this theory?
Does it not make a lot of sense because it rings true to our experience?
Love has that effect on us.
But this theory, which is sometimes called ‘the moral influence’ theory, is considered to have a number of weaknesses that we should look at.
First, does it underestimate the power of sinfulness in us all?
Let me give some very basic illustrations.
Suppose I am a very heavy smoker and I am anxious to break the habit, and you say to me: ‘What a wonderful man is the Bishop of Bristol; he never smoked a cigarette in his life.
Make him your example.
Consider him.’
Suppose you are on drugs and you know what they are doing to your body but you can't break the habit.
You are a slave, you are weak and it is no good for someone to say to you, ‘Just follow my example’, because at moments like that the intrinsic goodness of another person becomes an impossible dream.
They are who they are, and I am who I am — the gulf appears unbridgeable.
The example  may be inspiring, but I need a new ‘me’ to get to where I want to go.
So Abelard's theory seems to present me with a challenge as formidable as climbing Mount Everest.
Some thinkers have gone further and have even said that Abelard's idea of sin is superficial and inadequate.
Perhaps it is.
Experience of life suggests that evil does ravage our capacity to listen to God and hear him; it does lead to deterioration of character and to further separation from God.
If people are unwilling to consider the suffering of Christ, how can it ever have power to change them?
The theory seems then rather intellectual and remote from everyday experience.
A second criticism is that the theory assumes that all emotional response is the same.
Dr Kenneth Kirk offered this criticism years ago, that some people are moved more easily than others by suffering and death.
There are emotional types and there are some who are matter-of-fact and fairly cold in their emotional response.
This idea does leave out in the cold some of us who are not moved that much by emotion.
Then there is another point that I have just touched upon: if sin degrades and hardens us, then this will affect our emotional response anyway and make it even harder for the cross to be effective in inspiring us to change our way of living.
Third, it has been argued that Abelard's theory is too subjective.
We have already seen that it rejects any notion that God is changed.
For this reason the theory has been called a subjective theory of atonement because it insists that the cross changes us, not God; that he is always forgiving.
Does not this make forgiveness cheap grace and God himself a rather indulgent parent who is never put out by anything we do?
If it is true that humankind is fallen, that we are separated from the presence of God by our failure and helplessness and are in need of God's forgiveness, Abelard's views do not reflect sufficiently well the seriousness of our predicament.
They make it all too easy and cheap.
Yet Abelard's theory cannot be rejected totally.
It has to start with other ideas, offering us a clue or two as to why God chose this particular route for his Son and for us.
Let me pick out three aspects that may help to guide us.
The way of love .
When we look at the cross it does tell us how much God loves us.
Love is only fully understood by what it does.
We only really know love when it is expressed in action; when people demonstrate it.
Do you recall the story of Jesus at the house of Simon the Pharisee?
A woman came and poured ointment over his feet.
When Simon despised Jesus in his heart, Jesus replied: ‘Her sins, which are many, are forgiven, for she loved much; but he who is forgiven little, loves little’(Luke 7.47).
Her love showed in what she gave.
In what way is the life and death of Jesus an example of God's love?
This is the Achilles' heel of Abelard's theory, because Christ's death is only explicable if it saves us from a serious and dreadful predicament which is of eternal significance.
Christ's example is not that of helping us across a road, or showing us what good neighbours we must be — but costly, redemptive, self-emptying love; love which lays down its life for others so that they might be restored to God.
The way of sacrifice .
Love and sacrifice, of course, belong together because love is never wholly platonic.
Love is a sacrifice that comes in the willingness to be emptied out in selfless giving.
The sacrifice comes in dying for that valued person or thing.
Yet, for love, it is never called or named sacrifice.
Any parent knows that.
We pour much time, money, anxiety and effort into our children simply for the pleasure of seeing them grow into the kind of people we long for them to be.
Yet it is sacrifice which is offered in delight.
We only start to talk about sacrifice with our children when something seriously wrong has happened in the relationship, when the mother or father says bitterly: ‘Don't you understand what I have given up for you?
My career, my ambition ‘my dreams — and all that does not mean a fig to you!’
The way of understanding .
Human love can also be misunderstood.
We sometimes ask about a person: ‘Why has she chosen that course of action?
What on earth do they see in one another?
Why has he thrown up that promising career in politics to become a vicar?’
The point about love is its unpredictability; it has the capacity to surprise and even scandalize.
So it was with Jesus: he scandalized people by the company he kept, by the overturning of values which had become the cement of his society but which he saw as being barriers for people.
He chose a way of loving which was so outrageous and costly that only a few friends could follow him into his dark night of the soul.
Let me now illustrate some of these things by introducing you to a twentieth-century saint who lived a life of love in a radical way.
Her name was Lisa Skobtsova, and she was born in Riga in 1891, and studied in Russia.
Her father's death when she was eighteen destroyed her faith.
How could she believe in God in such a world as this?
‘There is no God, only sorrow, wickedness and injustice in the world.’
She poured herself into self-sacrifice now for another cause — the people.
She married another student and together they joined the communist party.
Lisa was a close friend of Tolstoy and Berdyaev but rejected their Christian ideas.
She joined a plot to assassinate Trotsky and had to flee to France.
In exile she expected their first child, having left her husband in Russia; he was later killed, and she suffered the blow of another death — her own child.
Yet this death led her back to God and restored her faith.
She found Christian friends and found a Cause more wonderful to die for.
Her great ability was to get through to the outcasts of society — the drunks, the crazed, the depressed.
She would go into seamy dives, sitting there, listening, consoling.
Orthodox Christian eyebrows were raised.
How could she go around with such undesirables?
In 1932 she became a nun and was given the name Maria ‘in memory of St Maria of Egypt who lived a life of penitence in the desert’.
Maria saw her mission to go out to act and speak in the desert of human hearts.
For her, the life of a conventional nun, a safe and comfortable existence separate from the misery and filth of the world was just not possible.
That was not the example of the Lord.
The war came, she was swept up with many others by the Germans and ended up in Ravensbrück concentration camp.
There she served others sacrificially.
She was given the chance to leave the camp on a number of occasions, but she waived the right so that others might go.
She died on Easter Eve, 1945.
The following day, Easter Day, the Red Cross entered the camp.
Maria followed Christ to the end; he was her inspiring Lord, he had changed her life and she knew he could change others.
Her job was to live the cross.
Let me give a brief application.
Abelard's theory, coming out of the experiences and theology of his day, presents a challenge to modern Christians who, all too easily, overintellectualize their faith.
Abelard encourages us to see the cross as a moving force for change.
Perhaps this is a challenge  to put it at the centre of our lives, to think about it and, this Lent, to read the story as if we were there.
Perhaps it is a challenge to our Church to be a more cross-oriented fellowship, living it, and working out what it means.
Jesus — Our Pioneer
If there is a hymn that encapsulates the example theory embraced by Peter Abelard it must be that well-known verse from C.F. Alexander's hymn, ‘There is a green hill far away’:
O dearly, dearly has he loved,
And we must love him too,
And trust in his redeeming blood,
And try his works to do.
Of course, Alexander would not in the slightest deny the more traditional view.
You will remember she wrote:
There was no other good enough
To pay the price of sin;
He only could unlock the gate
Of heaven, and let us in.
In this second talk I want to mention a view which has a long history in the Church, far longer than my previous subject.
I call the subject ‘Jesus — our pioneer’ because that seems to sum up the thrust of the idea.
The word ‘pioneer’ only occurs three times in the New Testament and the most important occurrence is found in Hebrews 12.2.
The idea of a pioneer was a very important one for the early Christians.
They were aware that in a deep way Jesus had dealt a death blow to sin and death, but they believed there was more to it than that.
They saw him also as a trail-blazer, someone who goes ahead of others and prepares the way.
Neil Armstrong is a good example, as the first man to walk on the moon: ‘One small step for man, one giant leap for mankind.’
We might think of a pioneer as someone who goes into the wilderness to prepare a home for others.
The first theologian I want to introduce you to now is a  second-century Christian called Irenaeus.
Irenaeus was bishop of a tiny Christian community in Lyons towards the end of the second century.
The Christians faced fierce persecution and opposition, especially from a more numerous religious group known as the Gnostics.
This group's theory of salvation attempted to incorporate Christ into their concept of God, but it was at a formidable price — he was just one of a number of divine beings in the pantheon.
Against this, Irenaeus asserted the primacy of Jesus for God's plan of salvation and, in opposition to a formidable heresy, developed the first Christian theology outside of the New Testament.
Irenaeus begins with Adam.
In his view Adam was not a fully developed being when he transgressed God's Law.
He was young and vulnerable and was thus easy prey for the wiles of the Evil One.
A key passage of Scripture for Irenaeus was Ephesians 1, where God's plan for humankind is mentioned.
Irenaeus saw a key word in this —anakepbalaiosis — which in the English translation means ‘to unite all things’.
However, the word can equally be translated ‘to recapitulate’, meaning that Christ summed up all things in himself.
There is a line from a familiar hymn which captures this idea very well: ‘A second Adam to the fight and to the rescue came.’
We can easily see what Irenaeus was exploring.
Adam and Eve were created by God for a glorious destiny with him.
They were not fully developed human beings; they had just begun.
The Evil One saw his chance and robbed them of their destiny.
The second Adam came, however, not only to save humankind, but to take us on to the destiny that should have been ours in the first place.
We can see then that Irenaeus's idea was very optimistic.
Christ recapitulated all of Adam's sin and restored us to God.
Indeed, God made of it something more wonderful than anybody could have thought.
There is a snatch of this in the Roman Mass for Easter Day which talks in terms of‘O felix culpa ’—‘O blessed sin which wrought man's redemption’.
Without the sin of Adam we would have been deprived of the wonder of our salvation.
A second element in this theory is that Jesus entered into every aspect of human life and sanctifies it with his presence and love.
I must confess that I find this deeply attractive, and I want to draw attention to a few Bible passages where I think this idea is being worked out.
We see it, for example, in the  birth of Jesus.
Of course the infancy narratives stress the divinity of Christ, but they are also emphasizing the incarnation of Christ as he shares our nature in his human growth and development.
We see him depicted as a young boy in Luke 2, obedient to his parents, going up to the Temple and spending time with the learned men asking questions.
Hebrews 5.8–9 tells us that: ‘Although he was a Son, he learned obedience through what he suffered; and being made perfect he became the source of eternal salvation to all who obey him.’
Why do I find that attractive?
I am suspicious of gods who dwell benignly in heavens, immutable and supreme.
Here is a Messiah who by becoming one of us knows all about human weakness, about human life and development.
He knows all about sadness, temptation and the grubby facts of life.
I can take comfort in this, knowing that my Lord has entered into our humanity and brought it home to God.
You see, this view takes incarnation seriously.
It is so easy for Western protestantism to fall into the trap of thinking that the last week of Jesus' life is all-important.
Well, it is important.
Without it there would be no Christianity!
But all that preceded it was very important too.
We must never separate incarnation and atonement.
The whole of Christ's life was atoning.
He entered deeply into our pain and grief.
‘Surely he has borne our griefs and carried our sorrows’, says Isaiah 53.4.
Let me go on now and tease out three aspects of this ‘pioneer’ idea.
Jesus our pioneer overcomes death .
Hebrews 2 contains a fascinating idea that Jesus had to be made human in order to overcome death for us; that is to say, he pioneered our way through the deep waters of death.
In Hebrews 2.9 we read: ‘But we see Jesus, who for a little while was made lower than the angels, crowned with glory and honour because of the suffering of death, so that by the grace of God he might taste death for every one.’
Jesus became a trail-blazer through the darkness of death and overcame it.
This is a familiar idea in the New Testament.
The New Testament writers were in no doubt that Jesus, through his resurrection, dealt a mortal blow to death and freed us from its influence and power.
Most of us will remember John Donn's wonderful lines:
Death, be not proud, though some have callèd thee
Mighty and dreadful, for thou art not so,
For those whom thou think ‘st thou dost overthrow
Die not, poor Death; nor yet canst thou kill me…
Why swell'st thou then?
One short sleep past, we wake eternally,
And Death shall be no more: Death, thou shalt die!
It is a wonderful comfort to know that Jesus has entered into our dying and will deliver us from it.
Fear of dying still grips our hearts.
Perhaps some of us here tonight are still gripped by fear of death.
One person said to me a year or two ago: ‘I'm scared of dying.
Yes, I believe in Jesus, but sometimes I wake up in the night just petrified.’
Let us face up to the reality of these fears and face them in the power of the cross.
Jesus our pioneer overcomes apparent failure .
Let's go back to the Greek idea of Jesus entering into our sinfulness and weakness.
If you ever get the chance of going to the catacombs in Rome you will see on the walls a very popular image of the cross shaped as an anchor.
Sometimes the anchor will be fashioned as a fish-hook.
The fish-hook image had an interesting story behind it.
Some of the later Greek thinkers developed Irenaeus's idea of Jesus defeating the power of evil, and they created a very vivid image of the defeat of Satan.
The picture was that of Christ impaled on a cross shaped like a fish-hook.
Satan, visualized as a great fish seeing his enemy in such distress, swoops to devour but gets more than he bargains for.
He is hooked.
We can quickly dispense with the crude mythology, but I like the concept of apparent failure.
It is clear that in the eyes of Jesus' contemporaries the cross was a contemptuous symbol.
Indeed, the cross was such an enormous stumbling block that we have in it a rather surprising proof of the genuineness of primitive Christianity.
If you were going to invent a brand new religion you would not start with a cross.
The cross denoted that the mission of Jesus had failed.
It was over.
The resurrection is God's vindication of the apparent failure.
I want to suggest to you that God has a far more positive attitude to failure than most of us.
We don't like failing; it hurts our pride; it brings us down to the dust.
God, however, sees the opportunity to recreate something new out of the failure we see.
Some years ago I saw on TV a most splendid series by a marvellous writer called Brian Clark.
Called ‘The Late Starter’, it is the story of a retired professor, Edward Brett.
Unknown to him, his wife is a gambler, who over the years has been secretly gambling away his money and assets.
The discovery is made on the day he retires.
He returns home to find she has left and he is bankrupt.
The series narrates his attempts to find employment.
Though he wants and needs work, no one wants a man of his age; furthermore, he realizes that his academic talents are not needed either.
His growing disillusionment is revealed ‘his gathering despair and feelings of hopelessness.
One episode ends with the proud man broken, humiliated and in tears.
Yet, from that terrible experience, hope is born — the late starter rises to new life.
The programme summed up for me all the human frustrations, hopelessness and despair.
I imagine most of us have entered that deep valley, and maybe some of us are in it now.
The cross declares: ‘I've been there.
I know.’
‘My God ‘my God, why hast thou forsaken me?’
That cry was a real cry of despair from the cross — not make-believe.
What about us?
I have a hunch that true life starts at the point of recognizing our failure.
That is the point when new life begins.
‘Unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies…
’(John 12.24) The importance of death is that for God it is the commencement of resurrection.
The cross takes us into death and failure, but the Greeks had another beautiful idea which is called ‘deification’.
Irenaeus puts it so splendidly: ‘He became human that we might become divine.’
He entered into our world to redeem it and restore it.
Jesus our pioneer restores all things and will bring them to a glorious fulfilment .
The third aspect shows a connection between this life and the one to come.
True Christianity never treats this world with contempt.
Beware of any form of faith which says: ‘Well, you know this life is unimportant; the real one is the one with God.’
No!
This life is sacred and is a gift.
Of course, the life with God will be glorious, but it will be a fulfilment of all the hopes and dreams here.
That is why Irenaeus hit the Gnostics so hard, because they rejected this  life as unimportant.
You and I will want to affirm this world and its beauty and its sadness and all the colours of life — the greens and golds, the greys and the blacks — as part of the tapestry which is God's gift to us all.
What about today?
How can we weave this theory into our theology and practice?
Let me take you to one twentieth-century Christian who seems to me to express this so vividly.
The man I have in mind is Oscar Romero, who was assassinated the year Robert Runcie was enthroned as Archbishop — 1980.
Romero was the unlikeliest of heroes and this is an encouragement to us.
As a priest and bishop he was not marked by revolutionary fervour — on the contrary, he was deeply conservative and disapproved of ‘political’ priests.
Hold that description of him in your mind for a moment.
Now turn to the country.
El Salvador is a poor country of just five million people; a place where the gulf between rich and poor could not be greater.
Because the clergy were on the whole ministering to the poor, many of them could not avoid being caught up in the unrest, violence and fear.
Some identified with a form of theology called ‘liberation theology ‘.
Romero disapproved of this theology; he did not believe that the way of Christ called anybody to overthrow governments.
As he saw it, the job of the Church was to get on with the task of proclaiming the gospel and ministering the sacraments.
When he was appointed Archbishop, the Government sighed with relief.
Here was an Archbishop after their own hearts.
Yet soon after his enthronement, Romero's close friend Fr Grande and two parishioners were callously shot in cold blood by security forces.
Fr Grande's crime?
He had preached a sermon in which he had said these words: ‘It is dangerous to be a Christian in our nation.
In fact it is practically illegal to be an authentic Christian, because the world which surrounds us is founded radically on an established disorder before which the mere proclamation of the gospel is subversive.’
The death of his friend became Romero's conversion.
He was outraged and demanded an explanation.
He closed all Catholic schools and colleges for three days and cancelled all services for the following Sunday, except for a single Mass in the Cathedral Church, to which 100,000 people came.
Events  swiftly followed.
Romero was caught up in denouncing policies which engulfed the poor in further misery and exploitation.
He saw that it was necessary to take sides.
There was escalating violence against the Church.
Romero became a symbol of hope to people.
When asked: ‘Why have you decided to take such a stand?’ he replied simply: ‘I felt it necessary to put feet on the gospel.’
The climax came when, on 24 March 1980, as he celebrated Mass, a shot rang out.
His blood mingled with the red wine of the Mass.
But it was a death in line with the pioneering Lord he followed; a fitting martyr's death for a very courageous man who found that God could be trusted with his weakness and fear.
Jesus — Who identifies wit Us
We are now faced with the question: From what did Jesus save us?
Let me now go to a number of scriptural passages to see how the New Testament sees the death of Jesus.
Common to all these verses is the idea that Jesus' death in some way removed our sin.
He became sin for us.
This idea developed in the Church and became linked with a theology which is known as ‘penal substitution’, the idea that Christ paid the penalty for you and me.
In the divine tribunal he became a sin offering.
In the post-Reformation world the doctrine of penal substitution gathered around it a very hard edge, especially north of the border in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Let us now go in our imaginations to Dunbartonshire and visit the town of Rhu in 1829 where the young minister of just twenty-nine was preaching.
He had been at this cure for a mere four years but his reputation was growing fast.
He was known for his brilliance, for his razor-sharp mind and for being a wonderful preacher.
His elders were becoming more than a little worried because people were saying his teaching was heretical.
For a start he was preaching that assurance was essential for salvation; that is, you could know within you that you were well and truly saved.
He was not saying merely that you believed it, but that you could know it as certainty!
Furthermore he was preaching against Calvinism.
He rejected John  Calvin's idea that Jesus paid a penalty to God.
So on this summer's evening, to an expectant and full congregation, we hear him saying something like this:
Now I hear some of you saying this: ‘Jesus saved me from my sins by taking my burdens himself; he came to this earth to save me and to redeem me.’
Oh, yes, we can all agree with that.
But how did he redeem you?
‘Oh,’ you reply, ‘he took the penalty for me.’
But what do you mean — he took the penalty for you?
‘I mean that I should have died that afternoon, but the matchless Son of God took my place, God visited all his wrath, judgement and curses upon Jesus and therefore I can go scot-free.’
But I want to put another point of view.
How can it be that Jesus could become sin for you and me?
How is it possible for someone to take my or anybody's sin upon himself?
You simply cannot switch moral qualities.
Of course he came to rescue us, of course he came to die for us, but he was not a sin offering to God because he was sinless.
So you ask me: ‘How are we redeemed therefore?’
I will tell you: He identified with our distress, our despair and our lostness.
He became so identified with us that he was the perfect penitent and made the perfect confession to the Father for us.
The sermon that evening was the last straw.
The minister, Dr McLeod Campbell, was accused of heresy and two years later deposed from his office.
His theology, nonetheless, was to have a major influence upon atonement thinking, and helped to shape modern thought.
Now, before we look at Campbell's teaching more closely, let me mention another thinker who probably had some influence on him.
Socinus was a radical Reformation thinker who saw Rome as the great harlot of Revelation 17.
He was a forerunner of Unitarianism.
He viewed Jesus as one who revealed God, but who was only a human being and no more than that.
For our purposes we must note one thing: he rejected any connection between our sinfulness and Jesus' death.
Moral qualities, he argued, cannot be transferred.
God can no more transfer his  sinlessness to us than we can transfer our rights or wrongs to one another.
So how did Socinus see God's forgiveness operating?
Simply in terms of God's free gift.
Salvation is not won by Christ but given by God.
In Socinus's theology, therefore, there was no room for Christ except as a voice proclaiming salvation.
In technical terms we say that Socinus rejected the ‘forensic’ idea of salvation.
So did Campbell, although he came close to it with his emphasis upon Christ as the perfect penitent who makes the perfect confession.
What does this mean for us?
Campbell is arguing that Christ shows God's love by identifying with us in our guilt and sinfulness and by standing before God as a perfect penitent.
Campbell is not saying that Christ takes our sin upon himself but he identifies so closely with us that it is as if he makes our confession and is thus separated from the presence of God for us.
Let us look at this more closely.
Is Dr Campbell saying that Christ did not really take our sin upon himself but acted as if he did?
That is the crux of the problem.
How can Christ be a perfect penitent if he is really sinless? putting it in ordinary terms: if you are completely innocent of a crime, no one is going to make much sense of it if you say: ‘I am not guilty of this offence, but I confess on behalf of others and wish to represent their guilt.’
Now, I happen to think that Campbell's idea is flawed because he wants to have his cake and eat it.
He wishes to reject the idea that Christ took upon himself our guilt but he wishes to say that Christ identified with our sin and weaknesses.
There is, nonetheless, a positive side to his teaching.
Let us think about the word ‘identification’.
The more you belong, the closer you identify, Think of children.
When we moved from Durham to Bristol our youngest daughter was ten.
By then she had acquired a distinctive Geordie accent and she was upset when her friends at school teased her about her rounded vowels and up and down, sing-song voice.
She felt excluded.
How did she react?
By acquiring a Bristol accent!
Think of teenagers.
It has been said of them that ‘in order to be different they dress exactly alike’!
In fact, you cannot find more conformity than among young people.
They are anxious to belong, and it shows in their tastes, dress and habits.
But it is true of us all — it is hard to break from the herd, it is hard to  be a rebel, it is hard to be a heretic.
Identification is part of our survival kit; it is the way we are.
To belong is to identify.
Think of missionaries who attempt to reach another group of people.
In order to have any remote chance of effective work they must learn the language, understand the culture and customs and identify in all kinds of ways with the people they wish to influence.
At the 1988 Lambeth Conference the Bishop of Hyderabad told an apt and amusing story about this.
When the troops pulled out of North Pakistan at the end of the last century, the Church Missionary Society sent a missionary doctor to the region to speak to the people of God's love.
The fierce Pathans saw this missionary in his little wooden home about a mile away and they said: ‘The British sent troops to kill us and they failed.
They now send a doctor to poison us.’
So they did not go anywhere near the doctor.
Months passed and the doctor despaired of ever reaching them.
Although he dressed as they did and walked among them, sullen glances were all he got.
He even learnt their language.
Still no breakthrough came.
One day, the missionary was awakened by the sound of scratching at the door, and the noise of whining.
He opened it and there was a village dog with a broken limb.
The doctor treated his first patient.
Washed and bandaged, the dog limped into the village.
‘Who did that?’
It could only be the doctor — and the breakthrough came.
Then, said the Bishop to the assembled Conference, ‘Who was the missionary — the dog or the doctor?’
In fact they both were.
The doctor with his presence and the dog as the witness to what the doctor had done.
Turning to Campbell's contribution, two ways are mentioned by which Christ identified with us.
First,Christ identified with our loneliness .
Campbell had no doubt that sin was essentially a form of loneliness; being cut off from God and his presence.
The consequence of sin is that it cuts us off from others.
It issues in forms of alienation or separation.
Christ, said Campbell, accepted a cutting off from his Father in order to unite us to God.
Let us think about this idea for a moment.
We live in a society riddled with loneliness: loneliness in offices, in our comfortable homes, on our estates and in our flats.
It is a loneliness caused by having no one to talk with.
Perhaps one or two of you have had keen personal experience of the frightening and destructive power of loneliness.
Now, by loneliness I am not talking about the absence of friends and occasional breaks from people.
In my busy life there are times when I dream of long periods away from people.
Oh, to be quiet; oh, to be on a desert island with no one to talk to!
But the reality is far, far different, and few of us can take that much reality.
I am not talking about that kind of quietness; rather the loneliness of people who feel quite cut off from God, from others, from society.
They feel estranged; they feel as if they don't belong; they cannot identify.
Two years ago on BBC television there was a moving programme called ‘The Boy David Trilogy’.
It was the story of a Peruvian boy from the jungle with almost no face.
The programme described David's condition and the sixty operations he had in order to have anything like a face — and there were still plenty to come.
But the love that surrounds that boy is having a marvellous effect in giving him a life.
His face is still deformed, but it is a face.
When Desmond Wilcox teased him and said: ‘You're a pickle!’ he replied: ‘I'm not a pickle, I'm a person.’
I was reminded of C.S. Lewis's great book Till We Have Faces , which makes the point that each human being is on the way to his or her full development in Christ.
Loneliness is being cut off from God, ourselves, our destiny, our hopes and dreams.
Christ identifies with us, and in the garden of Gethsemane he cries out of loneliness fur us.
Campbell also speaks of a form of loneliness which was a special feature of Jesus' ministry:the loneliness of the leader .
All of us in leadership know something of that.
‘The buck stops here.’
The leader may delegate a great deal of work but cannot delegate the responsibility for that work.
The leader carries that alone and carries too the anxieties, ambitions and the fear of failure that leadership brings.
Perhaps some of you are experiencing the pressures of leadership.
There are times, of course, when all goes well and we actually enjoy it, but at other times the cost seems too heavy and we have few people we can share the job with or who can understand.
So the anxiety mounts and the stress develops.
We wake in the night with a churning mind and it seems that nothing will settle the anxiety.
Campbell links our problems of leadership with that of Jesus' loneliness, and  comments: ‘See, he has been there too and because he identifies with it, he can handle it.
Don't pretend.’
The second very useful contribution from Campbell is that he saw how Christ identified with our suffering .
I have used the word ‘mystery’ of the cross, but let us never forget that suffering is a mystery too.
We must never have a simplistic view of suffering.
We have all had experiences of life in which the suffering of others has led us to ask questions of God and about God.
‘Why are you doing this to me?
Where are you in the midst of pain?’
Suffering and the cross nonetheless come together in Jesus' prayer of suffering love: ‘Why hast thou forsaken me?’
(Matthew 27.46)
Indeed, the Christian faith takes very seriously the presence of suffering and says that the life and death of Jesus encourage us to endure.
Hebrews 12.3: ‘Consider him who endured from sinners such hostility against himself, so that you may not grow weary or fainthearted.’
The story of Joni Eareckson is well known.
In 1967, as a result of a diving accident, Joni was made a quadriplegic.
Bitterness, anger and rebellion became her reaction.
One night, Cindy, her friend, spoke to her of the cross of Jesus and said: ‘He was paralysed too.’
It had never occurred to Joni that on the cross Jesus was unable to move, virtually paralysed.
She found that deeply comforting and was mentally able to see that he was carrying her pain and helplessness.
Christianity also takes seriously the fact of redemptive suffering.
Now we have to be careful with the word ‘redemptive’ because in a final way only Christ's sufferings can be deemed truly redemptive; but I feel that we can make guarded use of the term.
Jesus' sufferings draw us into the love of God and show us how much he loved us.
Campbell points out that Jesus' sufferings, far from being heroic, are far more wonderful than that; all our wounds and pains are taken up in his and are redeemed.
Some of you may have read Mary Craig's book Blessings .
In it she recounts trying to come to terms with the fact that two of her four sons had been born with severe abnormalities.
In the last chapter she meditates on the meaning of suffering.
She writes:
In the teeth of the evidence I do not believe that any suffering is ultimately absurd or pointless…the value of suffering does not lie in the pain of it but in what the sufferer makes of it.
It is in suffering that we discover the things that matter; in sorrow we discover ourselves.
So identification is a rich word.
Let me try to illustrate this from the career of one notable Christian.
His name was Father Damien of Belgium.
In 1864 he unexpectedly took his brother's place as a missionary priest and was sent to Hawaii.
His Superintendent asked for a priest to go to the island of Molokai where a colony of lepers lived in appalling conditions.
Joseph Damien, without hesitation, volunteered, and for the rest of his life lived among the lepers.
The colony increased to over a thousand people.
Joseph laboured as builder, nurse, superintendent as well as priest.
But the moment of deepest ministry came when ugly spots appeared on his hands and face.
One day at Mass Father Damien addressed the community and said simply: ‘We lepers.’
Damien, no doubt, would not have considered this particularly heroic — all he was doing was following his Master in identifying totally with those he had come to save.
Jesus — Our Reconciler
In this talk I want us to consider an image which I believe takes us a little closer to the meaning of the cross — the image of reconciliation and representation.
Let us glance at a familiar passage of Scripture: 2 Corinthians 5.16–21.
You will note that the verb ‘reconcile’ occurs five times — that in some mysterious way God reconciled the world to himself and that Christ was the means and the focus of reconciliation.
In what way was he for us the focus?
Some years ago now, a famous Methodist scholar, Vincent Taylor, wrote a trilogy on the atonement.
In it he expressed the view that Jesus was our representative who reconciled us to God.
Vincent Taylor was particularly concerned to avoid crude ideas that Jesus was a sin offering, one who somehow bore the penalty of our wrongdoing and placated an angry deity.
He correctly drew attention to the fact that the action  was God's — God was in Christ; that is to say, he was doing it.
Let us first look at the word ‘representative’.
It is a familiar and attractive idea.
Recently there has been a long ambulance drivers' strike.
Leaving aside the rights and wrongs of that dispute, we all know the importance of representatives.
Five thousand ambulance drivers cannot do their own negotiating — they need representatives to do it for them.
Indeed, in this country we have a conciliation service, known by its initials as ACAS, which is a forum whereby representatives can get together and make demands, counter demands and eventually — and hopefully — reach solutions.
Let me point out some of the weaknesses in the idea that Jesus is our representative.
First, we did not choose him.
We normally elect our representatives and say: ‘He belongs to us.
He can speak up for us.’
In the case of Jesus it might be thought that he represents the management, not the workers.
Second, can he really represent me and you unless, in some real way, he participates in our sin and weakness?
So we need to ask: Does Vincent Taylor's idea go far enough?
I am not rejecting the idea of Jesus being my representative — all I am doing at the moment is to point out some difficulties with it when it is considered as the central idea in the atonement theory.
Now let us consider the concept of reconciliation and note the elements that stand out.
Reconciliation needs someone to take the initiative .
The atonement may seem an irrelevant idea these days, but here is an image which is always topical, because the need for reconciliation is a lifelong occupation.
One thing I can be certain of is that we have all been involved in rows, misunderstandings and quarrels.
Perhaps something like that happened today and you wonder how reconciliation can take place.
Often the problems are only storms in teacups, and all that is needed is a gentle ‘sorry’, a laugh, a hug, a cup of tea, and all is well.
Sometimes, however, bitter feuds may last for years.
In the course of my pastoral visiting, before I took a funeral service, I called on the dead man's son, who told me that he fell out with his father at his wedding twenty years previously and that he was not going to the funeral service now!
We feel the shock and sadness of unreconciled behaviour that can follow people like that to the grave.
It is a fact that  the more serious the crime, and the more awful the act, the more costly the nature of reconciliation.
Let me offer another illustration.
At the end of the last war, the Allied Forces did not say to Germany: ‘War is over, let's forget it all.
We all made mistakes.
Build your country and let's live in peace again.’
No, you cannot do things like that.
Awful crimes had been committed by a civilized nation because Nazism had put to death over nine million people.
Evil men had ruled with terror and evil.
The Nuremburg trials were the trial of evil and resulted in judgement.
It had to happen before there could be true reconciliation of nations and before countries could begin to live and forget.
Now, what the New Testament says is striking.
God is never spoken of as if he needs to be reconciled to us.
God does the reconciling.
He says: ‘The door is always open.
I love you so much that Christ is the means of reconciliation.’
This is where we must challenge the idea that forgiveness is a costless thing; that all God needed to do was forgive.
He will forgive, people say cheerfully.
That is his business.
Some theologians have suggested that the essence of the gospel is nothing more than forgiveness as it is enshrined in the story of the prodigal Son.
The father sees the son coming home after all the bingeing — the wine, women and song — and runs out with love and says: ‘How good it is to have you home!
Kill the fatted calf!’
That is the gospel, they say.
It is, however, only one half of the gospel.
Forgiveness is a killing business; it has a habit of crucifying people.
We must not minimize the cost of reconciliation; forgiveness is never cheap.
But let us ask again: Is it the case that moral qualities cannot be transferred?
If a son or daughter commits a crime and is sentenced to imprisonment, the court will not allow an anxious father or mother to take their place, so how can it be that my sin can be taken by another?
How is it possible for Christ's death to affect me?
Let me give you a partial answer for the moment.
First, we cannot allow human factors to limit God's goodness.
God's wonderful grace and power can be made available for us.
Therefore his goodness and grace are transferable.
Second, it is a deficient view of sin which speaks lightly of it.
We are of a generation which is in dreadful danger of being anaesthetized morally.
People who are blind cannot judge the colour of light, people who are totally deaf cannot assess the  wonder of a Mendelssohn sonata, and people whose whole experience of life has been lived in the darkness of materialism cannot fully appreciate the holiness and perfection of God who dwells in light unapproachable.
We have lost our sense of holiness and we shift in the shadows; little wonder we fail to understand the significance of atonement!
So the cross proceeds from a forgiving God who wants people to be reconciled to him.
He does the reconciling, he sees the sin, the hurts, the enormous chasm of unreconciled conflict, and he takes it all to a lonely cross.
Doesn't that say something amazing about God's love?
He who is the blameless party takes the initiative in running towards us to forgive.
Reconciliation involves repentance .
We have to say ‘sorry’.
Imagine a married couple who are estranged from one another, yet who both wistfully long for reconciliation.
Let us imagine that they meet and the man begins: ‘Darling, it's awful to be apart from you.
I miss you so much.
Can we make a fresh start?’
She agrees — she too wants the past to be healed.
But the husband continues: ‘…but let us get one thing clear — I haven't done anything wrong!’
No human relationship can recommence with such an attitude; there has to be the admission of failure.
So it is with the cross.
In a sense we now live in a forgiven world.
When Christ died, ‘atonement’ was made between God and man.
At-one.
That is still the reality of the Christian message, but that forgiveness only becomes a reality, efficacious, when I make it mine.
The implications of this are awesome, because the Christian life is a continuation of atonement.
That is why the Lord's Prayer demands that the Christian community becomes a forgiving, reconciling community.
‘Forgive us our sins, for we ourselves forgive…
’(Luke 11.4) Think of the implications of that!
If we are reconciled to God, it affects others.
It means that we accept others.
Surely we need to work this out in our daily living.
Next time you catch yourself thinking uncharitably of another, criticizing another, say to yourself: ‘Reconciliation — what does that have to say to my relationship with that person?’
I would like to apply that to other relationships.
Think of the fact that there are over three hundred member churches in  the World Council of Churches!
Think of all the division in the Christian family which mocks the idea of us as a reconciled body.
How dare we say with St Paul, ‘be reconciled to God’(2 Corinthians 5.20), when we are so unreconciled?
Isn't that a terrible contradiction of the message of the cross?
We Anglicans have made our fair contribution of hurts to the unreconciled body of Christ.
You see, the cross preaches a radical message to us all — it proclaims that the ground is level at the foot of the cross.
What about our Church with all the opportunities and challenges before us?
Our Archbishop has just announced his retirement, and whoever is chosen to succeed him will lead us into the Decade of Evangelism.
Among other things, he will also have to handle with great sensitivity the issue of women's ministry.
Have we the capacity to remain together even though there may be real theological differences among us?
I hope that the reconciliation achieved by the cross will provide the basis for us all to say that we have no grounds for making fresh divisions which make a witness to a needy world more difficult than it is already.
Reconciliation implies a contract .
When two parties meet at ACAS and an agreement is reached it is normally expressed in terms of some contractual agreement which satisfies both sides.
In the Bible such an agreement is called a ‘covenant’.
We notice this about the covenants of the Bible; they are usually established with the signs of sacrifice and blood.
Abraham's willingness to offer his only son Isaac has the innocent Isaac saying in Genesis 22.7.
But where is the lamb?
Abraham replies, ‘God will provide himself the lamb for a burnt offering, my son’(Genesis 22.8).
The Egyptian deliverance has the sprinkling of blood on the lintels of the doors so that the avenging angel can see the blood and ‘pass over’ it (Exodus 12.13).
At Sinai blood is sprinkled on the altar and the people.
Barbaric, we might exclaim, how awful!
Maybe, but the point the Bible is making is that ‘without the shedding of blood there is no forgiveness of sins’(Hebrews 9.22).
God's way of reconciliation is harshest for himself in his Son.
The new covenant is commemorated every time we celebrate the Eucharist; and we have a vivid image of the covenant every time we hold out empty hands to receive the sacrament, because we have nothing to offer.
Indeed, there is no point in offering anything because we are ‘ransomed, healed, restored, forgiven’.
Vincent Taylor draws attention to two striking contrasts in God's method of reconciling.
First, he considers the contrast between power and weakness.
In the covenant established between God and humankind, God is all-powerful and we are weak.
The powerful have a way of establishing contracts that suit them.
We have often heard our prime Minister say: ‘We must negotiate from a position of strength.’
That has plausibility in the world of political bargaining.
God could so easily say that, too, but he does not; he negotiates from a basis of weakness which becomes for us the power of God unto salvation.
In the cross God allows his weakness to be our strength.
I have already drawn attention to the power there is in weakness and it is often the case that God is able to take ordinary weak things of this world and make them powerful for him.
The other striking contrast is between holiness and sinfulness.
Jesus, our holy representative, takes our sin upon himself and identifies with it.
You can now see why Christianity is so radical and so down to earth.
You can also see why we cannot play at being Christians — because God became human for us and took our humanity up to the throne of God.
This does not suggest, I must warn you, that we must dwell on our sinfulness and the holiness of God.
While we must take sin lightly we must not live as if we are unforgiven and unreconciled.
It is also a fact that very few people actually come into the Christian faith with a deep burden of sin.
It is as we travel into the faith of Christ that we grow in our appreciation of his love and of our own deep unworthiness.
Anything we do must be prefaced with: ‘We are unprofitable servants.’
Reconciliation cost Christ everything and sometimes it will cost us no less.
Let me in conclusion just remark on one of this century's Christian heroes: Dietrich Bonhoeffer.
One of the great theologians of this century, Dietrich was a loyal German who had a deep affection for his country.
In his travels before the war he came into contact with a French student, Jean Lassère, a pacifist, who encouraged Bonhoeffer to take the Sermon on the Mount seriously, and to live it out fully.
Bonhoeffer returned to Germany, but found himself in conflict with the mood of the times when identified with Hitler's arrogance and brutality.
He identified with the Barmen Declaration that: ‘Jesus Christ is the one Word of God  which we are required to hear…we repudiate the false teachings that the Church must recognize other teachings and other personalities alongside this one Word of God.’
This was fighting talk.
The confessing Church became the persecuted Church.
Bonhoeffer, increasingly uneasy with all he was observing, eventually talked with his brother-in-law, who was on the staff of Military Intelligence.
His horror was profound when he discovered the extent and depth of the evil perpetrated by Hitler.
With great reluctance, Bonhoeffer came to the conclusion that Hitler had to be removed from office and he became party to a plot to assassinate the country's Führer.
But the plot was discovered, and Bonhoeffer was imprisoned and hanged on Low Sunday, 1945.
In a letter to Bishop George Bell he wrote: ‘This is the end, but for me, the beginning of life.’
Jesus — Our Substitute
The idea of substitution must be the very oldest of theories that attempts to deal with the question of why Jesus died.
It still has its power to fascinate and impress.
This theory takes us first to the theme of sacrifice.
It is a theme that still means a great deal to modern people even though we have lost the background of a sacrificial system.
Consider any gift; I would wager that the gift that means most would not necessarily be the most expensive present but the one bought with sacrifice, expressing care and love.
The point about sacrifice is that it represents slog, sweat and tears.
So the Old Testament people were commanded to give a proportion of their talents and money to God as love offerings, thank offerings, sin offerings.
The gift could vary from pigeons, to cereal offerings, to first fruits of the harvest, to very expensive sacrifices like a goat, a lamb or a bull.
Not all sacrifices were sin offerings.
For example, the lamb in the passover celebration was not a sin offering; it was a communion offering.
It represented God's deliverance and was closer to our Eucharist than to a sacrifice.
If we are really looking for an archetypal sin offering, we must turn in our Bibles to Leviticus 16, where Aaron presents two male goats before the Tent of the presence.
One is said to be for the Lord  and the other for Azazel.
Upon the head of the latter goat the sins of the people are placed.
Who was this Azazel?
Who knows? perhaps a figure for evil or the place of sinfulness and evil.
As my deliberate intention in these lectures is to remind you of theology and introduce you to theological terms, however, let me do so now.
Here is the first theological word:vicarious .
Vicarious means a ‘standin’, someone who replaces you.
So, in the old days, a vicar was a clergyman who did not receive the tithes and proper dues of a parish.
He would merely do the job and get a pittance.
Someone else would get the perks of office; whereas a rector received the full tithes.
These days we have dealt very satisfactorily with the problem; we have made the rector as poor as the vicar!
But you understand now what the term ‘vicarious sacrifice’ means — it means that someone else, or, in the Old Testament,something else — a goat, a bull — took your sin for you.
The idea of ‘scapegoat’ comes from this passage (Leviticus 16.20 following).
The idea of sacrifice was part and parcel of the ancient world, and familiar to both Greek and Jew.
This is clear from a number of New Testament passages: Mark 10.45; John 3.14,16; 15.13; Romans 3.23–25; 5.8–9; 8.32; 2 Corinthians 5.21; Galatians 3.13; Ephesians 2.15–16; Hebrews 9.26–28.
In these verses, and I could have easily quadrupled them, we are presented with the idea of Christ dying for us.
Sometimes the word is for us and at other times instead of us ; but whatever the word, the New Testament writers were in no doubt that Jesus was Saviour of the world, and that his death was the crucial victory of God.
There are quite a few hymns which take up this notion of Jesus bearing my sin as a substitute.
There is, for example:
There was no other good enough
To pay the price of sin;
He only could unlock the gate
Of heaven, and let us in.
Or a verse from one of St Bernard of Clairvaux' hymns:
Jesus, who gave himself for you
Upon the cross to die,
Opens to you his sacred heart.
O to that heart draw nigh.
Look at the words of the hymns, glance at the dates and link them in with the theories we have discussed, and I can promise you that it will all make a little more sense and make it even more evident how our hymn-writers wrestled with the meaning of the cross.
The next question is: If Jesus died for me and paid the ‘price of sin’, to whom was the penalty paid?
I challenge anyone to show me anywhere in the New Testament a verse that says Christ pays a penalty.
His death is a sin offering, he gives his life for us, he dies for us, but, as far as I can tell, the New Testament never answers this question: To whom is the sin offering given?
I wonder why this is?
It is later Christians who will answer the question absolutely and thoroughly.
Some of the Fathers of the Church believed that Jesus paid the penalty to the Father.
He placated God.
Others of the Fathers were in no doubt that Jesus paid the penalty to the devil.
Yet stay with the problem: how could Jesus pay the price to the Father when the Father was involved so directly in the work of the Son?
Don't you see now why the substitutionary atonement must not be forced, because it separates the Father from the work of the Son?
Taken to an extreme, it makes the Father sadistic and the Son a Saviour who dies to placate an unforgiving Father.
That is surely wrong, and we must never adopt any theory which severs the Father's will from the work of the Son.
In any case, the words of Scripture contradict such ideas.
‘God so loved the world that he gave…
’(John 3.16), ‘God was in Christ reconciling the world…’(2 Corinthians 5.19).
So here is mystery with a vengeance — we seem to have the attractive idea that Christ died for you and me, he went to the utmost limit for us, he gave everything away, and in some mysterious and tantalizing fashion he took my sin and yours upon himself, but we cannot say to whom the price was paid!
Have we any clues?
Let me offer some.
The first clue we have lies in the concept of participation.
The theologian R.C. Moberly's Atonement and Personality helps us, I believe, with the analogy of a human family.
Think of a child who is alienated from you.
I am sensitive to the fact that some of you will understand the problem more powerfully than any illustration, but I will press on.
We might imagine a young person very defiantly rejecting the family, taking drugs and living with someone.
Yet there is not total rejection; the young person feels shame, guilt and bewilderment.
The problem, suggests Moberly, is how to create a change of attitude in the child to bring them back again.
It would be no good to wave the law at them; it would be no good to whisper ‘there, there’.
There is only one way, and it is a costly way.
You have to bear the punishment by standing with them, taking the shame with them, and bearing the cost with them.
This, says Moberly, is what Father and Son do for us: they enter into the pain of human sin and lostness and suffer with us and for us.
The writer D.E.
Whitely has in his book The Theology of the New Testament a powerful image of an officer in the war who had to lead his troops across a dangerous minefield.
He knew he would lose many of his men in the dangerous, slow pathway across.
There was one way, however, only one way he could make sure no life was lost apart from his own.
Deliberately he walked into the minefield, triggering off every mine and thus absorbing in his own body the entire explosion.
Like every illustration, of course, it only goes part of the way in satisfying our minds.
I want to go further.
This takes me into atonement as vicarious love.
Our problem is that we always separate love from justice and love from holiness.
Going back to the family problem just mentioned, much as we love that child in spite of his problems, we would not let ourselves be completely taken over.
The idea of our homes being smashed by drugs, by prostitution, by evil of whatever kind, would most surely be unacceptable to us.
We would say: ‘Much as I love you, I cannot condone this behaviour.
This is wrong.’
Here we are at the heart of the problem: holy love.
Love which wants redemption, healing, forgiveness and reconciliation knows that the demands of justice have to be met.
There is an eternal law which reduces in utter simplicity to: ‘You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind…and you shall love your neighbour as yourself’(Matthew 22.37,39).
I heard someone say the other day that modern people treat  the Ten Commandments like examination questions: only four need be attempted.
The Ten Commandments nonetheless stand as the expression of God's holy Law and of the purity and goodness he demands.
How we fail it, time and again!
It is in holy love that we glimpse the meaning of the cross because ‘God so loved the world that he gave his only Son’(John 3.16).
God's love is outgoing, outpouring love.
It is a love which redeems sinful people, not by saying: ‘We'll let bygones be bygones’, but by saying: ‘I'll bear that load for you; you won't need it again.’
It seems impossible, then, to avoid the New Testament message that Jesus' death was planned by God to be the means of reconciliation and peace.
God, who does not need reconciling, becomes the Reconciler; God, who does not need appeasing, becomes our peace; God, who knows no sin, becomes sin for us — by whose stripes and wounds we are healed.
In the death and resurrection of Jesus the two gardens of Eden and eternal life are joined.
What are the implications for us today?
Let me mention just two.
The Church must put the cross back into its preaching .
Over the last fifteen years, preaching has moved, by and large, from preaching the truths of the Christian faith to the experiences of the Christian faith.
The Holy Spirit and his power has been a favourite theme, or ‘You too can build a splendid church, or be an excellent minister, if you buy this book or follow these ten lessons.’
A ‘cross theology’, not on its own, let me add, but central to our preaching, will take us back to the central verity of our faith.
We are not in the business of popularity; it is too bad if others do not like the cross.
But ignore the cross and you ignore true Christianity.
Yesterday I and a few of my colleagues spent a day's retreat at Compton Durrville, a Franciscan retreat centre in this diocese.
You cannot go to a Franciscan centre without coming face to face with Francis' emphasis on the cross.
You who exercise a ministry of preaching and teaching, do preach the cross as the starting point of hope and peace.
Don't be ashamed of its offence to the proud hearts and minds of self-sufficient men and women.
They need its message of hope, pardon and peace.
I don't think we will talk sensibly about a Decade of Evangelism if we give a cross theology  second or third place in our preaching.
We must put the cross back into our spirituality .
Bonhoeffer, the theologian to whom I have previously referred, once remarked in one of his books: ‘When Christ calls a person, he bids him come and die.’
That goes to the centre of our faith.
We are dead in Christ.
Paul describes it vividly in Romans 6 in the theology of baptism.
Enter the waters, and you die with Christ and rise to newness of life.
In a wonderful way that is a thrilling thing to take on board.
From a Christian perspective, you and I will never face death.
Christ faced it for us and was victorious.
Our mortal bodies may die but we will never die.
We are already enjoying eternal life, and physical death will merely mean the passing from life, in which we see through a glass darkly, to life when we shall see and know as we are known.
If I am already dead and alive in Christ, then I must embrace the cross with a greater vigour and commitment.
I must try to live under the cross daily.
I must put my Saviour always before me as my example, friend and guide.
I must live a life that pleases him.
The problem is that it is hard.
A friend once remarked: ‘We are expected to be living sacrifices, but the problem is we keep crawling off the altar.’
How right he was!
How necessary it is for each one of us to apply the cross to our daily lives — to our giving to one another and to God of our money, our time, our talents.
Skin-deep Christianity will not endure, but heart Christianity will, because it is marked with a cross.
A cross spirituality will ensure that you and I are never tempted to follow fashions and fads in church life which, attractive though they may seem, ignore the cross or push it to one side.
Recently I have been reading the writings of Matthew Fox, a Dominican who is very popular for his creation spirituality and love of the environment.
I agree with a great deal of his concerns.
But I notice this: he exaggerates creation above redemption; sin is treated as a rather tiresome preoccupation of the Church, and what matters is the sin and fallenness of mankind's abuse of creation.
This is a distortion of Christianity which never separates creation and salvation in that way.
True Christianity believes that creation itself is fallen and awaits its redemption; that it also will benefit from the perfection that Christ offers and achieves.
A cross spirituality is, however, far from miserable and world-rejecting.
Christ was never that.
Just as he moved with grace, strength and love among men and women, so the Christian under the cross and the Church under the cross will have an effective, attractive and powerful ministry if we show his grace and live in his strength.
In this series I have been introducing twentieth-century martyrs to illustrate the points I have been making.
The theme of substitution is graphically revealed in the story of Father Maximilian Kolbe, a Roman Catholic priest who died in Auschwitz.
A prisoner had escaped from Auschwitz and ten prisoners were required to die in the starvation bunker — block 13.
Names were read out.
The tenth person cried: ‘Oh, my God, my wife and children.’
Suddenly Father Kolbe stepped forward, a small emaciated man with round glasses, and addressed the Commandant.
‘Let me take his place.’
The other prisoners gasped because they expected him to be shot on the spot.
The Commandant, equally surprised, asked: ‘Who are you?’
‘I am of no consequence, only a Catholic priest, doing my duty.
Let me take that man's place, please.’
He nodded, and the condemned men were sent away to the starvation bunker.
One man who was attendant to the condemned men said that cell 13 became like a church.
Instead of the screams of starving men, there were prayers, and the prayers passed into silence as one by one they died of starvation a few yards away from food.
Only Father Kolbe remained alive until a bored guard gave him a fatal injection of carbolic acid.
It would not serve my purpose to make that an illustration of Jesus taking my place or yours, because God the Father is clearly not like a Nazi war criminal.
Yet there are two points of contact.
First, Kolbe's death brought meaning and hope to dying men.
It showed the importance of human dignity and love.
Christ's death was that to an immeasurably greater degree.
Second, it was an amazing act of faith.
It could have been such a futile act.
The man whose place he took could have died the following week, or the next month.
It seemed such a pointless act of heroism.
But it wasn't.
The man survived the war and told the tale and has lived a purposeful life ever since, seeking to carry on Kolbe's work of reconciliation.
I  sometimes wonder if there was that kind of risk when God planned the cross from the beginning of time.
I think there was and is.
R.S. Thomas has a lovely poem, ‘The Coming’, which seems to suggest that.
And God held in his hand
A small globe.
Look, he said.
The son looked.
Far off,
As through water, he saw
A scorched land of fierce
Colour.
The light burned
There; crusted buildings
Cast their shadows: a bright
Serpent, a river
Uncoiled itself, radiant
With slime.
On a bare
Hill a bare tree saddened
The sky.
Many people
Held out their thin arms
To it, as though waiting
For a vanished April
To return to its crossed
Boughs.
The son watched
Them.
Let me go there, he said.
Conclusion
Kolbe died for his friend and Christ died for us — as an example for us to follow, as a pioneer who goes before us, as one who identifies with us, as our reconciler, as our sacrifice, and as our substitute.
As such he demands our response and our commitment.
That is why I keep saying that I am not only interested in our knowing more about our faith but also in our putting more faith into our lives.
May we all say with St Paul in Galatians 2.20: ‘I have been crucified with Christ; it is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me; and the life I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.’
Easter Day: The Challenge of the Resurrection Wells Cathedral, Easter Day 1988
Karl Heim, German Lutheran theologian, scientist and writer, recounts an incident which occurred in Moscow shortly after the Russian Revolution.
One of the frequent mass meetings attended by workers was taking place.
The leader announced at the beginning that complete freedom of speech was allowed but speeches must be kept short.
Many speeches were delivered expounding the glories of communism.
When all had finished the leader asked if any wished to represent the other side, since they had promised freedom of speech.
A little under-nourished priest climbed the steps.
As he did so the chairman called out ‘Five minutes, please!’
He replied: ‘I won't need five minutes for what I have to say.’
Then he began: ‘My friends, you have heard all the arguments that have been brought forward to prove the new world-view.
But, my friends, Christ is risen!’
You might have expected a howl of derision to greet this cry, but it did not come.
The workers had heard those words many times before at the Russian Easter night service.
So on this occasion when the priest set forth this ancient cry, it was as if a sleeping volcano erupted.
From a thousand voices came back the response: ‘He is risen indeed, Alleluia!’
Now was that priest simply playing cleverly on the emotions of the crowd?
I don't think so.
He was challenging the so-called ‘newness’ of the Revolution with the ‘newness’of the resurrection.
He was, of course, touching a nerve deep within the Russian psyche, but he was saying something like this, that ‘if Christ is risen, every argument for atheism is flawed’.
Now I personally have every sympathy with the man who says sceptically: ‘Dead men don't rise!’
Of course they don't!
But what we find in the resurrection of Jesus is not  something that originates from the natural processes of life, but something that constitutes a unique event.
It is a breaking in of something wholly new: it is an act of creation which parallels the story of creation in Genesis 1.
Years ago I read a sentence which has remained with me through the years.
‘The resurrection of Jesus Christ is the first article of the Christian faith and the demonstration of all the rest.’
Now this may not be characteristic of modern Christianity — more the pity for it — but I do believe that it is a just reflection of New Testament Christianity, because in the earliest preaching the emphasis falls on his resurrection.
The last act of Jesus was the starting point of the preaching.
For years I found it very odd that the disciples spent very little time talking about the significance of the death of Jesus or even the person of Jesus.
The emphasis falls instead upon the resurrection.
The reason seems to be that the gospel story was formed backwards.
Instead of starting with the birth of Jesus and going on to his ministry, death and resurrection, the first disciples began with the resurrection and showed how it made sense of the rest.
The notes of excitement and joy pervade the pages of the Acts of the Apostles.
Here we find the ring of truth because if you were one of the disciples and Jesus had appeared to you, what would you have told your friends?
You would not have gone to them with a theory of the death of Jesus — you would have gone to them with great wonder saying: ‘It is incredible, but our Lord is alive.
He lives and all is well!,
This great event is the foundation stone of the Christian Church.
It stands or falls on this one event.
While, of course, the universal symbol of the Christian Church is a cross and rightly so, the cross is part One of the Easter story.
When Jesus died, faith in his message died as well and his movement, which had begun with such promise, collapsed.
If the figure on the cross had been the last sight of him, we would have heard nothing more of him and there would have been no Church.
But from this broken and scattered group of men and women came the startling message of the cross and resurrection with a conviction and power that neither the Jewish authorities nor the Roman rulers could stem.
Well did one writer say: ‘The evidence for the resurrection is the existence of the Church in that spiritual vitality which confronts us in  the New Testament.’
This is so.
If you were to take a pencil and cross out every verse in the New Testament which refers to the resurrection or to the idea that Jesus Christ is alive, you would not have much of the New Testament left.
It throbs with the conviction that Jesus was raised by God and is alive for evermore.
What does it mean for us today?
Let us consider two ways in which the resurrection of Jesus challenges us today.
First, it challenges our world-view.
That priest was right.
The cry ‘Christ is risen’ is a challenge to secularism and materialism.
It proclaims that this is God's world and that his values are all that matter.
But it is not only the atheism of communism that is challenged by the resurrection, the materialism and secularism of our own culture comes under attack as well.
Even we as practising Christians find it extremely difficult to avoid the acid of materialism.
The delights of a secular society seem so appealing; technology appears to deliver the goods.
Indeed, for many of us, we have never had it so good.
That is, until we start to look at the reality of our society.
The erosion of values and moral standards, the relativism of life, the shocking things that happen, reveal that our civilization is but a veneer that hides a viciousness and rottenness that frighten us all.
The Easter story calls the Christian Church back to identify uncompromisingly with the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ.
Of course we shall get howls of laughter.
The death and resurrection of Jesus Christ is an uncomfortable message.
It is still foolishness and a stumbling block.
Lose the resurrection hope, though, and we lose our way.
Even this great cathedral will become a museum and mausoleum the day we lose our confidence in the resurrection.
Second, we are reminded that while the evidence for the resurrection is impressive, first Christians did not merely believe in the resurrection.
They did not simply see an empty tomb and say: ‘Coo, he must have risen!’
They did not go out giving intellectual addresses saying: ‘Come to our seminar and we'll discuss the epistemological significance of the empty tomb.
‘They rushed out with a testimony: ‘Christ has appeared to me!
He is alive!
I know it for myself!’
You can't keep good news in.
I remember years ago being amused when a young man given to very few words came to our vicarage  and burst in with the news: ‘Jane had a baby boy this morning!’ still with his bedroom slippers on.
He could not keep the good news in.
It had to be shared.
Some years ago I saw Sister Gemmell of the Church Army on television.
She was then working among ‘down and outs’ and prostitutes in London.
She was asked if she believed there was life after death.
She replied: ‘No.’
When the interviewer leaned forward open mouthed, she went on: ‘I don't believe, I know there is life with Jesus, after death takes my mortal body.’
She had experienced the risen Christ and she knew.
In a similar way the famous psychiatrist Carl Jung, when asked about his belief, said: ‘I don't believe — I know, I know.’
I believe that for some of us there's the need to possess for ourselves that inner conviction and excitement that is a mark of New Testament Christianity.
That conviction came very late in life to the Victorian writer and theologian R.W. Dale.
It was said of him that he was preparing his Easter sermon early one Easter Day when the significance of the resurrection dawned on him.
For years he had preached it, he had believed it intellectually, but never had it become personal to him.
This eminent theologian rushed out into the streets to greet the astonished passers-by with the words: ‘Christ is risen, he is risen indeed!’
It makes all the difference.
If Christ has not risen from the grave of our lives, from our doubts, fears, from our personal deaths, then all the so-called evidences of the resurrection are of no consequence except as props.
Jesus Christ's resurrection has to become our resurrection if it is to mean anything at all.
This morning I would like to invite everyone to face up to the challenge of the resurrection.
It calls us to identify with a Christ who through the horror of the crucifixion leads us, his people, to new life and hope.
It will make a difference to our world-view, to the way we see people, to the way we view God.
With the countless multitude of saints down the centuries we will be able to unite in exclaiming: ‘He is risen indeed — Alleluia!’