

Day Five — Thursday 11th August
6.30am
‘Where are you off to?’
Joe shot out of the milking house as Jinny came past.
Even in wellingtons, he could move as lightly as a squirrel.
Jinny looked down guiltily.
‘Just thought I'd have a walk.’
Joe watched her for a second, his long finger delicately turning the gold ring in his ear.
Then he shrugged.
‘You can get in and do the milking.
Then I should be able to get the roots hoed before breakfast.
That'll put me half a morning ahead, and I could do with that.’
It wasn't fair .
She had forced herself out of bed especially early, without waking Oz, just so that she could have a spare half-hour or so to take a walk up Back Clough Dale.
And here was Joe, brushing her plans aside like cobwebs with the dew still on them, not even knowing what he was doing.
He stood in the door of the milking house, holding out the buckets for her to take.
And she took them, of course.
That was how she had been brought up.
If there was work to do, you did it, with no lounging about.
She went over to the big, old, white sink in the corner and Joe fetched out the hoe and vanished towards the vegetable field.
Jinny rubbed the cake of scratchy, home-made soap between the palms of her hands and scrubbed her fingernails carefully.
Behind her, in the shadows, she could hear Florence making odd, bad-tempered cow-noises as she shifted about on the hard floor.
When Jinny went over with a bowl of water to wash her udder, she stirred restlessly, flicking her tail.
‘Oh, keep still !’
Jinny slapped the big, golden rump.
‘You've got nothing to moan about, you stupid cow.
No work to do.
Nothing but eat and sleep.’
She dried the udder and pulled the three-legged stool across, jamming the first bucket between her knees as she sat down, so that Florence could not kick it over.
Then she buried her face in the warm flank and began to squeeze the teats rhythmically, talking to the cow in an undertone, as Joe did.
‘Glorious to be a cow in the summer!
Knee-deep in lovely cool grass.
No call to move fast.
No worries.
And slaves to milk you when you get too full up.
Mmm?’
‘Moo-oo!’
said Florence balefully, looking round.
She was only half Jersey, and that half did not include her temper, which was chancy and morose.
In that moo, Jinny caught an echo of the bellowing noise Florence had made earlier in the year when they took her calf away.
She had kept everyone awake for a whole night and Oz had cried into his pillow.
And yet here Florence was now, munching away with her usual bad temper.
The calf was sold long ago, and she would not even recognize it now if it ambled into the yard.
How restful , thought Jinny.
If only people were the same, Harriet Shakespeare would not be staring up at a house where terrorists were holding her son.
All that crying and fear would be saved and she would long ago have wandered off, swishing her tail, to find a better patch of grass.
As Jinny milked on, her thoughts floated vaguely, in the way that was one of the pleasures of the job.
The thought of Harriet Shakespeare slipped into the thought of poor Keith standing awkward and miserable among his mess of papers, while his mother screamed at him for not being neat and ordinary, like Rachel.
From there, by natural progression, Jinny moved to the memory of herself, crying into Keith's comfortable jumper.
Choking out the puzzle of that other mother and son.
The boy in the attic who had cried, ‘Help !’ and the lovely, lying Hare-woman.
That stopped the pleasant floating.
She came up against the  unsolved riddle with a horrible jerk.
If Joe had not caught her, she would be there now, walking up the dale to look down on the sleeping cottage.
Wondering.
Watching.
Only here she was instead, working as usual.
Her bad temper came back.
She was too well trained to take it out on Florence and she finished milking her, but she scowled as she lifted the heavy pails and carried them outside, lifting them into the water trough to cool.
She turned Florence into the field and stood over the milk pails, stirring them slowly with a hazel stick.
Round and round went the rich, creamy milk, as the cool spring water flowed past, down through the three sloping troughs and away out of the yard.
Fragments of Jinny's face stared back from the broken surface of the water.
A skinny, cross face with freckles and a thin, sandy plait.
Joe found her there when he came back from the vegetable field.
He looked at her face, but he did not say anything, except, ‘Get those pails into the dairy now.
Otherwise you'll be late for breakfast and miss the Planning.’
Jinny sighed.
If there was anything worse than being cross, she thought, it was being cross and having it ignored.
But Joe was never one for thinking about what people felt.
Only what they did.
He would never ask her why she was pulling faces, in case it encouraged her to pull worse ones.
Just for her own satisfaction she pulled the very worst one she could think of — worse than any of Oz's — with her cheeks blown out, her eyes crossed and the tip of her tongue protruding.
Then she heaved the pails out of the trough and carried them into the dairy, pouring some of the milk carefully into wide pans for the cream to rise.
Good, obedient Jinny.
Doing as she was told.
All the same, she was late for breakfast.
The others were there already in a circle round the kitchen table, munching their way through slices of wholemeal bread and thick collops of bacon.
She slipped into the seat beside Oz and picked up her knife and fork.
‘Good,’ said Joe.
He wiped his fingers on his piece of bread.
‘Let's plan.’
It was their daily ritual.
Every morning, rain or shine, school or holidays, they sat round at breakfast deciding what work had to be done that day and sharing it out.
Normally, Jinny loved the Planning.
She had a neat, methodical mind and it pleased her to hunt around for an odd half-hour or so to fill with planting lettuces or doing the mending.
But today was different.
Today she had something of her own that she wanted to do and she felt trapped.
Joe was quietly listing the day's tasks on his fingers.
‘…someone'll have to go up to Top Piece, too, and have a go at that wall.
It won't wait any longer.’
‘Me!’ said Oz.
He liked walling.
But Joe did not take any notice.
They had not reached the time for sharing out.
He just carried on.
‘…and some time today I'll have to go into the village.
See about getting some people to come up and help with the harvest next week.
Tuesday'd be a good day, I think.
If it's fine.
That means you'd better sort out the hams and cheeses, Bella.
Decide what you'll give them.’
Bella nodded.
‘I'll make the extra bread on Monday, then.’
‘How about cakes?
You usually do cakes.
They ought to be baked today.’
‘Today?’
Bella shrieked.
‘But it's my butter day.
And there's beans to be sliced.
And if we want any bilberries bottled this year someone'll have to go out and pick them soon.
And —’
‘O.K.’ Joe lifted his hand to stop her speaking.
Bella always started each day in a frenzy of horror at how much had to be done.
Then he stared down at the floor, gathering together the threads of the day.
When he looks up , thought Jinny,he'll tell us all what to do and the day will be gone before it's properly started.
Like yesterday .
All the day before, she had waited for half an hour to go off walking by herself and it had never come.
Now it seemed that today would be the same.
She wondered what it was like to wake in the morning and plan things for yourself.
To choose.
‘Right.’
Joe looked up.
‘Oz can do the chickens today.
And when Jinny's finished the pigs she can do the butter.
She's helped you often enough.
It's time she did it by herself.
And Oz can come walling with me.’
‘Good !’ said Oz, with his mouth full.
Jinny sat resentfully, mopping round and round her plate with the last piece of bread as Joe's voice went on and on.
‘…and the bilberries can wait till tomorrow,’ he finished.
‘Then, if we're forward enough, Jinny and Oz can go off for the day with a couple of baskets.
How's that?’
‘Too much!’
Jinny said, before she could stop herself.
‘You've filled every minute I've got.
Don't I get any time off?’
Joe was not smiling as he looked at her.
‘You know it's busy getting things straight before harvest.
Would you want to be lounging about while the rest of us are working?’
‘No, but —‘
‘I'll tell you what.’
He tugged gently at her plait.
‘If you get through all right, I'll take you with me when I go down to the village after evening milking.
You can drop in on Keith while I go round and see people.
Yes?’
Jinny felt like shouting at him.
Couldn't he see that he was just organizing her even more?
But before she could say anything, Bella interrupted.
‘When you two have finished, perhaps someone'll listen to me.
I've got problems too.’
She coughed and looked down at the floor.
‘I've run out of sugar.
I'll need to buy some if I'm making cakes and bottling bilberries.’
There was a horrible silence.
Jinny picked up her mug and drank, to hide her face.
It happened every time.
Why wouldn't Bella learn?
Joe hated people not to plan ahead.
Especially when it meant spending money.
His long, narrow face was tight and angry.
‘How much?’
She shrugged.
‘Depends on how many berries they pick.
Three or four kilos ought to be enough, but I'll need some dried fruit as well if you want fruit cakes —‘
‘No.
How much money ?’
Even Oz was quiet, his eyes flickering from face to face.
Bella avoided looking at Joe.
‘Give me five pounds?’
He pushed his chair back from the table and walked over to the drawer in the dresser where they kept the cash-box.
Counting out seven pound notes, he laid them carefully on the table.
Then he counted the rest of the money in the box and frowned.
‘Well, that's my work settled for tomorrow.
I'll have to be in the workshop finishing that brooch.
To see if I can get the money for it before the end of the month.
Jinny'll have to do all the milking and start planting out the cabbages.’
Slam.
Thanks a lot , Jinny thought.
That's right.
Start getting rid of tomorrow as well.
Why did she have to be born into a mad, slave-driving family?
Everyone else in her class would be spending the holidays riding or playing in the hills or lying in bed until midday.
Even the people who lived on farms did not have to work like she did.
Those farms were businesses, not monsters that devoured you.
Joe was already out of the kitchen and half-way across the yard and Bella began to put the dishes together.
Now that she had the money she needed, she was singing happily.
‘That's what I feel like,’ Jinny said bitterly as she lifted the pan of pigswill off the range.
‘Way-hey!’
Bella gave a squawk and grinned.
‘Got the black sulks?
What's the matter?
Scared of making the butter by yourself?’
‘No, of course not.
It's everything .’
Jinny put the bucket down ready to pour in the swill and began to tip the pan with steady hands.
‘Honestly, Mum, don't you feel it too?
We work and work and work — and what's it all for ?
We're  horribly poor.
All that fuss about money!
Other people spend that much on newspapers and magazines.
I've seen them at the shop, paying their bills.
They buy books and nice clothes and shop cakes and —‘
Bella stopped in the middle of the kitchen with a huge pile of plates and said quietly, ‘Is that what you really want?
Lots of money to buy trash — and not work?
Because we could have that, you know.
All we've got to do is go back to London and get Joe to set up a workshop there and work himself silly.
Like he was doing before.
The rest of us could just sit and twiddle our thumbs and drink iced coffee.
But perhaps you don't remember how he hated that life, and what a state it got him into.
It was like a huge machine running away with him.’
Jinny was still not ready to stop sulking.
‘So we all have to live like beggars so that Dad can have what he wants?’
‘We're not beggars,’ Bella said calmly.
‘I could go upstairs this minute and drape myself in gold chains and beautiful bracelets.’
‘But that's different .’
‘No it's not.’
Bella reached out a lazy hand and prodded at Oz.
‘Go on, goggle-eyes.
No need to neglect the chickens just because I'm talking to Jin.’
‘That's right,’ Oz moaned cheerfully.
‘Force me out to work.
There's laws against it, you know.’
He ducked, as Bella aimed a swipe at him, and went out into the yard.
Putting the plates down, Bella sat in a chair and pulled Jinny towards her.
‘Look Jin, what's up?
It's not like you to moan.
And you know why we're here as well as I do.
Joe nearly had a nervous breakdown in London.
I couldn't get him away from his bench.
Even at midnight, he was still working.
There was too much pressure.
Too many other people were involved and he felt he was losing his grip.
We came here so that we could be in control of our own lives and not tangled up with anyone else.
We chose this life.’
‘You two chose it, you mean,’ said Jinny.
‘No one asked me.
Bella shook her head.
‘You're like all children.
You get the kind of life your parents choose until you're old enough to choose for yourself.
And when you are, you'll be well-grown and independent.
Twice as independent as most girls of your age.
Jinny scowled and shuffled her feet.
‘But what I want is a bit of time to myself.
Now .’
‘I know you do, love,’ Bella said, patting her arm.
‘And you've deserved it, too.
But I don't think there'll be any to spare for a day or two.
I'll tell you what, though.
I'll try and wangle you out of the cabbages tomorrow — so you can go bilberrying all day.
You'll have Oz, of course, but at least you'll be able to choose where you go.
How's that?’
She smiled, but Jinny still felt wretched.
She kicked at the chair-leg and the black, angry words burst out of her.
‘It's always Dad !
I don't want him to be unhappy and have a breakdown.
Of course I don't.
But whenever I try to lead a normal life, like anyone else of my age, he comes along with another job and more work.
If he weren't there —‘
She stopped, horrified at what she had been about to say.
Waiting for Bella to be furious and upset.
But there was no fury.
Just a long, sad pause.
Then Bella said gently.
‘It's always the people you love who trap you like that, Jinny.
If you didn't care about him, you'd just walk off and lead your own life.
Do whatever you wanted to.
It's because you love him that you feel like killing him and wiping him out of your life.
But it's the wrong answer.
If you kill the people you love — or run away from them — you only smash yourself in the end.
You have to grow round them.
Make space for how they are.’
Suddenly Jinny was calm.
Because she saw that it Was true.
And, more than that, she saw that Bella was really talking about herself.
This life was harder on her than on anyone else.
She was totally unsuited to anything where she had to organize herself.
Jinny swallowed her rage and tried to forget that she had wanted to go up to Back Clough Dale today .
After all, they were all in it together.
family life.
This time, when Bella smiled and said, ‘So — bilberrying tomorrow?’
Jinny smiled back.
‘Thanks, Mum.
That'll be great.’
5.30 p.m.
Doyle looked at his watch and then up at Tug.
When he spoke, his voice was raised just loud enough to carry over the low-pitched brass rumbles.
‘Time to go downstairs.’
‘What?’
Tug gaped at him.
He had got used to being in this room, shut in by the four scrawled walls, the sloping ceiling and the unrelenting noise.
With someone watching him all the time except when one of Them let the other out to fetch the papers.
Was it really possible to go out?
Doyle did not repeat himself.
Instead, he pulled the chair away and opened the door, gesturing with his gun for Tug to go through it.
Sliding off the bed, Tug pushed his feet into his trainers and laced them up.
Then, nervously and slowly, he walked to the doorway.
As he passed Doyle, he looked up at him.
‘Why?’
‘Can't keep you cooped up all the time,’ Doyle said, sounding amused.
‘What sort of parents do you think we are?’
You're not my parents .
Tug opened his mouth automatically, but for the first time since he had been there, he let the words go unsaid.
Because he wanted to go downstairs.
Looking up, he saw Doyle's small smile, and knew that the gap had been noticed.
For a moment he was afraid.
He had let something slide.
Only a little thing, but he was frightened of where it might lead.
Then his feet were on the stairs and he was walking down the narrow, dark steps, which twisted  sharply to the right.
Bracing himself, ready for whatever he might find at the bottom.
The stairs ended in a latched door.
Tug pushed it open.
At the same moment, at the top of the stairs, Doyle turned off the music.
It had not stopped, even for a second, over the two days.
Now, in the sudden silence, Tug felt as though he had been stripped naked and pushed out into a football crowd.
The tormenting music and the attic room were horrible — but this was more frightening.
‘Go on,’ Doyle said softly, coming down behind him.
Tug stared into a big kitchen/living-room full of old, heavy furniture that did not quite match.
Facing him was the main front door, the door that led to the outside world.
Beside it, a large window showed the first view that Tug had seen for five days.
Close to the house, a narrow track ran up a slight slope.
Beyond, in the distance, a great ridge rose high, running from one side of the window to the other.
It looked massive and majestic in the evening light and Tug stood quite still for a second, imagining the wind blowing across its top.
The free, cold wind.
Then Doyle pushed him and he stepped meekly into the room, noticing the heavy key in the front door and the two large bolts that were firmly shot at the top and bottom.
They were not taking any chances.
It was obvious that his visit had been planned and was not merely a sudden idea of Doyle's.
The Woman was sitting round to the right, beside a television, and as soon as she saw Tug she waved at a chair.
‘Sit down.
We thought we'd have a nice family evening in front of the television.’
They were both watching him.
Big, hazel eyes and cold, blue ones.
Watching him and waiting for something.
Settling himself in one of the big, shabby armchairs, Tug gazed suspiciously at the television screen and waited for a picture to appear.
Even then, he had not got as far as thinking what would be  the music that introduced the News and all at once the screen was filled with a picture of his own house, a picture that nearly jolted him out of his skin.
Of course!
He was News!
People must be hunting all over the country for him.
As the news-reader began to speak, he leaned forward eagerly, not caring about Doyle and the Woman.
‘Good evening.’
The television was not very good and the voice crackled and faded from time to time.
‘The terrorists who are holding thirteen-year-old Liam Shakespeare hostage in his home in Shelley Grove have announced that they are members of Free People, the left-wing revolutionary group that aims to ‘break the tyranny of the blood tie and abolish the out-dated family unit. ''’
It was nonsense.
Tug's eyes and ears blurred.
Not one word of it made any sense at all to him.
He must have gone mad or deaf.
But the news-reader's voice went on, crackling but unmistakable, saying extraordinary things.
‘The group has issued a communiqué setting out its general aims, but has not as yet made any specific demands.
Liam's mother, Harriet Shakespeare, was interviewed at a friend's house today.’
Tug's eyes snapped back into focus and there was Hank, sitting in Mrs Mallory's front room.
Her squashed-pekinese face looked peculiar, as though someone had smudged dusty shadows under the eyes and in the hollows of the cheeks.
Her mouth was stiff in a familiar way, so that Tug knew she was trying not to cry.
He wanted to be with her so much that he could hardly breathe.
Hank, Hank, come and get me out of here .
‘Have you been able to contact Liam directly at all?’ said the invisible interviewer.
Hank shook her head.
Her mouth was still tense, but her voice came out quite steady, as Tug had known it would.
‘Not yet.
There's a telephone link, of course, but we haven't managed to persuade the group to let Liam speak.’
‘But you know that he is alive and unhurt?’
‘We've glimpsed him moving around.
Not very clearly, but he's certainly alive.’
Tug felt like a ghost, mouthing and gesturing on the outside of a window, in the darkness.
Everything seemed to slip and slither round him — Doyle and the Woman, the dirty plates heaped round the sink, the vast, open view through the window.
They swirled together as though they had been stirred with a spoon.
But he gripped hard at the arms of his chair and forced himself to attend.
He did not want to miss a word.
Not while he could see Hank.
‘Mrs Shakespeare, you are well-known for your investigations into extreme left-wing groups and terrorist organizations.
Do you know much about free People?’
The tough little face looked suddenly alert.
‘I first noticed them when they carried out the hospital nursery raid about three years ago.
Remember it?
They swapped all the babies round and removed the name bands on their wrists.
That's a typical Free People stunt.
Not necessarily blood-thirsty, but making a point.
They didn't injure anyone that time — not physically, at any rate — but there must be mothers in Yorkshire who are still wondering if the babies were really sorted out correctly.’
‘But the group can be dangerous?
There is real reason to be afraid for Liam's safety?’
‘Of course there is!’ snapped Harriet Shakespeare.
‘You know that as well as I do, after the Beach Bombings.’
‘Of course, of course .’
The interviewer hesitated, and when he asked the next question he sounded faintly embarrassed.
‘You have always insisted that groups like this should not be encouraged to take hostages.
That no one should give in to their demands.
Do you still feel the same now that your own son is involved?’
Harriet Shakespeare turned to face the camera directly.
‘I hope I shall be strong enough to stick by my principles,’ she said.
Her voice was less controlled now.
Tug could tell that she was desperately in earnest by the way she opened her  eyes wide and by the little sudden lift of her eyebrows.
It was a characteristic movement.
‘But I also hope that people will understand what it's like standing outside your own house, knowing that your son is a prisoner in there and not being able to get in.
It's very hard to bear.’
‘And of course you don't yet know what the terrorists ' demands will be, do you?’
The pause before Harriet Shakespeare spoke again was very, very short.
Only someone who knew her very well would have noticed it.
‘That's right.
I haven't got any idea what they're going to ask for.
We'll just have to wait and see.’
She gave a tiny smile, brave but near tears, and then vanished from the screen.
It had been a moving interview.
Touching.
Intelligent.
Courageous.
And ending up with a thumping great lie.
Tug knew that that last bit about the terrorists' demands was a lie.
He could tell, from the way she had hesitated and from the smile she had given.
He went on staring at the television screen, not listening to the next item, but trying to work out the puzzle.
All through the first part of the interview — the crazy part, when she had been talking about seeing her son in the house — Hank had been telling the straight truth.
No doubt about it.
She believed every word she was saying.
And when she was talking about the clash between her feelings and her principles, she had been desperately serious.
But then suddenly — a lie.
It was a hopeless jumble.
And the eyes were still there.
Watching him.
Waiting to see what he had made of it all.
Tug stared down at his shoes.
‘Why did you bring me down to watch that?’ he said gruffly.
The Woman leaned forward, her face eager, but it was Doyle who answered, dropping every word slowly so that it rippled like a stone in a pond.
‘We thought you would be interested to hear about your friend.’
‘My — friend?’
‘Liam Shakespeare.’
‘He's not a friend of mine —’ began Tug.
Then he stopped.
He saw Hank's face saying,We've glimpsed him moving around .
All at once, he felt devastatingly weary.
A thought slid into his mind.
I have been blotted out from the world .
He was too weak and confused and unhappy to fight it.
Ridiculously, he longed for the attic room and the sound of ‘The Keel Row’, as if they were home.
as if he had no place anywhere else.
He stood up.
‘I want to go back upstairs.’
The eyes stared.
Then Doyle stood up too.
‘I'll take you.’
He put an arm round Tug's shoulders and the bare skin of his wrist lay warm and dry against Tug's upper arm, the crisp hairs tickling slightly.
Tug found it repulsive, but he had not the energy to resist and he let Doyle lead him upstairs as a father leads a child.
8.00 p.m.
‘I haven't got any idea what they're going to ask for.
We'll just have to wait and see.’
Harriet Shakespeare gave a wavering smile and Keith reached forward and switched off the video recorder.
Then he looked at Jinny.
‘There you are.
You've seen my cuttings and you've seen what's been on the News the last couple of days.
What do you think?’
Jinny was flummoxed.
Only an hour ago she had been finishing the evening milking, peaceful in the milking house with Florence.
But as soon as she walked in to see Keith he had faced her with a heap of newspaper and snippets of video-recordings.
Dropped her knee-deep into the Harriet Shakespeare business and asked her to think .
She looked round at the cuttings strewn on the floor and then back at the blank screen.
‘Well — I don't know — it's sad.
You have to feel sorry for  her.
That bit about her son and her principles — you know exactly how she feels.
And you've got to admire her for not collapsing.’
‘In fact, she's the picture of a brave, devoted mother,’ Keith said in an odd voice.
Jinny thought he was laughing at her.
‘Yes!’ she said fiercely.
‘I know it sounds corny.
You gripe about your mother and I gripe about mine.
But mothers are wonderful, and it's something like this that makes you realize it.’
‘That's right ,’ said Keith.
He rubbed his chin and Jinny noticed that he needed a shave.
‘These terrorists have really made a lovely picture by kidnapping Liam Shakespeare, haven't they?
A picture of mother-love and devoted families.
Let's all wipe our eyes.’
He frowned.
‘It's very, very peculiar.
How can they have got it so wrong?’
‘What do you mean wrong ?’
Jinny was too tired to try and work it out.
‘Why should terrorists care what it looks like — as long as they get their money, or whatever they're after?’
‘Terrorists hardly ever get what they're after.’
Keith rubbed at his sweaty forehead, leaving a black smear from the newsprint on his hands.
‘That's not what they're really doing.’
It sounded like one of his clever ideas.
Jinny sighed.
‘Come on then, genius.
What are they really doing?’
‘Well, they're not usually powerful enough to change things by themselves, see.
Not directly.
So they try to make pictures that will change people's minds.
Like — let me see — like when the Palestinians once injected Israeli oranges with mercury in a supermarket.
They told people there were thousands of poisoned oranges about.
That they'd better stop buying Israeli.
I don't suppose it damaged the Israeli economy much, but it put across just the picture the Palestinians were after.
Israel is poison.,
‘So?’ said Jinny.
She hated it when he made her feel stupid.
‘So these terrorists are making a picture that says Mothers are wonderful .’
‘What's wrong with that?’
‘Jinny !’
Keith pulled a face at her and tugged his hair despairingly.
‘Why don't you oil your brains?
Think what sort of group Free People are.
They don't want to say Mothers are wonderful .
They want to say Smash the family .
Like they did in the Beach Bombings.’
‘Beach Bombings?’
Jinny felt weary.
Was there no end to the things she hadn't heard of?
Keith sighed.
‘It was last summer,’ he said patiently.
‘Crowded beaches, full of families sunning themselves.
Then suddenly — POW!
Bombs went off on six beaches at once.
Blew about twenty families to bits and sent a shocking number of people scurrying away without their parents or their children.
Free People claimed they had been ‘exploding the myth of the happy family’.
So you see the sort of people they are?
Remember the communiqué they put out a couple of days ago?
Look, here.’
Jinny remembered seeing it and slipping past it because it looked complicated and she was tired.
Now she spread it on her knee and read it properly.
A Message from the free People to their Comrades Still in Prison
Comrades, it is time to wake and see your chains.
WOMEN open your eyes and see how you are chained to husbands and children.
All the equal opportunities in the world cannot save you from the demands of your families.
THERE MUST BE A DIFFERENT PATTERN.
MEN open your eyes and see how you are chained to the capitalist system by the needs of your wives and children.
As long as men have families, capitalists will be able to exploit them.
THERE MUST BE A DIFFERENT PATTERN.
CHILDREN open your eyes and see how you are chained to the needs and desires of your parents.
And while they force you to be what you do not want to be, they are also teaching you how to be parents.
Shudder when you understand that you, in your turn, will humiliate your aged parents and bully and deform your children.
THERE MUST BE A DIFFERENT PATTERN.
The family is a primitive institution that gives the rich an excuse to exploit the poor and prevents the poor from resisting.
There will be no justice and no liberation until the vicious circle is broken and the tyranny of the family is smashed.
The blood tie strangles the true brotherhood of mankind.
It is time for men to come out of the nursery.
The doors of the prison stand open.
The free People will free people.
In a few days we shall announce our exact demands which must be fulfilled before we release Liam Shakespeare.
Be prepared to support these demands!
Help build the revolution NOW.
Jinny read it three times.
Then, at random almost, she picked up one of the other cuttings, which showed Harriet Shakespeare's plain, squashed face looking white and distraught and pitiful as she leaned against a friend's arm.
‘You're right,’ she said slowly.
‘It makes no sense.
Why have they done it?’
Keith leaned back in his chair and waggled his bare feet, looking very pleased with himself.
‘That's what I'm waiting to find out.
You know, it's turning out to be a brilliant story  to do.
Thanks for thinking of it, Jin.
I was amazed you'd even heard of it, to tell the truth.’
‘I thought of it?’
Jinny said.
Then she remembered.
Those big, golden eyes turned towards the radio, ignoring Mrs Hollins.
‘Oh yes.
The Hare-woman.’
‘The what ?’
Keith sat up straight and stared at her.
She had not meant to say it out loud, but now that she had, she almost explained.
Because she always had told Keith everything.
Then it came back to her.
Find another fact or two , he had said.
And Aha!
It is the handsome stranger .
She tossed her plait over her shoulder and looked round at all the mess.
‘Why don't we tidy up instead of yacketing on?
Unless you want your mother to spend the rest of the evening raging at you.’
It was the first time she had ever warned him off anything private and for a moment he looked puzzled and embarrassed.
But he was not a person who would ferret for secrets.
With a meekness that made her feel mean, he knelt down on the floor and started to gather his cuttings together.
Day Six — Friday 12th August
2.00 a.m.
Tug woke suddenly in the dark, out of a nightmare of falling, of rushing water and ground that slipped away beneath his feet.
He opened his eyes and was instantly aware of utter, spine-chilling silence.
Everything was dark except for a single patch where the moon shone through the skylight on to the wall.
A single pale, bright patch, from which two black skeletons leered down at him.
He caught his breath.
At once, away to the side of the skeletons, a dark hump reared.
A shadow moved across the brightness, coming towards his bed.
Tug screamed.
In mid-scream, he was choked into silence by a hand that came over his face, forcing his jaw shut.
It was so dark that he could not see who was bending over him.
Let it be Doyle , he thought frantically.
Not Her .
He could just imagine the Woman hitting him, smashing at his face in the dark with the butt of her gun.
At least Doyle would not do that.
The dark figure bent nearer, too close for Tug to see the face.
But he could feel its breath on his cheek.
Thank God, he thought,it is Doyle .
And then he was doubly frightened, because he had known without seeing the face or hearing the voice, from small familiarities of feel and smell.
as if he had known Doyle all his life.
‘Quiet,’ whispered the voice, very low.
‘Daddy's going to tell you a bedtime story.’
Tug lay very still and concentrated on breathing and the voice went on, so softly that it was only just possible to hear  it, even though Doyle's face was right up against his ear.
‘Once upon a time, when Daddy was a little boy, he used to wake in the night and cry.
Because he was afraid of the dark.
Like you.
Crying in the dark.’
I wasn't , Tug wanted to say.
But there was something about Doyle's voice that made it impossible to interrupt.
Something tense and hypnotic and terrifying.
He lay there and listened as the voice whispered on.
‘And when he cried,his Daddy would come.
Always his Daddy.
If his Mummy tried to come, she was sent away.
And his Daddy used to bring things with him.’
Tug swallowed hard.
The voice was calm and soft and the words were ordinary, but he knew he was being told a horror story.
‘Sometimes it was a belt.
Sometimes it was a lighted cigarette.
Once —’ the voice shook and hesitated for a moment ‘— once it was a pair of pliers.
But whatever it was, it had the same effect.
Your Daddy learnt never,never to cry in the dark.
Because his Daddy didn't like it.’
Tug's head was being forced backwards so that his throat was stretched almost unbearably.
Just as he started to feel that he could not endure it any longer, that he would have to struggle, Doyle's fingers relaxed slightly.
But his voice continued in the same frightful hiss.
‘I've inherited that from my father.
I don't like crying in the dark.
What a pity you seem to have inherited that from me.’
Pain and choking and rage all came together at once and Tug twisted his head aside.
‘I haven't inherited that from you!’
he shouted.
‘I haven't inherited anything from you.
You're not my father .
My father's dead!’
‘You've inherited my fear of the dark,’ Doyle hissed again, as though Tug had not spoken, ‘But that's not the worst part.
You'll have inherited the other thing, too.
The hatred of crying in the dark.
I'll beat you, just as my father beat me.
And you'll beat your own children.
And they'll beat theirs.
On and on and on for ever, with no way out —‘
‘No!
No !’
Tug shrieked and struggled, trying to sit up.
‘You're not my father!
My father was Frank Shakespeare!’
But even while he was saying it, it did not sound true.
How could father be any blurred shape on a photograph, too faded and far away to remember properly?
Father was a huge figure bending over him in the dark.
A deep voice.
A rough chin brushing his cheek.
And any minute, any second now, it would happen.
Doyle would start to hit him and he would not be able to stop.
Nor would Tug be able to stop shrieking.
And it would go on and on and on —
Without any warning, the light flashed on.
‘What the hell's happening?’
It was the Woman.
She stood in the doorway with a man's night-shirt on and her hair in a plait.
When no one answered her, she came stamping into the room with a scowl on her face.
‘I said what's happening ?
I thought it was my turn for a kip.
But as soon as I get into bed and shut my eyes, this racket starts up.
Can't you keep the kid quiet?’
‘Just telling him a little story.’
Doyle smiled slowly.
‘About family life.’
He looked across at the Woman, so that she could share his smile, but she did not smile.
She was staring at Tug.
Suddenly she came across the room, the night-shirt flapping round her long, brown legs, and seized his shoulder.
‘What's been getting to you?’
‘I —’ Tug looked up at Doyle.
‘I woke up,’ he said weakly.
‘I saw the skeletons and —’ To his surprise, he had to stop, in case he burst into tears.
And he could feel himself shaking.
The Woman nodded.
‘Yes, they're pretty gruesome.
I thought you'd got a bit carried away when you were drawing them.’
She gripped his shoulder harder and pulled him up, out of bed.
‘Come downstairs.
I'll make you a hot drink.’
As they reached the door, she looked back at Doyle.
‘Get some Blu-Tack and put up those posters I bought.
Cover the scribbles over.’
She did not speak again until she and Tug were down in the  big kitchen.
Then, as she bent over the stove, heating milk, she said casually, ‘So, what was Doyle telling you, then?’
‘He —’ Tug breathed harder.
‘About his father.’
‘Ah.’
The Woman nodded, still with her back to him.
‘And he frightened you?’
Tug was still cold with the shock of it, but all he said was, ‘I didn't know.
That he was like that.
I thought he was — safe.’
She turned, laughing softly, as she put the cup of hot milk into his hands.
‘That's not how I'd describe Doyle.
Not safe .’
‘But he doesn't get angry and rage like —‘
‘Like me?’
the Woman said.
for a moment she was very quiet, staring over his head, and her throat moved as she swallowed hard.
Then she sat down beside Tug, put her elbows on the table and rested her chin in the palms of her hands.
‘Oh no, Doyle's not like me.
He never, never,never loses control.
But don't kid yourself.
That's a very angry man.
And dangerous.’
Tug lowered his head and sipped.
The milk was hot on the roof of his mouth and he was sharply aware of the Woman sitting there, the sleeves of the night-shirt falling away from her strong, brown forearms.
Her eyes travelled from his face down to the mug which he held in his two hands.
The surface of the milk shivered treacherously, betraying his trembling.
Slowly she stretched out and cupped her own hands firmly round his, steadying and warming them.
Tug felt his hectic heartbeat slow down and his pulse grow calm, as if he were a little child being comforted after a nightmare.
And, like a little child, he stopped being careful and tense for a moment and said what was in his head, quite simply.
‘Ma, what's going on?
The really frightening thing is not understanding.’
Her eyes flickered.
Then she reached up a hand and stroked his hair gently.
‘I know it's hard,’ she murmured.
‘But it will be all right, I'm sure it will.
And you will understand.
In the end.’
The next moment she jumped up, almost angrily, as though she had been trapped into a softness that she did not mean.
‘Come on.
Drink up and get back to bed.’
It was not until he was climbing the stairs in front of her that Tug realized suddenly, cold and clear, why her eyes had flickered before she answered.
He had called her Ma , without being asked to.
The thought appalled him so much that he went into the attic and slid back into bed without saying anything more to either of them.
Without even looking at the posters which now covered the walls, hiding the crayoned pictures.
The Woman gave him one look and then switched off the light and Doyle settled himself in the chair and sat silently in the shadows.
I called her Ma .
The thought ran through Tug's head, over and over again.
And it was worse than that.
Sitting there in the kitchen, he had actually felt as though she were his mother.
He could imagine sitting on her lap when he was smaller.
Racing up in tears and clutching at her when he was hurt.
Waking in the night to find her bending over him.
Rolling over, he buried his face in the pillow and tried to get back his old picture of her — hard and tough and violent, the same all the way through.
But a tiny, treacherous crack of doubt had opened in his mind.
Until then, he had been sure of his memories, certain that he could not have forgotten his parents and everything that had happened to him and reinvented the whole of his life before he woke in the attic.
Only — was it really reasonable to think that the rest of the world was in league against him?
It wasn't just Doyle and the Woman, after all, who were telling him that he was wrong.
The television news-readers and the police and Hank — even Hank — were saying that Liam Shakespeare was shut up in his own home.
What was it they said about people who were convinced that the rest of the world was plotting against them?
Then, uncannily, Doyle spoke in the darkness.
The only words he said before morning.
He planted them in the silence with eerie precision, as though he had read Tug's mind.
‘D'you realize how many people believe they're called Shakespeare ?
— In lunatic asylums, all over the country.’
5.00 p.m.
‘Aw, Jin, that's enough ,’ Oz said.
He was tired and crotchety, heaving his basket along with two hands.
‘Mum'll faint if we pick any more.’
‘Don't be such a mardy-baby.’
Jinny knew that she was being mean.
They had been out picking bilberries all day, stooping over the little tough bushes among the heather and separating the branches to find the fat, black berries with their bluish-misty sheen.
All along the Great Edge, from the Castle Rock northwards, they had worked in the sun, with bent backs and aching arms.
And Oz had worked just as hard as she had, not stopping to gaze down into the dale, but picking and picking until his fingers were stained blue-purple.
But now that they had reached the road at the dale head, he wanted to turn down it and go home.
He was right, really.
They had plenty of berries and there would be jobs ready and waiting for them.
Only — that was not what Jinny had planned.
At least you'll be able to choose where you go , Mum had said, giving her the day as a treat.
Well, she chose to go on, up along the hump of moorland that looked down on Back Clough Dale.
She shifted the basket on her arm and crossed the road.
‘Come on,’ she called over her shoulder.
‘You know there's more up behind Mrs Hollins's cottage.
No one 'll pick them unless we do.
It's waste to leave them.’
Waste was a magic word in the Slattery family.
It made Bella shriek and wave her arms about and it set Joe drumming his fingers on the table with that quiet disapproval that was worse than anything Bella could do.
Oz gave in straight away and started to follow Jinny up the slope.
Looking back and seeing him trudging so patiently and  you catch up, I can show you where Dad and I took the hare.’
‘And tell us how you did it?’
Oz said quickly.
‘If you promise not to go splitting all round the village.’
Oz formed his face into a solemn mask that would have been funny if Jinny had not been trying to keep him happy.
As it was, she forced down her sense of humour and began to explain what Joe had done, how he had blocked the holes and netted the gate and chased the hare out with Ferry.
There was nothing Oz liked better than finding out how to do some new thing.
He attended without wavering as she took him round to the head of the little dale, above the cottage, pointing out the hare's field below them as they went.
When they were level with the trees behind the cottage, she gave Oz a little push.
‘I'll do up here.
You go lower down, in the trees.
Be quicker if we split up.’
Oz edged carefully down the slope, crouching every now and then as he reached a little bilberry bush.
Jinny found some nearer the top, in the open, where she could stand and peer down at the cottage.
It lay in its hollow, drowsy in the afternoon sun, its grey gritstone walls casting a short, black shadow.
There was no movement, not even a twitch of the curtains, and no sound breaking the sleepy summer silence.
Discouraged, Jinny bent to her picking, telling herself that she was stupid to expect faces at the window or dramatic voices calling.
At that moment, a voice did call, so that she jerked with shock.
But it was only Oz.
He shouted from the slope below her, sounding shrill and puzzled.
‘Hey!
Jin!’
She spun round, but she could not quite see him.
He was somewhere a little to the left, in a cluster of small, scrubby trees.
‘Ssh!’
she hissed, as loudly as she dared.
‘Don't forget there's visitors in the cottage.
Don't go annoying them.’
It seemed that he had heard her, because there was silence again and Jinny turned back towards the little patch of  bushes she was picking over.
But before she could settle to it, there was a sudden scrambling and slithering at the bottom of the slope.
Then Oz's voice again, sounding quite different.
‘JIN !’
She knew that panicky, rising note.
Laying her basket down, she ran towards the shriek, her feet slipping on the loose ground as she came under the trees, until she finished with an uncontrollable slide that landed her almost on top of Oz.
And the Hare-woman.
She had Oz by the shoulder and Jinny, tumbling nearly into her arms, said the first thing that came into her head.
‘Mrs Doyle!’
‘What?’
The woman looked up, puzzled.
Then she looked closer studying Jinny's face.
‘Oh yes, I remember.
The self-sufficiency girl.’
And she grinned.
Jinny began to speak idiotically fast.
‘This is my little brother.
I hope he's not been annoying you.
He's not bad considering he's only eight and —‘
‘Thanks!’
said Oz.
He wriggled his shoulder free and stepped backwards, away from the Hare-woman and closer to Jinny.
‘What have you been doing?’
Reluctantly, Jinny looked away from the woman so that she could inspect him.
There did not seem to be any wounds or any broken bones.
‘That was a terrific yell.’
‘I heard the first one,’ said the Hare-woman, watching them both.
‘Thought he might have hurt himself or something so I came out to have a look.
And I guess I frightened him.’
Jinny looked at Oz again.
He didn't seem frightened.
He was gazing at the woman with the strange, unblinking stare which meant he was working something out.
‘What did you yell for, Oz?’
He let his breath out and said solemnly, ‘I found some mushrooms.
Look.’
He pointed at the top of his basket.
On top of the bilberries lay a few rather scrubby chanterelles, slightly battered.
Quite an ordinary haul.
Nothing to get excited about.
‘You want to be careful with those,’ the Hare-woman said.
‘Don't want to land up in hospital.’
‘Oh, Oz is good at fungi,’ muttered Jinny absently, wondering.
Why make such a fuss about a few miserable chanterelles?
‘They're grand.’
Earnestly, Oz scooped them out of the basket and held them towards the woman.
‘Here.
You have them.
Because I disturbed you.’
‘Oh no.
That's O.K.’
‘Please.
I want you to have them.’
He was doing his winsome act, almost fluttering his eyelashes at her.
The Harewoman looked sharply at him and then shrugged, taking the chanterelles into her hand too roughly, so that Jinny smelt the faint apricot smell they gave off.
‘O.K. Thanks.
Now — are you going on looking for more?’
‘Oh no,’ Oz said, before Jinny could answer.
‘My basket's full of bilberries.
We're going home now.
Come on, Jin.’
He hauled the basket up the slope, towards the place where Jinny had been, so that she could retrieve hers, but he did not stop there.
He walked straight back round the top of the little dale until they came down the slope to the road, well out of sight of the cottage.
Then he sat down with a thump, his legs sticking straight out in front of him.
Jinny squatted beside him.
‘And what was all that about?’
she said sharply.
‘All that fuss about a few miserable mushrooms.
And then you forced them on her .
She obviously didn't want them.
They'll go straight in the bin.’
‘Oh — them,’ Oz sounded scornful.
‘Did you really think I was shouting about them ?
Mingy little things.
No, I only said that to shut her up.
Because I thought she was peculiar.’
‘What d'you mean peculiar ?’
said Jinny angrily.
But the hair on the back of her neck prickled to hear him saying it so  calmly.
Because the Hare-woman was lovely, but she was peculiar.
‘She jumped me,’ Oz said.
‘Bounced out as soon as she heard me call you and came scrabbling up the slope.
That's why I yelled the second time.
I wanted you.’
‘And what about the first time?
The one that started all this off?
If it wasn't the mushrooms, what set you shrieking?’
She could see that she had got to it at last.
Oz looked important and mysterious, settling himself as though to tell a long story.
‘I saw a flash of white through the bushes.
Thought it might be a puff-ball.
Remember when Dad found that puffball up there and Mum did it with bacon —?’
‘Yes, yes,’ Jinny said impatiently.
‘Go on.’
‘Well , it wasn't a puff-ball.’
He rummaged in his pocket and pulled out something damp and crumpled.
‘Look!’
‘Oh OZ !
It's only a rotten paper dart.’
‘You open it and look inside.’
Oz sounded impressive and serious.
Silly little boy.
He was too old for stories like that and —
Then she opened the dart and saw the smudgy letters inside:
HELP I AM A PRISONER HERE.
She stared down at it for a long time.
That's just what you wanted , half her mind was saying excitedly.
But the other half was remembering how the Hare-woman had stood on the slope, staring with those wild, watchful eyes and saying The self-sufficiency girl , with that direct, lop-sided grin.
Oz tugged at her sleeve.
‘What d'you think it's for?’
‘Mmm?’
‘Jin !
Are you going to do anything about it?’
All of a sudden she decided.
She stood up.
‘Come on.
We're going down to the village.
We're going to see Keith's Dad.’
5.40 p.m.
Tug was suffocating.
His head was jammed up against the back of the sofa, his cheek on the carpet and Doyle's hand clamped over his mouth.
His whole body felt bruised from the speed at which Doyle had dragged him round and thrown him on to the floor when they heard the shout outside.
The television news-reader's voice still rang across the room, sounding forlorn now that no one was listening.
‘…free People today announced what they are demanding in exchange for the release of Liam Shakespeare.
They want the Government to abolish Child Benefit and all tax allowances for parents and use the money to set up full-time Community Homes for everyone under the age of sixteen.
They claim that this will ‘break the harmful power of the nuclear family’ and they have given the Government until next Friday to agree.’
Weird , thought Tug.
He knew that he had been brought down specially to hear that, but it seemed to have nothing to do with him.
Could have been a million miles away.
All he could think of was that he wanted to sneeze.
His nose was full of dust and he could not help himself.
‘A — a — TCHOO!’
He spluttered into Doyle's hand.
‘Filthy beast,’ said Doyle.
He did not move his fingers a millimetre.
Then they heard the front door open.
‘It's O.K.’’ the Woman's voice called.
Her hands were full of queer yellow mushroom things.
She threw them on to the table and looked down at Doyle and Tug.
‘You two having a wrestling match?’
Doyle smiled smoothly as he got to his feet.
‘Part of growing up.
Trying your strength against your Dad.
Philip's got quite a way to go yet before he can beat me.’
His fingers were still round Tug's wrists as he looked the Woman sharply up and down.
‘So?’
She shrugged.
‘Nothing.
Only a couple of kids larking about.
I've seen the girl before.
She's local.’
‘A girl?’
Doyle suddenly went very still.
‘About fourteen?
Skinny and ginger, with a plait?’
‘Well — yes.’
The Woman frowned and Tug could almost feel her muscles tense.
‘You've seen her too?’
‘Exactly.’
Doyle jerked at Tug's arms to bring him round to the table.
‘It was her, last time.
I think the three of us should sit down and have a little talk.’
Tug slumped into a chair and looked first to one side and then to the other.
On his left, the Woman sat biting her thumb-nail, with eyes flickering warily.
On his right, Doyle's pale blue eyes were steady under the black hair, his face doubly familiar and hated because Tug saw something very like it every time he looked into the mirror.
‘Right,’ said Doyle.
‘Let's talk about visitors.’
The two of them leaned closer, across the table, and Tug found himself leaning forward too, as though he were helping to make their plan.
As though the three of them were a group, defending itself against the outside world.
6.30 p.m.
‘I see,’ said Mr Hollins slowly.
‘And what is it you want then, Jinny?’
He refolded the paper dart neatly and sent it skimming across the tea-table.
Mrs Hollins tutted fussily and Keith bent to pick it up.
‘She wants you to go up there of course, Dad,’ he said.
‘To see what's afoot.’
He spoke a little impatiently, and his mother rounded on him.
‘I won't have you speak to your father like that.
And as for him going up Back Clough Dale and mithering the folk up there, and all for nothing — well, I reckon you've lost your brains, my lad, to think of such a thing.
And you can get your  elbows off the table.
I don't know what Jinny must think.’
You don't care a straw what I think , Jinny said inside her head.
But she pressed her lips together and kept it in.
No point in riling Mrs Hollins any further.
That wouldn't help Keith.
She fixed her eyes on Mr Hollins's face and waited for his answer.
But she had forgotten that Rachel would have to put her two pennorth in first.
It was done with a scornful glance at Keith and then a grin of agreement at Mrs Hollins.
‘Dad'll make himself look a great idiot if he goes up there, won't he, Mum?
Keith's gone out of his wits bringing Jinny in with a tale like that.’
Jinny clutched hard at Oz's hand, biting her tongue.
But she had no way of signalling to Keith, and she saw him frown ominously.
‘That's rude, Rachel,’ he said, firmly but softly.
‘You'll make Jinny feel bad, and she's done no harm.’
‘And I'll thank you not to tell your sister what to do!’
Mrs Hollins jumped to her feet.
‘Come on.
Upstairs.
I will not have you two bickering.’
‘But I wasn't —‘
‘Upstairs !’
Red-faced, Keith pushed his chair back, looking large and ridiculous.
Jinny saw Oz gaping in amazement and she kicked his foot.
No point in making Keith feel worse.
She stared down at her plate, embarrassed and angry.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said as Keith went out of the room.
‘I had no call to come bursting into your tea like this.
Disturbing you all.
Only — when I found the note —‘
‘When I found the note —’ Oz interrupted her.
‘Oh yes.
When Oz found the note, we reckoned it might be — it might mean —’ She doubled her fists and looked frantically up at Mr Hollins.
‘I'm not fooling, I promise.
And there was the shout the other day, as well.’
Mr Hollins grinned suddenly.
‘Calm down, girl.
I know you're not fooling.
Know you better than that.
You're pure Slattery, to the bone, with never a joke in your body.’
‘Well then?’
Jinny looked hopeful.
‘Please !’
Oz said.
He was sitting next to Mr Hollins and he looked solemnly at him.
‘You should have been there when that woman came leaping out at me.
Horrid it was.’
Mr Hollins rubbed a large hand over his large face.
‘You're never going to listen to them?’
said Mrs Hollins.
‘We-ell,’ he rubbed harder.
‘It could be — just could be — Jinny's right and there is something queer going on up there.
I'd best take a look, just to be on the safe side.’
‘But they're our tenants,’ Mrs Hollins snapped.
‘My tenants.
I'll not have them put out.’
Her husband stood up to fetch his helmet.
‘Tenants or no tenants, I've got my job to do.
Come on, Jinny.
I'll use you for an excuse.
Then you can see if you've made a fuss for nothing.’
‘And me!’
Oz said quickly.
Mr Hollins rumpled his hair.
‘I'm not running a Sunday School outing.
You can stop here with Rachel.’
Oz pulled a terrible face.
‘But I was the one who —‘
Bending down quickly, Jinny whispered in his ear.
‘It's no good going on.
He won't take you.
But you don't have to stop with Rachel and Mrs Hollins.
Take yourself up to Keith and tell him I'll be back to say what happened.’
To her relief, Oz nodded and, as soon as they all took their eyes off him, he slid away from the tea-table and out of the room.
Jinny followed Mr Hollins to his car.
He grinned at her as he switched the engine on.
‘Do we need the siren?
Blue lights flashing?’
He was much jollier when Mrs Hollins was not there.
Jinny grinned back.
‘Like a proper policeman, you mean?’
‘Cheeky young chip!’
But he was teasing her absentmindedly.
His real thoughts were on something else and he fell silent as they pulled away from the post Office and up the dale.
He did not speak again until they were bumping up the track towards the cottage.
Then he said suddenly.
‘There's no call to go stirring folk for nothing.
I think we'd best not speak about paper darts and cries for help.
Eh?’
‘But how will you —?’
‘Leave it to me, lass.
Just keep your wits about you.’
As they got out of the car and walked across the yard, their feet scrunching on the stones, Jinny had a queer feeling that they were being watched.
There was nothing to support it, no face at a window, no movement of a curtain, but when Mr Hollins knocked on the front door it opened immediately.
‘Yes?’
said the Hare-woman.
Then she caught sight of Jinny and their eyes met.
‘Oh, hallo.’
‘Hallo,’ Jinny said.
She felt that she had given the whole thing away, that the Hare-woman's eyes would be able to read all her thoughts from her face and that single word.
But if it was so, the woman gave no sign.
She simply looked back at Mr Hollins, polite and expectant.
‘Good evening, Mrs Doyle.’
Mr Hollins stood square on the doorstep.
‘I'm sorry to trouble you.
Perhaps we might come in a minute?’
‘Of course.’
There was no hesitation.
Not even the second's surprised pause that anyone might have made.
Jinny and Mr Hollins stepped through the door straight into the big kitchen.
The room was full of the cheerful clutter of a family on holiday — books, maps and a camera flung on to the table.
There was a faint stale smell, as though everything might not be as fanatically clean as Mrs Hollins liked it, but there was nothing odd to see.
The other two people in the room were sitting side by side on the old sofa.
There was the man Jinny had seen before, with the cold blue eyes that almost made her shudder as she met them again, and there was a boy.
A boy with black hair and ice-blue eyes.
‘I think you've met my husband before,’ said the Harewoman.
‘And this is my son, Philip.’
They're like as twin lambs , was Jinny's first thought.
Then she saw that that was not quite right, because their features were very different.
Especially the mouths.
The man's lips were narrow and pale where the boy's were full — almost  swollen.
But that extraordinary colouring, the pale, pale eyes and the black hair, clearly marked out the two of them as father and son.
All her images of a tiny waif locked in the attic seemed suddenly foolish and fantastic.
This boy was sitting in a room with his parents, like anyone else.
And no sign of chains or a whip or iron bars.
She stared at the floor, turning pink and feeling so confused that she almost missed what Mr Hollins was saying.
‘…embarrassing to have to trouble you like this, but we've had a bit of bother with the sheep hereabouts.
There's been a strange dog out chasing them.
Young Jinny here reckons she saw it heading up here yesterday.
That right, Jinny?’
‘Oh yes.’
Jinny looked up, gathering her wits.
‘A little terrier.
Like a Jack Russell.
With a tattered ear.’
(Was that overdoing it?
Why was the boy staring at her so?)
‘No dog here,’ said the man.
The question seemed to amuse him in some way.
‘But perhaps you'd like to look over the house.
Just to be on the safe side?’
‘Well — thank you.’
Mr Hollins looked surprised, but he was not ruffled.
‘I reckon I will.’
He got heavily to his feet.
‘Save a lot of bother in the long run.’
The woman opened the door at the bottom of the stairs.
‘I'll come with you.
Not that you need showing the way, of course.’
As they began to climb, Jinny looked back towards the sofa and met the boy's eyes again.
He was still gazing straight at her, without smiling or speaking.
And there was something odd about his face.
Something unexpected, but almost familiar.
Was it that he looked so much like his father?
Jinny tried to track it down, but it eluded her.
His father prodded him.
‘Go on, Phil.
The girl'll think you're thick.
Talk to her.
Make conversation.’
He said it with an odd, teasing leer, as though he were asking for something very difficult, and when the boy spoke he sounded awkward, his voice high and polite.
‘Do you live in the village?’
‘Not to say in the village,’ Jinny said.
‘We're up the dale a bit.
We've got a little farm — more of a smallholding, really.’
‘Oh?’
With a visible effort, he tried again.
‘You live there with your parents?’
Jinny nodded.
‘And my brother Oz and my baby sister Louise.’
The conversation was heavy, like a choking weight, and she plunged on, trying to get some reaction from the boy, to make it easier.
‘We're cranks, you know.
Grow all our own food and make our own clothes.
We'd have our own generator too, only there's not a big enough head of water to our spring.
My Dad s always talking about trying a windmill, but he's never managed it yet, so it's home-made tallow candles in the winter, to save the electricity.
And they stink .’
What was wrong with the boy?
He did not even force a grin.
He seemed to have not the slightest interest in what she was saying.
And yet he stared and stared and stared.
Jinny rattled on, less from politeness than just to try and cover the terrible, wooden silence.
‘We need a bit of money, of course.
There's always rates and suchlike.
So my Dad has a workshop.
He's a jeweller by trade and —‘
And then it happened.
Feet sounded on the stairs.
Mr Hollins and the Hare-woman coming down again.
For a split second the man on the sofa glanced away, towards the noise.
In that second, while Jinny was babbling on about Joe, the boy looked her straight in the eyes and spoke soundlessly, his lips shaping a single word.
Help .
There was no mistaking it.
And he was obviously serious.
His eyes were desperate.
They widened even more and his eyebrows went up and down, with an odd little flicker, as though with the effort of forcing his message silently across the air to Jinny.
‘— at the moment he's making a beautiful chain for a Mayoress down south.’
Miraculously, her voice went on in a steady stream, without a quiver, while her mind tried to take in what had happened.
What did he mean?
And then the  Hare-woman was coming through the door at the bottom of the stairs and the man with the cold eyes was watching again.
‘…very sorry to have troubled you,’ Mr Hollins was saying.
The man shook his head.
‘No trouble.
Come again.
Come every day, if you like.’
He still sounded amused.
‘Perhaps Philip'd like to come over to us,’ Jinny broke in quickly, finding courage from somewhere.
‘It's grand fun with the pigs and the chickens and the cow and that.
Not to count my sister Louise.
She's the noisiest of all.
But he'd be welcome to come.
My brother Oz is desperate to have someone to play with, on account of the rest of us being girls.
He says —‘
It was Mr Hollins who stopped her.
To her astonishment, he suddenly prodded her in the ribs.
‘We'd best be going, Jinny.’
The warning in his voice was clear.
Jinny was so amazed that she stopped speaking in the middle of a sentence and let him say goodbye and make their apologies all over again.
She did not understand what he had meant until they were getting into the car.
‘Sorry to haul you off, girl,’ Mr Hollins said in a low voice, ‘But I reckoned it would be more comfortable for everyone if I got you out afore they had to start making excuses.
You weren't to know, but the boy's simple.
Has fits, as well.
That's why they keep themselves to themselves up there.’
Jinny hesitated.
‘You mean he's mad?’
‘Oh no.’
Mr Hollins sounded shocked.
‘Not mad.
Just a bit simple, like a little child.’
He clipped his seat-belt and turned on the engine.
‘Had posters of Peter Rabbit and suchlike up in his room.
And a thick cloth across the skylight, to help him sleep.
Seems to need a deal of mollycoddling.
His mother explained it all.’
He put the car into gear and they slid away from the cottage.
‘So that's the way of it, you see,’ he finished kindly.
‘It's often like that.
Go to investigate one thing and you turn up another that you didn't expect, like as not.
That's one thing I've learnt in the police force.’
‘But —’ Jinny frowned, not quite ready yet to tell him  what had happened to her.
‘Didn't you think they were a peculiar family?’
Before she could explain what she meant, Mr Hollins was laughing at her.
‘Live in a box, don't you, up at that farm of yours?
Want to get down into the world, lass.
See how it is.
All families are peculiar.’
‘But that boy —‘
‘Come on, now.
I told you the way of that.’
Jinny looked down at her feet and spoke very quickly, so that he could not interrupt her.
‘He said ‘Help’.
When you were upstairs.
And he said it secretly, so that his father didn't see.’
Mr Hollins steered round a pot-hole.
‘There's no more I can do, Jinny.
I'm not a psychiatrist or a social worker.
Don't ask for miracles.
I've come on your wild-goose chase and that's all I can do for you.’
‘But —‘
‘But they're queer?
So?
That's a family.
I've told you.
Prod any family and you'll find queer happenings.
That's another thing I've learnt in the police.’
His voice was quite kind, but it forbade any more questions and Jinny fell silent, looking back over her shoulder as they reached the lip of the little hollow.
There were the three figures, standing in the doorway of the cottage, watching them go.
Philip stood between his parents.
His father's arm was round his shoulders and his mother was ruffling his black hair.
Dimly Jinny supposed that Mr Hollins was right.
A family.
That was what they were.
And who was to know what went on in anyone else's family?
It was just as Joe had been telling her all her life.
Not her business.
7.15 p.m.
Tug watched the back of the police car bump its way up the  track.
Gone.
They'd gone, the policeman and the girl, and he felt miserable and confused.
Part of him was coldly aware of the bulge in Doyle's pocket — the gun which had made sure he would not scream and beg for help.
Coward!
I'm a coward.
I could have been free if I weren't a coward.
But it wasn't that simple.
The policeman and the girl had come on an ordinary routine visit.
To the Doyle family.
They had talked politely and gone away without noticing anything.
Because they believed in the Doyle family.
And somehow that made it more real.
Tug shuddered.
I am Tug , he said fiercely to himself, struggling to drag his memories closer around him.
But they were ragged and insubstantial, with the lurid colours of fancy dress.
How could they cover the sensible, everyday clothes of Philip Doyle?
He shuddered again, and Doyle's arm tightened round his shoulders.
‘Well, well.’
The soft murmur echoed Tug's unhappiest thoughts.
‘And what do you suppose Mr Pig and skinny Miss Ginger made of our happy family?’
The Woman turned, pulling the whole of the little group round with her so that they faced the house, towards the mirror which hung over the sofa.
‘Look,’ she said.
‘That's what they saw.’
Tug looked.
Their faces were reflected back, two black heads and one brown, close together.
Doyle smiled slowly.
‘A lovely composition.’
He walked to the table and picked up the big Polaroid camera in its leather case.
‘Stay there, looking out of the door.
This thing's got a time-switch.’
Taking a chair, he set the camera up in the yard outside, bending over for a moment to fiddle with it.
‘What's he doing?’
Tug said tensely.
‘You know Doyle and his holiday snaps,’ said the Woman, her eyes grave.
Then he was back, sliding his arm nonchalantly round Tug's shoulders and smiling into the evening light.
‘Say cheese, you two.’
‘I won't —’ Tug started to protest.
But before he could move there was a click and Doyle was starting back towards the camera.
With a wrench, Tug wriggled free of the Woman's arm and ran.
Not out of the cottage — that would have been pointless, because Doyle barred the way — but back into the kitchen.
Flinging himself on the carpet, he buried his head wretchedly in the sofa cushions.
After a moment, Doyle said, ‘Don't you want to see it?’
‘No, I don't.’
Tug pushed his head deeper into the soft, musty cushions.
Doyle chuckled.
‘Scared?’
Defiantly Tug raised his head.
‘Of course I'm not scared.
It's just —‘
But he did not know himself what it was and the impossibility of explaining made him turn his head at last and look across at the bright, rectangular picture Doyle was holding out.
There they were, the three of them, in the doorway of the cottage, rather shadowy but plain enough.
The Woman loomed over the group, tall and brown and smiling down at the two mops of black hair — one over a quizzical smile and the other over a scowl.
It was a classic holiday picture.
The two parents with their rebellious adolescent son.
Anyone could have guessed the relationship without a caption.
Tug shut his eyes, screwing them up hard.
‘It's a lie,’ he said frantically, trying to convince himself.
Doyle smiled.
‘The camera can't lie.’
‘It can.
It has .’
‘Why?’
The Woman's voice was cool and intelligent, not teasing like Doyle's.
‘Tell us why.’
‘The whole thing,’ choked Tug, opening his eyes.
‘The whole stinking happy family.
It's a lie !’
‘Of course it's a lie.’
She sounded pleased to say it and Tug  stared at her, with a wild hope that she was going to explain everything to him.
‘Of course it's a lie,’ she said again.
‘The whole idea of a happy family.
All families are parasitic and destructive.
I've told you.
The family is a prison.
It was like being given an ice-cube when you needed hot soup.
Tug could have screamed.
‘I didn't mean that rubbish.’
Her smile faded.
‘Oh Tug !
Haven't you understood anything?’
A sour, thick fear eddied in his throat.
A fear beside which the fear of the gun was nothing — a game.
‘What did you say?’
He spoke very slowly.
‘I said you haven't understood a thing.
I've been struggling away, trying to help you —‘
‘No, not that .’
He brushed it away impatiently.
‘What did you call me?’
She hesitated, searching back to remember what she had said, and then she laughed.
‘What?
Oh, I called you Tug.’
Her eyes shifted, glancing at Doyle and then flickering back.
‘Don't you remember?
It's the name I had for you when you were a baby.’
‘No,’ said Tug, in a low, horrified voice.
A dense blackness swirled round him.
Tug, I am Tug .
It had been his defence against them.
His secret self.
‘No!’
‘Yes ,’ said Doyle.
‘Look.’
The Woman suddenly reached for her big, shabby handbag.
Doyle watched her riffle through a wad of papers as though she had taken him by surprise, and when she held up something for Tug to see he craned sideways so that he could glimpse it too.
It was another photograph.
Old.
It must have been old, because she was in the centre of it, the lines of her face less formed, the shape of her bones softer.
Her hair was cut aggressively short, accentuating the sharp point of her jaw and she was cradling a very small baby.
Her smile, as she gazed into the camera, was wry and mocking, as though it amused her to find herself in the traditional pose of a mother.
‘Really?’
murmured Doyle.
‘Well, well, well.’
‘Six weeks old,’ said the Woman, watching Tug.
‘No,’ Tug said again.
But it was a blind, wild reply.
As though he had lashed out with both fists to keep off an attack.
He wouldn't let it be true.
Suddenly he reached across and snatched the photograph out of the Woman's hand, ripping it in half and dropping the pieces on the floor.
As though, ridiculously, he could blot out the misery in his mind by destroying a picture.
Then he looked up and for a moment he was so amazed that he forgot the misery.
He saw that he had really hurt the Woman.
Hurt her beyond all pretending.
She went rigid, her eyes wide and the blood sucked out of her face.
‘How interesting ,’ crooned Doyle.
‘It's not — it doesn't matter,’ the Woman said harshly.
‘It was only a photograph, for God's sake.’
But she was not looking at it.
She was looking resolutely away, so that Tug could feel what an effort it took her not to bend down and pick up the pieces.
‘How touching ,’ Doyle said coldly.
He stooped and picked up the torn halves himself.
‘Been cherishing this, have you?’
‘It was only a photograph ,’ the Woman said again, as though she were defending herself.
They seemed to have forgotten Tug.
Whatever the point of the conversation was, it held them both tense, their eyes staring until there seemed almost to be an invisible bond.
Then, very slowly and deliberately, Doyle tore the two halves of the photograph across and across, into a shower of tiny pieces that fell through his fingers on to the floor.
The Woman said nothing, but her face was white and her eyes glittered terribly.
Tug found that his fury had gone and he was feeling sorry for her.
Nervously, he touched her hand.
‘I'm sorry.’
And then, because he thought she would like it, ‘I'm sorry, Ma.’
But she turned away without looking at him and the next moment Doyle had him by the arm and was hauling him upstairs.
Tug went miserably, without resisting.
The struggle in his  head was so fierce that he had no energy left to fight Doyle.
Images appeared in his brain, one overlaying another, confusing him.
The Woman smashing him to the ground and beating at his face.
In the kitchen, with her hands cradling his.
As he had just left her.
How did you put all those pictures together to make a whole person?
And — worse — how did you ever decide what you felt about that person or what she meant to you?
Doyle thrust him into the attic and locked the door, not bothering to stay and guard him.
The room was darkened by the cloth they had pinned over the skylight, to hide the bars, and Peter Rabbit and Mrs Tiggywinkle and Jemima Puddleduck stared down from the posters on the walls.
But Tug did not even look at them.
He walked across to the bed and flung himself on it.
Oh Hank , he thought,what would you do now?
Could you understand what's going on ?
But Hank would not come.
He strained to conjure up her face and her voice, but they had vanished, as completely as though the memory had been cut out of his brain.
And the more he tried to visualise her, the more he saw another face.
With brown hair, scragged back into an elastic band, and huge, golden eyes.
Day Eight — Sunday 14th August
10.00 a.m.
Jinny would have been quite all right.
Back to normal and ready to forget about the Hare-woman and the Back Clough Dale cottage.
Ready to concentrate on milking and hoeing and clearing away the broad beans and planting out the rest of the cabbages, so that everything was done before the harvest on Tuesday.
Only she could not stop seeing the strange boy's face.
All through Saturday, she worked on it, telling herself that it was none of her business.
That the boy was just simple and given to playing stupid jokes.
But it did not work.
Wherever she looked, the face stared back at her.
The pale blue eyes gazed from the bottom of the milk pan she was scrubbing, piercing the clouds of steam from the boiling water with the quick, earnest flicker of their eyebrows.
They danced in front of her as she went up Long Field, following Joe and the horse and heaving old broad bean haulms into the cart.
They glimmered reproachfully out of Florence's golden face when Jinny sat down to do the evening milking.
And it was not the memory of their silent, desperate appeal that worried her.
That could have been a game, after all.
Just possibly.
What disturbed her was the feeling, at the back of her mind, that there was something she ought to have understood.
Something that she would have grasped, if it weren't for her own stupidity.
She fought the feeling all through Saturday, but by Sunday she had had enough.
She was sweeping out the yard while Bella cooked the lunch and sang to the baby.
Joe was up in Long Field with Oz and the cabbage plants, expecting Jinny  to join him.
And she would have gone.
But as she swept, gritting her teeth and ignoring thoughts of the Doyle family, a rich, delicious smell floated out over the yard.
A rare, special smell that should have had her licking her lips and counting the hours until lunch.
Bella was cooking the hare.
For some reason that Jinny did not quite understand, it was the last straw.
Marching across the yard, she put the broom in the tool-house and simply went on walking, towards the village and Keith.
As she went round to the back of the Post Office, she could hear Mrs Hollins and Rachel in the kitchen, giggling and chattering while they cooked their Sunday lunch.
They sounded quite pleasant when they were alone together, without Keith to nag at, but Jinny still did not want to meet them.
She could see Keith, crouched over his papers, and she rapped on the living-room window to tell him to let her in.
When he opened the door, he was grinning with surprise and delight.
‘Jinny, you're psychic!
I was just wondering if there would be time to fetch you down here before lunch.
I need to ask you about something.’
‘And I want —’ began Jinny.
But Keith was already pushing her into the living-room, bubbling with what he had to say.
‘Sit there, where you can see the television.
I want to play you a recording I made last night.
See if you think it's as peculiar as I do.’
Oh no , Jinny thought as he bent down to fiddle with the controls of the video recorder.
Not more of this Harriet Shakespeare stuff .
‘Look I've not got long, and I want to —’
‘Won't take a minute ,’ Keith said firmly.
‘Listen — you know how worried she sounded when she was interviewed the other day?
When she didn't know about the terrorists ' demands?’
He didn't bother to say who he was talking about now, Jinny noticed.
It was just She.
He was obsessed.
Then she remembered, with grudging fairness, that it was  an obsession of her own that had brought her down there.
Keith must be as bored with the Hare-woman and her family as she with Harriet Shakespeare.
She would have to listen to him first.
Dragging up her last shreds of interest, she nodded.
‘Well, the terrorists have announced their demands now.’
Keith looked round at her.
‘I don't suppose the news has got up your hillside though.’
‘Don't be snide,’ Jinny said primly.
Keith grinned.
‘I thought not.’
Then he looked serious.
‘Well, I can tell you what they've asked for.
They want Community Homes to be set up for everyone under sixteen.
So children don't have to live with their families.
And the whole system's supposed to be funded by abolishing Child Benefit and the tax allowances people get for their children.’
Jinny shrugged.
‘So?
That's just crazy.’
‘No it's not.’
Keith shook his head.
‘It's exactly the kind of demand I expected.
Very definite and precise and practical.’
‘But they must know they'll never get it,’ Jinny said.
‘It's too much .’
‘Of course they'll not get it,’ said Keith.
‘This time.
But they're making dead sure people think seriously about the idea.
By saying they'll shoot Liam Shakespeare if the Government don't agree by Friday.
And that makes him as good as dead now.
So —’ He stopped and took a deep breath.
Thank goodness , thought Jinny.
We're getting to the point .
‘— so how would you expect Harriet Shakespeare to feel now?’
‘Well, worse, of course.’
Jinny could not understand why he was asking something so obvious.
‘She must have been hoping they'd ask for something she could give.
Even though she doesn't approve of giving in.
If they've asked for really impossible things, it means the whole siege has been done for publicity — and they'll probably kill Liam whatever happens.
And she can't do anything to stop them, because she's not the Government.’
‘Exactly .’
Keith beamed at her, as though she had passed  an exam.
‘Now, have a look at this interview that was on the News last night.’
He pressed a switch.
The recording started with the news-reader announcing that Harriet Shakespeare had replied to Free People's demands.
Then her fair, tough face appeared on the screen.
(‘She doesn't look any different,’ muttered Jinny.
‘Ssh!
Listen!’)
‘Mrs Shakespeare,’ said the interviewer, ‘now that we know what the terrorists are asking in return for your son's life, has your view of the situation changed?’
‘The demands are what I would have expected,’ Harriet Shakespeare said steadily.
‘I have spent the last six months investigating Free People, and what they have asked for constitutes the first stage of their long-term programme.’
‘And are they a violent group?
Do you expect them to kill Liam, as they threaten, if they don't get what they ask for?’
(‘That's an insensitive question if you like,’ hissed Keith.
‘Perhaps they think she can take it because she's an interviewer herself.’
‘Sssh !’)
‘…not really wise for me to comment,’ Harriet Shakespeare was saying.
‘But there's one thing I do want to say.
I'm told that the television is on most of the time in my house — the police can detect it — and I want to say something to Liam, if he's watching.’
Her pale blue eyes turned away from the interviewer and towards the camera.
Jinny's skin seemed to twitch all over her body, but she did not know why.
Harriet Shakespeare went on speaking, very slowly and emphatically.
‘Don't give in.
It's going to be all right.
If it's in my power, you'll be quite safe on Friday, wherever you are.
I'll do everything in my power to get you out .
Just keep on being brave, that's all.’
Keith switched off.
‘What do you think?’
‘She was serious, wasn't she?’
Jinny blinked.
‘Not just saying that to cheer him up.
She really believes she can get him out.’
There was no mistaking the earnestness of those  pale blue eyes and the curious, characteristic flicker of the eyebrows.
…the curious, characteristic flicker of the eyebrows….
Jinny sat back in her chair and swallowed hard.
I am going mad , she thought.
She swallowed harder.
‘Please will you run it again?’
‘What?’
said Keith.
‘Why —?’
‘Run it again !’
He gave her a puzzled glance and then shrugged and pressed the right switches.
This time Jinny watched carefully.
And she caught it twice.
Harriet Shakespeare's desperately serious expression, with the eyes widening and the eyebrows flickering up and down.
The expression that had been haunting her for nearly two days.
There seemed to be a block in her chest so that she could not breathe properly.
As Keith switched off the video recorder, she said, ‘You've got a picture of Liam Shakespeare, haven't you?’
She was so short of breath that it was an effort to speak.
‘Jin, are you all right?’
‘Please .
A picture.
No, not one of those.’
He had reached for the file of grey newspaper photographs.
One or two of them, taken through the windows of Harriet Shakespeare's house, showed a blurred back view of a fair-haired boy.
‘I want a proper one, that show his face.
Didn't you have something from before the kidnap?’
‘Oh, you mean the magazine article that Mam found.
The one you spluttered over like an old colonel.’
Keith grinned as he selected another file.
‘Jinny, why not tell me what you're after?
You look really peculiar.
As though you're going to be sick.’
‘I'll tell you in a minute,’ Jinny said shortly.
‘And I shall be sick unless you hurry up.’
It's impossible , her mind was saying.
You're mad, you're mad, you're mad .
‘There you are, then.’
Keith tossed the article across to her.
Three shiny pages folded together.
Jinny remembered it clearly because it had been quite different from all the solemn newspaper cuttings  Keith had shown her, and she had stopped to make fun of one or two of Harriet Shakespeare's more nauseating remarks.
Like —It takes a lot of nerve to become a writer when your name's Shakespeare and In the sort of job I do, courage and truth are essential .
As she unfolded the pages this time, looking for the picture of Harriet Shakespeare with her son, Jinny's hands were trembling.
She had not really examined the boy's face before, because she was too busy making fun of the article.
But she knew he was there, because she remembered thinking how mean his mother was to talk about him.
Now she was praying that her idea was wrong, that she would find herself looking at someone totally unfamiliar.
Because she had not the faintest idea what she would do if she were right.
There was the picture.
Harriet Shakespeare with her son Liam .
And the boy's face was not unfamiliar.
It was different, because the hair was fair and the mouth was smiling, but the same pale blue eyes looked out at her.
The same features.
‘Well?’
Keith said gently.
Jinny shut her eyes.
Opened them again.
‘Have you got a black felt pen?
A fine one?’
He handed it to her, with a piece of paper.
Jinny let the paper fall to the ground and, very carefully, began to colour in the fair hair around Liam Shakespeare's face.
‘What are you doing?
You've ruined it!’
Keith tried to snatch the pen away from her and she slapped his hand so that he did not jog her.
‘Shut up!’ she hissed.
Then she went on colouring very slowly and carefully, wondering all the time what she was going to do next.
When she had finished, she put the top on the pen and laid it down.
Then she stared at the picture for a full minute.
She could feel Keith watching her.
Waiting.
‘Liam Shakespeare's not in that house in London,’ she said at last, in a small, level voice.
‘He's here.
In your Mam's cottage in Back Clough Dale.’
10.45 a.m.
Tug had forgotten what day it was until he heard the bells.
He had been lying on his back, looking at the ceiling with his eyes out of focus, taking his pulse over and over again to keep his mind empty.
Because there was no music now to fill it.
Doyle and the Woman had left him in silence, watching him but not talking.
Letting the questions fill his mind.
The questions he could not answer and could not ignore.
Looking back, he saw that, for almost a week, he had kept himself going with little schemes and plots.
Shouting to attract attention.
Making paper darts.
Trying to signal to the girl and the policeman.
Like a baby, playing with plastic beakers on the edge of a volcano, or shuddering at tales of the Big Bad Wolf while monstrous murderers sharpened their knives at the door.
And all the time he had been asking ‘When can I go home?’
But all that seemed almost like a simple happy life, now that he knew the real questions.
The questions that everything around him was asking.
Doyle, the Woman, the television news-readers, Hank, the girl and the policeman — even his own face in the mirror — all told him that he was Philip Doyle.
That Liam Shakespeare was a hostage in a house in Shelley Grove.
And did he really believe that they were all wrong?
Or all trying to trick him?
Was the whole world mad?
Could he be the only one who had got it right?
The questions had chased each other round and round, finding terrible answers, until he knew he would start to scream if he did not shut them out.
So now he lay on his back and thought of nothing and took his pulse from time to time.
Because that was true.
That was the only thing he knew for certain about himself.
He wasn't dead.
Then the bells started.
Church bells, tumbling over each other in the peculiar, timeless, mathematical jumble that means Sunday .
They caught him unprepared, before he could blank out his mind, making him remember the last time he had heard that sort of ringing, last Sunday.
He had been running, running as hard as he could to break his record for the five miles.
And he had nearly given up.
But then the sound of the church bells had lifted him, flooded him with a glorious, fierce determination, and his aching legs had flown along, pumped by some extra force, some last strength that he had never tapped before.
He closed his eyes.
The memory was staggeringly clear, as though he had just heard those other bells, as though he were just surging forward in his final spurt, kicking for home.
I remember ….
No!
The cautious part of his mind froze.
It was a trick, leading him back into the same old treadmill.
Hank, Ma, Doyle, Shelley Grove….
Memories tumbled together.
Last Sunday I went running, expecting Hank home in the evening.
She'd been investigating one of her peculiar groups and she said there was about to be a break-through.
We were going to have a special meal….
No!
No!
Last Sunday I drove here in the car with Ma and Doyle.
When I got here, I fell over outside and knocked myself out.
That's why I have to rest….
No!
He gripped the sides of the bed and struggled to clear his mind again, to push out every memory, even the sharp, physical memory of the running.
Running was a delusion, just like everything else.
He couldn't trust it.
He couldn't afford to believe that he had ever run like that, with such aching legs and such a flood of strength.
It might not have happened.
It might not have happened.
It might not have happened it might not….
Of course it did .
The voice in his mind was small and cool, above the struggle.
And suddenly he saw that it was right.
It had to be right.
He sat up sharply.
So did Doyle, on his chair by the door.
Tug grinned feebly at him, shrugged and rolled over, turning his back so that Doyle could not watch his expression.
Then he started to think hard.
There was no way he could be remembering that experience of running — of the joy and the pain and the total, ultimate effort — unless it had actually happened to him.
Perhaps not last Sunday, and perhaps not on the way to Liam Shakespeare's front door, but it had happened.
It was a part of him, as sure and certain as his pulse-beat.
And if he could be sure of that, there must be other things that he knew about himself.
Other memories that were too sharp and real to be invented.
He could build up a knowledge of who he was, piece by piece.
Slowly, testing every thought and every memory, he began to think about himself.
And what he could be certain of.
He was fairly fit.
He could tell that from his pulse-beat, which was only fifty-four when he was lying like this, on the bed, and from the hardness of his biceps when he bent his arm.
He hated bananas.
Even thinking about their blotched yellow and black skins and their squidgy, floury middles made him want to throw up.
And he hated desiccated coconut.
And winkles.
He knew how to change the washer on a tap, and make pastry, and mend a bicycle puncture.
He was sure, not only because he could have written out a set of instructions there and then, if he had had any paper, but because he could imagine all the minute details of doing those things.
The soft, perished feel of the old washer which rubbed black on your fingers as you took it out of the tap.
The way the pastry mixture clung to your hands if you mixed it with too much water.
The lovely, tell-tale trail of bubbles that showed where the puncture was.
He probably learnt French at school (je m'appelle Je-Ne-Sais-Quoi) and possibly Spanish (no sé donde me encuentro) but not Russian .
He must have spent a lot of time out in the sun — running?
training?
— because his watch had left a clear, sharp-edged mark on his tanned arm.
Ideas bombed at him from all directions.
His heart thudded and he realized that he had begun to breathe faster, with excitement.
He took his pulse again to calm himself (it had gone up to sixty-five) and then began to concentrate hard on gathering up the bits of himself.
Bits that didn't depend on who he was or what family he belonged to.
He was still doing it over an hour later, frantically trying to remember everything and wishing he had somewhere to write it all down, when there was a sound of feet running up the stairs.
The Woman pushed at the door, behind Doyle's chair, and when he moved sideways she stepped in.
Doyle looked at his watch.
‘Not your turn yet.
Another hour to go.’
‘I know.
Came to tell you I've cooked some lunch, and —‘she hesitated.
‘Well?’
Doyle did not sound pleased.
The Woman put her chin up defiantly.
‘Well, I'm sick of heaving trays up and down the stairs.
And I bet you are too.
Why don't you just bring Tug down and we'll all eat together?’
Doyle gave her a long stare.
‘All right,’ he said at last .
‘Get up, Philip.’
Tug slid off the bed, watching them.
Doyle seemed wary and the Woman had started to fidget with her long tail of hair, holding it in one hand and drawing it through the fingers of the other.
She led the way downstairs and Tug followed her, feeling Doyle close behind him.
‘I see,’ said Doyle softly as they came out at the bottom of the stairs.
The big table had been covered with a checked table-cloth and set out tidily with cutlery and mats and glasses.
There were two large vegetable dishes with lids on in the centre of the table and, beyond them, on an oval plate, was a roasted chicken, brown and shiny with stuffing oozing from one end.
Tug sat down where the Woman pointed, but Doyle began to walk round the room, peering at the table from all angles.
‘Very elegant.
Do we say grace?’
‘Shut up, Doyle,’ the Woman snapped.
He wandered over to the draining-board and looked into a jug.
‘Custard!’ he said in disgust.
‘How bourgeois can you get?’
‘For God's sake!’
The Woman thumped the table with her fist and shouted.
‘It's only a bloody meal .
Not a political statement.’
Doyle looked at her coldly.
‘Nothing is only itself.
Everything has political overtones.
As you very well know.’
Picking up the jug of custard, he walked across to the table and tipped it, steadily and deliberately.
A thick, yellow stream ran on to the chicken and trickled down its sides, until it lay in a pool of custard.
Tug gasped.
He glanced up at Doyle to see if it was meant to be a joke, but Doyle was not smiling.
‘What's the matter, Philip?’ he said evenly.
‘Surprised?
You shouldn't be.
This is the traditional family Sunday lunch, and we're having the traditional family Sunday lunch-time row.’
The Woman stood up and faced him across the table.
‘You're just making an idiot of yourself.
Lousing up good food.’
‘I'm reminding you of what family life is really like,’ Doyle said.
His eyes did not waver from her face.
‘Before you get too sentimental about it.
Sunday dinners were hell in my family.
My father grilled us about what we had been doing all week.
Worked himself into a frenzy and gave himself indigestion.
We were dead lucky to get to bed without a belting on a Sunday.’
‘Great,’ the Woman said sarcastically.
‘I really enjoy your happy childhood memories, Doyle.’
They were leaning forward facing each other, one on either side of Tug, looming over him.
The Woman was breathing faster, but Doyle was cold and still.
‘They're happier than some childhood memories,’ he murmured.
‘Better than one story I know, about a baby who cried at every meal.
Even Sunday lunch.
A baby who landed up with five broken ribs and a cracked skull and —‘
The Woman leaned forward further and punched him hard, in the mouth.
Her face had gone white and very pinched.
Doyle's eyes narrowed and as he put one hand to his face the other slid dangerously to his jacket pocket.
Before he had time to think, Tug began to talk, quickly and nervously.
‘Ma, I'm hungry .
And when we've eaten — whatever's left to eat — I'd like to have a pen and some paper.
There are some things I'd like to write down —‘
For a second he thought the two of them were going to turn on him and hit him.
Then slowly the tension began to seep away.
The Woman unclenched her fists, gave a short laugh and sat down again.
Doyle looked at Tug almost sadly and spoke not to him, but over his head, to the Woman.
‘You see?
Make a pattern and people step into it.
As long as the pattern lasts.
Don't you remember interrupting like that to stop your parents quarrelling?’
‘Oh, sit down Doyle.’
The Woman was busy peeling the custard-covered skin off the chicken.
‘I've got what you mean.
I'm not thick.
But we might as well eat the food anyway.’
‘Delicious chicken and custard,’ murmured Doyle, pulling his chair out.
‘What have I got afterwards, to go with my gravy?’
‘Baked bananas.’
‘Oh Ma !’
Tug said it without thinking.
Annoyed.
‘You know I hate bananas.
I'll be sick.’
‘Don't be silly,’ the Woman said briskly.
‘Of course I haven't forgotten.
There's a yogurt for you.’
Her knife sliced down into the breast of the chicken.
1.00 p.m.
‘But you must listen, Mr Hollins.’
Desperately, Jinny dragged at his arm.
‘That boy was exactly like Liam Shakespeare except for the colour of his hair —‘
‘And you're just the spit of Queen Victoria,’ Mr Hollins  said heavily.
‘Or would be if you had white hair and put on a bit of weight.
Oh, there's no use flapping that picture under my nose.’
He pushed away the photograph of Liam Shakespeare that Jinny was holding out.
‘It's all scribbled over.’
‘But think when they came here — just at the time Liam Shakespeare disappeared — and —‘
‘Liam Shakespeare's not disappeared.’
Mr Hollins's voice was still kind, but he was not budging at all.
‘He's where all the world knows, in his own house with a couple of armed terrorists.
Now leave me be, Jinny.
I've come home to my dinner and I've not a lot of time to spare.’
Shaking her hand off his arm, he looked at Keith as he went into the dining-room.
‘See her out, lad.
Then come in to your meal.’
Jinny stood very quiet for a moment, with a fist pressed to her mouth.
When she was sure she could talk without her voice cracking, she said, ‘What can I do, Keith?’
‘I know what most folk'd do,’ he said quietly.
‘Go home and forget it all.’
‘So you don't properly believe me either?’
He waved his hands at her, to warn her to keep her voice down.
‘That's not what I said.
I know you're sure, and you're good at using your eyes.
You wouldn't dream a likeness.’
‘And no one 's really seen that boy in Harriet Shakespeare's house,’ Jinny said eagerly.
‘Only a back view in the shadows.’
Keith nodded.
But he still looked doubtful.
‘But where's the point?
Why pretend you're holding someone hostage when you've really carried him off?’
Jinny thought quickly.
There must be a reason.
Because she was certain that that was what had happened.
‘Well, there's lots of publicity to a siege, isn't there?
Pictures on television every night and headlines in the papers.
But do they work ?
Do the terrorists get what they want?’
Keith chewed his lip, trying to remember.
‘I think — there's a lot of pressure.
Quite often they persuade them to give up the hostages.
And sometimes they storm the place.’
He looked very thoughtful, his brows heavy over his eyes.
‘You mean they get the best of both worlds this way.’
He nodded slowly.
‘Could be.
And Harriet Shakespeare was definitely strange in that interview, wasn't she?
What was it she said?
You'll be quite safe on Friday, wherever you are .
Do you think she knows ?
That he's not really there?’
‘But wouldn't that make her —?’ began Jinny.
Then stopped.
Why argue?
She wanted Keith to agree with her.
Instead, she said, ‘So what do we do?
Phone up the London police?’
‘No use doing that.’
Keith shook his head.
‘They'd just be straight through to Dad, if they took any notice of you.
And we know what Dad would say.’
‘Well what?’
Jinny looked fiercely at him.
‘You're not expecting me to go home and wait till they shoot that boy on Friday?’
Before Keith had time to answer, Mrs Hollins stuck her head round the dining-room door.
‘Keith!
What're you doing mooching about out there when the dinner's on the table?’
‘My fault,’ said Jinny.
‘I'd best be gone.’
‘Yes Mam,’ muttered Keith.
‘I'll be in in a second.’
But when Jinny stepped towards the back door, he pushed her into the sitting-room instead.
‘Not yet!’ he hissed.
‘I've got an idea.
How we could get a message through about the boy here.
Without bringing in the police.’
Jinny frowned down at him as he fell to his knees and started to root about in his files of cuttings.
‘You mean — write to Harriet Shakespeare?
Something like that?’
‘Of course not!’
Keith sounded shocked.
‘Be terrible to go troubling her if we were wrong.
No, I thought — her friend.’
He took out the biggest picture of all, the one that showed a distraught Harriet Shakespeare supported by another woman.
‘Read that and see what you think.’
‘But I can't stop here.
You'll get in a row, and —‘
‘There'll be a row anyway.
Read it.’
Jinny looked down at the cutting.
A Mother's Grief , screamed the big, crude headline.
Beneath it, Harriet Shakespeare's face was huge and haggard and she was leaning hard against the woman beside her.
In spite of the sensational, unfeeling way it had been used, the picture was moving.
Jinny stared at it.
How could she go home and forget what she knew, when it mattered so much to someone else?
As much as life and death.
Then she read the caption.
A mother in agony , it gloated.
Shut out of her home and frantic with worry about her son, Harriet Shakespeare collapses in the arms of friend and neighbour Lucy Mallory .
‘It's foul.’
Jinny shuddered.
‘Just so their beastly readers can feel sorry for her.’
‘Better than not caring at all,’ said Keith.
‘Anyway, I didn't give it to you so you could go drippy on me.
Think.
Friend and neighbour .
This Lucy Mallory must live near Shelley Grove.’
‘Well?’
Keith rumpled his hair despairingly.
‘Well, dumbo, if we had a London street map and telephone directory, we could probably work out where she lives.
Can't be that many Mallorys in the roads round there.
All we need is a trip to the library in Matlock tomorrow.’
‘But that'd take all day!’ wailed Jinny.
‘I can't possibly —‘
The door opened suddenly and Rachel's coy face peered round it.
‘Don't want to intrude on you two, but Mam's nearly purple.
You'll be doing all the washing-up on your own, Keith, I can tell you.
And getting half of it chucked back because it's not clean enough.
She's in that sort of mold.
You'll have to tear yourselves apart, you two.
So sorry.’
Jinny went bright red and started towards the door so fast that Keith did not catch her up until she was outside on the path.
‘Look!’
he hissed.
‘I'll go back to Matlock.
But I won't make the phone call.
If you want that done, you'll have to come down and do it yourself.
Tomorrow night.
Half-past nine?’
Jinny calculated quickly.
‘Say ten.’
She would have a good chance of sneaking out unnoticed by then.
Keith nodded and darted back to the house and Jinny walked on down the path, trying to ignore Rachel, who was in the doorway.
But Rachel hated not to have the last word.
‘Honest, Jin,’ she called, ‘I can't think what you see in that great lummock.
Did you know he cuts his toe-nails in the bath?’
‘Better than having claws like some people!’
Jinny flung over her shoulder and ran.
But she knew that no amount of speed would save her.
As she walked up the track towards her own house, she braced herself, ready for a row of her own.
And the rich, savoury smell of the hare drifted down to meet her, turning her stomach.
Day Nine — Monday 15th August
4.00 p.m.
‘You'd better hurry up with those exercises.’
The Woman looked at her watch.
‘Doyle said there'd be a meal at four.’
Tug swung his arms like windmills.
‘Great.
What is it?
Jelly and chips?
Porridge pic?’
The Woman's mouth twitched.
‘Spaghetti and treacle.’
‘Tomato soup sandwiches.’
Tug's arms stopped and began to whirl the other way.
‘Beefburger ice cream.’
For a second it looked as though she would go on with the game, but then she stopped smiling and her eyes slid away from his.
‘It wasn't a joke yesterday, you know.
It was serious.’
Did she think he was an idiot?
As though anyone could have thought it was a joke, with Doyle's face set foul as a thunderstorm and the disgusting stream of custard ruining the meat.
Tug looked at her scornfully.
‘I'm not a baby, you know.’
Sitting down on the edge of the bed, he began to draw circles in the air with the toes of his left foot.
‘He was furious with you for making a special lunch.
But why couldn't he say that?
Why be so — so extravagant?’
‘Because — oh, because you know what he's like .
He doesn't think it's any use just telling people things.
Because they can only see what's straight ahead of them.
The things they've always seen.
If you want to get them to look at something new, you've got to make them see.’
‘Make them see what?’
Tug said, puzzled.
It did not seem to have much to do with custard.
‘Oh — everything.
The whole world.’
The Woman waved her arms wide.
‘Look, think of Doyle.
For years he hated his  father — and he believed, deep down, that he was wicked himself, because even his own father hated him .
And then, one day, he understood, and the whole world opened out.
He was free.
He said it was the most joyful moment of his life.’
Tug tried to imagine Doyle having a joyful moment.
Difficult.
And yet he could almost see it reflected in the Woman's wide eyes and her glowing, excited face.
Certainly that moment of Doyle's was real to her.
‘What had he understood?’
Tug said.
‘That it wasn't his fault.
Nor his father's.
That it's unnatural for people to be tied up together in families for years and years.
All those jealousies and demands and pressures — the stress is too much.
That's what happened to me.
That's why I —‘
She broke off abruptly, but that did not make her silent.
Swept on the flood of her own excitement, she simply changed course, banging her fist against the side of her chair in her eagerness to make him understand.
‘Animals don't stay in families for ever, do they?
And people don't need to either.
But the system is encouraged by big business and governments, because if you've got a family you've got something to lose.
It stops people fighting against capitalism and repression.
That's what we've got to make people see!’
She had been gesturing with one hand, to emphasize what she said.
Now she stood up and began to march restlessly round the room, swinging her long gun by its handle.
‘We've got to rip off the blinkers!
Let in the light!’
There was something glorious about her — almost Viking — as she stood in the centre of the room, tall and thin and fierce.
There should have been shouting and huge double-edged swords slicing the air, and giant bonfires with wild, roaring flames.
Tug felt the call to join her, to leap to his feet and let himself be carried up on the tide, into a high and heroic world.
But, instead, he drew back, repelled and almost frightened by the flooding, uncontrolled wildness of the emotion.
And  another voice spoke to him, in his head.
Familiar and wry, but just as fierce in its own way.
If a speaker excites you — distrust him.
And if he excites himself — distrust him a hundred times more.
Hank's voice.
His whole nature answered to the warning.
Yes.
That was what he felt.
He was a cautious, unheroic person, and Hank spoke for him.
Of course she did.
That was what she was for .
The thoughts dropped small and icy, into the very centre of him, paralysing all his senses.
He did not hear what the Woman said next.
He did not even see her face.
Suddenly, all he was aware of was one single, frozen thought:
Hank was someone he had made up.
Oh sure,Harriet Shakespeare was a real person.
He had seen her on television.
But the Hank in his mind, the one who calmed him down and cheered him up and got him going in a sensible way — she was just the sort of fantasy mother you'd make up if your own mother was too strong, too passionate, too overwhelming.
Like Ma.
If she tried to squash out your cautious, unheroic side.
Harriet Shakespeare was a real person, but perhaps Hank was only a part of himself, given a famous face.
Perhaps he was like the people who think they're Napoleon, or that they're in love with the Queen.
Mad Philip Doyle.
‘Tug, are you all right?’
The Woman's voice came swimming out of a great blankness, forcing itself on him.
She was sitting on the bed beside him, clutching his shoulders and looking almost frightened.
‘What's the matter?’
He felt weak and shaking, as though he had just had a huge shock.
For a moment he could not speak.
She shook at his shoulders.
‘Look, don't break down.
Not now.
Everything'll be all right.
After tomorrow.’
But he did not take in the words.
Could not begin to  understand them.
Tomorrow?
Tuesday?
What had that got to do with anything?
Her face loomed huge and strong and worried and he struggled with the dryness in his throat, trying to ask a question without knowing what it was.
‘Ma —‘
While he was still searching for the right question to ask, the sound of a key in the padlock made them both jump.
The next second, the door swung open and Doyle was standing in the doorway, with a tray in his hands, looking at them both.
‘What a pretty picture,’ he said.
‘A nice bit of mothering going on.’
The Woman had let go of Tug's shoulders as soon as the door opened.
Now she stood up and pushed both hands into the pockets of her jeans.
‘Don't be stupid.
We were just talking.’
‘I think,’ Doyle murmured, ‘that you have forgotten what you were meant to be doing.’
‘Rubbish!’
‘Then why —’ his voice was level and unpleasant ‘— have you left the Kalashnikov on the bed?
Where Philip can reach it?’
He was right.
The gun lay on the covers, where she had put it down while they were talking.
Tug had not even noticed.
Her arms jerked out immediately to scoop it up.
‘There's no harm done.’
‘You know very well that it was extremely dangerous,’ Doyle said coldly.
‘I was only being a little bit kind —‘
‘You weren't being kind.
You were being sentimental.’
They seemed to be trying to outstare each other.
If that was so, Doyle won, because the Woman suddenly crossed the room, pushed past him and ran down the stairs.
‘Here,’ said Doyle.
‘Have some food.’
He held the tray out.
On it was a perfectly ordinary meal of beefburgers, mashed potato and peas, with a cup of tea and an apple.
‘Thanks,’ Tug said.
‘Thanks — what?’
‘Oh.’
He had simply forgotten.
Thanks Doyle.
Sitting on the edge of the bed, Tug balanced the tray on his knees and began to cut up the first beefburger.
But his hands were shaking so much that he could hardly stop himself knocking the food off the plate.
9.50 p.m.
Jinny slid out of bed, pulled on a jersey and a pair of jeans and stood listening in the dark.
From the next room came the sound of Oz, snoring.
He always lay flat on his back, with his arms flung out, making a noise that drowned out Louise's snufflings.
Quite enough noise to cover the sound of Jinny's feet creeping out of her own room and across the landing.
Good old Oz.
There were no voices coming from Joe and Bella's room.
Usually, at this time, they were lying in bed talking.
Asleep already , thought Jinny.
Better and better.
Very slowly, she began to go down the stairs, step by step, wincing every time one creaked and glancing over her shoulder every ten seconds or so.
She was so busy thinking about the people upstairs that she did not see the figure standing in the shadows of the kitchen doorway.
Not until it stepped forward and Bella's voice said, ‘Jinny!’
‘Mum!
You're still up!’
Jinny stopped, trapped, and thought quickly.
Then she went on down the stairs.
‘
Look, Mum,’ she whispered, ‘I have to go out.
I have to.
Just for about half an hour.
Please don't stop me.’
‘More strange sneakings?’
Bella peered at her through the dark.
‘And you're not going to tell me why?’
‘It would take too long, honestly.’
If she stopped to explain, Keith would be gone before she got to the  telephone-box.
‘But if you did know, you wouldn't stop me.
You'd say it was all right.
I promise.’
‘I see.’
Bella hesitated.
‘And what about Dad?’
‘Ah.’
Jinny could not bring herself to tell the lie.
She hung her head.
‘You're right.
He would stop me.
Because — oh, because I'm trying to help someone outside the family.
He'd say I'm snooping and interfering.’
Blast it , she thought.
Now I've had it .
She wished she could see Bella's face properly, but the shadows were thick and all she could make out was the outline of a head.
Suddenly the head gave a brisk nod.
‘All right.
If you're not just doing something stupid.
You have to do what you think is right, even if Joe and I don't always agree with you.’
Bella stepped aside.
‘But be careful.
And come back quickly.
I shan't sleep until you're in.’
‘And you'll not tell Dad?’
‘I didn't say that.’
There was a soft chuckle in the darkness.
‘Let's hope he's asleep.’
‘Thanks Mum.’
Jinny leaned across and kissed her lightly on the cheek.
Then she let herself out of the door and walked through the yard, muttering quietly to Ferry, so that he would know who it was.
As she ran along the track to the road, she had an eerie sense that she was acting out something she had done before, but she could not pin it down until she reached the road and turned right, towards the village.
Last time it was left .
Then she remembered.
Last time she had slipped out in the dark like this was on the night the Doyles had come, the night that had ended with a mystery and a death.
For a second she could almost feel the warm slump of the hare's body, and its weight when it swung from her hand, heavy and loose, as she carried it home by the ears.
She shuddered.
Then she was running towards the village, ignoring the small scutterings on the bank beside the road, her old sandals almost soundless on the tarmac.
The village windows were bright behind their curtains, cosy and alive beneath the cold, black shadow of the Edge.
Jinny wondered for the hundredth time what it was like to be in a family which sat up and watched the television of an evening.
Played games and records and telephoned people, without feeling guilty about the electricity.
Keith was standing by the lighted telephone-box.
Jinny saw him move his head and look at his watch and she called softly, ‘Sorry I'm late.
I got caught.’
‘Caught?’
Keith sounded puzzled.
‘You mean you couldn't just say you were going for a walk?’
She passed it off as a joke, furious that she had given herself away.
‘Don't forget it's the middle of the night to a Slattery.
Come on.
Let's get on with it before I fall asleep.
Did you get the number?’
‘Sort of.’
They squeezed into the little, bright cubicle and Keith put a piece of paper down on the shelf.
‘Here you are.
There were two Mallorys nearby, I'm afraid.
You'll have to try them both.
I've lots of change.
I went into the bank while I was in Matlock.’
He dropped a bank bag full of silver on to the shelf and Jinny stared, momentarily distracted.
‘But that's pounds .’
‘Only a fiver.
There's no use in running out of money at the crucial moment.’
Only a fiver.
Jinny remembered Bella and the sugar.
What would Keith say if he really knew what it was like to be a Slattery?
‘Come on, girl.
Get going if you're going to do it.’
She lifted the receiver and dialled the first number with great care.
Out in the darkness, she saw the Post Office door open and Mrs Hollins poke her head out.
Nosy .
Jinny smiled politely at her, listening to the ringing tone.
‘Yes?’
It was a man's voice, brisk and well-bred.
Jinny was paralysed until Keith prodded her and she choked out the first words.
‘Mr Mallory?’
‘Speaking.’
‘Could I — I mean — please can I give you a message for Harriet Shakespeare?’
‘No you can't.’
Suddenly the man on the phone was furious.
‘For the last time, Harriet Shakespeare is not here !
Good night .’
He banged the phone down and Jinny turned to Keith, shaking.
‘He was — awful.
Why did he have to be so rude?’
Keith grinned.
He was near enough to hear everything.
‘Looks like we're not the only people to work out this Mallory thing.’
He took the receiver firmly out of her hand, listened for the dialling tone and dialled the second number.
‘You going to do it then?’
‘Yes.’
She took the receiver and Keith put his face close again, so that he would not miss anything.
The ringing seemed to go on and on and when at last a voice answered it took Jinny by surprise.
‘What number are you calling?’
‘What?’
She looked stupidly at the telephone.
‘This is the exchange,’ said the voice.
‘What number are you calling?’
Keith put his finger on the paper, beside the right one, and Jinny read it out.
‘And who do you want to speak to?’
‘Lucy Mallory.’
‘What is your name?’
‘Imogen Slattery.’
‘And what number are you calling from?’
‘Er —’ Jinny looked down at the dial.
‘— Ashdale 623X’
‘Hold the line, please.’
The ringing began again and Jinny covered the mouthpiece.
‘What is it?
What's going on?’
‘Must have had their calls re-routed through the exchange,’ Keith whispered back.
‘To put off cranks and keep a record of who telephones.
Looks like we've got the right number.’
He pushed a couple more coins into the slot.
Then there was another voice.
A woman's.
‘Lucy Mallory.’
Jinny took a deep breath and felt her heart thud.
‘Please — I want to give you a message for Harriet Shakespeare.’
At once the woman's voice went cold.
‘Who is that speaking?’
‘Please ,’ said Jinny desperately.
‘I'm not a crank.
It's important.
It's about Liam.
I want to tell you —‘
‘Wait a moment.’
The woman did not sound any friendlier and the pause was a long one.
Once they heard her say, ‘But Harry, you can't keep on —’ And then she must have put a hand over the mouthpiece, because they did not hear anything else until, suddenly, another voice spoke.
‘Hallo.’
A different voice.
Deeper, and very clear.
A voice that they had heard over and over again as they sat in Keith's sitting-room.
Jinny gulped.
‘You — you're Harriet Shakespeare!’
‘That's right.’
‘Look —’ There did not seem to be any way of wrapping it up.
The words came bursting out anyhow.
‘I know where Liam is.’
On the other end of the line, the voice hesitated and then went steely-hard.
‘Everyone knows where Liam is.’
‘But he's not.’
Jinny gabbled it, trying to get it in before she was cut off.
‘He's not in your house.
He's in my village.
Being kept a prisoner.
I've seen him, only he's got black hair and —‘
‘Listen!’
Harriet Shakespeare broke in, so fiercely that Jinny could imagine the fury on her face.
‘You're the fourteenth person who's worked out I'm staying with Lucy and phoned me up with crazy stories about Liam.
I suppose you must get a thrill out of it, but if you really knew anything you'd go to the police.’
‘That's not fair!’
Jinny shouted it.
‘I've tried telling the police, but they still think Liam's in your house.
It's no use talking to them.’
There was a silence.
Then Harriet Shakespeare said, more  softly and sounding puzzled, ‘So why is it any use talking to me?
‘Well — we saw your last interview.
You seemed — that is we thought — that you knew something —‘
‘Yes?’
The word was clipped short.
Jinny hunted for what she wanted to say and then let it out in a rush.
‘We thought you wouldn't have been like you were in that interview unless you knew something that — that you weren't telling people.
We thought you might have guessed that all those announcements by the terrorists were a lie and really —‘
‘And?’
Harriet Shakespeare said.
All at once her voice was very low.
Not angry, but quiet and tense.
‘What do I know that I'm not telling people?’
‘That they're only pretending to have Liam in your house.
‘That really he's somewhere else.’
‘Oh.’
It was long drawn out.
Almost, Jinny could have sworn, on a breath of relief.
And then she was angry again.
‘You're wrong.
You're quite wrong.
Now why don't you just forget the whole thing?
And stop imagining things about me!’
A click.
And then the dialling tone.
Very carefully, Jinny put the receiver back into its cradle.
‘Well,’ she said, and her voice came out high and cracking, ‘we were wrong.
She didn't know anything.
She didn't understand at all.
She was horrible .’
Keith patted her absent-mindedly on the shoulder.
But he was not looking at her.
He was staring out at the great dark sweep of the Edge, above the dale.
‘I don't think we were wrong,’ he said slowly.
‘We were wrong about what she knew, I'll give you that.
But she didn't like the idea that we knew she was hiding something, did she?
I wonder what —?’
And he went on gazing out of the window, drawing on it with his finger until Mrs Hollins came out and rapped on the glass.
Day Ten — Tuesday 16th August
2.55 a.m.
‘Tug!’
The whisper made him stir in his sleep, turning and thrusting one arm under the pillow.
‘Tug !’
This time the hiss was louder and strong fingers gripped his shoulder and shook it, jerking him awake.
He opened his eyes in darkness and for a horrific moment he was completely adrift, not knowing what was happening or where — or who — he was.
Nothing but blackness.
Then, under his pillow, his hand touched paper.
The small, folded sheets on which he was writing down the things he knew about himself.
The feel of them brought him back into the attic room, to the confusion that made a few words on a piece of paper into a lifeline.
He lifted his head.
‘Tug?’
‘Ma?
What's up?
What time is it?’
She leaned closer, her mouth almost on his ear.
‘Ssh.
Don't wake Doyle.
I thought you'd want to hear this.’
Dimly he saw that she was holding something, but he did not realize what it was until she spoke again.
‘Come on.
Wake up properly.
The next News is in a minute or two.’
Of course.
It was the little radio that they listened to while they were on guard.
But the Woman did not offer him the ear-piece that she and Doyle used.
Instead, she turned it on so low that at first Tug could not make out anything except a faint crackling and hissing.
He sat up and lifted the radio so that it was close to his ear.
Even so, the first words took him by surprise.
‘Good morning.’
It was soft, but as brisk and clear as it would have been in the middle of the day.
And then it went on and Tug stopped thinking about the quality of the sound.
Because of what the news-reader was saying.
‘There has been an extraordinary development in the Shelley Grove siege.
Just before midnight last night, a special unit of police stormed the house, taking control of it and capturing the terrorists inside, without loss of life.
However, they found no trace of Liam Shakespeare, whom the terrorists had claimed to be holding hostage.’
Tug's throat made a strange, clicking noise and the Woman's shadowy hand clutched at his.
The voice of the news-reader flowed smoothly on.
‘The terrorist group included a youth of about fifteen with bleached hair and it is thought that glimpses of this boy were used skilfully to support the terrorists' claims.
No further information is available at present, but it is understood that police are interviewing the five people arrested.’
‘Poor devils!’
said the Woman.
She clicked the radio off and sat quite still on the bed while Tug wondered what to say.
‘What does it mean?’
he said stupidly.
She snorted softly and he could imagine her smiling in the darkness.
‘It means that they're beginning to realize that Free People are not just a bunch of dumb bomb-chuckers.’
‘But what about me?’
She squeezed his hand again.
‘You're all right.
You're safe on holiday with your family.
Harriet Shakespeare can't —‘
She stopped.
Tug shook at her hand.
‘What?
What were you going to say?’
But she would not go on.
Pushing him back down into bed, she stood up, looming over him like the shadows of a nightmare.
‘Listen, forget about Harriet Shakespeare.
She's a hundred  and sixty miles away, in a different box.
All we have to do is wait until this day is over.’
Today.
Tuesday.
‘Aren't you going to tell me —?’
‘No.
Shut up now, or you'll wake Doyle.’
‘But you can't just —‘
‘Shut up .’
There was something in her voice that reminded Tug that she was the one who had beaten him round the face.
He rolled over, thinking resentfully that it was impossible to go to sleep.
His head was jammed with questions — about Free People, about the siege, about Harriet Shakespeare.
About today.
How could he just —
The questions linked, separated, twisted themselves into fantastic jumbles and finally slid over into his sleeping mind, so that he dreamed, terrifyingly, that he was opening a never-ending stream of boxes.
Some of them were beautiful, delicately lacquered or intricately carved, and some were rough old cardboard, stamped with code numbers.
But inside each one was another and another and another….
The dream grew faster and faster and more and more desperate, because he knew that he had to reach the last box before the end of the day.
But he was hindered by two things.
One was Hank, who stood at his side, pulling his sleeve to make him stop.
The other was the knowledge, inexplicable and certain, like all knowledge in dreams, that he would find something deadly inside the last box.
When he woke, sweating and exhausted, with his heart thudding as though he had been running, it was properly morning.
The cloth over the skylight had been pulled aside, so that the room was bright.
Blinking in the sunshine that fell on his face, Tug swam up out of the horrors of the darkness.
All the happenings of the night had mixed together so that he no longer knew whether he had really been woken and heard the Woman's hushed, hissing voice and the faint News from the radio.
They seemed part of his dream, as unreal as the terrifying boxes.
Was it really true that the house in Shelley Grove had been stormed?
That Liam Shakespeare was  missing?
Perhaps he might be Liam Shakespeare after all.
But —
But he could be Lord Lucan.
Or the crew of the Marie Celeste .
Or anyone else who had disappeared mysteriously.
What he really felt was that Liam Shakespeare had been vaporized.
Obliterated.
That he — Tug — was left bare and unprotected, with nothing to prove who he was.
Except the little bundle of Papers folded together under his pillow.
6.45 a.m.
Jinny's head ached and her eyes were heavy and sore as though someone had punched them.
I didn't sleep a wink .
She had heard people say it often enough — she had even said it herself — but she had not realized what it would really be like.
To lie hour after hour in the same hot, crumpled bed, looking at the same crack of sky between the curtains.
Watching the stars dim as it turned first grey and then pink.
Hearing all the time, over and over again, the words of that disastrous, shaming telephone conversation.
I suppose you must get a thrill out of it…stop imagining things about me .
She buried her head in Florence's flank and groaned.
The old cow turned and licked her with a huge, wet tongue until her blouse was damp all over the right shoulder, but it was not comforting.
It did not stop her knowing that she had made an idiot of herself and upset Harriet Shakespeare, who had enough trouble without that.
Or that there was no way left of convincing anyone that she was right about that boy.
It did not occur to her for a moment that she might not be right.
Ever since the first time she had seen the Hare-woman standing in the Post Office, staring with her luminous eyes as she told one lie after another, she had known that there was  something wrong about her.
Beautiful, but wrong.
And ever since she had realized who the Doyle boy reminded her of, she had thought she knew what kind of thing was wrong.
But she had bungled every single attempt to help.
Groaning again, she closed her eyes as her fingers squeezed and relaxed, and wondered why Florence was so hard to milk this morning.
And Florence lowed reproachfully and flicked her tail, restless because her milker was tense.
Stopping at last to move the full bucket and reach for another, Jinny heard a car come bumping up the track towards the farm.
Normally she would have wandered out to see who it was.
Cars were rare on their track, especially at seven o'clock in the morning.
And anyone who came calling at that time today must have more time than sense, because today was Tuesday.
And all the village knew that the Slatterys were harvesting this Tuesday.
The place would be in a rush and a turmoil until they were all out in the field and Joe was sure enough of the neighbours who had come to help.
But Jinny simply did not have the energy to investigate the car.
If she stopped milking, she would never start again.
So she kept her eyes closed, humming a little tune to try and make Florence let her milk down faster and barely listening to the sound of voices out in the yard.
‘Still milking?’
That was Joe.
He appeared suddenly in the door of the milking house looking long and sallow and disapproving.
‘It's not my fault.
I started on time but I can't —‘
‘Oh, never mind.’
His fingers flicked, brushing her excuses away.
‘You've got a visitor.’
So that was why he was so bad-tempered.
Jinny supposed it was Keith and she looked round, ready to make sure he knew how stupid he was to come now.
Only it was not Keith.
It was a woman in sun-glasses, the collar of her short, smart coat turned up against the morning mist.
She nodded dismissively at Joe, who glared and stamped back to the pigs, and then she came into the milking  house and leaned against the far wall, looking across at Jinny.
And still Jinny did not guess right.
She thought it must be some busybody inspector-of-something-or-other.
Giving her a polite, mechanical smile she went on milking, waiting for an explanation.
‘I'm sorry I was foul to you last night,’ the woman said.
Jinny was so startled that she nearly kicked the bucket over.
There was no mistaking that deep, clear voice.
‘You're —‘
‘No, don't stop milking.’
Harriet Shakespeare waved an impatient hand.
‘I expect you've got to finish it before you can do anything else.’
She took off her glasses and turned down the collar.
Her pudgy face was very pale and her eyes looked as bad as Jinny's felt.
She knew it, too.
As she ran a hand over her short hair, she pulled a face.
‘I must look like death.
But I've been up all night.
You can imagine.
I was on to the exchange for your name and number as soon as the news came through, but it took me an hour and a half to bully someone into looking up where the phone-box was.
And ever since then, more or less, I've been driving.
I had to knock up the girl in the Post Office to find out where you lived and — here I am.
I feel like a warmed Up corpse, but I wanted to get to you before the police thought of it.
Or before you went to them again.’
She tapped the arm of her glasses against her teeth and watched Jinny with sharp, pale blue eyes.
In an odd way she seemed too solid, too highly coloured.
More real than other people because her face was so familiar, although she was a stranger.
And totally incomprehensible.
‘I'm sorry,’ Jinny said, ‘but I don't understand.
Have you changed your mind since last night?’
‘You don't know!’
Eyebrows rose above the blue eyes and the pale, squashed face frowned, with impatience very close below the surface.
‘You haven't heard any News ?’
Jinny stood up and lifted one of the buckets.
Immediately, out to the trough, talking all the time.
‘Look — it's hard to explain clearly when you're shattered but yesterday I thought you were a ghoul.
Having me on.
Or a crank.
I knew where Liam was.
Then, last night, I discovered I was wrong.’
Copying Jinny's example, she hoisted the bucket into the trough.
Then she bent over and, with a flick of her hand splashed cold water and smoothed it over her face.
‘That's better.
Dammit, if only I could keep awake .’
She caught at Jinny's wrist.
‘I came to find you because you were the only person who told me that Liam wouldn't be in that house.
You're my only hope.
Where is he?
How do I get him out?’
Her fingers tightened, bending the wrist back painfully, and at last Jinny understood.
She had spent so many hours last night thinking about a pathetic, grief-stricken Harriet Shakespeare that this small, tough woman had taken her by surprise, almost annoyed her.
But she was just as desperate, as grief-stricken as Jinny had imagined.
Not pathetic, but certainly panicking.
At least I can deal with that , thought Jinny.
The Imogen Slattery special.
Calming people down.
She took a deep breath and made herself speak slowly.
‘Look, I can show you where he is if you like.
But there's no use in that.
You can't just knock on the door and ask for him.
We need to sit down and talk about what to do.’
The fingers on her wrist squeezed harder.
‘Don't you understand?
There's almost no time left.
We can't lounge about chatting.’
‘But I thought we had until Fridays,’ Jinny said, puzzled.
‘The newspapers said the deadline was Friday.’
‘Oh That !’
Harriet Shakespeare brushed the idea away.
‘That's a decoy.
The real deadline is today.
At two o'clock.’
Aha , thought Jinny.
There's one up for you, Keith.
She has got a secret.
And then she almost panicked herself.
Seven  hours.
Only seven hours.
And suppose she was wrong, after all?
She swallowed.
‘What — what's got to be done by two o'clock?
What's the ransom?
Not all that Community Home business by the Government?’
‘That?
No.
That is —’ Harriet Shakespeare wavered.
Stopped and shook her head as though to clear it.
The action seemed to calm her slightly, and when she spoke again her voice had dropped half a tone.
‘Look, I haven't got to do anything by two o'clock except get Liam out.
So please let's find somewhere we can sit down and make a plan.’
‘I'll just turn the cow out,’ Jinny muttered.
She wanted a few moments to think.
Wrenching her wrist free, she walked back to the milking house with her mind a complete blank.
And then, miraculously, through the gap in the outbuildings, she saw a familiar, reassuring figure galloping up the track, with his clothes all huddled on anyhow and his hair unbrushed.
Jinny waved frantically.
‘Keith!’
He burst into the yard, tripped over a duck and nearly fell over.
‘Jinny!
Rachel's got the most peculiar story —‘
Then he saw the figure standing by the water trough and his voice faded away, with an apologetic, lop-sided grin.
‘Oh,’ he said softly.
‘So Rachel was right.
I thought she was teasing me.’
Jinny turned back to Harriet Shakespeare.
‘This is my friend Keith Hollins.
The brother of the girl you spoke to at the Post Office.’
With Keith behind her, she felt much more confident and determined and she held out a hand to each of them.
‘We'll go indoors.
There's always breakfast and Planning here at this time.
Looks like all of us could do with a bit of both.’
She led them towards the kitchen, certain that Bella would make them welcome and throw another three or four collops of bacon into the pan.
Incredibly, it was not until she pushed open the kitchen  door that she remembered just what day it was and what they were all supposed to be doing.
7.15 a.m.
Very carefully, without looking right or left, Tug punctured the top of his egg with his fork.
Then he speared a square of fried bread and dipped it in, turning it about until it was yellow all over.
Very carefully, concentrating on what he was doing.
Now, he asked himself as he chewed the bread, do I always do it like that?
He fixed his mind deliberately on the question, not letting it wander.
Yes, he probably did.
He liked to eat methodically and tidily, not picking and leaving bits on his plate.
Eating was part of the serious business of training your body and keeping it fit.
Still, he could not be quite sure that he always did that with his bread.
Not sure enough to write it on his precious list.
Still staring down, he began to cut another square of bread.
Neatly.
Forcing himself not to think about anything else.
It was not really any use.
All the time, whatever he did, he was aware of Doyle and the Woman.
They sat one on either side of him, at the ends of the table, each with a cup of coffee and a half-eaten slice of toast.
Doyle was frowning down at yesterday's paper, pretending to do the crossword.
He liked to finish it each morning before he fetched the new day's papers.
But today he was only doodling in the margin, leaving the black and white diagram empty.
The Woman was gazing out of the window, picking at the hem of the tablecloth.
They were both jumpy and alert.
Their guns were on the table by their hands, out of Tug's reach, and from both of them came a feeling of expectant tension.
Ever since Tug opened his eyes and saw Doyle in front of the door, things had been different from the other mornings.
Doyle had barked at him.
Ordered him out of bed and impatiently interrupted his exercises to bring him downstairs for breakfast.
Normally they ate late and Tug was kept in the attic.
But today it was as though Doyle and the Woman needed to be together, even though they were not talking.
Today was not like any other day of his captivity, and Tug was afraid of it.
Which was why he dipped the second piece of fried bread carefully in the egg and turned it about, concentrating on making it yellow all over.
‘If you don't stop playing with your food, I'll take it away,’ Doyle said quietly.
‘If I have to watch you any longer I'll throw up all over the table.’
‘Sorry.’
Tug thrust the bread into his mouth and began to eat faster.
But it seemed that he had sparked something off.
Doyle looked from him to the Woman and back again and his face twisted into an expression of complete scorn.
‘What a way to spend a day!
Watching a kid fiddling around with fried bread.
What sort of life is that?’
‘Doyle —’ said the Woman.
‘Shut up!’
Doyle turned to Tug and his eyes narrowed.
‘Are you really contented?
Just sitting there and pushing food into your face?
Suppose you knew that this was going to be the last day of your life.
What would you choose to be doing?’
‘Doyle !’
The Woman glared at him and put her hand on Tug's arm.
‘He doesn't mean what you think.
It's a question we all got — that always gets asked when —‘
‘Quiet.’
Doyle did not raise his voice, but it silenced her.
He had not even looked towards her again.
He was watching Tug steadily, almost unblinking.
‘Come on,’ he said softly.
‘If you don't know what you'd choose to do on the last day of your life, you don't know what's really important to you.
What matters when parents stop pushing and other people's eyes stop looking and you're alone with yourself.
No one else to be afraid of.
No one else to please.’
His voice was low, but he was breathing harder and his eyes gleamed as though he  held Tug in a trap.
‘Only free people know the answer to that question.’
Did he mean free people or Free People?
Tug blinked at him.
‘Come on,’ crooned Doyle.
The Woman suddenly sat up straighter.
‘We both did it once.
For a test.
We faced the barrel of a gun and chose the last thing we would do.
I said I would drive into the country, lie in the long grass and watch the sun go down until it was quite dark.
But I was wrong.
It wasn't enough.
Not for the last day of my life.
It wasn't what I really wanted.’
Doyle's eyes slid towards her contemptuously.
‘Of course it wasn't.
Only a sentimental, middle-class idiot would have thought of it.
Sunset!’
‘What about you?’
Tug said.
He did not really understand the conversation, but he knew that the Woman was being attacked.
Turning the attack back on Doyle was a way of defending her — and of putting off the moment when he had to answer the question himself.
‘What would you do?’
Doyle's mouth curved upwards as though he were smiling, but with no humour.
‘I said I would gather together everything connected with my father — every photograph, every piece of clothing, his books, his certificates, his stamp collection — everything.
I made a great bonfire of it and stood and watched it burn until every trace of him was wiped off the face of the earth.’
‘And?’ murmured the Woman.
‘Was that enough?’
For a second the icy eyes were distant, remembering something pleasurable.
Then they snapped back to attention and Doyle shook his head.
‘No.
It was very good, but it wasn't good enough.’
‘So you see,’ the Woman said to Tug, ‘it's not easy to know what you want.
Because to do that, you have to know who you are .
Who you really are.
And how many people can be sure of things about themselves when they've been brought up to please other people?
Forced into jobs they don't like.
Trained to conform to the million tiny rules that each family makes for itself.’
‘You think you're Liam Shakespeare,’ Doyle said softly.
‘We say you're Philip Doyle.
Without one name or the other, you're lost.
You don't know how to be a person without a family to prop you up.
And you can't answer my question, can you?
You don't know who you are!’
They were both staring at him.
Fierce eyes.
Mad eyes , thought Tug.
Mad questions.
Why should I play their games?
and yet — he slid his hand into his pocket and fingered the folded sheets of paper, hastily bundled together.
‘Yes I do know who I am.’
His voice came out perfectly steady, not defiant, but certain.
It was obvious from the way the staring eyes blinked, both Pairs together, that they had not been expecting an answer.
Not any answer.
Tug brushed his thumb along the edge of the paper and thought of everything that was written on it.
The food he liked.
The things he could do.
His pulse rate and the number of his teeth and his daily exercise plan.
His secret fears and his even more secret hopes.
‘Well?’ said Doyle.
‘If you're so sure, what would you do on the last day of your life?’
Tug gazed out of the window at the mist lying in the bottom of the dale and the indistinct grey ridges stretching away from the cottage.
What could he do that would sum up everything he knew about himself?
What would satisfy every Part of him — body and mind and will?
What would use all his feelings and skills and understanding?
For a whole minute he stared out of the window and wondered.
And then he knew the answer.
It came into his head, clear and beautiful and complete.
Standing up, he gazed through the window at the massive gritstone ridge which stood against the sky on the other side of the main dale.
It ran, high and level and almost straight, from the north, where its Precipitous crags dropped sheer from the edge, black against the pale, early morning light, to the south, where a jagged lump stood up, breaking its smooth run.
‘What's that?’ he said.
‘That long hill?’
Doyle smiled, with sneering triumph, thinking he had given  up.
‘That's Ashdale Great Edge.
The famous local feature that families come miles to gawp at.
On their lovely family holidays.
And the lump at the far end is the Castle Rock.’
Tug took a calm, deep breath.
‘I can tell you what I'd do on the last day of my life,’ he said.
‘I'd run.’
He could almost feel the hard unevenness of the ground under his feet as he spoke.
‘I'd run the length of Ashdale Great Edge, from this end to the Castle Rock, as fast as I could.’
‘Another idyllic, bourgeois idea,’ Doyle said sarcastically.
Tug shook his head.
He was remembering the strength that came gloriously from nowhere when your body seemed to be finished.
The triumphant feeling that it was impossible to try any harder.
That was what he wanted.
Not people to applaud him.
Not a beautiful picture of himself running into the sunset.
Not even a world-beating time.
Just to run to the end of his endurance — and then to go on.
Once more.
That's what I'd do , he thought.
I know that's what I want, and no one can take that away from me.
Whoever I am.
‘Finish your breakfast, Tug,’ the Woman said.
‘It's getting cold.’
As he sat down, he looked sideways at her.
He wanted her to understand that the running was not just a pretty fancy, that he had been serious.
Somehow, whatever she was to him, it was important for her to believe that.
But her face startled him.
She was staring at him, with her great golden eyes, and her expression was so sad and apprehensive that the sight of it shocked him into asking the question he had been trying to ignore.
The question that had lurked under the surface of the whole conversation.
‘So — is this going to be the last day of my life?’
It was Doyle who answered, thoughtfully, as though it had been any ordinary question.
‘I think perhaps — not.
It will be the last day of someone's life, but not yours, I think.’
7.35 a.m.
Joe Slattery flicked his long, straight hair back behind his ears and rubbed his chin.
‘Oz,’ Bella said, ‘go and let the chickens out.
Then walk down to Far Field and wait.
If people start arriving, tell them Joe's on his way.’
Oz stuck out his bottom lip.
‘I want to stay and —‘
‘Oz,’ Joe interrupted, ‘this is the only day in the year when I need to ask for help from my neighbours.
I will have them treated politely.’
His voice was low, but Oz slid off his chair immediately and made for the door.
‘And Oz — not a word, eh?’
Glancing over his shoulder with a huge wink, Oz banged the door after him and went whooping across the yard.
Joe looked down at the table.
‘Let me get this straight, Mrs Shakespeare,’ he said slowly.
‘This boy — who you think is your son — is staying up in Back Clough Dale with a couple who may — or may not — be armed terrorists.
You don't want to go to the police, because you're afraid they'll simply get involved in another siege —if you can make them believe you in time, which seems doubtful.
So you want me to help you to produce a plan to solve the whole thing in the next five or six hours.
On harvest day.’
‘Yes,’ said Harriet Shakespeare.
She had not eaten or drunk anything since she walked in.
She had not even spoken much, leaving the explanations to Keith and Jinny.
She had just sat still, next to Bella, and stared at Joe, with fierce, desperate eyes.
Joe tapped his fingertips together and looked from face to face.
‘Do they ever go out, these Doyle people?’ he said abruptly.
‘I've not seen them out all together.’
It was Keith who answered, stumbling over the words because he was so eager to help.
‘One of the — the adults turns up at the shop every day, I think.
Mam said they'd ordered two daily  papers, and they must come down to collect those.’
Joe gazed at the ceiling and tapped his fingers for a little longer.
Then he sat up straight.
‘The plan's simple,’ he said briskly.
‘You'll never get that boy out of the house.
Not if everyone in the village joins in an attack.
It's too easy for the others to put a gun to his head.’
In Back Clough Dale ? thought Jinny.
Then she imagined the Hare-woman with a gun in her hand — and changed her mind.
The picture was easy to make.
Too easy.
‘So,’ Joe continued, ‘we've got to lure the others out and lock the boy in .
That will give us a breathing space to sort things out.
And if it's all a mistake, there'll be no harm done and no shooting.
Cottage door's got a bolt, hasn't it, Keith?’
Keith hesitated and the rest of them watched him anxiously, holding their breath.
‘Ye—es,’ he said.
Then ‘Oh yes.
Now I remember.
There's two.
Top and bottom.’
‘Right,’ said Joe.
‘This is how it would work.
A couple of you get down there as fast as you can and watch the cottage.
As soon as one of the adults goes for the paper, we'll send in a Trojan Horse.
Have to be Jinny, I think.
She's the only one who's small enough not to worry anyone.’
Bella opened her mouth to disagree, glanced at Harriet Shakespeare and shut it again.
‘Jinny gets inside the cottage with some excuse or other,’ Joe waved his hand, not bothering about details.
‘Meanwhile, the other watcher races down to Far Field and tells me.
I'll come up with two or three of the other men and knock on the door.
We should have fifteen or twenty minutes clear before the other Doyle gets back.
As soon as the door's opened, we grab the person who opens it and haul him outside.
Or her.
Only got to do it for a second.
Just long enough for Jinny to bolt the door.
Then we ask our questions.’
‘Suppose I can't get in?’
Jinny said.
‘Still no harm done.’
Joe shrugged.
‘They're not going to shoot you just for trying.
We'll have to make other plans, that's all.’
‘Who goes with Jinny?
To watch?’ said Keith.
Joe nodded.
‘You, of course.
Mrs Shakespeare can go too, if she likes,but she must not be seen .
This plan's only going to be successful if they don't suspect anything, and if they see her around they'll suspect lots.
Got any more questions?’
Nobody spoke for a second.
Then Harriet Shakespeare said briskly, It's a good plan.
The best we're going to get.
Keith, Jinny — are you coming?’
She had begun to push back her chair when Joe spoke suddenly.
‘Wait.
I have a question.’
He was very pale.
As everyone turned to look at him, Jinny realized that he had been waiting for this moment all the time he was explaining his plan.
She had been surprised when he seemed to join in so easily.
She knew how much he hated relying on other people or being involved in their affairs.
Now she saw that he had just been dealing with the easy, practical part first.
Before he got to the real problem.
Harriet Shakespeare caught the idea as well.
She went as pale as he was and clenched her fists.
‘What question?’
‘The most basic question of all,’ murmured Joe.
‘Why?
We're racing round and cobbling up a makeshift plan.
On the most inconvenient day of the whole year for me.
You want me to disrupt my harvest and put my daughter in danger — and yet, according to Keith, the terrorists in your house were saying that their deadline was Friday.
It's only Tuesday today.
Why the desperate hurry?’
‘I told you,’ Harriet Shakespeare said.
‘The real deadline is today.
At two o'clock.’
Joe shook his head.
‘That's nonsense.
People don't bring deadlines closer .
Not unless they're sure of getting what they have demanded.’
‘Or unless those demands are a blind,’ said Keith.
He had sat almost silently up till then, but his face was intent.
‘Free People like to play mind games, don't they?
What if they're using the public demands and the public deadline to distract attention from — something else?’
‘Oh what a genius you are,’ Harriet Shakespeare said wearily.
‘Yes, of course you're right.
The siege has given them publicity for their ideas, of course, but what they really want, to save Liam's life, is something quite different.
Only I know what that is — and that's all I can say.’
‘That's not good enough.’
Joe was relentless.
‘I have to know what you're being asked for.
Why should I put myself to a lot of trouble and difficulty when — perhaps — you could just give the terrorists what they ask and save all the bother?’
‘But if I tell you,’ Harriet Shakespeare said, as though she were talking to an idiot, ‘I'm putting Liam's life in worse danger.
Just by telling you.’
Joe did not even hesitate.
‘You're asking me to put my daughter in danger.
My first duty is to my family.’
Suddenly, startlingly, Harriet Shakespeare's mouth twisted.
She gave a loud, bitter shout of laughter that made them all stare.
Then she sat, very straight-backed, and looked hard at Joe.
‘Listen, then.
Understand what Free People have been doing to me.
They're not like any other group I've ever investigated.
They're clever and devious and dramatic.
Oh, they're as violent as any other terrorists, and they like to shock.
But they like to puzzle and tease and make people think , as well.
Playing mind games, like Keith said.’
‘A siege that's not a siege in London,’ murmured Keith.
‘A family that's not a family in Derbyshire.
A fake siege hiding a kidnapping and fake demands that camouflage something else.’
Harriet Shakespeare nodded.
‘You're getting the idea.
But you haven't seen how all this ties in with their long-term aims.
You haven't seen the moral.
They want to turn people against the family as a system.
Because — oh, I guess you know most of the reasons already.’
She had been talking very fast, as though it made her impatient to explain.
But suddenly her voice slowed and she looked down at her  hands.
‘If you were Free People and you wanted to strike a shocking, symbolic blow at the family — something that everyone in the country would feel — which family would you bomb?’
Bella got it first.
She gasped.
‘But that's impossible .
What about security?’
‘It only takes one fanatic,’ Harriet Shakespeare said heavily.
‘A fanatic with a bomb in the right crowd at the right time.
At two o'clock this afternoon.’
‘He'd need to be a fanatic,’ Keith said grimly.
‘It could be the end of his life as well.’
‘But that's another of their little games,’ said Harriet Shakespeare.
Her voice was stretched very tight, as though it might snap at any moment and tumble her into tears.
‘To get into the group at all, you have to say what you'd do if you knew you were going to die tomorrow.
And then they make you do it — with a gun pointed at the back of your neck.
You don't find out that the gun's not loaded until after you've heard the trigger click.
They're used to the idea of dying, you see.’
‘You know a lot about them.’
Jinny ran a finger along the edge of the table.
‘You must have spent ages investigating.’
She could see the whole thing now, crystal-clear.
‘And when you found out about this new plan of theirs, they kidnapped Liam to stop you telling.’
‘Oh !’
Impulsively, Bella put a warm, soft arm round Harriet Shakespeare's shoulders, but the shoulders did not droop.
They stayed rigid and determined, like their owner's voice.
‘It's a very pretty problem, isn't it?’ she said.
‘If I tell — they will kill Liam and point out that he's had to suffer for my stubborn principles.
And that's what being in a family does for you.
If I don't tell,’ she gripped the edge of the table, ‘there will be several deaths this afternoon, less important to me, but much more sensational.
And Free People will be able to announce that being in a family is corrupting.
That my love for my son has interfered with my passion for truth and  justice.
The passion that I have foolishly boasted so much about.
Very neat.
Either way, Free People get their moral.
And lots of free publicity.’
She put her head in her hands and sat very still.
It was Keith who spoke first, looking red-faced and embarrassed.
‘I don't want to sound awkward, but — you said Free People were devious.
Don't you think it might be a hoax?
No bomb, no fanatic.
Just a trick to find out what you would do?
That way they still get their moral.’
‘Don't you think I've been trying to believe that?’
Harriet Shakespeare said thickly.
‘That would let me nicely off the hook.
And it's the sort of thing they could do.
Just like their initiation ceremony.
But — they have got bombs.
We know that.
And — have I got the right to take the risk?’
She looked up and her face was only just under control, balanced on the edge of screaming.
It's always the people you love who trap you like that .
Jinny remembered Bella's words and understood them properly for the first time.
How could Harriet Shakespeare choose what to do — how could she face making the choice — when her own son was involved?
Joe stood up and came down the table towards Harriet Shakespeare.
‘It's all right,’ he said, looking down at her bent back.
‘I understand now.
There's nothing you can do except stand up for your own and try and get Liam out before two o'clock.
We'll just have to pray it's him in there.’
At last she raised her head.
‘You'll help, then?’
Joe did not answer directly.
Instead, he looked across the table.
‘I haven't got the most dangerous part.
What about you, Jinny?
Will you do it?’
‘Oh,of course .’
She jumped up.
It would be such a relief to be doing something practical, after all this talk.
‘Let's get up there quickly and start watching.
I'm sure we can do it.
Are you coming, Mrs Shakespeare?’
Harriet Shakespeare stood up.
‘Yes.
I know I can't help, but just to be there will make me feel I'm fighting to get Liam back.
Better than dripping around here.’
They were half-way to the door before Jinny realized that  the third person was missing.
She turned and saw him still sitting at the table.
‘Keith?’
His face was heavy and miserable.
‘Look — I don't want to blight the whole thing before we start, but — suppose we fail?
Suppose it's not Liam in there?
We've got to do something about the bomb before we start.
Tell Dad or something, so the police know.
I don't think —’ he looked even more distressed ‘— that it's fair to gamble with people's lives.’
‘What about Liam's life —?’
began Jinny.
But Harriet Shakespeare put a finger on her wrist to stop her.
Then she looked at Keith, every muscle in her face drawn tight.
‘Do you think I haven't been over every inch of that argument a million times?
And you're right.
Of course.
I had to change my mind.’
She gulped for breath, as though she could hardly bear what she was saying.
‘Yesterday I phoned the police and now, if we don't get Liam out by two o'clock, he'll die for certain.’
11.00 a.m.
The Woman shut the door and turned the key in the lock.
From outside came the noise of Doyle starting the car.
All morning he had been in a strange, erratic mood and as the car began to bump its way off down the track Tug felt a great lightening of his spirits.
‘Whee!’ he said softly.
The Woman turned and, for a second, he saw a reflection of the same feeling on her face.
They grinned at each other like conspirators.
‘Ma —‘
Her smile vanished.
‘Come on.
He'll be back soon.
How about getting the breakfast cleared up?’
Tug started to stack the dirty plates.
‘I was better off when  I was eating upstairs, wasn't I?
Waited on hand and foot up there.
Down here I'm a slave.’
He leaned across the table to reach the last cup and suddenly froze.
There, lying on the Woman's chair, where she had left it, was her gun.
The long Kalashnikov.
Within his grasp.
For a moment his fingers trembled, hovering over it, and then he gripped it firmly with both hands.
When he looked up, the Woman was watching him.
‘Well?’
she said quietly.
‘Doyle was right.
I am careless with that gun.
You can shoot me now, can't you?
And then escape.’
Tug made the pictures in his head.
Aiming.
No need to be particularly careful at such short range.
A jerk of the finger on the trigger.
He had a feeling there would be something complicated about a safety catch, but he might be able to work it out.
A burst of gun-fire and then — what?
He would have to heave her blood-stained body away from the door and then scramble over it before he could race out and lose himself in the hills.
Somehow the pictures were not quite real enough.
They were story-book pictures.
Holding the gun very still and steady, pointed at her, he said, ‘Could you shoot me ?
Really, I mean?’
She did not answer at once, but she went very pale.
As she hesitated, Tug found that he desperately wanted to know what she would say.
He stared hard at her face as, at last, her lips began to move.
‘I —‘
Then came the knock on the door.
Both of them stopped, stiffening, and the Woman glanced sharply at Tug.
‘Don't mind me.’
Gently he put the gun down on the table and carried the pile of plates over to the sink.
‘I'm just the kitchen-maid round here.’
But his blood seemed to be flowing at twice the normal Speed and he stood carefully, so that he could see the doorway.
The Woman slipped Doyle's gun into her bag and slid the  Kalashnikov under a cushion.
Then she turned the key, slowly and quietly, and opened the door.
‘Hallo,’ said a familiar voice, a little fast and breathless.
‘My Dad sent me up here.
He said we owed you a favour, because of all that fuss and bother about the dog that was chasing sheep.
He doesn't like to owe things.’
It was the girl who had come with the policeman.
She looked very small and slight standing there with her skinny plait and her pale, freckled face.
Disappointed, Tug turned back to the sink, listening vaguely to what she said as he began to wash up.
‘I'm sorry about the dog thing.
We'd like to ask you all down to the Harvest, to make up.
Oh — that must sound funny to you.
as if we're asking you to do our work.
It's not like that.
There's so many folk it's more like a party.
With lots of beer and home-made bread and cheese and ham and some of my mother's special cakes and —‘
‘What a pity,’ interrupted the Woman.
‘You've just missed my husband.
How funny you didn't see him.’
Tug heard the suspicion in her voice, but it did not seem to worry the girl.
‘I must confess,’ she said cheerily.
‘I waited till he was gone.
He scares me stupid.’
‘Well, we'll have to consult him,’ said the Woman.
But she sounded amused now.
Amused and relaxed.
‘Oh, do come!’
Suddenly, the girl darted past her, into the kitchen, and ran across to the sink, catching at Tug's sleeve.
‘Philip, do persuade her.
It's real fun.
Special !’
Tug was so surprised that he dropped the cloth he was holding.
She had grabbed his arm, hard enough to bruise it, and she was staring wildly at him, as though she meant something quite different.
But before he could answer her, there was a noise outside.
A car was coming up the track at high speed, creaking and groaning as it went over the bumps.
The Woman looked out.
‘Doyle's back,’ she said, sounding puzzled.
Tug had just one glimpse of the girl's horror as her mouth and her eyes opened wide.
The next moment she had her face  under control, turning towards the door with a polite smile.
The car-door slammed.
Feet raced across the yard, scattering gravel, and Doyle burst through the door.
He was breathless and moving at high speed, but there was nothing agitated or uncontrolled about him.
He had begun to give orders before he was properly inside.
‘Come on!’ he yelled at the Woman.
‘And bring the boy.
We've got to get out of here.
Harriet Shakespeare's around!’
‘What ?’ said the Woman.
Tug caught his breath and his head spun.
Hank!
But was it Hank?
But there was no time to think about that.
Doyle had seen the girl.
‘Bring her too!’
he snapped.
‘And the guns.
And the radio .’
Then they were being hustled towards the car.
It had only two doors and by the time they had been pushed roughly into the back, with the Woman leaning round in the front seat to point the small gun at them, they hardly dared to breathe.
The Woman was pale.
Her eyes seemed to have grown even larger and they stared grimly at Tug and the girl, barely blinking as she watched every movement.
It seemed incredible to Tug that only five minutes before he had been calling her Ma and they had been grinning at each other.
‘So — how did you find out?’ she said to Doyle, without turning her head.
‘Did you see her?’
‘No.
I picked up that silly, mincing girl from the Post Office.
She was walking that way, and I could hardly ignore her.
Natural chatterer.
All the gossip.’
He imitated a shrill, foolish voice and Tug could tell that it was a good imitation because the girl next to him looked up sharply.
‘You'll never guess who knocked on our door this morning.
At half past six !
It gave me a real shock to see her.
It was Harriet Shakespeare !’
It must mean something that she was here , thought Tug.
But he had stopped trusting his thoughts.
The Woman smiled dryly.
‘So you pushed her out of the car and gave the whole game away?’
‘Think I'm a fool?’
Doyle said scornfully.
‘I said I'd  forgotten my wallet.
Dropped her off and came screeching back here.’
He was driving even faster now.
Tug looked into the barrel of the gun and prayed.
Gradually everything else faded out of his mind.
All he could think of was the small, dark, murderous hole.
Please don't let it go off by accident.
Please don't let her finger jerk by mistake.
He was more frightened than he had been in all the time he had been with them, and he could tell that the girl was frightened too, by her quick, shallow breathing.
‘So you came crashing in,’ the Woman said, still sounding unimpressed.
‘Saddled us with another kid and raced off without any plan.’
‘Don't you understand?’
Doyle shouted.
‘That place was a trap once they knew we were there.
No proper view round and only one exit.
We need somewhere safe to sit out the last two or three hours.’
‘So you have got a plan?’
‘Of course I've got a plan, and you'll see what it is in a few moments, if you're too stupid to guess before that —’ They swung round a bend and he swore suddenly and loudly.
Tug had a sharp, split-second picture of people walking on the track.
Three or four men.
He had never seen any of them before, but the girl knocked on the window and shouted to them.
‘Shut up!’
With a single, sharp blow, the Woman knocked her sideways, into Tug's lap.
Doyle put his foot down and drove straight at the men.
There was a terrifying moment of confusion when faces loomed round the windows, voices bellowed and hands banged and battered at the roof of the car.
But the men gave way, because they had no choice, and the next minute the car had bounced out on to the road, turning left, away from the village and up towards the dale head.
‘Oh !’ said the Woman suddenly.
She's guessed where we're going , thought Tug.
But he could not guess himself.
His mind seemed to have gone into a  paralysing panic.
All he could take in was the muzzle of the gun the silent terror of the girl next to him and the Woman's stony face.
The car climbed the steep, twisting road at brake-squealing speed, until it reached the crest, where the fields stopped and the open moor began.
Doyle swerved, running the car on to the right hand verge, and braked hard.
Then he snatched the gun from the Woman's hand, opened the car door and slid out, tilting his seat forward.
‘Out, you two!’
Tug and the girl slithered out and Doyle jerked the gun towards the narrow squeeze-stile in the drystone wall beside them.
‘Get going.’
Edging between the two tall, upright stones, Tug heard him mutter at the Woman, ‘Lock up the car and bring the Kalashnikov.
And the radio .’
Then, louder, ‘Go on, you kids.
Get walking.
And don't forget there's a gun behind you.
‘But — we can't get anywhere this way,’ the girl said.
‘Shut up!
Walk!’
They stepped out across the moorland and the wind caught them, strong and cold, once they were out of the shelter of the wall.
Tug looked sideways, towards the valley on the right, and recognized where they were.
They were walking on to the long ridge they had been able to see from the cottage window.
Ashdale Great Edge.
And he had the strange feeling that he was moving in a dream.
Past and future were wiped out, and there was nothing real except the wind on his face and the springy heather and the small, tough bushes under his feet.
Beside him, the girl walked at the same pace, just out of step with him.
Like a person who walks beside you in a dream, she did not speak except once.
Then, in a strange, high voice, she said, ‘The Edge is good for bilberries.’
‘Good for wind too,’ said Tug.
And his voice sounded high and strange as well.
They walked like robots until Doyle yelled, ‘Stop!’ with half his voice whirled away by the wind so that it came to them as  a little thread of sound.
They had just reached the path that ran the length of the Edge, the barren ridge stretching in front of them, flat and clear all the way to the Castle Rock.
On their left it sloped gently away and on the right it fell sheer, in steep crags.
They had an uninterrupted view of all the directions in which people might approach.
‘What now?’ said the Woman.
‘End of the world?’
Doyle did not waste time smiling.
‘We watch for visitors.’
They did not have long to wait.
It was only a moment or two before a couple of cars came up the hill and screeched into the side of the road.
Tug watched the people get out.
The three or four men that Doyle had driven at, a tall, ungainly boy of about eighteen — and Hank.
But he was still in the remote coldness of his dream.
As he watched her squeeze through the stile and walk forward with the others, she seemed strange and unreal, like something he had imagined when he was a very little boy.
So much had happened since he last saw her.
Doyle let the little group of people walk on until it was only about two hundred metres away.
Then he caught hold of the girl, roughly, by her plait, and dragged her round in front of him.
With a deliberate, unmistakable gesture, he put the gun to her head.
‘Stay there!’ he yelled, at the top of his voice.
The wind blew his words at the men and they stopped, glancing at each other.
Doyle did not let go of the girl's plait, but he jerked at it, to make her sit down.
‘And now?’ said the Woman.
Doyle smiled, almost beautifully, as though everything had come right, and handed her the small gun.
‘Keep guard.
I'm going to put on the radio.’
He squatted down and propped it against a clump of little bushes, pulling up the aerial as far as it would go.
Then he fiddled with the controls until he had produced a clear sound that was audible even over the wind.
He glanced over his shoulder at the crowd of people.
They were still standing two hundred metres away, afraid to come any nearer, and he smiled.
‘Sit down everyone,’ he said softly.
‘There's plenty of time.
We're going to wait and listen to the News.’
Of course , thought Tug.
Why not ?
In its frosty, stunned isolation, his mind found it quite natural to be out in the wind in this remote place, waiting for a disembodied voice.
He sat cross-legged on the ground and stared into the black grid on the front of the radio.
2.25 p.m.
The wind was blowing over the top of Jinny's head, fluttering the loose, short hairs round her forehead.
It's an important wind , she thought dully.
It'll probably be the last wind I shall ever feel.
I should be enjoying it.
But she could not make herself care.
When she knocked on the door of Back Clough Dale Cottage, she had been afraid but in control.
That was less than three and a half hours ago, but it might have been years.
It might have been a different person.
Ever since Doyle burst through the door, furious and shouting and shoving, she had stiffened into ice.
She did not feel afraid, but when she looked down at her hands she saw that they were shaking.
Her moment of complete despair had come when Doyle switched on the radio and sat down to wait and see what happened.
We're waiting to hear the News .
And only Jinny knew that the news he wanted would never come.
Could not come.
She sat and stared along the Edge, down into the dale, not bothering to strain her ears and listen to the radio, because she knew it was pointless.
Not looking back the way they had come, because she could not bear to watch Joe.
She imagined him haggard and afraid, even though she was too far away to see his face clearly.
People had come and gone in the little crowd.
The blue uniforms of policemen had appeared and marksmen had fanned out, hunting for good positions to aim from.
But no one was any nearer.
Every time anyone made a threatening move, the Hare-woman hauled  Jinny to her feet and pointed the gun at her head until the person gave way and retreated.
And always she and Doyle made sure that their bodies were shielded by the other two.
The worst thing of all was that no one was talking.
Jinny had made one attempt to say something to the boy, but Doyle stopped her immediately, catching hold of her chin and jerking her head away.
Now they sat avoiding each other 's eyes.
Jinny avoided the Hare-woman's eyes too.
It was almost unbearable to look into them.
All the time those steady, golden eyes had fascinated her — and now they were looking steadily at her along the barrel of a gun.
If she moved, the Hare-woman would kill her.
And the terrible, disturbing thing was that there was nothing different.
It was just this power and seriousness that had fascinated her in the first place.
‘Listen!’ said Doyle suddenly.
His voice was quiet, but the effect, after their long silence, was as though he had shouted.
The other three swivelled round to look at him.
‘Listen carefully to this News,’ he said, with no expression in his face.
‘All of you, but especially Tug.
This is the one that really matters.
We're waiting to hear of deaths.
Of certain important deaths that were due to occur at two o'clock.
If the news comes, all your worries are over.’
‘And if not?’ the boy said, almost defiantly.
‘If not,’ murmured Doyle, ‘you will know that Harriet Shakespeare has chosen to save those important lives — instead of saving her son's.
Presumably because he is less important.’
Not true , Jinny wanted to say, watching the boy's face go white.
It's not like that at all.
I've seen how much she loves you.
But she dared not say anything.
Instead, she crouched over the radio, listening, like all the others, as the news bulletin began.
Riots in a South American country.
Reports that the economy might improve in six months' time.
Cross-channel ferries held up by a bomb scare….
It was too late already.
They all knew it.
Important deaths come in special news flashes, or as the first item, not at the end.
If the deaths had taken place, they would know it by now.
But Doyle listened right to the last word of the News.
Right up to the moment when the news-reader said, ‘And that's the end of the News.
The next News will be at —‘
Then he switched off.
‘Now,’ he said, ‘we talk.’
‘What is there to talk about?’ said the boy, still in that funny, cold, high-pitched voice.
‘You're going to kill me, aren't you?’
Jinny clenched her fists, digging the nails into the palms of her hands.
But no one looked at her.
Doyle and the Harewoman were both staring at the boy.
Doyle nodded.
‘Oh, we're going to kill you all right.
Don't start kidding yourself that there's any way out of that.
But first — you've got a choice to make.
The last one you'll ever have, and the most significant.’
He was speaking very slowly and clearly, as if he wanted to make sure that the boy understood.
Now he gestured backwards, towards the group by the wall.
‘Harriet Shakespeare's over there.
I can't imagine what brought her, but I'm certain you've seen her.’
‘I brought her,’ Jinny interrupted frantically.
‘I telephoned her and said I was sure he — Philip — was Liam Shakespeare, and she came racing here from London.’
She clutched at the boy's arm.
‘Don't listen to them.
Of course she loves you.
She's desperate.’
Doyle smiled scornfully, as though she had somehow missed the point.
But it was still the boy he spoke to.
‘Of course she loves Liam Shakespeare .
But she can't be sure you're Liam, can she Tug?
She's too far away to see you properly.
And until she's sure, you can't be absolutely sure yourself.
Can you?’
His voice had dropped lower and lower, until he was almost whispering, and he let the last question hang in the silence.
It sounded nonsense to Jinny, but she saw the boy's face go pale.
‘This is what I'm going to do,’ crooned Doyle, in the same, soft voice.
‘I'm going to signal to Harriet Shakespeare to walk across here.
Slowly, so that we can watch her face.
So that we can wait for the moment when she sees you well enough to be sure whether you are Liam or not.
The moment when her expression changes.
One way or the other.’
‘And then,’ said the boy, his eyes on Doyle's face, ‘then you'll shoot me.
Whoever I am.’
‘Oh,I shan't shoot you,’ Doyle murmured lightly.
‘Your mother will do that.’
Jinny did not understand, but the boy's head turned and he stared at the Hare-woman.
‘Ma?
You would really —?’
Doyle laughed before he had even finished.
‘You don't believe she would do it?
Don't know her very well, do you?
She hasn't got a very good record as a mother.
They took her last baby away from her twelve years ago.
It had five broken ribs and a cracked skull, and it was brain-damaged for life.’
Jinny felt her breath stop as her eyes swivelled automatically to look at the Hare-woman.
She saw the long, strong face go deliberately stiff.
So that's what's chasing you , she thought.
But she could not speak.
Neither could the boy.
He went on staring at the Hare-woman.
‘Not lucky with your mothers, are you, Tug?’
Doyle said.
‘Neither of them fits the picture of a proper mother.’
For a minute more, the boy went on gazing at the Harewoman.
At last he muttered stiffly, ‘You told me I had a choice.’
‘That's right,’ said Doyle.
‘It's very simple.
You can do what I've described.
Wait for the look on Harriet Shakespeare's face to tell you who you are.
Wait meekly for her to put you in a box and label you — give you a face to shelter behind, whether it fits or not.
Or —‘
‘Or?’
whispered the boy.
But Jinny could tell from his voice that he knew the answer already, and when Doyle replied it was with a nod.
‘Exactly.
Or you can dare to be alone with yourself.
Dare to do the thing you chose as being the most important.
To find out whether it really is important to you.’
‘What we're offering you,’ the Hare-woman said — and her voice was almost gentle —‘is a choice between knowing who other people think you are and knowing who you really are, inside yourself.
You can have one of those things before you die.
But not both.’
Suddenly Jinny was furiously, recklessly angry.
The boy looked sick and white and terrified and the other two were staring at him almost without blinking, as though they were sucking out his life through his eyes.
‘You're as bad as Harriet Shakespeare said you were!’ she yelled.
‘You don't care about people at all.
You're just playing mind games!’
But she did not break that concentrated stare.
‘It's not a game,’ Doyle said calmly.
‘Is it, Tug?’
The boy shook his head.
Picking up the long gun, Doyle ran his finger along the barrel and then held it out to the Hare-woman.
She dropped the other gun — the little one — into the pocket of her jacket and reached for the wooden grip of the Kalashnikov.
‘There you are,’ Doyle said.
‘We're ready, Tug.
Don't go thinking you can outrun the bullets.
This gun's got a range of about three hundred metres and your mother's a very good shot.
So there's no way out.
Just the choice to make.’
The wind suddenly seemed to have grown much colder, striking so fiercely against Jinny's cheek that it numbed it.
For a second there was no sound except the swish of that wind across the hillside.
‘Well, Tug?’
Doyle said.
Tug's first reaction was to look towards the Woman.
She had hit him and fed him, shouted at him for being idle and  comforted him when he woke in the night and was afraid.
If she was not his mother, she had still crammed a lot of mothering, good and bad, into the last few days.
Could she really be going to kill him now?
‘Ma —‘
But there was no point in continuing.
She stared at him with a stiff, expressionless face.
For a moment he was horribly, surprisingly hurt, as though she had disowned him.
Then he understood that she was not going to help him, because she wanted him to make the choice.
He glanced to his right, towards the distant mass of the Castle Rock.
If he ran in that direction, would he be able to dodge?
Briefly he imagined himself jinking and swerving, avoiding the bullets until he was out of range.
Then his common sense took over.
There was no shelter to make for, anywhere on the long, wide ridge, and the heather and the little bushes would tangle his feet and trip him as soon as he strayed from the straight path.
There was no way to escape.
He was going to die whatever happened.
Thinking about anything else was just a way of avoiding the choice.
The choice.
He let his eyes slip the other way, towards the little group of waiting people, hunting along the front line until he picked out Harriet Shakespeare.
He was sure — or almost sure — that he wasn't mad.
That she was Hank, and his mother.
But she seemed small and remote and somehow two-dimensional, like a picture.
It was not only space which separated them.
It was the whole complicated, confusing tangle of his life with Ma and Doyle.
He had grown without her.
Now, even if she did say, ‘You are my son,’ what would that mean?
She could not know the things he had discovered about himself in the last few days.
To wait for her would be like walking backwards.
And yet — what kind of a monster would he be if he ran off in the opposite direction?
If she were his mother, and he let himself be shot without giving her a last chance of looking into his eyes?
Into her little boy's eyes.
Her — little — boy.
Oh Hank !
— and he knew, this time, that he was appealing to a part of his mind and not to another person at all—What would you choose ?
Suddenly, without trying, he knew what the real Harriet Shakespeare would say.
With a fierce look on her tough, plain face.
For Heaven's sake, Tug, do I have to decide everything for you?
You've got to rely on yourself.
Be a person of your own.
The picture of her in his head was so clear that he actually smiled.
Of course she was his mother!
He knew it now, without question.
He loved her and trusted her understanding — and that made the choice perfectly simple after all.
He stood up.
‘Ready,’ he said.
Turning his back on Hank, he began to run away from her, along the path towards the Castle Rock.
Jinny jerked as though someone had pulled at her.
That was the last thing she had expected.
She did not understand what could have made the boy run off in the opposite direction.
Nor did she understand the expression that leapt on to the Hare-woman's face, lighting her eyes with a fierce, proud joy.
All that was mysterious.
What Jinny could understand was the slow, careful way the Hare-woman settled her hands round the long gun.
‘You can't!’
Jinny shouted.
‘You can't !’
She would have rushed forward to knock the gun aside, but she was not fast enough.
Doyle gripped her closely from behind, pinning her arms to her sides and holding her motionless.
‘Wait!’
he hissed.
‘Wait and see what happens!’
Too fast !
Too fast ! thought Tug, willing himself to slow down.
There was no point in going off like a stone from a catapult.
He couldn't outrun the bullets.
He would just sprint  himself to a standstill in a couple of hundred metres.
His fear screamed at him to bolt, but he forced his mind into action, to plan the run sensibly.
Ahead of him was the Castle Rock.
Two miles away?
Something like that.
That was his finishing line.
That was what he had to concentrate on.
The wind was much more powerful than he had realized.
Bracing his body against it, he battered forwards, with his head down, and it ate away at his strength.
He was out of training, too.
Exercises in a room were all very well, but they were no substitute for running every day.
Distantly, muffled by the wind, he heard shouts from behind, but he bullied himself to ignore them.
Concentrate.
Concentrate .
Forget Ma.
Forget Hank.
Forget everything except the pace and the effort of keeping your feet pounding steadily, the effort of keeping your body moving forward towards the pain.
Jinny was screaming now.
Flinging her voice into the wind in a last, desperate attempt to make the Hare-woman put down the gun.
‘It's not fair!
It's not fair !
You both did this sort of test, I know you did.
But no one shot you .
You got away with it.
How can you shoot Tug?
He hasn't done anything to you.
It's wicked !
You're both crazy!
All your ideas are mad and —‘
Doyle's hand suddenly clamped over her mouth, cutting off her voice and nearly stopping her breath.
‘Get on with it, you stupid cow,’ he said harshly to the Hare-woman.
‘Stop dithering about, or it'll be too late.
They're coming.’
And, out of the corner of her eye, Jinny saw that it was true.
Harriet Shakespeare and the policemen had begun to creep closer, ready to run as soon as the first shot was fired.
The Hare-woman's hands steadied the gun and she started to lift it, taking aim.
Tug was suffering already from the lack of training and the  stupid way he had begun the run.
His breathing was frightful and the unrelenting ache in his legs grew harsher with every stride.
He started to be afraid that he would have to slow down, even to walk.
Had he really chosen this pain as the way to spend his last minutes?
He must be mad!
His legs thudded on and on, but the movement was mechanical, with no spirit in it.
What was the point of dying with your lungs gasping for breath?
What was the point of running to the Castle Rock anyway?
What was the point of doing anything, when you were going to die?
Standing dumb and immobilized in Doyle's hands, Jinny felt the last grains of fight trickle out of her.
All her thinking and watching and planning, from the first sound of the car on the track while she and Joe crouched by the netted gate to that last desperate shout that Doyle had cut short, all that worrying and puzzling had ended up like this.
Any moment now, one burst of shooting would make Harriet Shakespeare childless and turn the Hare-woman into a murderess.
And she was not strong enough to stop what was going to happen.
All she could do was stand there, a passive witness.
It was all going to end wrong after all.
Closing her eyes, she let her whole body droop, limp in Doyle's hands.
Then, with his legs like dough and his breath tearing out of his chest, Tug raised his head and saw the jagged, ungainly outline of the Castle Rock, sharp against the sky.
Dimly, he knew that somewhere inside him was the power to reach it.
Because that was what he had decided to do.
Dragging the last remnants of his determination together, he fixed his eyes on the dark, looming rock and thought,I will .
And suddenly, like a miracle, the extra strength came to him, and he was running .
Hundreds of metres up in the sky above Ashdale, he was running along the Edge with every last fibre of his body.
Every thread of will-power, every cell, all of himself.
At the same moment, Jinny heard Doyle shout, ‘What are you waiting for?’
There was something in his voice that made her open her eyes.
As her eyelids flickered up, she saw the expression on the Hare-woman's face.
Only just under control.
Balanced on the edge of screaming.
And she knew that she had seen that expression before, and very recently.
But where?
She nearly did not remember in time, because the similarity was such an unlikely one and she was hunting for pictures of hatred.
But, in the last fraction of a second, it came to her.
As the Hare-woman's golden eyes narrowed and hardened and her finger moved towards the trigger.
It was Harriet Shakespeare who had looked like that.
Harriet Shakespeare, in anguish because of her love for her son.
Without fully understanding, Jinny moved instinctively.
She bit Doyle's fingers and jerked her mouth free of them, shouting the words that came into her head.
Bella's words.
‘It's because you love him that you feel like killing him!
But if you kill him, you'll only smash yourself !’
the huge eyes widened again, startled, and Harewoman looked around, lowering the gun.
As she did so, a shot cracked across the ridge, from one of the police marksmen.
Putting a hand to her side, she staggered.
Instantly, Doyle let go of Jinny and started forward, his arms outstretched to take the Kalashnikov.
But the Harewoman was too quick for him.
Whirling her long, powerful arms, with the last of her strength, she flung the gun in a great arc, so that it sailed up, high above Doyle's head.
For a second it was only a black silhouette against the sky.
Then it fell out of sight, over Ashdale Great Edge.
As she crumpled, the Hare-woman called into the wind, ‘Run, Tug, run!
You're free!’
And Harriet Shakespeare, stumbling over the rough ground towards them, raised her voice at the same moment and yelled, ‘Tug darling, it's all right.
You're safe!’
The sound of the shot blew to Tug on the wind, and then  he heard the shouts.
Somewhere in the back of his mind he registered that they were both calling to him, Hank and Ma together.
But he did not turn, he did not even falter, because his head was up and his feet were pounding.
The pain and the wind and the shouts from behind were all nothing.
All that mattered was the running, and the voice in his head which sang triumphantly,This is me.
Here I am, Hank.
Here I am, Ma.
This is me.
This is who I am.