

IN A POLICE STATE
Fear has many eyes, and can see things underground.
Cervantes 
In me the need to talk is a primary impulse, and I can't help saying right off what comes to my tongue.
Don Quixote 
There are but two families in the world, as my old grandmother used to say, the Haves and the Have-nots.
Don Quixote 
The Sud Express to Lisbon leaves Paris Austerlitz at nine o'clock every morning.
But it does not arrive in Salamanca until about one-thirty the next day.
This was not how I wished to catch my first sight of the fabled city of Lazarillo de Tormes and of Gil Blas, who in Le Sage's novel made the journey to Salamanca only from Oviedo in the north.
So I decided to travel to Salamanca — by way of Valladolid and Jordi of course— through Andorra and Barcelona.
I knew something about Catalonia but nothing about Andorra, except that it was a tiny independent principality, one of the world's smallest countries, set high in the eastern Pyrenees.
I took an early morning train from Paris to Toulouse, where I changed to a small local train for Ax-les-Thermes.
There I got on a bus that took me to Le Hospitalet près l'Andorre, and through the frontier post at Pas de la Casa, over the Envalira pass and down into a land whose mountainous beauty at once put me under a spell I shall never forget.
In those days Andorra was still a rather primitive country, the resort of contrebandiers .
Accommodation was pretty rough-and-ready but the people were friendly and warm-hearted, and I took endless delight in exploring on foot the wild landscapes of lakes and forest, mountain waterfalls and paths as rich with alpine flowers as a medieval tapestry.
On that first brief visit I made up my mind that one day I would  return there.
I started learning Catalan and reading fine modern Catalan poets, whom I intended to translate — Foix, Espriu, Bartra and many others of the emergent Catalan school whose work, and whose very language, were banned by Franco.
To be forbidden to speak and write one's own native tongue is one of the greatest punishments a cruel dictator can inflict upon a proudly independent people: it was one of the Franco regime's most despicable crimes against humanity.
Today, fortunately, that dictatorship, like so many others, has crumbled into dust, and Catalan literature and culture are flourishing.
At the end of summer there were still patches of old snow on the sheltered slopes of the Cirque des Pessons, and I wrote my first poem about Andorra:
The dark flanks of mountains
patched with the tawny white
of old snows, the harsh peaks
packed with golden ice
against a blue and amber sunset
that stains the plaited waterfalls
with leaping rainbow trout of light.
From Andorra la Veila, the capital with its lovely small cathedral and fortress-like Parliament House, la Casa de la Vall, I took a bus to Barcelona through stark, barren landscapes by way of Lerida and Manresa.
There is a fantastic intensity and wildness, almost savagery, in the landscapes of Spain, and Catalonia, delivered from the Arabs by Charlemagne, is no exception.
I travelled among grotesque rock formations, past gorges and canyons, weird spectres of fanes and fortresses on distant isolated heights, small villages strung along spines of haggard cliffs.
In the Goya wail paintings today fittingly displayed in the Prado, and in many of his other works, one sees again and again these formidable elephantine rocks lowering over a cringing humanity trying to find shelter in a bandit landscape.
The piercing brilliance of the late afternoon sunlight seems to intensify the surrealism of the constantly changing scenery.
The first glimpse of Montserrat is always deeply moving as it begins to rise like a vast ragged curtain on the evening horizon, mysterious and slightly sinister in its grandeur as it looms ever nearer in Goya-like menace, shifting from side to side of the bus until it vanishes behind us.
Night had fallen by the time we reached the centre of Barcelona.
I stayed two nights at the Hotel Manila on the Rambla Liceu, in a side-street named after the painter Fortuny, father of the great  dressmaker.
This hotel was at that time a sort of private dwelling crammed with the owner's collection of Catalan works of art and pastel portraits of the great singers who appeared at the nearby Opera.
In this respect it resembled another favourite hotel of mine, the Quirinale in Rome, where I like to stay in the room where Ronald Firbank died.
The Hotel Manila has now been transformed into a Ramada Renaissance Hotel, with correspondingly high prices, so I prefer to stay at the Hotel Gaudi, still unspoilt, which has the advantage of being right opposite the enchanting Theatre Museum.
I'm pretty sure Firbank must have stayed there, and also probably at the Hotel Manila, so convenient for the sumptuous Opera, now restored to its full glory.
I attended a Wagner performance that evening, high in the gallery, and spent the next day clambering around Gaudi's towers of the Sagrada Familia.
At the Parque Güell, at the terminus of the 24 tram (‘Origin y final de los servicios’), after mounting the billy Calle de Larrad, I again experienced the peculiar pleasures of this fantastic Gaudi park, the subject of one of my best poems in The Descent into the Cave .
Next morning, from the Paseo de Gracias station, I took the first express to Zaragoza, passing through the small seaside town of Sitges, which was in later years to become a British hooligan holiday playground.
Zaragoza is the city where Buñuel was born.
Buñuel, the creator of a film that deeply impressed my youth,Los olvidados , gives a love-hate description of his Zaragoza childhood in his autobiography,Mi ultimo sospiro (My Last Gasp).
I stopped there only to change trains.
I took the mid-afternoon express to Valladolid that goes on to Salamanca.
It was after nine o'clock when I reached Valladolid, and I took a taxi to the Hotel Moderno.
Jordi was waiting for me outside after I had a bath and changed my clothes for dinner.
We did not speak, just smiled, shook hands and set off walking along those dim back streets where Jordi felt fairly safe.
Again we took dinner in a cheap workmen's restaurant.
We were sad because he could not come to my room and I could not go to his home, where it would have been difficult to explain our relationship.
So we had to go to the park where we had met under the protective shade of a friendly tree.
We were both trembling with desire, afraid to make the first move.
In the end we just stood holding each other close, as the tears coursed down our faces.
The noises of the evening streets seemed very far away.
The shouting voices did not belong to our little world of passionate love.
We stayed there a long time, until well after midnight.
We had to keep drawing apart as occasional couples, and sometimes prowling single men, passed nearby.
We were conscious of the insecurity of our  situation.
I felt that hidden eyes must be observing us from behind bushes and tree-trunks.
And we had to keep an eye open for police patrols.
From rime to time we strolled hand in hand, with lighted cigarettes to give warning of our presence, for we did not talk.
If we did see some figure approaching, or standing in the distance, we would release our tense handclasp, fingers intertwined, and walk apart, puffing idly at our cigarettes or lighting new ones from Pablo's box of fosforos , as if we were just friends out for a casual stroll.
Who those single men were who sometimes crossed our path I do not know.
They did not give any sign of interest in us.
Perhaps, I thought, they were peeping Toms, voyeurs on the hunt for indiscreet novios and novias embracing in the shadows, as we did, at the mercy of every intruder.
Perhaps they were exhibitionists — flashers.
I was quite interested in flashers and their psychology, and often wished they would ‘flash’ me; but they always looked at me with the utmost contempt as I stood waiting hopefully for a revelation.
It was girls and women they were after.
‘Piss off, will you?’ one of them hissed at me once on Wimbledon Common.
‘Have some common decency!
Mind your own business, whatever it is!’
He insinuated that my ‘business’ must be something utterly depraved, far worse than anything he might be going to do.
Or were those men simply other lonely hunters of other men?
I felt a cold thrill in my bones when I realized the implications of the word ‘hunters’— perhaps those men were Franco's secret police?
At one point on the next night Jordi drew me into the shadows and to my astonishment produced a vicious-looking switch-blade knife, warning me never to look at another man in his presence.
‘I use this for sticking pigs,’ he said, giving me a mysterious smile, gesturing with the ugly blade across his uncovered throat, then laughing, flicking it shut and thrusting it into a long pocket in the side of his dusty black corduroys.
Then he kissed me, playfully.
Afterwards we went to a bar and had some cognac.
Jordi seemed frightened, and we did not stay for long.
As we left, we were followed out by two men.
In the street they stopped us and asked for our papers.
In such a situation in a foreign country I am never able to speak the language, so when they asked for my passport I just said ‘Hotel’, because Spanish hotels always kept visitors' passports, at any rate for the first night.
(They still do, in fact.)
The men motioned me to go away, and after they had looked at Jordi's papers I saw them escort him to a car.
The last I saw of Jordi was when he turned his head towards me before getting into the car, smiled, and gave a shrug.
I was unable to find out what had happened to him.
I dared not go to his house, fearing  that it might cause further trouble for him.
I left Valladolid for Salamanca the next day.
I was frightened, too.
I did not see Jordi again, except for one brief encounter in Salamanca.
I was never to return to Valladolid, a place of fear and heartbreak, until long after the death of Franco and the end of his regime.
Towards sunset I was travelling towards Salamanca from Medina del Campo.
In that pure evening light of late summer the plains were brown and golden, with here a crumbling village with women nearly always in black, and here a straggling group of toylike, stunted umbrella pines.
No birds.
A shepherd with his stick, solitary, was already wrapped up to the eyes in his striped poncho, the only true centre of his eccentric flock.
There is an unutterable sadness around Medina del Campo, where I had to change trains for Salamanca.
It was the perfect moment to arrive in the city where I was to spend the next year.
I first saw Salamanca at a certain moment of dusk when the setting sun still casts a deep red glow over the city's rosy stone.
At the station there were several little buses.
I entered one full of nuns, their winged white coifs illuminating the dim interior, making it like a candle-lit church.
They sat silently.
When the bus started, they all crossed themselves, as I had seen nuns do in Ireland when setting out on a journey, however short.
I think they noticed that I did not follow their example.
They were so different from the lively Irish nuns, who, when they were passing some workmen unloading crates of beer into a pavement hatch in Nassau Street, Dublin, burst out laughing when the jovial brewery workers called out to them: ‘Now, girls, steady up!’
There was something faintly sinister about these speechless nuns; but perhaps they belonged to a silent order.
Yet if so, whey weren't they cloistered?
The driver and conductor made up for them by shouting and singing, and the little bus itself was extremely noisy as it rattled along the bumpy streets.
We had started off in grand style, rattling right round the station plaza with a great tooting of horns.
Now we were rumbling and petarding up a steep brown-earth road with long, high convent walls on each side, towards a little square with a few dimly lit small shops and pollarded trees like headless ostriches perched on one knobbly leg.
There were a few houses whose wrought-iron balconies were crammed with plants: great pots of geraniums, full and dark, the flowers looking down at me like tiny faces, intently.
At various stops nun after nun silently descended.
The RENFE train  station must be a long way from the centre, I thought, just as we began to enter the acid neon groves of the darkening city, through a narrow glade of brightly lit shops, the Corrielo, then through a vast archway — a policeman's shrill whistle — and the bus was rolling and swinging right into the grand Plaza Mayor, which it circled slowly, triumphantly hooting.
The sight of the noble stone arcades with hanging lanterns, café tables, people sitting smoking and drinking, waiters wearing long white aprons balancing trays of bottles and glasses and highly coloured liqueurs, the busy shops, a glimpse of a sombre church — it was ail enchantment.
The bus trundled out into the Avenida Generalissimo Franco, a name that made my heart sink — again the sharp, imperious police whistle — faces looking in on us from outside, where the slow-moving crowds were talking and laughing.
The bus shuddered to a stop.
I hauled my luggage to the nearest small hotel and took a cheap room.
Before term started I wanted to live anonymously in this city where no one knew me, just for a few days.
Then I would announce my arrival to the university authorities.
And I would have to meet the head of the English Department, Professor Ruiperez, who had sent me kind letters of invitation and welcome, in faultless English.
After a fashionably elevenish dinner at my hostal-Pension , in a small green dining-room lit by blinding neon, I strolled out into the streets where the sellers of lottery tickets were still in full cry —‘Para hoy!
Para hoy!’— and the blind beggars and cripples crouched and complained, some of them small children left squatting on a bit of cardboard and bawling their heads off.
I tried not to let this interfere with les très riches heures de James Kirkup, but the wretchedness and misery were overwhelming.
Some of the beggars knelt in the middle of the pavement, arms raised in an attitude of crucifixion, their rheumy eyes lifted heavenwards like the imploring ecstasies of El Greco saints.
But people just walked round them.
There was a legless young man on a cushioned board to which roller-skates had been fitted, and he propelled himself along with hands encased in old cigar-boxes.
He had developed a fine pair of shoulders, and his biceps bulged under his short-sleeved singlet: his arms seemed to have grown unnaturally long and appeared simian.
He held a metal cup in his teeth, which were perfect in his bearded face and glittered as brilliantly as his big, dark eyes under the street lamps.
Occasionally a small coin clattered in his tin.
There were blind men begging, selling lottery tickets.
I left these agonizing streets of beggars behind and entered the Plaza Mayor, a magnificent example of eighteenth-century Spanish baroque, dominated by the superb façade of the Churrigueresque Town Hail or Ayuntamiento.
There are spacious arcades and galleries on all sides of  the square, and on these I could see nobly sculpted medallions of famous Spaniards.
On its eastern side stands the grand Pabellón Real (Royal Pavilion), facing the Ayuntamiento.
The whole Plaza was ablaze with floodlighting, and big globes of pearly lamps hung in every arcade.
The fine statues on the topmost balconies of the Ayuntamiento and framing the moonlike clock-face gestured against the midnight skies, and at once I was under the spell of the past.
All this dazzling illumination was in honour of my arrival?
No.
It was for the great annual festa of 3 September, with its cattle fairs, bullfights and zarzuelas .
There was dancing and singing at various points — the chatter and whir of castanets, the hoarse yelps and anguished arias of flamenco, the pistol-like crepitations of zapateado , the sharp slow hand-claps of café patrons calling waiters.
Gerald Brennan, writing just two or three years after the war, says in The Face of Spain that the slow hand-clap to attract the attention of waiters had died out, but I heard it in several places in the north.
As his book is mainly about the south, perhaps it had died out in Andalusia, though even there I remember being startled by its male authority as I walked past a café in Seville.
The hand-claps sometimes seemed to be keeping time with my leisurely steps as I wandered under the arcades in the hot night, but that was just a coincidence.
I slightly lengthened my stride, feeling self-conscious as I always do if I find myself marching in step with martial music, when I deliberately break step and try to walk between the beats, as it were, in as unmilitary a way as possible.
After a while I sat down at a pavement café table and rather shamefacedly clapped my hands, but produced such a ladylike patter that no one heard me.
So I just sat watching the passing scene until I caught the eye of a waiter and ordered some wine.
As I sat there and sipped my Valdepeñas I observed the ladies in their flounced festival attire, plying elegant fans, escorted by dignified caballeros wearing black sombreros.
There were small girls selling roasted melon seeds, shoeblacks clacking their cloths over hand-tooled Spanish leather boots.
Extremely pretty young women, still in their teens, advanced from table to table, offering baskets of roses and carnations to couples.
As I did not have a woman companion, they tended to ignore me, but I called to one and bought a little bouquet to put in my hotel bedroom's tooth-glass.
There were fewer beggars under the arcades, perhaps scared away by the patrolling police, and by the awe-inspiring Civil Guards in their black-lacquered headgear and solemnly swinging capes.
The constant presence of police I found rather intimidating.
I was also depressed by the sight of rich, elderly couples strolling along laden with jewellery, the man's arm laid lightly round his spouse's shoulder.
But always at the  back of my mind there was the memory of Jordi, his knife, his smile, his helpless shrug.
Why could he not be walking with me here?
I saw there were some middle-aged men, single or in small groups, who all wore very dark glasses and pencil-thin moustaches, light raincoats hanging effetely from their shoulders in that Spanish fashion of male superiority that is elsewhere considered the mark of a homosexual.
Younger people, because of the unseasonal heat, were wearing sweaters tied round the hips, another typically Spanish style that has been imitated by the Irish.
I was once or twice approached by stony-faced nuns begging for charities, but I gave nothing because I felt sure that some of those nuns were fakes, possibly men in drag, for their big, dark, hollow eyes, dyspeptic noses bright red in chalk-white faces, compressed, colourless lips and faint moustaches were hardly the signs of religious penance, and they were all wearing rather large boots.
I glimpsed a pair of shimmering transvestites in a back-street bar.
Despite all the illuminations, the thrilling flamenco and the shrill life of the streets, there was a sense of menace, a feeling of insecurity.
I was made uneasy by those parading men in smart suits and dark glasses, who appeared to be a kind of confraternity of Falangists, ardent nationalists and supporters of Franco, whose picture was everywhere.
Life here, I could see, was going to be on an even more perilous tightrope than it was in Britain.
As I expected, there was no evidence of an alternative culture, and there were no obvious homosexuals, though I received a few long looks from passers-by which I was careful not to return.
My mood was briefly lightened by the arrival of a tuna group of university students in traditional academic robes decorated with flying coloured ribbons who played guitars and mandolines and sang cheerful folksongs, accompanied by the antics of a virtuoso tambourine player.
These strolling minstrels are very popular in Spain, and the tuna in Salamanca is one of the best.
I was often to meet these apparently carefree young men parading the streets and lanes of the city well after midnight, or serenading pretty girls beneath their lighted windows, their only reward a thrown rose or carnation.
Their music was both charming and professional.
I returned to my hotel around 3 a.m.
My sadness over and fear for Jordi would not go away.
The front door was locked, and that was when I made my first acquaintance with a venerable traditional figure, the sereno , an old man with a stick, a big brass badge and a large bunch of keys.
These serenos patrol the streets at night, acting as watchmen and guardians of the peace.
But they are also authorized to open street doors for people who have neglected to carry their often very ornate and heavy antique front-door keys with them.
Here again the slow hand-clap  is the signal one gives for a sereno's help.
He would usually appear in answer to the signal within a few minutes, for each sereno has a certain section to patrol.
Their name is derived from the ‘all quiet’ or ‘all's well, cry (‘sereno’) that the men used to give after calling the hours, just like our old English tradition —‘Two o'clock and all's well’— which has unfortunately died out.
The serenos receive a small salary from the shopkeepers and private houses they keep an eye on, but it is considered proper to give them a tip each time they open a door for one.
I found them to be cheerful, reassuring old men, and delightful conversationalists.
They were a contrast to the ever-present police and Civil Guards.
But they are all old men, and theirs is a dying profession.
(They were still patrolling the streets of Madrid as late as 1973, when they were officially retired.)
As I turned to say good-night to my sereno , and to press a tip into his palm, the deep-blue sky held a brimming star — Orion.
Breakfast was a bowl of weak, milky coffee and a tasteless roll of bread.
The small block of semi-refined sugar, like cement, took a long time to dissolve.
Outside, at eight o'clock, the streets were already busy with sweepers, a watering-cart, shop assistants, police blowing whistles, bicycles, scooters, not many cars, the voices of the lottery ticket vendors, schoolchildren screaming as they ran to school, carts pulled by donkeys braying, trucks hooting, an ambulance siren — it all added up to utter confusion.
But it was an early-morning bedlam that soon died down.
The Spaniards are by nature noisy and vociferous, especially in the mornings when, like cocks crowing, they have to announce to the world that they are alive and doing.
The stout, middle-aged men in black glasses do not appear until ten o'clock, with brief-cases or small leather bags.
They were smoking cigars, hawking and spitting and shaking hands with friends or associates.
There is some kind of conspiracy of bureaucrats: they all have their fingers in the same profitable pie.
Their thin black moustaches were glossy with cologne, which wafted sickeningly behind them as they strolled to their offices.
It was a heavenly morning, not too hot yet.
I wandered ail over the city, getting lost then finding myself again where I had started.
I saw some of the places that were to play an important part in the later dramas of my life: the great Clerecia church where I was to be sitting one momentous morning, and beside it the lovely Casa de las Conchas, its walls decorated with rows of carved scallop shells — seven rows adorn the upper storeys.
I admired the main door of the Catedral Nueva — comparatively new, that is, for it was started in 1513.
The splendidly ornate style and the wealth of carvings in the soft-tinted stone were to be the subject of a poem.
For the moment I kept away from the university.
I strolled down to the Tormes and its Roman bridge: in the Plaza del Puente at its northern end stands an ancient, battered statue of the Roman lion mentioned in Lazarillo de Tormes .
The bridge was constructed in the first century BC and is attributed to Trajan.
Its many arches reminded me of the perfection of the Roman aqueduct at Segovia.
I walked along the banks of the Tormes, sucking a native sweetmeat called Piedras del Tormes — pastel-tinted boiled sweets imitating the pebbles of that great river.
Here and there were crowds of men bargaining over cattle and horses.
These were magnificent, but in my eyes the men were even finer, with their dark, hollow cheeks, taut, slim bodies in tight-fitting black corduroys that vividly outlined their considerable sexual equipment.
Some of the men, when they saw me looking at them, smiled shyly, and as if automatically scratched their swollen codpieces.
This I knew was not a sexual invitation but a protection against the evil eye.
Their warm Spanish eyes in luxuriant black eyelashes melted my heart which had been chilled by the dark-glassed fascists in the city streets.
They sported knives like Jordi's.
They all reminded me of him.
All the churches are closed for lunch and siesta.
But I can hear nuns singing quietly, sweetly, invisible behind thick wooden grilles.
There are little street altars, devotional carvings in the most unexpected places.
Inside the churches I could feel intense devoutness, and recalled the ejaculations shouted after La Macarena in Seville, so truly reverent yet passionate, reminiscent of medieval mystery plays' earthy realism and at the same time resembling the way men call after girls in the street.
Yet there is a firm respect for women and for the relations between men and women in daily life.
Behind the reserve of the Spaniards there is warmth and passion.
As in Ireland, there are many frustrated bachelors and spinsters, and there are frequent late marriages.
Sometimes in the parks I see sweethearts,novios and novias , showing one another great respect, walking sedately together, not even holding hands.
During the evening paseo the atmosphere is more relaxed, but still quite formal.
They have a frank and friendly interest in foreigners, in machinery, in clothes.
They ask me how much I paid for everything I was wearing, how much I pay for my room at the pension , how much salary I shall be getting at the university — a salary to me ridiculously small, little more than pocket-money, but for the majority of working-class Spaniards a fortune.
There is such volubility I find it hard to follow what some people are saying, and they make no compromises for non-native  speakers.
Like the French, they expect everyone to understand their language.
Even when I can understand all they are saying, they give me little opportunity to reply, so anxious are they to keep up the headlong momentum of their own speech; then they complain that I say nothing!
They are great gossips, the men as much as the women, whispering behind raised hands, then bursting into sudden excesses of rage with wildly waving hands, flashing eyes, curled lips spitting torrents of invective.
Then it is changed in a moment, and they are all sunny smiles and playful pats on the arm.
A few determinedly modern young women eat snacks in the street, but no girl or woman in Spain dares wear trousers or skimpy bathing-suits.
In the Franco era Spain is the least modern of all European countries.
This may be partly due to its isolated geographical position, which has helped to give the country its intense feeling of national uniqueness, and its deep conservatism.
George Borrow, in The Bible in Spain , called it ‘the genuine spirit of localism,.
Although the country is one of astonishing variety in landscape, climate and speech, it is everywhere itself, unmistakably Spanish.
In his work on Spanish cathedrals John Harvey comments on the Spaniard's national pride, often so abrasive, so aggressive and disdainful of foreign ways, modern ideas of internationalism.
But without that pride the Spaniard would not be Spanish, as Harvey writes: ‘It is profoundly to be hoped that he will never allow these sharp angles to be smoothed off by the modern cult of ‘all things to all men'’, and a false catholicity of taste which is no taste at all.
Spain is the last country of discrimination; long may she retain this priceless gift.’
The woman who sells you a ticket at the bus office crosses herself for you as she makes it out.
Beggars, when you give them money, bless you and wish you good luck, a gold tooth flashing surprisingly in a dusky smile suddenly lighting a dirty face.
There is something medieval in the way the Spaniard can reconcile earthy realism and practical common sense with soaring fantasy and spiritual exaltation.
To most Englishmen such a conjunction will be unbelievable; but, on returning to England, he may find himself wondering how he has finally accepted the Spanish view.
It is impossible to live in Spain and not be radically changed, not to discover profound truths about life, and about oneself.
A FATAL ENCOUNTER
The Poem in the Pencil 
This pencil has a poem I could write.
It lies asleep within its woody shade,
A fountain that the forest leafs to light
And thins to nothing but the wish I made
To cast a shadow down the page.
The pattern is disguised within a cage.
I cannot bring its meaning to escape
Although I tease it with a tender rage
And pledge with love its naked shape.
-It will not lie down by my side.
Because I call it out of pride,
Its veins run cold within my hand
And leave the narrow page too wide.
-When will it let me understand
My wish to share the words we hide?
Salamanca had been Franco's headquarters in 1937.
Something of the secret terror of that period in the Civil War remained.
The beautiful tawny stone of the great churches and university buildings seemed to me stained with the blood of Republican idealists in the British battalion of the 15th International Brigade.
They were fighting for justice for the workers, a fine cause but one that had already proved useless in Russia, where the same old bureaucratic hierarchy held sway as it did in Spain.
There was another iron dictatorship in Germany, whose Condor Legion bombed the working classes in Guernica on 26 April 1937.
Kim Philby had been a war correspondent in Salamanca, sending dispatches to The Times .
As the newspaper's special correspondent with Franco and his troops, Philby had a watertight cover for his clandestine operations.
Guy Burgess had told my Gateshead chorus-boy friend, Jack Hewit, that Philby must have had very good reasons for going to Franco in Salamanca.
Pablo Merry del Val, whose father had been Spanish Ambassador in London, conducted briefings for the correspondents and  censored their dispatches.
Their briefings were held in the airy first-floor gallery of the university quadrangle.
This was where the offices of the English Department and several lecture-rooms were situated when I arrived in 1957, twenty years after Philby.
The beautiful old building in neoclassical style is called the Palacio de Anaya, situated on the square of that name, and it was built in 1760.
There was a bust of Miguel de Unamuno at the bottom of the staircase, and it seemed to have been defaced.
He was a fine writer, essayist and philosopher who wrote The Tragic Sense of Life and who was persecuted by Franco and put under house arrest by Primo de Rivera because of his liberal views expressed fearlessly while he was the Rector of the University.
He died in 1936, and despite the Franco oppression he was venerated by many of the university staff.
Professor Ruiperez of the Faculty of Letters spoke to me quite openly of his admiration for the man and the writer.
He died under house arrest in Salamanca, uncompromising to the end.
It was Unamuno who wrote: ‘Only in solitude do we find ourselves; and in finding ourselves, we find in ourselves all our brothers in solitude.’
This was an idea that appealed strongly to me, though Unamuno had not been thinking of some of the ‘brothers in solitude’— the outcasts from social and sexual ‘normality’— who were the brothers that first sprang to my mind on reading that sentence in Corsham.
But I was one with the solitaries of the spirit, too: with St Teresa and St John of the Cross as well as with humbler dissidents like Jordi and one or two other men of the working class I had known in Spain, the young bank clerk I had met in Cordoba the previous spring, among the orange and lilac blossom of Las Tendillas, where we walked and whispered, hardly daring to look at one another, and separating at the sight of police.
My own solitude was as nothing compared with their constantly patrolled loneliness, without hope of escape.
Unamuno also wrote: ‘Love is the child of illusion and the parent of disillusion’— a very Zen Buddhist concept of which I was to learn the truth in Salamanca.
Nothing had prepared me for the overwhelming architectural beauty of Salamanca, and in particular for the grandeur of the university, the oldest in Spain and one of the oldest in Europe, with its noble façade in plateresque style.
Some of the ancient lecture theatres had been well preserved, like the Aula de Fray Luis de Leon, named after one of the many notable scholars who have graced its pulpit-lectern.
Founded in the thirteenth century, Salamanca was the equal of Paris, Bologna and Oxford, became internationally famous and attracted students from all over the world.
It fell into intellectual decay during the eighteenth and  nineteenth centuries, from which it was rescued by its famous rector, Miguel de Unamuno.
The great library contains one of the best collections of ancient manuscripts of the Hispanic civilizations, including the most complete copy of an extraordinary medieval poem,El libro de buen amor (The Book of Good Love) by Juan Ruiz, dated 1343 in its second version, which Menendez Pelayo praises thus: ‘Juan Ruiz, Archpriest of Hita, wrote the comic epic of an entire epoch in his multiform book, the Human Comedy of the 14th Century.
He managed to reduce the variegated and picturesque spectacle of the Middle Ages to the unity of a humoristic concept at the very moment it began to dissolve and crumble.’
The university chapel and the grand stone stairways with carved reliefs on the ornamental balustrades are extremely fine.
I was deeply imbued with the historic and cultural spells of this monumental structure when I took my first walk round the cloisters of the inner courtyard, whose first-floor gallery, open to the sky, is beautifully panelled and wainscoted.
I had called Professor Ruiperez from my hostal , and at once he came to take me out to lunch at an expensive restaurant featuring all the local dishes, including a hearty paella and fine Rioja wines.
He was a very kind, youngish, amiable scholar of great distinction, and a power in the university.
I think he was shocked to find his new Professor of English staying in a cheap pension .
But the place he took me to after lunch, the Colegio Ponce de Leon, where I was supposed to have rooms, was a rather stark student hostel, and my little room was very small, with just a narrow bed, a table and a chair.
But my windows commanded charming views of the city.
I stayed there only a few days, and then for some reason I was removed to the Colegio Fray Luis de Leon, where I was given a somewhat larger and more comfortable room.
The toilets and bathrooms and showers were at the end of the hall on the second floor, and from my window I had a splendid view of the cathedral, whose Gothic, Renaissance and baroque styles mingled perfectly in the dark-rose-and-amber stone to give it almost the appearance of some natural rock formation.
There was a multitude of bells — solemn, melodious, hasty, irritable, angry, tinny, noble, girlish — an infinite variety of calls to worship and memorials of passing time.
The students had not yet arrived, but I took meals in the refectory with a few of the college authorities and professors who had already started the new term's work.
They seemed to me very distant, almost suspicious.
There was no kind of social life.
Indeed, all the time I was at Salamanca, I was never once invited to anyone's house.
One by one the students returned, filling the corridors and the public rooms with cheerful noise.
They were male students.
It would have been  unthinkable in the Spain of those days to have male and female students living under the same roof.
The majority were Spaniards, but there were many from South America, particularly Venezuela, and these were better dressed and better off than the other students, a fact that caused some resentment.
Some of them were mature students studying medicine, dentistry, law, engineering.
They were in their early thirties, so 1 did not feel too out of place from the point of view of age, and at first no one took any notice of me, as if they thought I was just another mature student.
I intended to study, and registered for courses on Spanish language and literature.
It was on the morning when registration began that I had my fatal encounter.
I had registered for my classes, and Professor Ruiperez had shown me my lecture-rooms, where I had introduced myself to large classes of students, mixed men and women, with a preponderance of women, as is usual in foreign arts faculties.
They seemed quite pleasant young people, who listened intently to my greetings, my introductions and my little jokes.
I announced the titles of the textbooks we would be using.
These included Jespersen's Primer of the English Language , a book I had not opened since my student days, and then only to shut it immediately, never in the intervening years opening it again.
Now I should have to study the English language in earnest, keeping one chapter ahead of the students each week.
I expected to hate it, but in fact I enjoyed my lectures on English language history and became an enthusiastic advocate of exercises in parsing, syntax and dictation — the very best test of listening comprehension.
In literature I was going to offer both British and American authors, both prose and poetry, so that was no problem, though it did mean that I should have to read authors I disliked — Conrad, Hemingway, Woolf, Graham Greene, C.P. Snow — but I leavened this stodgy bunch with those I felt more in sympathy with, though they were not officially on the syllabus — Waugh, Firbank and Forster at their head.
Between two classes I went out into the beautiful gallery on the first floor, open to the cloisters and the courtyard below.
I leant back against the stone balustrade and lit a cigarette.
What happened next is something I shall never forget, and I have thought of that moment incessantly ever since it happened.
Jordi was still very much on my mind.
He knew my address at the university but had not written.
His long silence worried me and made me frightened.
Among the throngs of passing students I was thinking fondly of Jordi when someone who was obviously an American passed by, and our eyes met for a split second.
He was a little shorter than myself, rather stocky with broad shoulders and that slightly duck-toed walk I find so attractive in athletic young men.
He was dressed casually in jeans and T-shirt and sweater, and his eyes in his sun-tanned face were very blue.
He had not shaved for a day or two, and there was fair stubble on his cheeks and jaw.
But the most remark able thing about him was his hair, unusually long for those days, and abundant — of the palest, curly blond, exactly the moonlight platinum colour of my own hair when I was a little boy.
I thought I detected a faint smile on his lips, but I did not smile back because my heart was in a turmoil.
I thought he was the most beautiful creature I had ever seen certainly the most beautiful male.
On the Waterfront and Rebel without a Cause had appeared in 1954 and 1955, starring Marlon Brando and James Dean respectively, and I had fallen for them both.
The person I saw that morning in the sunny gallery of the Palacio de Anaya reminded me of James Dean, not so much in physical appearance, though they were alike in presenting the essence of a certain youthful American type of the period, as in an instant personal magnetism, a cocksure and irresistible sexual charm.
I was stunned.
It was almost as if I had received a blow to the heart.
He was the ideal of all the friends I had ever longed for, the elder brother that, as an only child, I could never hope for — though he was at least fifteen years younger than I, his assurance and absolute maleness made me feel like a younger brother by contrast.
I returned to face my next class with wildly beating heart and in a state of utter confusion, of mingled joy, misery, hope and despair.
Fortunately it was the first class in English literature, so I did no more than introduce myself and give the reading assignment for the next week.
Then I dismissed the students and turned myself loose on the streets of Salamanca, under the burning sun of an Indian summer, trying to get my emotions under control.
Who was he?
Why had he come to Salamanca?
As far as I knew, he was the only American student in the Arts Faculty.
At least I had seen no others.
These were foolish and unnecessary questions anyhow, because I was sure such a divinity would never have anything to do with someone so much older and so much less good-looking than himself.
All my life I have seen that type of person, handsome and self-assured, who knew he could have me just by crooking a finger and beckoning me to follow.
They had caused me many heartaches and disillusions, and I was determined that it should never happen again.
My readings in Zen, too, had shown me the folly of love, analysed it as an illusion among all the other illusions of this floating and temporary world, an emotion that by its very nature created suffering.
For Zen teaches us that love breeds fear, and fear breeds hatred, and hatred breeds violence, in a neve-rending, vicious circle.
I was certainly not going to allow myself to suffer all that hell again.
In any case there would be no occasion for that to  happen.
The person I had seen could have not the slightest interest in a beat-up old poet like me.
Or so I thought….
A day or two later I had a free morning, in which I intended to follow a class in Spanish language.
When I got to the classroom, I found there were only about six students in the class, and we chatted idly until the lecturer arrived.
The class started, and I was in the middle of reading aloud a prose passage from Galdós when the door opened and in walked the fair-haired god I had glimpsed in the gallery.
My heart lurched and seemed to miss a beat, but I went on reading calmly, though the print was blurred.
At the end of my reading, the lecturer asked the newcomer his name, and I heard his voice for the first time — a soft, warm American accent, with the rich, furry tone the English find so attractive.
I stole a quick sidelong glance, and saw him turn his head at the same instant to look at me and give a faint smile.
I turned my head away quickly, but I had had time to take in another feature — his rather sharp, small nose that looked as if it might have been broken in a boxing match.
Then he gave his name, one of those Midwest American names, I guessed, probably originally Ukrainian, from Kansas or Montana.
The class dragged to its end.
The other students stayed seated, all turned towards the newcomer, anxious to make his acquaintance, and I knew only too well that he could have any one of them he liked as his friend.
He was one of those people who are instantly popular, and I felt sure he must know and relish his power over others, the power that only exceptional physical beauty can give, especially when it is allied with intelligence and strong animal magnetism.
I felt very much the wallflower as I crept out of the room without speaking to anyone, my books held tightly against my chest in a way which, I was to learn, was feminine and wrong for a man.
Something made me linger at the bottom of the grand staircase, near the bust of Unamuno, pretending to read some notices about student societies.
After about five minutes I heard a voice behind me say: ‘Hi, there!
I'm Dana.’
I turned round, knowing already who it was, with sinking heart.
Yes, it was he, with a broad, sunny grin revealing perfectly white, rather small teeth in a friendly smile.
I was British enough not to want to reveal my name to a stranger, so I just said, rather coldly: ‘How are you?’
A slight cloud on his smile, then it passed, and he asked: ‘Where can you get a cup of coffee in this place?’
I took him to a nearby café.
I knew I was hooked.
And I knew he knew it.
But I was determined not to allow myself to be hauled in like a helpless fish as he reeled in his capable line.
On that day we became friends, yet for a long time I kept my distance, afraid even to shake hands with him.
About twelve years later, when I was looking back on that meeting with Dana, I wrote the following poem:
Christ Rejected 
In the life of the ugly,
the plain, the lonely, sometimes
a stranger of great beauty comes
with an ease almost holy.
They who were never loved,
who worshipped from afar with scorn
the beauty of the nobly-born
for a moment felt themselves moved.
How can it be?
Who is he?
A stranger of great beauty,
with limbs perfect, smile all purity,
comes, and gives his love to me?
ft is as they tell us of
Jesus, loving the halt and the dumb,
who, laying his hands upon lepers, did come
on earth, to give us of God's love.
How beautiful are thy feet with shoes,
the joints of thy thighs are as jewels,
the smell of thy nose like apples.
His legs are pillars of marble, his lips lilies…
The ugly believe, and know
that this is the love of Christ.
-But put an arm about the stranger's waist,
he melts away like snow.
The stranger of great beauty comes
and goes in lives that are plain,
bringing love, but also fear; hope, but pain.
Ours are the hearts, but his the drums.
None can resist him, who are not
as perfect as he, but those sad fools
who turn away as he comes with smiles,
and seek the comfort of the brothers he forgot.
(from White Shadows, Black Shadows.: Poems of Peace and War )
I did indeed see him as a kind of Christ figure, perhaps as someone who had come to save me from myself, from my ineradicable loneliness of mind and soul.
For despite all the passing lovers and the casual one-night stands or five-minute fantasies, I was always essentially alone, a solitary.
Because of them, perhaps.
Each fevered quest for a true love left me more adrift than ever.
And long after Dana had left me, I still thought of him every day, and from time to time wrote poems about him, like this one which came to me after several viewings of a film that greatly disturbed and fascinated me, Pasolini's Teorema :
On Pasolini's Teorema
Glimpsed in a courtyard, a gallery, a cloister, a garden —
yes, we know him all too well,
that plausible young male demon,
unscrupulous messenger of hell, fair angel of our fate,
handsome, mysterious, understanding,
and inexplicably loving,
who comes one day from nowhere
and takes our hearts, our minds, our souls,
in exchange for — what?
For loneliness and desolation worse than anything we knew
before his coming; for a persistent sense of loss,
an ache of separation, a bitter, loveless isolation
in a world to which he brought
a temporary joy, a passing sweetness.
-But was it worth it?
A brief time
of unforgettable pleasure in a life of pain?
For now the pain grows worse,
the isolation more intense,
and he who came and took our souls
when we least needed him
does not come now, now that we need him most.
Instead, a hollow shadow walks beside us
and haunts us day and night
with visions, madness, dreams
of impossible and unimaginable love
that, even if we knew it once again,
we should reject, knowing it untrue
and foul: and unavailing, hollow


as the words and smiles with which
he first approached us, come from nowhere,
to take us back there with him, and leave us there alone.
(from Ecce Homo — My Pasolini: Poems and Translations )
The star of that upsetting movie, Terence Stamp, reminded me of Dana at his most perverse and enigmatic, half-god, half-demon, lover and destroyer.
Yet he was a kind of Christ figure, who entered the lives of ordinary people in a rich, bored, bourgeois family, made love to them all indifferently, both male and female, inexplicably, then left as mysteriously as he had come, deserting them in the hours of their greatest need.
Sad to say, I had learnt to be suspicious of good-looking young men who for no particular reason seemed to take a sudden interest in me.
I knew I was not attractive.
Yet I had such a deep longing for the romantic friendship, for the ami amant , for that ‘someone to watch over me’, that I was often half tempted to succumb to the wiles of youths I felt pretty sure were plain-clothes detectives from the Vice Squad or undercover agents for MI5.
In that cold war atmosphere that was mingled with the chill dictatorship of Franco, I felt that the American ‘innocents’ of Henry James's novels had become the sophisticated manipulators his Europeans had once appeared to be.
So Dana was my European exploiter; I was his Daisy Miller.
This was how I regarded Dana from the start.
What was behind his apparent friendliness?
At that first meeting he told me something about himself.
He had been a student of D.J.
Enright at the Freie Universität in West Berlin, and that information immediately put me on my guard.
Were the British literary mafia on my tracks again?
Had Enright told him about my appointment to Salamanca, and instructed his student to infiltrate my literary and private life?
There is always such intense jealousy among members of the British literary establishment when someone who is not ‘one of us’ is favoured by an appointment, a prize.
A few years later Enright came to see me when I was working in Kuala Lumpur and he was Professor in Singapore.
We met in the old Majestic Hotel, where I was staying, and I asked him about his former student in Berlin.
Oh yes, Enright remembered him very well, and when I mentioned the name a puzzled look fleetingly crossed his face.
Dana had travelled from Berlin to Salamanca on an old motor bike that was to play a large part in our lives both in Spain and in England.
He had put up at a cheap pension , the Hospedaje Lisboa (‘Camas, Comidas’— Rooms, Meals), where he had an even smaller room than the one assigned to me at the Colegio.
He told me he had been studying poetry with Enright, and that he wrote poetry too.
One of his poems had been published, he said, in The New Yorker by Howard Moss, the Poetry Editor, who — though I did not know it until Dana told me later — was a well-known homosexual.
When I told him that Howard Moss — whom I never met but whose poetry I greatly admired — had already published several of my poems, Dana appeared surprised and a little put out.
I could not remember ever having seen one of his poems in The New Yorker , but it was a magazine I saw only occasionally in those days.
We started talking about poetry and about our favourite modern poets.
We neither of us had much interest in contemporary British poets, but were united in our enthusiasm for Elizabeth Bishop, Marianne Moore, W. S. Merwin, Wallace Stevens, William Carios Williams, Charles Reznikoff, Theodore Roethke and Richard Wilbur.
He did not share my passion for Frank O'Hara, Robert Duncan, Denise Levertov (whom I had met in London and Paris), James Merrill and the early Pound; nor did I agree with his high estimate of Robert Lowell, Howard Nemerov and T.S.
Eliot.
But we both agreed that Robed Frost, Allen Ginsberg, Kenneth Rexroth and the rising ride of repetitive Beat poets were not worthy of consideration.
Dana did not ask to see my own poems, which at once made me suspect that he had some knowledge of them already.
But he seemed anxious to show me his own poetry, with which he had filled several notebooks.
I agreed to take a look at these efforts, and we arranged to meet next day after my morning lectures.
The first thing that struck me about Dana's poems was his incredibly tiny script, an almost minuscule handwriting that was often difficult to decipher.
This queer way of writing filled me with foreboding, because it seemed to indicate a cold, self-centred nature, the reverse of the outgoing geniality he displayed to one and all.
His writing looked crabbed.
At the time I was interested in graphology, and had experimented with various styles of handwriting.
My usual script looks like demented knitting, but among my manuscripts I am still surprised to find poem drafts and diary entries in neat italic calligraphy, painstakingly produced with a special calligraphic pen, or ‘disguised’ and back-sloping hands, or the ‘progressive’styles I had copied from my art students in Corsham.
My multiple personality required multiple scripts, and from my study of graphology I tried to create individual scripts that conformed to the analyses of heavy down-strokes, ‘pasty’ loops and uncrossed ‘ts’: I was especially interested in ‘pasty’strokes, which are supposed to indicate a rich sexuality, and disconnected letters, indicative  of ‘inspiration’.
By adopting various graphological forms I hoped to fool the editors to whom I submitted my poems with a covering note, often under a false name.
I was particularly keen to give my handwritten lines an upward slope — a sign of success, according to graphologists.
But I also remembered that André Gide's letters to me had shown this tendency very clearly.
As for Dana's poems, at first I thought they were pretty feeble.
We sat down together at a café table and went through some of them together.
As we sat there in that noisy, smoke-filled place I was deeply conscious of his physical presence, so close and so disturbingly animal, almost electric in its restrained, pulsing sexuality.
I tried to keep my eyes off his muscular thighs in their tight blue jeans, but as we bent over the café table it was easy to cast occasional surreptitious glances at his powerfully outlined sexual equipment under the much-rubbed fly, which seemed to be almost bursting at the seams.
I was conscious, too, of his fine, tanned hand holding the pencil, and of the occasional play of warm breath from his mouth, wholesome as home-baked bread, though he was a heavy smoker — much heavier than I. ft was I who introduced him to the Bisontes brand, a Spanish version of Lucky Strike, with a similar ‘toasted’ flavour.
Today, having given up smoking about twenty years ago, I find it unbelievable that I should have smoked as many as ten cigarettes a day; but they were one of the things that helped to create a bond with Dana, something we could share.
We would each bring out a packet of Bisontes with the bold bison emblem and a little box of those peculiarly Spanish waxed matches called cerillos .
I remember the first time I offered Dana one of these cigarettes: he accepted one, and I then took one myself.
But by the time I had got it out of the packet and placed it between my lips, he had lighted a cerillo and was holding it out to me in cupped hands, smiling above the soft yellow flame whose elvish reflection danced in his blue eyes.
As we pored over his crippled handwriting I felt a steady heat coming from his body like an aura which slowly enveloped me and seemed to penetrate the very marrow of my bones.
I knew I was being bewitched, laid under a spell so intensely personal, so thrilling, I did not have the power to resist it, or to judge if it were good or evil.
From time to time I took in little details of his face: his small, neat ears round which the moonlight-blond locks curled; the light golden stubble round his laughing mouth; the rather dry, sensuous yet slightly cruel lips; the perfect column of the neck and throat emerging from his open shirt, unbuttoned to give me — was it deliberate?— a shadowy glimpse of a dark nipple in a hairless chest, the beautifully smooth breast of an ancient god.
I felt myself falling, falling, as if for the first time, deeper and deeper into mysterious pits of passion and anxiety, longing and despair.
He moved a leg to scratch — innocently?— his bulging crotch, and the knee just touched mine beneath the table, as if accidentally, and I felt as if I had been touched by lightning.
And all the time, in this turmoil of sexual ambiguities, we were talking about words, about poetry.
I was trying my best to correct his style without imposing my own upon it, and he seemed genuinely grateful when I pointed out what I thought was a weakness in rhythm, a word to be changed, an image to be further developed, a form to be tightened or relaxed….
Yes, in poetry I felt I could stand at least as his equal, and indeed what started off that day as a sort of master-pupil relationship soon became a strange kind of poetic collaboration, in which we played equal parts.
We would work on one of his poems, then turn to one of mine and work together on it.
Then we started finding our common subjects and composing poems together, a double authorship.
I stopped writing my own poems.
He had taken them away from me and was making them his own.
Our voices were mingled in poetry.
But though he had taken all my poetic power, and gave me some of his in return, he still remained himself, his own man, his own poet.
At times I felt I was just a kind of palimpsest, or a blackboard that could always be wiped clean to make room for his own work.
Even my handwriting changed, and started to become small and stunted, like his.
Yes, I was possessed, but happy to be so, if it allowed me to be with him, to feel him near me for a few hours every day.
We became inseparable, and I was so proud to be seen walking with him, to enter a concert hall with him and let others see us sit down together at café and restaurant tables.
His Spanish was almost non-existent, and he did not know how to study a foreign language, so I gave him lessons.
I, too, was studying Spanish; but soon I had abandoned the classes for foreigners in the university and was studying on my own.
The classes were so slow for me.
Dana soon dropped out and came to study with me.
All this time I was trying to make a little money by doing hack-work translations of French and German children's stories.
I translated Schiller's Don Carlos and revised my version of Heinrich von Kleist's Prinz von Homburg for Eric Bentley's anthology of classic German theatre, for which I was paid a pittance.
Dana got an allowance from home: his father was a government official; his mother worked as a teacher — she sent him wads of onion-skin typing paper that were then unobtainable in Europe, and also drugs, bottles of Dexedrine.
Because the cafés were so noisy and crowded, we had started working on our poems in my room at the Colegio.
And because I had only one chair, we used to sit on the edge of the hard, narrow bed and draw up the table so that we could write on it together.
One day, after we had  been working together all afternoon without much success, Dana without warning lay back on the bed, his head on the pillow.
‘Lie down and relax,’ he told me.
In absolute terror, I lay down beside him.
On that narrow bed we were so close together.
I did not dare move, and yet I did: I put my hand on his thigh, and slowly moved it up towards the centre of my desire.
After a moment he gently took my hand and moved it away, saying nothing.
We lay there silently, then he got up and left the room, leaving me lying there in an agony of frustration and guilt, furious with myself for having given way, yet curiously glad I had finally done so.
Dana did not reappear for a few days, and during that time I felt I was going mad.
I wandered the streets of Salamanca, hoping to run into him.
I went to our favourite cafés, but no one had seen him.
At night I would stand on the pavement opposite the Hospedaje Lisboa and look up at his window.
Sometimes it was lighted, and I would wait there, watching until the light went off, usually long past midnight.
Then I knew he was writing poetry alone, without me, and that hurt me to the depths of my being.
Among the unpublished poems I wrote at that time there is one that tries to express my feelings of loneliness and abandonment by my beautiful god.
I wrote it one late evening, sitting at my window, looking out into the rainy darkness of autumn and at the great black bulk of the cathedral:
The rain beats on the window
As the bells beat down the dark.
I wonder where you are, and if
You walk in rain, or under stars.
The bells beat into my memory
The days and nights we knew
In this one room, among the city's
Mysteries of stone.
To you
I send this whispered message
Through the fastnesses of wind and rain —
To you, whose face begins to fade,
And hear your voice again.
Stay true to our belief
In one another and our singular art.
If the rain beats for me, it beats
For both of us.
I hear it falling in your heart.
The bell-laden streets were haunted by the fume of roasting chestnuts.
Now whenever I smell roasted chestnuts in Shijo-dori in Kyoto, or in Zürich Hauptbahnhof, I remember that aching void in my life.
But after all you came back one day, and it all started again.
You were unchanged.
You made no reference to what had happened.
You did not tell me what you had been doing, or where you had been, and you were not interested in whatever I might have been doing.
You were joyous and friendly and warm, and full of your own poems.
You had come back to me in order to show me your poems: there was no one else to whom you could show them.
That at least was something, something I could cling to, something I could use to keep you close to me.
My poetry had never been of so much practical use to me before.
I was half proud, half ashamed to be using it in this way.
No wonder it kept deserting me!
But just to have you near me I was willing to give it all to you.
Your second-hand motor bike was always breaking down.
One day, with me clinging to you — what rapture!— on the pillion, we made a trip to Zamora, a small medieval city to the north of Salamanca. ft was one of those heavenly, crisp autumn days, all sunny chills and skies of broken clouds whose grotesque shadows went moving slowly over the bare brown earth of the fields and hills.
You were always a late riser, quite unlike me, so we did not start on this little adventure until after lunch.
So we were late in returning, and night fell when we were only half-way home.
The road was deserted and we were throbbing along at a moderate pace when suddenly the engine sputtered and stopped.
I had not the first notion of mechanics, but you with your capable hands worked on the machine until, after running with it, pushing it along, we were able to make the engine tick over again.
We got on, and started off again through the lonely night, in pitch darkness, not a house or a lantern to be seen.
Then after a few miles the engine stopped again.
Again we worked on it and pushed hard, and again got it to start, jumped on before it changed its mind and sped away.
This happened about a dozen times.
Finally the engine gave up the ghost completely and nothing could persuade it to start again.
We were left in the middle of nowhere.
So we took turns in pushing the bike along.
You wanted to abandon it by the side of the road, but I made you push it on, with myself taking short spells of pushing.
I was no match for your proud, muscular strength: after a few yards I was exhausted, and you would take over, shoving the burden along with tireless energy.
At last, in the  far distance, we glimpsed the first lights of Salamanca.
From there the road was downhill, so we were able to coast noiselessly down into the sleeping suburbs, then dismount and push the bike into the city centre.
It was an experience that bound us more closely than ever.
I had been studying a guide-book to Zamora before we left.
(Dana would never dream of doing such a thing — he would just take off into the void and somehow find his way around.)
In the book I found a Spanish proverb that runs,No se ganó Zamora en una hora —‘Zamora isn't reached in an hour’, which is the equivalent of our ‘Rome wasn't built in a day’.
We learnt that by our own experience.
Our friendship had been noticed, as I had hoped it would be, for I was so proud of having a friend.
The atmosphere in the college was becoming strained, and mealtimes in the refectory were agony.
One Sunday afternoon, when Dana and I were sitting on the edge of the bed working over versions of various poems, the door, which we always left unlocked, suddenly burst open and a group of surly-looking students entered, led by a big bully who was not Spanish but Venezuelan.
We looked up from our papers in surprise.
I felt afraid.
The group strode over to our table in a menacing way, and the Venezuelan growled: ‘Why are you always together?
What are you doing?
Why is he here?
He does not belong to this college!’
I replied that we were studying and writing, a fact that was obvious from the books, dictionaries and papers scattered over the table and the bed.
With sulky faces, the students turned to go.
But the Venezuelan turned at the door and ordered us to come downstairs and drink with them.
I did not want to go, but Dana said we had better do as they asked.
So we spent the whole afternoon in aimless beer-drinking and student ragging, singing student songs to stamping feet and clapping hands.
It was not at all my idea of pleasure, but I did it for Dana's sake.
Unlike me, he at once felt at home in that charged, aggressive, almost militaristic atmosphere, joined heartily in the drinking and singing, and soon had all the students on his side, which was fortunate for me, because el Americano's prestige deflected a terrible submerged violence and hatred that might well have done me harm.
I was astonished, and a little dismayed, by the ease with which Dana entered into the spirit of things, giving Indian war-whoops and clowning and laughing in a way I thought was rather contemptible.
But perhaps he was doing it to save me?
Or was it just another side of his character I had not seen before, but that I may have suspected was always there?
Those students were all right-wing, fascist bullies, ardent supporters of Franco and his regime.
They were out to destroy me, I was sure.
So a few days later I moved to an hotel, the Hotel España (solo apartamentos ) on the Plaza Españia.
I  had an apartment on the third floor, overlooking the square and the end of the Avenida Jose Antonio de Rivera round which I would watch Dana coming to join me for another afternoon of poetry.
Day after day, night after night, we spent sitting together at my table in that apartment.
Now we did not have to sit on the edge of the bed — a much wider bed — because there were two chairs, and I had my own shower and facilities for making coffee and snacks.
Now that I had left the college dormitory I used to look fearfully from rime to time out of my window, expecting to see that gang of fascist students coming to beat me up.
One day when I went to give my language class at the university I found the word maricone (queer) chalked in large Gothic letters on the blackboard.
I pretended not to notice it, and, as the students listened with bated breath, instructed them to turn to page thirty in Jespersen.
I gave a good class: there is nothing like teaching well for making one forget oneself and one's petty troubles.
I did not wipe the offending word off the blackboard, but as I was packing up my books and papers at the end of the class, a girl got up and without a word erased it, to a scattering of applause.
I did not tell Dana about it.
But I did tell him about Jordi.
I do not remember now how or why I did so, because despite my infatuation I still sometimes thought Dana was a Franco spy, or from the FBI or the CIA or even the CID or the KGB.
Then I would tell myself such ideas were unreasonable: why would an American half-poet want to betray me to any government agency?
It was absurd.
But I knew that absurder things had happened in America and Britain — and in Spain.
When I told Dana about Jordi, he said something I found revealing: ‘I like working men too.’
What exactly did that imply?
Was he, too, after all, as I half suspected, a bisexual?
He had already told me about his girl-friend, an American student of modern dance in West Berlin.
But he had also hinted at a sexual relationship with one of his American university professors, and with the editor of a certain American music magazine, with whom he had spent a vacation in Hairi.
He showed me photographs of them together in a boat there, on a beach, in a restaurant.
But as far as I knew, he had no other friends in Salamanca, though he had only to lift his little finger and both men and women would have come running at his bidding.
He was unfailingly modest in behaviour and appearance, though his luxuriant hair used to excite the cupidity of the two hairdressers in the little barber-shop opposite the entrance to the Hospidaje Lisboa.
I was letting my own hair grow too.
The barbers would playfully wave to us as we went by, motioning towards their empty chairs.
I wished I had said nothing about Jordi.
At times I would wake up in the night, streaming with sweat, from a nightmare in which I relived that  terrifying night in Valladolid.
I shall never forget Jordi's face, his rueful smile, his fatalistic shrug as he was pushed into the car.
At times of the greatest mental stress I would wander into some cool church and try to pray in the dimness scented by peasant sweat, cold candle-grease and stale incense.
Sometimes Dana would come and sit with me on the hard little chairs.
Sometimes I would sit in the deserted church of San Madin, a small twelfth-century romanesque building just off the Plaza Mayor, on the Plaza Poeta Iglesias.
At other times I went into the much larger, colder Clerecia and watched the glib little gilt pendulum of an old-fashioned wall-clock next to the altar silently swinging my pain away.
I gave alms to all the blind beggars, lit candles without believing at all in their efficacy.
I just wanted to add a little light to illuminate the darkness of my soul.
When we came out of the Clerecia, after dipping hands in the holy water stoup and placing a drop on each other 's brows, as we had seen the novios and novias do (the boy on entering a church would dip his hand in the water and transfer a drop to his fiancée's fingertip so that they could cross themselves in unison), we would go into La Casa de las Conchas next to the Clerecia, with elaborate wrought-iron window-grilles and its tranquil courtyard, and sit there quietly for a while, thinking of the next poem, or of the one we were working on.
It was in this splendid fifteenth-century monument to the high architectural taste of the Catholic sovereigns that I read a message written by a fifteenth-century schoolboy on his classroom wall:Aquí supo lo que es bueno, y lo que es malo, /Lo que es dulce, y lo que es amaro (Here I had knowledge of what is good, and of what is bad, /Of what is sweet, and of what is bitter).
It seemed to apply to my life in Spain.
The ornately decorated and sculptured churches were parables and sermons in honey-coloured stone, miraculously preserved.
Like the French cathedrals, they were Bibles for those who could not read.
One of our poems was about the great carved tympanum over the main door of the Catedral Nueva, an incredibly detailed, deeply undercarved Nativity in two tall arched panels.
A typed version tells me the poem was written in December 1957.
I had written to Joe Ackerley about Dana, and how we were writing poems together, and he asked to see some examples of this unusual collaboration.
I sent him our Christmas poem, ‘Adoration of the Shepherds and the Kings’(Puerta del Perdón, Salamanca), which he printed in the 19 December issue, his 1957 Christmas number:
Under the cathedral's leaning cliff, the caves
Of darkness slam their doors.
Above, in high relief,
Twin arches, flocked with angels, open up their graves


Of rosy stone upon the gospel's double leaf,
Where kings and shepherds offer gifts to their belief.
Below some angels carolling an arch, the star
Steps out in front of formal clouds,
To light a tardy shepherd down the stable's far,
Rooftopping hill into the other panel's night —
With a curly dog, two camels and three trees in sight.
Off to the manger — to the boy whose little sleep
Is carved of brighter stone that leaves the starlight dim —
The shepherds run: one brings a basket, one a sheep
That tumbles round the wicker cot; one in the brim
Of his dumpled hat is kneeling; another kneels with him.
Behind them, dumbstruck in a wattled stall,
A donkey breathes into their frosted hair;,
A baffled ox has horned in through the wall.
The mother kneels and tends the infant air
That He has warmed by lying naked there.
Inside the other arch, three wise, outlandish kings,
Extravagantly groomed, are kneeling to adore
A child, the lodestone of their wanderings,
With gold and frankincense and myrrh.
They cast a crown before him on the briared floor.
Joseph to the background lends an honest charm.
A page is peeping round his master at the Son
Of Man, whose mother stands Him in her arm.
-Michael, geared for battle, guards the little one,
Whose clouds of angels blaze his star into a sun.
It was something we could barely understand, but I had a growing feeling that without my love the whole project would collapse.
It was love that kept me going; it was ambition to be a poet that fuelled Dana's labour and yoked it with mine.
At the same time I think there was a certain kind of love — detached but concerned — in the background of all he did, a love that steadily grew, without display, without spoken devotion; and I, too, never spoke of ‘love’.
I realized I just had to accept him for what he was, and when I learnt to do that, he did the same to me  -accepted me without question, in all my imperfection, in all that made me unworthy of him.
Another poem that I have dated in the typescript ‘December, 1957, Plaza de Anaya, Salamanca’, is one I was able to write for myself, and that I never showed to Dana.
ft was just about the last poem I wrote on my own for the next six months or so; it is called ‘Believing Is Seeing’, and it was also about a carving, the sculpture illustrating the miracle of Christ healing the blind man:
In this little park, beneath the blind man's door
That made our separate vision; one,
I walk again alone, and all is dark.
I am afraid to find belief has gone.
In this moment, I try to see,
But cannot.
Light is set apart
From the reality we both restored
To one another.
I am blinded to the heart.
Each moment that once brought me
To yourself abstracts me more and more.
I stare dumbly from behind a glass
At snow falling down the blinded door.
Pray now no more for you and me,
But only for that one identity
We give each other.
Let us believe
Its miracle will always make us see.
In the little park beneath the blind man's door
That blessed us with the vision faith had won,
The day now is wrapped in snow,
And it is brighter than the sun.
I still recognize that poem as being utterly my own.
In our Nativity poem, I can still, thirty years later, recognize the contributions made by Dana to the poem, and those that are mine.
Dana's words and phrases are unmistakable; they have that slightly cute, American ring: ‘Twin arches, flocked with angels’, ‘some angels carolling an arch’, ‘a tardy shepherd’, ‘the star steps out’, ‘a curly dog’, and so on.
The inherent American way with words is everywhere evident.
That poem, ‘Believing Is Seeing,’ refers to one of the first poems we wrote together.
It was one about another exquisitely detailed carving on a cathedral door, the Portada de Ramos — the Palm Sunday Doorway.
I  did not date the typed copy I made — for Dana could not or would not type, and after we had finished a poem to our common satisfaction, I had to type it out while he rested on the bed — but I am fairly certain it was written soon after I met Dana in that Spanish class for foreigners, which I have noted in my 1957 Letts Diary: ‘Wednesday, October 16.
Moon's last quarter.
Met Dana in class.’
So here is our first poem written in collaboration:
Portada de Ramos 
Here in a country where so many men are blind,
We pass a daily miracle performed in stone:
Followed by the three disciples he loved best,
And bridling his ass beneath a wall and by a bridge,
Christ gentles out of stone into the arc of sight.
Two palm trees frond the background of the day.
A halo rich with rust is lofted round the heads
Of James and John and Peter.
Thinned by time, the rings
Still dip and float above their brows, with grace
That perfectly restores their master's perished crown.
His robes are loosely folded in the clouding stone.
His missing hand is lifted and its blessing stays.
A crowd of two or three lay down their cloaks
And strew palm branches beneath the donkey's hooves.
In a corner by a bridge, Zacchaeus climbs a tree
To match the fame of Jesus with his face.
Two boys, perched upon a wall, surprise
A gesture and believe the miracle.
A shaft of metal weaves the light of Jesus' eyes
Into the blind man's stony gaze and makes it His,
A sight that lets the others see across the dark
Their faces lifted to the light.
Their arms are stayed
Between the questioning and answering of faith
That still projects itself along the rusting shaft.
The blind may never see this proof of hope.
They cannot find it here in stone as soft as sand
Whose dusty roses shroud the scene and shell their eyes.
They count their steps along the darkened streets,
Fumbling a lottery of falling leaves, and crying to the stones
Their message for the day, which is today.
That last line was a memory of all the blind lottery-ticket sellers we had heard crying ‘Para hoy!
Para hoy!’
Our ideas about faith were taken from my readings of Unamuno, and in this poem from one of the essays, ‘Faith, Hope and Charity’, from The Tragic Sense of Life : ‘A faith that does not doubt is a dead faith.’
This was one of the unequivocal statements that aroused in 1913 the ire of the traditionalist clergy of Spain.
I preferred Paul Delvaux's macabre vision of the Crucifixion.
In my diary, some time after our first meeting, I wrote the date of Dana's birthday.
He was a Libra, or the Balance, the seventh sign of the Zodiac whose name indicates that day and night, being of equal length, are being weighed ‘in the balance’.
It is an autumnal sign and one in which the ‘balance’ might be tipped one way or another, and in sexuality could hover between male and female, with one sexual scale dipping then the other rising obediently and almost passively, distantly, independently, in an alternation of identities and desires that I knew so well.
Dana was always balanced between the two, whereas I would fluctuate for long periods — a year or two in the male, a year or two in the female scale, with often sharp and distressing adjustments of behaviour and character.
I always thought that my Taurean nature — though on the cusp with Aries, looking forward towards another double-image sign, Gemini, which made for imbalance — was far from typical; but certainly the bull was well and truly there in my strong sexuality.
Dana was steadily centred right in the middle of Libra, and so could be regarded as a perfectly balanced human being, with a true equivalence of male and female, physical and intellectual, animal and spiritual, and I think it was from this delicate balance, never upset, that his magnetic force of personality derived.
I secretly longed to upset his balance but never succeeded, except in the making of poetry, in which he was compelled to tilt towards me.
Another diary entry, in the same black ink, written with my calligraphic pen, was for 2 November: ‘Day of the poem ‘Fall, a Flock of Sheep, a Roman Bridge’.’
This was the first poem Dana showed me, and one of the first I reworked with him.
My typed version is signed with our pseudonym.
In the ‘Notes’ under the same date I have written something I always wanted to remember: ‘The walk at night.
Dana.
Viva!
Todos Diffuntos (All Saints).’
There is also the name Angel Kirvor, which was the first pseudonym we thought of for our combined poems.
After we finished that poem, late in the evening of 2 November, we went walking through the streets of Salamanca for most of the night, for the poem had persuaded us that something remarkable was really happening to us, that some kind of poetic grace had been bestowed upon us.
We had been careful until then not to think that way.
But this  poem seemed to us incontrovertible proof of our poetic twinship.
And we went on writing poems, in that luxuriant air of mingled spirituality and sexual anguish.
Dana always sat with his legs wide apart, as if inviting the touch of eyes, if not hands.
I was sure he knew I could barely contain myself or restrain my trembling fingers that longed to run their tips along the insides of those meaty thighs that were spreadeagled enticingly over the edge of his seat.
He had few clothes — a ‘good suit’ of dark-blue lightweight dacron that was the badge of every American in those days, a couple of shirts, a long, shapeless tweed overcoat of German origin he wore when it got colder.
Then there were those brown corduroys and blue jeans: the very seams of his old, faded pants enraptured me, seeming to underscore the seductive outlines of his lower frame, running from the back of his thick leather belt down along that mysterious, rich intercrural channel, and coming out at the other end of the tunnel at the tense crossroads orienting the scrotum's heavy bag with its blissful raphe, or subtly defining and underlining the inside and outside of the long, smooth thighs and the stocky, bulgy, athletic calves.
He had been a very successful amateur boxer, and sometimes would try to relieve our tension by sparring with me, teaching me basic moves of a sport I knew nothing about and instinctively detested.
But as I tried to follow his instructions, keeping my fists up and my chin tucked in and learning a new kind of dance on the balls of my feet, the sight of his bare, hairless chest, so brown and muscular, would suddenly fill me with more than muscular weakness, and I felt I would collapse, not under the playful blows he landed on my discombobulated body, but under the sheer spell of his magnificence.
I never landed a single blow on those perfect shoulders, that sun-tanned thorax, that laughing, mocking, taunting face; but I was only too happy when he slipped through my feeble defences and gently pummelled me all over with his bare hands, until my all-too-vulnerable defence degenerated into a giggling slapping match.
He was fully aware, I now realize, of my absorbed interest in his loose-limbed, perfectly proportioned body, its stocky compactness, and exploited my obsession, my helpless longing to touch the untouchable.
As we spent hour after hour sitting at our work-table, all curtains drawn to intensify our concentration beneath the old-fashioned fringed standard lamp, he would from time to time ease his buttocks and balls, pulling and tugging on the firm seams of the taut, well-worn jeans or the  well-rubbed brown needle cords, scratching and stroking himself idly, as if unselfconsciously in the most private places with those delicate fingers with the bitten nails and his big, warm palms.
Was he just a common cock-tease, I would wonder as I suggested a new word, broke an overlong line, or did he sometimes really desire a more intimate contact?
If so, he never gave any definite sign of it.
All through that October and November, in my claustrophobic college room or in my dark-curtained hotel apartment, I grew to desire more of him than just his presence at my side as we wrote.
Sometimes 1 would try to withhold my gift of words as the only way I could convey to him that he was withholding something I needed as badly as he needed my poetic ability.
At once he would sense my withdrawal, and was sad and silent for a while.
He would go out for a walk, leaving me alone for an hour, then return full of high spirits, shouting from the doorway:.
‘Back on form now?’
Was he taking drugs?
If so, he concealed it from me.
But sometimes he seemed unnaturally flushed and lively — and it was not with drink.
Was it marijuana, which he told me he had smoked?
Or something more sinister?
The very idea of taking drugs disgusted me.
As I had told Dr Grey Walter, a poet is born ‘high’.
He needs at all rimes to be in full possession of his faculties, or that extra, unpredictable poetic thrust would never declare itself — that heart-lifting boost that rockets mere words into the outer spaces of true poetry.
I loved working with Dana, and yet as time went by and we produced more and more collaborative poems I began to long to get my own poetic and personal identities back.
From the very first day I saw him I began writing poems to him that later grouped themselves into the sequence entitled ‘Suite Salmantina’ which, with other poems about Spain, forms the central part of my collection called The Prodigal Son: Poems 1956–1959.
They were not all written at the same time, or in that order: I had to keep struggling to write my own work as Dana's poetic demands became more and more insistent.
TURNING IT ALL TO POETRY
The satisfied, the happy, do not love; they fall asleep in habit, near neighbour to annihilation.
Miguel de Unamuno , THE TRAGIC SENSE OF LIFE
‘I'll turn it all to poetry!’
Myself, when threatened with arrest by the British police
Like Unamuno, I am all contradictions.
Poetry is my only defence against a world I detest and celebrate, my only weapon against a life I love and abominate.
Being bisexual is a simple duality.
But to have a multiple personality, in which one self may suddenly be overthrown by another and one mind may be torn in several different directions is sometimes so intolerable, I long for extinction.
But would even physical evaporation bring peace to warring souls and contradictory afterlives?
I doubt it.
My infatuation with Dana did, however, bring a certain simplicity to my existence.
As I became more and more obsessed by him, and as he absorbed more and more of my being, all else seemed to start retreating into a permanent, one-dimensional background, against which only he and I stood out as more than stick figures.
We had made our own Garden of Eden.
I wrote dutifully to my parents every week.
I kept in touch with Joe — there were no other friends.
But they appeared to me as if seen through the wrong end of a telescope, muted and unreal.
Students, colleagues, passers-by all faded into deceptive distances.
Even Jordi and his knife withdrew slowly from my consciousness.
All was excluded by this all-exclusive passion.
All those I had loved in the past — Richard, Marjorie, Alain, Madeleine, Leo, Muriel, Alan, Sandro, Erich, Jordi — all loved more or less in vain, hopelessly — were now without substance or meaning.
I could see this condition coming upon me relentlessly from the first moment Dana cast his eyes upon me: he was another who knew how to use the power of the evil eye, almost casually, to enchant total strangers.
Against his magnetic forces, my own ‘evil’ eye, which had anyhow long  since started to abandon me, could put up no resistance.
After my first sight of him that sunny autumn morning in the gallery of the courtyard in the Palacio de Anaya, his face haunted me all day, and I dreamt of him during the night — a long, ecstatic dream of such acute sensual pleasure I woke up aching and exhausted by too much bliss.
The dawn was just breaking.
I got up and, sitting at my window, looked out over the still-sleeping city, and wrote my first poem to this unknown god:
The dawn strikes up its music in the dark.
Behind the black cathedrals of the square
Cocks shout, and wake the grumbling dogs.
Great domes compose their masses on the air.
A flock of doves, cast from the breeze's hand,
Crockets a pinnacle with wings on wings.
Bells beat at the morning stars like fans,
And in between their silence rings.
Street-lamps still illuminate
Each level, long façade.
But the roofs' inventive arabesques
Turn black against a sky of jade.
Translucencies are brushed with clouds
And furred with feathers, with the bloom
Of dark and fronded trees.
The city breathes, and flows into my room.
I lean from a window like a statue from a wall,
And dip my face into the fountains of the east.
A chimney slowly hangs out smoke.
My eyes are brimmed with the horizon's feast.
Now jade is blue: grey distances are slashed with red;
The fretted spires are pierced with white.
-I look towards these preparations for the sun,
And see your face lift from its dream of night.
The night before, I had gone for a long, lonely walk along the banks of the Tormes, crossing and recrossing the Roman bridge, hoping against hope that I might somehow find you also walking there.
But all was deserted, and I took comfort from a star:
The first star, liquid Sirius,
Drips in the river's glass its slender
Chandelier.
Its lustre, long as light,
Drops brimming candles deep
Into the melting mirrors of the night.
A swimming creature undulates across the sky, and shakes
The limpid evening to a pulse of cool desire,
A weeping star that mends itself in time
With lost light that trembles round
The bend of space, and barely breaks.
The next day the unbelievable happened, and you entered the Spanish class for foreigners.
I heard your name for the first time.
And at the end of the class, near the bust of Unamuno, I heard your voice calling to me for the first time.
We went to that café with the tourist postcards rattling on their metal lattices in the dusty wind, on the street called Libreros.
We talked for the first time about poetry, poets and our own poems:
Your eyes first looked into these words
With that steady honesty you give
To cats and ballads, food and birds,
To fields and faces, sticks and stones,
And only then they seemed to live:
I felt your body in my flesh and bones.
Was it a case of demonic possession?
I began to think it must be, for every hour of my waking and sleeping was occupied by thoughts and images of you, in every expected and unexpected situation and attitude.
In my day-dreams and nightmares you were always clothed in those washed-out jeans: I can still see their frayed, ravelled seams with their bleached, raggy threads softened by countless abrasions and grindings, the frazzled button-holes, the worn buttons showing the cheap metal underneath.
I often saw you sprawling on the floor or on a park bench, a joyous sunburst of creases radiating from your abandoned crotch, your jumping fly.
But mostly I imagined you asleep, left utterly to yourself in a situation where my own absence from your life did not matter:
I dream of you asleep:
A contained sweetness,
Warm, and full, and deep.


I think of your completeness,
And the way you place
A gentle strength, a neatness
In a line that orders grace
With wildness; the unexpected break
Of phrase that lights your face,
The seafarer's eyes that shake
Their pale blue fires on the prow
Of poetry, your sparkling wake.
We were looking forward to the vacation, to Christmas, to what you called ‘New Year's’.
Secretly I was planning to take you home with me to show to my parents.
I had already written to them about you, in guarded terms, and their lack of response to my enthusiasms in the way of friends never discouraged me.
I had learnt, however, never to tell them much, to keep the best parts hidden, as indeed I often had to.
But with you, there was nothing to hide — at least so far.
We were ‘just good friends’, however much I wished we could be more than that.
The closest I ever got to you was when we went for a spin on your motor bike, with me like a ravished flapper on the pillion, legitimately clinging to your lissom waist, to those two wonderful hip-bones I loved to hold, as if they were the very hinges of heaven, whose wind blew your hair back into my ecstatic face:
Each day now is Christmas,
With the present of the day before
Still with me, past being broken,
And the present day's own gift
Still to be given and received.
Love gives each morning's air,
Cleansed by the sun's wide sweeps of blue,
A breath of celebration, spicy
As the wind-thrown fragrance of your hair,
The very essence that is only you.
The ‘presents’ and the ‘gifts’were those we exchanged daily when we were writing poetry together — presents which, unlike those of my childhood, did not break as soon as touched.
Life had become spiced by my longing, by the sheer happiness of knowing I would see you that morning, that night, next day:
At five of the stars I wake
On a rare October morning,
And a poem overflows
My candid dark.
I keep my eyes closed,
Happy, pretending sleep,
With a gift in my head for you,
Another in my heart.
Suddenly both are one.
I am writing with open eyes
The words I dreamed for you,
as if the familiar were new.
The paper warms to them
And to my flowing hand
With the untidy fire
Of the bed I burned to leave.
Looking to where the dark
Shelters the house in which you lie,
I feel my heart beat like a boy's
On Christmas morning, in a house of toys.
After I moved to my apartment in the Hotel España I kept hoping I might be able to persuade you to come and share it, or at least to take the one next to mine, which was empty.
But you always evaded this question, saying your allowance from home would not stretch to paying the extra rent.
And you seemed to have become attached to that awful little room in the Hospedaje Lisboa.
I think I obscurely felt relief that I would continue to live alone, to have at least a few hours of the day and night when I could try to regain one of my mixed-up selves.
For I was still struggling in the web you had woven, like a helpless insect wanting to escape, yet hypnotized into acquiescence and adoration by the spider's malefic eyes and enveloping threads, wound slowly one by one round my resistless mind:
Love blinds, but makes me see
Life's folly clear as day.
My self has gone away from me
And nothing come to stay.
Only the love I flee
Is true, and will not go away.
I was convinced of one thing: of the purity and truth of my love for you.
Then why did I want to run away from it?
There were bitter memories of broken love for Alan, a good-looking Londoner I had fallen for while I was still at Madame Sheba's.
With her penetrating instinct she did not like him, and was so angry with me for, as she said, ‘wasting myself upon such rubbish’, that in the end she turned me out of my room and I went to live in a tiny, freezing attic in a house in Morningside Crescent owned by a friend of hers, a white woman.
I was very unhappy there, away from the love and warmth Madame had always given me, and the love affair that accompanied the change soon turned cold: Alan exhibited a certain kind of treachery, casually throwing me over for someone else who ‘was better in bed’.
It was a common experience for me to fall in love with love and then be led up the garden path, only to be rejected and mocked.
That affair left a permanent scar on my heart and I was afraid of reopening it.
So I clung to the concept of ideal love for you, at the same time hoping for the even more impossibly ideal physical fulfilment and completion that would seal our closeness for ever.
Each time I saw you coming dancing towards me along a sunny street, moving lightly on your toes like a boxer, with your slightly duck-toed run that I, a turned-out-toes walker, found so male and so sexy, my heart jumped in my throat and I wanted to run towards you and throw myself into your arms.
But we never even walked arm-in-arm, as was the accepted way for conventional Spanish male friends or accomplices like the black-glassed Falangists.
I struggled to keep my love pure, remembering at the same time something Madeleine had told me and that Rena was to repeat: ‘What you need, Jimi, is the love of a bad woman.’
Well, I did find that, and the love of bad men, too, but it made no difference.
I was an incurable romantic and yearned for a romantic friendship before it would be too late, for I believed in those days that romantic friendship was possible only in youth.
So I strove to keep our relationship ‘true’— on a true course:
True love alone can write
Because it asks no more
Than its undemanding light
To burn out passion's core
Of self, with care for others' sight.
A pure flame burns my snow.
I melt and freeze,
But I am water, too, and flow,
To give my driven spirit ease,


In a single tear, that is the joy I know.
My hand runs like a delta through
These maps my soundings make.
Although I draw them all for you,
And keep a lighthouse for your sake,
All men may use them, for my love is true.
From time to time, walking in the crowded arcades of the Plaza Mayor, my heart would miss a beat as I fancied I saw Jordi mingling with all those similar dark heads and slender figures.
Something about the back of a man's neck would remind me of him.
I have always felt that character is most clearly expressed in the back of a person's head, and especially in the nape.
From a swift glance at the back of a person's head I can at once estimate the intelligence and sexuality of that person.
For me, intelligence and sexuality go together, and it is usually with the intelligence in a person's eyes that I first fall in love.
Jordi's head was set beautifully on his broad shoulders, and there was something in the way he held his neck to support that head which was unmistakably intelligent and sexy.
I like big heads that are flat at the back, not pointed, and for that reason in recent years it is Korean males who have attracted me most, with their rich, straight black hair laid perpendicularly on that square-backed skull — always, to me, the sign of a male good at mathematics, the sexiest science.
There were many heads like that in Spain, and I would follow outstanding examples gazing in admiration at that nape, that neck, that flat-backed skull, until the head turned and let me glimpse the face, which was never disappointing.
But each time my heart stood still, expecting to find Jordi: yet it was never he.
One short poem in ‘Suite Salmantina’ applies to both you and Jordi:
Instead of a despair, believe
True love is never lost.
Though no hand will receive
Its foolish gift, its ghost
Will not go wandering without release
Along the rivers of the midnight air.
Although the body finds no peace,
True love is in the spirit's care,
And is not wasted in a selfish sigh.
-This one truth I find in you
Is gathered by the waters and the sky,
And is not lost, because my love is true.
Most of the square-skulled men I followed in this way in the streets turned out to have very macho faces, conventionally handsome, proud, even disdainful, as if they felt they alone were the lords and masters of the earth.
That always disappointed me.
I have never cared much for men who are all man: they are the ones who smugly believe they must be irresistible to me, and take elaborately cautious steps to protect their priceless male virginity from what they seem to imagine will be my marauding hands.
I can understand so well what women feel when they are subjected to a male-dominated society — an almost intolerable urge to scream at those smirking, swanking Don Juans who think no woman can resist them.
I prefer men who have some feminine tact and delicacy and sensitivity, and women who have some of the better masculine qualities — tenderness, protectiveness, a good brain and a humorous way of dealing with all the practical impossibilities of life.
And I could sense this feminine quality in you.
Sometimes I even thought of you as one of my favourite fictional heroines, Maggie Tulliver in The Mill on the Floss , while I was Philip Waken, though not such a limp type.
It was the sort of relationship I had with my earliest girl-love, the tomboy Isa, when I was about three or four years old, described in The Only Child .
Then our relationship to each other would change, and you would be a more boyish Philip Waken, and I a less hoydenish Maggie.
Willa Cather's My Antonia , which along with her other novels I was absorbing with great delight at this period, provided another couple with whom to identify, Antonia and Jim Burden, and I kept switching sides with these characters also.
I wanted so much to put into words, in a novel or a play, all that you and I felt for one another, not just to love love but to inscribe it as George Eliot and Willa Cather had done.
So I felt inexpressible gratitude to you for giving me the support and care of that relationship, however attenuated it appeared to me at times:
You are the only ghost
I ever truly loved,
Because your presence moved
My heart with more than lust.
With not a single touch
And with no human kiss
You brought my life to this
Wild calm that holds so much.
Not only gaiety and trust
I learnt from your repose,
But that true passion grows,


Like art, because it must.
O, with a single look
I felt the darkness change.
And it was nothing strange:
The opening of a book.
In the brightness of the sun
You bring a moonlit air.
-No ghost had ever gifts as rare,
Or love more substance, than this only one.
And always, when we were apart, I kept bringing you beside me in my imagination, in the poems I was writing all alone, writing for you as well as for myself:
I seem to hear you stir, as if 
You were only in the other room.
Distance has paper walls.
The air between us
Is your breath and mine.
Though you are close,
You are most far away.
But because you are so dear
I bring you through the paper wall
That is neither there, nor here.
And often, as I sat writing such poems that helped me cling to the last shreds of my many identities, I would suddenly sense that you were indeed approaching.
You could not be in the room next to mine, but you were in the same city, coming towards me, turning the corner of the square, entering the same street!
And I would rush to the window and look down and see you turning the corner to cross the square below, or walk round it to the hotel door.
I never went down to meet you, for I was always afraid those right-wing student bullies might be waiting for me — you they could not touch, but I was an easy prey.
It was only when I felt safe with you, and after we had spent some hours working on our poems, that we would go down to the restaurant for late dinner, which always ended with either banana or ‘flan’.
Then, when it had grown dark, we would go out to join the paseo :
I wait for the drown
Of evening, when we go,


Together and together, through
The sinking town,
A meeting that is not a rendezvous
With loneliness and dark,
And stiff knives thicketing a naked park.
Slowly the roofs go down,
Releasing buoyant stars
To mark the watered sky with spars
Of light, a splintering crown
That binds our hidden scars
With stone, and keeps our heads above
The wrecks of solitude and love.
Yet as our relationship deepened, you seemed to abstract yourself, and sometimes I would not see you for days on end.
Then when we met again, you would be full of all you had done — a ride on your motor bike to Alba de Tormes or Ledesma, a strange church you had discovered, or a new book someone had sent you from the States.
Even worse, you would tell me about new poems you had started to write, and it was like a dagger in my heart when you described working on them without my help — though the real reason you had come back to see me was to labour over them with me, adding my suggestions and excisions in the margins in your minuscule script.
When you stayed away from me, I would try in vain to will you back beside me: then, long after the dinner I waited for you to share but had to eat alone, I would wander out into the stony streets, hoping to bump into you, to glimpse you sitting in a bar or on a park bench:
Wandering alone at midnight
Along the streets we walked together,
I was a stranger once again,
For everything was unfamiliar,
Changed by the loneliness as much
As by your presence at my side.
Even the stars were altered.
The fixed positions that I saw with you
Now seemed obscure.
I could not find my orient,
Or the pole that keeps its compass in your hand
At meeting and parting, night and day.


-Then I found myself beneath
Your window lighted from within,
And for a moment watched
Your shadow move across the glass.
I gave a shout: but as I looked,
Even that last star went out.
Still, I waited patiently, and wished you well.
I wanted your poetry to be better, wanted to show you the way into a wider perspective of words and feelings.
After long days and nights alone I would wake in the mornings wondering if this new day would bring a new poem from you, a new smile as you ran dancing towards me on your boxer's turned-in toes.
When I awoke and started getting ready for my classes, which now passed mechanically, as if in a vacuum, the students suspended in time and space, and my own voice seeming to come from somewhere a long, long way away, I would write a poem for you as a kind of incantation to bring you back that day:
Now you are waking to our common air
That is the same for sleepers and their mates,
For those who watch and wonder at the rare
Bright morning that combines our separate fates.
Let this long day be full for you,
Filled with your working sun
That makes the heavens white and blue
Above the brown horizons where your poems run.
Although you always came to me brimming with news of where you had been and what you had done, I do not think you told me everything.
And you never asked me what I had been doing.
And suddenly so much was happening to you and, by extension, to me.
You got letters from home, from your father asking when you were going to settle down and get a proper job, or were you going to be an ‘eternal student’?
Packages of that rare onion-skin typing paper which made my erasures of mistypings so easy came from your mother, who also sent you boxes of drugs, chiefly Dexedrine, those shocking-pink amphetamines which, I later discovered, are bad for the heart.
The Spanish laws against drug use in those days were exceptionally severe, and I was terrified in case you should be found out by the police or the drug squad.
I had heard awful tales of Spanish prisons.
You persuaded me to experiment with Dexedrine.
I still remember the night we started, sitting in the brasserie on the ground floor of my hotel, downing Dexedrine with San Miguel beer.
They were supposed to heighten our perceptions, but really I could see little difference between my ordinary vision of life, which was fantastic enough, and what the pills apparently produced, mainly a nervous sleeplessness shot through with incoherent babblings and bursts of laughter alternating with floods of tears.
They also made me extremely randy, an effect I pointed out to you, who seemed unaffected in that department and were astonished that they should stimulate my already overwrought sexuality —‘oversexed and under seventy’ is how I still think of myself.
Under the influence of the drugs we exchanged a few playful cuddles and kisses, just for a lark.
It went no further, despite my insistence: you always gently repulsed me.
But our complicity in taking those dreadful little uppers, of which I thoroughly disapproved, as I do of all narcotic stimulants, drew us closer together, so I submitted to their influence.
You rarely received letters yourself.
I never received one from you, though you had many from me, of course.
That you did not write letters to me I sometimes attributed to the fact that you must indeed be a secret agent, unwilling to commit himself in writing.
I think the postman would never have been able to decipher your scribble, your own version of Walser's MS,Bleistiftgebiet or Kingdom of the Pencil, which we were to describe in a later poem, ‘The Poem in the Pencil’.
But you certainly received some letters.
There was one from an American girl in Berlin.
I believe she was studying modern dance and had been a pupil of Mary Wigman, or of one of her disciples.
She announced, to my dismay, that she was coming to Salamanca for a week or so.
I could so clearly see her coming between you and me, between us and our poetry, and I felt furiously jealous and unhappy but tried not to show it.
After all, I had no real claim upon your attention, and I knew I meant so little to you I could be dropped at any moment without a second thought.
The young woman arrived late one evening after having driven all the way from Berlin in her Volkswagen Beetle, at that time the ‘in’ means of transport for young Americans.
To my surprise, I liked her very much.
She was tall and dark and pale, and looked very mysterious and romantic.
She had a beautiful figure which she used in subtle movements of unparalleled grace.
The only thing I did not like about her was the flat ballerina-style slippers she always wore, to reduce her height I think, because she was taller than you.
We all three had dinner  together, then you went off with her to your room, where she was to stay, though how you managed to accommodate yourselves in that tiny room with its narrow bed was something I preferred not to think about.
I suffered agonies of suspense in silence, for I never knew when or where I would see you again, or whether she would be with you.
One morning, to my intense embarrassment, you brought her to my poetry appreciation class — which you had never bothered to attend yourself.
You came without warning and without asking my permission and sat with her at the back of the lecture theatre, exchanging glances and comments.
My poems that day were Hopkins's ‘Heaven-Haven’ and ‘The Habit of Perfection’.
You ruined them for me, and I have hated them ever since.
In Japan I refuse admittance to the many foreigners who try to barnstorm my classes.
I inform them that my classes are intended ‘for Japanese only’.
For native English speakers I would give a quite different kind of lecture, and I did not want to be judged by the standards of my lectures to the Japanese, which were nearly always basic and very simple in expression.
Yet ‘The Habit of Perfection’ was once my private vision of our own poetic relationship.
And as Hopkins writes in a letter to Bridges: ‘Now it is the virtue of design, pattern, or inscape to be distinctive and it is the vice of distinctiveness to become queer.’
I was already queer, and had known too long the vice of distinctiveness in my personal life as well as in my poetry.
The young dancer put a stop to our writing, as I had expected.
You went for rides with her in her VW, and made an extended trip to Lisbon -to Madrid also, I believe.
I behaved with great dignity and showed none of the resentment I may have felt.
But it was a relief to me when she left and, I was thankful to discover, it was even more of a relief to you.
We took up the lost threads of our writing together with even greater dedication.
After that long interval it was hard to get started again.
But as soon as we had found our voice again, we were once more interrupted by visits from Berlin.
A group of your former fellow-students at the university, all Germans, and all extreme radicals, arrived on the scene in Salamanca and proceeded to disrupt our lives and shock the Spaniards with their outrageous behaviour, in which you joined.
One of the things we were involved in remains in my memory with shocking force.
It all started out as a silly student prank, but it was to mark me for life.
We had been conducting the German youths on tours of our favourite places in the city — to the bullring, the restaurants, the bars, the River Tormes, the Casa de Santa Teresa, the Antiguo Colegio Mayor de Iriandeses, San Martin (where we were nearly locked in for the night) and to the conventual church of San Esteban.
The Convento de San Esteban is a magnificent plateresque sixteenth-century edifice on the Plaza Santo Domingo, approached by a small arched bridge which provides an impressive forefront to that immense carved façade, with the arcaded convent standing at right angles to it on the right.
It was one of my favourite churches, because the interior was so vast, so gloriously ornamented, and nearly always empty.
That altar is one of the greatest works of José Churriguera.
As usual when we entered a church together, I dipped my finger in the holy water and gave you a drop from my fingertips, so that we could cross ourselves together, like a novio and novia .
Our gesture was not really a religious one, for neither of us believed in the Roman Catholic faith and detested its oppressive hold on the Spanish people, particularly the poor.
We used to do it almost as a social thing, a conventional Spanish gesture which for us had a special meaning — or at least it did for me, because I looked upon it as a seal on our friendship.
I think you did it just to please me, or perhaps to satisfy your own deep-seated urge to be conventional in outward things.
But when your German friends saw us doing this, they hooted with derision.
Fortunately, the church was empty: there were no priests, no sacristans, no black-mantillaed old ladies worshipping in front of the gorgeously gilded altar with its six twisted baroque pillars framing the blue heaven of the inner sanctuary.
It is one of the most imposing interiors in Salamanca, and the atmosphere of utter devoutness that informs every inch of stone and ornament is overpoweringly strange and haunting.
We all trooped up to the altar, behind which your Berlin friends discovered a mysterious opening.
I think it must have been left by workmen who had been preparing the crypt for the disposal of some saintly relic or the body of a recently deceased priest.
The young Germans went down into the crypt, pulling you after them.
You looked back at me, and I knew I had to follow you.
When we got inside the dimly lit space beneath the main altar, we found an open coffin, in which a partially decomposed skeleton was lying.
The robes were stained and torn, but there still seemed to be some blood on the bones.
There was what may have been a bishop's mitre on the skull, which grinned amiably up at us.
We gazed at the figure in the utmost fascination.
Then you cried: ‘Anyone who doesn't touch the bones is chicken!’
Immediately you touched those bones, and all the others did the same, laughing and jostling to get at the coffin.
Again you just looked at me, and I knew I had to do as you had done, so I stretched out my right  hand and touched the bones, which were slightly sticky.
But in touching them I tried to bless them, in a spirit of reverence.
I prayed silently for peace to those venerable remains.
We left the church without being seen.
After a few more days in Salamanca, during which you and I could do no work in common, your friends left in a great uproar of drunken invective, shouting political slogans — which fortunately were in German — against the Franco regime.
Though I agreed with their political views, I could not condone the way they acted and was glad to see them go at last.
So, I am sure, were you.
But the memory of those sacred bones remained engraved upon my memory for the rest of my life.
They had been defiled, and I expected punishment.
There was a curious incident when a man from the British Council in Madrid came to see me.
This was to be the third of my many run-ins with that typically British authoritarian institution, which is never happy unless making trouble.
The British Council abroad is bent on getting everything connected with British education and culture under its tyrannical control, and outsiders like myself who found their own positions without passing through the old-boy network and the rigid screening system of the Council were always given a hard time.
I don't know why our man in Madrid came to see me; just idle curiosity, perhaps — so few people have ever met me, so many seem anxious to do so.
Or perhaps he had heard rumours of my goings-on, and had come personally to find out ‘what Kirkup's up to now’— the traditional BC phrase wherever they have the misfortune to discover my presence.
He was a typical British Council smoothie, with a fatuous grin and an ingratiating manner.
To my surprise, he invited me to give a poetry reading in Madrid.
I agreed, provided Dana were allowed to go with me and share the reading.
He was rather taken aback but said he would report to head office and let me know about it in the New Year.
Dana and I had already spent a few weekends in Madrid, travelling by bus via Avila through wonderful country.
On our first trip together we had visited a café of a very old-fashioned kind, called Cafeteria Varela Reposteria in Preciados, and I had noted an inscription saying En este lugar escribiõ sus mejores versos el gran poeta Emilio Carrere 1881–1947.
Homenaje de los poetas españoles, Madrid MCMLII .
An  ancient waiter had come to take our order.
I wanted to introduce Dana to Pernod, so I asked the old man for ‘dos Pernod’.
I was expecting the usual French style of service, with an ice-bucket and a carafe of chilled water, and two glasses containing a small amount of Pernod at the bottom.
Instead, the waiter brought us two full glasses of the ‘green fairy’.
It was probably the first time he had been asked for such a drink, despite his long years of service.
I should have sent the drinks back, but instead looked upon them as a windfall in our rather straitened circumstances.
After calling for some ice-cubes which we popped into the straight Pernod, we drank them down, with predictably weird results (we had already had Dexedrine).
We staggered out into the Madrid evening ‘full of piss and vinegar’, as Dana said later, and somehow made our way to the Puerta del Sol, where there is a large circular fountain.
Its waters proved irresistibly attractive to us, and we playfully started splashing one another.
We grew more and more excited.
Then I saw a stem policeman standing nearby with suspicious and disapproving stare.
He looked so miserable I decided to cheer him up by inviting him to join our little game, and started throwing handfuls of water over him.
But he considered this an unforgivable insult to his dignity and marched us both to an underground lavatory on the edge of the square, followed by a curious and gleeful crowd waiting for the extranjeros to get their come-uppance.
In my elevated state I was afraid only that the cop might search us and discover the Dexedrine in Dana's pocket.
We were both carrying packets of condoms, too, as an extra precaution, should we be granted the favours of some fair señorita or visit the red-light district, the barrio chino .
However, after haranguing us and making me mop up his uniform, the outraged policeman indicated a couple of wash-basins.
I had tried to excuse our conduct by telling him we had just needed a wash.
He turned on the taps and thrust my face and head into the water and completely soaked my shirt and jacket.
‘If you want a wash, that's the way to do it!’ he shouted, his face contorted with fury.
I have since learnt that this kind of treatment is known as the ‘water torture’ in Spanish prisons.
Then we were allowed to go, to the disappointment of the crowd.
That lavatory is still there….
But once outside, Dana and I became quarrelsome and started to fight with one another, releasing heaven knows what accumulated stores of fury and resentment.
I was knocked to the ground, and a kind passer-by picked me up and dusted down my soaking clothes as 1 watched Dana walking away into the night.
I was too proud to follow him and beg forgiveness.
Anyhow, we were both at fault.
After trudging disconsolately round a few bars, I went back to our cheap hostel, where to my relief I found Dana snoring in the double bed we were to share.
I  crept in beside him and lay for some time with throbbing head.
Then I felt Dana squeeze my hand, and he said: ‘Buenas noches, amigo Jim.’
That was all.
We drifted into sleep.
I was up early next morning with a clanging hangover, and as I sat beside the bed watching Dana sleep, I wrote one of the several poems of that period about insomnia and my vigil over my sleeping friend's form, ‘The Lonely Insomniac’:
While you enjoy sound sleep,
I the insomniac am deep in light.
My head is full of blazing night
That mocks the vigil I must keep.
I wrap myself in lamps and fires,
And the four walls are a shining jail.
The blinded windows rattle in my pale
Bones, the skeleton that never tires.
The dark is lit as bright as day.
I watch your dreams with open eyes.
The planes are heavy in my hanging skies.
My love's asleep and far away.
Late risers always exasperate early risers like myself, who hate to miss what they know is the best part of the day.
As soon as it was light, I crept out of the room and went downstairs for a coffee at a nearby café.
Then I strolled around the city for a couple of hours, knowing that Dana would not be awake before noon.
When I got back to our hostel, our bags were in the hallway and Dana was waiting for me.
Apparently we had made so much noise when we returned separately the night before that we had wakened everyone and we were being thrown out.
Dana was pale and still half asleep.
We trudged around for an hour or so, unable to face the thought of lunch, and found another small hotel near Chamartin (we were going back by train the next day by the last evening train).
Dana felt so sick, he went straight back to bed, but had been there only a few seconds before he leapt out with a scream of agony: an autumnal, sleepy wasp had been brought in by the chambermaid among the bedclothes which had been airing at the window and had stung my friend on the bottom!
The sting proved a lightning cure for his hangover, for he stood rubbing his arse while I rushed to the farmacia for a remedy.
Then he allowed me to rub it into his injured posterior, a great thrill for me.
But I was even more thrilled by the fact that our little tiff had been meaningless and that we were still good friends.
We went out  for a lunch that was late even by Madrid standards, then went to a zarzueia .
That night, before we fell asleep — stone sober this time — Dana again gave my hand a squeeze.
I was in heaven.
But we were to have several more arguments in the months to come, and not all of them about poetry.
That weekend is also memorable for something Dana said to me in the train on the way back to Salamanca: ‘I knew you were gay as soon as I saw you that morning in the galleria .’
Then, in response to my crestfallen look, he added kindly: ‘Of course you did not look gay — you're no screaming queen — but nevertheless I just knew.’
Then I realized he must have known many bisexuals before me, and many homosexuals too.
I think at times he found his own handsomeness an awful burden: people just wouldn't let him alone.
He told me he sometimes hated his face, hated his body because of the ease with which they helped him to dominate others.
He told me he was also in revolt against his strict puritan upbringing, a fairly common case in the sons of God-fearing Americans.
People were always taking him in hand, hoping to reform him, to make him conform to their own self-centred ideal of what he should be.
I was the first person to take him simply as he was, and for that he showed his gratitude by giving me a light kiss on the cheek in the darkened carriage.
November.
We sang together those heart-rending popular songs about the season: ‘The Autumn Leaves’ and Trenet's French version from which it was taken.
We also sang ‘Longtemps, longtemps, longtemps, après que les poètes sont disparus…‘, also by Trenet, one of the most beautifully upsetting songs for poets.
And we were finding poets everywhere.
In Salamanca we often smiled at each other as we passed along a street called Street of the Two Poets — or was it a little plaza?
We fatuously wondered if a street or a square would ever be named after us -‘two spooky old Villons,’ as Dana once described us.
Then came December.
The dancer, on her way back to the United States, took Dana in her VW to Lisbon, Porto and Bilbao, where I met them, then we drove all the way to Paris.
Dana went on with his friend to see her off at Le Havre, while I made my way to London, where I was joined by Dana a few days later.
We were in Bath to stay for a couple of weeks with my parents, in time for Christmas and ‘New Year's’.
So far, I had behaved with great restraint.
But in Britain things were to take a new and not unexpected turn.
WELCOME TO BATH
Oh! who can ever be tired of Bath?.
Jane Austen , NORTHANGER ABBEY
We stayed a couple of nights in London, in a small hotel situated in the street extending from the top of St Martin's Lane.
Again we had a double bed, and I made one or two tentative sexual advances, to no effect.
But we would fall asleep in one another 's arms — that romantic image which is in reality so uncomfortable and painful.
Dana would fall asleep immediately he put his head on the pillow, and after a while I had to try to extract myself from his embrace.
I thought of us as the little princes in the Tower, and of the city of London as the cruel torturer Hubert who at any moment might come and put out our poetic eyes.
While we were in London I took Dana to meet Joe Ackerley in his office in Marylebone High Street.
Joe looked on us both with quizzical amusement, no doubt savouring the incongruity of our companionship.
He also looked rather envious.
I could see that he was wondering just how far we had gone in our relationship, and how long it might last.
Would it, he was thinking, be like the ending of Forster's as yet unpublished Maurice , a somewhat tame homo novel of which he was to say, commenting on the male lovers setting up house at the end, ‘I give it three weeks?’
Well, we had already lasted three months, and I was keeping my fingers crossed for our relationship to continue for ever.
Joe invited us out to lunch, which was what I had been hoping for, because we were both more or less on our uppers.
He conducted us to a new restaurant, the Hungry Horse, which was pronouncedly ‘gay’, with all the young waiters in tight-fitting cotton trousers of small blue-and-white checks.
Joe obviously thought it was all very daring and suitable for us both.
When the waiter came to take our orders, I could not help noticing the massive sexual equipment outlined by his soft cotton pants.
We were sitting on rather low chairs, and he was very tall, so that when he placed himself at my corner his impedimenta were almost on a level with my nose.
He caught my astonished stare, and paused as he was jotting down the orders, glancing down at himself in apparent wonder at what I could be looking at.
Joe was in good form, though the time for his retirement was drawing near, and he was already beginning to feel a bit lost and abandoned by people who once fawned on him.
Now that they knew he would be leaving, the literary confraternity had already started to turn their backs on him, and had begun to scan the possible replacements in the current British intellectual mafia.
Joe was trying to be bright and cheerful, but there was a deep undercurrent of sadness, and later, when he had gone back to his office, Dana said: ‘I think he's terribly lonely.’
During lunch Joe kept us entertained with anecdotes about his friends and contributors — old Wyndham Lewis, half blind, who was one of his art critics, and who, when taken to eat at L'Escargot, just pushed his gourmet food around on his plate.
He was concerned, as always, about Morgan Forster's health and his own sister Nancy's extravagance.
He talked about Elizabeth Bowen, a dear friend whose unhappy marriage had upset him.
‘All the people I know who have married, have ended up unhappy,’ he told us.
Then, laying his hands on our shoulders, he added: ‘Never get married, dears.
Marriage is the death of art and freedom and self-respect.’
I wondered if he thought Dana and I were about to tie the knot, or whether he was thinking of us individually — the latter, I think, because he had warned me against marriage once or twice before when I had shown what he regarded as too much interest in a woman friend.
In this he resembled Bonamy Dobrée at Leeds, who reacted with the utmost dismay when his pet student, Robin Skelton, announced his engagement to a fellow-student.
‘Marriage will be the end of his talent,’ Bonamy predicted, though I had not seen much talent in the poems Robin had so far shown me.
They showed promise and were not as mediocre as all the other stuff inflicted upon me at Leeds, but I could not see any real future for Robin as a poet.
He has proved to be an excellent literary scholar.
Yes, Joe must have been desperately lonely at that time, because he asked us to dinner the following evening at Chez Victor's, one of his favourite restaurants.
After dinner he took us to the Royal College of Art, where he seemed proud to be an honorary member of the faculty club and students' union.
He took us up to see the students, and the very first ones I saw were Sonia Lawson, already a highly gifted artist, daughter of my friends Fred and Muriel in Redmire; and one of my best students from Corsham, the vivacious, beautiful and witty Helen Dear, the shining light of my so-called ‘duds’.
She was far from being so, and I always remember her with affection for the way she enlivened my drama classes.
Sonia and Helen flung themselves into my arms, to Joe's great astonishment.
But the girls had eyes only for Dana's beauty and sexy demeanour, which that night was particularly James Deanish.
Next day we were off in the train to Bath.
I had borrowed ten quid from Joe — later repaid, and the only interest he demanded was a chaste kiss in front of the BBC in Langham Place.
The Thames at Maidenhead -a name that provoked Dana's hilarity — looked wintry, and there was snow obliterating the white horse at Uffingham.
But Chippenham and Bath were milder, free of snow.
We gazed enraptured at the city of Bath from the train as it drew in to the station — it was all laid out on the slopes of Lansdown like an aerial map of a moon landscape.
‘How very different from Spain' was Dana's first comment as the bus took us from the station to Avondale Buildings.
My mother and father seemed glad to see me, and they welcomed Dana warmly.
My Aunt Lyallie was also spending Christmas with us, so our little house was rather crowded.
Dana and I slept together in the double bed in my bedroom, next to my parents’ room, where my mother was sleeping with Aunt Lyallie.
My father put up on the sofa in the big living-room next to my bedroom, which I had claimed as my study.
It was the first time Dana had stayed in an English house, and I think he was delighted with the difference between it and his home in the United States.
He said we were much more Spartan.
It was perhaps the small electric heater in my bedroom which made him say that.
The cold was intense, but I welcomed it because it gave us an excuse to lie close together for warmth.
And on that first night at home we had our first real sexual encounter, a rather one-sided one, with Dana quite passive.
Trying not to make a sound, I achieved a long and delicious orgasm, a heavenly mixture of sheer physical bliss, emotional release and satisfyingly agitating anxiety.
I was ‘over the moon’, as Joe liked to say in imitation of his working-class friends' picturesquely idiomatic Cockney.
But was Dana?
I could see at once that my parents and Aunt Lyallie had taken to him.
He was so attentive, and so polite, and we loved the way he addressed them as ‘Sir’ and ‘Ma'am’.
They were happy, I think, that I had found such a good friend, and did everything they could to make him feel at home.
My aunt and my mother were particularly fond of him, and when he had a stomach upset they fussed over him all the time, preparing special bland food for him, making him swallow Milk of Magnesia and advising him not to drink too much Christmas sherry.
Under their ministrations he soon recovered.
They loved to ‘baby’ him in a way they could never do with me.
I sensed that they approved of him whole-heartedly, and that by comparison I was no longer the blue-eyed boy of the family: I did not come up to scratch.
I did not mind.
I had no desire to change anything as long as Dana was around.
I was happy with him just as he was, without affectation.
‘He has no  ‘side’, ‘my Aunt Lyallie said approvingly for she had always thought Americans were a stuck-up, boastful lot.
My father and mother perhaps saw in him the son they would have liked to have, not the peculiar failure they had produced in me.
Just to look at Dana fully clothed was enough to give me an erection.
When I was with him I was in a more or less permanent state of sexual excitement, and I could bring myself to orgasm just by looking at him, without the aid of hands.
In my love-making I simply held him close and let the rest take over, rounded off with a simple kiss.
That was always enough for me in my homosexual role.
I could prolong the ecstasy as long as I liked, even after he had fallen asleep in my arms and continued sleeping right through my climaxes.
It was that simple.
The purity of my love was something that to me remained undefiled.
But did Dana see it the same way?
Did he, too, feel undefiled?
On the morning after that first sexual experience we walked after breakfast up the street, past gossiping garden gates and twitching lace curtains to the fields at the top.
We walked in silence for a long time.
Then we sat down for a rest under a hedge, and Dana asked that typically American question: ‘Do you want to talk about it?’
This came out without any warning, so I answered, with fake innocence: ‘Talk about what?’
A pause.
‘Last night,’ Dana replied, with a rather grim note in his voice.
‘I'm not blaming you,’ he went on.
‘But I'd just like to know where we stand.’
I hardly knew what to say to this, so remained silent.
‘If we are going to continue to be friends and write our poetry, we must come to some kind of arrangement,’ Dana said.
‘I don't find you unattractive, but I think you might consider my feelings as well as your own.,
Another pause.
‘The only important thing’, he continued, ‘is for us to go on writing our poems.
That's all I care about.
If it brings us closer together, and helps us to write better poems, I would be willing to trade some sex with you.
You help me, and I'll help you.
And let us help each other get this thing into perspective or it's going to ruin our collaboration.’
It was an unusually long speech for Dana.
I was speechless with a mixture of fear and embarrassment.
I did not want to ‘talk about it’.
That seemed to me unnecessary.
Then he gave me a smile and a playful punch on the arm: ‘You were pretty good last night, you old sex maniac.’
Thankful to hear the change in his tone, I responded with a less playful punch, and soon we were on our feet slapping at each other with a wild hilarity, a contest in which inevitably I was the loser.
But we had saved the day, and our long friendship.
And from then on, Dana  became increasingly responsive to my love-making.
Months later he was to admit: ‘Don't you realize, Jim, I was just egging you on all the time?
Why were you so slow?
And: ‘You are the purest person I've ever known.’
But on that morning my happiness was clouded by something he said to me as we were walking home to lunch: ‘Your parents know about you, Jim — you know that, don't you?’
It was something I had never admitted to myself.
Of course, deep inside me, I knew all along that they knew.
But we would never have dreamt of talking about it.
Dana's words struck at my heart, as he had done, quite deliberately, when he had told me: ‘The very first time I saw you, I knew you were gay.’
At lunch I was sad and subdued, and I could hardly face my mother's and father's happy faces, or the rather more knowing glances of Aunt Lyallie, who I later discovered had put my mother wise to many things.
After lunch we went up to my study to work on our poems.
But we did not create much poetry: we held each other tenderly, and he comforted me with kisses.
‘Just wait, Jim.
Don't let's do it here in this house with your mother and father watching and perhaps listening….’
I nodded in agreement, saying: ‘We'll keep it for our New Year's present.’
He hugged me in consent.
My Christmas happiness was complete.
We all went to the carol service in Bath Abbey, where I had difficulty restraining my tears.
I was too choked with emotion to sing the carols of my childhood in that glorious fane.
Though I had always disliked Christmas, because I knew it made my mother unhappy for some reason, that was one Christmas when I was happy, and I have never forgotten it.
After a week at home I began to get restless, as always in the company of my parents.
I felt ashamed of feeling so bored with them.
But I knew that it was time to leave, and we said goodbye to them on New Year's Eve.
That morning I met my father on the middle landing of the stairs, and we were alone together for the first time in the holidays.
We stopped and looked at each other, then shook hands.
‘Well, goodbye, then, Jim,’ he said, with a little smile.
‘Goodbye, Daddy.’
It was the last time I saw him alive.
Dana and I spent a few days in London again before travelling to Spain.
We spent a lot of time in the National Gallery and at the Tate, and wrote some poems about the pictures there, including Verrocchio's Tobias and the Angel , Piero di Cosima's Mythological Subject and Titian's Christ Appearing to the Magdalen — Noli me Tangere , whose theme had a special significance for me now: Dana was Christ, and I was the Magdalen.
‘Or can it be the other way round?’ he asked.
‘ft can be  either,’ I replied, ‘now that we know who we are and where we are with one another.’
It is one of our best collaborations, so here it is:
On the distant ocean, burnished
To a passionate blue, the tree is bent,
And in the kindling sky, whose benison
Of green and golden leaf transcends
The sepulchres of dark, the winds of light
Now wash the living wood.
The tree leans patiently away
From habitations on a dusky hill,
Whose pathway lights a shepherd and his dog
To a greening valley white with sheep.
-The foreground of the quickening day
Confronts the Magdalen with her risen Lord.
She kneels to him along the leaning
Tree of her desire, and reaches out
A hand whose hesitations beg to touch
The gardener's unearthly robes.
Tenderly his perfect body fends
Her gesture nth the faith of love.
He leans above her like a leafy bough
That frees its gentle body from the grave
Rhythm of a bitter tree.
—Touch me 
Not .
— His face makes sweet
This quiet admonition, and his hand,
In blessing, hangs above her head its dove.
I remember we sat there all afternoon looking at that wonderful picture and planning our poem in our heads.
After an early dinner we went straight back to our hotel and wrote it.
Then we undressed each other, lay down on the bed, and made our first, fully reciprocal, passionate love.
MY DISTRACTED WINTER
Nur an den beiden Poien menschlicher Verbindung, dort, wo es noch keine oder keine Worte mehr gibt, im Blick und in der Umamung, it eigentlich Glück zu finden, denn nur dort ist Unbedingtheit, Freiheit, Geheimnis und tiefe Rücksichglosigkeit .
(Only at the two poles of human relationship, where there are no words, or no more words, in the looking and the embracing, is happiness really to be found, for only there lie unconditional surrender, freedom, mystery and profound irresponsibility.)
On the back of a piece of paper where we had worked on a poem called ‘The Word’ I found the quotation that begins this chapter.
I do not remember now who wrote it, but it is no doubt from a modern German author, perhaps a philosopher, and it expresses exactly my state of mind at the beginning of 1958.
as if in answer to the prophecy I had written in Amsterdam in the Hotel Brabant after visiting the exhibition of Picasso's Guernica , I was now in the very presence of love itself, in the form of the hero imagined there and then.
The poem we were working on was one of several left unfinished, but I can quote here the first three verses, for their expression of our condition at that time, our sense of being so close together that we were utterly apart from all else:
A cool, real thing,
The object of our art,
Has the unsounded life
Of all that is apart.
We look into its heart,
And see a meaning there.
We take its strangeness in —
The familiar, too, is rare.
We whisper it across
The table of our looks;
A kiss exchanged in time
Is the seed of books….
Our love had become completely exclusive, in its lookings, embracings, kissings, from all but ‘the word’ of whatever poem we were writing together.
It was a strange, hothouse life in my shuttered and curtained room at the Hotel Españia.
I rarely went out.
The weather was bitterly cold, and because there was no heating in Dana's little room he used to spend all day, and nearly every night, in my warm apartment.
We would sit hour after hour on either side of my table, exchanging glances, kisses, embraces, smiles — and the words of our poems.
I was always conscious now of the mocking presence of those fascist student bullies in the streets, following me with laughter and taunts.
Sometimes they would come and lunch or dine in my hotel, sitting at a table next to ours.
These goons did not attack Dana — it was me they were after.
Sometimes they broke into my classes at the university, carrying pictures of Franco and Primo de Rivera and chanting Falangist slogans or singing army songs, and shouting maricone! maricone !
There were some students, mainly girls, who protested.
In particular, Manuela, the girl who had wiped the word maricone from the blackboard, stood up to the rowdies and lashed them with her tongue.
This girl seemed as if she wanted to become our friend.
We sometimes met her in the street on her way from classes, and she always stopped to talk to us.
But we were beyond friendship.
We were totally absorbed in one another and in our work.
We used to take showers together in my apartment and then wander around naked until we were dry.
We were still writing our own separate poems, and one I did started:
The naked body turns a room
To jungles where the panther prowls
In black and green and yellow gloom
And blood in walls of darkness growls.
Within the hunter's furry loins
The sun-flexed muscles play.
Showered with movement's leafy coins,
The level haunches lightly sway….
Sometimes the shutters of my room, raised slightly to let in streaks of sunlight between their horizontal slats, made our winter room seem tropical.
Then we would fling ourselves upon each other at all hours of the day and night make love upon the unmade bed, for often we refused to let the maid in to make up the room:
I love your nakedness displayed
In bored abandon on the tangled bed,
The dark nipples starring the wide, smooth chest,
The rough lips parted in your sun-tanned face,
The strong and slender hips,
The navel's little cup of bitterness,
The blond-tinselled thighs,
The well-set neck's warm spoon,
The feet's long fans,
The arms curved round your radiant head,
And the dark treasure at your body's heart
That beats and leaps for pleasure….
Reading Unamuno, I found this passage which gave me comfort among all the mockery: ‘The greatest height of heroism to which an individual, like a people, can attain is to know how to face ridicule.’
I hardly knew how I was able to face it, either then or at any other time of my life in this mocking world, but I did, though it did not seem to me that I was in any way heroic — just the opposite, in fact.
I sometimes felt degraded and cowardly to be so different, and the object of so much taunting and discrimination.
When the life of that one room became too oppressive, we would go for a spin on the motor bike to Bejar, Miranda del Castanar, Sequeros — places where no one knew us.
We also went to Madrid again and saw a performance by the famous travelling circus, the Circo Price, about whose clowns I wrote a poem in The Prodigal Son .
I was in a very black and negative mood, I remember, and waited for the trapeze artists to fall and kill themselves, for the female contortionist to twist herself into such a knot of meat that she would never get disentangled.
Dana was shocked by my attitude, but I was not in my right mind.
The Circus Price, the oldest in Europe, was a marvellous popular institution.
It was founded in the mid-1850s by an Englishman, Thomas Price.
The elegant old Price building stood in the Plaza del Rey, right at the heart of Madrid's banking and commercial district.
It was a family show.
One of the stars was the trapeze artist, Señorita Pinito del Oro, a gypsy who learnt her art on a clothes-line strung between two Madrid apartment buildings.
Josephine Baker and such well-known and beloved clowns as Grock, Ramper and Charlie Rivel appeared regularly with the circus.
The tyrant Primo de Rivera loved circuses, and loved big cigars, which he smoked during the performance, though it was forbidden.
On being reproved by a humble usher, Primo de Rivera had a law passed making  the Circo Price the only theatre in Madrid where smoking was allowed.
And that law was still in effect when the building finally had to close in 1972, on the expiry of the lease, after which it was transformed into a bank.
Naturally I was sleeping badly.
My insomnia became chronic whenever Dana stayed the night, simply because I could not take my eyes away from his sleeping form beneath the bedside lamps.
There are several poems I wrote about this fixation, and some unfinished ones like this:
I who cannot get a wink of sleep
Sit by the night's large window watching you, naked,
Adrift in the moonlight on the bed,
Your tanned face drowned in the dew, the foam
Of pillows, and brown arms cornering your head
Like wreaths of sand about your hair's blond sheaf.
How can I ever drop my eyes as deep
Into the swimming dark as you…?
Our love-making was of the purest, simplest kind, without extreme erotic refinements and recherché positions.
We would hold each other in an embrace, exchanging long kisses, and rock our bodies together until they overflowed.
Dana was much more experienced than I: he taught me a form of carezza by which we could indefinitely prolong erection and contain ejaculation.
We were like a couple of shamans.
It was utterly delightful.
I wanted nothing more, though I think Dana must have wanted other things that I never thought of offering him; with him alone I would have been happy to do what I had always denied others.
I got some insight into this when I was telling him about my readings in Zen, and trying to explain the principles of yin and yan.
I drew a small diagram of the interlocking male and female principles in their embracing circle.
I saw that next to it Dana wrote ‘Sixtynine’(the amatory position the French call soixante-neuf ) and changed the ‘comma’ shapes into ‘69’.
It was only towards the end of my time in Spain, when we were in Ciudad Rodrigo for the Festival Taurino, that we once, quite by accident, found ourselves in the 69 position and went through with it successfully.
I had no desire to try it again.
From time to time we visited the old barrio chino , the red-light district, which formed a kind of everyman's land at the heart of the bell-haunted, church-loaded city.
I am not sure why this quarter was called ‘Chinese’ except that perhaps its apartness from the regular  secular and religious life of Salamanca made it seem like another country, and a far-off, exotic one at that.
The place was all tawdry bars, dance-halls and flop-houses that were also houses of assignation.
Besides the ‘straight’ prostitutes, there were a few transvestites, heavily made up, trying to swallow their Adam's apples and speak in wheedling, fluty voices.
They deceived no one, but I felt a bond with their strange sisterhood.
Indeed, I had always, since living in the red-light district of Leeds, Brunswick Place, had a fondness and respect for prostitutes.
It was the prostitutes in Douai and Lille and Paris who gave me my first induction into their ways and wiles.
In the sixties my heroines were not Bardot or Monroe or Vivien Leigh, but Christine Keeler and Mandy Rice-Davies.
I admired them for doing openly what many women do in secret or under the respectable cover of marriage.
I felt like those women and men who openly sold their favours.
Why should not people do as they pleased with their own bodies?
And I thought some of the girls were extraordinarily attractive in their outrageous costumes and theatrical make-up.
I envied them their sexual freedom and their self-assured dignity, and I despised the British vice squads that ran them in and were not above enjoying their charms for a consideration.
Since I hated the police, it was natural that I should feel myself aligned with the prostitutes.
The girls in the barrio chino of Spanish cities were of all ages, sizes and nationalities.
We used to go to a certain bar and sit at our favourite table, where we would be joined by a pair of bedizened harridans with dyed orange hair and chipped scarlet fingernails.
In their almost dead-white, overpowdered faces, the mean little eyes looked red and sore in their crusted pits of mascara; their great painted mouths with lipstick smearing over the fuzzy edges gave them a touchingly clownish look.
They wore over their sagging, wrinkled breasts flimsy, lace-up bodices with nothing underneath, and from those cleavages arose a fume of mingled sweat, baby powder and cheap scent.
They were always smoking.
Every five minutes they would cadge a Bisonte from me, or a Lucky Strike from Dana.
They did not seem very interested in business, though they ran up big drinks bills for us and would occasionally ruffle our hair or squeeze our balls with an experienced touch, weighing us up, as it were.
I'm afraid we did not measure up to the standards set by the well-hung Spanish men who drifted around with flies bulging to the point of bursting their buttons.
But the women liked to talk to us, as we were foreigners, laughing uproariously at our accents and our mistakes in Spanish.
Sometimes they would read our palms, finishing by giving them a little scratch that signified they were available — one scratch twenty douros, two scratches fifty douros and so on up the scale from an  ‘in and out’ in the toilets or a ‘short time’in a back room to a whole night in the brothel, with champagne and bath.
I remember well what one of these old hags told us.
They were great judges of character, and her analysis of Dana was: ‘You are good enough to be a film star.’
Then, turning to me: ‘And you — you think much, too much….’
I think we were both put out, for Dana, though certainly James Dean material, hated to be valued for his looks alone, while I resented the ease with which he attracted praise and disliked being thought of as an intellectual with nothing else to recommend me.
We left in a strange, silent huff, the women running after us into the street and trying to pull us back inside.
It was always a Toulouse Lautrec evening in the barrio chino : grotesque, horrible, funny, depressing, exciting and often pleasantly relaxing.
I never forgot those women, their hard lives with their superficial glitter and laughter concealing untold tragedies and disillusions.
I felt respect as well as affection for them.
But we could never bring ourselves to be bedded by them, though there was a little gypsy flower-girl with her gilded basket of faded carnations, stolen from a grave, who announced a sudden passion for Dana.
As she was only about fourteen, we always bought a few dark-red carnations from her, but that was as far as we would go, to her surprise and indignation.
She had lost her virginity when she was ten, so she told us, and she was popular with some of the Spanish men who would perch her on their knees and allow her to fondle their private parts as a joke.
But everyone took care of her, from the brassy madames to the scruffy young page-boys and the sinister young bartenders.
The barrio was a place where I felt freer than anywhere else in Salamanca, for it was really a land outside the law, where outcasts at last could feel at home.
All the time, we were making love as we wrote our poems, in a great wave of inspiration and tenderness that seemed as if it could never end.
Then one night towards the end of January we had had too much Dexedrine and San Miguel, and we started exchanging acrimonious words.
We did not exactly quarrel, but we started unloading pent-up resentments and frustrations.
Poetry was forgotten.
Dana went back to his room at the Hospedaje Lisboa, leaving me in tears on my bed, sunk in despair.
That evening, before dinner, we had sat together in the Clerecia, watching the glib little gilded pendulum of the antique wall-clock wagging away.
It was while we were sitting there that my father must have died of a heart attack in Bath.
The hotel manager woke me at 10 a.m. with a telegram from my mother, which had been delayed.
It simply said that my father had died: it asked me to come home.
I dressed and rushed through the streets to Dana's place, and after prolonged hammering on his door managed to wake him and tell him  the news.
It reconciled us: he took me in his arms and comforted me.
Then I hurried back to pack my things.
There was some kind of festa that day, for the narrow streets and the Corillo were dense with merry throngs of students and the tuna was playing in the Plaza Mayor.
The manager of the Hotel España was very kind and thoughtful: he would have to let my apartment while I was away, should anyone want it, but promised to let me have it back when I returned after the funeral.
Dana saw me off at the station.
I reached Bath next morning, after travelling all day and night.
My poor mother was grief-stricken and all alone.
She managed to tell me what had happened.
There had been a heavy fall of snow, and my father, clearing the path in front of our house, had suddenly felt a terrible pain in his chest.
He lay down on the bed, with my mother beside him, and he died in her arms, saying: ‘You've been a good wife to me, Mary.’
We had no telephone, and in any case there was no time to call a doctor.
She took me into the first-floor front room, where my father had already been laid out in his coffin.
The room was filled with a strange, sweet smell.
He looked so dignified, so calm, so thankful to be gone from this world and from his troublesome son.
I remembered the last time I had seen him, on the half-landing on the stairs, and how we looked at one another— as if he had sensed it would be our last encounter — and had shaken hands and said goodbye.
My mother smoothed his perfect brow, so broad and noble, and I laid a final kiss upon it.
‘It was really Corsham that did it,’ my mother said.
‘He never recovered from the way people treated us there, all that spite and unkindness and the way they spoke of you, Jim.’
Then she told me that during the last winter, while I was in Sweden, my father had already had an attack, but they had not told me.
Years later, after my mother's death, I found out what had caused that first attack and precipitated the fatal one.
There were anonymous letters to my parents, postmarked Chippenham, Corsham, Bath and London, telling them to watch out and do something about their son or there would be trouble for them.
But they had never mentioned these despicable attacks to me; they had kept cheerful faces and shown me all the love and care they had always given me, their prodigal son.
A few months after his death I finally was able to write an elegy for my father, ‘died 21st January, 1958’, which is the final poem in The Prodigal Son .
The shameful outrage committed by the German students in the crypt of San Esteban inevitably was echoed in the conclusion of the poem.
I had to return to my classes in Salamanca.
My Aunt Lyallie came to  keep my mother company until she recovered a little from the shock, which seemed to have worsened the condition of her eyes, for she was slowly going blind.
I often thought her blindness was not entirely physical: she wanted finally to shut her eyes to the sorrows and miseries of the son she still adored, for she could not bear to see me suffering.
Before I left, I bought a large-screen television set for her and Aunt Lyallie.
Television was then just becoming very popular, though the screens were still only black and white.
My father would not even allow a radio in the house, and when I suggested getting a TV set for him and my mother he adamantly refused, saying that the wireless had been the death of good conversation, and that TV would be the death of the family.
The first programme we watched after it was installed was one my father would have loved, about old sailing-ships and the life of our ancestor, the poet-sailor William Falconer, who wrote a long poem,The Shipwreck , which was popular in its day.
My mother sighed as she peered at those crowding white sails and topgallants: ‘If only he were here to see that!’
And our tears flowed again.
Here are the first two verses of my elegy for my father.:
In a cold season you suddenly left our home
When I was far away, and sick in mind.
Those harsh days in my distracted winter
Must have touched you, too, and the heart
That failed you as my own gave up the ghost.
My dark nights blazed with sleepless candles
In my drugged room shuttered tight against the bells,
The stars, the snow, the people thin as burnt-out sticks,
The black and iron-frosted gardens of a city that was once
A rose of stone, and now was only stone….
My father's favourite flowers were dark-red carnations.
The night before his death I had bought a big bunch of red carnations to put in my room with the lighted candles we were now writing by, to please Dana.
I must have been arranging those flowers, and setting the lighted candles round them, at the very moment my father was dying.
‘O, Father, let my last touch rest your ashes, love….’
My Father's Rule
Brass-bound boxwood
with the two triple brass hinges
and, on the eighteenth inch,
the big brass sun,
the folding centre.
‘Rabone Warranted Boxwood
Made in England
No. 1380.’
At the tenth and fourteenth inches
brass points fit into holes
at the twenty-second and twenty-sixth inches.
On the inner seventeenth and nineteenth inches,
two tiny brass pins protrude,
linking with holes on the thirty-fifth inch and the first,
the holes worn with use
into slits that cannot hold.
The four nine-inch lengths
smooth and neat
folding together, opening
like a fan: the noble numbers and
the halves, quarters, tenths —
dark on the outside,
dark with the labour and sweat
of my father's hands,
the inside numbers clearer,
the wood paler, like his palms.
When I was a boy
often I played for hours
with this rule —
opening it and shutting it,
folding it, extending it.
The rule became so many things to me —
the holding centre was a crown of gold,
a coin of undiscovered realms:
the steel rivet at its heart
was the hub of every thought and act.


Sometimes, a solitary child,
I unfolded it to make
the oriental zigzag fence
of our Willow Pattern plates.
Sometimes, opened upright
and covered with a duster
borrowed from my mother Mary
it became an American native wigwam.
Or it grew into a tree
of angled branches like an ancient plum —
in my imagination
I could make anything
of its flexible inflexibility.
Three feet of honesty and pride
in decent workmanship —
thirty-six inches divided into four
stained, worn wooden slats
that measured more than wood.
The hands of the carpenter have blessed them,
and the skill of the craftsman hallowed them
all the days of his life.
For every time he used them
he gave them grace, his touch
each day was left upon them,
part of his very self —
in work and out of it.
I see still
the way he used to slide his folded rule
into the long side pocket of his dungarees,
and how, as he strode along,
it knocked against his thigh.
I see him draw it out to measure
my height, marked on the door-jamb each birthday
by his flat carpenter's pencil with its chisel point.
Now, a lost child,
and more alone than ever,


I hold my father's rule
in helpless hands, holding it for dear life,
and holding on to it, like grim death,
a last plank in
the wreck of a drowning world.
-And where is his spirit level now?
On another of our jaunts to Avila and Madrid we admired the Velasquezes and Goyas in the Prado.
But we were not moved to write about them, possibly because they were so very much themselves, any personal comment of ours might seem an intrusion.
And the complex, ever-absorbing detail of Las Meninas was really beyond words — pure art underlying mysteriously the brilliant surface, where literature has no place.
But we loved Los Borrachos , those working men drunk on the ambiguous beauty of Bacchus as well as on the wine.
It was on this visit that Dana did something I found surprising and at first puzzling.
I had always believed everything he did and said to be sincere and genuinely personal, but gradually small cracks began appearing in his carefully constructed persona and well-tended integrity.
On this occasion we were sitting late at night in a small park somewhere in Madrid.
We were the only people there.
I forget what we had been talking and arguing about, but probably it was something connected with our continuing confusions about poetry and sex.
He may have been genuinely distressed by the pain he was causing me — something he later confessed he had deliberately provoked, with subtle sadism masquerading as friendly frankness.
Now he was starting to cry, and I had never seen him cry before.
Were these real tears, or was he just squeezing them out after too much cognac?
I observed him quite coldly but with my usual hapless concern.
He looked really wretched and crestfallen.
So I said: ‘It would have been better if we had never met.’
And he answered: ‘Yes, I have been waiting a long time, waiting to hear you say that.
It's what they all say to me in the end.
They always say that.’
Who, I wondered, were ‘they’?
Then, out of his overcoat pocket he produced a safety razor-blade, with which he sharpened the pencil he always used for his often indecipherable, cramped little scribbles — a sign, a psychiatrist later told me, of someone wanting to attract as little attention as possible, as in the case of Robert Walser.
My own feeling is that Walser's microscript was a symptom of abnormal modesty and self-effacement or self-depreciation  in an unbearable modern world where, rather than seek fame, he preferred to be a servant.
In Dana's case, as in my own, there was a withdrawal from normal or so-called normal society.
Dana was often embarrassed by his good looks and their power over everyone who met him, so his tiny writing may have been a kind of Walserian camouflage.
With that dulled little blade in his right hand, he began drawing it slowly across the inside of his left wrist.
His tears dropped on the blade.
Beads of blood appeared along the cuts, which alarmed me, though at the same time I could see that the wounds were superficial.
Nevertheless, I rushed him back to our nearby hotel, where I cleaned the wounds and fixed three or four large Band-Aids on them.
I remember the helpless, almost childlike way he submitted himself to my ministrations.
He, too, needed someone to watch over him.
At that moment my feelings of love for him became somewhat abstract, like a mother bandaging her little boy's playground cuts and sores.
I gave him some aspirin, undressed him and put him to bed.
Next day, when he awoke at noon, he was as bright and cheerful as if nothing at all had happened.
And indeed nothing had happened.
It was all play-acting, a bluff to get attention, but he never admitted it nor apologized for anything he had done or said.
I wonder how many times I was taken in by his Yankee sincerity, his B-movie honesty.
How many times had my heart sunk when I asked if we could go somewhere or try something new in our poems and he had answered with the excusing phrase ‘I guess not’?
Perhaps unconsciously I willingly let myself be fooled, just in order to please him and keep our relationship going.
I was so terrified of losing him, for I sensed there would never be another love like this in my life.
But he always wanted to be the one in control, the top dog, to be the one who could take off on a whim and relate his volatility to democratic individual freedom to do as one pleased — a special privilege to which only Americans were supposed to be entitled.
But I needed his love so much, and he knew it.
Always at the end of any love affair I had wondered if there would ever be another, and there always had been.
But now I feared I was getting too old for romantic friendships.
If Dana left me, I knew I would never love anyone again — or at least, not in the same way, with the same intensity.
So I clung to him through the poetry I went on helping him to write.
If only he had started to write in a larger script, I might have felt I had succeeded with him, made him a poet.
There was only one thing I was ashamed of in my love for Dana, which had sprung from poetry, and from sources I knew were pure.
After all, it was he who seduced me.
But then I tried to seduce him with  poetry.
I wanted our collaboration, strange as it was, to continue for eve;, just so long as it kept him beside me.
I think that he, who could have had as many friends as he wished, never realized how much it meant to a lonely and friendless person to have a friend, to be seen walking with him in the rose-red streets of Salamanca, to be able to go to a concert or an art museum with him, to have him opposite me at dinner in even the meanest, cheapest restaurant.
So I used to encourage his own poetry, and his ideas for poetic themes, even when I knew they were poor or did not interest me.
I was terrified that if I criticized him he would take offence and leave me, if not permanently, then for a few days, without giving me a sign of life, and so leaving me in anguish.
We discussed my pacifism, and on one occasion I denied my convictions, just to be on his side.
He had been just too young for the Korean War, and one day he told me that it was one of the experiences he regretted having missed.
He said he could understand my hatred of war, and why I rejected all involvement in war and the governments that perpetrated it.
But he added that in the case of the Korean War the Allies were justified in fighting against the communists.
I cravenly agreed, simply in order not to antagonize and perhaps lose him.
But immediately my heart was suffused with shame.
Now I am never ashamed of anything, for I consider shame to be a bourgeois and petty emotion, but this was the one occasion when I felt ashamed of myself, and I have never forgotten how sad it made me to have denied my principles for the sake of friendship and love — or what I imagined to be love.
Was it not infatuation, rather?
But this incident gave me an insight into Dana's mind.
If he was an anti-communist, could he not be some kind of spy or agent of the American government?
The dread Pentagon…?
That possibility, always present in my mind, became, I must admit, an added thrill.
Dana was opinionated and liked to have the last word in an argument.
As I have never been interested in argument, he must often have felt frustrated by my silences, my refusal to rise to the bait.
Sometimes he immediately pounced upon whatever I said and showed me in a psychoanalytical way how wrong I was, and how right he was.
He could always find fault with something, either in my writing or in my personality — something not difficult to achieve because I have always laid myself open to easy attack.
I remember one instance, after we had been making love, when he took my hands very tenderly and turned them this way and that, pressing them gently, kissing the palms and the wrists.
Then, out of the blue, he pronounced ‘Jim, the backs of your hands are very ugly — did you know that?’ in a tone that suggested I  might be surprised and hurt.
I was silent, for I could not understand in what way he meant that my hands were ugly: I had never considered whether they were beautiful or not.
But at once I saw that perhaps he was right, that perhaps the backs of my hands were indeed hideous and strange.
But after turning them over to reveal the palms, he declared: ‘But the palms are so beautiful, the lines so clear and simple, the shape so pure.’
Was I supposed to be pleased by these comments?
I did not know what to say in reply, so I took his hands and held them beside my own, showing first the backs, then the palms, then measuring them one against the other, palm to palm — something the Japanese would often do in comparing their smaller, lighter hands with my grosser ones.
Dana's hands were strong and sun-tanned, with long, spatulate fingers and firm, dry palms — the hands of an athlete, the fists of a boxer.
I thought they were beautiful in their male hardness and power, so I told him: ‘Dana, your hands are perfect, front and back.’
He rewarded me with a puzzled smile, as if he wanted to show he did not quite believe me, then with a kiss from sun-blistered lips, dry and firm.
Dana once said that the real proof of love was the sharing of a single toothbrush by lovers.
Like many of his pronouncements, I thought this was facile.
But as always I was wary of contradicting him, not wanting to antagonize him by even the slightest show of disagreement in case he left me.
He did not like to be contradicted.
On the few occasions when I had ventured a criticism, he always picked on some word or expression I used to prove his point, claiming that it was a subconscious betrayal of my true nature and my real thought.
I always found this kind of slick psychoanalytic one-upmanship irritating, but I never attempted to defend myself, because I am bored by argument and discussion of any kind.
It was easier just to let him have his way.
After all, he was fifteen years or so younger than I, and presumably still intellectually immature, despite all his literary and philosophical name-dropping.
That I myself was hardly any more mature than he, was beside the point: I had no very high opinion of people who claimed to be mature adults.
But I went along with him, and from time to time we shared a toothbrush, either his or mine.
I quite enjoyed using Dana's toothbrush.
The thought that it had been inside his mouth, touching his tongue and gums and those rather small but perfect teeth, that it had been drenched in some of his most intimate fluids gave me an erotic thrill.
I often wondered if he enjoyed using my toothbrush as much as I enjoyed using his.
It was a new slant on the eternal problem of the one who kisses and the one who is kissed.
I was usually the active partner, or rather it was usually I who initiated a kiss or an embrace.
He was my Rimbaud, certainly: I was the Vierge Folle.
But I could be both Verlaine and  Rimbaud.
He was always Rimbaud.
Today, of course, the test of love between men would be their willingness to share not just a toothbrush but also a razor.
Dana did not shave as often as I did.
His blond stubble was silky and made his mouth as exciting as an adolescent boy's.
And I envied his smooth, hairless chest, with its peachy tan.
A hairless chest would have been a great advantage for a bisexual like myself.
For bisexual Dana, it was something to be proud of, and he looked down upon my inferior condition.
He always had to be number one.
The only person I ever felt I might fall in love with again in the same way was a Japanese, the poet Takahashi Mutsuo.
I met him briefly in 1963 at a poetry reading given in Tokyo at the American Center by James Dickey.
He was sitting on a sofa outside the lecture-room, smoking a cigarette.
He was wearing chinos, and looked almost American, and there was something sexually magnetic about him that at once reminded me of Dana.
I was introduced to him but did not linger to prolong our acquaintance.
I was too afraid of falling hopelessly in love with this protégé of Yukio Mishima, whose marvellous homoerotic poems I translated.
Once when I was leaving for Europe, he came to see me off at the airport, bringing a parting gift.
It was quite unexpected.
But again I held myself warily at a certain distance, not daring to make contact with him for fear of falling into the kind of trap Dana had prepared for me.
I often see his picture in literary magazines.
Now that he is wearing a beard, he looks just like Dana — the square-shaped face, the mouth, the nose.
Only the eyes are different, but they are a poet's eyes.
Takahashi is one of those people I loved on sight, or with whom I just wanted to go to bed, but denied myself the opportunity, thus leaving them forever desirable in my memory.
Another Japanese who attracts me today is the unattainable sumo wrestler Kirishima, from Kagoshima in Kyushu, who is one of the most beautiful males I have ever seen.
My Japanese friends wonder at my passion, because he is not very well known and not very successful, though when he visited Paris with his fellow sumotori he was at once called ‘the Japanese Alain Delon’— to my mind, an insult to my hero, but for a while that kind of adulation seemed to give him a little of the confidence he needed, and on his return to Japan he delighted me by winning an unusually high number of contests.
The success soon faded, but my adoration lives on.
Kirishima is nothing like Dana, but he has that male charisma which makes me want to lie in his arms — I feel safer just gloating over his superb body on the television screen.
No one will ever take Dana's place.
WINTER'S END
…the hounds of spring are on winter's traces…
(Algernon Charles Swinburne , ATALANTA IN CALYDON)
Sing if you're Glad to be Gay — Sing if you like it that way…
Tom Robinson Band 
I was utterly devastated by my father's death.
But on my return to Salamanca Dana gave me strong support, a spiritual courage that entered our love and our poetry.
I felt as if a huge gap had appeared in my existence, because one who had always been there was there no longer, and I should never see him again.
When I gave my first class, Manuela stood up as soon as I entered, and in beautiful English, then in Spanish, expressed the sympathies of the whole class.
I was moved, and the tears fell on the pages of Jespersen.
Everyone was so kind at the university.
Professor Ruiperez told me I need not start my classes until I was quite recovered, and the women in the office and the library spoke friendly words to me for the first time.
I had lost a father, ‘someone to watch over me’ who had done his best to do so, though he had failed.
I did not hold that against him.
Nor did I bear any ill-will against my poor mother, though she had brought me up in error, innocently ignorant of what she was doing to my psyche.
I knew that she now expected me to live with her for the rest of her days.
But I also knew I could not; it would have been the death of me.
Yet I vowed to do as much as possible for her comfort and happiness, to write to her and see her regularly, too.
But could I live with Dana?
Could I live with anyone?
I was beginning to think that I was a person with whom no one could live.
The trouble was, other people.
They wanted me to be different from what I was.
They wanted me to ‘put down roots’.
But all things in this impermanent world are essentially rootless.
The desire to put down roots is a recognition of human rootlessness.
I am like the leaves and flowers of ikebana , with roots cut off, stuck in a spiked metal holder (kenzan ) instead of in the earth.
Their ground is water, renewed every day, as the  leaves and flowers are renewed in accordance with mood and season, even with the hour of the day.
My hydroponic life was the only kind with which I was happy, a gypsy trait from my Viking ancestry.
The true value of a lifetime's loneliness is then seen as Nothingness, Emptiness, perfectly expressed in the minimal art of traditional ikebana , and in the minimal, marginal existence of the person without ties, without permanent position, situation, family, roots.
It is a transient death alive in art, in which all natural will-to-live has been severed.
Such limitations are not deficiencies but modes of behaviour that are essences of reduction, to be valued for their essential selves.
This was how I valued other people, too — how I valued Dana, as someone who did not need to be improved but allowed to flourish in his own right, with all the confusions and contradictions of which he was capable.
I gave myself to him completely, both as a human being and as an artist.
But I began to see limitations in the amount I could give.
I wanted to get back to myself and to my own work, to all that he had robbed me of — even my own name.
Yet I could not let him go: his love was too precious to me, and I knew I would never find its like again.
It could be kept only by giving my entire self, roots and all.
I knew that I should have to make a decision.
I must choose between Dana's love and my own identity as a person and as a poet.
Perhaps I knew already what the answer would be — that I must cut myself free from him.
It would be painful for both of us, but more for me than for him, for he was young and beautiful and gifted, with the whole world before him.
I was neither young nor beautiful, and now I doubted my gifts.
Would they survive the surgical cut I was contemplating?
It must come.
The only question for me was, when?
I began to see one way out of our dilemma.
Joe had written to me suggesting that there was a post for me in Japan (available through the good offices of Stephen Spender, who had just returned from there with a commission from the Dean of the Faculty of Letters at Tohoku University) to go and teach English, in the poet-teacher tradition for which it was famous.
The last poet they had had, had been Ralph Hodgson, before the war.
George Barker had taken his place in 1940 but had escaped to the United States before Pearl Harbor, for he had been followed everywhere by the ‘thought police’, the sinister kempeitai , who suspected him of being a communist spy.
But I knew nothing at all about Tohoku University, or about the city of Sendai.
I pushed Joe's letter into the back of my mind.
One evening, towards midnight, I was walking back to my hotel from Dana's place along a deserted street.
Suddenly, out of a dark doorway, a figure stepped and stood in front of me with open arms.
It was Jordi!
We embraced.
I was bewildered.
Where had he been?
Why hadn't he  written to me?
He had been in prison for three months.
When he was released, he sold up his home and moved to Barcelona, where he now had a job in a printing press.
We entered a café for a drink.
Why had he been imprisoned?
He would not tell me, or could not explain.
But I gathered that it was because of some kind of political dissent, his being a member of an unauthorized group that had held secret meetings.
He had aged: his hair was touched with grey, and his face was haggard.
Jordi had been in Salamanca only one day but he had found out where I was living.
And he had seen me walking from my hotel apartment with Dana —Americano , he said disdainfully.
Who was he?
I told him he was a student.
‘Is he your lover?’
Remembering the knife he had displayed on our last night in Valladolid, I took fright and denied it.
Jordi gave a bitter smile.
Not only his face had changed; imprisonment and hardship had changed his sweet good nature, too.
He had been brutalized in prison and become cynical.
He was leaving on the early morning train for Zaragoza, then on to Barcelona.
He could not take more time off.
I knew he could not stay at my hotel.
It was all right for Dana, because he was just another foreigner, but for Jordi it was impossible.
Again we were confronted by that vengeful force which stood in the way of same-sex lovers in Spain — especially if one was a foreigner, and one a Spaniard.
We wandered round the streets until dawn.
There was no love left in Jordi.
But he had remembered me and come to say goodbye to me.
It was the only way he could let me know what had happened to him.
As we were sitting in the station waiting-room, waiting for the train to Zaragoza, he took my hand and wept.
He would not give me his address in Barcelona — it would be too dangerous for us to meet again.
I thought of the refugees whose turmoil was invading the whole of Europe.
We, too, were refugees — the refugees of a forbidden love.
I felt this was a rehearsal for my parting from Dana.
The train entered the station.
As he was getting into the train, Jordi smiled and shrugged as he had done that night in Valladolid when the secret police had led him away.
But this time he drew out his knife and showed it to me with a meaningful glance.
My blood froze.
‘No, Jordi, no!’ was all I could say as the train slowly carried him away into the dawn.
He was standing at the window of an empty compartment, laughing, as he made the gesture of slitting his throat.
I never saw him again, never heard from him.
Whenever I am in Barcelona I expect to run into Jordi, even today, thirty years later, in a totally different, freer, happier Spain.
But something tells me he is no longer alive.
I carry with me the memory of that knife's sharp flash in the rising sun.
I never told Dana of this encounter.
The first step was to leave Salamanca.
I told Dana I could no longer bear the atmosphere of the city, the right-wing bullies, the Falangists, the deadening work of teaching mostly bored and resentful students.
He said he would stay on until the vacation.
Then what?
Probably return to the United States….
It was Easter again.
I left for Bath.
As soon as the train started, I drew a long breath of relief.
I was not running away from anything — I was running towards something, my old self, my old talent, and — for a while — my own home.
Of course my mother thought I had returned in order to live with her.
She was very lonely, though she had some friends and visits from relatives from time to time.
But her whole life had been my father and myself; without us, she was lost.
She had no other interests in life, nothing to fall back on.
And her eyesight was getting worse.
I had arranged for her to see a specialist, and he told me the condition was irreversible, that she would never lose her sight completely but that she would be almost totally blind within a year.
It was around this time that ‘queer-bashing’ began in Bath, as in the rest of Britain.
Down by the bus station I was followed by a gang of youths chanting ‘Puff, the Magic Dragon’.
I escaped only by jumping on a bus to Warminster.
If Dana had been with me, they would never have dared.
Without Dana I was suffering the agonies of hell.
Perhaps sex had become for me a habit-forming drug.
I was suffering severe and painful withdrawal symptoms, and my mother was alarmed by my fits of weeping, my chronic insomnia, my thinness.
She had started attending classes at the Blind Club, and was being prepared for her further loss of sight.
She now had a collapsible white metal stick she used quite defensively when out walking.
In later years she would hit the shins of passers-by with it if they got in her way.
We went for walks in the enchanting gardens of Bath.
In particular the special garden for the blind was her favourite, where she would gently rub the sweet-scented leaves and herbs and flowers between her fingers and recall their names — the names she knew so well from the allotment we had had in South Shields.
Those daily walks with her helped to calm my mind a little, but I could not bear the thought of writing poems again, not without Dana.
I was so sure I would fail,
My mother went on an outing for a few days with the Blind Club.
Left all alone, I was in despair.
I wrote to Dana but got no reply.
I did not really expect one.
Yet his presence was everywhere in the house, like my father's, and in all the places we had known in London and Bath and Bristol.
While my mother was away I decided to take a trip myself, and took refuge in my old home town, South Shields, now changed almost unrecognizably.
But the old market square was still there, the ferry to North Shields; Ocean Road, the Town Hall, the Library, Trow Rocks, the sands, the pier…. ft was on the pier that I made my first stumbling attempts to start writing poetry on my own again; my very own poetry:
I walk the long dark pier that bends
Out of the seaport's lonely streets into
The unlit centre of the northern seas.
Slowly I leave the land's hard lights behind,
And turn to the deadly power of the stars,
The full moon's malignance racked in clouds.
The sea runs on each side of me,
Banging the stone defences of an endless sleep
With bitter tons that die in fits of spray.
Only the lighthouse at the end is true.
To touch its burning tip will give love life.
I shall not reach it if the gates are shut
Against the storm that hoists the lunging sea.
-But though the gates are shut, it reaches me.
In my utter loneliness I had only one resource: several times I took the ferry to North Shields, and walked up the steep bank to a certain public lavatory beside a roaring pub.
The lavatory was below ground, and in the white brick walls between the two cubicles a hole had been hacked, one of the best glory-holes in existence at that time.
There was usually some man waiting on the other side of the hole, like some sea creature waiting to grab its prey, and after I had settled on the seat, there would be a significant pause.
We would start to make movements that suggested masturbation.
Then a horny pit-lad's hand, coal-dust under the fingernails, would insinuate itself through the hole, just wide enough for his big, warm, tender hand.
Already I would be in what Nabokov calls ‘a manly condition’, and the release was sharp and sweet.
Then it was the turn for my own hand to explore the anonymous member beyond the missing brick.
It was a pleasure of the utmost, basic simplicity, convenient and hidden, yet profoundly human and tender in  its mutual concern.
We never tried to see one another 's faces: that would perhaps have spoiled the purity of the experience.
Yet when I emerged from that heaven-haven of sexual absolution, I would feel guilty, frightened, torn between happiness at being liberated from overwhelming sexual tension and the scared wonder of the events, as if they had been rituals in a half-remembered primitive religion.
At night the place was jumping, the whistling urinals were all occupied, and then the smell of piss and semen was the smell of ecstatic terror, for we never knew when the place would be raided by the cops, and the person standing at the next stall playing with himself might be a copper's nark, an informer or an agent provocateur .
How on earth I came through all those perils unscathed, unarrested, is one of the miracles of my early life.
There was an angel watching over me, as someone had once predicted in my childhood when she read my fortune in the tea-leaves, in my cup of white china with the gilt shamrock on the rim and in the centre of the saucer.
No one knew me now in South Shields.
Occasionally I felt that a policeman or a plain-clothes dick was looking rather too intently into my face.
But as usual I affected a supreme unconcern, and floated past them with a sway of the hips that was a touch exaggerated.
Wolfenden had come and gone, but persecution was still abroad in the streets and back lanes of Tyneside.
I paid surreptitious trips to our old homes in Ada Street and West Avenue, where the fences my father had put up for Granny Kirkup before the war — in 1934, I believe — were still standing round the long garden of ‘Mundesley’, named after my grandmother's birthplace.
I felt so proud of my father for having been such a fine craftsman.
I had a letter about him from the Amalgamated Society of Joiners and Carpenters, of which he had been a prominent member.
It said they all stood with bowed heads at the start of the meeting after they had heard of his death, ‘and there was a silence that could be felt….’
Who would not be proud of such a father?
And yet I had failed him, and he had failed me.
Those psychic scars would never heal.
Now I could not even write my own poems to my satisfaction: I felt crippled.
Furtive but fulfilling sex was the only consolation.
I was back home before my mother returned from her little holiday.
She seemed much more cheerful and was full of chatter about her new friends and about the wonderful workers at the Blind Club, where she was learning to write using a metal board with black elastic stretched  across it for lines.
She practised writing letters to me, though I was still at home.
She must have sensed that one day I would be leaving her again, and that nearly broke my heart, knowing the sadness she must feel all too well in my experiences with lovers who never stayed long but left me feeling as if part of me had been torn from my body.
Aunt Lyallie must have been needling my mother while I was away, because one day she suddenly asked me, with tremulous anxiety: ‘Why don't you get married, Jim?
Don't you want to get married?’
Unconsciously she put a note of hope into those half-scandalized questionings, because she knew I knew she would never be happy if I married.
She wanted me to stay as I was, the way she had created me.
All I could say in reply was: ‘What for?’
And she gave a faint smile, reassured.
A few years later, when a Japanese professor on holiday in England visited her in our other house in Bath, Hill House in Sion Road, he said to her, in the usual Japanese joky way: ‘I'm sure your son will be marrying some nice Japanese lady, Mrs Kirkup.’
She at once sent me a terrified letter, accusing me of concealing my marriage plans from her.
I had to send her a greetings telegram, so that she would not be alarmed at the sight of the envelope, saying: DARLING MUM I AM MARRIED TO MY MUSE AND HAVE NO INTENTION OF SEEKING A DIVORCE SO DON'T WORRY I'LL BE A BACHELOR GAY FOR ME REST OF MY LIFE LOVE JIM.
Her reply was an almost audible sigh of relief.
Occasionally I spent a day in London, always returning at night to keep my mother company.
I saw Joe, of course, and remember laughing at his description of how Morgan Forster had been interviewed by Alfred C. Kinsey for his researches into Sexual Behaviour in the Human Male .
Joe had once taken Rose Macaulay to a Billy Graham revivalist, fundamentalist mass meeting and been utterly revolted by all the rabid emotionalism and the militant Christianity, and he reminded me what Graham had said about Kinsey: ‘It is impossible to estimate the damage this book will do to the already deteriorating morals of America.’
On May Day I got a shock that was half pleasant, half sad: Joe had printed, over our pseudonym, one of the last poems Dana and I had composed, ‘Winter's End’:
We shall not watch the long delay
Of snow, nor feel its sudden flight
Alarm our sleeping eyes, and play
Its rosy waterfalls across the white
Suspensions of the rising day.
Nor shall we hear its airy flakes


Feather the quiet as they fall
Their massive winds upon the lakes,
Nor shiver through their leaning wall
That always mends what nothing breaks.
-If winter wreathes our breath again
Upon a branch where summer blew,
Will it recall the season when
We made one weather out of two,
And snow its secrets on us then?
I was on the bus from the centre of Bath to the end of our street, Avondale Buildings (we lived at No. 5), when I casually opened The Listener and saw this May Day poem.
My heart always jumped with fright whenever I saw one of my poems in print, because I was sure it would contain one of the misprints whose steady drizzle has haunted my work all my life.
But this was all-correct.
My heart kept jumping as I read it, remembering Dana and our many days and nights together.
When I had left him for Bath, he had said, sadly, seeing me off at Salamanca station: ‘I should have come with you when your father died.
I'm sorry.
Then this parting need never have happened.’
I had felt his absence keenly at my father's funeral, among the little group of family mourners at the Bristol Crematorium.
I wanted to have Dana beside me as his coffin slid so smoothly into the flames and my mother clutched my arm, not daring to watch something she felt was horrible — and was to happen to her one day, at the new crematorium in Bath, high up in those verdant hills.
Now, as I read our poem over and over again, I longed to see him, to share it with him, to show him I still loved him, however impossible my love might be.
I remembered our last days in my hotel room, their fevered, unhappy intensity, with the already-hot Spanish sun blazing down outside the shutters.
I remembered also the time we finally accepted that British Council invitation and went to give a poetry reading in Madrid.
Dana read a group of modern Americans, which must have annoyed the British, starting with Elizabeth Bishop's ‘The Fish’— I can still hear his voice, the faint American accent and the hushed astonishment he put into the first line: ‘I caught a tremendous fish….’
Then I think I read some of my favourite English poems — Hardy, Hopkins, Housman, Blake, Yeats, Edward Thomas, Wilfred Owen, and I think one each by Ted Hughes and Thom Gunn, the only contemporaries I could stand at that time.
We ended with a group of our own poems.
In Salamanca we had taken to living by candlelight in my shuttered hotel room, and those candles  crept into two or three of our last poems written there.
We finished our reading with all the lights in the hall turned out, and candles burning on our reading-desk.
The poem was about hypnotism, and contained verses like:
The room is growing darker with my voice.
You see the candle shine and slowly weep
Into the dark that listens to my voice.
Look at the light that sends your eyes asleep….
At the end of each of the five verses, one of us blew out a candle, and it was very effective, dramatically.
We could feel the tension among the large audience of Spaniards and British and Americans, a tension that relaxed into applause as I blew the last candle out and the room lamps came on.
People came up to us to congratulate us on the reading.
We were exhausted.
There was to be a reception, and later we were invited to dinner at the house of the British Council representative.
But we refused both invitations.
The representative seemed stunned.
He sent his young daughter over to try to persuade us to stay.
‘People always do, you know,’ she told us, as if that were incontrovertible proof that we had to conform.
We rushed out of the building and started running along the street, hardly knowing where we were or where we were going, until we felt we had put enough distance between us and the reception.
I had our fee in my pocket — enough for us to have a magnificent seafood dinner at a place just off the Gran Via, with a couple of bottles of wine.
The enormous relief at being released from that obligation made us light-headed with happiness.
I used to like giving poetry readings, but in the end I had to give up, for I could not stand the socializing afterwards, as if my poetry had just been the excuse for a drinking spree à la Dylan Thomas.
I could not stand the ridiculous questions people came and posed about my work: ‘But how do you find such interesting subjects for your poems, Mr Kirkup?’
Or: ‘I don't understand all this modern poetry at all, but I know what I like, and for some reason your poems manage to penetrate even my thick head.
How do you do it?’
Or the many awful questions beginning: ‘Did you ever read….’
Or the dismaying prospect of endless explanations of my unusual background in reply to: ‘Nice to meet you.
I really enjoyed your reading.
Where you from?’
Our escape from that hellish occasion was an act of liberation.
The agonies of reading one's most intimate feelings and thoughts aloud to a roomful of strangers, and then being expected to talk about them and explain them in an acceptably relaxed and humorous manner were more than I  could bear.
It would not be so bad if I could just stand up, read my poems and leave, but that was apparently unthinkable.
It was as if poets owed an explanation to the audience for being what they were, to bring creatures apart down to the level of ordinary folks; as if the poet might be indulged his little failings and eccentricities as long as he allowed himself to be democratically mauled in public by thoughtless questioners or — even worse, much worse — by fellow-poets or by those who had poetic pretensions and who found in ‘question time’ an opportunity to assuage their jealousy or seek revenge for their own incompetence and mediocrity.
Thanks, but — no thanks!
Poets will do anything to put one another down.
I remember the pleasant surprise I had when Olivia Manning, sitting next to me on some poetry-reading platform (the ICA?) turned to her husband after my reading and remarked to him — a BBC radio producer —‘Now there's a poet who knows how to read poetry.
Why don't you…?’
But before she could finish, he retorted: ‘He's not a member of Equity.’
as if that had anything to do with the ability of a poet to read his own poems!
That is the sort of thing poets either have to learn to put up with, or retire from the scene in order to retain their sanity.
And that is precisely what we had done in Madrid.
One morning the unbelievable happened: there was a letter from Dana.
ft informed us that he was leaving Salamanca for England on his motor bike, via Cherbourg, and that we could expect him in Bath on a certain day.
My heart leapt, then sank, then leapt.
My mother was guarded, but she said how nice it would be to have Dana stay with us again.
Day after day we waited for his arrival.
Then late one night, around eleven o'clock, there was a ring at the doorbell.
My mother had already gone to bed.
I went to open it, and there was Dana, travel-stained and weary but with a beaming smile on his sun-tanned face.
I looked past him and saw the old motor bike, which he parked in our front garden.
I made him some tea and supper while he bathed and changed and unpacked his things in my bedroom.
There was much to talk about, and we were awake until after four.
Incredibly, he had taken up with those student thugs, and they had taken him out drinking until they were all blind drunk —‘So drunk, nobody remembered what had happened next day.’
I could guess what that standard excuse for sexual orgies might mean.
So, after that, he had decided to leave Salamanca for good and return to the United States by way of England, to say a final goodbye to me and my mother in the house where we had all been so happy at Christmas.
‘There's someone missing,’ he said.
‘You can feel his absence.
I  liked your father so much.’
We slept together, in one another 's arms.
Next morning I let him sleep until midday.
He had left some notebooks on my study table.
I picked one of them up and was struck to the heart, for it was obvious that he had been writing a lot of poetry, all of it, so it seemed to me, very good.
And I had been dumb so long!
I felt a furious jealousy.
I felt our situation had been reversed: now I was the halting beginner, he was the fluent expert.
Now I needed his help in order to get started again, and we took up once more our old collaborative writing habits.
I realized that all I wanted was to stop him from writing on his own, and that this was possibly his own motive for working with me in Salamanca -to keep my true poetic self silent, subservient to his.
It was a slow and painful realization, as when he had told me that he had been deliberately tempting me to have sex with him all along….
But our poetry started to flow again, though now it was he who distributed the favours: there was no call for him now to bribe me with sex, so this aspect of our relationship was something he kept under tight control, allowing sexual contact only when he felt like it and not just when I wanted it, as in the past.
Nevertheless, I was quite happy.
Bath was more beautiful than ever in the early summer.
We took my mother to some of the events and concerts of the Bath Festival, among them a wonderful performance by Hepzibah and Yehudi Menuhin.
One day as we were going to a choral concert in Bath Abbey, we were all three walking along the Parade when my mother stopped Dana and said, pointing across the road: ‘That's the police station.
So you had better be careful.’
ft was said as a joke, and Dana and I laughed, but it left me frightened.
Perhaps my mother had received another anonymous letter which she had successfully concealed from me?
On the motor bike we rode all over the countryside, to Bathampton, Bradford-on-Avon to see the old tithe barn, to Bristol to visit the Llandoger Trow, and as far as Cheltenham Spa, Leamington and Gloucester.
We even paid a surprise visit to Corsham, where Rosemary and Clifford Ellis welcomed us warmly and invited me to give a series of lectures and classes.
We were broke, so I accepted, and Dana took me on his bike to and fro from Bath to Corsham throughout the next six weeks.
But I was thankful when the summer holiday started and I could be released from duties I was finding it harder and harder to cope with.
In Salamanca, as a parting present, Dana had given me two of his most beloved treasures, two books of Chinese prints and ink drawings.
They now inspired us to write a poem, ‘Chinese Print’:
He lies on rocks
As though they were a bank of clouds,
And reads a book.
He lifts the leaves
In one small hand to fan the light
Under his lids.
He reads the air:
Its empty pages are the wings
Of painted birds.
They fly with him
Across another turning page —
Clean out of sight.
How far will he
Go floating in his robe of mist
With lifted wrist?
This poem helped me to find a way back into my own poetry.
Unknown to Dana, I began writing a series of free-verse poems about the pictures.
They later appeared in The Prodigal Son as ‘Seven Pictures from China’, and have since proved popular with anthologists.
Unwisely, I let Dana see my drafts of these poems, and at once I could sense his disapproval, his jealousy even, that I had written the poems myself.
(When he finally left us for the United States, he took these gifts back from me, with the excuse that as he had bought them in Berlin he wanted to show them to the dancer.
But the true reason was that he wanted to prevent me from writing any more good poems about them.)
He could see that I was slowly but surely getting back to my old self, and to my own poetry.
A number of tentative poems took shape, and five of them form the first section of The Prodigal Son .
I could not finish them until after Dana had left for the States, when I would sit day after day beside my desk, trying to write, while on the other side of Avondale Buildings the children screamed and shrieked in the playground.
I wrote lines like this: ‘I wait with a pencil in my hand/ Beside the morning's empty page…
‘, ‘The dumb words are fastened in my throat, /And will not come….’
And, in ‘The Lost Poem’:
Will what I now begin to write
Become the poem I have lost
So long, and did not wish
To find again?…
This period of inarticulate waiting began to end with ‘After Pentecost’:
The wonder is that I write
This, when I cannot find a word.
Once, everything came to my hand,
The farthest phrases, and the closest calls,
And I drew my meaning lightly
From the waters of a page…
Yet for the first time now,
as if I learned to speak
Again, after a long dumbness,
I seek the wind of a word.
The wonder is that I write
This, upon the waters of a page.
In the weeks before he left, Dana and I sometimes quarrelled bitterly.
I think we were both wanting to be free, to write our own work, yet we were afraid to relinquish the relationship that had kept us writing together so long.
I had gained a poet but was losing a lover, perhaps the last I would ever know.
We had our little mock boxing-matches, in my study, circling round the table as if it were a ring.
Sometimes the slaps and punches were for real now, and my mother would cry up the stairs in alarm whenever she heard a sudden thump as I fell on the floor or bumped into the furniture.
Then I had to reassure her that we were ‘just having fun’.
She did not believe me.
‘Queer sort of fun,’ she would comment, her eyes, so gentle, so nearly sightless, filling with fear.
She sensed the tensions we were suffering before we finally parted.
I stood at the front door of No. 5, watching Dana straddle his bike, adjust his backpack and wave cheerily to me as he roared off down the road.
I watched him until he turned the corner.
He never looked back.
That was something I could understand, and approve of — to make a clean cut.
I got on the bus at the terminus at the bottom of Avondale Buildings and rode it back and forth to the other end of the line, sitting on the top deck, not knowing where I was or what I was doing, until the conductor came up to me at the other terminus, after my fifth trip, and asked: ‘You all right, mate?’
So I got off and walked around for an hour or so, unseeing, my mind a total blank.
I kept weeping.
Trying to compose myself, I got back home in time to make tea, but could do nothing except collapse sobbing in my mother's arms.
She held me tenderly and stroked my hair, and said nothing until I was calm again.
Then we switched on the TV and had a cup of tea.
‘Don't worry,’ she  told me as she went to bed that night.
‘It's all over now.’
But it was not.
Our love affair was over.
But it lives on in the poems we wrote together, and in the poems I wrote myself in Salamanca and Bath.
Though we had parted for ever, I did not believe our love was lost.
Mine, at any rate, after the initial angers and resentments, has lingered on to this day, and I think there has never been a rime when I did not remember that love and think of Dana.
I sometimes dream of him: at times he enters my dreams with loving smiles, at times he is cold and indifferent, but we are always friends.
One of the last poems we wrote together in Bath expresses perfectly the state of our love at that time.
It was about two skeletons discovered in a stone coffin in Bath.
We called it ‘The Anatomy of Love’:
How comfortable they look,
Laid out together in a bed of stone
Whose rocky coverlet was rolled
Away, stripping these sweethearts to the bone.
No chance encounter has composed
Their double genders in a single birth;
Nor is it accident completes
Their pleasure in the lively earth.
Two skulls repose upon the same
Worn pillow in their dusty mine.
Their tangled joints are slung upon
The cable of one common spine.
Now those two contracted hearts
Have wept each other 's dust away,
Their cages' interlocking ribs
Do there embrace till judgment day.
Among the innocent exchange of limbs
The knees are capped with skipping stones.
The fists have rattled down the shins
To shake the footloose fans of bones.
These chalky relics of the flesh
Have danced beyond, and clean above


Boneless tongue, and melting eye,
And parts that want the whole of love.
The coffin is displayed in the museum attached to the Roman Baths.
Today, since my mother's death in that beautiful city, I cannot bear to
return.
There are too many memories, all sad, in Bath and its environs.
But one day I must take my courage in both hands and go back to visit
all the places we knew — to Beckford's Tower on Lansdowne Hill, to
Corsham Court, to Brunel's great suspension bridge at Clifton, to the
ancient tithe barn at Bradford-on-Avon.
Perhaps the best poem about the ending of our love was one we
wrote in my apartment at the Hotel España in Salamanca, just before I
returned to England.
We called it ‘The Last of Love’, and it
commemorates the last time we made love in Salamanca:
Behind the shutters' bended shafts
That slake our bodies with the lime of light,
We take our last of love; then float
The battens open to the ends of night.
Calming bewildered flesh, we coax
The spirit back into the haunts of breath
And catch the drift of loneliness
Whose wide confusions flank desire with death.
Here, in each other 's arms, we end
A love that left no gentle wish to true
The compass of a common star,
No I to take the strangeness out of you.
What double weathers in our hands
Cause them to flutter in the air, and sneak
A flame through which to drag the time?
The morning is a wound that will not speak.
As time bends out before us through
A window that turns in upon the pane,
We draw unending parallels
Of light through eyes that cannot meet again.
The parallels with that coffin poem are evident.
If we had gone on, our love would have brought us the death we secretly called up every time we embraced.
We were like those skeletons still embracing in the dust of their vanished flesh and dead desires.
The flame of the cigarette we used  to light and share after making love was the last symbol of warmth we had when the fires of passion were quenched.
And even after Dana had left, there was something of him that remained in Bath, as we were to find out.
A presence lived on in his absence.
Dana had wanted to take his old bike with him on the ship back to the States.
We had gone to the Council Offices to obtain permission for him to take it with him.
But for some reason I cannot remember, it was impossible to get permission to ship the motor bike.
He said he might sell it in Southampton if he could not get it on board.
I had been away in London for the day, about three or four days after Dana's departure.
When I got home, my mother's face was white with shock.
A policeman had come while I was out and had asked her to tell me to call at his house as soon as I got back.
‘What have you done now, Jim?’ she whispered in a shaking voice.
I did not know what it could be, but I tried to reassure her and went up the road to where the policeman lived.
I was quite calm.
If I was to be arrested, I would be arrested with dignity.
But the tall policeman who came to the door was quite amiable.
It turned out that Dana had simply left his old motor bike on the quayside before embarking on the ship.
The police at Southampton had got in touch with Bath, asking what was to be done with the bike, as it had apparently been abandoned.
I explained everything to the policeman.
He asked if it would be all right if the Southampton police were to sell the bike and give the proceeds to one of their charities, and I readily agreed.
And that was that.
I returned home for a late tea and carefully explained to my mother what Dana had done, and tried to excuse the thoughtlessness that had caused her such a shock.
‘I thought he had come to take you away, Jim,’ she said, breaking into tears.
Then we both had a good cry together, and felt a lot better after a good strong cup of tea.
About fifteen years later I saw Dana again.
It was when I was living in New York, in Greenwich Village, in 1974, after completing a semester of ‘creative writing workshops’ at Ohio University, where I had been very happy.
I found a directory of poets in a famous West Side bookstore, the Gotham Book Mart, and idly turned the pages of American names.
Suddenly one name seemed to leap off the page from among the hundreds of unknowns — it was Dana's, and it was followed by his  address and telephone number.
So he was now living in Washington, DC!
The entry specified that he had Spanish as a foreign language, which made me smile, for his Spanish had never been more than rudimentary, though of course it might have improved since he was in Salamanca.
He had vaguely mentioned that he was hoping to join the Peace Corps.
I knew Washington quite well, having visited it two or three times while I was at Amherst in 1969.
I had been intending to return there to visit again the marvellous art galleries, in particular to see the Whistlers and the oriental art in the Freer Gallery.
So I got on the Greyhound Bus for a six-hour ride to Washington and checked in at a cheap hotel opposite the bus depot.
It was quite a respectable place, occupied mainly by blacks, and transients, and there was the unmistakable sweet smell of marijuana in the elevator.
I looked up Dana's name in the telephone book, and, with wildly beating heart called the number.
Almost immediately a woman's rather rough voice answered, and I said: ‘Could I speak to Dana, please?’
She put down the receiver and roared ‘Dana!’
I had the impression that she was shouting upstairs, and I seemed to hear footsteps tripping lightly down to the phone.
Then was his voice, saying: ‘Yes, hello?
Who's this?’
I could not answer.
I put down the receiver, overcome by emotion at hearing that voice again, unchanged.
But I felt I could not possibly meet him again.
The next day, after visiting the Freer, I went to inspect the brand-new modern art museum, the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden.
As I entered, I saw an unmistakable figure in front of me — Dana.
He had his back to me, and he had grown a beard, but his hair was still thick and blond.
He was with a group of friends whom he had apparently met in the gallery, and they were all standing around him admiringly, talking and laughing in that exaggeratedly animated way only Americans have, reacting and demanding reactions.
One of Dana's reactions was very characteristic: he bent double with laughter at something he had said that made all the others laugh, too.
He was wearing a dark suit.
I was more casually dressed in corduroys and a black leather jacket.
I did not want him to see me.
I managed to pass behind some tall screens on which those ridiculously huge contemporary paintings, works of the utmost nullity, were hung, and crept cautiously round a group of cranky statues.
I looked carefully about me, hiding behind one of those contorted shapes, and glimpsed Dana in the distance, walking away from the group of friends and joining a young woman, tall, pale, dark, distinguished-looking — could it be that dancer of his?
They walked slowly along one wall, laughing and talking and only incidentally looking at the eccentric  pictures.
They disappeared from sight, and I was about to advance into another part of the gallery from behind some screens when I stopped dead: Dana was there, alone, right in front of me.
He looked at me as if he could not believe his eyes, and a faint, doubtful smile began to move his lips.
I just stared back at him as if I did not recognize him, then moved away out of sight behind another screen.
When I emerged on the other side, our little game of hide-and-seek was over: he had vanished, taking the girl with him.
I got the impression that he was frightened, as if he had seen a ghost.
The next day I took the first bus back to New York.
But ever since then I have often wondered why he was in Washington.
Was he, as I originally suspected in Salamanca, an FBI agent or working for the CIA? ft was a mystery I had no longer any wish to clear up.
About ten years later, in 1980 I think, I revisited Salamanca, on my way back from Lisbon.
I stayed at the Gran Hotel on the Plaza del Poeta Iglesias, more mortuary than El Escorial.
What bothered me most after my long absence were the forests of TV aerials on even the humblest dwellings.
The shallow, red-tile roofs of the Plaza Mayor, once so touching in their simple irregularities, now glitter with armies of metal rods, antennae.
Trying to take pictures of the buildings without those intrusive TV aerials is almost impossible.
And surely the Plaza was not the crowded car-park it is now?
Perhaps it was just the effect of the tourist season, but Spain seemed very much more prosperous, and the construction companies and property developers had their giant cranes everywhere, their crude colours looming garishly over the old amber-rose stone of the city's most ancient monuments.
People seem better dressed, and there are more cars in the streets, and fewer beggars and blind men selling lottery tickets.
There are huge new blocks of flats, some of them with swimming-pools.
The young people now seem much freer, and there are young girls drinking with their boy-friends in the bars of the Plaza Mayor.
I went to the university on the Plaza de Anaya and climbed the familiar stairway in the Palacio de Anaya.
The bust of Unamuno is still there, and again it looks as if someone has attempted to defile it, perhaps in some would-be funny student jape.
I stood in that upper gallery where I first saw Dana and he cast that look upon me which was to make me his slave.
The beautiful old university buildings are unchanged — the Fray Luis de Leon lecture hall, with that scholar's statue outside, the ancient library, the delicately carved plateresque façades.
Next I went to the Clerecia, where I had been sitting with Dana  watching that wall-clock's gift pendulum busily wagging away on the wall in front of the great baroque gilt altar.
The clock had been removed for repairs and only a small hook remained in the wall.
I prayed a little and wept for my dear father, and for myself, my unhappy passion.
I visited the Casa de las Conchas where that lonely schoolboy, so many centuries ago, had inscribed his sad and bitter thoughts.
They are still there.
At the Hospedaje Lisboa where Dana stayed —‘Camas, Comidas’— I looked up at his window as I had so often done on those lonely days and nights he spent away from me.
At night, sometimes the window was lighted, sometimes it was dark — either eventuality filled me with foreboding and sorrow.
Then I ascended the narrow stairs to his doorway.
There was a notice on the entrance:No hay habitaciones.
Gracias por su visita .
Down the twisting stone stairs again and out through the front door opposite the barber-shop where the barbers used to look so longingly at our flowing locks — later on, the regulation hair-style for most young men.
Summoning up all my courage, I entered San Esteban and its overpowering gilded Churriguera altar seemed to welcome me like a long-lost friend as I dipped my hand in the holy-water stoup at the door and knelt to pray in front of Claudio Coello's heavenly blue painting.
The place where we had entered the crypt below the altar had been bricked up.
I prayed for forgiveness.
Again the tears flowed unchecked, and I was sobbing loudly in the empty church.
At San Martin the wall to the gallery had also been bricked in.
Once we had sat together in that ‘condemned’ gallery until evening, and the sacristan, not knowing we were there, had nearly locked us in for the night.
I prayed for us both before the altar, then lit two fat little night-light candles, one for Dana, one for myself, the larger one for him.
As I prayed for the peace of our souls and for forgiveness for both of us, I was startled to see the wick on his candle fall over and almost go out, while mine remained upright and brightly shining.
It was the sort of omen, one of the signatures of destiny, for which we were always watching.
All my anger and envy and resentment were gone.
It only remained for us to forgive one another, and for my part I gladly forgave him for anything that might still need forgiveness.
It was a pilgrimage I had had to make, and I was glad I had made it.
I made no pilgrimage to Valladolid, where it had all begun.
But whenever I am in the United States, or near an American Center in Kyoto, Paris or Seoul, I always look at the Washington, DC telephone directory and seek out Dana's name, address and number.
I gaze at the entry for a long time, tom between a longing to hear his voice  again and the terror of becoming in thrall to even his disembodied form.
But in my heart of hearts I know I cannot telephone him.
My deep love for him still remains.
But I cannot abandon my identity now as I did so freely in those days of my youth.
Yet I still dream about him, and write poems about him like the one that follows.
Photo Robot — Identikit Portrait 
It was over thirty years ago.
But
let me try again to get it right.
His face, front or profile,
how was it then — how exactly
was the hair?
Am I making it
too thick, too wavy, too blond?
The nose, I'm almost certain, was —
No.
Was it not rather more
flat, almost broken, a boxer's?
How sharp?
The tip slightly tilted?
Was the mouth so full, that warm
memory of smiles and kisses, rough —
the tongue, rich hive of words,
the teeth even, white, rather small?
I'm sure the eyes were deep blue.
Or were they rather lighter, almost
grey, changing with his moods?
Were they so wide-spaced, in brows
so smooth, pale brown, and level
as the way he looked at me — that look
I now can barely remember, though
it has left its mark on me.
His body perfect, peach-sunned.
Its gold has rubbed off on me a little.
I loved it.
Yet more than all
it was that face, that look I loved
and now lie long nights awake
trying vainly to recapture.