

INTRODUCTION
‘Thou know'st 'tis common, all that lives must die,
Passing through nature to eternity.’
Hamlet 
When we are going on a journey to a strange country, our state of mind and the nature of our preparations are determined by what we think we shall find there and, in particular, by whether we have friends and relations living there.
It cannot be otherwise with the approach of death; whether we go on pilgrimage with Raleigh or put out to sea with Tennyson, the metaphor of travel is one with which the poets have made us familiar.
This book, therefore, is not only about how men and women in the nineteenth century faced the hour of death; it is also about what they expected to encounter on the further shore.
It is a subject that historians and sociologists, stressing the activities of men's lives, have been inclined to overlook.
Scant attention has been given to the way in which man's attitude to death feeds back into his life and so exerts an influence upon society.
For this is a link that cannot be uncoupled; ‘in my end is my beginning’.
How we live is inescapably linked to what we think about our origin and our destiny, even if we only discuss these mysteries late at night in the company of a few friends.
Those hardy souls in the present century who ignore the mysteries and regard themselves as random atoms, moving purposelessly in a world of blind chance, must necessarily behave differently from those who, like so many in the nineteenth century, believed that they inhabited an ordered world in which they had moral duties to perform, even if these  were obscurely glimpsed and seldom accomplished.
The contrasting attitudes become more vivid if we try to envisage men and women of the two epochs as they lie (as all must) on their death-beds.
There is probably no such thing as a typical death-bed in any century; but it is not difficult to take two representative scenarios, separated from one another by about one hundred years.
In the first, the friends and relatives of the dying man, frequently accompanied by young children, are standing within earshot of his bed, listening either to his last words or, if he has already fallen silent, to the prayers of the pastor, who is celebrating the triumph of Christian immortality over death and the devil.
The beneficiary of their prayers dies in his own home; his relations, or servants, lay out the body and watch beside it until it is placed in the coffin and taken for interment in accordance with the rites of the Church.
An account of the last hours and words is written for the edification of those unable to be present.
In our day there is little of the earlier resignation in the face of death; we resist it to the limits of medical technology, and our obituaries speak of our ‘gallant struggle’.
Death, for us, is the sorry end of the human story, not the mysterious prelude to a new one.
A high proportion of us die not at home, but in hospitals, clinics and special institutions for the terminally ill.
There our friends and relatives sometimes come to visit us and speak resolutely of trivial matters; children seldom come, because that might seem ‘morbid’, especially if the illness is known to be terminal.
When the end is coming, screens are placed round the bed; in any case there are unlikely to be any ‘last words’, because most of us die under some form of sedation.
The undertaker then takes over, makes up our faces and carries the coffin to the crematorium.
There a hybrid service takes place, to which even a confirmed atheist could hardly object.
If there is an address, it is often given by a layman, who commends what we did in life and skims discreetly over the question of survival, if any.
As the coffin slides into the furnace, we try to restrict our emotional involvement — sometimes at considerable psychological cost.
The contrast is striking, and cannot be dismissed as irrelevant to the social and other problems that we confront in the last decade of our century.
It is not the purpose of this book to study these problems, but rather the changes that in an earlier century began to alter our attitude towards death.
It is not enough to assume that all that has happened is that we no longer believe in hell, and that mutes, carrying black ostrich plumes, are out of favour.
The changes have been more fundamental and some of them may have affected us in ways that we do not immediately recognise.
All centuries, of course, have been centuries of change; but few would deny that in the nineteenth century change was greatly accelerated; that much was apparent to the more perceptive of those living at that time.
Some felt that they were hurrying into an epoch of unprecedented enlightenment, in which better education and beneficent technology would ensure wealth and leisure for all.
This was Herbert Spencer's view, namely that an upward evolutionary process was inherent in the human condition.
To others, including Tennyson and Arnold, it seemed as if ‘the ringing grooves of change’ were carrying them at break-neck speed into a future full of uncertainty and alarm.
Browning was more hopeful, but he, too, was impressed by the transiency of the world, flashing past the carriage windows: ‘Must the rose sigh ‘Pluck — I perish!’
Must the eve weep ‘Gaze — I fade!’’
The Impressionist painters caught the contagion, and the new race of photographers tried to seize the fleeting moment and make it stay.
Cultures and historical periods differ greatly in their concepts of time and the continuity of life.
We live in a century imprinted on the present, which regards the past as little more than the springboard from which we were launched on our way.
Ours, for better or for worse, is the century of youth.
Earlier centuries, in contrast, had an appreciation of the past that embodied more than nostalgia or antiquarian interest.
Age and experience were valued in the belief that length of days had provided some guidance on how to live and what to expect in the life to come.
For the life on earth of each individual was not a finite entity, complete in itself, but a transition to  another mode of existence; the gateway to that unknown land was death —Mors Janna Vitae , as the memorial tablets had it.
This belief was fostered by the churches, the floors and walls of which were incised with the records of those who had gone before, but it was expressed positively in the family.
Families cherished their forbears, whether these had lived in humble cottages or in manor houses.
Sons aspired to follow in their fathers' trades or professions.
The landed gentry planted for their grandchildren avenues of hardwood that they themselves would never see.
In the nineteenth century this leisurely view of the pageant of time began to speed up.
People became more mobile, both physically and socially; men wished to rise in the world.
Young men with feet on the ladder, provided by the Industrial Revolution, looked askance at the old-fashioned ways of their fathers.
Growing more acquisitive in the present, they prepared to disown the past; the future was to be different, both for themselves and their children, and they had to run to catch up with it.
Improving life expectancy gave them every hope of doing so, especially if they belonged to the rising middle-class.
For the middle-class was both the agent and product of these changes.
The rise of the middle-class was not, on the whole, predicated on an aspiration to join the aristocracy, whose way of life, especially during the Regency, met with a good deal of disapprobation; but it was determined by the resolute intention of the new men to distance themselves in every possible way from the working-class, out of which so many of them had raised themselves.
Their rise during the Industrial Revolution was expressed in capital accumulation; the status of the aristocracy still derived from birth and ownership of land.
The new men were not aping the landed gentry; they were basing their careers upon the infrastructure provided by urban Britain.
There was no coherent ideology embracing the entire middle-class, but there were two ideologies that subsumed its more active sectors.
The older one was that of the Evangelicals and Dissenters, of whom more will be written in chapter three.
The newer ideology was that of the  followers of Jeremy Bentham (1745–1832), the so-called Utilitarians; it was far from sharing a common world view with the Evangelicals, but there were certain social issues, such as abolition of slavery, on which concerted action was possible.
Macaulay was one of those who had a foot in both camps.
Before we consider how these ideologies affected attitudes to death, we must glance at the social and economic changes that provided the context within which they operated.
In 1801 the population of England and Wales was under nine million, of whom the great majority lived in rural communities outside London.
Seventy years later the population had risen to 22.7 million, of whom 62% lived in towns and cities.
The legislative measures corresponding to this change had been the Reform Act of 1832 and the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846, which recognised that the price of bread could no longer be controlled in the interest of British grain producers.
Another, and less welcome change was the restructuring of the traditional parochial system for the relief of poverty.
In 1834 Parliament, largely under Benthamite influence, adopted the new Poor Law, which grouped workhouses for the indigent into regional Unions, and imposed harsh discipline designed to deter ‘able-bodied vagabonds’ from exploiting the charitable instincts of the locality.
Poor people's hostility to this measure was redoubled by their realisation of its relationship to another, adopted two years earlier under Benthamite influence, namely the Anatomy Act.
The ostensible purposes of this Act were to ensure that an adequate supply of bodies was available for dissection in the teaching hospitals and anatomy schools, whilst eliminating the nefarious activities of the body-snatchers, whose commerce had nourished the medical profession.
The Act stipulated that ‘unclaimed’ corpses should in future be used.
It was clearly foreseen, though not stated, that these would be drawn mainly from the workhouses, either because the relatives of the dead could not pay for interment, or because they had not been notified of death.
The terrors of the workhouse were thus extended beyond the portals of death; for the least  favoured section of the population there waited the ultimate humiliation of dissection by medical students, a fate hitherto reserved for convicted murderers.
In an impressive study of the Anatomy Act, Ruth Richardson had deduced ‘the existence of distinct class-bound death cultures in Victorian Britain — an important aspect of the cultural gap which divided the ‘two nations’ of rich and poor’.
More about the odious practice of body-snatching will be found in chapter five.
In this introductory chapter the aim is, rather, to stress the emergence of these two death cultures, characterising the relevant literature of the nineteenth century.
The aristocracy had long chosen to immure its dead in church vaults or specially constructed mausoleums, and this practice reached its peak in the royal mausoleum at Frogmore, built by Victoria after the death of Albert.
At the opposite extreme, paupers' graves had long been unmarked; but in between, death had been the metaphorical leveller.
This ceased to be the case as the middle-class, finding vaults overcrowded, erected miniature fortresses in the new necropolises and encased their dead in double, and even triple, coffins against the depredations of body-snatchers.
Elaborate funerary rites, strenuously promoted by the emergent trade of the undertakers, ensured that the social pretensions of the middle-class would extend as far into the next world as money could take them.
It was a hard act to follow, but the poor did what they could to provide respectable funerals for their dead.
This was a major objective of burial societies and other forms of insurance; irreplaceable possessions were often pawned or sold to pay for a funeral.
Other factors widened the gulf that in death separated rich from poor and also separated the poor from their dead.
As villages grew into towns and towns into cities, the lack of churchyards was felt at least as much as the lack of churches.
No custom was more deeply rooted than that of visiting the graves of the dead and arranging to be laid beside them when the time came.
At Stoke Poges as elsewhere, ‘the rude forefathers of the hamlet’ had slept beside their ancestors in the shadow of the church in  which they had worshipped.
Where congestion made this impossible, the estrangement was severely felt.
Only the traditional resting-place would do.
What held good for Stoke Poges held good for the Western Isles; Kathleen Raine has given us a description, worthy of Thomas Gray, of the burial of an old Scotswoman:
‘…poor, almost illiterate…her pride was that she was of the Clanranald.
In the small, square grave-yard, tangled with bramble and escalonia and overgrown with rank grass and nettles, a hole was dug for her among the bones of former generations; bones of old women and men scarcely yet forgotten were turned up to make a place for her among them.
A piece of pastureland adjoining had been given by the Laird, so dense was the population of the dead in that rank square; but the people would not use it, they would rather return to the hallowed earth of the dead from whose collective and immortal life they had themselves briefly emerged…‘
In the new cities, where there was scant room for the living, there was even less room for the dead.
During the great epidemics, such as the successive invasions of cholera, there was neither space nor time to bury the dead with decency; the degradation of human beings continued in death as in life.
In time, each city constructed its necropolis; but this was situated in the outskirts.
Carriagefolk might drive there, but poor people, immigrants from the countryside, could no longer visit the graves of their dead and at Easter place flowers on them.
They had dropped out of the human chain of ancestors and descendants that had formerly bound them all together.
As a factor in the atomisation of society, this alienation from the dead has been underestimated.
E. P. Thompson is no doubt right to insist that a distinctive working-class culture was being formed at this period.
Nonetheless it was the aspiration of most of those living above subsistence level that they, or their sons, should be absorbed into the expanding middle-class.
There were indeed frontiers between the classes, but these were constantly shifting.
Both Evangelicals and Utilitarians wished to impose the middle-class way of life upon their thriftless fellow men, whose poverty, they believed, was in great measure attributable to improvident and ungodly habits, such as addiction to drink and raising illegitimate children.
The Evangelicals recommend ‘Ragged Schools’, Sunday schools, and regular churchgoing as the cure; they agreed with the Benthamites that education was the ladder leading up the economic scale.
Compulsory primary education had not yet been introduced by the state, and the educational system, from church school to university, was still dominated by the clergy and their middle-class values.
These were also powerfully promoted by domestic service at a time when even the meanest clerk expected to employ at least a resident maid-of-all-work.
In pious families it was the rule that the servants attended family prayers.
All these reasons serve to explain why this study concentrates mainly upon the attitudes to death that prevailed in the middle-class, whose irresistible rise was so prominent a feature of the nineteenth century.
An additional reason is to be found in the relative paucity of working-class sources.
Those members of the working-class who rejected or had sunk below the influence of the class above them, remained largely illiterate and inarticulate.
It was the middle-class that kept and circulated family letters, especially those recounting saintly death-beds.
It was the middle-class, and especially Dissenters and Evangelicals, who wrote regular diaries as an aid to daily reviews of conduct and repentance for sin.
By comparison, the working-class has left only meagre traces of itself.
If we turn to literature for corroboration, the story is the same; the great Victorian novelists, such as Charles Dickens and George Eliot, were middle-class authors, writing for middle-class readers.
Even philanthropists, like Henry Mayhew and Charles Booth, who penetrated into the slums to record how the very poor lived, were reproducing their findings through the filter of their own middle-class minds.
Those whom they encountered were for the most part leading precarious lives; they lacked the  leisure, the mental energy, even the vocabulary, for speculation about the great issues of heaven and hell, death and judgement.
Death, with which they lived so intimately, could not be detached from their lives as an object of contemplation.
Hugh McLeod has summed it up:
‘Preoccupation with keeping afloat in a cruel environment produced an indifference to questions about the meaning of the world and a good deal of scepticism about most schemes for changing it.’
The representative middle-class institution was the family, which reached its apotheosis in the nineteenth century.
As our death-bed scenario illustrated, the family was at its most cohesive at the times when the rites of passage were celebrated.
Scorn has been poured upon the excessive mourning practised by Victorians, to which even their children and servants were subjected; but it should be recalled that the badge of mourning was like the tartan of a Highland clan: it symbolised solidarity.
The family was at one in its grief, and grief shared was suffering alleviated.
Abortive attempts in our time to shuffle off the whole experience and make light of its impact have only begun comparatively recently to attract the attention of psycho-analysts.
Mourning can have a therapeutic function that we ignore at our peril.
There is no doubt that family ties were knotted with great intensity; indeed, well before the end of the century there was criticism of this intensity, directed chiefly against the dominant paterfamilias.
One reason for this, which might at first sight seem paradoxical, was that, except in the aristocracy, the family unit had contracted.
In the rural communities of previous centuries most families included more than two generations — the extended family — and the families of land-owners were further extended to include the indoor and sometimes the outdoor servants.
The benevolent influence of a family, such as that depicted in the first chapter of Tom Brown's Schooldays , reached out to the tenants and other members  of the local community; the girls from the cottages came into the big house as dairy or nursery-maids; the boys were taken on as under-gardeners or grooms.
With the urbanisation and expansion of the middle-class the pattern began to change.
The new class was mobile, following where the opportunities of trade or profession might lead, and leaving behind the communities in which its older members had been rooted.
The city or suburban dwellings of the new class were at first too small to accommodate the extended family.
Moreover, aspiring members of this new class were not only moving about the country; they were also moving upward, abandoning grandparents who could not keep up, or did not wish to do so.
Within this nuclear family, the hopes and affections of its members were concentrated and the emotional level could rise dangerously high.
In this small inward-looking world, the intrusion of death could be dreadfully destructive; the damage could be limited partly by sharing the loss and partly by belief that it would be made good in the afterlife.
Religion and the nuclear family went hand in hand.
The expansion of the middle-class was one aspect of the great increase in population marking the nineteenth century.
The chief reason for this was that people were living longer.
At first sight, it might seem that this trend should have restored the feeling of stability and counteracted the sensation of transience, to which reference has been made.
In practice, this did not prove to be the case.
There were no reliable statistics before 1838 and, even after that date, demographers did not agree on how the data should be interpreted.
At one time it was widely believed that there had been a great rise in the birth-rate; there was, in fact, a slow rise to the end of the 1861–70 decade, after which the rate began to fall.
Moreover, until the end of the century infant mortality remained at the deplorably high rate of 150 deaths per 1,000 live births.
For those surviving the first year of life, however, the chances were improving; death-rate fell from 23 per 1,000 (living) in 1841 to 18 per 1,000 in 1901.
It is now widely accepted that this was the main cause of the rise in population.
It was by no means clear at first, however, that this was a constant trend, nor that permanent improvement in life expectancy was possible.
On the contrary, many followed Malthus in believing that availability of food would always tend to limit population growth, and that the ‘iron law of wages’ would prevent the poor from achieving a standard of living allowing diseases of malnutrition to be banished.
Karl Marx was not the only economist who died holding this belief.
It was not until the 1880s that a number of new factors operating together began to change the prospect for the better.
Leaving aside social legislation, the most important of these factors was the opening up of the grain-bearing areas of North America, refrigeration, and acceleration of maritime transport.
At home, improvements in urban sanitation and hygiene in hospitals were gradually raising health standards.
Even so, dark areas remained.
Death was a respecter of persons, and chances of survival were better in the upper and middle-classes than in the working-class.
Although women were living longer than men on average, there remained throughout the century an ‘accident blackspot’ for women who bore children.
The advances of medical science were slow to alleviate diseases associated with childbirth, such as puerperal fever; midwives were untrained.
The London School of Medicine for Women opened its doors in 1874 to the accompaniment of much ridicule of ‘lady doctors’; despite the efforts of Florence Nightingale, the profession continued to be male-dominated.
This may well have been a contributory factor in the prevalence of death in child-birth.
In the decade 1855–65 the death-rate for delivery at home was 5 per 1,000; but the rate in hospital was substantially worse.
In the days when contraception was still a rarity, every husband knew, if he chose to think of it, that by sleeping with his wife he might imperil her life.
This awareness was undoubtedly one of the elements promoting prostitution, which pious Victorians often referred to as ‘the great social evil’.
It also throws light on the guilt-feeling associated with sex, which is a distinguishing mark of nineteenth century morality.
Love and death have always been themes exciting the  imagination of poets; but in the last century they figured in works of art and literature to an extent that was almost obsessional.
Woman, whether as wife, mother or mistress or ‘fallen woman’, is depicted as victim of man.
This might seem inconsistent with the fact that women were living longer, were it not that longer life brought no immediate improvement in their prospects; it remained a man's world.
According to the census of 1851, nearly one quarter of all women over 30 were unmarried; between 1851 and 1871 the number of single females above the age of 15 rose from 2,765,000 to 3,229,000.
Domestic service or the mills were the main openings for single women of the working-class; if they married and outlived their husbands, there were no old age pensions available.
For single middle-class women without dowries there was only the prospect of becoming a governess or companion.
Even married women, before the enactment of the Married Women's Property Act of 1882, might find themselves trapped in dependence upon their husbands in a loveless marriage.
It is in such conditions that we should look for an explanation of the outcrop in the 1860s of sensational popular fiction, replete with desertion, adultery, bigamy and sudden death; much of it was written from the woman's point of view by women writers, such as Mary Braddon, Rhoda Broughton and Mrs Henry Wood.
We emphasised religion in connection with education and the family, but we should not overlook the importance of the secularisation of society.
The term ‘secularisation’, as its distinguished chronicler has pointed out, was coming into use in the period 1865–70.
The process, however, had begun long since.
Any date would be arbitrary, but two deserve to be mentioned.
One is the founding of the South Place Society in 1795; the other is the initiation in 1817 of Robert Owen's anti-religious campaign.
The aim in both cases was to substitute Man for God in a new temple of humanity.
The agents of this substitution would be education and the discoveries of science, which would sweep away not only the authority of revealed religion, but indeed all metaphysical ideas.
Reason and utility were the pass-words to the new heaven  on earth, and Jeremy Bentham was its prophet.
He regarded posterity as the only afterlife worth contemplating and, to show his contempt for the resurrection of the body, he left his to be dissected — a bold gesture that his contemporaries were slow to follow — and his reconstituted skeleton was exhibited in University College, London.
Later, the influence of Saint-Simon and Comte was introduced into English humanism through the efforts of John Stuart Mill (1806–73).
These philosophers and reformers believed that promotion of happiness could safely be entrusted to men and women themselves, without divine intervention, since they were innately good; but some had misgivings about how to hold onto Christian charity.
Could they jettison Christian faith and hope, without loss of moral standards?
Their aspiration to hold everyone at the ethical level of the enlightened bourgeoisie encountered the strong disapproval of Friedrich Nietzsche, who wrote under the heading:G. Eliot —
‘They have got rid of the Christian God, and now feel obliged to cling all the more firmly to Christian morality: that is english consistency, let us not blame it on little blue-stockings à la Eliot.
In England, in response to every little emancipation from theology one has to reassert one's position in a fear-inspiring manner as a moral fanatic’
The moral fanaticism, as we have long seen around us, proved scarcely more durable than the theology.
There were, however, some immediate gains; one of these was the decline of belief in hell, which gradually ceased to resound in the sermons of Ministers of God other than Calvinists.
Many death-beds were thus relieved of one of their terrors.
In a poll of Anglican Clergy undertaken in 1864 only 40% expressed the view that the damned would suffer everlasting torment; it may be assumed that a poll of laity would have disclosed a substantially lower percentage.ii.
One consideration that was coming to influence the more perceptive minds was a  realisation of the immensity of the populated globe.
In an age of imperial expansion and active missionary endeavour, it became harder to believe that everywhere the heathen were damned for their ignorance.
In the first decade of the century the Rev. Richard Cecil (1748–1810), a leading Evangelical preacher and one of the founders of the Church Missionary Society, had expressed doubt on this score:
‘Were a benighted inhabitant of Otaheite to feel the wretchedness of his present life, and lift up his soul to the god he worshipped as a supreme being…no doubt God would hear such a prayer.’
At the Reformation, Protestants had incautiously narrowed their options by throwing out limbo and purgatory, leaving themselves no mid-point between heaven and hell.
Though no-one was prepared to admit that Roman Catholics had got the better of the argument, some Protestants felt a certain dissatisfaction with an afterlife in which all earnest endeavour, for better or worse, was at an end.
Under the influence of Quakers, Benthamites and others the savage penal code had been amended to give it a reformative, as well as a retributive, purpose.
If men could feel some compassion for their fellow sinners, what were they to think of an all-merciful Father, who conceded to his children no ultimate hope of forgiveness?
If men were beginning to abandon their fear of hell, they were clinging with some tenacity to their hopes of heaven, as we shall see in chapter nine.
Those who thought otherwise relied upon the observation that attendance at church was declining.
One authority on the evolution of the working-class quotes Friedrich Engels to the effect that,
‘The workers are not religious, and do not attend church…
Among the masses there prevails almost universally a total indifference to religion, or at the utmost, some trace of Deism…’
This view would seem to be supported by the Sunday census of March 1851, when it was found that in London only 37% of the inhabitants attended any form of divine service, whilst in eight other cities with populations in excess of 100,000 the figure was only 42%.
It must be understood, however, that church attendance is a very uncertain guide to what people think about the great mystery of life and death.
In the days of pastoral England, country people had gone to church under the stern eye of squire and parson, one of whom was almost certain to be the local magistrate.
When in the new urban conglomerates this pressure was removed, it was natural that attendance should decline.
Squires, parsons and magistrates were associated with tithes and the administration of the Poor Law, in an era when the workhouse represented many poor men's idea of hell.
The reaction of the urban proletariat was natural; one cannot safely deduce from it any decisive change in attitude towards death and survival.
Even to this day, many who have never been inside a church since their baptism expect to be buried in consecrated ground after some form of religious service.
Engels, whose observations were based on life in urban Lancashire, was obliged to make an exception in favour of the Irish immigrants, who in 1841 already constituted 10% or the population of Manchester.
The exception is an instructive one, because the Irish priests lived at much the same social and economic level as their flock; they held their communities together and sustained their faith in a way that only Dissenting ministers in Wales and remoter parts of England were able to do.
After the Irish famine more immigrants came south, and by 1851 they made up 4.6% of the population of London.
Hugh McLeod writes:
‘The Catholic Church…was unique among the larger religious bodies by the fact that so many of the most devout were drawn from the working-class and even from the poor.’
If the secularisation of the working-class had gone ahead as rapidly as Engels wished to believe, one would  expect to see some reflection of this in figures showing the growth of Rationalist and Secularist Societies.
It has been estimated, however, that at no point in the century did membership of such Societies exceed 6,000, a figure roughly comparable to the number of adherents of the New Jerusalem Church of the Swedenborgians.
Some of those, predominantly of the middle-class who had declined from religious orthodoxy, turned to cults such as spiritualism and Theosophy, which insisted upon survival in some form.
These cults are dealt with in chapter ten.
The leading British convert to Theosophy was Annie Besant (1847–1933), herself a renegade from Secularism.
One of the most significant areas in which secularisation operated was the indefinable one of shared responsibility, human and divine, for life and death; this is studied in chapter two.
Dietrich Bonhoeffer once commented that ‘religious people speak of God when human knowledge has come to an end, or when human resources fail…
. It is certainly true that as men came to understand the natural world and thus to control it, they began to banish God from it.
This applied with special force to the discoveries of medical science; life and death were no longer defined in terms of‘the Lord giveth, the Lord taketh away’.
By the end of the century the advocates of Neo-Malthusianism, as it was called, were aiming to bring child-bearing under control; life, except in strict Catholic families, was not regarded as the gift of God.
At the other end of the human time-scale, the idea that life could be, and was being, prolonged through man's skill and foresight had taken a powerful hold.
God might have oversight over the destinies of nations, for example, in times of war; but individuals would do better to rely on their own foresight, and on such pressure on the state as could be exerted by groups organised to sustain collective interests.
In our day this has degenerated into the assumption that virtually every personal misfortune can be blamed upon some authority or institution — usually the government of the day.
No attempt can be made in a work of this scope to relate the full story of how nineteenth century attitudes to death evolved during the present century into those now  prevailing.
Such a task would require separate volumes dealing with the different religious denominations.
It would also need to pay attention to regional variations, since it is true, even in these days of mass mobility and the mass media, that to travel to a place remote from a major centre of population is to move back in time and rediscover the traditions and practices of an earlier period.
Nonetheless an effort has been made in the final chapter to draw some conclusions about the contemporary impact of changes that have occurred.
This book does not have a polemical purpose, but the author has not been able to escape the conclusion that at least some of the customs and habits of mind of the earlier period tended to induce healthier attitudes, both among those on their death-beds and those left behind to mourn.
The earlier death-bed was at once more solemn and more familiar; the tears at the bedside and the liturgy of the church were well adjusted to the sufferings of the dying and of the bereaved.
Scepticism and an attitude of indifference to the prospect of final extinction have proved, as a matter of practical experience, no adequate substitute for the doctrine of immortality, however illusory one may hold it to be.
The tranquiliser and the bottle are poor comforters when the time comes to part for ever from those we love.
The hospice movement, in its care of the terminally ill, is the living recognition of these sombre facts.
A traditional anecdote may be said to sum up the change that has taken place in our attitude.
The Sufi sage, Hadrat Uwais el-Qarni, a contemporary of Mohammed, was once asked how he was feeling.
He replied, ‘Like one who has risen in the morning and does not know whether he will be dead in the evening.’
‘But this is the situation of all men.’
‘Yes, but how many of them feel it?’
In the nineteenth century a comparatively high proportion of the population was aware of its own mortality; today this sense has almost vanished from everyday life.
It recurs only at isolated moments in the lives of those who suffer and, by this very experience, become more isolated from their fellows.
This would be all very well if we were on the high road to eliminating  death altogether; but this is a claim that not even the boldest scientist can make.
This being so, there is a case for casting a backward glance at attitudes of men and women of an earlier generation, whose lives had a limited span — like ours.
THE CONCEPT OF PROVIDENCE
‘There's a special providence in the fall of a sparrow’.
Hamlet 
The transition from the Old Testament of Jahweh to the New Testament of Jesus Christ consisted in great measure in the abandonment of Job's sombre belief that, when he died, he would go:
‘whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness and the shadow of death…without any order, and where the light is as darkness.’
This vision of a featureless future was not only dreadful in itself, but appeared to mock the efforts of those who, like Job, tried to do God's will, but had fallen on evil days.
The point was emphasised in Ecclesiastes by the Preacher:
‘All things I have seen in the days of my vanity: there is a just man that perisheth in his righteousness, and there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his wickedness.’
No people in human history have so consistently encountered so terrible a fate as that of the Jews, whose compact with Jahweh should have preserved them.
As George Steiner has written:
‘To the strong believer the torture and massacre of six million is one chapter — one only — in the  millennial dialogue between God and the people He has so terribly chosen.’
It was the Jewish people who first conceived of a single God, who was all-powerful and, in return for worship and obedience, could be expected to reward virtue and punish vice.
As often as not, He has done nothing of the kind.
The laws of cause and effect, which appear to operate so consistently in the physical world, seem to have no such application in the world of metaphysics.
A Sufi has written:
‘Trust in God…is not taught to human beings by God.
On the contrary, God gives men so many reasons to have lack of trust (calamities, uncertainties, loss of hope) that it could be said that God actually illustrates that trust in something or someone beneficial is not to be erected on happiness or good experiences alone.’
To reach such a conclusion necessarily requires a longer perspective than that allowed by brief life on earth, followed by eternal night.
Just such a perspective was provided by the New Testament, the gospel of good news, with its doctrines of incarnation, resurrection and atonement, which separated Christians from Jews and in the process did away with the shadow-land of Sheol, except for the heathen and the damned.
The Christian view of life, death and afterlife as a continuum not only supplied a happy ending to the human story, but could also ‘justify God's ways to man’, in so far as the good man would be rewarded for a well-spent life, even if it seemed to have been dogged by misfortune.
Atheists, who have destroyed the continuum by insisting that death is the end, have failed to take into account that this arid conclusion must feed back into life as it is lived, making it seem haphazard and futile and emphasising its injustices.
No atheist need be surprised that the twentieth century has seen so massive an increase in greed, social disorder and mass violence.
If the Christian continuum provided hope for the regenerate individual, it offered a much less satisfying answer to the more general question that had perplexed  Job and so many others: why was there so much evil in the world that the Lord had made and seen to be good?
It was a question that troubled Saint Augustine: ‘Whence is evil?
Why then doth the soul err which God created?’
The Bible supplied part of the answer: man sinned and became mortal, hence the incarnation and crucifixion.
‘Since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.’
But death, in itself, was only part of the problem; for many people, an even more terrifying part was the uncertainty when and how death would come.
The manner in which death came to men, including those innocent of any offence, could be so appalling that the final stroke could only be regarded as a merciful relief.
The problem of evil was rooted in Christian monotheism, which obliged the word ‘God’ to do duty for two functions, between which some other creeds had drawn a distinction.
The Greek and Roman pantheon honoured gods who, if adequately propitiated, could bring good fortune; Jove could make jovial; but these were not gods of last resort.
In the background, overriding the powers of all the gods, was the supreme authority of fate, or necessity, against which no petition nor sacrifice could prevail.
I his was the Providence that, in the eyes of the Stoics, directed the world order.
The gods could, up to a point, be merciful; but it was fate that was all-powerful.
Christian theologians, lacking this differentiation, find themselves in a predicament.
Dietrich Bonhoeffer, after emphasising that the German word for fate (Schicksal ) is neuter, wrote of:
‘God meeting us no longer as ‘Thou’, but also disguised in the ‘It’; so in the last resort my question is how we are to find the ‘Thou’ in this ‘It,’(i.e., fate).
In other words how does fate become providence.’
Both in peace and in war death came to man in every guise of terror, so that insurance companies declined to provide against acts of God or the King s enemies, as if these formed a single category.
Men were appalled by the sudden onset, which allowed no time for the deathbed repentance so dear to the hearts of pious Victorians.
Providence, in its benevolent aspect, was a power to foresee what dangers might be averted or, if that were not granted, how one might prepare to meet one's Maker.
‘Lord, make me to know mine end and the measure of my days what it is…
’ God was both cause and cure of affliction.
An epitaph on two brothers in Old Radnor reads:
‘Afflictions sore long time two brothers bore
Physicians strove in vain 
Till God was pleased their lives to cease
And ease them of their pain.’
Almost to the end of the nineteenth century, even educated men made no distinction between the merciful hand of God and the merciless grasp of death.
When in 1895 Sir Ronald Ross discovered the cause of malaria, he commemorated the event in a verse inscribed on a plaque in the Memorial Hospital in Calcutta:
‘This day relenting God
Hath placed within my hand
A wondrous thing; and God
Be praised.
At his command
Seeking his secret deeds
With tears and toiling breath,
I find thy cunning seeds,
O million-murdering death.’
For Sir Ronald Ross, the Christian God was barely distinguishable from the Hindu Shiva, who was at once preserver and destroyer.
Traditional Christians had long struggled to escape this identification.
Richard Cecil, like a good Evangelical, appealed to the Bible to support his view that evil had no independent existence, but conformed to God's masterplan:
‘A great part of the Bible is to show us that all creatures are in God's hand, and that He will either make our afflictions work together for good, or remove them.
But the believer must wait for God's time of deliverance; he may think it long  in coming — forgetting that God's time is the best time.’
Later in the nineteenth century George MacDonald took a similar line:
‘All pains, indeed, and all sorrows, all demons, yea, all sins themselves, under the suffering care of the highest minister, are but the ministers of truth and righteousness.’
This fundamentally optimistic interpretation of the world and its mysterious working was contested by the heirs of the Enlightenment of the previous century, who were looking for rational explanations and practical methods of applying them.
Their search was increasingly fuelled by the discoveries of science, especially medical science.
The tendency for earlier generations to lean so heavily on providence had been connected with the brevity and insecurity of life.
In the mid-nineteenth century life expectation was rising, especially for the new middle class, and central and regional authorities were coming to terms with the urban influx, which had changed the face of Britain.
Industrial labour was at last being regulated, water supplies purified, hospitals sanitised and prisons reformed.
Confidence was increasing that men, through foresight and effective action, could ameliorate their existence and even prolong their lives.
For the new generation, providence meant looking ahead in this progressive sense; those who would not do so were classed as improvident.
Provident societies, often connected with home buying, had existed since the end of the eighteenth century; in 1872 a Provident Knowledge Society was established ‘for the promotion of thrift among the lower classes’, who were encouraged to contribute to penny banks and post-office savings.
It was the age of self-help and Samuel Smiles.
As men expanded the field of responsibility for their own existence, the field formerly assigned to Providence, in the traditional sense, contracted.
We can illustrate this point by drawing on the novels of Charlotte Yonge (1823–1901) who was deeply religious and  much concerned by human suffering.
One of her best loved characters was Dick May, the pious, but innately conservative, doctor of ‘Stoneborough’, where an epidemic strikes, causing many deaths.
May's instinctive reaction is to blame the feckless poor of unhygienic slums:
‘Those wretched Martins, in Lower Pond Buildings are the worst.
No wonder, living in voluntary filth; but it is all over the street — will be all over the town unless there's some special mercy on the place’
But May's friend and colleague, Dr Spencer, ascribes the epidemic not to ‘voluntary filth’, but to defects in the drainage system.
More and more people were looking to the drains, rather than to providence.
In a churchyard at Bilston in Staffordshire stands a memorial to a mother and her two infant children, who all died within a period of three weeks in the winter of 1847; they are described as ‘all victims to the neglect of sanitary regulations specially referred to in a recent lecture on Health in this town.’
In mid-November 1849, as a cholera epidemic was in decline, Sunday services of thanksgiving were ordered to be held in churches.
Lady Edisbury, who had lost an infant in the epidemic, wrote to her husband:
‘I believe this is the only country in which there has been a national acknowledgment of God's directing Providence in the cholera, and I believe it is not a mere outward form but that more and more are becoming every day religious.’
Sadly she deceived herself: as the sanitary authorities became convinced that cholera was water-borne and could be checked by means more immediately effective than prayer, public attention became focussed more on the sanitary inspector than on the parson.
In these transitional years of fluctuating opinion some continued to adopt a passive attitude towards fatalities, in which they sought to trace the hand of God, whilst others favoured active remedies for what they held to be primarily human failings.
The judgement of observers of the  misfortunes of others were influenced by numerous factors, such as the scale of the calamity and its proximity or remoteness, as well as by prejudices arising from class and privilege.
Those who were safely beached on the shore of prosperity had the option of giving the credit to Providence, or arrogating it to themselves; as they regarded those less fortunate ones who were struggling in the water, they could see them as victims of their own improvidence or of God's ineluctable decree.
Charles Trevelyan, who was Chief Secretary of the Treasury at the time of the famine in Ireland, regarded the tragedy as due to‘the operation of natural causes’; the unhappy Irish were victims of Providence, as expressed in the laws of supply and demand.
After reading a report of his Relief Inspector, Trevelyan sympathised with his being exposed daily to:
‘Scenes of heart-rending misery, without being able to give effectual relief…
But, as justly observed by you, we must do all we can and leave the rest to God.’
There remained one category of great natural calamities that, because of its scale and random impact, still seemed to be the work of a wrathful deity.
This was the category of volcanos and earthquakes.
The famous Lisbon earthquake of 1755, which had faint reverberations as far north as Scotland, led George II to issue a solemn admonition to his people to the effect that ‘the manifold Sins and Wickedness of these Kingdoms have most justly deserved heavy and severe Punishments from the Hand of Heaven.’
John Wesley drew a similar conclusion and published his Serious Thoughts on the Earthquake at Lisbon .
When in 1777 there were minor tremors in Manchester, he observed — not without a certain satisfaction —‘There is no divine visitation which is likely to have so general an influence upon sinners as an earthquake.’
He included accounts of the eruptions of Etna and Vesuvius in his Compendium of Natural Philosophy .
In the nineteenth century men began to regard these phenomena with more composure, especially if they lived in northern climes where the earth's crust was relatively  secure.
In 1855, when there was another cholera epidemic, Charles Kingsley approved of the refusal of Palmerston to order a national day of fasting and repentance.
Kingsley denied that God should be held responsible for evils attributable to ‘man's selfishness, laziness and ignorance.’
Yet when he came to write the chapters on earthquakes and volcanos in Madam How and Lady Why (1869), he could not dismiss from his mind the notion that, underlying the scientific explanation of how these disasters occurred, God must have had a reason for permitting them.
In August 1868 there had been terrible earthquakes in the Andean foothills of Peru and Ecuador, which were estimated to have cost some 25,000 lives; these events made some stir in London and £11,000 was collected to relieve suffering.
‘We may guess at something like a good reason for the terrible earthquakes in South America,’ observed Kingsley.
‘I do not wish to be hard upon poor people in great affliction; but I cannot help thinking that they have been doing for hundreds of years past something very like what the Bible calls ‘tempting God'’— staking their property and their lives upon the chances or no earthquakes coming, while they ought to have known that an earthquake might come an day.’
Among the forward-looking theologians who were trying to come to terms with the new scientific data was the Dean of St Paul's, Canon H.L. Mansel, who gave the Bampton Lectures in 1858.
He began by distinguishing between destructive mass phenomena, such as we have been discussing, and the destinies of individuals: ‘Divine Providence…under the twofold aspect of General Law and Special Interposition.’
He then continued:
‘However much analogy may lead us to conjecture the universal prevalence of law and orderly sequence, it has been acutely remarked that the phenomena which are most immediately important to the life and welfare of man are precisely those which he has never been, and probably  never will be, able to reduce to a scientific calculation.
The astronomer, who can predict the exact position of a planet in the heavens one thousand years hence, knows not what may be his own state of health tomorrow…’
It was a shrewd thrust, bringing home to the sceptics the Pascalian contrast between the littleness of man, for all his ingenuity, and the immensity of the universe.
It also confronted them with the disagreeable fact that at any moment some disorder in their own sensory apparatus would cause that universe, ostensibly so orderly and so stable, to disappear.
In short, Mansel was leading the argument back from the generalities of science to the particularities of individual destiny, which constitute the essence of religion.
It had been a conspicuous feature of the Wesleyan and Evangelical revival to illustrate the operation of God's grace by drawing attention to divine intervention in the lives of the elect.
Richard Cecil frequently insisted on this ‘doctrine of a particular providence’, writing in his sermon notes:
‘Oh that we regarded not only the God who governs the stars, but the God of minute providences — the Overruler of moments!
So that not even a sparrow shall fall to the ground unnoticed by Him’.
Cecil's most popular publication was his life of his friend the Rev.John Newton (1725–1807); in the preface he writes that his decision to undertake this work arose
‘when I considered how striking a display such a life affords of the nature of true religion — of the power of divine grace — of the mysterious but all-wise course of Divine Providence — and of the encouragement afforded for our dependance upon that Providence in the most trying circumstances…‘
Newton was one of the great heroes of the Evangelical movement, partly because of his friendship with the poet Cowper, and partly because the vagaries of his career presented so striking an example of a sinner saved.
It was common form for converts who had led relatively blameless lives to condemn, as Newton did, ‘the impiety and profaneness’ of their unregenerate days; but in his case there were the hard facts of his voyages in slave ships to the West Coast of Africa, on one of which he had been abandoned to his fate and only rescued through a combination of circumstances that indeed seemed to be almost miraculous.
After he had given up the slave trade and was already hoping to be ordained, he was appointed tide-surveyor in the port of Liverpool with duties that included the inspection of incoming vessels.
On one occasion he was about to go on board a ship that had just anchored when unforeseen business detained him.
When he eventually embarked to be rowed out to the ship, ‘it blew up just before he reached her, it appears that, if he had left the shore a few minutes sooner, he must have perished with the rest on board’
The annals of war were combed for accounts of the near-miraculous escapes of pious persons.
The Rev H.P. Wright, who was a chaplain in the Crimea, always carried in his breast-pocket a prayer-book given to him by a devout family nurse.
At the battle of the Alma, he came under fire at close range but survived.
He afterwards ‘found the ball flattened that would otherwise have passed through his heart’; the prayer-book had saved him.
Would one of the Waverley novels have served the same purpose?
No religious person would have thought so.
In October 1881 fearful storms swept the coasts of Britain, and thirty-one fishing vessels from Eyemouth, near Berwick, went down with the loss of 129 lives.
George Collins of Eyemouth steered White Star into the eye of the storm, singing ‘Jesu, Lover of my soul’, and forty hours later brought her safely into the Tyne.
Would the ship's company have been saved if he had been singing a hit from the music-halls?
For those in desperate straits the line between superstition and saving faith is finely drawn.
The narrow escapes of the ‘elect’ from death fuelled  debates about the continuance of miracles.
Nobody who read the Bible could legitimately doubt that miracles had once occurred; the question whether they still did so became for doubters a test of their faith.
The young Edward Fitzgerald, who became a sceptic, wrote to his friend Thackeray, ‘I think the evidence for them is to be doubted.
But Paley is very clever about them.
I am in a quandry of doubts.’
Belief in miracles was linked with belief in angels, who were traditionally God's messengers.
Gabriel, the messenger of the Annunciation, had been an angel of life and joy; but the angel of death was a familiar and sombre concept in Christianity, as in Judaism and Islam.
Guardian angels had survived the Reformation, though they led a less secure existence than in the Catholic Church, which in 1621 had decreed a festival of guardian angels, to be celebrated annually on 2nd October.
In England, some belief in angelic guardianship of national destiny survived at least until 1914.
During the terrible retreat from Mons in late August, certain officers wrote home of their impression that their foot-sore infantry had been accompanied one night by a mysterious force of cavalry, of which no trace could be found next day.
This legend rapidly evolved into that of the ‘Angels of Mons’, under the influence of Arthur Machen's story, ‘The Bowmen’, which appeared in The Evening News at the end of September 1914; the bowmen were the bowmen of Agincourt, led by St George of England.
There was, however, an insidious corollary to the belief that God might intervene to save His chosen people and prolong the lives of deserving individuals; it was that where He did not intervene to save life, those who lost their lives had been found unworthy.
It became more difficult for devout persons to explain why unforeseen disaster should overtake a religious group.
Such a case occurred at Kirkcaldy in 1828.
The celebrated preacher, Edward Irving (1792–1834), who was at the height of his powers and still at peace with the Church of Scotland, had returned from London one Sabbath evening to preach once more to his own people.
The Church was overcrowded and, just before he entered it, the gallery collapsed, killing thirty-five members of the congregation.
Irving was horror-struck: ‘God hath put me to shame this day before all the people’.
Another case that, because of the genius of Gerard Manley Hopkins, has in retrospect become better known, is that of the loss of the Deutschland , which sank at the mouth of the Thames in December 1875.
The vessel was carrying, among other passengers, five Franciscan nuns, refugees from the anti-Catholic laws recently imposed in Germany, and thus objects of special sympathy among other Catholic communities.
The Times published a short report of how they died: ‘Five German nuns…clasped hands and were drowned together, the chief sister, a gaunt woman six foot high, calling out loudly and often, ‘0 Christ, come quickly!’ till the end came.
From this episode Hopkins evoked a magnificent description of that wild night; but he also provided his own elucidation of God's dealing with His creatures: God had shown forth both His majesty and His compassion.
‘…
God, Throned behind
Death with a sovereignty that heeds but hides,
bodes but abides;
With a mercy that outrides
The all of water, an ark
For the listener; for the lingerer with a love glides
Lower than death and the dark…‘
In the poet's eyes, God has shown his compassion by ending the nuns’ suffering, whilst enabling them to give heroic testimony to their faith.
What remains unexplained is why it should have been necessary for the Deutschland to go aground, so preventing the nuns from continuing their service to God.
The premature termination of pious and useful lives, for which supplication had been made, raised the whole question of the efficacy of prayer.
Richard Cecil dealt with this in a sermon that in its day was much admired and was published with the title,A Friendly Visit to the House of Mourning :
‘You will perhaps readily object, ‘I prayed earnestly for the life of the deceased.
I thought at  one time I saw signs of a recovery; but the event makes me fear that I was not heard…
’ A little consideration will, I hope, show you your mistake, and prove that a petition may be graciously accepted, when its particular object is not granted.
Did not our Lord declare that His Father heard Him always?
But consider how He was heard: certainly not by having the cup taken away, but in being…supported while He drank it; and in victoriously accomplishing His grand design through drinking it to the very dreg.’
When death struck close to home it was not easy to accept such counsel, nor to see God's design.
A poignant case occurred in India, in which Cecil's great-niece was the victim.
Lucy Cecil married a missionary, the Rev. John Hay, and accompanied him to Vishakhapatnam, where they arrived in the unhealthy monsoon season of 1844.
She was already far advanced in pregnancy, and soon fell gravely ill.
All connected with the mission united in prayer for her, but her life was not spared.
Her distraught husband wrote to his father-in-law:
‘During the whole of her illness, prayer was made without ceasing by the whole Church on her behalf, and I felt persuaded that the Lord would yet hear us and for His name's sake appear as the one prayer-hearing God — for the heathen around knew what was done, and would say, ‘Where is now your God? ''’
The miracle, which might have saved her life and converted the heathen, was not granted.
It was not only in the mission field that such hopes were cherished.
One forgotten hero of the Victorian era was Capt. Hedley Vicars of the 97th Regiment, a gallant and devout officer, whose tireless work for the welfare, both spiritual and physical, of the men under his command became widely known after the publication in 1856 of Catharine Marsh's biography of him.
She records that, when his Regt embarked for the Crimean campaign and  fears were expressed for his safety, she took the hopeful view that ‘so much prayer was made for him, we ought to believe that a special providence would be extended over him.
He said he did not doubt it.
Still his impression was that he should not return.’
His premonition proved to be well founded.
The expectation that God would reward the righteous in this world ran parallel to the less attractive expectation that He would punish the unrighteous.
Calvinists, for whom no event could be fortuitous, were especially prone to make judgments that divine providence was supposed to bring to fruition before their eyes.
It is recorded of a Bishop, who was a strong Sabbatarian and disapproved of Sunday trains, that he was puzzled by statistics showing that train accidents were no more frequent on Sundays than on weekdays.
Readers of the great Victorian novelists rejoiced to find in the final chapters how summarily justice was meted out to the villains; some were perplexed that the Almighty often failed to knot up loose ends equally satisfactorily.
The editor of the monthly The Child's Companion concluded one of her homilies, entitled ‘Do Not Mock’, with these minatory words:
‘Even little children take advantage of the goodness and long-suffering of God.
Because He does not at once take wicked people out of the world, they seem to forget that He is angry with the wicked every day, and that He has said, ‘Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished''’
Insistence on instant cause and effect was particularly prevalent among sects such as Plymouth Brethren, and Edmund Gosse, in recording his early life, has given revealing examples of his father's inflexible thinking.
When a member of the congregation, a Mrs Goodyer, broke her leg,
‘My father, puzzled for an instant as to the meaning of this accident, since Mrs Goodyer was the gentlest and most inoffensive of our Church  members, decided that it must be because she had made an idol of her husband…‘
The tendency to see the hand of God in every eventuality, even a trivial one, was sometimes carried to excessive lengths.
In August 1840 Judith Holt, the wife of a Lancashire Justice of the Peace, recorded in her diary:
‘Little Emily had a fall against her chair which cut her forehead; but thank God! she was no worse.
We are not so sensible as we ought to be of the Providence which hourly sustains us.
‘Little Emily’ grew up to become a prolific author of didactic historical fiction, in which the hand of Providence administers justice with unflinching rectitude.
It is natural that a mother should regard her child's health as a matter of the highest importance; but Judith Holt believed that the Almighty should also keep a watchful eye on a bank of which her husband had become a director.
In the same summer she wrote:
‘News of stoppage of Commercial Bank.
God preserve us safe from harm, if such be His Holy Will!
May He grant more peace of mind to my dear husband!’
As the century grew older, this belief in divine intervention in the minutiae of life became less common; but in certain devout households it was still alive at the century's end.
In 1896 the Lancashire industrialist and philanthropist F.W. Crossley observed, ‘There is no holiness of a radical sort without divine, positive, every-day guidance…
’ One traditional way of discovering God's will had been that of the biblical sortes — the question would be posed and the Bible then opened at random.
John Wesley and his close associate John Berridge (1716–93), the Rector of Everton, had both been addicted to this practice; both had used it to obtain an answer at a particular time to the knotty question whether to get married.
Berridge contemplated this step, he tells us, because he had been 
‘grievously tormented with house-keepers…letting the Bible fall open of itself, I fixed my eyes immediately on these words, ‘When my son was entered into the wedding chamber, he fell down and died.
''’
Other Evangelicals rejected the idea that God was constantly ordering men's lives.
John Venn (1759–1813), Rector of Clapham, made the point cogently in one of his sermons:
‘A man of sound mind will cherish no extravagant notions of divine communications.
He will consider his own nothingness and will form the most lofty conceptions of God, as chiefly manifesting his wisdom by the general rules according to which he directs his administration.
An enthusiast, on the contrary, entertains lofty notions of himself and degrading conceptions of the Deity: he conceives that the course of nature is to be regulated with a view to his own interest…
Is he in want?
God at once, and in some remarkable manner, sends him a supply.
Is he opposed?
The judgments of God fall upon his enemies.
Is he doubtful on any question?
The spirit of God reveals it to him…‘
The persistance of literalist and puritanical thinking into an epoch that was growing more and more inimical to it was certainly one factor in the decline of faith in the second half of the nineteenth century.
It was no longer just a question whether reason and science could tolerate divine intervention in the apparently stable and unalterable laws of the universe; the new and more insidious question was whether the universe had required a creator in the first place.
Biblical criticism had undermined the Bible story, and physicists and geologists chipped away at the events depicted in the first book of Genesis.
When in 1859 Charles Darwin published The Origins of Species , he had no intention of implying that random mutation of genes and natural selection could account for the emergence of life on earth; but it was inevitable that some of his followers would try to project his hypothesis backwards, and speculate that life might somehow have been generated spontaneously in gaseous, primeval slime.
Such a miracle would have dwarfed all miracles recorded in the Bible, and Frederick Temple, who in 1896 became Archbishop of Canterbury, pointed out in his Bampton Lecture of 1884 that neither Darwin nor Huxley had claimed to know how life had come to animate inert matter.
The secular temper of the times, however, ensured that the more extreme theories connected with evolution continued to gain ground.
Men might reject the guiding hand of Providence and increasingly take control of their own lives, but death, when it came to them or their loved ones, had the same countenance that had frightened their ancestors.
Indeed, the bitterness of separation was more terrible than before for those who had lost the belief that an afterlife would bring reunion in happiness.
Arthur Machen describes in his autobiography how, walking in the hills above Caerleon, he came to a farm, once a Roman villa, where a stone had been found inscribed: ‘Ave, Julia, carissima conjux; in aeternum vale .
Hail, Julia, dearest wife; farewell forever.’
The old sadness of the pagan world, so poignantly depicted in the early chapters of Walter Pater's Marius the Epicurean , had returned.
Those who were not in the hand of God were the playthings of blind hazard.
‘Chance or Providence!’ wrote Pater, ‘Those are the ‘fenced opposites'’of the speculative dilemma…
'However eager sceptical Victorians might be to replace the superstitious world of their forefathers with a structure that seemed to them more solid and more rational, the alternative, namely that they lived in a meaningless world of chance, was repellent to many of them.
Such a concept seemed at odds with the progressive and ameliorative spirit of the age.
Surely it could not be that, whilst they were classifying the laws governing the physical world, they were themselves under no moral order, but existing in a chaos of random motion?
As the familiar features of the benevolent Deity became obliterated, thinkers began to replace them — rather than admit the vacancy of total nescience — with the sinister features of a malevolent fate: Shiva the destroyer driving  out Shiva the preservers.
Habits of thought and speech die hard, and even educated men, trying to think new thoughts, could find only the old words — the ‘fenced opposites’, either God or devil.
The historian George Trevelyan, shortly before he became a Fellow of Trinity, wrote to his brother Charles:
‘Do you really think that the chances of events are ruled by any far-seeing or pre-arranging intellect?
I don't, and if I did I should have to suppose Providence to be the devil…’
The third Marquis of Salisbury was a devout Christian, but his daughter Gwendolen once heard him say, ‘God is all-powerful, and God is all-loving- and the world is what it is!
How are you going to explain that ?
This attitude was by no means confined to educated sceptics; it was probably even more marked among the urban proletariat, who had largely abandoned churchgoing and were alienated from the established Church, which they identified with a repressive economic and social system.
Hugh McLeod has written of the lower-class, ‘the arbitrary ruler of their world was not God but Fate.’
He cites the remark of a poor Irish woman, living in the London slums: ‘I don't believe there is a God at all.
If there is, he don t care for us I know.’
Pessimism was putting its mark on contemporary fiction.
Some of Thomas Hardy's leading characters are relentlessly pursued by fate; they come to grief through sequences of evil coincidences no less remarkable than those by means of which the earlier heroes of Evangelical literature had been saved.
In other words, we are seeing the same film, but it is the negative that is now being presented to us.
Hardy was not alone.
The longest novel of William Sharp (1855–1905), who also wrote under the name Fiona Macleod, bears the significant title,The Sport of Chance (1887).
In the year following publication, Sharp wrote:
‘What has always impressed me deeply…is the blind despotism of fate…the terrible, indifferent Fate, this tyrant Chance, slays or spares, mutilates or rewards, annihilates or passes by without herd, without thought, with absolute blankness of purpose, aim or passion.’
We think of J.M. Barrie as a whimsical, sentimental writer, but he wrote in his private notebook:
‘There is an ironical little God smiling at us.
Favours — then gives twist of string and down we fall.’
Into the vacancy in men's minds left by the retreat of the centennial myths of Christianity, crept strange cults and substitute faiths, some of which we shall look at in chapter ten.
Some were new imports, such as spiritualism, Theosophy and Christian Science; others were revised versions of older beliefs.
Nietzsche, having announced that God was dead, placed his Superman in a cycle of eternal recurrence, which seemed equally repulsive to the Christian and to the scientist.
Throughout the nineteenth century there were faint waves of Adventism, deriving from the Judaic roots at the heart of the Christian faith.
In Jewish eschatology, ‘the last things’ would precede the coming of the Messiah, who would judge the world.
Apocalyptic expectations, envisaging the end of the world as we know it, have strangely survived abandonment of the belief that all our lives are in the hands of Providence.
Fears that the world may soon end are no longer associated with God's inscrutable purpose, but with the human invention of the force of nuclear annihilation.
In some circles this obsession provoked hysteria of which no primitive adventist need feel ashamed; but earlier theological trappings were discarded in favour of more fashionable, secular ideology.
Both Marxists and Christians suffered from these fears, as if they detected signs of ‘the last things’ in the tension between the superpowers.
Some of the priests and pastors who joined the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament seemed to have abandoned the fundamental Christian belief that God brought the world into existence and will determine when, if ever, it will come to an end.
When in February 1983 the  General synod of the Church of England debated the nuclear threat, only the then Archbishop of York, Dr Blanch, thought fit to remind his hearers that the early church had not only held that the world would soon end, but had regarded this as a desirable consummation.
This gentle admonition did little to still the clamour of unilateralists in the churches; yet there must surely be many Christians who have retained enough faith in divine Providence to believe that the world will not end unless God wills it and that, if He does, it will be for the best.
THE EVANGELICAL WAY OF DEATH
‘Hold thou thy cross before my closing eyes;
Shine through the gloom, and point me to the skies:
Heaven's morning breaks, and earth's vain shadows flee;
In life, in death, O Lord, abide with me!’
H.F. Lyte (1793–1847)
When we think of religion in the eighteenth century, we are inclined to do so in terms of deists, sceptical philosophers and other pundits appropriate to the Age of Reason.
This is legitimate if we are tracing the evolution of contemporary attitudes to religion, or studying the history of ideas; but if we wish to regain an impression of eighteenth century people as a whole we need to recall that, even among educated men (themselves a very small minority), intellects cast in the mould of David Hume and Tom Paine were exceedingly rare, however great their later influence may have been.
Amongst the great majority, the faith of earlier centuries persisted, at least outwardly; indeed, if we look for a movement of thought and feeling that by the end of the century had penetrated into every class of society except the highest, we shall find it in the revival of ‘vital religion’, or ‘enthusiasm’, as it was also called.
This was the movement, initiated by the Wesley brothers and White field, which came to be called Methodism among those leaving the established church, and Evangelicalism among those remaining within the Anglican fold.
To this great current of faith, life in this world was not an end in itself, but rather the prelude to the life to come.
Death, too, was not the end, but rather the beginning of a new phase of existence.
This new phase, following on the  day of judgement, was to last for all eternity.
The hour of death and mode of dying, however brief and fragmentary in relation to eternity, thus acquired a fateful significance — fateful indeed, if the death of an unrepentant sinner should prove to be the broad gateway to everlasting torment.
Richard Cecil had this thought in the forefront of his mind, writing in his journal about his early life before his conversion to ‘vital religion’:
‘But through all my stage of infidelity I never could get rid of one thought and that was Death .
I found I must die.’
Memento Mori was in no sense new in the teaching of the churches, but it had acquired fresh importance in the light of the conversion experience, which was a central feature of the religious revival.
For those who claimed to have had this experience, the exemplary manner in which they met their death was the ultimate proof they were indeed saved.
For pious people, to whom the experience had until then been denied, the solemn hour of departure offered a final chance.
For sinners, the death-bed was the stage on which was played the last act of the impending tragedy.
The bedsides of the dying were therefore thronged, not only by pastors saying prayers, but also by relatives and friends, listening attentively for a last instructive word or, in the case of a sinner, for some hopeful indication that all was not lost.
Branwell Bronte was regarded as a sinner by his pious family and, when he lay dying, his father, the perpetual curate of Haworth, prayed constantly by his bed.
His sister Charlotte, hoping these efforts were not in vain, wrote to a friend:
‘I myself, with painful, mourning joy, heard him praying softly in his dying moments, and to the last prayer which my father offered up at his bedside, he added ‘amen'’.
How unusual that word appeared from his lips, of course you, who did not know him, cannot conceive.’
If the auguries for Branwell Bronte were, at best, uncertain, the same could not have been said of the last leave-taking of one of his father's predecessors at Haworth, the Rev. William Grimshaw (1508–63), of whom John Wesley wrote:
‘His intimate knowledge of Christ abolished all the reluctance nature feels to a dissolution; and triumphing in Him who is the resurrection and the life, he departed on April 7th, in the fifty-fifth year of his age…’
‘Triumphant death’, as it came to be called by Evangelicals, was, first and foremost, a triumph with Christ over death; in St Paul's words, ‘Death is swallowed up in victory.’
It was also a triumph over the devil, who was thought to be particularly active at death-beds, either gloating over the sinner who was about to fall into his clutches, or trying at the last moment to snatch a soul in the throes of fear or doubt.
The death-bed thus prefigured the decisive struggle for possession of the soul, which would take place on Judgement Day and which had been so vividly depicted in mediaeval murals and missals.
In Protestant countries since the Middle Ages, however, this struggle had become even more terrible and irrevocable, because the Reformation had renounced both prayers for the dead and purgatory as an intermediate stage, in which those who had committed venial sins might work their passage to a better world.
Belief in the devil persisted; for the dying and those ministering to them, Satan was no figment of a distraught imagination.
A case is cited by the Rev. John Warton in his Death-bed Scenes and Pastoral Conversations .
One evening he was summoned to the bedside of a dying lawyer, who had first robbed and then seduced a female client.
As Dr Warton entered the bedroom, he heard the dying man cry out to his medical attendant:
‘Why, will you not believe your own eyes?
Cannot you see him as well as myself; Is he not sitting behind me at the bed's head, to seize upon me for his victim, as soon as I have breathed my last?’
To bring about a death-bed conversion was the highest accolade an active Evangelical could win.
In 1816 Mrs Hawkes, a pious lady who had herself been a convert of Richard Cecil's, was called to the death-bed of a Mr Vaughan, whose last hours she described in a letter to a friend:
‘Our friend Vaughan ‘liveth '’.
He ceased to breathe yesterday about five o'clock.
I saw him depart as peacefully as a sleeping infant.
I must not stay to tell you his sweet sayings, save one.
About half-an-hour before his death, he said, ‘I am dying’, and soon after added, ‘‘I am in the high road to heaven.'’
About nine in the morning, when he was struck with death, he said, ‘Call for Mrs Hawkes — she will help me!'’
Dear creature!
He had a better Helper, even one who is Almighty!
May this Helper be yours and mine in the same trying hour!
For, oh, how awful is the seizure of the invisible, last enemy, sitting in triumph over the body, which is all over which he can have power.’
Despite these brave words, when Mrs Hawkes lay on her death-bed sixteen years later, she found herself assailed.
The Rev. Francis Fell, who preached at her funeral, was summoned to her side:
‘To my grief and surprise I found her mind bowed down to the very depths of painful disquietude, unable to realise the presence of her Saviour, and harassed with the fiery darts of the great Enemy…
Thanks be to God for His gracious help!
In this case, as in innumerable others, the sword of the Spirit prevailed.
Satan was bruised under her feet…‘
There developed an ars moriendi , or art of how to die, which had its own literature.
In emphasising the state of mind at the moment of death, it carried overtones of remoter creeds.
Thus the Tibetan Book of the Dead had  stressed that ‘on whatever sphere of being the mind of a man may be intent at the time of death’, this would determine his future state.
A similar thought is to be found in the Bhagvad-Gita:
‘Whatever a man remembers at the last, when he is leaving the body, will be realised by him hereafter; because that will be what his mind constantly dwelt on during his life.’
These oriental concepts find parallels in the teaching of Swedenborg,(see chapter ten), but would have been repudiated by Evangelicals, whose missionary zeal made any taint of paganism hateful to them.
They would have been reluctant to admit that the human mind, confronted with the mysteries of life and death, has found some common ground in all cultures and in all known periods of history.
It is doubtful whether the Evangelicals, in laying so much stress on the last hour as indicator of the soul's future state, realised how great a departure this was from the eschatology of the early church.
The first Christians had reserved the crucial decision about the individual soul until the second coming of Christ, when all would be judged; in the interim period, whether decades or centuries, the dead ‘slept’.
As the centuries passed and the second coming receded into the remote future, it came more and more to be assumed that the final verdict could be pre-empted.
The view expressed in 1829 by the Rev. Richard Whately (1787–1863), who later became Archbishop of Dublin, had become orthodoxy.
He wrote that
‘practically, to each particular person, the time of his own death is the time of the Lord's coming.’
It did not follow, however, that human judgement could anticipate that of Christ.
Clergy who remained untouched by the ‘enthusiasm’ of the Evangelicals were more inclined to adhere to the authoritative opinion of another Irish Bishop, Jeremy Taylor, the seventeenth century Bishop of Down, who had written:
‘He that ask of the standers-by, or of the minister, whether they think he [the dying man]shall be saved or damned, is to be answered with words of pity and reproof.
Seek not after new light for the searching into the private records of God…the event is registered in heaven, and we can expect no other certain notice of it, but that it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared by the Father of mercies.’
It was the Calvinists who claimed to have insight into ‘the private record of God’.
Jeremy Taylor, who had at one time been chaplain to Archbishop Laud, was no Calvinist.
Nor would he have had any taste for ‘triumphant death-beds’.
On the contrary, he enjoined upon those present on such occasions that
‘they make no outcries and exclamations in the departure of the soul; and that they make no judgement concerning the dying person by his dying quietly or violently, with comfort or without, with great fears or a cheerful confidence, with sense or without, like a lion or like a lamb, with convulsions or semblances of great pain or like an expiring and a spent candle; for these happen to all men without rule…‘
Jeremy Taylor's The Rule and Exercise of Holy Dying (1651) continued to be a well-loved book of solace and meditation throughout the nineteenth century; seven editions were published by Pickerings, and Rivingtons brought out a new edition as late as 1889.
He certainly exerted influence on those Evangelicals who adhered to the older, more sober tradition.
Chief of these was the Rev. Charles Simeon (1759–1836), the Vicar of Holy Trinity, Cambridge, who wrote:
‘If you should see me die, you will not see me die in that manner…
No, triumph will not suit me till I get to heaven…
But while I am here, I am a sinner-a redeemed sinner — that is my style…‘
As the century advanced — and secularism with it-pious propagandists laid great stress on death-bed conversions, and were sometimes accused of having stage-managed them.
Some pastors were diverting into a pious channel the unseemly activity associated with ‘wakes’, at which strong liquor was consumed.
The agony and the ecstasy of the eleventh-hour reprieve illustrated the central paradox of Calvinism.
If the soul's fate was indeed predetermined, it followed that all human endeavour to bring about its salvation must necessarily be in vain.
The great issue of predestination had divided the movement for ‘vital religion’ from the outset: Whitefield had been a Calvinist, but the Wesley brothers had not followed him.
Whilst many Methodists inclined to Calvinism, many of the leading Evangelicals, notably Simeon and the Rev.John Venn, Rector of Clapham, tried to avoid doctrinal controversies, which seemed to them irrelevant to the paramount issue: how to lead a Christian life and enter the Kingdom of Heaven.
Hope of maintaining this detached attitude, however, declined after the emergence of the Tractarians and Ritualists.
In reaction against them — and even more against those who defected from their ranks to Rome — some Evangelicals found refuge in high Calvinism.
Appropriately enough, there was a late input from Geneva, where César Malan, pastor of the Eglise du Témoinage, was an influential figure.
One of his converts was Charlotte Elliott, author of one of the best-loved of hymns:
‘Just as I am, without one plea,
But that Thy Blood was shed for me,
And that Thou bidst me come to Thee,
O Lamb of God, I come.’
Another convert was Emily Holt (1836–93), the historical novelist, whom we mentioned in the preceding chapter.
At the impressionable age of fourteen she spent twelve days in Geneva, and soon fell under Malan's spell:
‘We passed outside the city walls, and after a little  walk, entered; i green garden door, and made our way to a little plain square building, in which were arranged wooden benches, a pulpit and below the pulpit a plain wooden table and chair.
Standing by the table was a tall, upright, stately figure with long, white flowing hair.
And this was Dr Malan of Geneva!’
The memory of those twelve days of high summer and high Calvinism remained with her all her life, and was commemorated annually in her diary.
The preeminence assigned to last hours on earth gave a special significance to the final words of the dying.
These words were treasured by those present at the death-bed and recorded for the benefit of those unavoidably absent.
For the dying man to lapse into a state of stupor or incoherence was regarded as a misfortune both for him and for those unable to profit from his words, or even, perhaps, from some shared glimpse of the unseen.
Mrs Hawkes wrote regretfully of the taciturn death of the widow of her former mentor:
‘Mrs Cecil's departure was preceded by such an entire sinking of her constitution and by an exhaustion tending so much to lethargy that she was seldom able to converse…and it was a peculiar favour to herself and daughters that Mr Simeon and her excellent son were in the house and watched for every reviving moment to pray or converse with her in all holy tenderness, till she ceased to breathe.’
If poor Mrs Cecil had been less lethargic, she might have wished to echo George Washington's last words, addressed to his physician: ‘I thank you for your attentions; but I pray you take no more trouble about me.
Let me go off quietly.’
My great-grandfather, a Congregational Minister, who at Ongar had trained young David Livingstone for the London Missionary Society, also disappointed friends and relations by dying speechless.
One of his daughters, who had been absent, afterwards received a letter  commiserating with her both on her loss and on her absence; but the letter concluded:
‘And yet to have been there and heard none of the holy words which we should naturally have listened for from those lips at such a time — how distressing!’
In these circles such was the preoccupation with final utterances that some were recorded on occasions when silence might have been preferable.
In 1893 the following notes were made at the death-bed of a Dissenting Minister:
‘The name of John Bunyan was constantly on his lips.
Sometimes he fancied him in the room, and said, ‘I must just speak to John Bunyan; he's over there…
‘Then he called him in a loud voice, and said to me, ‘I think John Bunyan must be deaf.’
…He tried to sing a great deal, but it was difficult to hear what.
I think I caught a refrain from one of Sankey's hymns: ‘A bright crown awaits thee, Hold fast till I come’.’
Anxiety to hear and record last words was still strong at a time when anaesthetics were beginning to come into use, making it possible to reduce suffering, though often at the cost of rendering the dying person comatose and inarticulate.
The Christian attitude towards pain had always tended to be stoical; as Jeremy Taylor bluntly put it: ‘He that is afraid of pain is afraid of his own nature.’
Sin, pain and death were linked together; all three belonged inescapably to our transitory existence in an imperfect world, and each link in the chain led on to the next one.
This did not necessarily mean that the churches opposed alleviation of pain, but it did mean that the ministrations of the pastor were much more important than those of the physician, and those of the latter should not be permitted to interfere with the spiritual task of the former.
In the case of childbirth, which in the nineteenth century so often proved fatal, there was a certain disposition — at least among males — to believe that to relieve the pains of labour would be to  interfere with what had been divinely preordained; indeed the Bible could be quoted to this effect.
In some minds this attitude was linked — no doubt below the threshold of consciousness — with sexual guilt; someone had to suffer.
These misgivings in the face of the anaesthetist were weakened when in 1853, Queen Victoria's physician asked Dr John Snow of Edinburgh to administer chloroform to the Queen, who welcomed his help and was duly delivered of Prince Leopold.
Chloroform had already been employed by Dr James Simpson, Professor of obstetrics at the University of Glasgow; ether had first been used in 1846 by Dr Robert Liston for an operation at University College Hospital in London.
Before that time, alcohol had been in general use to deaden pain, though some sturdy souls rejected it on principle.
The father of the writer George MacDonald declined a tot of whisky before suffering amputation of his leg above the knee.
In 1842 a surgeon in Nottingham painlessly amputated the leg of a patient using mesmerism; but the hostility of the medical profession and the growing availability of drugs prevented wider employment of this practice.
In British India, however, where the collective prejudices of doctors were less effective, Dr James Esdaile made widespread use of the mesmeric trance to relieve suffering.
When he returned to England, medical journals steadfastly refused to publish any account of his work.
If suffering could not be relieved in a manner acceptable to doctors, patients would just have to put up with it.
Doctors persisted in this view, despite increasing evidence that opiates caused addiction, a fact widely publicised as a result of the literary success of de Quincey's study of the subject.
The drug in most common use was laudanum, a derivative of opium, which was often taken for bronchial coughs, as well as for consumption.
Pious persons disapproved of its use in any circumstances; by mid-century they had also come to deprecate the mesmeric trance, which was associated with the activities of spiritualists (see chapter ten).
The tradition continued, though more feebly, that pain must be endured as a manifestation of the will of God, who was either testing or punishing the sinner; suffering purified.
An observer at the death-bed of my  Congregationalist great-grandfather wrote afterwards:
‘It was evident to me that he believed a certain act of self-denial was required of him.
He thought it was the will of God that he should be called to suffer.
His poor weak frame trembled under the trial, but endure it he would.’
In 1879 the eldest daughter to the Rev. Richard Cecil died at the age of 97.
Her last hours were disturbed by ‘strong delirium’; but her younger sister, who helped to nurse her and afterwards wrote an account of her death, insisted that ‘the medicine given to her contained no opium.’
By the end of the century, use of drugs in cases of terminal illness was more common; but many would have shaken their heads at the thought of patients dying drugged, as is the norm today.
To keep one's faculties to the last, if possible, heightened the dignity of death.
Nothing could illustrate the point more vividly than the following extract from a letter written in 1857 by Thomas Boardman to one of his surviving sons, describing the death of another son, who was curate at Louth:
‘I shall ever remember the two or three hours conversation I had with him that beautiful May morning he died, before I woke the rest of the family.
We began to talk about four o'clock and the morning was most delightful, the sun shining along the Terrace and the air so balmy.
I was obliged to assist him to the easy chair towards the window, so that he could sit upright, for his coughing was agonising at times.
He looked out and said, ‘0 how beautiful is the morning, how lovely is creation!'’
I led on to the subject of the probability of his having shortly to be released from his pain and suffering and hoped that his trust was in his Saviour and he replied, ‘Oh yes, it is!
I feel an assurance that I shall be saved…
‘' Shortly after he looked me full in the face and said, ‘You have been a good father to me and I  am persuaded we shall meet again in heaven
Letters such as these were passed around among relatives and friends; often copies were made before the letters were returned.
A great archive, scarcely explored, must exist in attics and box-rooms.
In a century of imperial expansion it was inevitable that many sons died far from home and not, as they might have wished, in the bosom of the family.
If the exiled son were a soldier and died suddenly, as so often happened, a brother officer would write of his last hours to the sorrowing parents (see chapter seven).
Emigrants, feeling the cold hand of death upon them, would summon up their memories of home and their failing strength, to send back a final message.
Here is an extract from such a letter, written in 1863 by Charlie Thomson, who had gone to Australia not long before to make his fortune:
‘I would fain write a long letter to each one of you but have no strength…
Goodbye, my dear father.
My dear mother, you at least will soon be with me and your sorrow not as those who have no hope.
Christ will give you strength even to bear this trouble — be sure you do not regret the decision we came to about Australia…
Goodbye, my sweet little sister Alice!
I feel almost more sorry for you than for any, for you have let your heart entwine itself so round mine that the shock to you will be very great; take care that you be not too much overcome.
And now last comes my brave boy, my pet, dear Will, the one we are anxious about…what sort of man you shall be.
O may the memory of Charlie's love and his earnest desire that you shall grow up an earnest Christian lead you to…throw your whole soul into the service of Christ…‘
In his last illness Charlie Thomson was granted time to compose his mind and convey his messages.
This was regarded as a great boon by Evangelicals, who dreaded sudden death without the benefit of the clergy and their  prayers.
They held, contrary to Roman doctrine, that prayer for those already dead was ineffective; repentance before death was all-important, as was also forgiveness of those against whom resentment had been harboured.
These points are well illustrated in John Warton's narration of his talk with a woman in the last stages of consumption, to whom he gives the name ‘Mary Barton’.
She had been seduced by a man who deserted her and went to sea, carrying her curses with him.
‘The ship was wrecked; he perished in the waters.
Not a moment was spared him to say, ‘God have mercy on me!’
Mary Barton continues: ‘If we pray for the dead, Sir, will God hear us?’,
Warton replies: ‘It cannot be of any use to the dead themselves.
As the tree falls, so it lies.
Whatever was our state with respect to God at the moment of our departure hence, that same will it be at the dreadful day of judgement.’’
Because of the stress laid upon the need for timely preparation, there was no support for the common contemporary practice of withholding from a sick person as long as possible warning of the terminal character of the illness.
The shock to the patient was regarded as less grave than the risk of being precipitated unprepared into the next world.
Indeed, Evangelicals considered fear of death to be salutary.
Richard Cecil makes the point in a homily, ‘On Visiting Death-Beds’, which was published with his collected sermons.
He went to see a young clergyman, seized by what was thought to be a dangerous illness:
‘The first time I saw him we conversed very closely together; and in the prospect of death he seemed solicitous to prepare for it.
But I could make no sort of impression upon him…when I visited him a second time, the fear of death was gone, and with it all solicitude about religion.’
The second interview ended abruptly when the convalescent tried to embark on a discussion of the merits of his  water-colours.
As might be expected, Evangelicals were inclined to reprove those who were reluctant to have the sacrament administered to a gravely ill patient for fear of making him lose hope of recovery.
Although the doctor's status in the sick-room was rising, he still took second place to the clergyman.
The dilemma facing the parents of a seriously ill child was especially acute.
Such a case emerges from the diary of my great-grandfather, James Taylor, who was a doctor as well as an Evangelical.
In the spring of 1848 he travelled from Lancashire to Torquay for the health of his consumptive son, James, aged fourteen.
By late September, the local doctor concluded that the lad was sinking fast, and told him (according to the diary)‘that notwithstanding all the efforts which have been made to check the disease, they had not done so…and advised him to look to God to prepare him for whatever might be the event of the disease.
James remained thoughtful, very silent all day.’
Two weeks later the parson, Mr Gilton, administered the sacrament, after telling James that he was dying.
‘James gave to Mr Gilton some pleasing indication of a change of feeling, and he prayed earnestly that he might die the Death of the Righteous.’
He died on the following day.
By mid-century, however, the taste for deathbed scenes was beginning to change.
This was duly noted by Mary Sherwood (1775–1851), author of the often lachrymose children's classic,The Fairchild Family .
She concluded one of her Indian tales:
‘As there are but few persons who love to meditate upon scenes of death, and too many are only able to view the gloomy side of them, instead of following by the eye of faith the glorious progress of the departing saint, I will hasten to end of my story.’
A younger female novelist, Charlotte Yonge, unkindly described Mrs Sherwood as ‘first in the field of pious slaughter.’
Miss Yonge, author of the famous tear jerker,The Heir of Redclyffe was no less devout, but belonged to the  High Church party and practised greater moderation.
She was shrewd enough to see that, if all the saintly characters were killed off, readers might be inclined to deduce that ‘the sure reward of virtue is a fatal accident.’
her strong suit was the family chronicle and, if this was to be extended over three or more generations, enough leading personages had to be kept in the land of the living.
The proper state of mind of the dying was to accept the will of God and die at peace with all men.
Special weight was laid on reconciliation within the family, and prodigal sons were urged to speed to the parental bedside in order to receive a last blessing.
The earthly family was divinely instituted, and devout families believed that it would be reconstituted in heaven.
Samuel Butler and others have pilloried the Victorian paterfamilias, and there were indeed families that suffered the tyranny of fathers using religion as one of their instruments of subjection.
Cases are recorded in which a child was crudely exhorted to take a vow over the coffin of a parent to amend his or her childish ways; but there were also cases in which the death of a parent worked spontaneously on the child's feelings.
In 1865 young Arnold Taylor wrote from boarding school to his older half-sister:
‘I never felt that Jesus was a friend and I don't think that I really ever loved him before this half but now he seems always near to me and I like to think of Him more than I ever did before Mama's dying so suddenly and unexpectedly made a great impression on me…’
There were very many families in which, despite strict insistence on standards of behaviour, it was also remembered that God was God of love; in such families, religion reinforced the family tie and the family tie reinforced religion.
Charles Smyth has written that, if the Oxford Movement was ‘the religion of the Church’, the Evangelical Movement was the ‘religion of the home.’
The home ranked with the church as the place of religious allegiance, and this was symbolized at the beginning and end of the day by family  prayers.
In 1834 Henry Thornton, a leading member of the Clapham Sect, published a book entitled Family Prayers , which within two years went through thirty-one editions.
The family circle was extended by inclusion of the indoor servants.
At King's College, Cambridge, the Rev. Charles Simeon, who was unmarried, organised Sunday evening prayers for the bed-makers.
Family religion forged bonds which, it was hoped, would hold firm through the valley of death.
Infidelity was doubly feared as threatening this hope of reunion.
Some even feared deviation from their own narrow path, as if deviants were excluded from heaven or segregated.
Emily Patmore, the wife celebrated by Coventry Patmore in his poem ‘The Angel in the House’, was the daughter of a Congregationalist Minister, and mistrusted her husband's growing interest in the Roman Church.
She suffered from terminal consumption and, before her death said, referring to the priests, ‘when I am gone — they will get you, and then I shall see you no more.’
Two years after her death he became a convert, and married a wealthy Catholic woman.
He was more confident than his first ‘angel’ that heaven would provide him with the best of both worlds, and he wrote jauntily to his second wife that he had prayed that
‘two loves and two possessions might survive death, and not contradict each other.
Why not?’
In the last quarter of the century, much of the diminished energy of the Evangelical movement was channelled into exaggerated opposition to High Church practices and Romanism.
As W.E.
Forster observed in 1874, ‘the only belief much felt is that we are not and will not be papists.’
This internecine strife within the Christian community was a sad diversion of effort at a time when faith was rapidly decaying.
In so far as this tendency brought with it loss of belief in survival, the Evangelicals may be said to have unintentionally contributed to the process.
The twin pillars of their faith were the Bible, regarded inter alia as an historical record, and the central figure of the historical Christ, his resurrection and atonement.
On these pillars belief in immortality rested and, once these were  under-mined, little remained.
There seemed to be no place for the concept of a human soul sustained by a divine being, which exists in other religions, independently of the Christian accretion of the Man-God and suffering Saviour.
No document of the period so cogently illustrates the swift descent into infidelity as does the semi-autobiographical novel of Samuel Butler (1835- 1902), in which the hero, Ernest Pontifex, having been advised by a free-thinker to study the differing accounts of the resurrection in the four Gospels, finds that he cannot reconcile the discrepancies.
From that moment he abandons his faith, as well as his career in the Church.
The great impact made by The Way of All Flesh suggests that many young men shared the experience of Pontifex, especially those who, like him, had been brought up in accordance with strict Evangelical principles.
Their in fidelity was not only a solvent of family ties in this world; it also destroyed all prospects of reunion in the next.
Its effect was particularly damaging in relation to the recurrent tragedies of death in childhood, which are examined in the next chapter.
SUFFER THE LITTLE CHILDREN…
‘A gem that glitters while it lives,
And no forewarning gives;
But, at the touch of wrong, without a strife,
Slips in a moment out of life.
‘To H.C.’ W. Wordsworth .
A much admired memorial is that in Lichfield Cathedral dedicated by Sir Francis Chantrey to ‘The Sleeping Children.’
It depicts the two daughters of the Rev. William Robinson, a Prebendary of the Cathedral, who died, full of promise, early in 1812.
As the first snowdrops began to appear, his daughters picked a few to cheer their bereaved mother.
As the younger one was reaching up to the mantlepiece with the flowers, her frock caught fire; her sister ran to her aid, and soon both girls were engulfed in the flames.
Mrs Robinson, who a few months before had been the mother of a happy and united family, found herself alone in the world; an inscrutable fate had robbed her of the children who might have consoled her widowhood.
This tragedy, which acquired a certain celebrity because of the sculptor's art, illustrates a problem that must necessarily perplex religious people: in a religion teaching moral purpose, reward and punishment, what can be the meaning of early death in a pious family?
The most intellectually satisfying explanation is that embodied in the doctrine of karma , in accordance with which the dead child may be regarded as having completed the final stage of a soul-life that, in previous incarnations, had almost earned its passage and, after one more brief sojourn, was  able to escape from the cycle of death and rebirth.
This doctrine is satisfying because it invests early death with meaning, whilst emphasising the innocence of childhood.
Christians, having in the sixth century finally rejected the concept of reincarnation, were thrown back upon two main arguments justifying God's ways to man, neither of which is altogether convincing.
The first, having special application to devout families, was that God had favoured the dead child, by taking it to Himself and so sparing it both the suffering of this world and the danger that its relative innocence (for children were born in sin) would become corrupted.
The other, more brutal, explanation was that God was punishing the parents.
Examples of both explanations are found in the works of Richard Cecil, whose homily,A Friendly Visit to the House of Mourning was much admired and several times reprinted after his death.
In it he insists that God is in all cases acting through ‘His minister, Death’, even when His intervention appears arbitrary: ‘entering a careless family, He smites the first-born; and, as one who will be heard, calls aloud: ‘Awake thou that sleepest!’
’. It is assumed that pain and suffering are forces driving men to true religion.
‘in the wreck of human affairs, indeed, God often makes His truth appear; and causes His Gospel, like a plank thrown out to the perishing mariner, to be properly known and prized.’
In our day the argument is more frequently encountered that ‘the wreck of human affairs’ disproves the existence of an all-merciful and all-powerful God.
When ‘God's minister, Death’ visited the pastor's own family and he lost a child aged one month, he was at first overwhelmed by grief, as described by his wife in a memoir written after this death.
‘Nor can I ever lose sight of that flood of tears which then poured from his eyes, when reluctant nature was constrained to resign a beloved child to the cold arms of death.
Cecil retired to his study to ponder the explanation that God had acted mercifully.
He emerged in due course with an elegy, which he presented to his sorrowing wife, of which two verses read:
‘Lately launched, a trembling stranger,
On the world's wild boisterous flood,


Pierced with sorrows, tossed with danger,
Gladly I return to God.
Now my cries shall cease to grieve thee,
Now my trembling heart finds rest:
Kinder arms than thine receive me,
Softer pillow than thy breast.’
The fact that the bereaved mother cherished these verses, and had them printed after her husband's death, presumably indicates that she derived comfort from them.
In Evangelical circles, this confident explanation of the inscrutable working of providence persisted throughout most of the nineteenth century.
It is exemplified in the following extract from a letter addressed in April 1866 to my grandfather, Henry Cecil, on the loss of his first child, a daughter, aged four weeks:
‘Your touching announcement awakened in my heart various emotions.
The first was a pang of sorrowing sympathy with the bereaved and weeping parents; but this was quickly succeeded by a thrill of holy joy that the lovely flower, which was just permitted to take a glimpse of earth, was so soon removed from all earthly contamination!
What a delightful reflection for you and your dear wife that you should have been instrumental in contributing to the loveliness of the celestial kingdom, and that your beloved infant should be an additional star in diadem of Jesus!
I cannot pursue the thought, but just give the hint for your commiseration.’
A modern mind may well feel that even the hint was too much.
On the other hand, it was clearly preferable to the assumption that to be deprived of a child was punishment for sin.
One of the more saintly characters of the first half of the century was Mary Sherwood.
Whilst her husband, Captain Sherwood, was serving in India, she there gave birth to her first son, Henry, who did not long survive.
Henry was  almost certainly the victim of an ayah who, in the interests of peace and quiet, fed the child opium; in any case, the mother had no cause to blame herself, as she did in the following verses:
‘Lord, ‘tis Thy hand, Thy sovereign power,
That formed him in the womb;
Thy holy, just, almighty word
Now lays him in the tomb.
Far heavier strokes my sins deserve,
If Thou shouldst be severe;
Patient, submissive, all-resigned,
Thy just rebuke I'll bear.’
Whether or not one feels that, by modern standards, Mrs Sherwood's attitude was a healthy one, the fact remains that, despite the loss of a second child in India, she and her husband were able to return to England with their faith unimpaired, and settled down to live useful and active lives.
One of the hazards of the sudden death of infants was that they might be carried off before they had been baptised.
The doctrine of original sin and baptismal regeneration meant that an unbaptised infant could not go to heaven.
Devout parents thus lost their greatest consolation, that of being eventually reunited with their dead child.
In the tightly-knit Victorian family, this prospect of permanent separation was more terrible than death itself.
At one time, the so-called baptismal syringe was actually inserted into the womb in cases in which prolonged and possibly fatal labour was anticipated.
Mrs Sherwood records an instance in which her brother, who was a clergyman, was  summoned to baptise an infant whose life was in danger.
‘My brother, thought he would dine before he obeyed the summons, and by this delay the child was dead before he arrived…
If the soul of this child is lost on account of Martin's delay, how can he ever forgive himself?’
As the century progressed and belief in eternal damnation began to lose its hold, so too did fear for  unbaptised children.
Nonetheless, pious parents in moments of crisis, when no clergyman was present, would themselves apply the baptismal rite, fearing that the child would die unhouseled, unaneled.
Henry Cecil records such a case:
‘After we had prayed together in tears and heartbreak a few moments…1 then dipped my finger in water and, as the priest to my own babe at such a moment, touching the little forehead in the sign of our redemption, said:'‘I baptise thee Mary Salome, in the name of the Lord Jesus, of the Father and of the Holy Ghost.'’
Imperceptibly she began to mend — life dawned back…‘
Unhappily, it was a false dawn.
A few hours later,
‘my eye fell on a little hymn which my sister had copied; it was that beautiful one: ‘There's a home for little children Above the bright blue sky…
’ As I read it we could not restrain abundant tears and I felt instinctively as if it were a gentle, loving hint to us to be prepared for what followed.’
Mary Salome died half-an-hour later.
A corollary of baptismal regeneration was the need for the death-bed conversion of poor children, who had been left in ignorance of the truths of religion.
One favourite Victorian theme was that of the dying gipsy child, who at the last hour was found by Christian children and so found salvation.
A well-loved scene in Dickens’Bleak House is the one in which little Jo, the crossing-sweeper, first hears of God:
‘Jo, can you say what I say?’
‘I'll say anythink you say, sir, for I knows it's good.’
‘OUR FATHER.’
‘Our Father!— yes, that's wery good, sir.’
‘WHICH art in Heaven.’
‘Art in Heaven — is the light a-comin' sir?’
‘It is close at hand.
HALLOWED BE THY NAME!’
‘Hallowed be — thy —‘
‘The light is come upon the dark benighted way.
Dead.’
In The Water-Babies , Kingsley wraps his message in symbolism.
Little Tom, the sweep's climbing-boy, ‘had never been taught to say his prayers.
He had never heard of God…
’ Tom, therefore, had to pass through various stages of purification, in which water is the essential element, before he can be reunited in heaven with Ellie, the well-brought-up little girl, into those bedroom in Harthover House he had so unceremoniously descended by way of the chimney.
There is a further twist to the story in that Tom learns to forgive his tyrannical master, Grimes, whose soul, too, is saved.
This illustrates another aspect of Victorian didactic: it is not always the adults who bring children to the knowledge of God — it can work equally well in reverse.
The classic case is, of course, that of Little Nell.
There must be doubt whether Dickens himself held any firm belief in the afterlife; but he knew how to strike the right chord in the hearts of his readers.
Nell dies in mid-winter, far from home; but we all know that she is homeward bound and will see another and better spring:
‘Her couch was dressed with here and there some winter berries and green leaves…
‘When I die, put me near something that has loved the light, and had the sky above it always.'’
Those were her words.’
The imagery imprinted itself on the minds of a whole generation of parents who had lost young children.
Little Emily Napier died in March 1867; her mother an accomplished water-colorist, depicted the child on her death-bed, her small head encircled with leaves and berries.
On the next page of the sketch-book is a picture of her being borne up to heaven by cherubs, much in the  style of the concluding illustration of The Old Curiosity Shop .
Dickens has often been criticised for his portrayal of dying children; John Carey describes him as ‘a manufacturer of model children, pious little monsters, moribund and adult.’
This is the fashionable contemporary view; but the fact remains that such children, whether or not we regard them as monsters, did exist.
Here is an example cited by Richard Cecil in an address to the pupils of the school attached to his church in Bedford Road, London; he is recounting the death of one of their school-fellows, aged twelve, as narrated by the boy's father:
‘Awaking after a short sleep, he said to his mother, ‘I was never sure I should die before; but now I am sure I shall die, and go to heaven.’,
He begged her to forgive him all he had done amiss, and alter a pause he said, ‘God has forgiven all my sins.'’
His father then asked William what he should say to his school-fellows, to which the boy replied, ‘Tell them to prepare to meet their God; and tell them I said so’’
Mrs Sherwood relates the death of a boy of six, whom she and her husband had been asked to look after whilst his parents were in India:
‘He did not change for death till about four o'clock on the day he died.
When it was said to him, ‘Try to look on God’, he answered, ‘I was trying to make a little prayer, but my cough hindered me.’’
These examples could readily be multiplied.
Let us take one more, this time from the latter part of the century; it comes from a letter written by the Lancashire engineer and  philanthropist , F.W. Crossley, describing the death of his son, Richie:
‘We had such a sweet leave-taking yesterday at about four o'clock.
Such a loving heart as Richie's  is rarely found.
No murmuring all through the weary, awful fourteen days, and perfect peace at the conscious close.
‘You have borne it well, my darling,'’ I said.
‘You have Christ's peace in your heart now.’
‘Lord, I have’, with his own deep emphasis; and then, ‘Kiss me…
’ Oh!
God has done us such good in this sorrow.
It has been the cutting of a cord that was instantly and for ever knotted again inextricably.’
Today it is customary to have children removed to hospital, and to do everything possible to avoid a scene which might embarrass all present.
Evidence is growing, however, that we have a need to express our grief and that we ignore it at our peril.
It may be that Dickens was a better psychologist than some of his critics.
To the charge that Victorians sentimentalised the deaths of their children has been added the allegation that they may have inflicted psychological damage by bringing them prematurely into contact with death.
It is true, of course, that most Victorian parents regarded acquaintance with death as an integral part of the school of experience, much as modern parents look upon sex education.
Whether or not in our time parents may be said to be justified by the sad statistics of the permissive society, it is certain that in the nineteenth century, parents had little option because of the sad statistics of mortality among children.
Figures for the pre-census period are unreliable; but, according to an informed assessment of 1835, ‘half the infants baptised in London in the period 1770–89 were dead before the age of five.’
The 1851 census recorded of Liverpool that only 45% of those born there would reach the age of twenty.
Perinatal statistics were equally lamentable: out of every 1,000 live births in 1840, 154 infants died before attaining their first year.
During the remainder of the century no improvement was was registered.
It must surely be apparent that, with death visiting almost every family with such regularity, any attempt to mask or evade the reality of death could not have succeeded, and would probably have made the situation worse.
The problem facing Victorian parents was  to reconcile themselves and their families to the harsh realities; this most of them achieved through their religious beliefs.
It must also be remembered that death usually took place in the home, not only because nineteenth century parents preferred it, but also because, before the development of antisepsis in practical nursing in the last quarter of the century, to send a patient to hospital was much more likely to prove fatal than keeping him at home.
In these circumstances parents made a virtue of necessity; they believed that the experience of death could strengthen family ties, rather than act as a dissolvent.
In 1879, Maurice, son of the poet and novelist George MacDonald, died at the age of fifteen.
He was nursed by his family until the end, and his mother afterwards wrote, ‘his brothers and sisters were just like strong angels tending a weak one…
’ Readers of Jane Eyre will recall the episode in which the young heroine creeps upstairs at night to share the bed of her friend, Helen Burns, who is dying of consumption.
It is thought that Charlotte Bronte was drawing upon her memories of her sisters, Maria and Elizabeth, who were consumptives.
There is an authentic parallel in this case of the two sisters chronicled by Kilvert:
‘I went to see Mrs Prosser at the Swan, a pretty women dying I fear of consumption which she caught of her sister…
She was warned not to sleep with her sister who was dying of decline…
But her sister begged her so hard not to leave her and to go on sleeping with her that she gave way.
‘What could I do?’ she said.
‘She was my only sister and we loved each other so.’’
One may condemn such a reaction on grounds of hygiene, but not on any other grounds.
It is unhistorical to assume that children in the last century responded to death in the same way as children today; children's attitudes are largely conditioned by those of adults, and in our day the usual adult attitude is to evade the subject of death, to treat it as ‘morbid’ and, so far as possible, to exclude it from the home.
Against such a  background a child may well develop a troubled reaction, and one that seems to lack sympathy with adult bereavement.
One may suppose that such was the genesis of C.S. Lewis's sad comment on his step-children's response to the death of his wife:
‘I cannot talk to the children about her.
The moment I try, there appears on their faces neither grief, nor love, nor fear, nor pity, but the most fatal of all non-conductors, embarrassment.
They look as if I were committing an indecency.
They are longing for me to stop.
I felt just the same after my own mother's death when my father mentioned her.
I can't blame them.
It's the way the boys are.
It is the way boys are because it is the way adults are.
The face of death offered different features to the Victorian family, as compared with the contemporary scene; for them, death was not a taboo subject.
Dr Warton did not scruple, on occasion, to visit a dying woman taking his own young children with him; he describes how, despite the dirt on the floor, they knelt around her bed in attitudes of prayer.
A preacher, victim of a wasting illness, would refer in the pulpit to his forthcoming demise without shocking his congregation.
Thomas de Quincey was by any standards a sensitive little boy; when he was nearly seven, his much loved elder sister, Elizabeth, died.
He has described how on that summer morning he tip-toed alone up the back-stairs to the bedroom where her body lay:
‘Awe, not fear, fell upon me; and whilst I stood, a solemn wind began to blow — the saddest that ear ever heard.
It was a wind that might have swept the fields of mortality for a thousand centuries.
A child's response to death will vary not only in accordance with parental attitudes, but also in accordance with age.
In Scenes of Clerical Life , that careful observer, George Eliot, shows the graded reaction of the children of Millie Barton, who have been grouped round her coffin by her sorrowing husband (Patty, the eldest, is nine):
‘Patty alone of all the children felt that mamma was in that coffin, and that a new sadder life had begun for papa and herself.
She was pale and trembling…
Fred and Sophy, though they were only two and three years younger, and though they had seen mamma in her coffin, seemed to themselves to be looking at some strange show.
They had not learned to decipher that terrible handwriting of human destiny, illness and death.
Dickey had rebelled against his black clothes, until he was told that it would be naughty to mamma not to put them on, when he at once submitted; and now, though he had heard Nanny say that mamma was in heaven, he had a vague notion that she would come home again tomorrow, and say that he had been a good boy and let him empty her workbox.’
Victorian parents have been condemned for clothing their children in black for months on end, and putting even babies into mourning.
We can agree that they carried these shows too far.
On the other hand, we have been reminded by modern research, notably that of Lily Pincus, that to pass over death in silence and offer no explanation of the disappearance of a well-loved member of the family can cause psychological damage that plagues a child when grown up.
In the nineteenth century there were, of course, families in which the attitude to death was morbid or prurient, such families exist today.
No doubt Thomas Hardy's biographer is right to conclude that the novelist's sombre outlook on life was conditioned by his parents’ practice of relating ‘stories of suicides and executions.’
In families that did not indulge themselves in this way a healthier climate prevailed; children do not seem to have been unduly obsessed with death.
There can be no question that the family of J.M. Barrie was closely knit.
Yet he recorded that, when his elder  brother died in a skating accident at the age of thirteen, James and his sister, Maggie, played together under the table on which the coffin was lying.
Children can react in a very matter-of-fact way, like the little boy who, in the aftermath of his father's death, climbs into his mother's bed in the mornings.
Here is an extract from the diary of seventeen-year-old Lillie Higham, covering two days in August 1871, when her mother took ill and died:
‘Saturday: Fine, Mama worse.
In afternoon went in garden, got gooseberries.
Sunday: Betty came into our room to fetch us to Mama who was dying.
She died about four.
Tidied her room, then had breakfast.
Mary and Betty went home…
In afternoon Uncle C. came, stayed tea.’
There is nothing in the later history of this laconic diarist (who was my maternal grandmother) that would suggest that she was other than a normal ‘teenager’ of her time.
It must be allowed, however, that there were attitudes that can legitimately he designated as morbid; for example, there was a cult of consumptive girls.
Kingsley exclaimed, ‘How one does love a girl in a consumption!’
Kilvert belonged to the same club; he describes poor Lizzie Powell —
‘…crouching up in the sunny window opposite the vicarage, pale, wasted, shrunken hollow-eyed and hollow-cheeked, dying of consumption, but with the sanguine and buoyant spirit of that mysterious and fatally deceptive disease…‘
Evangelical writers began to recognise, as the century advanced, that not all their child death-beds were appreciated.
In the end, even gentle Jane Taylor, author of ‘Twinkle, twinkle little star…’ was not exempted from the criticism of those for whom the sharp outlines of heaven and hell had become blurred, and who regarded Evangelicals and Nonconformists as purveyors of needless  gloom.
Jane and Ann Taylor, who were the daughters of a Dissenting Minister, had published in 1806 what was the first volume of poetry primarily designed for children.
This was Hymns for Infant Minds , which won the praise of Scott, Southey, Browning, Arnold of Rugby, and many others.
It enjoyed a prolonged spell of popularity — at least among adults — despite the very high proportion of poems with titles such as‘The Day of Judgement’, ‘A Child's Grave’ or ‘For a Dying Child’.
The following verses are not unrepresentative:
‘A glorious troop shall fill the skies,
With Jesus on his judgment throne;
Then, first, the dead in Christ shall rise,
And leave the wicked dead — alone.
‘Think, dearest child, with what suspense
Thy mother, risen, shall watch to see
If all her children, rising thence,
Come forth with Christ the Lord to be.
This preoccupation with death and judgment was not merely a cultural phenomenon it was deliberate.
In 1817 Jane Taylor wrote:
‘I have sometimes thought that more might be done than is commonly attempted in education to familiarise the idea of death to the minds of children by representing it as the grand event for which they were born; and thus making a future state the object of their chief interest and ambition.
Long before the end of the century, with increased expectancy of life and, except among the less privileged, rising standards of living, the interests and ambitions of the young were turning into very different channels from those that Jane Taylor had thought desirable.
In 1874 her nephew, the painter Josiah Gilbert, found it necessary to defend her reputation.
He did so partly by relying on the unquestioned fact that death and violence were an  integral element in many books which were already on the way to becoming children's classics; from a list compiled rather later in the century one might cite Grimm's Fairy Tales, Hans Andersen's and the expurgated Arabian Nights.
Gilbert wrote:
‘Surely most people will think that children get little harm from such dramatic representations, whether in the grotesque of the older legend or in the homely treatment of the newer poem.
If a giant cuts off somebody's head, the spectacle is only realised as a striking and funny denouement…
Death itself is more curious than dreadful.
The child's mind demands strong lines and colours in the picture presented to it, while its moral sense is not satisfied short of the extremest sentence of the law.’
Gilbert would probably have done better to base his case not on the child's moral sense, which was largely that imposed by adults, but rather on the child's tendency to invest violence with fantasy.
In any event, among adults the moral rigidities of hell and damnation were rapidly disappearing, except in the families of the Dissenting sects.
This might have been expected to mitigate fear of death; unfortunately, with the general decay of faith towards the end of the century, it was not only terror of hell that was declining, but also hope of immortality.
In the face of doubts about the truths of religion, could bereaved parents still take courage and assume that their children's death meant only a brief separation, the prelude to reunion in happier surroundings?
If not, how could they, with Browning, greet the unseen with a cheer?
Broken columns, rising over the graves of those who had died prematurely, denoted truncated lives.
The more traditional cross symbolised fulfilment; but fulfilment implied a span of existence transcending the grave.
What if the grave were all?
Then indeed man was, as Hardy depicted him, the mere plaything of fate; life was a black comedy; perhaps Oscar Wilde was right to regard the aspirations of Little Nell as only good for a laugh.
For those who could  not laugh, the best remedy might be to try to erase the whole subject from their minds.
Cynicism, defiance, desperation — these were adult attitudes; so, too, was the attempt to evade the thought of death, as so many do today.
As Freud has pointed out, however, children do not normally repress the thought of death, but are more likely to express it in fantasy.
But the fantasies relate to the death of others; few children soberly contemplate their own deaths.
As Wordsworth wrote, ‘Nothing was more difficult for me in childhood than to admit the notion of death as a state applicable to my own being…
’ The instincts of Robert Louis Stevenson — that sanguine consumptive with the heart of a child — told him much the same:
‘I do not admit immortality, but I cannot believe in death: that is to say, in my own death…
How do you expect me to conceive myself as no longer existent?’
Until a certain age many children cleave to the secret conviction that they will live for ever.
Towards the end of the nineteenth century this belief began to impress itself upon a few mature minds that were open to a concept of childhood quite different from that of an earlier age, when children tended to be regarded as nothing better than undeveloped adults.
Criticisms of society in the previous century had cleared the path for a vision of childhood as a period of blessed innocence, before social evils could distort the child's perception of the world.
Childhood thus became a condition to be explored and valued for its own sake, much as the French ‘philosophes’ had formerly thought to examine and extol ‘natural man’in his savage state.
Romantic poets, Wordsworth and especially Blake, developed this idea.
Heaven lay about us in our infancy; the innocence of childhood was a spiritual category with its own space and time:
‘Eternity is not endless time, nor infinity endless space; they are the entirely different mental  categories through which we perceive the unfallen world.’
For Blake, the true antithesis was not between life and death, but between fallen and unfallen, youth and age, innocence and experience.
To grow old in vice was worse than to die.
Blake derived these views in large measure from Swedenborg (see chapter X), who had reserved a special place in heaven for children.
There they were brought up by angels, but only up to the ideal age:
‘Children in heaven do not advance beyond early manhood, but remain in that state of eternity’
Blake's ideas achieved little currency until late in the century; but there were others who, by a different route, were coming to hold a comparable view of youth and innocence.
These latter writers were trying to re-enter the lost world of childhood after first discarding the traditional concept of the afterlife.
The growing materialism of the age led them to envisage the hereafter as the eternal ‘Now’, and depict survival in terms of the senses.
The chiefs of this tribe were Kenneth Grahame and James Barrie.
Neither was a spiritualist, but both connected contemporary ideas of earthbound survival with the ancient superstition of eternal youth.
Grahame begins the prologue of The Golden Age with the wistful phrase, ‘Looking back to those days of old, ere the gate shut behind me…
’ Growing up is not just the pain of going away to school; it is also the acceptance of the values of the adult world.
Tragedy is not, as parents held, to die young, but to grow up and lose the innocence of youth and its impossible vision.
And what heaven could the preacher offer that would compare with the joys of the long summer evenings, messing about in boats with other laughing boys and girls?
These sentiments were shared by Barrie, who wrote in 1896, ‘Nothing that happens after we are twelve matters very much.’
A few years later he wrote Peter Pan for those who believed in fairies but did not want to believe in death.
Children who did not want to grow up haunted  Kensington gardens because they had been happy there.
Barrie had lost his youth, but he, too, had been happy, because he had met the children there.
‘To die’, said Peter ‘will be an awfully big adventure!’
It was the finest adventure of all, because it took place in the known world of childhood and, at the same time, released the child from the bondage of illness, old age and the death that adults died.
Rudyard Kipling was a more sophisticated and less sentimental writer than Grahame or Barrie; but he was not wholly immune from similar influences.
Like them, he was no spiritualist, though his sister followed the cult.
In 1899 he lost his much-loved daughter, Josephine, and this sad event may have been in his mind when he wrote the emotive story,They .
The woods and walks surrounding the old Sussex manor house are peopled by children who died young; the visitor, who is the narrator, is aware of them, but cannot actually see them; his hostess, who is vividly aware of the children's presence, is blind.
This story completes the reversal of earlier, religious attitudes: death has not released the children, enabling them to take their places in a happier realm above; instead it has allowed them to linger here below, continuing to savour the known joys of the here-and-now.
Kipling rubbed in this moral in the poem accompanying the story:
‘Neither the harps nor the crowns amused, nor
the cherubs’ dove-winged races —
Holding hands forlornly the Children wandered
beneath the Dome;
Plucking the radiant robes of the passers-by, and
with pitiful faces
Begging what Princes and Powers refused: ‘Ah,
please will you let us go home? ''’
(Mary, the mother, intercedes and the children
return to earth).
‘So through the Void the Children ran homeward
merrily hand in hand,
Looking neither to left nor right where the


breathless Heavens stood still;
And the Guards of the Void resheathed their
swords, for they heard the Command:
‘Shall I that have suffered the children to come
to me hold them against their will? ''’
Kipling's children have preferred the familiar earth of man to an imaginary, man-made heaven; his vision is earthbound.
In the century that has passed since Jane Taylor wrote about Christ mercifully taking children to Himself, the wheel has come full-circle.
TOMBS AND INTERMENTS
‘Death has set his mark and seal
On all we are and all we feel,
On all we know and all we fear…‘
‘Death ’ W P.B. Shelley
If Shelley reflected the feelings of many of his contemporaries there was good reason why this should have been so.
Death was a regular visitor to every home.
Death had not been sterilised, as in our day, and relegated to the hospitals, morticians' parlours and crematoria chapels; the fatal visitations were family events, at once more frequent and more familiar than is now the case.
Here is a short account of how death came in February 1838 to Todmorden Hall, an old house already darkened by the smoke of a growing industrial town on the border of Yorkshire and Lancashire; the diarist is Judith Holt, sister of the dead mistress of the Hall:
‘We set out to pay the last mournful duties through a road almost impassable with snow which continued to fall with a boisterous wind which blew it into immense drifts.
Again we had to view the signs of mourning at Todmorden Hall, the fourth time within four short years — and now alas! all looked more melancholy than ever.
There was the black coffin with its silvered ornaments and the mourner who sat at its head this time was a widowed husband!
And those two dear little children…
I took each upon my knee and told them that Mamma is gone to Heaven to  God Almighty, and asked them both to promise me that they would try to be good children and follow their mother to that happy place…‘
One of the children, the little boy, did indeed follow his mother ten years later at the age of fourteen.
His father could hardly complain; not far away in Manchester at that period only 43% of the children of the working-class reached even the age of five.
By 1848 Judith Holt, the diarist, had already followed her sister into the grave, at the age of forty-three; she had failed by only one year to attain the average life span of the gentry and professional class, to which her husband belonged.
In the labouring class, expectation of life was barely half as much.
We observed in chapter one how change in the nineteenth century affected every aspect of life and death, and how influence was exerted by two major currents — the Evangelical and the Benthamite.
The aims of these two movements, in so far as they touched on the rites of death, were sharply dissimilar: the Evangelicals aimed further to sanctify death as the gateway to immortality; the Benthamites wished to demystify death in order to concentrate on the material means of increasing human happiness on earth.
Both aims were in some measure frustrated by the inexorable march of change.
The eighteenth century had been marked by keen intellectual enquiry and, among the educated class, some decline in devotion to revealed religion; but at last leave-taking there had been little to disturb the old familiar ways; the sense of continuity between life and death, between this world and the next, was carefully preserved.
Old and young were attended to their last resting place by those who had loved them, and slept in churchyards adjoining the fields where in life they had played or ploughed.
Their graves were tended by surviving relatives in much the same way that they looked after the house of an absent friend.
At Eversley, where Charles Kingsley was pastor, he picked out the site of his grave and promised adjacent berths to some of his old retainers.
In rural Wales, where the old traditions persisted, the Rev. Francis Kilvert described one of these surviving churchyards, where communion with the dead  was almost palpable:
‘I went into the churchyard under the feathering larch which sweeps over the gate.
The ivy-grown old church with its noble tower stood beautiful and silent amongst the elms with its graves at its feet…
It seemed to be given up to the birds and their morning hymns…
I wandered round the church among the dewy grass-grown graves and picturesque ivy — and moss-hung tombstones.
Round one grave grew a bed of primroses…‘
For the new urban population, however, conditions had sharply deteriorated.
Some villages, especially in the North and Midlands, were quickly converted into industrial slums, where there was no room for living or dead.
Other villages were sucked dry of their impoverished agricultural workers, who flooded into the expanding cities and there became early victims of incessant toil, undernourishment and insanitary housing.
Churchyards were lacking; in some cities the poor were soon shovelled underground in common graves, dug to an initial depth of 30ft and then filled with rough coffins to within 2ft of the surface.
Within a decade the area might be dug over; the bones would then be sold as fertiliser and the coffins chopped up for firewood.
Congested city graveyards soon acquired very different associations from those about which Kilvert rhapsodised.
These were well summed up by Charles Dickens; he wrote of bearing off
‘the body of our dear brother here departed to a hemmed-in churchyard, pestiferous and obscene, where malignant diseases are communicated to the bodies of our dear brothers and sisters who have not departed…where a reeking little tunnel of a court gives access to the iron gate — here they lower our dear brother down a foot or two: here sow him in corruption, to be raised in corruption: an avenging ghost at many a sick-bedside.’
The urban poor tried valiantly to give to their dead a dignity they had scarcely known in life; but the attempt often proved unavailing.
Undertakers would give the poor no credit and, whilst efforts were being made to raise cash, corpses remained on their deathbeds for up to a fortnight.
Among the immigrant Irish, ‘wakes’ were exploited as a means of bringing in contributions, some of which vanished down the throats of relatives and friends in need of consolation.
The more provident joined burial clubs as a form of insurance; but these, too, were seldom alcohol-free, since the local treasurer was frequently the publican, who provided the meeting-place and the entertainment that went with it.
Poor people preferred to hold their funerals on Sundays, when they did not have to work and when public-houses were open.
There can be no doubt, however, that funerary liability was a powerful inducement to save; it was estimated in 1843 that between one-quarter and one-third of all deposits in savings banks were intended to provide for ‘a respectable funeral.’
Notwithstanding such efforts, the smell of death was seldom absent for long from the dwellings of the poorest people.
The Rev. John Warton, who was himself chairman of a small savings bank, recounts one of his parochial visits:
‘It was the height of summer and very hot…
I emerged into the sick room, the stench of which was overpowering…
I first opened the window.’
The painful problem of the corpse kept overlong was alleviated gradually by the provision of mortuaries, to which bodies could be removed pending burial; but this severed another link between the living and their dead, as the traditional overnight vigil by the body came to be abandoned.
The long delays preceding interment were partly due to the need to accumulate enough money to avert the disgrace of being buried ‘on the parish’.
To encourage surviving relatives to meet the fees of parson and sexton, as well as the minimal costs of the undertaker, open discrimination against paupers was practised.
The coffin, consisting of a few planks, was carried from the workhouse by other inmates; it was not allowed in the  church, but was met by the parson at the graveside.
No memorial was raised over a pauper's grave.
Warton has provided the following description of a man of eighty, who was sole mourner at the funeral of his equally aged wife.
‘Never, perhaps, before was such a suit of mourning seen to distinguish the mourner-in-chief; no long black cloak, no scarf, no hatband, no gloves…
The only funeral emblem that he wore was a pair of black worsted stockings, which no doubt he had borrowed for the occasion…
Coat he had none, but only a waistcoat with sleeves…fastened at his neck and in divers places below with pieces of cord…
On his head he wore a white nightcap…‘
It will be recalled that it was the spectacle of unseemly levity at the pauper's funeral that launched Lord Shaftesbury on his famous philanthropic career.
In addition to the urban congestion, there were two new factors, more or less coinciding in impact, which operated to degrade the traditional sanctity of the grave and hit the poorest people hardest.
One was the outrage caused by the Anatomy Act, which was briefly described in chapter one; the other was the onset of cholera, beginning in 1832, the year in which the hated Act came into force.
Poor folk had long been the chief sufferers from the raids of the body-snatchers, because of the flimsy coffins and shallow graves to which their corpses were consigned.
The insensitivity of the Benthamites, who promoted the Act, lay in their refusal to see how bitterly the poor would resent becoming the designated victims of the Act, as if their love for the dead were in some way inferior to that of ‘their betters’.
There were two main causes of resentment.
The first was that authorised dissection of corpses had previously been restricted to felons as an ultimate retribution imposed by society.
Almost a century would elapse before the prejudice thus created was extinguished, and donors began freely to leave their bodies for medical research.
The second prejudice against dissection was held by religious people who took in a literal sense the resurrection  of the body, and had an emotional commitment to this doctrine, even if intellect told them that an incomplete body could be no bar to the miracle of rising from the grave with the sounding of the last trump.
This may have been a popular superstition, but it was by no means confined to uneducated people.
In September 1842 Gladstone suffered an injury in a shooting accident, as a result of which one of his fingers had to be amputated.
The remains of the finger were preserved in a jar of spirits and buried with him when he died over fifty years later.
The Anatomy Act did not end the odious traffic in corpses, though it checked the more extravagant crimes of body-snatchers, such as the murders committed in Edinburgh in 1828 by Burke and Hare, and in London three years later by Bishop and Williams.
There continued to be corrupt sextons and workhouse staff, who illegally channelled bodies to the medical profession.
Hospital staff were particularly suspect: a riot took place in Manchester in 1832 after surgeons removed the head of a dead child, and three years later in Oxford only 16% of cholera victims could be induced to enter hospital at all.
Out of this noisome soil grew some of the funerary customs of the upper classes, which today strike us as so exaggerated.
The hideous iron railings round the tombs of the more opulent dead were intended to protect them against the depredations of body-snatchers.
In the new cemeteries, which came into existence to relieve overcrowded churchyards, gatehouses were often provided for watchmen.
The wealthy, as if trying to secure their dead not only against body-snatchers, but against decay itself, encased them in immense coffins, lined with lead, which six men could scarcely carry, leading Dickens to write of ‘a blind monster with twelve human legs, shuffling and blundering along.’
Kilvert, who in 1870 attended the funeral of a rich aunt in Worcester Cathedral, has described how the lead coffin, lined with white satin, was fitted into an outer coffin of dark oak, the lid of which was surmounted by a ‘brass breastplate’.
The second factor adversely affecting the rites of death was cholera.
Judith Holt recorded in her diary:
‘21st March 1832: The day appointed by Government as a general Fast.
To church in morning, where a very large congregation was assembled.
May Almighty God graciously vouchsafe to hear the prayers of his people and turn away his judgment from this sinful land!’
The general fast was not regarded with the same favour everywhere; in London it was dubbed ‘General Farce’ by the National Union of the Working Classes, which organised a demonstration.
Neither prayers nor demonstrations halted the advance of the pestilence, which traversed the country from Glasgow, where 3,200 died, to Exeter, where there were 400 deaths.
The worst sufferers were those in the cities, which had neither sewers nor running water.
The general terror was compounded by ignorance about how the disease spread.
One popular theory was that it was propagated by the miasma which hung about the damp, insanitary places such as overcrowded burial grounds.
The very corpses were thought to be contagious; in some parishes attempts were made to prevent their burial in consecrated ground, and it became necessary for the parson to conduct the service under cover of darkness.
Cholera victims who had hardly ceased to breathe were heaped precipitately into mass graves.
Undertakers' men and grave-diggers had to be copiously supplied with liquor to keep them at work, and this added to the disorder and indecency.
By the spring of 1833 the first onrush of the epidemic had subsided and the government marked the occasion in the way thought most appropriate, as Judith Holt's diary records:
‘14th April 1833: Appointed for a day public thanksgiving on the cessation of that dreadful scourge — the Cholera Morbus.
I hope we did feel truly grateful for our merciful preservation…
May God grant that the lives he has spared may be devoted to His glory and service!
‘
The respite was not long, especially for those living not  far from a seaport, and at the beginning of August there is another apprehensive entry:
‘Laurence Taylor died at Stubbylee of Asiatic Cholera, having arrived from Liverpool only on Saturday last; he was interred the same day at the old Baptist Chapel.’
Despite the efforts of man and appeals to God, cholera returned again in 1848–9, 1853–4 and 1866–7.
By the date of the last epidemic it had been understood that the disease was mainly water-borne, and steps were at last being taken to secure a safe supply.
The scourge had abated, but psychological damage had been done, which was not so readily repaired.
One side-effect was to increase the terror of premature burial (of which more later).
Cholera reduced heartbeat and caused muscular spasm similar to rigor mortis; anxiety to dispose quickly of the victims’ bodies led to gruesome errors.
The main symbol of death had long been that of the old man holding a familiar rural implement, the scythe, implying that man would be cut down when he was ripe for it.
The epitaph on the tombstone of a man of seventy-four, buried at East Tytherley, cites Job: ‘Thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn cometh in his season.’
Such comforting rural symbolism no longer seemed appropriate; death in the great cities came upon his victims more like a hungry Moloch.
There had always been tension between fear of the process of dying and hope of a happy hereafter.
It is well expressed in another extract from Judith Holt's diary:
‘Sarah Perkins took her sister home in the last stages of consumption; how I sympathized with her distress!
A mournful idea it seems — to go home to die!
And yet to a real Christian death has lost its sting.
How often have those lines been my prayer: ‘Teach me to live that I may dread The grave as little as my bed.
''’
But among adherents of Romanticism, whether Christian or not, the tension was being described differently, as when de Quincey wrote of ‘the oscillation of horror, alternating between death as an agony and death as a mystery.’
The Gothic imagination dwelt on the mystery, and found it more productive of nightmares than of dreams of paradise.
Doubters, sceptics and Benthamites sought to dissolve the mystery in the clear light of reason, but succeeded only in creating a vacuum that was equally disturbing.
Death, as in the classical era, was again becoming an underworld; it no longer heralded, except for the devout, a glorious resurrection.
Nor could men be sure, as faith diminished, that death would only visit them, or their loved ones, in God's good time.
As the concept of the predestined moment receded, there entered their minds not so much the ringing message of the Pauline Epistles as the echo of an older despair.
‘For man knoweth not his time; as the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare; so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falleth suddenly upon them.’
Declining faith went hand in hand with the secularisation of death.
The trend was illustrated by the new cemeteries, which were springing up on the cities' fringes.
Men were no longer buried in the shadow of the church where they had worshipped, but were carried away into some strange suburb.
There was, of course, a mortuary chapel — indeed Kensal Green had two chapels, so that Anglicans and Dissenters, even in death, could remain segregated; but the dead had become divorced from the Christian communities to which they had once belonged.
The very term necropolis, which came into common usage, harked back to the pre-Christian era.
The churches, slow to see that change must come, failed to take control of developments, which passed into the hands first of private enterprise, then of local authorities, under the general direction of Parliament.
A necropolis was established in Liverpool in 1825, and within five years was paying shareholders a  dividend of 8%.
In the London area, Parliament approved the operation of eight similar companies between 1832 and 1847.
These served the classes that could afford to buy plots or construct a family vault, which might cost as much as the total annual salaries of the domestic staff of a Victorian household.
Parliamentary intervention was necessary, partly to allay friction between the established church and Nonconformists, and partly to ensure that cemetery space was allotted at minimum cost to the poor.
The long-term solution was reached in 1852 when local authorities were empowered to provide for all classes and denominations.
By mid-century, responsibility for burial in urban areas was being progressively removed from the vestry and parish into the hands of representatives of the ratepayers.
Around the same time, Parliament took a further step towards excluding the dead from the inner cities by taking power to close churchyards.
The Corporation of the City of London had long maintained a non-denominational burial ground, though it had predominantly been used by Dissenters.
This was Bunhill Fields, where pilgrims came to pay their respects to John Bunyan and Isaac Watts, much as later and more politicised generations visit Highgate Cemetery to honour Karl Marx.
By 1852 Bunhill Fields was almost full; indeed, the last interment there took place two years later.
There followed an unseemly dispute between the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, who owned the freehold, and the City, which believed it had a lease in perpetuity.
Preservation of the graves was only assured after Parliament had pronounced in favour of the City.
High Church opinion, becoming more vigorous with the rise of the Tractarians, was outraged by the excess of pagan symbolism in new cemeteries.
Some of it was undoubtedly derived from associations with British India, where graveyards abounded in miniature pagodas and obelisks.
The Ecclesiologist , which began publication in 1845, complained that, instead of the true Christian symbol of the Cross, there was a plethora of classical urns, pyramids and broken columns.
Undercliffe Cemetery in Bradford displayed a pagan temple, guarded by two sphinxes, and Highgate actually boasted an Egyptian Avenue.
These developments  may have been in keeping with the new vision of Empire, but they did nothing to keep alive the Christian symbolism of death as the gateway to life.
In reformist circles there was also a revulsion against the eighteenth century tendency to fill the churches with grandiose memorials rendering fulsome tribute to the earthly triumphs and complacent virtues of local dignitaries.
Where Ritualist influence was strong, this campaign achieved some success; but it failed to eliminate monuments reflecting the mundane interests of the dead.
A monument to a railway engineer in Bromsgrove shows a train in bas-relief.
Highgate Cemetery displays crossed bats with a broken wicket, as well as a stone piano with a few bars of one of Puccini's operas.
Perhaps the most extreme flight from Christian tradition is the mausoleum erected in the cemetery at Mortlake, Surrey, to the memory of the explorer, Sir Richard Burton (1821–90).
It takes the form of a stone tent, to which his widow intended to attach camel-bells; a small crucifix, incongruously superimposed upon it, fails to redeem it from its bizarre and Bedouin appearance.
The significance of removal of the dead from the communities in which they had lived should not be underestimated.
The bereaved have always wished to ‘remember’ their dead, in the literal sense of reconstituting form and feature; an integral part of this process has been to visualise the place of death and burial and, if possible, to visit it.
Even Utilitarians were touched by this need.
Harriet Mill died in Avignon as she and John Stuart Mill were en route to Nice, and there she was buried.
In the same year, Mill bought a house near the cemetery and regularly spent half the year there until his death fifteen years later.
After the Falklands war, one could observe what great efforts relatives of soldiers and sailors killed there were prepared to make in order to visit their graves, and so keep memory alive.
The later Victorians were experiencing, to an extent that they themselves may not have fully grasped, the psychological impact of a sharp deterioration in the dignity and decency formerly associated with the interment and commemoration of their dead.
Once this alienation had set in, it was inevitable that, as in our day, the loved one should come to be regarded — at least by the conscious mind — as  no more than a body to be disposed of as quickly and hygienically as possible.
If the regret of the bereaved was not to be alleviated by continuing remembrance and hope of reunion, the whole process became one from which it was better to avert the eyes.
It has perhaps been too readily assumed that fear of death among Victorians was primarily fear of hell-fire.
This may have been true of strict Evangelicals, particularly the Calvinists, the dissenting groups such as the Plymouth Brethren, but in the population of the cities where churchgoing had fallen steeply, fire and brimstone were losing their power to terrify.
In place of the fear inculcated by the churches, there was beginning to re-emerge an older, pagan fear — that of the dead themselves.
If they were not lying securely in their graves, awaiting the Day of Judgement, what might they not be up to in the long hours of darkness, as the boards creaked and the wind howled on Wuthering Heights?
What evil forces were at work in a world from which God and His angels were being shut out?
Symptoms of reversion to primitive superstition about death are contemporaneous with Romanticism.
In the literate section of the community, decline of faith went hand in hand with the evolution of the Gothic story, imported from Germany; the hour of the revenant, the Doppelganger, the werewolf and the vampire had come.
Coleridge was no infidel, but his imagination was not immune from this contagion.
Thinking that the heart of the mystery might be found on the Brocken in the Harz mountains, he journeyed there in May 1799.
‘On the 1st of May,’ he wrote,
‘all the witches dance here at midnight: and those who go may see their own ghosts walking up and down with a little Billet on the back, giving the names of those who had wished them there.
For ‘I wish you on the top of Brocken’ is a common curse…‘
Coleridge's friend, Thomas de Quincey, wrote his own Gothic novel,Klosterheim , and passed on the infection to James Hogg (1770–1835), who, in The Confessions of, a Justified Sinner, borrowed the spectre of the Brocken and installed it at Arthur's Seat, near Edinburgh.
Readers became familiar with their Doppelgangers, as if they had turned a corner and unexpectedly confronted themselves in a mirror.
This phenomenon crossed the Atlantic and reappeared in William Wilson , one of the best known stories of Edgar Allan Poe.
In Goettingen, not far from the Brocken, the brothers Grimm were polishing their folk-tales, which brought a new frisson — even in refined translation — to many Victorian nurseries.
In one tale a women makes a boy into stew; but he has his revenge by becoming a bird and dropping a millstone on her head.
In another, a peasant and soldier watch for three nights at the grave of a rich man and so defeat the devil's hold on him.
Indeed the pact with the devil emerges as a favoured theme not only in Goethe's Faust , but also in Melmoth the Wanderer , the strange work of a Church of Ireland clergyman, the Rev. Charles Maturin (1780–1824).
Another Anglo-Irishman working in the same tradition was Joseph Le Fanu (1814–73), whose father, the Dean of Emly, lived and died in fear of premature burial.
In his will the Dean expressed the desire that ‘my body may be kept until unequivocal signs of my death shall have taken place…
’ The macabre in Joseph's fiction became strangely intertwined with his life.
He inherited little from his father, but his wife, Suzan, was daughter of a wealthy lawyer, George Bennett, and after the latter's death the Le Fanus moved into the dead man's house in Merrion Square, Dublin.
There Suzan was haunted by visions of her father, beckoning her to come and lie beside his tomb.
Whatever their relations had been in life, this was no sacred invitation, since it coincided with her loss of faith in the consolations of religion.
She became a somnambulist, and two years after her father s death she died suddenly during an attack of hysterics.
Le Fanu, in accordance with her wishes, placed her in the vault with her father, whose sinister purpose was thus accomplished.
Le Fanu was not alone in experiencing a morbid convergence between his life and his imaginings.
Thomas Lovell Beddoes (1803–49) had an obsession with death, and devoted much of his time to polishing his dramatic poem,Death's Jest-Book , which was published after his death.
He had studied to be a surgeon at Goettingen, and continued to practise occasionally.
His health never recovered from an infection incurred in 1848 whilst he was dissecting a corpse; he committed suicide in the following year bizarre incident took place in the life of the composer, Hector Berlioz (1803–69), whose first wife was the Irish actress, Harriet Smithson.
He had fallen in love with her when watching her play Shakespearian death scenes as Ophelia, Juliet and Desdemona; but after her retirement from the stage she took to drink, became estranged from her husband and died in 1854.
Ten years later, after the death of Berlioz' second wife, with whom he had been living before Harriet's death, he was obliged to disinter Marriet's remains, because of the closure of the small cemetery in Montmartre where she was buried.
As Berlioz, ‘leaning back against a cypress tree’, watched the grave-digger moving the decomposed body, the skull became detached, ‘the ungarlanded, withered, hairless head of ‘poor Ophelia’.’
Harriet had to share the grave of the second wife, who had dispossessed her.
Was there feeling in the tomb, as Emily Bronte's Heathcliff evidently believed?
He was not alone in thinking so.
Our Lancashire diarist, Judith Holt, who was a devout Christian, wrote after the death of her sister:
‘It is a foolish idea, but one cannot help thinking that the mortal remains can still feel when the immortal soul is gone.
I cannot bear to think of her as laid in the dark grave.’
Those who were not Christians were even more exposed to the belief that the dead might continue to harbour feelings, including, perhaps, feelings of resentment for injuries suffered in life.
D.G. Rossetti did not have a Christian conscience, but he was not immune from a sense of guilt about the long deferment of his marriage to his model and mistress, Lizzy Siddal.
During his absence from home one night, she died of an overdose of laudanum.
He buried her in Highgate Cemetery and, in a moment of remorse, thrust his manuscript poems among her golden hair before the  coffin was closed upon her — but not closed for ever.
Six years later, in 1868, he needed the poems to complete a volume he was preparing for the printer.
He secured permission from the Home Secretary for Lizzy to be disinterred but, unlike Berlioz, he could not face the grisly spectacle, and delegated the task to his lawyer.
It was reported to him that Lizzy's hair was still golden, but his MSS book stank; it had to be disinfected and was eventually burned.
Rossetti decided to be buried elsewhere when his time came.
Uncertainty about the afterlife and speculation about the dark mystery of death encouraged research into the strange hinterland where life begins and ends.
Medical science was not yet equipped for investigation into near-death experiences, to which we shall refer in the final chapter; almost the only form of resuscitation with which doctors were familiar was that following near-fatal immersion in water, accompanied, as it often is, by a rapid replay of the victim's life.
There were, however, two new fields of research; galvanism (as use of electrical current was at first termed) and mesmerism.
The vivifying force of electricity was recognised, and a fictional experiment is described in Mary Shelley's Frankenstein (1818).
An actual experiment is described in the Newgate Calendar .
When Professor Aldini applied galvanism to the face of a felon who had just been cut down from the gallows,
‘the jaws of the deceased criminal began to quiver and the adjoining muscles were horribly contorted and one eye actually opened…
Mr Pass, the beadle of the Surgeon's Company, having been present during this experiment, was so alarmed that he died soon after his return home from fright.’
The second field of investigation was mesmerism.
Sleep had always been regarded as being in some way analogous to death; the hypnotic trance was seen as having aspects of both conditions.
If, under its influence, normal physical functions could be suspended, perhaps the hand of death, too, could be stayed.
This was the theme ingeniously exploited by Poe in his tale,The Facts in the Case of M. Valdemar , in which a semblance of life was related as having been preserved in a man mesmerised when at the point of death.
The story, published in the USA in 1845, was reprinted in England as a pamphlet with the title,Mesmerism in Articulo Mortis , and was widely held to be an account of a real experiment.
In his earlier story,The Premature Burial (1844), Poe set out to confuse his readers: whilst the pseudo-autobiographical part is clearly fiction, the introductory section, with its reference to the ‘Chirugical Journal of Leipzig’, seems intended to be read as fact.
It cites the case of ‘Edward Stapleton…a young attorney of London’, who appears to have died of typhus, but is restored to life by use of a ‘galvanic battery’.
Stapleton afterwards declares that ‘at no point was he altogether insensible’.
It is tempting to believe that in this story Poe may have had in mind a case of premature burial, in which the principal figure was the mother of his patron, John L. O'Sullivan.
O'Sullivan, who in 1837 founded The US Magazine and Democratic Review , to which Poe was a contributor, later became American Minister in Lisbon, where my grandfather stayed with him.
The Minister's wife related to my grandfather, in the presence of her mother-in-law, how the latter had accompanied her husband many years before on a mission to the Barbary Coast, where plague was raging.
She soon fell victim, and ceased to show any signs of life.
Emergency regulations insisted upon immediate burial, and her body was carried to a cemetery outside the town.
There O'Sullivan senior, in an agony of grief, prostrated himself on his wife's body and at once detected some sign of life.
Hurrying back to the town, they applied restoratives and brought her back to consciousness.
She at first regarded the episode as a nightmare: ‘I dreamed I seemed to you all to have died.’
The younger O'Sullivans liked to tell this macabre tale and it is very possible that Poe, too, may have heard it.
In assessing the impact of stories of premature interment, one must bear in mind that for most of the nineteenth century, medical science, such as it was, was helpless in the face of coma and cardiac arrest; if the patient had apparently ceased breathing and had no discernable  heartbeat, it was assumed that death had come.
In the age of the life-support machine, we may sometimes look back wistfully to those days, when doctors and relatives of the moribund person were not faced with the agonising decision whether or not to preserve the existence of a human vegetable.
One hundred years ago, however, mistrust of the medical profession and loss of belief that divine providence had decreed all our exits from the stage, combined in some sensitive souls to produce a state of mind akin to panic.
In 1868 a certain Mr Vester of New Jersey devised an elaborate coffin with a narrow passage, leading to an exit elevated above ground.
He demonstrated its use before a large crowd and emerged unscathed, whilst an attendant band played a suitable dirge for the benefit of the spectators.
This sombre event, which was reported in the London Times , may have stimulated the construction a few years later of a strange mausoleum in Paisley.
There a Scottish engineer, Dundas Porteous, erected in the Woodside Cemetery a vault for his family surmounted by a bell, which could be tolled from within.
Whether this device would, in a crisis, have served to drive people away or draw them to the spot seems not to have been put to the test.
Fear of premature burial was undoubtedly one factor, if not a major one, in bringing about cremation, the most noteworthy funerary innovation of the century.
The main argument was, of course, the overcrowding of city graveyards, to which we have already referred.
There was also a sanitary argument which seemed to have scientific backing, even if evidence was lacking.
It was voiced by the Queen's Surgeon, Sir Henry Thompson, who described cremation as absolutely necessary for the bodies of those dying of infectious diseases.
This was strong language, and must have swayed many who would have liked to uphold the religious tradition of burying the body whole to await resurrection.
Clergymen accused the early Cremation Societies of creating local monopolies, which were putting the new practice beyond the reach of the poor.
In 1878 the Vicar of Woking unsuccessfully opposed acquisition of the site for the Brookwood Crematorium.
It was difficult, however, to find valid objections, either  in law or logic.
The Low Church Bishop of Manchester, James Fraser, admitted in a sermon in 1874 that,
‘The omnipotence of God is not limited…
Could it be supposed that it would be more impossible for God to raise up a body at Resurrection, if needs be, out of elementary particles, which had been liberated by burning, than it would be to raise up a body from dust?’
As so often happens, a sound case was weakened by one of its more fanatical advocates.
An eccentric Welsh atheist, Dr William Price, cremated the body of his illegitimate infant, to whom he had given the name Jesus.
Local opinion was outraged; Price was brought to trial and would have been convicted by the jury if the judge had not insisted that his offence had been against morals and not against the law.
It was a legal precedent, if not a very reassuring one.
The great majority, even among those whose Christian ties were loosened, continued to observe the old ‘rites of passage’.
The innovation, however, had come to stay; it was hygienic, clinical, and consistent with the increasing secularisation of the age.
The only result of clerical opposition was that the established Church once again forfeited its chance to control developments.
If it had been in charge from the outset, its architects and liturgists might have devised more dignified surroundings and procedures than those that now prevail.
The chance was lost and the secularists took over.
Their legacy has been,
‘The crematorium chapel with pseudo-altar, badly-canned music, sliding doors or false-bottomed catafalque, gothic chimney stack and other offences against a decorous leave-taking.’
John Betjeman leaves us with this vignette:
‘Between the swimming-pool and cricket-ground
How straight the crematorium driveway lies!
And little puffs of smoke without a sound
Show what we loved dissolving in the skies.’