

It was seven o'clock on Sunday morning when Marie reached the kiosk; far too soon yet to open up.
It was still raw and cold.
Overnight, a damp fog had seeped inland from the sea, hanging above the beach, clinging to the buildings.
The muffled whooping of fog-horns showed that there were ships, anchored somewhere out there in the Estuary, waiting to dock.
The Big Wheel, with its spindly framework of long, slender struts, girders, and bracing wires stood out in delicate black outline against the thinning white mist.
The arcades were still shuttered.
There was no one about.
There was no wind.
The night before, Marie had been restless and unable to sleep.
At four in the morning, in sheets clammy with sweat, she was still awake.
Like a tape-recorder gone berserk, endlessly repeating a rewind and play sequence, her mind wittered away, tormenting her with Mr Bishop's words: ‘No pin-up; slow, slow; next to nowt; no pin-up; slow, slow; next to nowt.’
At last, she could bear it no longer .
‘Shut up, will ya!’ she yelled, and put her hands over her ears.
Later, walking along the prom in the deep silence of that foggy early morning, she tried to taunt herself out of her depression: ‘You never learn, do you?
I mean, what do you expect!
He was just like all the others.
— Only you were too thick to see it.
So what's new?— Don't know what you're making all the fuss about!’
And, by the time she climbed down the wooden steps to the kiosk, she had managed to coax her lips into a sour smile.
The padlock on the back door hung open.
‘I locked that!’ thought Marie, hauling herself up into the dim interior.
It took seconds for her eyes to adjust to the darkness.
The hut had been ransacked: inside, it was a total wreck.
Some of the cupboards containing the stock had been unlocked but others had been kicked in.
The contents of all of them had been pulled out and  scattered all over the floor.
The empty tin cash-box lay gaping open in one corner, twisted and crumpled as if someone had stamped on it repeatedly.
The sauce from Mr Bishop's tomato ketchup bottles had been emptied out in great red gobs or smeared over the cupboards.
One bottle had been flung against the wall where it had exploded in shards of glass and a bloody, dribbling splash.
Sticky pools and channels of drink were seeping out through the gaps in the floorboards on to the sand beneath the kiosk.
Like a cruel joke, someone had tidily piled the crushed and empty drink cans in one comer: not a single full one remained.
Nothing remained that had not been ripped, smashed or kicked in.
The cupboard doors had all been deeply hacked and scored with a knife, every crisp bag had been burst, every stick of rock shattered and splintered: it was a very thorough job.
Marie opened the shutters, letting light in on the devastation.
Crisps crunched under her feet.
She kicked aside some of the mess, bent down to pick up a crisp packet, dropped it again and leaned against a wall, overwhelmed.
‘What on earth's been going on here, then?’
At first, Marie looked towards the open back door.
She saw a black labrador paddle out of one of the breakwater pools and shake itself, in a flurry of spray.
‘I'm here, Marie.
Over here.’
Simon was standing, looking in through the serving-hatch.
‘This place has had a good going over!
They didn't miss much, did they?’
‘Wait a minute,’ said Marie.
‘I can't talk from in here.
I'll come round there.’
She swung herself down from the back door and went round to the front steps of the kiosk.
‘I heard about Mr Bishop.
Just now.
On the local news on the radio.
poor old bloke!
I can hardly believe it.
— And now all this, as well.
I mean, who'd do something like this, eh?
I bet Madge is in a right state!’
‘She doesn't know about this yet,’ said Marie.
‘I've only just found it myself.’
‘I was just taking the dog for a walk.
I saw the shutters open, so I came over.
— I was surprised to see you in there.
It's a bit early for you to be down here, isn't it?’
‘Yes, but I couldn't sleep last night.
Thinking about Mr Bishop and that.
Thought I might as well come down here.’
‘Sit down a minute,’ said Simon.
‘It must have given you a shock finding this, after yesterday and everything.
I mean, after Mr Bishop getting himself drowned.’
Marie sat down.
She was pleased to see him.
To Marie, many of the boys she knew, like Gazzer, for instance, were like daft little kids compared to Simon.
And it was true that Simon had the self-possession of somebody much older: he seemed to have everything worked out.
Where Gazzer was excitable and unpredictable, Simon was cool and even-tempered; where Gazzer was daft and impulsive, he was thoughtful.
Marie felt safe with him.
She didn't need to be on her guard all the time.
You could trust him not to take the mickey, or to turn round and bite your head off.
Or to say one thing while he was thinking another.
He was good with people: one day, when Madge trapped him outside the kiosk, Marie had been embarrassed hearing her prattle on.
But Simon had been really nice to her, not losing his patience or making excuses to escape.
He had asked her all about the kiosk, about where she lived; treating her as if she was interesting and important, not a boring, silly old woman.
Later, Madge had said: ‘You've got yourself a smashing lad there, Marie!
There's not many got time for us old ‘uns.
— Mind, if I was fifty years younger I'd be after him myself!— A right charmer and no mistake!’
Marie had been pleased when Madge had said this: it backed up her own opinion of Simon, that he was a genuine person and kind.
—‘And there's not too many of them about,’ Marie had thought, at the time.
Now, after what had happened with Mr Bishop, she had become even more convinced of this.
‘What's been going on, then?’ asked Simon.
‘Why don't you tell me about it?— Sorry I haven't been around for the last couple of days.
I've been away, see, since Thursday, with my Mum and Dad.
We went down to see my Gran.
Only got back late last night.’
Marie told him about Mr Bishop being drunk and getting himself drowned; about Gazzer finding Madge wandering along the prom and having to take her to Mr Bishop's brother because she wasn't responsible for herself.
But, all the time, she was thinking about Simon's family.
She had been on a bus once and had seen Simon in a posh  car pulling out of an ‘executive’ housing estate opposite the boating lake.
The estate had a huge wall around it, with a sign saying ‘PRIVATE’ at the entrance.
Simon had never told her where he lived.
Marie was sure that this was because he didn't want to make his family out as ‘better’ than hers: he knew she lived on a scruffy council estate with a bad reputation.
But they had been better than her family.
Marie could see that, even after one glimpse from the top of a bus.
His mother driving the car, so happy, young-looking and fashionably dressed and his father, a big, confident man in a smart suit, smiling and turning round to say something to Simon in the back seat.
Marie thought of her own mother with her frumpy clothes and ageing, lined face: no one would have guessed that she was only forty-two.
She thought of the purple crimplene trousers with the saggy bum and elasticated waist that her mother put on to keep warm in the factory and the thick support tights she wore all year round, even under her trousers, because she said her legs ached.
And she couldn't drive a car.
Her father, she didn't compare at all.
You couldn't begin to compare a father like hers, who wasn't there and whose face and voice were so vague now in your memory that you' d almost forgotten them, with a father like Simon's who had such a powerful physical presence.
‘Let's have a look at the damage, then,’ Simon was saying.
As they walked round to the back door, Ben, Simon's dog, came lolloping up the beach, charged at Marie with a stick in his mouth and laid it down carefully at her feet.
He backed off, barking.
‘He wants to play,’ said Simon.
‘He's really taken to you, hasn't he?
He doesn't give his stick to just anybody.
He's dead choosy!’
It always pleased Marie when Simon said that she got on well with his dog: it made her feel special.
She picked up the stick and hurled it, skimming it low over the shallow pools left by the tide.
As she drew back her arm to throw, the dog revved up, his back legs scrabbling frantically in the sand.
As soon as she released the stick, he shot off, following its long, curving flight out on to the sandbanks.
The mist had cleared now.
Further down the coast you could see the dock tower, tall and elegant, rising out of the squat warehouse buildings around it.
Across the Estuary, two miles away, the sun was lighting up a narrow strip of sand on the Yorkshire coast.
Simon pulled himself up inside the kiosk: ‘It looks like a bomb's hit it!— Is that the cash-box over there?
How much did they get?’
‘Nothing,’ said Marie.
‘Mebbe that's what they were after in the first place.
There was nearly a hundred quid in there — we did good business yesterday morning.
I forgot to give it to Madge when she asked for the keys.
But after I locked up I took it round to Mr Bishop's brother.’
‘How did they break in, then?’
‘They didn't break in,’ said Marie.
‘They just unlocked the padlock.
Go and see.’
‘I never noticed that,’ said Simon as he went back to check.
‘You're right, nobody's forced it.
They must have had a key, then!’
‘They had keys to the cupboards as well,’ Marie added.
Simon thought a minute: ‘Are you sure you closed those padlocks?
I mean, you could easily have forgotten, couldn't you, what with finding out about Mr Bishop?
Nobody could blame you for it.’
‘I did lock up!’ said Marie.
But, even as she answered him so decisively, she was thinking: ‘I did, didn't I?’
Simon shrugged: ‘If you're so sure….
But did you say Madge asked for the keys?
Has she got them, then?’
‘Yes.
There was two bunches of keys both the same as each other with the house keys on and the keys to this place.
Mr Bishop had one lot in his pocket when he got drowned.
Suppose they're at the bottom of the sea now.
And Madge has got the other set.
Well, I give 'em to Gazzer to give to her.’
‘So Gazzer took them, did he?’
‘Yes, but he give them to Madge.’
‘Did you see him do that?’
‘No,’ said Marie.
For a moment, she looked at the tomato ketchup on the walls and thought of Gazzer's graffiti.
She thought of him nicking the crisps, of him not caring what he did.
He'd said that himself, hadn't he?
‘No,’ she said finally.
‘He's daft but he wouldn't do this.’
‘He may not be as daft as you think,’ said Simon.
‘I'd watch  him if I were you.
I'd be careful he's not making a fool of you.
— Anyway, whoever did this little lot needs watching.
They're not right in the head.’
‘No,’ said Marie.
‘Not Gazzer.’
‘Well, I'm just worried about you, that's all.
I wouldn't like to be stuck down a dark alley at night with whoever put the boot in here.
Looks like they went berserk.’
Marie thought of Gazzer stamping with his big boots.
‘And they used a knife,’ said Simon.
‘Gazzer hasn't got a knife.
I asked him for one yesterday and he said he never had one.
And anyway,’ said Marie, ‘I've known Gazzer all my life.’
‘Watch yourself all the same,’ said Simon.
‘After all, you never can tell.’
Marie smiled at him.
In spite of everything: Mr Bishop's death, the wrecked kiosk, she felt happy because Simon cared enough to be worried about her.
‘Let's clear this up, then,’ he said.
‘Take your coat off first.
You don't want to get that messed up.’
Marie hung the leather jacket out of the way, over the top of the back door.
‘Mr Bishop'll go mad when he sees this lot.’
Then she remembered.
‘I forgot about him being dead!’
‘You got on all right with him, didn't you?’ said Simon.
He was shovelling up the broken glass on to a piece of cardboard.
Outside, Ben was barking for Marie to go and chuck sticks fur him.
Marie felt she could tell Simon everything: he was a good listener.
‘He wasn't really absent-minded, you know, Mr Bishop.
He was testing me out, leaving that cash lying about.
To see if I'd nick it or not.’
Simon laughed.
‘Crafty old beggar!
My Dad would've got on well with him.
He says that you can't trust anybody in business.
Look out for number one.
protect your interests.
He's always going on about that!’
But Marie wasn't listening: ‘He said these other things about me, Mr Bishop did.’
‘What did he say?’
‘Oh, it doesn't matter,’ said Marie.
‘He's dead now, isn't he?
A good job an’ all….’
Simon looked up surprised, even amused: ‘And I thought you liked him!’
Immediately, Marie felt guilty: ‘I didn't mean that — what I just said.
I don't know why I said it.
— He was right anyhow.
I was useless at this job….’
‘Have you got any dustbin bags?’ asked Simon.
‘I'll take this lot to the nearest litter bin.’
Marie held the bag open while he tipped in the empty drink cans.
They worked in silence until he said, ‘Do you mind if I ask you something?’
‘No, course not.’
‘Look, don't get mad or anything.
I mean, I can understand it, honestly.
But — well, you didn't do this yourself, did you?
To get back at him?— I understand it if you did.
And you can tell me.
You know I'd never breathe a word to anybody.
You know that, don't you?
I mean, I can see that he upset you about something.’
Marie was bewildered.
‘But he was already dead!
What's the point in smashing this place up if he's already dead?’
Simon shrugged.
‘people do all sods of things.
When they get upset.
Sometimes they can't even remember doing them.
I mean, your mind plays tricks on you, doesn't it?— But look, I'm sorry I said it.
It was a daft idea, really stupid.
You're not the type to let yourself get carried away like that, are you?— Forget I said it, will you?
I must have been crackers even to think it!’
And he put his arm round her shoulders.
He had never touched her before, or kissed her.
Marie had been wondering when he would.
But then he picked up the rubbish bag and slung it over his shoulder.
‘I'll just go and dump this.
I might have to walk up to the pier to find a bin.’
Marie could hear Ben's barking growing fainter and fainter as he raced after Simon along the beach.
It was cut off, abruptly.
probably Simon had thrown a stick for him.
The back door swung to.
Left alone, Marie retreated to her comer and sat on top of a cupboard in a mess of spilled crisps and ketchup.
She felt dizzy with confusion.
Her mind, like the living screen in a darkened cinema, began to show her pictures….
There she was, on Saturday night, locking up the kiosk, stretching out her hand to close the padlock on the back door….
But then the screen went dead: she couldn't imagine the end to that scene.
Then she saw Gazzer, stamping about like a loony, feet flying in all directions.
She might have laughed if she hadn't felt so sick.
Then, larger than life, so vivid she might almost have reached out and touched herself, there she was, transformed, hardly recognizable: teeth bared in a grin of manic glee, her eyes white-hot and blazing like a berserk android in a film she had seen once.
She saw herself pull back her arm, and, with more than human strength, launch a red missile.
Streaking a fiery path through space it blasted into the kiosk wall.
Crash!
The ketchup bottle cascaded out into a million glass fragments which showered down in slow motion; floating and turning lazily like snowflakes, the light shivering in them like jewels.
Entranced, she watched herself watching them as they spiralled to earth around her.
But wait a minute!— Wasn't that blood?
There, dripping down the wall…?
Sea-birds, like snowflakes, turned lazily far out over the mud flats….
Marie breathed a sigh of relief.
It was Seal Sands Lock.
Everything would be all right now.
Sitting there, in a dark corner of the wrecked kiosk, she exorcised those disturbing, violent images with soothing visions of the Lock.
She imagined the castle, at low tide, grey, black, then silver in the changing light.
She saw the glistening black heads of the seals driving through the waves….
Gradually, she calmed herself down.
‘Don't be so daft,’ she told herself, in her severe, self-mocking voice.
‘How could you do all this and not remember about it?
You'll drive yourself crazy, you will, thinking things like that….
‘It wasn't me!’
Just say that to yourself: ‘It wasn't me.’’
And, repeating this like a charm: ‘It wasn't me; it wasn't me,’ she turned to look at the red splashes on the wall.
It was only tomato sauce, after all!
Satisfied, she walked to the back door of the kiosk, flinging it wide open to let the sunshine in. for a moment, she leaned against the doorpost, taking in deep breaths of that heady seaside mixture of salt, ozone and rotting seaweed.
There were a few people about now: walking their dogs, jogging in tracksuits along the firm sand out by the water's edge.
She could hear the clatter of iron shutters being cranked up over at the amusement arcades.
The normal world….
Simon was coming back along the waterline with Ben trotting at his heels.
Every so of ten the dog would break away and belt off to splash in the shallows or to investigate something smelly, thrown up by last night's tide.
Simon was good-looking, Marie thought, as she watched him cut across the beach on a long diagonal towards the kiosk.
He had a clear skin.
She thought bitterly of the spots she of ten got at the comers of her mouth or across her forehead.
She had a crop of them now that she couldn't get rid of, even though she was using that acne treatment that worked wonders for the girl on the telly advert.
Simon was slim, healthy and well-cared fur.
Marie, lonely and desperately short on self-esteem, ached for his affection.
She longed for his bright world to be opened up to her.
She had caught sight of it only once, from the top of a bus, but she knew, from watching television, from looking at pictures in her mother's magazines, what it must be like.
To Marie, that world, to which Simon's family and people like them belonged, seemed so fresh and shining: full of promise, energy and purpose.
Those kind of people did not drift through their days in a bored and aimless way, as she of ten did.
They were always busy; they were never alone.
Simon, she was sure, would help her to find the key.
His glossy, clean, well-organized world, that acne-free world of snowy white clothes, gleaming kitchen surfaces and smiling, happy families eating, shopping, and playing together had none of the drabness, confusion, and dark corners of her own messy existence.
Simon's jacket lay on the sand.
The sight of it snapped Marie out of her dreamworld.
It had fallen down when she had pushed the door open.
She leapt down, carefully shook the sand off it and handed it back to Simon as he and Ben ran across the last few yards towards her.
He shrugged the coat on: ‘Look, I'm sorry, Marie.
I'd stay if I could.
But I have to get back.
My Dad's away on business again tomorrow and I want to spend a bit of time with him before he goes.
We're going to play tennis together.
Go swimming, maybe.
You don't mind, do you?’
He was invariably polite to her: something that at first made her uneasy.
She was used to the heckling and aggressive tones which other boys she knew adopted as their normal way of  speaking.
‘But they're yobs,’ she told herself.
‘They're not like him.’
‘What are you going to do with yourself today, then?’ asked Simon.
Marie sighed.
She envied Simon, spending the afternoon with his Dad.
He always seemed to have something planned: something to do, somewhere to go.
‘Well, I can't open up, can I?
There's nowt left to sell.
So I'll go round to Mr Bishop's brother and tell him what's gone on down here.
He'll know what to do.’
‘And then what?’
‘Don't know.
I might go round to Bella's.
She's one of the old ladies I go to see for my Community Care Course.
You know, the one I told you about — She asked me to cut her toenails and give her feet a wash.’
‘Euch,’ said Simon, ‘doesn't it turn your stomach?— Come here, Ben!
Here!
We're off now.’
He turned back, as if a thought had just struck him.
‘Just check up about those keys, will you?’
‘What keys?’
‘Those keys that Gazzer was supposed to give to Madge.
Just check if he did.
I don't think that kid's as daft as he makes out.
And if you're so sure you didn't leave the place unlocked — I mean, somebody's responsible for this little lot, aren't they?’
‘I don't want to think about it,’ said Marie.
‘I don't blame you,’ answered Simon.
‘Best to forget it really.
Ten to one you'll never find out who did this, anyway — I mean, it's not going to worry Mr Bishop, is it?
Not now the poor old feller's dead.
— Ben, stop mucking about.
Come here!’
‘I don't want to think about it,’ said Marie to herself.
When he reached the first breakwater, Simon turned and waved.
‘See you!’ he yelled back at her.
All around him, the film of water left by the tide shimmered in the sunshine: it was going to be a beautiful day.
Then he vaulted over the breakwater, ran up the steps on to the prom and was lost to view.
Bella's television blaring out.
She tried the door.
It was unlocked, so she went straight inside.
It was no use waiting for Bella to answer her door: if it was one of her favourite programmes she would pretend not to hear the door bell.
‘Here we are,’ gushed the presenter of Gardeners' World , ‘we're in my very favourite corner of the estate now, with its magnificent, sweeping views down to the river.just look at this superb example of Metasequoiaglyptostroboides , or Dawn Redwood to give it its more familiar name, I don't think I've ever seen a better specimen anywhere.
No, I don't think I have!
And here's Lady Forbes-Hamilton, busy weeding her borders.
Now, you're a plants-woman of no small renown, if I may say so, your ladyship.
Could you tell us a little more about this remarkable tree?
Do you happen to know how old it is, for example?’
‘You shouldn't leave that door unlocked, you know, Bella,’ said Marie.
‘Anybody could walk in.’
Bella's eyes were fixed on the television screen: she didn't even turn her head.
Marie sighed and pulled out a dining-chair from under the table.
She sat down, taking care not to block Bella's view.
She might be in for a long wait: Bella didn't break her routine for anyone.
At the beginning of each week she read through the Radio Times and TV Times and ringed the programmes that she wanted to see.
It was your hard luck if you came in in the middle of one of them.
If you persisted in trying to talk to her, she would heave herself out of her chair and turn up the volume to a decibel level that made your ears ache.
people usually took the hint and either shut up or left.
Finally, Bella glanced at her, but then turned her attention back to the screen again.
She had been passed on to Marie after two of the other trainees on the Community Care Course had failed to ‘get on’ with her.
One of them had called her ‘a rude old sod’.
So far, Marie had lasted longer than either of them: it  wasn't that she was better at her job than they were, it was just that she didn't expect so much of people.
Marie was quite prepared to sit there, being ignored, until the credits rolled.
It was not until the last note of the closing music had died away that Bella clicked off the set.
‘I like gardening programmes,’ she said.
Marie thought of the open plan patch of lawn, covered in dog dirt, outside the bungalow: ‘I could plant you some flowers, if you like.’
Bella shrugged.
‘Not worth it.
The cats would scratch them up, or pee on them.’
She pulled herself up on her walking-frame and shuffled off, pushing it in front of her, towards the kitchen.
‘Suppose you want a cuppa?’
‘No, thanks,’ said Marie.
She knew that it was no use offering to make it: it would only make Bella angry.
It was one of her bad days.
As soon as they knew that Bella had been assigned to her, the other two trainees cornered Marie in the canteen and briefed her on what to expect.
‘Don't take no notice of her,’ said one of them.
‘She'll tell you all sorts.
She told me that her fiancé had been killed in the war.
Well, I don't believe that fur a start.
I can't imagine any feller being loony enough to want to marry her.
— I think she just said it so I'd feel sorry for her!’
‘Yes, she was having you on,’ said the other one.
‘You don't want to encourage her,’ she said to Marie.
‘She makes things up.
She told me she was Champion Fish Gutter down the docks!
She'll tell you owt.
I just didn't listen.’
‘And it'll drive you mad,’ the other one chipped in, ‘the way she plans things out!
She's got to listen to this boring story on the radio every day, then do the crossword, then make a cuppa, then water her plants — I mean, what's it matter?
You'd think it was all really important.
And she won't let you do any of it neither!
So don't bother asking.
— I caught her trying to brush her hair the other day.
She knows she can't do that!
She can't lift her arms up.
I said, ‘Give that here,’ and got the brush off her.
‘I'm supposed to do that,’ I said.
But then she went all moody.
Honest, you're wasting your breath trying to tell her anything….’
‘They weren't wrong, those girls,’ thought Marie as she listened to Bella clashing the crockery in the kitchen, her  walking-frame squeaking over the lino as she pushed it about.
‘I heard about Mr Bishop!’ shouted Bella.
‘How's his wife taking it?’
‘She's round his brother's,’ said Marie, as if that was an answer.
She had seen Madge that morning when she had gone round with the news about the kiosk.
‘She's in bed,’ Mr Bishop's brother had said.
‘The doctor's given her some pills to calm her down.
Do you want to have a look in?
She'll be pleased to see you.’
But Madge hadn't been pleased: she hadn't shown any emotion at all when Marie looked round the door.
She was lolling in bed, her mouth wet and slack like a gormless child's.
There was no vitality left in that face now.
It was grey and blank, drained of all personality.
She had looked in Marie's direction but she had made no sign of recognition.
‘It's the drugs, see,’ Mr Bishop's brother had said, apologetically, as he showed Marie to the door.
‘Still, it's a good thing that doctor gave 'em to ‘er.
I mean, it stops ‘er getting upset, doesn't it?
If you ask me, I don't think she even remembers he's gone.
Better all round, really….’
‘Take this tea off me, then!’ said Bella impatiently.
Marie blocked the picture of Madge's face out of her mind and looked up guiltily.
Bella had been trying to push the walking-frame along and carry the tea at the same time.
Most of the tea had slopped into the saucer.
‘She knows she can't manage a saucer!’ thought Marie.
‘I've told her I don't want one anyway.
It's like talking to a brick wall!’
The two girls had said that, hadn't they?
‘You might as well save your breath,’ they had said.
‘She won't do as she's told!’
‘Where's that tray?’ asked Marie.
‘What they give you to fit on your frame?
To carry things on?
Di'n't they say you 'ad to use it?’
But Bella didn't answer.
She lowered herself carefully into her reclining chair.
‘That's something else,’ thought Marie.
Bella was not short of money.
She had told Marie that.
But the chair had been very expensive, with a foot-rest and a back that you could raise and lower by using a lever on the arm.
It made  no sense to buy a chair like that.
She could sit in the armchairs: Marie had seen her.
So why buy it?
Why waste her money?
But Bella had gone ahead, all the same, and sent for it from a catalogue.
The afternoon sun filtered through the leaves of Bella's plants and made delicate, trembling patterns on her walls.
Marie saw that Bella was watching it, following the rippling shifts of light and shadow.
‘Shall I do your feet now?’ asked Marie.
‘It's not my feet day.
Tomorrow's my feet day,’ said Bella.
She sounded irritated.
‘You don't usually come on a Sunday.’
It was stuffy in here.
‘Why doesn't she ever open any windows?’ thought Marie.
The room smelled of old woman.
Marie could think of nothing else to say.
‘Let's go out,’ she said, suddenly.
‘I'll take you out, shall I?’
‘There's a good film on this afternoon,’ said Bella, pointing to one of her ringed programmes in the Radio Times .
‘Come on,’ urged Marie, ‘it's a smashing afternoon.
You won't be cold.’
If Marie hadn't been so desperate to escape from that room, she wouldn't have suggested taking Bella out in her wheelchair.
Once before, she had tried it and Bella had said: ‘I don't want no one gawping at me!
Feeling sorry for me!’
But today, for some reason, Bella gave up without a fight.
‘Put me stockings on for us,’ she said to Marie, after she had manoeuvred herself painfully into her wheelchair.
‘No one 's going to see whether you've got them on or not.
Nobody's going to be looking at you, are they?’
Marie pointed out.
‘Put them on!’ said Bella, dangerously irritated.
‘They're in the bedroom.
In that little chest of drawers next to me bed.’
The first drawer Marie opened was the wrong one.
It had bottles of pills in it — and an open envelope stuffed with twenty-pound notes.
Marie rammed the drawer shut as if it had burned her fingers.
Gazzer's mocking laughter echoed in her mind: ‘— Testing you out!
Didn't you know that?
Didn't you?’
‘Not another one,’ said Marie to herself in quiet desperation.
‘Have you found them yet?’ demanded Bella from the living room.
For a wild moment, Marie thought she meant the notes.
‘They're in the bottom drawer, with me knickers!’
‘Yes, I've got them.’
Marie took the stockings back into the living-room.
She knelt down and rolled them up Bella's legs and over her swollen knees.
‘Now look in me purse.’
‘You do it.’
Marie was agitated.
She handed Bella the purse.
‘What do you want your money now fur, anyway?’
‘I only want two ten-pences. — To keep me stockings up.
They'll just drop down if you leave 'em like that, won't they?’
‘She's going round the twist,’ thought Marie.
Suddenly, her fears that Bella, like Mr Bishop, had set a trap for her with the money, seemed ludicrous.
Bella wasn't sharp enough for that.
‘Don't be stupid,’ Marie told herself, sternly.
‘She's just a silly old woman.
Stop imagining things what aren't true!’
Then she thought: ‘Daft old bat.
What's she keeping all that cash in the house fur?’
‘Was that window open in the bedroom?’
Bella was saying.
‘No,’ said Marie.
‘I don't think so.’
‘It's that bloomin' home-help.
I can't stand that woman.
Always yackin'.
She never shuts up.
— Always nosing into your business.
If I don't watch her, she goes round opening all me windows.
I tell her not to but she takes no notice.’
‘Eh,’ said Marie, ‘I've never seen anyone do that before.’
Bella was putting a coin inside the top of each of her stockings and twisting it round until the stocking was tight against her leg.
‘Well, I can't see me wearing one of them suspender belts,’ said Bella.
‘I couldn't fasten it up.
Not with my hands.
And I can't get away with tights.
— I can't get 'em on.’
Marie began to put Bella's slippers back on.
‘Not me slippers!’ said Bella, exasperated.
‘Me proper shoes!
I'm going out, aren't I?
You don't go out in your slippers, do you?’
Marie pushed the wheelchair along a side-street that sloped steeply down to the prom.
In the distance, right at the bottom of the hill, they saw throngs of people.
A fine Sunday afternoon always brought the trippers out.
On a day like this you could almost make yourself imagine that the old times were back, when the resort was crammed with holiday-makers for the  whole of the summer season and every seaside guest house had a ‘No Vacancies’ sign hanging in the window.
‘The kiosk would've done good business today,’ thought Marie.
‘It's nigh on two year since I've been out that house,’ said Bella suddenly, ‘since the Warden took me for that X-ray after I fell over and hurt me wrist.’
‘Two years!’
Marie was shocked.
It was something she hadn't thought about.
Bella shrugged.
‘It's me own fault,’ she said.
‘There's plenty of folk that would've taken me.
If I'd asked them….’
It was packed with people on the front.
Packed and very hot.
Back down the beach, the Big Wheel was turning and there were even queues waiting to get on.
The tide was up, so people, flaked out on their towels or sprawled in striped deckchairs, were jammed on to a little strip of beach.
The shallow water was thick with paddling children.
The seascape, dominated for most of the year by grey sky, grey sea, brown sand, was splashed with bright colours today: a white motor-boat whining past dragging a water-skier in a brilliant orange wet suit; a wind-surfer's sail bellying out in blue and red stripes, silver heart-shaped helium balloons joggling above the slow-moving crowds; women in egg-yolk yellow, lime green, shocking pink….
Most people were eating or drinking something: ice-cream, chips, hot-dogs, candy-floss, cans of Coke.
The smell of stale fat wafted out from the cafés.
It was a leisurely and surprisingly quiet scene.
From here, you couldn't hear the amusement arcades or the bingo callers.
They were in the other direction, at what Marie's mother called the ‘common end’ of the prom.
Besides, people were too drained by the heat to move about quickly or to make much noise.
There was the hum of cars up on the main road.
Conversation drifted over you as families sauntered by.
And that was all.
Marie parked Bella next to the floral clock.
It had ‘WELCOME’ spelled out underneath it in yellow flowers.
From here, up in the windy pier gardens, you could look down and watch the trippers.
You could pick out individual families: that old Grandma who had fallen asleep in her deckchair, legs apart, showing a formidable pair of bloomers; the fat baby next to her pushing candy-floss into its chubby face with both hands, trying to find its mouth; the Dad lying on his back like a stranded whale, great white beer belly rising majestically into the air.
Marie collapsed onto the grass: it was hard work, pushing that chair.
For a moment, she felt unusually relaxed, caught up in the lazy, easy-going atmosphere of the Sunday afternoon crowds.
Then Bella said: ‘You don't say much, do you?’
Automatically, Marie sat bolt upright, even the muscles in her body alert to this new challenge.
‘What's she getting at now?’ she thought, trying to clear her sun-dazed mind.
‘I mean,’ Bella continued, ‘you don't say much about yourself, do you?’
Marie shrugged: ‘There's nowt to say.’
‘What about where you live, what your Dad does.
What about brothers and sisters?’
‘I live on the Fairfield Estate.
Me Mum works at Rayner's — they make anoraks and that.
And there's only me.
I haven't got no brothers or sisters.’
‘What about your Dad, then?’
‘He doesn't live with us any more.’
‘I know,’ said Bella, ‘I'm a nosey old woman!
Just tell me to shut up.’
‘Shut up, then,’ said Marie, to herself.
‘I don't blame you,’ said Bella.
‘Not wanting to talk to people.
I don't like people much either.
Give 'em half a chance, they let you down.’
Marie found herself listening.
It hardly ever happened that someone said something she identified with.
of ten, when people talked at her, it only made her feel more isolated and cut off.
Sometimes, she would stare at them as they were talking and they would grow smaller and smaller, like a genie going back into a lamp.
At other times she would have the odd sensation that they were shouting at her, through a megaphone, from a rowing-boat that was pulling swiftly away towards a distant ship.
She had seen a scene like that once, in a film about a prison island where convicts were dumped and left to fend fur themselves.
‘Have people let you down, then, Bella?’ she found herself saying.
‘Oh, yes,’ said Bella scornfully. ‘— The buggers.’
Bella lapsed into silence, staring out to the west at the vast industrial complex upstream of the resort.
‘I don't blame you:’ Bella had just said that.
But Marie almost always blamed herself.
If people behaved badly towards her, then it must be her fault.
She saw herself as an unlikeable person.
That was why her Dad hadn't kept in touch with her, why her Mam got angry with her….
Sitting there, the sun hot on her bowed head, absorbed in self-recrimination, Marie began to chew her nails, already bitten down to the quick.
‘Have you got a boy-friend?’
Bella said, suddenly.
‘Eh?’
Marie had forgotten about Bella, parked in her wheelchair, right next to her.
‘A boy-friend?
Have you got one?’
‘No,’ said Marie.
But she lifted up her head.
When she thought about Simon, she felt herself taking a step into another world.
It was like switching over from an old black and white film.
Abracadabra!
Colour flooded back into her life, like magic.
She told herself off: ‘Whinging on.
Feeling sorry for yourself.
You forgot about him, didn't you?
Fancy forgetting about him!— He knows everything about you.
And he still likes you!
He hasn't stopped coming to see you, has he?’
And, as she pictured Simon in her mind, she allowed herself a brief, spontaneous grin of relief and childlike joy.
‘I used to go out there,’ said Bella, ‘when I was courting.
Before the war.’
She had turned away from the food-processing factories and chemical plants spewing bilious yellow smoke to gaze towards the east, to the mouth of the Estuary where the river ran out into the North Sea.
‘You know, to Seal Sands Lock.’
Marie, made unwary by her moment of optimism, and before she could stop herself, said: ‘Did you?
I go out there.
I go out there a lot.’
Immediately, she wished she had kept her mouth shut.
She had told no one about the Lock.
Not even Simon.
It belonged to her secret life, the life of her imagination.
‘We used to take picnics out there,’ said Bella.
‘Me and him.
Just before war broke out.
— You could get away from it all, out there.
I used to love that place.
—‘Course, I can't get out there now.
But I can still remember what it was like then.’
Marie felt again the strong, almost irresistible pull of a common sympathy but she said nothing.
‘What's it like out there now?’ said Bella.
‘Have they spoiled it?’
One of her Lock pictures assembled itself in Marie's head: miles of crawling grey sea kicking up frills of white foam and the castle black, romantic, against it.
But she could not express in words what she saw in her head.
‘There's the castle, I mean, the fort out there now.
And these pill-boxes.
What they built during the war.
I used to play hide and seek in them when I was little, with me Dad.
Some of them don't have a doorway.
— You crawl into them, along these tunnels.
Dad used to take me out there for picnics.
— He sat me up on his shoulders.
I could see for miles.
— We put our picnic on one of them big bits of concrete.
You won't know about them, will you?— You must have seen the seals, though, didn't you?
Me Dad used to show them to me.
I see them out there all the time!’
‘Seals?’ said a voice behind her.
‘There's no seals round here.
Not any more, there aren't. — You must need your eyes testing!— Anyway, that Lock sounds like a right dump to me.
Remind me never to go there!’
Marie whipped round, her mood shattered.
It was Gazzer.
She could have bitten her tongue off, letting herself be carried away like that.
‘Stupid bitch!’ she said to herself viciously, under her breath.
‘That was where they found Mr Bishop's body, washed up out there,’ said Gazzer.
‘You wouldn't find me going out there on me own!’
‘You're just saying that, aren't you?’
Marie was horrified.
‘They didn't find it there, did they, Gazzer?
It's one of your jokes, in't it?’
‘No, honest!’ protested Gazzer, putting on his aggrieved expression.
‘I'm telling the truth now!— It was there; where you just said: Seal Sands Lock.
Madge told me.
Honest!— Besides, it was in the papers wasn't it?
That bird-watcher bloke found 'im….’
In an instant, those vivid mental pictures of the castle, the  seals, the everchanging backdrop of sea and sky, began to darken and fade away.
They had been irretrievably spoiled.
— Instead, another image, one of horror this time, was trying to slide into her mind.
She shook her head and made it go away.
‘Mind you,’ Gazzer continued, ‘I'll remember what you said about them pill-boxes.
They're good hiding-places are they?
Private, are they?
I might want to take one of me girl-friends out there one of these nights.
— For a picnic, like….’
‘What you doing here?’ said Marie, her voice bitter with anger at Gazzer and at her own weakness.
She had never spoken about the Lock to anyone before and now look what had happened!
‘Don't sound so pleased to see me, then!’ said Gazzer.
‘Anyway, I've come to see me old mate Bella here.
— Not you.’
Marie realized that Bella's face had lit up with pleasure at the sight of Gazzer.
‘You didn't know we were old mates, did you?’ said Gazzer.
‘Well, you don't know everything!’
‘Take no notice,’ said Bella.
‘I'll clip his ear for him in a minute.
He's just winding you up.
— His great-grandad lived next door to me for years, before they took him away to that home.
Everybody round here knows Gary.
We've known him since he was little.’
It took Marie a few seconds to realize who Gary was: nobody, not even the teachers at school, called Gazzer by his real name.
‘He's a good lad, really,’ Bella was saying.
‘Even when he can't get round, he phones me up, just for a natter.’
‘Don't know why,’ said Gazzer. ‘'Cos you're a bad-tempered old beggar, aren't you?’
‘Less of your cheek!’
And Bella laughed, swiping out at him from her wheelchair.
The good-natured banter between them excluded Marie.
She had never seen Bella so cheerful….
She tried to clear her head, concentrating on this new situation.
All thoughts of Seal Sands Lock were stashed away, safe from the mockery of people like Gazzer.
And stashed away too, was her new fear that she might never, ever be able to recreate such pictures in her mind again.
Instead, she remembered Simon's words: ‘Those keys.
— Just check up, will you? just check up.’
Marie was ready now to believe that Gazzer could have stolen the keys and wrecked the kiosk.
‘Did you give those keys to Madge — the keys to the kiosk?
Her house keys were on there as well.’
‘'Course I did,’ said Gazzer.
He hardly seemed to be listening.
He was idly kicking the tops off the daisies.
‘I put them in her cardi pocket.
Go and ask her if you don't believe me.’
Marie knew that it was no good going to ask Madge anything.
‘Anyway,’ said Gazzer, ‘what do you want those for?
The place is all smashed up.’
‘Is it?’ said Bella.
‘You never told me that, Marie.
I wondered why you weren't round there today.’
Gazzer grabbed the wheelchair and began to push it along the paths in between the flower-beds.
Marie had to run to keep up with them.
‘How do you know it's been smashed up?’ she demanded.
‘I've just come from down there, haven't I?
Mr Bishop's brother told me.
He's clearing it all out.
— You can probably see him from up here.
turn round.
You can just see the kiosk, look, right along there.’
Marie didn't turn round.
‘Has he got those keys?’
‘Look, I don't know!’
Gazzer sounded exasperated.
‘I never asked him!
Perhaps he's got his own.
He used to help out down there, didn't he?’
‘This is getting stupid,’ Gazzer was thinking.
‘Change the subject.
— Try to get a smile out of her.’
In his mind, he ran through his routines and selected one: the comic monologue.
‘Hey,’ he said suddenly to Bella, ‘remember me great-grandad?
You and him?
You were a right pair, weren't you?
He always fancied you, you know!’
‘Give over!’ said Bella.
‘He was 83!
He shouldn't have been thinking about things like that at his age!’
Gazzer turned to Marie.
As he spoke, he watched her suspicious face, waiting for a change of expression.
‘You ought to have known him, Marie.
You'd have liked him.
He was a real old devil.
A right laugh!
Once, I was round his house when the district nurse came to give him his iron injection.
She was this new nurse, see, really young, dead pretty.
She went into  the bedroom with me great-grandad and I could hear her saying: ‘Do you have the injection in your arm or in your backside, Mr Ramsay?’
He said, ‘In my backside, please, nurse.’
Well, I knew he was Up to something because, with the old nurse, he's always had the injections in his arm.
— After a minute, I can hear me great-grandad say, ‘I can see you, nurse!’, and I hear the nurse give a little squeal.
There's this clatter as she drops the syringe.
She comes running back into the room.
She's doubled up laughing!
Anyway, after a bit, when she can talk, she says to me, ‘The cheeky old devil!— Did you know, then?’
I says: ‘Did I know what?’
She says: ‘That he's got these two eyes tattooed on his bum?’’
‘You'll be the death of me, you will,’ said Bella laughing.
‘Go on, Marie.
You've got to smile, haven't you?’
‘She'd crack her face if she tried,’ thought Gazzer.
But he said to Bella, ‘Yes, he told me, after, that he was dead drunk once, in Portsmouth, when he was on leave from the Navy, and he'd had them tattooed on for a bet.’
‘ere,’ Bella dragged out her purse from down the side of the wheelchair.
‘Go and get us an ice-cream each, Marie.
There's a shop down there on the prom.’
She gave the purse to Marie.
‘I don't need this,’ said Marie.
‘I'll buy us some.’
‘No, let Bella pay,’ said Gazzer.
‘She's loaded, aren't you, Bella?’
‘Wouldn't you like to know!’
‘She's probably got an old tea-pot stuffed full of cash — or a mattress.
— Where do you keep it all, eh?’
Bella laughed.
‘You don't think I'm going to tell the likes of you, do you?’
She turned to Marie.
‘Go on, then.
Get those big ones with the chocolate flakes in.’
They watched Marie as she trailed down the steps by the artificial waterfall that was lit up at night with pink and green floodlights.
There should have been a yellow one too but the bulb had gone.
‘She doesn't say much, does she?’ said Bella.
‘That's because she's thick,’ answered Gazzer.
‘By the time the words get from her brain to her mouth everybody's talking about something different.’
‘She's a good lass, Gary,’ said Bella.
‘I don't want you calling her.
And she's not thick neither.
There's a lot going on in her head.’
‘You could have fooled me.’
‘Yes, well,’ said Bella, ‘if you kept your mouth shut and listened a bit more you might have noticed.
She was talking to me just now, before you put your oar in.
Gazzer said nothing.
‘All right, all right ,’ said Bella, ‘don't sulk.
I'm not saying she's brainy, am I?
Just that she's not as daft as she looks.’
‘I'll take your word for it, then.’
‘Mind you,’ Bella continued, ‘she doesn't seem to like you, so she must have her head screwed on right!’
Gazzer laughed.
‘I'll let the brake off this chair and tip you over the edge in a minute.
One good shove should do it.’
‘You would an’ all!
I wouldn't put it past you!’
Marie, on her way back up the long flight of steps from the prom, watched them laughing together.
She had already begun to think: ‘Who are they laughing at?
Are they laughing at —’ When, suddenly, she thought she saw Simon.
There!
Up in the gardens.
Just walking behind that hut where you got your tickets for the putting-green.
It was his walk, his dark, cropped hair, his leather jacket….
She shaded her eyes against the sun.
But the figure had gone.
‘What's she staring at?’ said Gazzer to Bella as they both looked down from the pier gardens.
He followed the direction of Marie's gaze.
‘Oh, it's him, is it?
I might have known!’
‘Who?’ asked Bella.
‘Who you talking about?’
‘Him, look.
Over there.
In the jeans and leather jacket.
That tall one with the short black hair.
See him?
He's just crossing the main road, over to the shops.’
‘Oh yes, I can see him now.
— Nice-looking lad, isn't he?
Do you know him, then?’
‘Me?
No. — He used to go to our school, that's all.
Marie's dead keen on him.
She thinks the sun shines out of his backside.’
‘And she told me she hadn't got a boy-friend!’ said Bella.
‘Is he her boy-friend, then?’
Gazzer shrugged.
‘Don't ask me.’
But although his voice sounded cool and dismissive, his eyes, as he watched Simon cut down an alley between the shops, flamed bright with hostility.
Down on the steps, Marie had decided that she had made a mistake.
‘You need your eyes tested,’ she said to herself finally  as she trudged on up the steps, the melting ice-creams dripping all over her fingers.
Gazzer didn't stay long.
He ate his ice-cream and made off, on some errand or other.
Marie and Bella sat on until the sun left the gardens and it began to grow cold.
‘I fancy some chips on the way home,’ said Bella.
‘There used to be a good chippy down the back of Albert Street.
Is it still there?’
‘It sells kebabs now,’ said Marie, ‘but there's loads of chip shops along the front.
We'll stop at one of those if you want.’
Marie pushed the wheelchair out of the gardens, across the main road and past the souvenir shops.
They stopped outside one of them, among the fishing-nets, turning windmills, and buckets and spades, while Bella read the dirty seaside postcards.
‘They get worse, them postcards!’ she said, laughing.
The shop windows were full of souvenir crockery: ashtrays shaped like toilets, and salt and pepper pots like women's breasts.
One of the plates caught Marie's eyes: ‘TO THE GREATEST MAN IN THE WORLD,’ it said.
‘It's been a nice trip out, this,’ said Bella.
‘I get sick of the same old routine day after day.’
‘You shouldn't try to do so much,’ said Marie, automatically.
‘Everybody says that!’ snapped Bella, suddenly on the defensive.
‘But I've seen it.
I've seen what happens when you let yourself go.
They put you in a home.
Just give 'em half a chance, they'll whip you in and the only way they let you out of them places is feet first, in a box.’
Marie said nothing but she had worked at an old people's home as part of her Community Care Course.
She saw in her mind the woman who sat in the same seat day after day.
She couldn't hold her head up.
It would droop lower and lower until it rested on her knees, then she would clasp her knees with both hands and rock herself, backwards and forwards, backwards and forwards, moaning, her face hidden in her skid.
Sometimes she would stay like this for hours until one of the care assistants had time to stop and prop her up.
Then the whole process would begin all over again.
And she saw old Billy, his toothless gums mumbling away at the mashed-up food she spooned into his mouth.
The food dribbled out and she had to scoop it off his chin and shove it back in.
Like feeding a baby.
‘Yes,’ said Bella, ‘you've got to keep going, keep yourself  busy.
They come in, the doctor, the Warden, me social worker, the nurse, any of them lot, and you're sitting staring at the walls not doing nothing….
Well, they've got you then, haven't they?
And once you're in there, there's no way out.’
‘So that's it,’ thought Marie.
‘She thinks they're trying to get her into a home.’
She felt suddenly close to this scared old woman with her secret fears.
There's no way out: Marie could identify with fears like that.
She had seen a horror film once about an archaeologist in Egypt.
One scene from the film had remained in her mind: it had seemed to Marie to be more or less her own experience of life.
Images from television of ten fired her imagination like this.
She might not be good with words but she was brilliant at thinking in pictures.
The archaeologist in the film knew that there was a curse upon anyone who entered the pyramid.
But he had gone in there anyway, carrying a torch which flung light into dark comers, showing snakes, scorpions and even a grinning skull.
He had found himself trapped in a room with doors made up of huge, sliding slabs of rock all round it.
Then, the curse had started to work: he was taunted with the promise of escape.
With a grinding noise one of the doors moved slowly back.
He made for it, then, slam!
It closed in his face.
Another one rose, like a portcullis.
He dived underneath it but it came down, almost crushing him.
He only just wriggled free.
Another door opened.
He raced towards it but there was a yawning, black pit on the other side.
He stopped just in time, teetering on the edge.
He threw a rock down it but you could not hear it strike the bottom….
Marie couldn't remember the end of the scene.
She knew he didn't escape: perhaps he had gone mad, a gibbering idiot in the middle of that room, in the dark, with those doors opening and closing all around him.
In her head, Marie could see the people she knew in terms of those doors.
Her Dad: that door was firmly closed now; she didn't see it ever opening again although she still watched it, hoping.
Her mother's door was for ever opening and closing, opening and closing, tempting her with affection, then, when she approached, dropping to crush her.
And people she thought she knew, like Mr Bishop, Gazzer: those doors had pits behind them, waiting to trap the unwary.
But she did not see herself like the archaeologist, because for her, there was a way out.
Simon's door was open, throwing shafts of light into that dark, inner chamber.
In her mind, she often saw herself striding towards it, through it, out into the sunshine beyond to be part of that bright, busy, civilized world where people like Simon smiled, listened, and were polite to each other.
And Bella?
When Marie, walking along, pushing the wheelchair, tried to add Bella to her collection of doors, she imagined a half-open door, inviting her to enter.
The way she saw Bella had changed during the course of that afternoon.
She was aware of her now, not just as a daft, cantankerous old woman but as someone like herself, fearful and isolated.
All she had to do was push that door and she might find a friend, someone who could understand.
But she didn't see herself doing that.
It was too risky.
Who knows what might lie behind it?
It could be just another trap and what with Mr Bishop and Gazzer, there had been too many of those lately.
Besides, Simon's door was the one she was counting on: she didn't need any other escape route.
So all she said to Bella, in a voice as flat and indifferent as she could make it, was: ‘Don't be silly.
They're not going to put you in a home.’
She didn't want Bella to say anything more about herself.
She didn't want that door to open any further.
But Bella did not notice the tone: she was deep in her own private nightmare.
‘They carted Gary's great-grandad off and he didn't last long once he was in there.
He'd started to forget things, see.
Left the gas on, things like that.
He nearly blew us all to kingdom come once….
No, just let them see that you can't cope and they've got you!’
Marie waited in the warm, greasy atmosphere of the fish and chip shop and got a tray of chips, complete with its own little wooden fork.
She was still at the counter, shaking on some vinegar, when, through the steamy window, she thought she saw Simon, leaning against one of those big, concrete litter bins on the other side of the street.
But, when she came out of the shop, there was no one there.
She laughed at herself: ‘You've got Simon on the brain, you have.’
‘Don't you want no chips,’ Bella was saying.
‘No, me Mam'll have me tea ready.’
She pushed the chair through the thinning crowds.
The whole of the prom was in shadow now and a chill, blustery wind began to riffle through the litter in the gutters.
It was time to take Bella back home.
‘That chair,’ said Bella suddenly, ‘that reclining chair I sent for.
I sleep in that now, you know.
I can't get up out me bed any more without somebody helping me, so I sleep in that chair.
I sent for it deliberate, so I could sleep in it.
But I don't let on, I'm not telling them that.’
She turned her face as far as she could towards Marie.
‘You won't tell them that, will you?
That I sleep in that chair?
Once they get wind of that they'll have me in there like a shot — And me hands are getting worse.
It's hard to turn the key to lock me door.
And if that woman leaves me windows open, I can't close 'em up properly.
It gets that cold at nights….
But you won't tell no one, will you?’
‘'Course I won't,’ said Marie.
Despite herself, she found that she wanted to comfort the old woman.
The arthritis in her hands had already locked them into claws and Marie knew, because her supervisor had told her, that the creeping arthritis in Bella's spine and hips would eventually make her bed-ridden.
‘I wouldn't tell them,’ she added.
‘I mean, what do you think I am?’
She night even have said more if she could have thought of anything.
But Bella seemed to be satisfied.
For a time, there was silence between them.
Then, ‘Mind,’ Bella said as Marie, sweating and out of breath, struggled to shove the wheelchair back up the hill from the prom, ‘mind, these chips are swimming in vinegar.
Did you tip the whole bottle on ‘em?
They've gone all soggy now!’
On Sunday night, in the darkness, the feverish minds of two sleeping people create images of terror.
A bottle blasts apart like a bomb.
There's a red trickle, running down the wall, seeping through the gaps in the floorboards and soaking the sand beneath.
It's streaming down now, a never-ending supply, until it rushes, in a hissing torrent, along the tidal channels.
Red-crested waves rear up like snakes, nicking off bloody foam, thundering out to meet the oncoming sea.
And racing along with the flood, tossed from peak to peak, plunged into troughs, was Mr Bishop, arms flung wide, eyes open, staring up at the sky.
‘What's that noise?
Where am I, then?— I'm here, squatting down among rustling crisp packets.
This floor's sticky!
There's a pulse hammering in my head.
— feel my hands shaking!
Boots crunching on broken rock.
Pitch black.
— There's someone out there!— And there's no way out!
Hang on a minute — the shutters —.
Lift them down, quick, quick.
— Too late!
The wooden steps creak.
His breath rattles in his throat.
Next I'll see his white hand, sliding in through the serving hatch.
— Make for the door.
My feet slip but I'm here, ready to jump.
But he's here as well!
I can smell him.
Waiting for me down on the sands — a great hulking shape, crouching there, darker than darkness.
I'm screaming now.
Listen to that noise I'm making!
My screams are splitting my head apart but they don't drown him out.
Because he's laughing.
He's in a good mood!
‘Come on,’ he says, like he was talking to a little kid.
‘Come on, look at me.
You've got to look at me, sometime.’’
Monday morning: it was nearly ten o'clock but so grey and overcast that the light was switched on in the kitchen in Marie's  house.
Marie, still in her pyjamas, was sitting slumped at the table that took up most of the floor space: you had to squeeze round it to move about at all in the tiny kitchen, and Marie's legs had permanent bruises from its sharp comers.
She was wearing a plaid dressing-gown that her Dad had left behind: it smelled like an old dog and was as scratchy and heavy as wearing a carpet.
In summer, even in a damp house like this, there was no need to wear a dressing-gown as thick and bulky as this one and Marie only put it on when her mother wasn't around.
This morning, before she left for work at eight o'clock, her mother had been friendly, quite chatty in fact.
This was not unusual.
of ten, overnight, especially after a major row with her daughter, Marie's mother, stricken with guilt, would swear to herself that she would make it up to Marie tomorrow: tomorrow, they would make a fresh start.
At breakfast she would be persistently bright and chirpy, deliberately steeling herself against all the things that Marie did that irritated her.
It was later, in the boredom of those long, lonely evenings, that her resolve collapsed and, despite herself, she slipped back into the old habits of sniping at Marie, horrified at what she was doing to them both, yet unable, in her bitterness and isolation, to stop herself.
What Marie was doing now would have irritated her mother.
She was eating a sauce and sugar sandwich, made by shaking gobs of sauce on to a slice of white bread, sprinkling on white sugar and folding the slice over.
These had been her favourites when she was little but had not of ten been allowed because the sauce oozed out the sides and made a mess of your clothes.
She was drinking a coffee made entirely with warm milk.
This ‘waste’ of milk would also have annoyed her mother but Marie had woken, anxious and depressed from a restless sleep and needed to comfort herself.
She had been dreaming, and images from her dream still haunted her.
When Gazzer knocked at the back door, she was thinking, vaguely, that she ought to get dressed but she felt too apathetic to shift herself.
‘Eh,’ said Gazzer, throwing open the back door and letting a blast of cold air into the stuffy kitchen.
‘Are you deaf or something?
I've been stood out there ages!— Anyway, why  aren't you dressed yet, you lazy beggar?
Do you know what time it is?
Look!
Look at what time it is.’
As he made a pantomime of checking his watch, shaking it in mock disbelief, then shoving it right under Marie's nose, he looked as empty-headed and harmless as ever: it's only Gazzer, acting daft.
But Marie was not going to be fooled like that again.
She forced herself to concentrate, alert now as she had never been before with Gazzer.
‘Shouldn't you be at the Tech?’ she said to him.
‘It doesn't start ‘til September does it?
I'm on me holidays, same as you.
How long do you get off from the YTS then?’
‘Two weeks.’
‘Two weeks!’
Gazzer was saying.
‘Is that all?
Bet you wish you was back at school!’
Images were crowding into Marie's head, superimposing themselves, one upon the other: the wrecked kiosk; Gazzer, with the keys dangling from his hand, leading Madge away; Gazzer stamping about in his big boots.
And then, suddenly, an open door with a dark, bottomless pit behind it.
She felt herself teetering on the edge.
— There was no way, though, she was going to step into that pit: Simon's warning, ‘Making a fool of you — not as daft as you think — making a fool of you,’ replayed again and again like a commentary to the pictures in her head.
Gazzer could put on his act.
He could lie and pretend all he liked, as so many people she had known had pretended, as even her Dad had only pretended to love her.
But, this time, she was not going to walk straight into the trap.
Gazzer, totally unaware of the explosive resentment in Marie's mind, waiting to be ignited, launched into his story.
‘'Ow was I supposed to know,’ he thought afterwards.
‘I mean, she didn't look any different, did she?
She just looked thick, same as she always does.’
‘Eh, Marie,’ he began, excitedly, ‘guess what?
I've got some news.
I came round here special to tell you.
I've just been over to see Madge and guess what?
Her house was burgled last night!
Really turned over.
They'd nicked money — smashed things up.
Mr Bishop's brother told me.
He said it made you sick to look at it.
He'd been round there early this morning to get some papers for the solicitor or summat.
Anyway, do you know what he said?
He said: bquo; Thank God Madge wasn't there.
Whoever  did this was a right nutter.’
They just let themselves in the back door, he said, took the money and smashed the place.
Even ripped up the chairs with a knife.
What do you reckon to that, then?’
‘I reckon,’ said Marie slowly, ‘that you must think I'm a right idiot.’
‘What you on about?’
‘You smashed up that kiosk, didn't you?
You never gave them keys to Madge.
You kept them and you smashed up the kiosk.
You were after the takings, weren't you?
Only you never knew I'd taken 'em round to Mr Bishop's brother.’
Marie pushed back her coffee and got up from the table.
She felt an unfamiliar surge of confidence: well, everything was obvious now, wasn't it?
Fancy him thinking he could con her!
‘Then you went round her house last night.
Let yourself in.
Took her money.
— What did you have to smash the place up for, eh?
What did you have to do that for?’
‘What you on about?’
Gazzer's mind was working desperately, selecting, then rejecting all of the possible ways he could respond to this surprise attack.
He hadn't bargained for this.
‘I haven't got no keys!’ he said.
‘Look, look!’
He began to dump the contents of his pockets on to the table: dirty tissues, a few coins, empty crisp packets, some more money….
Even now he couldn't stop himself from making a comic routine out of it: looking at his fingers, his face screwed up in disgust, pretending that he'd found something unspeakably revolting in the depths of his pocket.
He wiped the imaginary mess on his trousers.
‘'Course you haven't got them now!’ said Marie scornfully, with a sudden flash of inspiration.
She was amazed at her own certainty.
She was sure that Simon was right about Gazzer.
‘That's why you went round there this morning, wasn't it?
To put 'em back.
So no one'd ever know it was you had 'em all the time.
Where'd you put them, eh?
In her cardi pocket?
She wouldn't have noticed, not like she is now!’
Marie shoved the table aside to get closer to Gazzer.
Gazzer took a step backwards, disturbed to find that he felt threatened: she was not so easy to manage after all.
He tried another technique.
‘If I did burgle Madge's house, like you said, then I wouldn't come round here and tell you about it, would I?’
‘Oh, yes, you would!’ said Marie.
Suddenly, and for almost the first time in her life, apart from in her dreams, Marie felt that she was in a position of power.
She knew the truth about Gazzer: he could not deceive her now.
The knowledge made her articulate, even eloquent.
‘That's just the sort of thing you would do — to make yourself look big — to make me look a fool.
You're probably thinking to yourself now how thick I am.
That's just the sort of thing you'd like!’
Even in the turmoil of his own thoughts, Gazzer found himself registering surprise at what she had just said: ‘She knows!’ he thought.
‘She's known all along — about me thinking she's thick —.
Bella warned you, didn't she, that there was a lot going on in her head?’
Too late, Gazzer told himself, ‘I should have listened!’
He had forgotten that Marie was only a girl; forgotten that she was wearing a ridiculous dressing-gown.
He only knew that he was afraid of her.
‘Yes,’ said Marie, ‘Simon always said it was you did that to the kiosk.
Wait until he knows what else you've been up to!’
Gazzer fell back on his most trusted and tried routine: if in a tight comer, joke your way out.
‘What, him?
I can't stand him!’ he said.
‘Mr Perfect!
I thought he'd come into this somewhere!
You know what I used to say about him at school?
I used to say, if he farted, it'd smell like roses!’
And he laughed, uneasily.
There was an explosion close to his head.
Something spattered all over his face: he put up his hand and his fingers came away red.
In confusion and panic he felt behind him with his left hand for the door-handle, pushing the handle down and edging his way round the door.
‘I'm, off then.
I'm off round Bella's,’ he stuttered.
Once outside, he didn't stop running until he reached the end of the street.
But he needn't have bothered.
Marie, sick and trembling, overwhelmed with fear and guilt at her own actions, was already kneeling down with a dustpan and brush, sweeping up the broken glass from the tomato-sauce bottle that had been on the table.
Razor-sharp slivers of glass punctured her hands and knees, drawing blood, but she didn't stop to pull them out.
When she had aimed the bottle at Gazzer's head, years of pent-up hurt and frustration had spilled over into violence: violence which she had previously directed against herself or had lived through only in her mind.
And the delirious thrill of release as that bottle detonated against the wall had been terrifying in its power.
She had even felt her mouth begin to twist itself into a grin….
But the second after the bottle shattered, the horror of what she had done hit her with the shock of a faceful of freezing water.
Instead of a white kitchen wall, she saw the wooden walls of the kiosk, dripping red.
‘It wasn't me.
It wasn't me,’ this chant came automatically into her head.
‘It was Gazzer, Gazzer, remember?
He did it, not you.’
And then: ‘Look at that mess!
Our Mam'll go mad!’
In her confusion, one thing stayed fixed in her mind: she would clear this lot up and go straight out to the Lock.
Out there she would be able to calm herself down.
Things would look different from out there.
As she wiped down the kitchen wall, she could see herself sitting on the half-buried block where she and her Dad used to picnic, watching the —
But the image wouldn't jell.
It slipped away, unattainable.
She tried to imagine the castle, silver against a black sea.
The sky was —.
‘He knows about Bella's money!’
She dropped the sponge and stood up, lost in concentration, her mouth slack, as all the sickening implications of this sudden thought bulldozed their way into her brain.
‘She's loaded, aren't you, Bella?— Where do you keep it all, eh?’
Marie could hear again Gazzer's facetious voice.
‘And remember,’ she told herself with growing horror, ‘what Mr Bishop's brother said!
He said the seats was all ripped.
He said: ‘Thank God Madge wasn't there.’
He said whoever did it was a right nutter.
Simon said that as well, about the kiosk, didn't he?
‘They're not right in the head.'’
That's what he said, isn't it?
And Gazzer's off round there now!
He'll be round at Bella's any minute now!’
Pictures of old, tired faces: Madge's made vacant by drugs, Bella's grey with pain on a bad day, threw themselves like projected images on to the white kitchen wall.
Then Gazzer's  boyish face, grinning, cracking jokes, leapt up on to the screen.
‘That's right, Gazzer,’ Marie told his face, ‘keep on smiling!
But you'll not laugh your way out of this one.
— I'm on to you.
— I know what you're really like!’
As she ran to her bedroom to find some clothes, her Dad's dressing-gown, flapping round her legs, slowed her down.
She shrugged it off and left it lying where it fell, in a heap at the bottom of the stairs.
Marie was half-way to Bella's house when self-doubt began to gnaw away at her new-found confidence and her sense of purpose crumbled.
Again she saw Gazzer in her mind, laughing with Bella, clowning around, never taking anything seriously and she knew that she could never find the right words to convince Bella that he was dangerous.
With one well-timed joke, Gazzer would be able to make her fears look ridiculous.
As well as that, how could she admit to Bella that she had seen the money hidden in the drawer?
She heard herself saying: ‘I opened it by accident, see.’
Now who was going to believe that?
The frustration of her situation made her stop, undecided, on the pavement of the busy main street.
She began to bite her nails, chewing at them viciously until the blood welled up.
It had begun to rain: the kind of damp, penetrating drizzle that chills you to the bone.
There were no pictures!
No pictures of the Lock in her head!
She tried again to conjure them up but it was no good: the traffic was too loud and she was too cold.
Even as they were forming, the images slipped away again.
People loaded with shopping shoved her aside: she was blocking the exit of a big supermarket.
Treacly piped music from inside slopped out each time the automatic doors opened.
Stumbling slightly, she moved out of the way, propping herself up against one of the big windows.
‘COME ON IN!’ shrieked a poster in huge red letters behind her.
If anyone had been paying any attention, they would have seen the drooping head suddenly lift, the hands come away from the mouth, and the strained facial muscles relax.
But no one noticed.
‘Go and see Simon,’ Marie was telling herself.
‘He'll believe you! 'Course he will!
He knows what Gazzer's like.
He knew before you did, didn't he?’
It was so obvious!
Simon was the way out of all this mess and confusion.
He would listen and he would know what to do, what to say.
In her desperation she had been on the point of walking out to the Lock but there was no need to do that now.
And she grinned to herself at the luxury of having someone in her life who would pay attention, who she could talk to.
Since her Dad ran off, there had been no one like that.
Marie followed the bus route to where she had seen Simon with his mother and father coming out of the private estate in their car.
So strong was her need to talk to Simon, that it never occurred to her that he might not actually live there.
The avenue she had to walk down to reach Simon's estate was wide and tree-lined.
The houses were spacious, detached, each one built to an individual design and set back from the road in well-kept gardens: it was the posh part of town.
It was quiet and there was no one about: no stray dogs barking and running loose, no bored kids riding round and round on bikes on the tarmac-and-broken-glass wastelands of open ‘play areas’.
She tried to imagine the people here sitting on their front doorsteps with a cup of tea and a newspaper like they did on her estate when the sun came out.
Simon's estate was hidden behind high walls.
Marie hesitated at the entrance.
‘PRIVATE,’ the sign said.
From here she could get a glimpse of the houses: ‘luxury’ newly-built bungalows, double garages, big picture windows, young trees, landscaped gardens with lawns so smooth and green they could have been carpets.
Again, there were no people anywhere.
Marie hung about in the middle of the road, looking in.
Nervously she smoothed down her hair.
It needed bleaching again, you could see the black roots.
Her mother had played war when she had had it done like that.
Her thin denim jacket was sodden and clung to her like a wet tea towel.
She looked down at her frayed jeans and dirty trainers: the spongy shoes were full of water and squelched whenever she walked.
She stood undecided in the rain, wanting desperately to find Simon yet not daring to step inside.
Then suddenly, there he was!
Hurrying towards her across a central green which had been planted out with trees and flowers.
He took her arm and led her away from the entrance.
‘Marie!
I just saw you out the window!
Were you looking for me?’
‘Yes.
— Yes, I was.
I wanted to tell you about something.’
Still holding her arm, he was walking with her back along the avenue, down to the sea front.
‘How did you know where I lived?’
‘I saw you once — from the top of a bus….’
Marie paused.
She sensed Simon's agitation — and his grip on her arm was tight.
‘And how were you going to find the house, then?’
‘I don't know,’ said Marie.
‘Knock on doors, I suppose.
Ask people.’
‘It's a good job I saw you first, then!’
‘It's all right, then, is it?’ asked Marie anxiously.
‘Coming round to your house like this?’
‘'Course! 'Course it is!
Why shouldn't it be?
I was just surprised, that's all.
Seeing you standing there.
I was staring out the window see, only half-awake. — I didn't sleep so well last night….’
He let go of her arm.
‘I'm glad you came round, though.
It's nice to see you, honest.
I was fed up of being in the house, anyway….
Let's go down the arcades, eh?
It'll be dry in there.’
Marie relaxed.
No wonder he had seemed a bit on edge.
It must have been a shock, her turning up out of the blue like that.
‘I had to find you,’ she said, by way of explanation.
‘So what's on your mind, then?’ asked Simon.
‘I'm listening.’
Marie concentrated hard, trying to find the right words to give some shape and order to the confusion in her head.
‘Gazzer came round this morning.
He said that Madge's house was broken into last night.
There was some money gone.
And things were smashed up, just like in the kiosk.’
‘You're kidding!’
Simon exclaimed.
‘That's sick, that is!
What with Mr Bishop dying.
Then the kiosk.
Now this.
I mean, the poor old lass must be round the twist by now!’
‘I wish,’ said Marie, ‘I wish I could get my hands on whoever did it.’
‘You reckon that Gazzer did it, don't you?’
‘How did you know that?’
Simon shrugged.
‘Well, I'm the one who told you about him, remember?
I told you to watch out for him.
He's a con artist, that one.’
They turned out of the avenue and crossed the road to the rainswept, empty promenade.
The tarmac glistened wet and the trees in the pier gardens dripped.
The sea was a dreary, unreflecting grey, churning and heaving sullenly, clamped down under heavy layers of low, black clouds.
‘What lousy weather!’
Simon said.
‘And after yesterday as well.
It was brilliant yesterday!’
‘Were you down the prom then, yesterday?
I thought I saw you!
Did you see me, with Bella?’
‘I'd have had a job,’ said Simon.
‘I was only down here the once, you know, early on when I helped you clean the kiosk up.
— I told you, didn't I?
I was with my Dad all afternoon.
— We played a game of pool down the Leisure Centre.’
‘Oh, yes.
I forgot.’
They crossed over the road to walk in the shelter of the awnings above the souvenir shops.
Just being with Simon had calmed Marie down.
The sense of desperate urgency she had felt on the way to his house was slipping away….
‘So you've told the police about Gazzer, then?’
‘The police?’
Marie didn't seem to understand the question: ‘No, no,’ she shook her head vigorously.
‘I've told nobody.’
‘Best thing, probably.
You've no proof, have you?
I mean, it's his word against yours, isn't it?
You know what he's like.
— They might even end up suspecting you!— Unless he's still got those keys of course.
Do you reckon he has?’
‘Dunno,’ said Marie.
‘He told me he was round Madge's this morning — He might have put them back — in her cardi pocket or somewhere.
Or he's chucked them away.’
Marie felt the conversation drifting away from what should concern them most.
She wrenched it back again.
‘I'm not bothered about telling the police, though.
I'm bothered about Bella. — He knows her.
He knows she's got money.’
‘I didn't know he knew Bella!’
‘I didn't neither.
Not ‘til yesterday, down the prom.
But they're good mates.
She calls him Gary.
She says all them old people round there know him.
— And she won't believe it if I say owt bad about him.
She likes him.’
‘Likes him!’ said Simon.
‘She must need her head seeing to!— Anyway, how do you know for sure she's got money?
You told me before about all this money she's supposed to have.
She might be having you on.’
‘She isn't, though.
'Cos I've seen it.
In a drawer in her bedroom.
Loads of twenty-pound notes in this envelope.
— And she leaves her door unlocked.
I'm always telling her about it!
She can't close her windows properly neither.
She told me that.
Mind, Gazzer doesn't know where it's hid.
He was joking on, trying to get her to tell him yesterday.
But she never let on.
‘Perhaps she won't tell him.’
‘But what if he loses his temper — threatens 'er with that knife, even knocks 'er about?
You saw the kiosk, didn't you?
And Madge's house.
— Mr Bishop's brother said: ‘Thank God Madge wasn't there.’’
They had both stopped in front of a rack of old-fashioned saucy seaside postcards: puny little men with worried expressions and legs like sticks versus huge, menacing women built like battleships with backsides and bosoms straining against their frocks like over-inflated balloons.
‘I'd kill 'im,’ said Marie, suddenly.
‘I'd kill 'im!’
It startled her when Simon laughed.
She turned round to sec if he was laughing at one of the postcards but he was laughing at her.
He saw that she was hurt.
‘Look, I'm sorry.
Honest, I'm dead sorry.
I didn't mean to upset you.
— But you don't know his type like I do.
He's just a yob, right?
A little vandal.
He hasn't got the bottle for anything else.
— He saw his chance with those keys and he took it.
Let himself into the kiosk, didn't get any cash, so he did a bit of damage.
Let himself into Madge's place, pinched a bit of cash, slashed a couple of armchairs….’
Simon hesitated.
Finally he said: ‘Look, Marie, he's just a yob, that's all.
He's had his little fling.
It's all over now.
I know his sort.
Like I said, he wouldn't have the bottle to face anyone.
He's a coward, see.’
‘Do you really think so?’
‘I promise you, Marie, he won't touch her.
Not after I've seen him anyway.’
‘But he's got a knife!
You'll have to be careful!
And he doesn't like you!’
‘Look, I'm trembling!’ said Simon, laughing.
‘Stop worrying will you?
I don't like to see you so worried.
— Anyway, he's not worth getting so worked-up over.
He's just a little creep who saw his chance, that's all.
— And even if he has got his sights set on Bella's money, I'll fix that.
I'll see him tonight.
— I can't do much about him vandalizing the kiosk, or Madge's place.
But I might get Madge's money back for her, if he hasn't spent it already.
And like I said, he won't be getting his kicks from smashing up other people's property.
Not when I've finished with him, he won't.’
Simon took Marie's arm and looked into her face: ‘All right?
Is everything all right now?’
Marie felt her distress ebbing away.
She could not remember now why she had thought that Gazzer was so dangerous.
After all, he hadn't hurt anybody, had he?
Why should he start with Simon?
Like Simon said, he was just a vandal who liked spoiling things.
An image came into her head: of Gazzer's spray can dropping out of his pocket and clunking across the floor of the kiosk: a little vandal who went round spraying his name everywhere.
‘I won't hurt him,’ said Simon, ‘if that's what you're worried about.
There's other ways of dealing with his sort.’
Although Marie said nothing, she had not been at all worried about Gazzer getting hurt.
‘Anyway, to make extra sure, you get yourself round to Bella's tomorrow morning,’ said Simon, ‘and get her to put that money in the bank.’
He looked at his watch.
‘It's too late to do it today.
The bank'll be closed soon.’
‘Why don't you come round there with me?’ asked Marie.
‘She'll believe you about Gazzer.’
Simon, Marie knew, would be able to find the right words to persuade Bella.
‘Why should she believe me?
She's never even seen me before, has she?’ said Simon.
‘Anyway, there's no need to worry her, is there?
Like I said, I'll warn him off.
And you needn't even tell her that you've seen her money.
Just tell her about Madge being burgled.
Tell her you're scared the same thing'll happen to her.’
‘She won't listen.’
‘She will!
She trusts you, doesn't she?’
‘Dunno,’ said Marie.
‘I don't know what she thinks about me.’
‘Look, if she really won't listen to you, we'll go round there together.
See if I can say something to persuade her.
O.K.?’
‘O.K.’’ said Marie.’
I should have known though, shouldn't I?— After him nicking them chocolate flakes, them crisps.
I mean, he'd nick anything, he would.
I should never have given him them keys….’
‘Marie!
Will you stop blaming yourself.’
‘Yes, all right.’
‘Have you stopped worrying?’
‘Yes.’
‘Smile, then!’
Marie smiled.
She felt as if he had led her out of darkness into light.
Somehow, she had let herself get mixed up.
‘Stupid bitch!’ she told herself.
But he had shown her the way out of her panic and con fusion: taken her into his world where things were bright, ordered, clear-cut, and easy to control.
‘I don't like to see you worried,’ he was saying.
They had reached the first of the amusement arcades: dimly-lit and claustrophobic.
In there, it was a lunatic world.
Mad machines gibbered, cackled, screeched insanely and blasted each other with sudden bursts of machine gun fire.
Random flashes of light: putrid green, violent orange, hellish red, shot through the swarming darkness.
She followed him inside.
A man, his face washed in an eerie red glow, was crouched over a fruit-machine.
His concentration was total.
He moved along the row, putting in money, pulling the handle, watching the drums revolve and click into place, moving on.
When he reached the last machine he went back to the beginning and played them all again.
As they watched, he did this over and over.
Sometimes money clattered into the tray.
He scooped it out and moved on, never breaking his rhythm, the expression on his face never changing, like a robot pre-programmed to perform this sequence of movements until someone clicked the ‘Off’ switch.
Marie was impressed: ‘Look at how much he's winning!’
Simon laughed.
‘What, him?
He'll put it all back — and then some more.
He's a loser, he is. — The world's full of ‘em.
— You want to see who the real winner is, then look up there.’
Marie followed his gaze.
If he had not drawn her attention  to it she would never have noticed the little glass cubicle, tucked away high up under the roof in one corner of the arcade.
There was a man sitting in it looking down.
From here, he could see all the machines, everything that was going on.
‘See him?’ said Simon.
‘Up there?
That's where the money is.
He's the one with the power.
— Look at him laughing.
Bet he's laughing all the way to the bank!
Looking down here, thinking: ‘What a load of mugs!’
Bet all these machines are fixed.
That one is for a start!’
Marie had been putting her money in a machine which had a little silver crane which came down and swung round, grabbing at the prizes.
The claws on the crane didn't seem to close properly so that, even if they did manage to get a grip on a tube of sweets or a pink plastic comb, the prizes always slipped out again as soon as the crane started to lift them.
‘That'll be his Rover parked outside,’ said Simon.
‘See the number plate?
It's this year's reg. — It's not the car I'd go for, mind.
I'd fancy a Porsche myself.
But it shows he's got money.
And he makes it out of losers like that.’
And Simon nodded towards the fruit-machine player, still going round and round in his endless routine.
‘My Dad says that.
He says: ‘There's only two sides, see, winners or losers.’
And the winners go out there and get what they want.
— Bet that bloke on the fruit-machines didn't come down here in a Rover!’
A cacophony of staccato bleeps and irritating electronic tunes, endlessly repeated, made it difficult for Marie to catch the sense of what he was saying.
‘I saw your Dad,’ she said, ‘in the car with you.
He looks like a nice feller.’
She had stopped putting her money in the machine with the silver crane.
‘Who does he work for, then?
Your Dad?’
Simon had hardly ever spoken to Marie about his family.
But today was different.
Today he was more talkative than she had ever known him, pleased with life, his eyes shining with enthusiasm.
‘Let's go somewhere a bit quieter,’ said Simon.
‘Next door, in the café.’
The young waitress, who looked barely out of Junior School, had wiped their table with a sour-smelling cloth and  had slopped down two grey coffees, each with its floating grease slick, when Simon asked, ‘What were you saying, about my Dad?’
‘I dunno. — I said: ‘Who does he work for?’’
Simon laughed: ‘He doesn't work for anybody.
Other people work for him.
He tells them what to do.’
‘What line of work is he in, then?’
Marie had in her mind an image of the laughing man in the car: a big man, who looked sure of himself, as if he was in control of his life.
‘He's in business.
That's why he's away a lot, meeting people, fixing things up.
You have to make an appointment to see him, these days.
He used to own a garage, that one with the big car showrooms on the High Street.
But he's expanding now, buying property, houses and that.’
She hardly listened to what he was saying: that didn't matter.
What was important to her was sitting here, like this, with Simon telling her about his personal life.
It made her feel important and needed.
She sat very still, letting his words flow over her, not daring to comment in case she said something stupid and broke his mood.
‘He's making a lot of money.
Says it's all out there, just for the taking.
— All you've got to do is use your brains, be one step ahead of the opposition.
Look!
I'll give you an example….’
Simon was animated, excited.
He leaned forward, his arms on the table, his face passionate with belief in what he was saying.
‘He bought this old factory the other day, down by the bus station.
They make coats, anoraks and that.
The bloke that owned it before was soft, a real loser.
So me Dad twists his arm a bit, like.
Gets him to sell up.
Turns out he was running the place for charity!
He had this load of dead-weights working for him, old lasses that should have been given the boot years ago.
But my Dad thinks: ‘I'll soon get shot of them!’
He says they're a real pushover.
You just shout at them and they burst into tears.
Soft as muck!— Half of them have quit already.
— Because he only wants the land, see.
As soon as the last order's out, he's going to close this dump, clear the site and sell the land.
— He got the word, from one of his business contacts, that they're planning to build a Hypermarket there.
You know, trying to  attract people into the town — And they'll need this land.
— He'll be able to name his price.
I mean, he bought it for next to nowt.
He says he's really going to make a killing!— It's beautiful!’
Suddenly he focussed properly on Marie s vacant face.
Her mouth was slack.
He said, ‘I'm going on too much.
I'll shut up now!’
But Marie, although she had not been paying attention to his words, had been thinking, her mind wandering off along a track of its own.
The idea of being able to control things and people was something she could hardly imagine.
One of the ways she visualized life was as a swirling, unpredictable tide of confusion which swept you along helpless, bumping against rocks, trying to snatch at branches, bits of wreckage, anything that might help to keep you afloat for, if you didn't watch out, the waters would suck you down and close over your head.
She remembered a scene like this from a film, where some men had bee n shooting rapids on a river somewhere in America and their boat had capsized.
She remembered also, the hand of one of the drowning men, rising up out of the torrent and clutching, clutching at empty air before being dragged under for the last time.
It was this nightmare image of panic and despair that she kept in her mind's eye as Simon talked his way confidently through his own philosophy of life.
‘Do you want another coffee?’
‘What?’
She felt immediately guilty for indulging in her own private thoughts.
She told herself off for not being attentive enough, for not finding the right words to encourage him to go on.
She tried to keep him talking.
‘What about your Mum?
You haven't told me about her.
What's she do then?’
It was the wrong question!
His voice went flat, lost all its previous enthusiasm.
He shrugged: ‘Do?— Well, she takes her pills, goes shopping, has her hair done, takes another pill, goes shopping again….’
He laughed, suddenly.
‘If you asked my Dad that, he'd say: ‘She does what she's told!’’
Then he stopped talking.
There was nothing more to say.
She cursed herself for spoiling the closeness between them.
Somehow, with her usual clumsiness, she had opened her  mouth and put her foot in it.
Simon, though, did not appear to be annoyed.
His voice was polite and apologetic.
‘Don't know what I'm doing boring you with all that.
Sorry.’
‘It wasn't boring, honest.’
‘Anyway, it took your mind off Gazzer for a bit, didn't it?
Stopped you worrying.’
It was true: she had not given a thought to Gazzer.
‘I forgot about him —!’
‘Forget about him again!
I told you.
I'll sort it all out for you.
I'll see him tonight.
I know where he'll be.
And you go round to Bella's tomorrow.
O.K.?’
She was about to tell him to be careful, but then she remembered how he had laughed at the idea that Gazzer could be dangerous, so she kept her mouth shut.
‘Come on, then,’ he said, getting up from the table.
‘Let's make a move, eh?
It's stopped raining.’
He handed her her jacket, which had been hanging on the back of her chair.
‘This jacket's wringing wet!
I should have asked you into the house to dry it out!’
He shook his head, as if exasperated by his own lack of consideration.
‘I just wasn't thinking!’
‘It's all right,’ said Marie.
‘I didn't expect you to ask me in.’
‘Why not?
Why ever not?— I want you to meet my Mum and Dad.
Tell you what, we'll fix up something soon, shall we?
You can come round for a meal, or something….
Anyway, I'll meet you down here tomorrow, tell you how I got on with Gazzer.’
‘What time?’ asked Marie.
‘Oh, I'm not sure.
— Not tomorrow morning.
Me and my Mum are fetching Dad from the airport.
He's coming home tomorrow — And we'll probably be doing something together in the afternoon.
— Tell you what, I'll see you down here, about 4 o'clock, outside Mr Bishop's kiosk.
That O.K.?’
When they emerged from the café a wedge of blue sky had forced itself between the storm clouds and the sea.
The sea, still a wicked pitch-black out on the deep water, had shaded to a gentle dove-grey in the shallows.
‘Fine weather coming,’ said Simon.
And Marie, oblivious of her cold, wet jacket, clung on to his arm as they walked along.
It was getting dark when Simon went looking for Gazzer.
Along the prom the amusements and rides were still open but the bad weather had kept people away.
The video games tootled their loony tunes; illuminated signs, ‘HOTDOGS, POPCORN, ‘DO-NUTS’, winked out through the gloom.
Somewhere, in the depths of an arcade, a bingo-caller went through his lonely routine: ‘Come on in, ladies and gennelmen.
Last game of the day.
Last game of the day, ladies and gennelmen.’
But the show was all for nothing: there were no punters out there, except for a scattering of people, hunched into anoraks, hurrying home to get out of the persistent drizzle.
Strands of coloured electric light bulbs, threading their way from lamp-post to lamp-post, joggled in the rising wind.
It looked like being a filthy night.
Down on the beach, the Big Wheel was still going round, its elegant shape picked out against the blackness of sea and sky by coloured lights, fixed at intervals, along its slender struts.
All its brightly painted wooden seats were swinging empty: there was no one riding the wheel, yet it still turned, revolving at a dizzy speed in the gathering darkness.
Further along, Simon could see Mr Bishop's kiosk, abandoned to the elements, its shutters still down, its back door flapping open, banging to and fro in the wind.
And there, exactly where Simon knew he would be, was Gazzer.
He was sitting in the little hut where you bought your tickets to get on to the Big Wheel.
Simon had of ten seen him here, at this time of night, standing in for the owner, who had nipped across to the pub for a pie and a pint.
The owner's son, a silent, backward man in his early twenties, was crouched by the lever that operated the wheel, struggling to stop the wind whipping over the pages of his comic.
He had a bright yellow hat on with ‘KISS ME SLOWLY’ written on the side.
Simon stood watching for a moment, then, adjusting the expression on his face, he walked down the wooden steps on to the beach.
He was gratified to see the shock in Gazzer's eyes.
Simon smiled.
‘Knew you'd be here,’ he said.
He couldn't remember ever having spoken to Gazzer, even though they had been in the same school for five years.
‘Don't think we've ever talked to each other before,’ he said, keeping his voice friendly.
‘You told me off once,’ said Gazzer, ‘for bumping into you in the corridors.’
Simon laughed.
‘Anyway, I want us to have a little talk now.
— I've got a proposition to put to you.
I think you'll be interested.’
‘I might be.’
Simon glanced round at Tony, the owner's son, who had stopped reading his comic and was watching them both, curiously.
‘Not here.’
‘Well, I've got to stay here, haven't I?’ said Gazzer.
‘He won't be back for another half hour.
And I can't leave Tony on his own.’
Simon looked up into the massive, spinning construction of wires and girders that soared above them into the night sky.
Right at the top, the coloured lights flickered feebly, hardly visible from the beach below.
‘We'll have a ride on the wheel,’ he said.
‘Nobody'll hear us up there.
It'll only take a couple of minutes — what I've got to say.’
Gazzer's mind was working furiously, selecting, rejecting possible courses of action.
He played for time.
‘But what if somebody comes to buy a ticket?’
Simon looked back along the deserted promenade.
‘You'll be lucky,’ he said.
Then he smiled, a charming smile of happy anticipation.
‘Come on, I've always wanted to ride on the Wheel, ever since I was a little kid.
Might as well have a go, eh, now that I'm here?— I'll pay for us both, if that's what you're worried about.’
Gazzer grinned back.
‘No, that's all right.
Free rides is one of the perks of the job.’
He came out of the ticket-booth: ‘Hey, Tony!
Stop the  wheel, will you?
Me and my mate, here, we're just going for a little ride.’
Tony pulled the lever and the wheel slowed, then jolted to a halt.
As they climbed in, the red wooden seat swung suddenly backwards, steadied itself.
— Tony leaned over him to lock the safety-bar into place and Simon said: ‘Tony, turn the lights out, on the Wheel.’
‘What for?’ asked Gazzer.
‘You get a better view that way.’
As the great wheel began to revolve, the coloured bulbs snapped out and it was drowned in the dark.
Gazzer could see Tony going into the lighted ticket-booth to read his comic.
The wheel gathered momentum as they rose up to the top: balanced, it seemed, on nothingness for a precarious second, then plunged, in a stomach-churning dive, back to earth again.
From the top you could see right over the seaside resort out into the countryside beyond.
The criss-cross pattern of streets, pricked out by street lights, flowed inland until the town petered out into blackness.
Piercing white lights shook on the masts of ships in the docks.
From behind them, they could feel the wind driving in, wild and bitter cold, from the open sea.
‘You can see a long way from up here,’ said Simon.
‘I didn't think you'd be able to see so far.’
‘It's cold,’ complained Gazzer.
His teeth were chattering.
‘I'll get down to business then, shall I?— I want you to do something for me.’
‘What?’
‘I want you to take that money from Bella's house.’
Gazzer's mouth hung open in amazement.
Simon laughed.
‘You didn't know I was after it as well, did you?’
Over the top, down the outside of the wheel, like being flung out into the night: dangling queasily in space then dropping like a brick.
It made the muscles in your backside tighten up.
For one heart-stopping second you thought the wheel would pitch you out, headlong, over the town, to swim frantically, comically, in empty air until the ground roared up to meet you.
‘Close your mouth,’ said Simon.
‘You look like Marie when you do that.’
Gazzer concentrated his mind: ‘Think,’ he told himself, ‘think.’
‘I thought you fancied her,’ he said, keeping his voice light, casual.
Simon's face screwed up in disgust.
‘What, me?
Fancy that stupid bitch?
You must be joking!
The thought of touching her makes me sick!’
The wheel went through a whole revolution before Gazzer spoke again.
‘So how do you know about Bella's money, then?’ he said, eventually.
As they went up, he looked down through the skeleton of the wheel with its spindly metal bones.
It made him light-headed.
Tony was still in the ticket-booth.
‘Like I said, she's thick as two short planks but she's useful.
I get a lot of information out of her.
She thinks I'm in love with her, see.’
Next to Gazzer, in the darkness, Simon was smiling to himself.
‘I can get her to do anything I want, to think anything I want.
She's soft as muck.
I even asked her if it was her that smashed that kiosk up!
You ought to have seen her face!’
And Simon made his mouth hang open, like Marie's did when she was con fused.
‘I could have got her to believe that, if I'd wanted to.’
Simon shook his head, as if he could scarcely believe the depth of Marie's stupidity.
‘But, in the end, it was more useful to me to get her to think that you'd done it….
She took a bit of convincing, mind!
She spoke up for you!
Well, at first, anyway.
She said,’— and here Simon mimicked Marie's voice, exaggerating her slow, hesitant way of speaking —‘she said: ‘I've known Gazzer all my life….’
But that burglary was the clincher.
After that, I could have told her that you were Jack the Ripper and she'd have believed me.
And now, one word from me and she'll be round that police station, letting them know all about you….’
In his school career, Gazzer had given a great deal of time, energy, and thought to getting round various people, to making sure that they did not take out their boredom, frustration or spite on him, the most obvious victim, the smallest and puniest boy in the class.
He had had a lot of practice in persuading bullies not to thump him, and now he recognized in Simon, only too well, all the signs of a violent, bullying, and  unpredictable nature.
‘I always knew there was something fishy about him,’ thought Gazzer.
‘I've never liked him….’
Immediately, he began trying to predict Simon's responses, to work out ways of soothing him, of flattering him, of making him laugh, anything that might defuse that aggression or at least make sure that Simon directed it at someone else.
He knew that Marie was the perfect scapegoat.
He knew that he was a fool not to join Simon in abusing her, in making her into a joke.
But he could not bring himself to do it, especially not now, after Simon had revealed how she had spoken up for him.
Instead, he began to defend Marie, a move that, in the present circumstances, was at best stupid, at worst, dangerous.
‘Yes,’ Simon was saying, ‘I can manage that stupid bitch, no trouble!’
‘I thought that once,’ said Gazzer, ‘but it might not be so easy….
There's a lot going on inside her head, see.
More than you think.
I mean, she —’ Then he stopped himself, abruptly.
‘Shut up, you moron,’ he told himself.
‘Shut up!
Now's not the time to cross him!’
But Simon's reaction was to throw back his head and howl with delight: he seemed to be genuinely amused.
As they belted over the top of the wheel, the wind plucked his laughter away into the night.
‘A lot going on in her head!
Did you say that?’ he yelled.
‘— Marie was right!
You are a comedian!’
He seemed to be in a really good mood.
Gazzer sighed with relief.
Then, Simon stopped laughing.
He turned to Gazzer and said, pleasantly, ‘You'll get your share of the cash, if that's what you're worried about.’
Gazzer thought for a minute.
‘This cash,’ he said, ‘Bella's money.
— If you know about it, why don't you take it?
What do you need me for?’
‘Because,’ answered Simon, ‘you know her don't you?
Like you know a lot of those old people round there.
You know the layout of her house.
I've never been in there, see.
I don't even know where she lives.
But you, you can just walk in and take it.
The daft old bat probably won't know it's gone for days.
— And the other reason is, I'm bored with taking all the risks.
I fancy giving the orders for a change and letting someone like you take the risks for me. — Besides, if she did suspect you, you  can always tell the old cow that Marie nicked it, can't you?— The money's in a drawer, see.
— In the bedroom.
Just there for the taking.
And Marie's been in there and seen it.’
Simon was enjoying himself.
He felt powerful, a winner, as if there was no one alive who could challenge his supremacy.
The speed of the turning wheel exhilarated him, flying through the wind and darkness with the whole town spread out, illuminated, at his feet.
He felt like throwing back his head and laughing out loud again.
The idea of controlling Gazzer, of making Gazzer afraid of him, excited him: it had been evolving in his mind ever since that afternoon's walk with Marie down to the arcades.
‘You know,’ said Simon, ‘she's so thick it takes all the fun out of it.
I mean, it's boring, you don't even have to bother to watch what you say.
Like this afternoon — I went on about the armchairs being slashed in Madge's house — We were talking about you at the time.
Well, she hadn't even told me yet about any chairs getting ripped up.
I shouldn't have known about that, should I?
But she didn't notice.
— just sat with her mouth hanging open — like you, just now.’
‘Oh Christ!’ thought Gazzer.
‘It was him!
He did it!’
He felt sick.
His mind could not take in all the implications of this sudden realization.
All he could think of was: ‘Keep him in a good mood!
Don't let him get worked up!’
As their wooden seat rose, swaying to the top of the wheel, Gazzer edged his body away from Simon, squeezing himself into the comer.
‘Look at that,’ Simon was saying.
‘You can even see the airport.
All lit up, right down the coast there.
And there's this plane!
See its lights, look!
It's circling round…coming in to land.’
‘It's a fantastic view from up here, isn't it?’
Gazzer couldn't stop his voice from shaking.
His knuckles, gripping the safety bar, were white.
‘Come on,’ said Simon, pleasantly, ‘you're not daft, not like she is, anyway.
I just told you that I did Madge's house, didn't I?
And the kiosk — It's a little hobby of mine, see.’
Gazzer forced himself to laugh.
Even to him it sounded almost hysterical.
‘Some people deserve all they get, don't they, eh?
And why shouldn't you have your little bit of fun?’
‘Oh, it's not just fin,’ said Simon, edging his way along the seat.
‘You should see my bank account.’
‘Where's Tony?’ thought Gazzer, frantically.
‘Shout for Tony!’
But, as the wheel hurtled down and round he could see Tony, safe in his little illuminated booth.
His yellow ‘KISS ME SLOWLY’ hat bobbed about as Tony chuckled to himself over his comic.
‘Cor!
A bank account!’
Gazzer heard himself saying.
He was using his ‘goon's’ voice, the one he put on when he wanted to make himself sound like a harmless imbecile.
‘Do you put it in the bank, then?
I'd spend it, I would.
I'd go mad!
I'd get everything I've ever wanted.’
But, all the time, he was telling himself: ‘Play for time.
— Keep him talking.’
His eyes strained through the darkness, trying to pick out the familiar, heavyweight figure of Tony's father trudging his flatfooted way back up the prom.
There was still a handful of people down there, identifiable only for brief seconds as they flitted through the pools of light thrown out on to the pavement from cafés and shops.
But none of them was him.
‘You would spend it, wouldn't you, Gazzer?’ said Simon.
‘That's just what you would do.’
He still sounded friendly, like a wise and understanding father, forgiving his son's immature behaviour.
‘But then you're a loser, aren't you?
You'll always be a loser.
— Oh, I'll use the money all right.
Later on, when I need the capital — I got plans, see.
I'll be a millionaire by the time I'm twenty-five.
— Where will you be when you're twenty-five, Gazzer?’
‘In jail, probably,’ said Gazzer.
His scalp crawled with tension.
Simon was so close that he could smell his aftershave and the leather of his coat.
‘But you've got brains, though.’
Gazzer could not disguise the grovelling tones of this clumsy attempt at flattery.
‘Where is he?
He should be back by now!’ ran through his mind as the wheel threw them over the top again.
He searched desperately for Tony's father among the confusing patterns of lights and shadow shifting and flickering down there on the prom.
‘I need someone with brains like you,’ he said to Simon, not daring to turn and look into his face.
‘I'd mess things up on me own.’
‘Well, there is that,’ Simon acknowledged.
‘But I've got  two other reasons for why you should take that money.’
His voice was kind, reasonable.
But he could hardly keep himself from laughing out loud in anticipation: he crammed his fist into his mouth to stifle the outburst.
‘One is that, like I said, I could probably frame you for the kiosk and the burglary.
Probably.
That's not definite though.
But the best reason, and the one I am sure about, is that I'll kill you if you don't.’
There was no doubting Marie's conviction that Simon was good with word.
The mechanism of the big wheel was remarkably quiet.
There were no snarling motors, no grinding of metal.
It sped on, bowling through its silent circles.
Sometimes the wind made a low, musical hum as it vibrated in the wires….
‘Look at me!’ said Simon to Gazzer.
‘Look at me!’
Gazzer, his mind seized up by terror, turned to see a knife in Simon's right hand.
He stared at it, fascinated.
‘Eh,’ he said finally, his fear making his voice tremble.
‘What do you need that for?
There's no need for that.’
‘I like violence,’ said Simon, simply, as if no further explanation was needed.
Gazzer's mind unfroze and thoughts seethed round and leapt up at him, like salmon jumping in a fast-running river.
For one mad moment he thought of climbing out of the seat and sliding down a girder to safety: ‘No, you berk, they only do that in films!’
And then, he made the first of his mistakes.
‘I'd do it,’ he said to Simon, ‘honest.
But Bella's got no money in the house.
It's all in the bank, see.
Honest.
I'm telling you the truth!’
Gazzer fought for breath.
Metal smashed into his windpipe.
His head was forced down, so that the safety-bar slammed into his neck.
Simon, his right hand grasping Gazzer's hair, and his left the back of Gazzer's anorak, bent Gazzer's head still further forward.
The seat rocked wildly.
As he choked, Gazzer's right hand jerked spasmodically behind him, clutching at Simon's jacket.
His left arm was jammed tight against the side of the seat.
There was a voice in his ear.
‘You lying little shit!
I know what you're up to.’
He lifted Gazzer's head slightly and then rammed it down again so that the bar chopped into his neck.
‘Aren't you?— Aren't you?’
Gazzer's right arm twitched.
‘You're after that money for yourself, aren't you?
I've told you where it is.
So you reckon you'll go into business on your own, eh?— I know how your mind works!’
Gazzer's crawling hand found the knife, where he had hoped it would be, on the seat beside Simon.
Simon had wedged the handle under his thigh to stop the knife from sliding off into space.
There was a pile-driver demolishing Gazzer's skull from the inside.
He retched, trying to breathe.
Rattling sounds came from his throat.
As his fingers gripped the knife and tugged, the blade sliced into his palm.
He didn't notice the pain.
The knife came free.
‘Kill him!’ cried a fear-crazed voice inside Gazzer's head.
‘Kill him!’ it said again, urgently.
But Gazzer felt himself being shoved off a cliff into unconsciousness.
Helpless, he toppled forward into blackness: his hand went limp and the knife clattered down on to the foot-rest.
Startled, Simon's hand shot out to grab it, his fingers scrabbling desperately, his nails scraping the wood.
But he was too late: the knife tipped over the edge and went spinning off into the night.
Gazzer's head was wrenched up until it crashed into the back of the seat.
Immediately, he began to draw deep breaths, his mouth wide open, his puny chest heaving, working to pump the air into his lungs.
They felt as if they'd been scoured out with a Brillo pad.
He collapsed forward again in a fit of coughing that racked his whole body.
‘You've made me mad now!’
Simon spat out the words.
‘You shouldn't have done that!’
His face was flushed, burning bright red along his cheekbones.
‘But I don't need a knife to finish you off!’
Any plans Simon had made for dealing with Gazzer were swallowed up by his frenzied rage at Gazzer's unexpected defiance.
Simon was out of control: he couldn't have told you what his next move was going to be.
He pulled Gazzer's head up by his hair.
Gazzer's eyes were closed.
‘Open your eyes,’ said Simon, ‘and look down there.’
He shook Gazzer's head to and fro.
‘Open them!’
Wearily, Gazzer opened his eyes.
He felt he had been imprisoned for ever on this mad, rotating world, racing ceaselessly through its dark orbit.
Nothing seemed to exist outside that swaying chair and Simon, whose terrifying ability to repress his own humanity made him into an enemy that Gazzer didn't know how to defeat.
Gazzer looked down into that cat's cradle of turning metal.
His crushed throat felt as if it had a lump of stone lodged inside it.
He gulped painfully, but the stone was still there.
‘We'll go round,’ said Simon, ‘a couple more times, just so you can see what a long way down it is, and then, when we get right up there, right to the top, I'm going to chuck you out.’
Gazzer believed him.
Looking through the metal bars, hypnotized by the revolving wheel, he could see his own body, broken arms and legs flopping grotesquely, bouncing from girder to girder on its way down.
At the same time, out of the comer of his eye, he saw Tony coming out of the ticket-booth.
‘And this time,’ Simon was saying, his voice high-pitched and cracked with excitement, ‘I won't dream about you afterwards.
There'll be no more dreams now!’
Simon was convinced that the only way to gain power over his nightmares, to rid himself of them forever, was to defy them and steep himself in further acts of intimidation and violence.
‘I did for him, see.
Mr Bishop.
It was me, me that finished him off!’
Simon shouted this aloud, throwing out his challenge into the dark, as if daring Mr Bishop's ghost to haunt him again.
‘Tony!’
Gazzer croaked.
He tried to scream the name but his throat felt as if it had been cauterized with a hot iron.
They were rising up, to the very top of the wheel.
The wind was dropping now: it sighed in the wheel's framework.
Gazzer was shivering uncontrollably with cold and panic.
Simon looked down and laughed out loud.
‘He won't help you!
Look at him, the moron.
He's forgotten we're up here!’
Tony was standing by the controls, gazing along the prom, looking out for his Dad.
The wheel careered onwards, carrying their chair over the summit and hurling it out again into the sickening void beyond.
‘Next time round,’ promised Simon.
‘Next time round.’
And Gazzer began to yell, tearing the sounds out of his bruised throat.
‘Stop the wheel!
Tony!
Stop the wheel!’
But then Simon put both hands round his neck.
Tony stared about him, puzzled.
He looked up.
Suddenly his face flooded with recognition but it was too late: the seat with Gazzer and his mate in had swept past him.
His eyes followed the struggling figures into the night.
The chair was rocking crazily, threatening to tip them both into space.
He saw Gazzer's fingers jab ferociously into Simon's face; Simon slacken his grip and Gazzer twist away, grab hold of a girder with both his hands, and haul himself up it.
Anything, anything to escape!— But then the darkness engulfed them both and Tony could see no more.
His hand moved, slowly, towards the lever that stopped the wheel.
‘For God's sake, Tony!’
It was Gazzer, still clinging on like a monkey and kicking out at Simon, who was dragging him back.
There was blood on the girder where Gazzer's hands were sliding helplessly down….
Horrified, Gazzer saw a yellow hat flash by.
The wheel wasn't stopping!
In desperation, he gave one last, vicious backward kick and launched himself out into the dark.
The wheel sailed serenely on, without him.
Then Tony pulled the lever and the wheel began to slow down.
Gazzer felt damp, gritty grains of sand under his cheek.
He lay there for a moment, stunned, winded, waiting for a message from his numbed brain.
‘Move!’ it told him.
Gazzer pushed himself painfully up on to all fours, peered around to get his bearings and scuttled, like a crab, past the swing-boats, down towards Mr Bishop's kiosk.
Behind him, the wheel was motionless and Simon, breathing heavily, had already begun to hunt him down.
‘Where are you, Gazzer?’ he called softly into the darkness.
His voice was friendly, coaxing, as if he was playing hide and seek with a small, reluctant child.
‘Don't go home, Gazzer.
I know where you live.
Don't go home.’
Underneath Mr Bishop's kiosk, in the litter of empty drink cans and greasy fish and chip trays, Gazzer, flattened against the sand, lay listening.
He watched Simon's trainers padding  around to the back door only inches from his face and he wanted to scream, to rid himself of the unbearable tension.
‘You in there, Gazzer?’
He heard the door crash.
The planks above him creaked as Simon hoisted himself inside.
Gazzer let his breath out in a long exhalation of relief.
He had been on the point of hiding in the kiosk: only at the last moment had he dived beneath it.
For the first time that night, he felt lucky.
Rolling out, he wriggled his way across the dry sand, all churned up with trippers' footprints, out to the firm, wet sand made smooth and level again by the tide.
Simon's words echoed in his head: ‘Don't go home, Gazzer.
Don't go home.’
He leapt up and began running, stumbling over driftwood, sometimes falling full length.
To his left was dense blackness, although from out there somewhere he could hear the gentle shushing of the waves.
Over to his right were the brilliant winking lights of the cafés, fish and chip shops, and illuminations along the promenade: harsh dazzling white, soft yellows and the fiery red and orange letters of neon signs.
When all these lights had been left far behind him and there was nothing but darkness on either side, Gazzer was still running.
On Tuesday morning, in the very early hours, Simon's nightmare began with a ringing telephone:
‘Brring!
Brring, Brring!’
What's that?— In this nightmare, he could see himself, quite clearly, as if he was watching a film on television.
He was in a room, a bedroom with a dim light source somewhere which bathed the room in shadows.
‘Brring!
Brring!’
He saw his own head twist round, his eyes widen in horrified disbelief.
He saw himself, moving out of the bedroom into another, totally dark room, feet dragging yet drawn irresistibly to answer the call.
He tried to scream a warning to his nightmare self: ‘No, don't go in there!
Don't pick up that phone!
It's not for you —!’
But his voice sounded feeble and far away: the nightmare self was beyond his reach, controlled by a power a thousand, a million times stronger than his own.
He saw his own reluctant hand pulled down by some invisible force towards the receiver — pick it up, raise it to his ear.
With his next breath he inhaled the stink of putrefaction….
‘Remember me?’ said Mr Bishop, at the other end of the line.
On Tuesday morning, at 9 o'clock, Marie, following Simon's instructions, went round to Bella's to try to persuade her to bank her money.
She was not hopeful about this.
She took a short cut along the prom.
It was a fresh, blustery day; very clear: she could see the lighthouse on the Yorkshire coast, two miles away across the Estuary and all the sun-washed white buildings huddled below it.
The air was sharp as lemons: it stung the inside of your nostrils.
You could get drunk on the ozone.
Marie had slept well last night: there had been no dreams of violence.
Eager to see Bella, she had got up as soon as she  was awake, although it was her usual habit to lie, for twenty minutes or so, drowsy, cocooned in her warm bed, entertaining herself with fantasies.
In one of her favourites, she and Simon were down at the Lock, picnicking on one of the half-buried concrete blocks.
He was in bathing trunks, more tanned than he was in real life, his body glistening with suntan oil, and she was aware that she, although she dared not picture herself, was in a bikini.
Like countless adverts for soap powder, shampoo, tropical fruit drinks, deodorants, which had been absorbed into her memory during hours of television watching, the world they inhabited in this fantasy was innocent and carefree, a garden of Eden before the Fall.
They laughed, swam in the Humber (which, strangely, was as warm as bathwater and a dazzling, transparent blue), chased each other, in slow motion, through the sand dunes, caught each other and kissed, fed each other with — Marie could not decide what they should feed each other with.
She decided eventually on slices of melon, the kind that was red inside with black seeds….
It was a clean, bright, uncomplicated world from which con fusion, evil, darkness, suspicion, betrayal had been banished.
The light which fell on their brown skins was dappled, as in the television adverts she had seen which were set in jungles.
She could even hear background music, syrupy and soothing, in her head.
Many of the girls who had been in her class at school, had they been told about it, would have scoffed at the coyness and naïvety of Marie's fantasy.
Even Marie herself might have confessed to you that it was ‘daft’: she saw how improbable it was, but in her desperate need for comfort, for attention and affection, she still believed it….
She stopped, abruptly.
An ambulance, siren wailing, was pulling away from Bella's house!
There was a police car slewed into the kerb, lights still flashing, doors open, empty.
There was a group of curious onlookers….
Marie felt her legs give way beneath her, she sat down on the edge of the pavement, feet in the gutter, doubled-up, sick and winded as if someone had punched her in the stomach.
She lifted up her head and looked again.
She had watched scenes like this so of ten in detective films and police series on television  that she could hardly believe that this was real life.
If she tried hard enough, surely she could make it all, the car and the people, vanish into thin air, like one of her fantasies?
But then, Bella's home-help came out of the bungalow and it was no use any more trying to pretend that it wasn't happening….
The home-help walked down the road towards Marie, wheeling her bike which had been propped up against the curb.
Marie got up, unsteadily, and leaned against someone's garden wall for support.
‘I daren't get on this bike,’ the home-help said to Marie.
‘I'm trembling that much.
Look at that!’
Her outstretched hand shook, dramatically.
She was a middle-aged woman with a worn, washed-out face: she always reminded Marie of her own mother.
She had thin, brittle, permed hair, and, under the blue and white checked overall she always wore for work, her legs were stringy and knotted with varicose veins.
Like Marie's mother, her skinny, deceptively frail body was fired by nervous energy.
‘There's no use me staying,’ she said to Marie.
‘They won't let me touch owt.
Won't even let me hoover round.
— They'll be looking for fingerprints I suppose: threads from his coat and that.’
The home-help, too, had seen films on television: she knew what happened at the scene of a crime.
‘What's bin going on?’ said Marie, urgently.
‘That's finished me off for the day, that has!
I'll do no more work today!’
Bella's home-help sounded excited rather than upset.
‘Tell me.’ begged Marie, desperately, ‘what's bin going on!’
‘Well,’ said the home-help, ‘it were the Warden found her, not me.
It should have been me what found her really.’
She seemed annoyed about this: ‘But he went on his rounds earlier than he should have done, see, and so he found her before me.
Somebody'd broke in, got in through the bedroom winder.
Turned the place upside-down.
There she was, stretched out on the floor.
— He'll have panicked if I know him, that Warden.
But he did manage to pick the phone up and call an ambulance.’
‘Did he hurt her?
The bloke what broke in?’
‘I don't know about that,’ said the home-help, reluctant to  confess her ignorance.
‘The Warden was just telling me all the details when this policeman come over, wanted to talk to 'im.
— But from the look of that bedroom, I'd say he was a right maniac.’
‘Did you see her in the ambulance?’
‘Only a quick look.
I mean, it pulled away that fast.
She weren't moving, though.
She were just laid there, dead still,’ said the home-help, relishing the sound of her own words.
‘Dead still,’ she repeated, disappointed at the lack of reaction on Marie's blank face.
‘Do you think they'll let me see her in hospital?’
‘Oh, I shouldn't think so,’ said the home-help.
The Warden had robbed her of her rightful position of importance in the drama, but at least she could make herself feel better by taking this girl down a peg or two.
‘I mean, you're not even related, are you?
You're just from the YTS. — You've only known her a few weeks.
No, the police'll want to talk to her first, won't they?
If she can talk to anybody, that is. — And I'll be going round, of course.
They'll let me in. — I've been doing for her for years.’
‘Yes, and she hated your guts!’ thought Marie.
But she could scarcely control the quivering of her lower lip.
And the home-help went off, pushing her bike, rehearsing her story in her head, improving it, adding a little detail here and there.
She was pleased that most people she told the story to that day proved to be a more appreciative audience than Marie had been.
At least they didn't stand there looking stupid: at least they had the decency to look shocked and horrified.
When everything had seemed to be sorting itself out, when the way ahead seemed, for the first time in ages, to be solid under her feet, Marie felt the path crumbling away in front of her.
It was a distinct, physical feeling of sick panic, as if she had taken a step — and there was nothing there.
She couldn't understand what had gone wrong: she thought, at first, of joining that little knot of onlookers to see if she could find out more.
She even took a few steps towards them.
But they were already drifting away: the show had become boring, there was nothing left to see.
Then she tumed to go to Simon's house but half-way along the street she remembered that he had gone, with his mother, to pick up his  Dad from the airport.
So she changed direction again and found herself walking down to the prom and out along the beach to Seal Sands Lock.
Merging into that vast, sweeping seascape of sky, waves and sand gave her no sense of calm.
Instead, images of horror thronged her mind, jostling each other for pride of place.
There was Bella, her body a crumpled heap on the floor, with injuries that Marie could not bear to visualize: ‘Don't be so daft!’ said Marie viciously to herself.
‘He might not even have touched her.
She might have fainted, or summat.’
And here came a vision of Simon, terribly hurt by Gazzer's knife and left to bleed to death in some stinking alley.
—‘He probably couldn't even find Gazzer last night!’ she told herself, desperately.
‘He'll be perfectly all right.
You'll see!’
But her imagination continued to torment her, replaying this last scene over and over again, as if trying to force her into admitting that the only person in her life who really cared about her might be dead.
The sun was reflected in every tiny scoop of water.
The miles of wet, corrugated sand were alive with dancing light, sparkling, glittering: it almost blinded you to look out to sea.
Where was the sea anyway?
There it was.
If you shaded your eyes you could just make it out: a gleaming band of silver right across the horizon.
Soon, the tide would turn and it would begin to creep inshore again.
Marie passed the old chalets, neglected and boarded up now, their paint peeling, their woodwork rotting away, that used to be rented out to holidaymakers.
She walked by the tiny marina, where the halyards jingled on the masts of the half dozen boats that were berthed there.
Then there was nothing but dunes, sky, and that endless stretch of wet, glistening sand.
In the hazy distance there were people riding horses, strung out along the waterline.
Otherwise, there was nobody.
At the Lock, Marie sat in a hollow in the sand-hills by the canal and waited for the magic to start; she waited for everything to be made all right.
The dry, white trickling sand of the dunes was warm to the touch.
Tiny, polished black pollen beetles crawled over her hand: she had become part of their landscape.
But she was not taken out of herself by the sweeping cosmic  changes of light and colour.
Her mind was not soothed by memories of her Dad and of the days when she was a little girl.
She strained her eyes, searching, but today she could not persuade herself that there were any seals out there.
Now, when she looked out into the Estuary, she saw not seals, or castles, or knights in armour but Mr Bishop's body, rolling in on the tide.
It seemed that she could no longer use this place to escape from the reality of the present: from her fears for Simon and Bella, her growing rage against Gazzer and from a terrible, sinister premonition that her life was about to fall apart.
The clutching hand lifted up out of the water, the dark pit beyond the open door: all the old, despairing images passed momentarily through her troubled mind….
Her gaze travelled round from the rusty old fort, over the salt marsh, past the blocks, sandbags and barbed wire on the beach and lingered on the mud on the near vertical sides of the channel next to her.
It had a slick, shiny surface like smooth, sweating skin.
It didn't look deep or treacherous but it was deadly.
A bird-watcher had climbed down there once, to get his binoculars, and the mud had sucked him in up to his waist.
He had drowned, unable to move, when the rising tide had filled the channel: Marie remembered seeing about it on the local television news.
She could smell the chemical effluent off the agricultural land: she couldn't remember having noticed that stench before.
A swallow darted between the glazed, black walls, climbed steeply to clear the Lock gates and skimmed over the canal on the other side, sipping the water.
Marie watched it go.
— What was that!
Alarm bells rang in her head.
She retraced the swallow's flight and there, up in the grass on the canal bank, just to the right of the Lock gates, she saw it: ‘GAZZER’.
The name was spray-painted in thin, straggly red letters on the outside of one of the concrete pill-boxes.
Marie scrambled out of the sand-hills and ran along the bank, crashing her way through the tall, razor-edged grass, not minding if it cut her hands.
She put out a finger to touch the letters and it came away red-stained: the paint was fresh.
She remembered now the conversation she had had with Bella about the Lock.
On Sunday, only the day before yesterday — it hardly seemed possible!
And how Gazzer had interrupted them and  talked about these old World War II pill-boxes as good hidingplaces….
The pill-box was square, about three feet high, with a slit in each side for the guns.
Underneath there would be a pit, deep enough for the soldiers to stand up in.
Marie crouched down to peer through one of the slits but she could see nothing, only blackness inside.
This pill-box had no door.
It was one of those you entered by means of a short underground passage.
There would be a network of tunnels leading to two, perhaps three other pill-boxes.
Marie could see another of them, almost buried by brambles, about twenty feet away.
She looked round for the entrance.
There it was, just as she remembered it from her childhood, further along the bank, down concrete steps, choked up now with tall, dark green nettles.
She smiled.
If Gazzer was in there, he was trapped because that was the only way out.
She took some gravel off the top of the pill-box and threw it through one of the slits.
She listened.
Nothing.
She chucked in another handful and heard it rattling against the walls.
There was a scuffling noise!
So he was in there!
Quickly, Marie moved over to the entrance.
Gazzer was at a great disadvantage: she had him cornered, she was stronger than he was, she could remember the lay-out of these tunnels and she was after his blood.
He had robbed Madge, he had hurt, even killed Bella and, worst of all, he had probably, knowing him, deprived her of Simon.
‘What about the knife?’
This warning flashed into her brain but, immediately, she blocked it out.
It was a great release from the torture of doubt, confusion, and anxiety to abandon her mind to revenge.
Her aggression, so long pent-up, was so intense that, while it lasted, it stopped her from thinking, or worrying, about anything else.
Oddly enough, it even, while it lasted, seemed to give her a sense of purpose in life.
She went down the concrete steps.
The nettles in the tunnel entrance had been partially flattened.
She barged through them: if you did that they didn't sting you.
Inside, the tunnel was shored up with beams and was high enough to stand up in.
Her feet sank into mud.
Empty bottles and beer-cans littered the tunnel floor: other people, it seemed, had used this place as a shelter.
At the end of the tunnel, only yards away, was a little cell-like room.
That was where the first pill-box was.
There was enough light in the tunnel from the entrance and from the gun emplacement slits in the pill-box for her to be able to see through the dark.
Tunnels branched off to right and left: these led to other pill-boxes.
She stood still, listening.
Suddenly, she felt the thrill of her own power: ‘You've got him trapped all right!’ she thought.
‘But careful.
If you choose the wrong direction, he could escape!’
Her foot went into a puddle: the green, algae-filled water slopped up over her trainer.
She moved out of the sunlight that flooded in between the nettles and into the dank gloom of the main tunnel.
She stopped again, listening, at the entrance to the left-hand tunnel.
There was no noise, no clue.
She looked down it: all she could see was blackness.
When she had thrown the gravel, there had been someone in the pill-box directly ahead of her.
But he might have had time to move.
She could see partly into the little room at the end of the main tunnel.
On the floor there were some charred branches.
She could smell the wood-smoke: someone had been trying to light a fire.
Pressed against the wall so she couldn't be seen, Marie edged her way, very quietly, towards the pill-box.
There was a smile on her face.
She was thinking: ‘I've got you now, Gazzer!
I've got you now!’
She launched herself into the tiny room, crouching, arms spread wide, ready to grab Gazzer if he made a dash for the door.
But it was empty.
Wrong one!
She ran frantically back, splashing through the scummy water, stumbling, not caring how much noise she made, and plunged into the darkness of the right-hand tunnel, feeling her way along the walls.
Marie wanted to get Gazzer: she wanted to hurt him, as he had hurt others.
She burst out of the tunnel into the dim light of the second pill-box.
Empty!
Spinning round, kicking a heap of empty cider bottles out of her way, she raced back towards the entrance, not stopping now to feel her way, cannoning off the walls in the darkness.
There he was!
She caught hold of one of the timber supports to stop herself from shooting out into the main tunnel.
Panting, trying to stifle  the noise of her breathing, she stood in the dark, just inside the right-hand tunnel, and watched him.
‘Look at him, the fool,’ she thought.
‘He thinks he's getting away!’
She shook her head, in amazed disbelief at his stupidity.
Gazzer, moving cautiously, looking all about him, was creeping out of the left-hand tunnel and making for the entrance.
She continued watching him for a moment, then stepped out into full view.
‘Come ‘ere, you,’ she said.
She was sure he would run for it: she had been fully prepared for that.
In fact, he did begin to run, but then he stopped, abruptly, right in the entrance, turned round, and peered back down the tunnel.
‘Marie!
Is that you?’
Shafts of bright sunlight, pouring in all around him, had dazed him.
‘Is that you, Marie?
I can't see properly.’
Marie moved forward so that he could see her better.
‘Thank God for that!’ said Gazzer.
‘I thought it was him.’
The relief in his voice was pathetic.
He began to come back down the tunnel towards her.
But the hostility on her face made him think twice about going any nearer.
‘Look,’ he said, deciding, for the moment, to keep a safe distance between them, ‘I know you think I nicked them keys, that I did that kiosk and Madge's house —‘
‘What's happened to Simon?’ said Marie, dangerously.
Gazzer stood his ground.
But he remembered yesterday's incident in Marie's kitchen.
He was pleased that she wasn't coming any closer.
‘Let's get out of here,’ he suggested.
‘Out into the fresh air.
It stinks in here.
Somebody uses it for boozing sessions.’
‘What happened to Simon?’
‘Happened to him?
I don't know, do I?
I couldn't care less what's happened to him.’
‘What about Bella, then?
What did you do to her?’
‘What are you on about?’
Gazzer couldn't see Marie clearly.
She had stepped aside, so that her face was in shadow.
‘Stop trying to con me!
I suppose you'll be making a joke out of it next, eh?
Won't you, Gazzer?
An old woman, robbed  of her money.
Knifed, maybe.
Dead, even?
It's a laugh a minute, innit?
A real scream?’
‘Oh, no.
He never went and did it….’
Gazzer was in bright light, down by the entrance and Mane could see every move he made.
If she had been paying more attention to his face she might have believed that his deeply shocked, anguished expression was not an act, put on for her benefit.
But she was busy watching his feet, waiting for him to do a runner.
‘Is she all right?
Where is she?
Have you seen her, then?’
‘What do you care!’
Marie took a few steps towards him.
‘Look, look, back off a minute, will you?
Please.
Just back off.
— I want to tell you something.’
Those more experienced than Marie in practising acts of intimidation and violence could have told her that it is of ten a mistake to delay, to let your victims talk to you.
Even now, Marie could sense that the stranglehold of her rage had been broken.
Standing there, her feet in slimy water, her teeth chattering in the chilling dampness of the tunnels, she felt her sense of purpose draining away.
‘Just listen to me,’ Gazzer was saying.
‘If you don't like what I've got to say, then I'll go with you to the police.
O.K.?’
‘I know you!
You want to soften me up, don't you?
Tell me a load of old rubbish!
You're thinking: ‘She's thick.
I can tell her owt and she'll believe it!’— Well you can't con me.
Not any more!’
It was too late to do any physical hurt to Gazzer.
The impetus had gone.
And now, Marie wasn't sure what to do next.
She had not seen beyond the violence: she had not planned for any other outcome.
Her one, clear thought was that, whatever he said, she would not be convinced by him.
She would not let him confuse her with his lies.
‘And don't try to run off!’ she said to him.
‘Look at me,’ said Gazzer.
‘Look at the state of me. — I wouldn't get very far, would I?’
For the first time, Marie paid attention to Gazzer.
He was a wreck.
His face was grey with hunger and lack of sleep, his hair matted, his clothes stiff with mud.
There were bruises on his neck and a bloodstained rag round his right hand.
He looked close to collapse, but Marie felt no pity for him.
‘What's up with your hand?
I bet you did that last night.
— Did she put up a fight, then?
Did she recognize you?
Is that why you're hiding out up here?’
‘I did do it,’ said Gazzer, wearily, ‘last night.
But on Simon's knife.
When we were on the Big Wheel.’
‘So that's your game, is it?
You're going to try to tell me that it was him, not you?
That it was him did all them things?— I knew you were daft, Gazzer.
I never knew you was that daft, though.’
‘Let's go outside,’ said Gazzer.
‘This place gives me the creeps.’
Marie hesitated.
‘Look, I won't run off,’ said Gazzer.
‘I promise you.
O.K.?
I couldn't run if I tried.
I've had nowt to eat since yesterday.
— And I got no sleep last night.
Me throat hurts.
And me hand hurts.’
‘That's terrible, that is!
Tragic!’ scoffed Marie.
The words echoed strangely in her head.
They were not her words: she didn't use words like ‘tragic’.
But she could not remember where she had heard them before.
Gazzer remembered, though.
‘Look,’ he said, awkwardly, ‘I know I've taken the piss out of you in the past.
I'm sorry about that.
I didn't know no better.
— I like you,’ he added recklessly.
He was aware, even as he spoke, that she would think he was lying, putting on his ‘sincere’ act to try to get round her.
‘If I was her,’ thought Gazzer bitterly, ‘I wouldn't believe me either.’
‘Shut up!’
Marie was saying, sickened.
‘I bet you crawled round Bella like that, didn't you?
Didn't stop you from taking her money though, did it?— Where is it, then?
What have you done with it?’
‘I haven't got it,’ said Gazzer.
‘I told you!
It wasn't me!
It was Simon.’
Marie moved towards him.
He tripped backwards up the steps.
The nettles stung his hands.
But all she said was: ‘Go on, then.
Get a move on, if you're going.’
The sun exploded in their faces.
They screwed up their eyes, trying to get used to the glare.
The sky was blue, cloudless.
There were meadow browns, small skippers, and even painted ladies flitting among the tall flowering grasses on the canal bank, bending them over as they settled, knocking off the pollen in  puffs of fine, yellow mist.
But neither Gazzer nor Marie noticed the butterflies or the rare, superb weather.
Outside, Gazzer looked even worse than he had in the tunnels: his face was haggard, haunted by his memories of last night, his fears for Bella, and his desperate need to make Marie believe him.
‘Whatever I say,’ he thought to himself, ‘however I say it, she'll think I'm putting on an act.’
Gazzer hauled himself up to sit on top of the pill-box.
Marie stood watching him.
She had decided, largely because she didn't know what to do with him, to let him talk.
But she had steeled herself not to believe a word that he said.
‘Simon told me, last night,’ began Gazzer, ‘that he'd smashed that kiosk up.
That he'd broke into Madge's house.
He said he'd done things like that before.
He wanted me to nick Bella's money for him.’
Marie shook her head in exasperation at Gazzer's lies.
‘I swear,’ he said, ‘that's what he wanted.
He was using you, see, to get information about Mr Bishop, about Madge, about Bella —‘
‘What do you mean?
He had nowt to do with Mr Bishop!
He never even met him!’
‘He said, ‘I did for him’.’
Gazzer swallowed, nervously.
He knew he was on very dangerous ground.
‘I finished him off,’ he said.
— He'll have been after the takings, from the kiosk.
— And that's where I reckon he got the keys.
off Mr Bishop.’
‘I don't believe you,’ said Marie.
‘Everybody knows Mr Bishop was drunk and got drowned.
It was an accident.
How did Simon have owt to do with that?’
‘I don't know how,’ said Gazzer, hopelessly.
‘It's just what he said, that's all.’
‘You don't know nowt, do you?’
‘Marie,’ said Gazzer, urgently.
‘You ought to have seen him.
You'd believe me if you'd seen him.
Last night.
On the Wheel.
It was like he was a different person.
Honest, Marie.
He tried to kill me.
He went crazy….’
Gazzer's voice trailed away: words were not adequate to communicate the horror of last night.
Yet it was still so vivid in his mind.
He could not stop himself from thinking about it and he shuddered, as he imagined again Simon's hands around his neck.
‘Simon wouldn't hurt nobody.’
Gazzer's shoulders slumped.
His head drooped.
He sighed, defeated.
He slid down from the pill-box and sat in the high grass, halfway down the canal bank.
Five swans, necks outstretched, their great curved wings rising and falling, leisurely, powerful, pulled, as if in slow motion, past his unseeing eyes.
They flew just above the surface of the water and their wings made a loud wubbering noise like canvas flapping in the wind.
Sticky spider-webs clung to his hair; little green frog-hoppers landed on him, then flicked off again.
Delicate, lacy moths flopped softly into his face.
He turned to Marie, who was sitting on the top of the bank, just above him.
‘You know when Simon was talking to you yesterday, in the arcades?’ he asked her.
‘How do you know about that?’
‘Simon told me, last night, on the Big Wheel.
He said he made a mistake: he said that he talked about armchairs being ripped up at Madge's house, even before you'd told him about them.
— Think, Marie.
Can you remember him doing that?
Because, if you can, it'd prove he was there, wouldn't it?’
Marie shrugged, impatiently: ‘How do you expect me to remember something like that?— You're just trying to get me confused, aren't you?
Trying to mix me up!’
She wafted a butterfly away from her face.
‘Anyway, it wouldn't prove he was there, would it?
Somebody else could've told him about it.’
‘Who?’
‘How do I know?—’ A thought struck her and she said, triumphantly.
‘I know that he couldn't have done owt to Mr Bishop, though! 'Cos he wasn't here on Friday.
He was away, with his Mam and Dad, seeing his Gran.
He told me.
He never got back until Saturday night.’
Gazzer felt fatigue overwhelming him.
There was no point in all of this: she would never believe him.
Not in a million years.
He wanted to lie down, in the sunshine, lost in this tall, scented grass and go to sleep….
Sitting there, above him, watching him slowly keel over and close his eyes, Marie was remembering something else: ‘Our Mam said Simon's Dad was up the factory on Friday, didn't she?
So how could they all have gone away together?’
But she didn't tell Gazzer this.
All she said was: ‘Gazzer, wake up!’
His head nodded up from among the pink clover flowers.
‘Eh?’
‘If you knew Simon wanted to nick Bella's money, why didn't you go straight round there and tell her?’
Gazzer pushed himself wearily back up to a sitting position.
Shivering the night away in the reeking darkness of the tunnels, he had asked himself this question more than once.
‘I was scared.
I wanted to get far away from him as I could.
— I thought he was going to kill me.’
His excuse, said in this bright morning light, sounded feeble and over-dramatic.
‘Besides,’ he said, ‘I didn't think he knew where she lived.
I could swear that he told me he didn't know!
Why did I believe him!
I mean, he lied about everything else, didn't he?’
Gazzer seemed to be talking to himself, not to Marie but, suddenly, he looked straight into her face and said: ‘Did you tell him where she lived, like you told him about the money?’
Marie was agitated.
She stood up: ‘No, I didn't!— So he couldn't have done it, could he?— And before you say owt, he couldn't have looked her up in the phone book 'cos she's ex-directory!— And anyway, he told me to go round there today and get her to put her money in the bank.
He wouldn't have done that if he was going to nick it, would he?’
‘Well, that's why he had to take the money last night, then!
Isn't it?
That explains it!
He covers himself, see, by telling you to bank the money.
And then everything goes wrong when he can't get me to go round there and pinch it.’
Gazzer was excited.
He felt she was paying attention.
‘You still haven't told me how he found out where she lived!’
Gazzer shrugged.
‘He could have done that easily.
— He was down the prom on Sunday.’
‘No, he wasn't.
He was with his Dad, playing pool.
No — swimming or summat.’
‘Bella and me both saw him.’
‘Well, so what if you did?’
‘He could have followed you back to her house, couldn't he?’
With the stealth of a thief, a memory sneaked into Marie's  brain: Simon, seen first on the putting-green and seen again, outside the chip shop.
And here came another!
Simon, yesterday, denying he was on the prom at all.
Telling her he was with his Dad.
— She tried to shut them out but it was as if one memory had set free another: they came clamouring now to torment and bewilder her.
She remembered her mother's words: ‘Shot of him — for a couple of weeks — went off, straight to the airport — flying down to London — for a couple of weeks.’
And today as well!
Why had he said he was going to retch his Dad from the airport?—‘Maybe his Dad came back early,’ Marie told herself.
‘I bet he can explain everything.
Just ask him, this afternoon.’
‘What did he say about me, then?’
Marie asked Gazzer, casually.
‘Last night, when you say you were on the Wheel with him?’
She waited for his reply.
She sat quite still, her body paralysed with tension.
A tiny spider floated down on a thread from a purple-headed thistle and scuttled over her hand.
Two swallows, their rapid wings slicing the air like scissors, flashed their white bellies as they turned and dived right in front of her face.
‘He didn't say anything, much,’ said Gazzer, just as casually, chewing on a sappy grass stem, not looking at her.
‘Tell me!’
‘No.’
And this, more than anything else Gazzer had said before, set up doubts in her mind.
‘Anyway,’ said Gazzer, eager to get her mind off this subject.
‘I'll tell you one good thing: he didn't get nothing.
Because I put Bella's money in the bank.
Yesterday, after I'd been round to see you.
— I told him that, on the Wheel, but he didn't believe me.’
‘I don't believe you, neither!’
‘All right, then!
Let's go and see Bella.
In hospital.
She'll tell you.
She'll prove I'm not lying.’
‘They won't let us in.
We're not related.’
‘Oh, yes, they will,’ said Gazzer.
‘I'll just lie about who we are, if they don't.’
Marie thought about this.
She brushed the spider off her hand.
‘Do you believe me, then?’ asked Gazzer.
‘How do I know who to believe?
People tell so many lies!
You tell lies don't you?— And you nick things, don't you?’
‘Everybody lies.
You're not telling me you never lie, are you?— And I only nick crisps — stuff like that.
That doesn't make me like him!’
Gazzer nearly started his next sentence with ‘Use your brains!’ but he stopped himself, just in time.
‘— How could I rob Bella and her not know it was me, eh?
We'll go round and see her.
She'll tell you it wasn't me. — I like her, for God's sake!’
Marie desperately wanted to be told what to do but there was no one but herself to rely on.
Bella was in hospital and she still believed that Gazzer, in spite of all his denials and glib talk, had put her there.
Simon: he wasn't here to help her and she had no idea what had happened to him.
And Seal Sands Lock, the place where she had come to be healed so many times in the past, offered her no comfort now.
The magic had gone.
Finally she said: ‘All right, then, we'll go and see her.
But don't try to run away!’
‘You must be joking!— What hospital's she at, anyway?’
Marie shrugged.
‘Dunno.
St Mark's probably.
That's the nearest, in't it?’
‘You'll be lucky if I make it there!
You'll end up having to carry me!’
Gazzer wasn't surprised when Marie didn't laugh.
He trailed along behind her through the sand dunes, along the edge of the tidal salt marsh.
These marshes were alive with an odd mixture of land and sea birds: yellowhammers, linnets, sparrows; little terns, ringed plovers, oyster-catchers.
You hardly saw them until you were almost on top of them.
Then they exploded noisily into the air right in front of you, wheeled round in great, sweeping circles, crying their alarm calls, and settled again when you had passed.
But Gazzer didn't notice them.
He was reliving last night: on the Wheel, in the tunnels.
Up at the Lock, in the darkness of the tunnels, he had thought about Mr Bishop's body being washed up there.
He had imagined that….
But he didn't want to remember now, what he had imagined.
‘I phoned up from there last night,’ said Gazzer, talking mainly to stop himself thinking.
Marie, lost in her own thoughts, did not hear him.
‘Marie, I phoned up from there last night.’
He was pointing to a telephone-box, over by the chalets.
‘That box doesn't work any more.
It hasn't worked for years.’
‘Yes, it does.
It's still connected.
I phoned up from it, didn't I?
I phoned my Mam and Dad, told 'em I was staying round somebody's house.
— Not that they'd be bothered.
— But I daren't go home, see.
He knows where I live.’
Marie made no reply.
‘And I phoned Bella up as well.
To see if she was all right.’
‘Oh, yes?’
Marie's voice dripped sarcasm.
‘I did phone her.
— And nobody answered.
— So I put the phone back down again.
She takes sleeping-pills, see, for the pain.
Nothing could wake her up when she's had a couple of them.
She sleeps like the dead.’
‘Are you trying to be funny?’
‘No, no, honest!
I don't know why I said that.
— What do you think I am, anyway?’
Gazzer said, angrily.
‘You act like I'm some kind of monster!’
His anger made her turn to look at him: ‘You look a right mess!’
‘Well, so would you if you'd spent all night in them tunnels!— How did you know I was in there, anyway?’
‘You only went and wrote your name on the outside, didn't you?’
‘Did I?— Oh, yes, I forgot about that.
— I couldn't do it properly, though, what with only having the one can on me.’
‘You are daft.
Fancy having a hide-out with your own name on it.’
‘Yes, well, I got bored, didn't I?
I didn't think anybody would see it….’
These weren't the real reasons.
When he was at school, Gazzer's graffiti had been part of his act: another way of establishing himself as a ‘character’, of making his mates laugh.
Early this morning, in a raw, grey dawn, he had climbed out of the tunnels and sprayed his name on the pill-box.
After a night spent scared, confused, alone in miles of dark desolation, tormented by his imagination, seeing his own name written there had helped him to keep his sanity, to believe in his own existence and identity.
‘Daft thing to do,’ added Gazzer, lamely.
Looking back, he thought he had been a little bit crazy, last night.
‘When did you last have something to eat, then?’ asked Marie.
‘I can't remember.
Yesterday sometime.
I never had me tea, anyway.
I know that!’
‘Well, there's a little hut up there, by the boating lake.
Sells icecream and sweets and that.
— I'll buy you a Mars Bar, or summat, if it's open.
— But don't take off, mind, while I'm getting it for you!’
Gazzer came out of the main doors of St Mark's.
‘What are you still hanging about out here for?
Come on.
I've found out where she is.’
Marie had been waiting for him out in the car-park.
‘She's all right, then?’
‘I don't know.
All I know is, she's still alive.
She's in the same ward me Grandad was in. — Come on, I'll show you the way.’
Marie could not remember ever having been inside a hospital before.
She peered anxiously through the glass doors into the reception area.
‘Isn't it posh!’ she breathed to herself.
Immediately, she felt intimidated and uneasy.
It seemed to Marie like those ‘executive-style’ rooms she had seen in numerous television advertisements and soap operas: bright, spacious and open plan with acres of carpets, a jungle of lush potted plants, low leather chairs with squashy seats and coffee tables, casually strewn with expensive, up-market magazines.
Fashionable, successful people occupied rooms like this.
Even though it was a summer afternoon, the foyer was drenched in a harsh, white neon light.
It was easy to see that in reality the tables were old and stained with coffee rings, the seats cheap and plastic, the magazines tatty and two years out of date, and the strange, tropical foliage too glossily green and perfect not to be artificial.
But Marie did not notice these things: she was too preoccupied with trying to look inconspicuous as she hurried, head down, past the reception desk.
At every moment she expected the girl behind the desk to call her back: ‘Hey, you!’ and question her right to be here.
It seemed to Marie that people would only have to take one look at her to see that she didn't belong in these surroundings.
The corridors beyond, though, were stark, bare, and as cold and draughty as wind tunnels.
All the walls were painted a sickly  green: the same colour, thought Marie, as mushy peas.
Clusters of signs pointed off down endless bleak, echoing passageways: PATHOLOGY.
X-RAY, ANTE-NATAL, MEN'S SURGICAL.
‘Here we are,’ said Gazzer.
‘The ward's in there, through them doors.’
There were half-a-dozen silent people in the corridor, queueing up self-consciously against the green walls.
‘Is it visiting time, mate?’
Gazzer asked one of them.
‘Five minutes yet.’
The man whispered his answer, as if he was talking inside a church.
Marie and Gazzer joined the back of the queue.
‘'Orrible places, 'ospitals,’ said Gazzer looking round and shivering.
‘They stink of disinfectant, like swimming-pools.’
Marie didn't answer.
She was thinking about Simon.
All the way from the Lock she had told herself that it was Gazzer who was lying.
She still believed this but, standing there in that dismal, chilly corridor, a picture came into her head: it was of a baby she had seen once, being wheeled in a pushchair down the prom.
It was holding one of those tinfoil, heliumfilled balloons on a string.
The balloon was beautiful.
It bounced along above the pushchair, flashing gold, red and silver in the sunshine.
Was it shaped like a fish, a parrot or a heart?
Marie couldn't remember now.
But the baby was crying.
Its mother, chatting with a friend, didn't notice its distress.
But Marie had seen what was wrong: the string of the balloon was slowly slipping through the baby's fingers.
The baby saw it happening but could do nothing to stop it, its pudgy fingers would not close tightly enough to grasp the string….
Soon, that string will run out and the balloon tug itself free and be lost.
It'll float high out of the baby's reach.
Its bright colours will shrink to a black dot in the sky, and then it'll disappear altogether.
Suddenly, for reasons she could not explain, Marie felt like crying too, like the baby in the pushchair….
‘Stop it!’ she told herself viciously.
‘Don't be so soft!’
And she drove out the image and her own overwhelming feeling of terrible loss, by concentrating her mind desperately on what Gazzer was saying.
He was talking about Bella.
‘…and that money was her life-savings.
Not much, is it, for a lifetime slaving away?
She's done all sorts, has Bella.
She's had a hard life, she has — braiding fishing nets for trawlers, cleaning out the Findus offices down dock, gutting fish in the fish market.
— She was Champion Fish Gutter two years running!
Me Grandad told me, He said she was real lively when she was a young lass, before her bloke ran off….’
‘I thought he got killed in the Second World War!’
‘Yes, she tells everybody that.
Me Grandad knew him, though.
He always said he was no good.
He was dead handsome, me Grandad said.
And he had the chat to go with it.
Bella believed everything he told her.
He took advantage of her, me Grandad said.
He told ‘er that, when he came home on his next leave, they were going to get married.
The wedding was all arranged.
He led her on right until the last minute.
Only he never turned up, did he?’
Are you sure he wasn't killed in the war?
He might have been killed!’
‘No, he wasn't. — He just never intended marring her, that's all.
He was going out with somebody else by then.
He probably told them all lies like that.
— Me Grandad used to see him about, sometimes, down dock, after the war.
Not to speak to, like: this bloke's family were trawler-owners see, important people, and me Grandad was only a docker.
He got married in the end, though.
He lives down Taylor's Avenue, you know, in one of them great big houses opposite the park.
He's still alive, far as I know.’
Marie had no time to think about Bella's story: the little queue surged forward and they found themselves inside the double doors in a short corridor leading through to the main ward.
The other visitors walked on, leaving them stranded.
Gazzer looked about: ‘Never any nurses around at visiting time.
— Hang on, there's one!’
A young nurse, not much older than themselves, with the fresh, scrubbed pink complexion of a young child and ginger hair scraped up under her cap, came through the ward, carefully carrying a stainless steel bed-pan, covered by a white cloth.
‘Excuse me, nurse,’ said Gazzer.
‘Can you tell us where Miss Lawis is?’
‘Bella Lawis?
She's through there, in that side ward.
— Are you related though?
I've only to let relatives in this afternoon.
And then only one person at a time.’
‘'Course we're related,’ said Gazzer, using his ‘sincere’voice.
‘Can't you see that we look like her?’
The young nurse, whose feet ached something cruel and who was desperate to snatch a cup of tea before somebody else asked her to do something for them, looked them up and down.
A scrawny boy, his hand wrapped up in a bloodstained rag, his clothes caked in mud, who looked sicker than some of her patients, and the pale, sullen girl who stood over by the teatrolley, shifting awkwardly from one foot to the other and looking as if she didn't have a brain in her head.
They looked harmless enough….
‘She's our Auntie,’ added Gazzer.
‘All right then.’
The young nurse turned away.
She felt dead on her feet and didn't have the energy to question them further.
‘She's probably still asleep, mind,’ was all she said, as the door of the sluice-room closed softly behind her.
‘You go first,’ said Gazzer.
‘I'll sit down here, have a rest.’
He was going to add, sarcastically.
‘And I'll still be here when you come out!’
But Marie was already inside the room.
In the darkened room the slats of the venetian blinds were half-closed.
There was only one bed, with high sides, like a baby's cot.
The top of it had been raised so that Bella, propped up against two pillows, her face grey against their whiteness, was almost in a sitting position.
She seemed to be asleep.
Some light from the window above fell on her wispy hair and deeply lined face: even her closed eyelids were creased.
Her little mouth, pursed up and wrinkled, made her face look hard and unforgiving.
She opened one eye: ‘Oh, it's you, is it?’
She opened them both.
‘I wondered when you'd turn up.
— Do you know if there's a cuppa going?
I could murder a cuppa.’
Her voice sounded slurred and she mumbled her words, as if she had a mouthful of marbles.
‘Gazzer's outside,’ said Marie, not knowing what else to say.
Marie had watched many hospital dramas on television.
She had been prepared for tubes, drips, oxygen masks, machines that bleeped frantically, and anxious, hovering doctors in white coats; not Bella, as truculent as ever, sitting up demanding cups of tea.
‘You all right, then?’ said Marie.
‘I will be, soon as I get out of this place.
— Did you say Gary was out there?’
‘Yes.’
‘Good.
He'll cheer me up.’
Marie made a conscious effort to close her mouth, which she knew was hanging open.
She felt a giddy sensation of ground shifting under her feet.
She sat down, suddenly, in the comer of Bella's room.
‘That home-help —’ she began, stupidly.
‘Oh, her!’ said Bella, contemptuously.
‘I bet she told you all sorts of tales.
Told you I was half-dead, did she?’
Marie nodded her head, dumbly.
‘No wonder you look gone-out!
Well, I'm not surprised.
— She always liked a good story, that one.
— Anyway, to tell the truth, I'm not feeling too good.
— Me back's giving me gip. — No worse than usual, mind!
So don't you go telling them any different.’
‘Bella,’ pleaded Marie, ‘what happened last night?’
‘I've lost track,’ said Bella, ‘they must have give me something to make me sleep.
— Don't you know about it, then?’
‘Only what the home-help said, about somebody breaking into your house last night.
And the Warden finding you —‘
‘He's useless, for a start!’
‘'aven't you told no one about it yet?’
‘No, how could I?
I've just this minute woke up.
— I'm only just remembering myself!’
‘Tell me, then!’
‘All right!— Hang on!
I thought I couldn't talk proper.
Give us me teeth.
Out that glass.
I can talk better with me teeth in.’
Bella's mouth worked furiously as she clicked her teeth into place.
‘That's better.
Right, then!
About last night.
— Well, I was trying to get to sleep, see.
On me chair, the one I watch telly from.
I told you I sleep in that chair, didn't I?— It must have been about midnight because I'd just watched this film and that didn't finish until half eleven.
I couldn't get to sleep.
— Me back was playing me up.
— And I was going to take one of me sleeping-pills.
I was just reaching out to get the bottle — I keep them on that sideboard just behind me chair — when I heard this noise….’
The noise Bella heard had been someone trying her backdoor.
But tonight, although she had left it open on many other nights, it happened to be locked.
The handle rattled insistently.
Bella put her hand on the receiver of the telephone by her chair but, even before she could lift it, she heard someone prise open the bedroom window.
The home-help had left the window ajar that morning and Bella, because of her arthritic hands, couldn't close it again properly.
The bedroom door was pushed right back and, from where she was lying stretched out on her reclining chair, Bella could see him climbing through the window.
He drew the curtains and went straight towards the bed.
Bella pulled a cellular blanket up over her head, closed her eyes and lay, as still as she could, under her heap of covers.
She heard him go quickly into all the rooms one by one.
She thought that she was a goner: that he must surely see her.
But when she opened her eyes, peering through the holes in her blanket, he was already back in the bedroom, turning on the little bedside light.
And that was how she saw his face so clearly.
As he bent down, wrenching out the cupboard drawers, flinging their contents all over the room, she saw his face, lit up by the lamp.
She would never, she said, forget that face.
He was stottin' mad, she said.
In a right temper, she said.
He smashed her cut-glass vase against the wall, not caring how much noise he made.
He ripped up her pile of old letters, the ones with the ribbon round them.
And then, he moved towards the living-room.
Bella knew that he would certainly find her.
His hand reached out, feeling up and down the wall for the light switch.
She could hear her own heart beating….
The phone rang.
‘You ought to have seen his face,’ Bella said, ‘when that phone started ringing.
You'd have thought he'd seen a ghost!— He hopped it, then.
Back out the window.
I've never seen anyone move so fast.
— The phone stopped ringing.
— And then I did a daft thing.
I should have rang the police straightaway, shouldn't I?
But I wanted to close that window first, make sure he didn't come back.
He'd got me scared to death, Marie, I don't mind telling you.
And there's not much frightens me. — Anyway, I was a clumsy beggar.
I fell down, knocked me walking-frame over and I couldn't get meself up again.
So, I just pulled some blankets over me and waited for somebody to  come.
— I told the Warden that I didn't want to go to no hospital but he never listened.
I felt a right idiot, being carried out on a stretcher, everybody gawping at me.
They say they're keeping me in for observation.
— Not if I can help it, they're not.
I'll be out of here by tomorrow, you see.
I'll be home by tomorrow….’
And Bella sank back on her pillows, exhausted by pain, by her long story and by the growing suspicion, nagging away obsessively in her head, that, once they had her in here, they would see that her condition was worsening and they would never, ever let her go home again.
‘So it wasn't Gazzer?’
‘Eh?’ said Bella, surprised out of her personal nightmare: the one where she sat, in a big room, unable to move, imprisoned in her crippled body, surrounded by a sea of senile faces, while a pitying young woman stuck a baby's cup between her toothless gums so that she could suck lukewarm tea out of it.
‘It wasn't Gazzer, then?’ repeated Marie.
‘What are you on about? of course it wasn't Gazzer!
Didn't I say who it was, at the beginning?— It was that good-looking lad.
The one you're walking out with, the one Gazzer and me saw down the prom.’
‘Are you sure it was him?’
Bella was irritated: ‘'Course I'm sure!
There's nowt wrong with me eyes, is there?— I told you, I saw his face.
It was him all right and no mistake.’
Marie said nothing.
An image flitted into her mind: she saw herself plunge over the edge of that black pit and tumble helplessly through the dark.
— A hospital trolley trundling along the corridor broke into her private world.
When the picture flicked off she was still falling….
‘What did you expect?’ she asked herself, viciously.
‘You should have known it was too good to be true!’
‘I can't understand it,’ Bella was saying.
‘I mean, when I saw him down the prom he didn't look the type at all— smart, respectable-looking lad.’
as if something had just occurred to her, Bella turned her head to look at Marie: ‘Must be a bit of a shock to you an’ all.
Him being a villain.
— He must 'ave told you all sorts of lies.
Did he find out from you about my money?
Where I lived and  that?
I know you wouldn't tell him deliberate.
— Don't blame yourself.
You mustn't blame yourself.
It was all his fault.
He used you.
— Took advantage of you.’
Sitting in her dark comer, Marie said nothing.
She felt too lethargic to speak: it didn't seem worth the effort.
Outside the nurses were clattering the tea-cups.
Visiting time was nearly over.
‘What did you think it was Gary for?
I know he mucks about a bit, but he's a good lad really.
And kind — he'd do owt for you.
He took my money to the bank for me yesterday — after Madge's house being broken into.
He said it was daft keeping all that money round the place.
Good job he did, eh?
But what a carry on!
I rang up, just to check that he'd taken it straight along there, like I told him to, and they said I had to fill in all these forms.
— Even sent somebody round to help me do it.’
‘You'll be wanting to see Gazzer now,’ said Marie, forcing herself to say something.
‘Wait a bit.
— Sit down again for a minute.
Here, on my bed.
I can't see your face when you sit in that comer,’ said Bella. ‘— You thought the world of that Simon, didn't you?— I know just what it's like.
Mine was good-looking as well.
And charming?
He could charm the birds off the trees.
But he used me, just like that Simon used you.
— Never trust ‘em, love, whatever they look like.’
Bella's face was flushed with enthusiasm.
Marie felt herself caught up in the intensity of the old woman's hatred.
Despite herself, she leaned forward, paying attention.
Their heads were almost touching.
‘When mine did that to me,’ said Bella, ‘I could have killed him.
I could!
Even now, if I could get my hands on him.
— I've never forgiven him, never!’
Bella plucked at the sheets with her crooked fingers.
‘And that one last night.
That Simon.
He deserves all he gets.
For what he's done to you.
And to me!
I might never get out of here because of him!’
‘He thinks I'm an idiot!’ said Marie, eagerly, letting herself be swept along on the hysteria of Bella's rage.
‘He used me to find out about Madge, about Mr Bishop and you as well.
He thinks I'm thick!’
‘Prove him wrong, then!’ hissed Bella, fervently.
‘Get your own back.
Make him sorry he ever messed you about!’
Marie thought for a moment, then got up, suddenly decisive.
‘You've told the police about him, though, haven't you?’
‘Not yet,’ said Bella.
‘And I won't tell ‘em.
Not for a bit, anyway.
After Gary's gone, I'll pretend I'm asleep.’
And she and Marie smiled at each other, like conspirators.
‘Don't let him get away with it, will you?’ pleaded Bella, her voice almost a whine.
‘They don't care, see, they don't care how they hurt other people.
Well, someone should hurt them back.
—’ Her hand flopped down on the sheet.
She closed her eyes, drained by her excitement.
Marie's eyes shone with the light of inspiration, as if she had suddenly found a purpose in life.
‘Don't you worry,’ she said to Bella.
‘I'll get him.
I'll get him for both of us.’
And she patted the old woman's ruined hand, which was barred across and across by bands of sunlight from the window above her bed.
Marie turned back to look at Bella as she reached the door.
‘I'll take him on a picnic,’ she said.
Out in the corridor, Gazzer was asleep, legs sprawled out, head thrown back, mouth wide open, snoring.
Someone shook him, violently.
Panic-stricken, still halfasleep, he hit out wildly: he thought he was back with Simon, on the Wheel.
‘Eh?
Eh!’ he protested, as Marie jolted him into wakefulness.
‘Wake up!
It's your turn to go in now,’ she was saying.
Gazzer belted his forehead with the flat of his hand to clear out the nightmares.
‘Go on, get a move on!’ said Marie.
‘Is she all right, then?’ asked Gazzer.
‘Is she O.K.?
Did she tell you it wasn't me?’
But the double doors of the ward were already swinging shut behind Marie.
‘Eh!’ shouted Gazzer, lamely.
‘Where are you going?’
He was disturbed, disorientated.
He could usually find, in his armoury of comic routines, some way of dealing with people, of coping with distressing or threatening situations.
But, since last night he had felt totally vulnerable and defenceless, as if his familiar world had suddenly become a dangerous, alien planet and he was stranded on it, lost and without protection.
Somewhere in the ward a bell rang, once: ten minutes to go before the nurses came round and chucked out all the visitors.
Gazzer went into Bella's room.
It took seconds for his eyes to adjust to the gloom.
Then he saw, with relief, that she did not seem to be badly hurt.
He had almost decided that Marie had run out like that because she had found Bella dead or dying.
‘Where's Marie gone?’ demanded Gazzer, his agitation making him forget that you didn't talk like that to sick, old people.
‘She's gone to get that Simon,’ said Bella, smugly.
‘What do you mean ‘get him'’?— What have you been telling her?’
‘I told her it was him what broke into my house.
I told her I saw him clear as day.
I told her he should be made to pay for what he's done to her, for using her, for leading her on….’
‘You daft old woman!’ shouted Gazzer, passionately.
‘You don't know what you've done.
Do you know what he told me last night?
He said: ‘I finished Mr Bishop off.
I did for him.’
He told me that himself.
Boasted about it, he did.
And he robbed Madge's house and smashed it up.
He nearly finished me off, as well, last night.
What do you think he's going to do to her!’
Bella appeared to be unperturbed: ‘I wondered why she was going on about Mr Bishop and Madge just now.
— Anyway, he must have been lying about Mr Bishop.
Mr Bishop got drowned.
In an accident.
Everybody says so.’
‘What's up with you?
You don't seem bothered!— You don't understand what he's like!
She doesn't either.
She doesn't know what she's letting herself in for!— He carries a knife, Bella.
You were dead lucky last night.
Didn't he try to hurt you?
He likes hurting people.
He told me that.’
‘He didn't see me,’ said Bella.
‘The phone rang and he hopped it.’
‘What time did it ring?’
Bella shrugged.
She seemed calm, even unconcerned.
‘About midnight.
Must have been a wrong number or summat.
Nobody rings me up that late.’
‘It was me, Bella.
Me ringing you up.
I phoned to see if you  were all right.
— But I can't understand it.
Why should a phone ringing stop him?’
‘Perhaps it scared him.’
‘You must be joking!
Marie says he went crazy, smashed things up in your bedroom.
When he's in that mood, nowt scares him.’
‘Well, I don't know, do I?’ said Bella, petulantly.
She hardly seemed to be listening to what he was saying.
‘I thought we'd have a good laugh when you came in,’ she complained.
‘I thought you'd cheer me up!’
‘He carries a knife!’ said Gazzer.
‘He didn't have one last night.
He had nowt with him last night.
And he ran off when the phone rang.
No, he's just one of them rich kids, spoiled rotten, with a bit of a temper on 'im, that's all.
— I know his sort.
Thinks he can treat people like dirt.
— Well, she'll make him sorry.
She'll find a way….’
‘He's got a knife!’ said Gazzer again, slowly this time, as if talking to a child.
‘Look!’
He held up his injured hand for her to see.
‘And he told me he did for Mr Bishop.
I don't know if that's true.
But I know that, last night, he damn well nearly did for me!’
Bella lay there, stubborn, tight-lipped.
But for the first time, he saw doubt in her eyes.
Then she said: ‘Don't shout at me, Gary.’
‘Where's she gone?’ demanded Gazzer, urgently.
‘The police'll be here soon,’ said Bella.
She was agitated now and confused.
‘I can't wait for them.
They won't understand.
It'll be too late by the time I make them understand.
— So, where's she gone?’ repeated Gazzer.
He tried to make his voice gentle so that he didn't antagonize her.
‘Look, you've got to tell me.
You don't know what he's like.
— I didn't either.
Not until last night.
— Where's she gone, Bella?’
‘I've done a daft thing,’ said Bella, her thin lips trembling.
She reached out a hand towards Gazzer.
She sounded like a tired child, needing to be comforted.
‘I couldn't help it, Gary.
— My back hurts something terrible.
I'm frightened, Gary….’
Her bewildered voice trailed away.
She couldn't explain  now her bitter fury of a few moments ago or why she had used Marie to take revenge on Simon.
‘I've done a daft thing,’ she said again.
‘Please, Bella!
Think!
She must have said something.’
‘I don't know do I?
I don't know where she's gone.
She said summat about taking him for a picnic.
— Stay a bit, Gary.
Stay and cheer me up.
Tell me it'll be all right.’
But Gazzer had already gone.
Gazzer wasted twenty minutes on the sea front waiting for a bus to take him up as far as the Leisure Centre.
He sat on the low wall surrounding the pier gardens.
Behind him, people were lolling on the lawns among the neat flower-beds, ignoring
It was a sweltering hot afternoon: acres of pale, pimply flesh were being uncovered and exposed to the sun.
Men had stripped off shirts and even vests; middle-aged ladies had daringly pushed their skirts right to the top of porridgecoloured thighs.
People coming up from the beach were carrying their shoes, walking barefoot on the hot tarmac paths.
Backs, shoulders and bald heads were tinged various shades from blushing pink to angry brick red: some people tonight would regret this reckless sunbathing.
Babies, sweaty and overheated, were whining and fractious.
Gazzer, still in his mud-encrusted clothes, did not notice the heat.
He had not even taken his anorak off.
Fretting, he looked again and again at his watch.
Half past four!
Jumping up, he went to the edge of the pavement, trying to catch sight of the bus among the trippers and the traffic: ‘This is no good!
The damn thing isn't going to turn up!’
He cut across the grass, stepping between and over the outstretched bodies.
Women were in white or pastel shades: pale lemons, pinks and blues.
Gazzer, a strange, urgent little figure, hurrying among them with a bloodstained rag round his right hand, dressed in filthy black trousers and a black anorak, made one or two people shield their eyes against the sun and, with lazy curiosity, prop themselves up on one elbow to follow his progress through the gardens.
But they forgot about him as soon as he disappeared out of sight down the steps which led to the promenade and beach.
He had made no plans: fatigue made it impossible for him to think rationally.
All his energy was concentrated on putting  one foot in front of the other, to get out to the Lock before Marie provoked Simon into uncoiling his other self, the one hidden behind the attentive, polite, charming Simon in whom Marie had invested so much of her trust and hope for the future.
She would not realize how spectacular her deception had been until she had seen, as he had, the frenzied rage on Simon's face, or heard, as he had, the pleasure and excitement in Simon's face as he threatened violence.
And then, Gazzer knew, it would be too late.
Gazzer remembered the depths of Simon's contempt and hatred when he spoke of Marie and he felt more and more certain, as he neared the Lock, that Simon would need hardly any excuse to harm her.
‘And how are you going to stop him, then?’ he asked himself scornfully.
‘Fancy yourself as a hero, do you?
Well, that's a laugh for a start.
— One look from him and you'll run!’
He wondered whether Simon had found his knife or got hold of another one.
He wondered, more than once, why he didn't just turn round and go home.
—‘It's her problem,’ he told himself.
‘She let herself be made a fool of.
She deserves all she gets.’
The tide was rising: it came filtering gently in through the salt-marsh vegetation, washing up the beach and receding, leaving ribbons of foam along the sand.
Once past the chalets Gazzer took what he thought was a short cut through the dunes.
It was a mistake: the fine, white sand collapsed away from under his feet and made the going difficult.
Sweating, he took off his anorak and carried it slung over his shoulder.
He wondered if —‘Shut up!’ he told his hyperactive brain.
He almost missed Marie.
He hadn't yet reached the Lock but there she was, sitting high up in the dunes, on a sandy shelf, half hidden among grasses and brambles.
It was only the sun, flashing briefly on her bleached hair, that made him shade his eyes and look again in that direction.
‘Marie!’ he yelled.
‘Hey, Marie!’
She glanced down at him once, then shifted her gaze back out to the Estuary and the rising tide.
She didn't seem hurt in any way.
She looked calm, even contented, sitting there with her hands clasped round her knees.
Gazzer scanned the dunes around her: she was on her own.
He clambered up and flopped down beside her.
It was hot and still in the little hollow.
A cricket chirruped suddenly in the tall grass by his ear.
Bees hummed steadily through the yellow bird's foot trefoil that wove itself in a tangled carpet over the sand.
Gazzer felt his tired body relax as the heat unknotted tense and aching muscles.
He had been a fool to get himself so worked up.
Here she was, without Simon, sitting peacefully looking out at the view.
He had panicked.
Common sense ought to have told him that Marie's reaction would be just like this: quiet and resigned.
She was that sort of girl.
‘You're better off without him,’ said Gazzer.
It sounded like a line of dialogue from a soap opera, but Marie seemed to respond to it.
‘You're right, there,’ she said, smiling.
Somewhere, quite close, a dog was barking.
Gazzer felt pleased that she had taken things so well.
It reassured him to see her sitting there, so thoughtful and placid.
He was quite prepared now to admit that he had been mistaken about Marie: that she was not thick and that, though she was not very articulate, she was, in her way, intelligent, kind, even sensitive.
And she was quite pretty as well.
He felt that he could grow to like her a lot.
But his new picture of Marie did not take into account those disturbing scenes in her kitchen, or in the pill-box tunnels when her aggressive, violent behaviour had scared him half to death.
He preferred to forget about those, or to pretend to himself that ‘the real Marie’ had not sent that bottle crashing into the wall by his head, or hunted him down in the darkness of the tunnels.
‘She's not like that, really,’ he told himself.
‘That Simon had her all mixed up.
She didn't know what she was doing.’
Watching her now, in this setting, made it easy for him to believe this.
Idly, he let his gaze drift across the horizon.
Today, the sea was dark blue and silver.
Out in the middle of the Estuary the deep water reflected the unclouded sky while the shallows were one vast gleaming mirror.
The fort was a jagged, black silhouette.
White foam flecked the sea's surface: ‘No, it's not foam, it's birds.
Look!’ thought Gazzer as a flock of gulls and terns spilled into the air, mewing and screeching.
‘I can see why you like this place,’ said Gazzer.
‘It's great, innit?
When you see it in daylight.’
Marie shrugged and didn't look at him.
Finally, Gazzer said: ‘What are you looking at out there?’
‘I'm watching the sea,’ said Marie.
‘I'm waiting for high tide.’
‘What happens at high tide, then?’ yawned Gazzer.
He was too tired to disguise his lack of interest.
‘He'll drown at high tide,’ said Marie.
‘Eh?’
‘At high tide.
Simon'll drown.’
Gazzer was saying something to her.
His voice was urgent, pleading, but Marie shut it out.
She was thinking back, to just over an hour ago, when she had met Simon on the sea front.
At first, she was afraid that he had not turned up because he was not waiting, as he had promised, by Mr Bishop's kiosk.
But there he was!
She had only seen him when she had climbed the wooden steps up to the promenade: he was out of sight of the kiosk, waiting across the road, almost hidden in the dark cave of an amusement arcade.
He had Ben with him, on a lead.
Simon's fresh, clear complexion was sallow.
There were dark rings under his eyes as if he hadn't slept.
He seemed agitated, restlessly pacing about, looking out into the crowds, then drawing back into the shelter of the arcade.
But when he saw Marie, he adjusted his face and came out to meet her, smiling.
His voice, too, was as sincere, as unwavering and self-assured as ever.
Marie turned to Gazzer: ‘It's easy lying, isn't it?’
To get him to go out to the Lock with her, Marie had told Simon all sorts of lies.
They were clumsy, hesitant lies, yet Simon had believed them: it did not occur to him that someone as stupid as Marie could ever successfully deceive him.
‘I can see right through her!’ he might have boasted, if you had suggested the possibility to him.
Marie had thought about telling him the truth: that Bella had seen him and the police would soon be after him.
She wanted to hear his voice falter, to see the fear and confusion in his eyes.
She realized though, that if she did this, he would never come out with her to the Lock.
It was better to have him  relaxed, confident, thinking that all his problems were solved; he would be easier to manage that way.
‘Have you seen Gazzer?’ was the first thing Simon said to her.
They stood together, in bright sunlight, leaning against the warm bricks of the arcade wall.
‘I couldn't find him last night.
I looked all over!’
‘You couldn't find him?’
Marie put a baffled expression on to her face: ‘I can't understand it, then,’ she said, shaking her head, making her voice sound particularly gormless.
‘I saw him down the bus station this morning.
He was catching the coach for Scunthorpe.
off to stay with his uncle, he said.
He was in a real funny mood.
— He looked scared to death.
— Went on about never coming back no more.
I thought you must have scared him off….’
‘Me?’
Simon couldn't suppress a triumphant smile.
‘If he's scared, it's nothing to do with me.
I never saw him last night, remember.’
Marie shrugged.
‘Perhaps he had another row with his Mam and Dad, then.
— Perhaps they threw him out.’
‘You're probably right,’ said Simon.
‘Yes, that's what must have happened.
— But what about Bella?
When I couldn't find him, I was worried he might be there, pinching her money.
I would've gone round to warn her, but I've got no idea where she lives.’
‘Bella's all right,’ answered Marie.
‘I went to see her this morning like you said.
She never saw Gazzer last night.
She told me.’
‘And nobody broke in?’ asked Simon.
‘Broke in?
No, 'course they didn't.
Gazzer wouldn't need to break in, would he?
Nobody would, come to that.
She's always leaving her back door unlocked.’
Simon was unable to stop his face registering surprise, then bewilderment.
In this crazy conversation of mutual lies, Marie was thrilled by her own power.
She was in control now, because she knew the truth about Simon's real character.
He hadn't, though, yet realized the truth about hers.
Secret laughter bubbled up inside her.
But when she spoke she was careful to keep her voice flat and monotonous to disguise the exhilaration she felt in taking revenge, for herself and for Bella.
‘She won't put that money in the bank.
Di'n't think she  would.
She's in a bad mood, anyway.
Her friend, next door, she's gone off to Australia to see her daughter.
Went yesterday morning.
She won't be back ‘til after Christmas.
— Bella spent loads of time round there.
We went there on Sunday, me and Bella, after we'd been down the prom.’
She could see the look of astonishment on Simon's face as he made the connections she wanted him to make.
‘You broke into the wrong house!’: that was what he was thinking now.
She could see his old confidence flooding back as he began to realize that everything was working out very conveniently….
Early this morning, in the darkness of his bedroom, waking up after the nightmare, he had almost given way to panic.
Too much was happening that he couldn't explain, things were spiralling out of his control.
He had even begun to doubt himself!
He could not imagine now, in this brilliant daylight, how he had allowed himself to be so weak.
The break-in would not be discovered for months.
Bella's money was still there, just asking for someone to take it.
Gazzer had cleared off — Wait a minute, though!
He looked into Marie's face.
She stared back at him, more vacant and stupid than he had ever seen her.
Ben rattled his chain lead, impatient for his walk.
‘Are you sure,’ said Simon, speaking slowly as if to someone with a poor knowledge of English, ‘that Gazzer hasn't already got the money?
I mean, that could be why he's gone off to Scunthorpe, couldn't it?
Because he's already got his hands on the money?’
It had suddenly occurred to him that he might have underestimated Gazzer: he remembered that unexpected defiance, last night, on the Wheel.
‘No, he hasn't got it,’ said Marie.
‘And that's for definite.’
‘So he's just like all the rest,’ thought Simon, ‘a loser.’
‘I know that,’ Marie was saying, ‘'cos she showed me her money this morning.
She's dead proud of it!
There's thousands there.
Thousands and thousands!
You ought to see it, Simon!
She said to me: ‘Look, just to shut you up, I'll find a better place to hide it.’
So we hid it somewhere really good, where nobody'd think of looking!— Anyway, it don't matter about putting it in the bank now, does it?
It's safe, now Gazzer's gone.’
‘So where did you put it, then?’
He didn't even try to hide  the excitement in his voice.
Marie turned her face away and smiled.
‘I can't hear myself talk here,’ she said.
‘Them machines give me a headache.
Let's take Ben for a long walk, eh?
We can talk properly then.
Let's buy some sandwiches or summat.
Have a picnic….’
‘That's a great idea!’ said Simon, enthusiastically.
His smile was especially charming.
‘It'll be nice having a picnic together, just the two of us, won't it?’
Gazzer was shaking her arm.
‘Did you hear me?
What do you mean, ‘He'll drown’?
What have you done to him?
Marie, Marie….’
In her mind, vivid as on a television screen, she replayed her moment of triumph.
All the way out to the Lock she had lied, pretended.
For once, words had come easily to her: she was amazed and delighted by her own glibness.
She had told him lies about where Bella's money was hidden, pretended to be fascinated when he had lied to her about spending the day with his father: ‘We played golf together, then he took me for a ride in the new car.
You ought to see the acceleration!’
And she had nodded and smiled.
Deceiving him gave her a fierce pleasure and, as they strolled along by the waterline, with Ben splashing beside them through the shallows, she kept her hatred burning red-hot with a litany of her grievances, chanted over and over inside her head: ‘He only pretended to like you; he couldn't care less about you; he thinks you're thick.
He used you, made a fool of you.’
And, more  unforgiveable than all these things, he had destroyed her dreams.
Those fantasies that had protected her from real life, that beautiful, unpolluted world of the Lock with its seals and its childhood memories of her father and that other glossy, television world that she imagined people like Simon inhabited, had been ruined for her for ever.
She felt there was nowhere now to take refuge, nothing left to feed her imagination but images of despair.
As they trudged up to the top of a sand-dune, Seal Sands  Lock was there below them.
The canal cut through that flat, agricultural landscape, its monotony broken only here and there by a farmhouse or a barn, until the closed Lock gates dammed it up.
Beyond the gates, the channel which carved its way through salt-marshes and mud flats, out into the Estuary, was empty, except for a sluggish trickle at the bottom.
Soon, though, the rising tide, which was already rushing inshore through a shining network of smaller channels, would pour into this main one and fill it up.
The first thing Simon saw from their vantage point on the sand-hill was Gazzer's name, shakily painted on the pill-box.
‘Eh!’ he said.
‘Look at that!
The little beggar gets about doesn't he?
I wonder how long that's been there?’
They had climbed out of the dunes and were walking now along the canal bank towards the pill-box and the Lock gates.
Simon had put Ben onto his lead so that he didn't run back down to the beach and cut himself on the rusty barbed wire.
‘Not long,’ Marie answered.
‘He did it last night sometime.’
‘Last night!
How do you know that?’
Simon was still jovial, and totally unsuspecting.
‘Because I asked him about it this morning, when we were both up here, sitting on that bank.
I told him I thought it was a stupid thing for him to do.
He thought it was an, all.’
She watched Simon's face changing: not shock yet, or rage, just a puzzled incomprehension.
‘This morning?
I thought you said you saw him at the bus station this morning.
That he was going to Scunthorpe?’
‘Well, I lied, didn't I?’ said Marie.
‘Is he in there?’
‘Yes,’ said Marie.
‘Go and get 'im.
Let me hold Ben while you go and get 'im.’
He looked at her, doubt in his eyes.
She took the dog from him.
He turned back again to the pill-box and, as he began to run towards it, she shoved him into the empty channel on the seaward side of the Lock.
He rocked for a moment on the edge, his arms circling wildly, desperately trying to regain his balance.
The dog tore his lead out of her hand and raced along the bank, barking.
Marie shoved Simon again, viciously, and he toppled over.
She watched his fingers gouging into the smooth, stinking mud, the bottom.
Ben was still barking.
Clouds of sea-birds wheeled into the air at the noise.
Marie looked down at Simon.
‘Gazzer's not in that pill-box,’ she said.
‘I lied about that as well.
There's just me here.
Just me.’
She felt exultant and powerful.
She had finally hit back!
It wasn't only Simon she pushed over the edge: in that defiant, violent act she was taking revenge on all those people who had ever hurt her and made her feel worthless.
And it was her Dad's face that she saw, briefly superimposed on Simon's, as he slid helplessly down the slimy walls.
Immediately the mud sucked him in up to his ankles.
His trainers disappeared in it.
He looked up, still smiling.
‘Come on, then,’ he said, ‘you've had your little joke.
Give us a hand up now.’
She said nothing.
‘Come on, Marie.
Look at the state me jacket's in!’
Ben scrabbled at the bank, barking but not daring to go down.
‘All right, then,’ said Simon.
‘I'll get out myself.’
The channel was now only ten, perhaps twelve feet deep and fifteen feet wide: since it had fallen into disuse as a waterway it had, over the years, become silted up with layer upon layer of sludge.
Sea-water was washing in over the slippery grey stones.
The rising tide had begun to fill up the channel.
Using both hands, Simon pulled at his leg.
The mud released it, but without his trainer.
Unbalanced, he was forced to plunge his foot back in to stop himself from falling headlong.
The ooze swallowed him up to his knees.
He stopped smiling.
He tried to drag himself through the mud but he only sank more deeply into it.
Finally, he stood still, not daring to move.
The stones in the centre of the channel were hidden now: the slow trickle of water which flowed around them had become a fast-flowing stream, which covered them.
‘I'm stuck in here!’ he called up to Marie, in disbelief.
‘I know,’ said Marie.
‘And the tide's coming in.’
For thy first time Simon noticed the changing water level.
It crept stealthily towards him over the mud, advancing, retreating, advancing again like a living creature stalking its prey.
Soon, it would begin to lick round his knees.
‘What are you playing at?
The game's over.
Get me out of here, Marie.
Please get me out.’
There was growing panic in his voice.
Marie had him at her mercy.
She had planned now to tell him that he was the one who was thick; that he had fallen into her trap; that she, Gazzer, and Bella knew all about him and what he had done.
This was meant to be the moment of her greatest satisfaction, when she unleashed on him all the bitterness and resentment that she had carried inside her over the years.
But, somehow, she could not find the words.
Instead, she turned away, almost wearily, and left him to drown.
‘Where are you going?
Get me out of here!
Get me out of here, you stupid bitch!’
He was screaming at her from down in the channel.
She put her hands over her ears and walked along the beach, to sit up in the sand dunes, where Gazzer found her….
A red and black burnet moth landed on her hand, crawled over it and whirred away again into the grass.
By her feet dozens of tiny snails, with striped brown and white shells, were clustered like flowers on the thistle stems.
A warm wind was coming in with the tide.
She lifted her head up and the sharp, salty tang stung the inside of her nostrils.
‘I pushed him into the mud, over there, near the Lock gates,’ she said to Gazzer.
‘He can't get out.’
Gazzer looked over to where she was pointing.
He said, stupidly: ‘I didn't think you'd do owt like that.’
That dog was still barking: a hysterical, high-pitched bark that went on and on.
‘No, he didn't, neither,’ said Marie bitterly.
‘You ought to of seen his face.
He couldn't believe it!
Thought he'd got me weighed up — eating out of his hand.’
Gazzer suddenly realized the depths of her resentment.
And he found, to his surprise, that he understood it.
He was astute enough to see that in some ways they shared the same experiences.
Both of them were easy victims: where she was slow and tongue-tied, he was short and physically weedy.
Only his adopted role as class comic had made him accepted, even popular, and had saved him, sometimes at least, from those who feel powerful when they humiliate others.
There was a price to pay, of course.
If you made everything into a joke, people thought that nothing mattered to you, that you took nothing seriously.
In that too, they were alike: both of them had thoughts and feelings that few people gave them credit for or even suspected.
Gazzer felt closer to Marie now than he had ever done before, and it mattered to him very much that she should take him seriously.
‘O.K.,’ he said.
‘That's enough, isn't it?
Let's go and get him out.
He's going to drown if we don't.’
She listened to him but she said: ‘So what?’
He turned over in his mind what to say next.
He was thinking about saying: ‘If you do this, it makes you just the same as him.
And you're nothing like him at all.’
But it sounded too much like preaching, so he kept his mouth shut.
Finally, he got up.
He could see the tide pouring into the end of the channel.
He couldn't waste time in useless persuasion.
If he was in her place, he might have done the same thing.
He began to run towards the Lock gates.
Then she surprised him again.
She was following him!
She caught at his arm.
‘Hang on.
I'm coming with you.’
And even Gazzer did not appreciate the strength of character it needed for her to make that choice.
It was not that she wanted to kill Simon any more.
Seconds after she pushed him into the channel any pleasure, or sense of power, had evaporated.
Eventually, even her rage had gone flat and stale, leaving her with nothing but a sour taste in her mouth.
Hopeless lethargy had taken its place.
Paralysed in its grip, she kept telling herself, over and over again, that she mustn't leave him to drown: whatever Bella had said to her, however much she herself hated him, there was no point in pretending to herself that she could abandon anyone, not even him, to die.
The trouble was that she could not seem to bring herself to do anything about it.
It seemed much easier to sit and do nothing, to pretend that he didn't exist, to empty your mind of feelings so that you felt nothing, nothing at all….
‘Get moving, you stupid bitch!
Get off your backside and do summat!’
With an immense effort of will she goaded herself into activity, striking life into her numbed brain, forcing limbs as heavy as wet sand, to respond.
When she looked down into the channel with Gazzer and  saw Simon, water swilling round his waist, she could hardly believe that she was responsible.
It seemed as if another person had done this, not her.
‘You must've been crazy!’ she told herself.
She said to Gazzer: ‘We've got to get him out!’
‘How?’ asked Gazzer.
‘What do you mean, ‘How’?’
‘Well, look for yourself.’
Simon was seven or eight feet below them, immobilized in mud.
The channel walls were sheer.
The full force of the rising tide had reached the channel mouth and a foaming mass of water was pouring in with terrifying speed.
Ben danced around them, still barking.
He wanted to play.
As he jumped up, his chain lead whacked into Gazzer's leg.
‘Clear off!’
Gazzer shouted at him.
Simon heard him shout.
He looked up at them, panic-stricken, water streaming down his face.
‘Get me out of here!’
Marie felt sorry for him.
‘All right.
All right,’ said Gazzer.
‘We'll get you out.
Don't worry.
We'll get you out.’
‘I can't move!’
Simon yelled up at them.
‘Can't you swim your way out?’
‘I told you!
My legs are stuck.
— Now get me out!
Please!’
They watched him trying to free himself, as he must have tried countless times before.
When he launched himself to swim, pulling desperately with his arm, he didn't move.
Instead, his face fell into the water and he came up, spluttering.
He had to thresh with his arms to get himself upright again and, it seemed to Marie, all he had done was drive himself even further down into the mud.
The water was ruining his leather jacket.
‘Stop struggling,’ said Gazzer.
‘You'll only bury yourself deeper in.’
He turned to Marie: ‘I'll go get help.
I'll phone from the chalets.’
Then he shook his head.
‘That's no good, is it?— He, 11 be dead before I even reach the phone.’
Marie sat down on the bank.
‘What you going to do?’ asked Gazzer.
‘I'm going to jump in.
I'm a good swimmer.
I might be able to pull him out.’
She began to edge her way over.
Gazzer grabbed her shoulder and pulled her back.
‘Don't be so daft!
You jump in there, you'll go straight down into that mud.
And even if you don't, the current'll drag you under.’
‘I can't believe it!
We can't just leave him there, watch him drown.’
It was the perfect cue for Gazzer to say: ‘You should have thought about that before you shoved him in, shouldn't you?’
But he didn't say it: he understood her reasons too well.
He didn't blame her for what she'd done half as much as she blamed herself.
The sun had suddenly left the Lock.
It was cold and the Estuary was no longer sparkling blue: it was an opaque, sullen grey.
‘That water must be freezing,’ thought Marie.
She said to Gazzer, ‘Tell you what.
I'll let you down there.
See if you can reach him.’
‘Eh?’
‘Go on.
I'll hold your ankles.
I won't let you go.’
Gazzer gazed down, hypnotized by the swirling tide.
He couldn't stop himself from shuddering.
He couldn't swim: he had always been afraid of water.
‘What you playing at?
Get me out!’ shouted Simon.
‘Get me out.
‘There must be something lying about that we can pull him up with.’
Gazzer looked frantically about.
He even ran along the bank and back.
No handy planks of wood, no convenient lengths of baler twine kindly left behind by a farmer.
Nothing: it was a desolate place.
‘What about on the beach?
There might be something washed up.’
‘It's nearly high tide,’ said Marie.
‘Everything's covered up.
— Hurry up!
Get on with it.
There's not much time left.’
‘Suppose I'll 'ave to do it then.’
Gazzer lay face down on the bank and inched himself out over the edge.
‘Don't let go!’
He slid over and dropped.
She was letting him go!
His heart stopped beating.
He could taste the mud, clogging his mouth, squeezing like toothpaste up his nostrils….
‘Can you reach him?’ shouted Marie.
He felt her restraining grip on his ankles.
He was dangling down the side of the bank, his face and body pressed into the mud.
He raised his head to look down, stretched out his arms:
‘Let me down a bit more!’
Below him, Simon reached upwards out of the water.
His lips were purple.
Gazzer could hear his teeth clashing together with the cold.
‘Move a bit closer!’
Gazzer ordered him.
‘I can't move, you moron!’
Simon screamed at him.
The powerful driving fist of the surging tide was cuffing him off balance: he was rocked from side to side as it rose and fell.
There was a foot or more of space between their finger-tips.
It seemed to Gazzer that the pressure hammering away inside his skull would crack it open, like the smashed shell of a hatching chick.
‘It's no good!’ he shouted to Marie.
‘Pull me back up!’
He felt himself being dragged to the top of the bank.
He lay for a moment, flat-out, breathing heavily, waiting for the red haze juddering in front of his eyes to clear.
‘Get up, then,’ said Marie.
‘What you laying down there for?— We got to find something we can reach him with, something he can hold on to.’
Ben danced around them, barking, jumping up.
‘Clear off!’ yelled Gazzer, pushing the dog away.
‘Get his lead!’ said Marie suddenly.
‘Ben's lead.
— You might be able to reach him with that!’
They wasted precious minutes trying to catch the dog.
Every time they got near him, he backed off, ecstatic with excitement, tail wagging furiously.
He thought it was a game.
‘Come ‘ere, you stupid animal!’
Once Gazzer nearly collared him but the dog twisted out of his grip and ran along the bank with Gazzer stumbling after him.
The trailing lead got snarled up in a bramble bush but, just before Gazzer reached him, the dog yanked it free and raced away through the dunes, to the thin strip of beach left uncovered by the tide.
Gazzer followed him and Marie lost sight of both of them.
‘You're still up there, aren't you?
You're not going away!’
She looked down at Simon.
The water was chest height and still rising.
‘What are you doing!’ he screamed at her, as soon as he saw her face.
‘Go for help for God's sake!
Don't just stand there watching!’
He looked small and helpless, almost engulfed by the scummy grey tidal waters slopping and heaving all around him.
Marie sought for comforting words to say: ‘Don't worry.
Gazzer's gone to get Ben's lead.
We'll pull you out with that.’
But, even as she spoke, she heard the dog's faint, shrill barking and saw him, in the distance, haring off along the water's edge, scattering sea-birds before him.
She couldn't make out whether he still had his lead on or not.
Gazzer was nowhere to be seen.
‘Is the dog up there?’
Simon was shouting to her.
‘Ben!
Ben!
Come here!’
Suddenly Gazzer appeared, climbing wearily over the top of a sand dune.
‘You got it, then?’
Marie yelled at him.
The lead was a chain lead, a good strong one.
She felt sure that they could haul Simon out with it.
Gazzer opened his hands to show that they were empty.
He shrugged: ‘Couldn't catch the dog!’
‘Oh, no,’ Marie breathed to herself, in despair.
At this moment of crisis, ludicrously irrelevant thoughts swarmed into her head: ‘Why didn't you chase it yourself?
He was always useless at running at school!’
She even had a sudden, vivid mental picture of Gazzer.
There he was, in a race on Sports' Day, his skinny, uncoordinated limbs flung out in all directions, galloping clumsily round the track at least half a lap behind everybody else.
‘Get me out!’
Simon was moaning, over and over again.
‘Get me out!’
Marie snapped back to reality and to the horror of what she had done.
If he drowned, she would be responsible.
— This thought was so agonizing to her that she shut it out.
She did not dare to look over the edge: she didn't want to know how far the water had risen.
The thought of staying here and watching him drown was too horrific to contemplate.
It came into her mind that she should just run away, off along the waterline like the dog, and leave this nightmare situation far behind her….
‘I've found this, look!’
Gazzer was shouting.
‘Marie, I've found this!’
He was struggling to pull something to the top of the dunes.
It slipped down again and she could hear him swearing as he tried to haul it up.
‘Well, don't just stand there!’ he yelled.
‘Give us a hand!’
Marie, feverish now with urgency, raced madly along the bank.
Brambles, creeping over the path, plucked at her jeans, almost tripping her up.
She ploughed up the sand-hill and grabbed hold of the rusty blue oil-drum before Gazzer lost it again.
‘Chasing dog,’ said Gazzer breathlessly, ‘— found this — washed up — float him out.’
The empty oil-drum was awkward to handle: their fingers could not find a grip.
They rolled it off the dune, then staggered up to the path along the canal bank, carrying the drum between them.
Down in the channel they could hear the water slapping against the greasy mud walls.
‘Hurry up!’ said Gazzer.
‘Hurry up!’
Sweating with effort they wrestled the drum along the overgrown towpath.
The jagged edges gashed their fingers: the rag round Gazzer's hand was bright with fresh blood.
Her frantic anxiety gave Marie extra strength: it was only her brute force that dragged the drum back when it skidded off the path and began to slither over the grass down towards the channel.
When they reached the place where Simon was, Gazzer collapsed over the drum, too exhausted to move, his limp body draped across it like a filleted fish.
‘Get off!’ ordered Marie.
‘I'm going to throw it in!’
Gazzer raised his head: ‘Only one chance.
— You get it in the wrong place, he's had it.
— It'll never work, Marie.
— He'll never be able to get it!’
‘Get off!’
Gazzer rolled off the drum and lay, flat out in the long grass.
Marie manoeuvred the drum to the edge.
‘Simon!’
Simon's arms were still above the rising tide.
He kept making desperate swimming movements, feebly threshing the water trying to pull himself free.
The harsh, squawking voices of the gulls echoed between the channel walls.
They skimmed low, passing so close to Simon that their wings beat at his head.
It was as if he no longer existed: he had already merged into their grey landscape, claimed by the marshes, the mud, the rocks and the waves.
‘Simon!’
He looked up at her.
She was appalled to hear that  he was sobbing with panic.
‘It's going to be all right!
Honest!
We're going to get you out now!— Here, look, catch this.
Put your arms over it!’
She spent seconds watching the ebb and flow of the tide.
Then she gauged distances and gave the drum a shove.
It coasted down the mud walls and sploshed into the channel.
‘He'll never get that,’ said Gazzer flatly, heaving himself to his knees to look over the edge.
‘Yes he will.
Just watch.’
Simon was reaching out for the drum.
Suddenly, the tide, washing into the channel, sent it bumping up against him.
‘See!
I told you!’ shouted Marie.
‘He's got it, look!
Told you I could do it!’
Her voice sounded different: it had an unfamiliar ring to it.
Gazzer realized that it was because she was pleased with herself.
‘You did good there,’ he said, admiringly, meaning what he said.
‘I could never have done that.
I'd have dropped it on his head!’
They watched together as Simon struggled to keep hold of the drum.
The force of the tide threatened to snatch it away from him.
His numbed fingers slid down the side and the drum bobbed away.
But it was hurled back again and he grabbed hold of it, throwing his arms over it and hugging it to him, his face pressed against the metal.
He hoisted himself further over.
The drum disappeared beneath him and Marie thought he'd lost it but as it shot to the surface Gazzer yelled: ‘It's pulling him free!’
Again, Simon threw the top half of his body over the drum, sinking it with his weight.
When its buoyancy forced it up again, it carried him with it.
They could see his legs, kicking.
Immediately the current caught the oil-drum and with Simon still clinging to it, whisked it off down to the Lock and crashed it into the wooden gates.
Jittery swallows, which had been lined up in a row along the top of the gates, catapulted into the air.
Simon slipped off the drum and the water closed over his head.
The swallows flitted round Marie as she ran down the bank.
The drum was floating, jammed up against the Lock, thumping into the gates with each surge of the tide.
Gazzer came hobbling after her: he had cramp in one of his legs.
Marie scanned the surface of the water anxiously: it was  unbroken.
The old familiar image of that desperately clutching hand, rising up out of the waves and then sinking again for ever, created itself in her mind's eye.
For a moment she thought she had really seen this happening and that Simon had drowned.
She almost turned away….
‘Stop it!’ she told herself scornfully as she blocked the picture out.
‘Don't you dare give up yet!’
She forced herself to look again.
Then she saw him, hanging on to one of the many bracing beams that ran horizontally across the Lock gates.
The wood down there, below the water line, was spongy and rotten: she could see it crumbling away in his hands.
‘He's down there!’ she shouted to Gazzer, who was still limping along the towpath.
‘I'm going to get him out.’
Gazzer watched her lower herself down from the top of the gates and edge out on one of the beams.
As she felt her way cautiously along, she pressed herself flat against the wood for support.
It oozed slimy green algae that plastered itself on her face and clothes.
Her toes were on the beam, her arms above her head, holding on to the top of the gates.
Once, her foot slipped and Gazzer heard the sharp intake of breath hissing through his teeth: he thought she was going to fall.
But she recovered her balance and carried on.
The rising water, filling the channel, meant that it was not difficult to reach Simon from the Lock gates.
She was very close to him now: all she had to do was stretch out her hand….
Gazzer saw her take one hand off the top of the gates and jam it into a wide split in the wood, then she crouched down and grabbed Simon's jacket with the other hand.
It looked precarious but she was in no danger.
Even if she fell in, Gazzer told himself, she could probably swim her way out.
With a bit of luck.
Using handholds in the wood to steady herself, she crept back along the beam, hauling Simon along with her.
It was mesmerizing to watch her, to see if she could make it.
He stopped being a spectator and goaded himself into action.
He sat astride the Lock gates and began to pull himself out along the top of them.
He could hear Marie telling Simon to climb to one of the cross beams.
Gazzer leaned over as far as he dared and gave her a hand, holding on to her arm while she helped Simon to hoist himself up.
Water coursed down Simon's body as he stood, shaking with cold, on the beam.
His feet were bare: his trainers were still buried in the mud.
Together they worked their way back towards the bank.
Gazzer thought his tired arms would crack with the strain when he had to help Simon pull himself to the top of the gates….
Gazzer crawled up the bank and lay down in the tall grass, pole-axed by fatigue.
His mind went blank.
Ages seemed to pass although it was only moments, until a pollen-laden grass flower tickled his nose and he sneezed himself back to life again.
He rolled over and saw Simon's face, inches from his own.
Simon was staring at him.
It was only then that Gazzer remembered what Simon had done: the intense activity of the last half hour had driven it out of his mind.
Gazzer got up hastily, looking round for Marie.
He saw a splash of white in among the greens of the vegetation: it was Marie's hair.
‘Come on!’ he shouted to her.
‘Let's get going!’
Already Simon was trying to struggle to his feet.
He was on his knees now!
Gazzer backed away down the tow path.
‘Come on,’ he said again to Marie.
‘Let's go, eh?’
Marie was wading up to the path through waist-high reeds: ‘Look at the state of my clothes!’
‘Never mind them!
Let's get a move on!’
Marie looked back at Simon.
‘What, and leave him here?’
‘Why not?
You got him out didn't you?
So what else is there to do?’
Marie shook her head.
‘Nowt.’
She turned her back on Simon and walked off into the sand dunes.
They could hear him shrieking after them.
‘Losers!
You didn't have the guts!
Didn't have the guts to finish me of l; did you?
I knew you wouldn't!— I'm going to get you!— I'm coming after you!— Losers!
You'll always be losers!’
He was still shouting as they walked past the barbed wire and the concrete blocks down to the waterline.
But they couldn't make out any of the words.
Inland, looking west from Seal Sands Lock, there was a faint  pink tinge to the sky.
Out in the Estuary, the sea was grey and placid, rocking gently.
Even the sea-birds were still.
It was the calm after high tide when life seems to be held suspended, waiting, breathless, for the tide's turning when everything will be thrown into motion again.
Marie had not taken in the events of the past few days.
There would be bad, and good, effects and it would take weeks, even months, for her to assimilate them.
Just now, she was too tired to think about anything at all.
She knew only, as they made their slow way along the beach back to the town, that she felt exhausted but peaceful, even momentarily carefree, as if she had shed burdens that had been weighing her down for a long time.
Stray images wandered into her unfocussed mind: the glossy black heads of seals breaking the sea's surface, the castle with knights riding out — She could make pictures of the Lock in her head again!
But she found that she didn't need them any more.
Suddenly, she felt impatient with these worn-out illusions and she shrugged them off, casting them aside like old clothes as she had already discarded the dreams she had woven around Simon.
‘I don't need you no more!’ she said to herself and even she was not sure whether it was Simon, her Dad, or those old, frayed fantasies she was talking about.
Her mind felt frighteningly empty.
Then another image began to fill the vacancy.
At first she thought it was one of the old ones and she almost wiped it out.
There she was, alone, canoeing through white water, shooting rapids.
It boiled all around her and she struggled to keep the canoe upright, bashing against rocks, getting entangled in floating branches.
Any second now she would be thrown out into the water, then her hand would —
She sighed to herself at the boring predictability of it.
But wait a minute!
The fragile canoe did not capsize!
It sailed on, strong in spite of its seeming inadequacy, through treacherous undertows, wild water, whirlpools, rapids, rocks and came through, battered but still intact on the other side.
She could hardly believe it: she could actually see herself, safe on a calm, sunny stretch of water, an exhausted but undefeated survivor!
The image made her smile.
She had never pictured herself  like that before.
Then, she caught herself smiling: ‘Feeling pleased with yourself,’ she thought immediately, in that ruthless, self-mocking voice.
‘What you got to be so pleased about?’
But she stored the ‘shooting rapids’ image away, for possible future use.
All the time, she had been half listening and even replying to Gazzer as he chatted on about Simon, the police, and Bella.
‘What you smiling about?’ asked Gazzer, curiously.
Marie shrugged.
‘Nowt really.’
She couldn't find the words to explain to him how she felt.
Besides, the feeling had passed.
Now, she was just hungry and tired out.
Then something occurred to her.
‘Eh,’ she said, ‘what were you doing anyway, just now, coming up to the Lock?’
She turned to look into Gazzer's face, concentrating her attention on him for the first time since he had climbed up to sit beside her in the sand dunes.
Gazzer was embarrassed.
The fears that had driven him to race frantically out to the Lock seemed so ridiculous now that he could not help making a joke out of them, and himself.
‘Well, would you believe I came up there to save you?
I was going to come charging down from the top of a sand-hill.
You know, like the cavalry in one of the old Westerns.’
Gazzer tipped an imaginary cowboy hat, ‘Howdy, ma'am.
I was just passing through.
Thought you could use some help.’
Gazzer said this last bit in his Texan drawl.
Then he said, seriously, in his own voice: ‘I came out to the Lock because I was worried he might hurt you.’
‘Were you?’ was all that Marie said but he was relieved that there was no laughter in her voice.
She sounded surprised and grateful.
Gazzer had been afraid that she would say something like: ‘Well, you needn't have bothered!’ or ‘You and whose army!’
She didn't, though.
‘You hungry?’
Marie asked Gazzer for the second time that day.
It had taken them ages to get back from the Lock and now the evening was drawing in.
Over on the promenade they were already putting the lights on in the shops and cafés.
Ahead of them, they could see the Big Wheel turning against a sky streaked with red and grey.
Beyond the Wheel, the pier was suddenly lit up, brilliantly, along its entire length.
The tide had turned long ago and the sea had slushed gently  down the sands, withdrawing into its channels, then back into the deep water far out in the Estuary.
I could murder some chips,’ said Gazzer.
‘Or a cheeseburger.
Or a hot dog with loads of fried onions.’
‘I could, an’ all.’
‘Come on, then.
There's a take-away over there.’
They looked so filthy and disreputable that a woman walking her dog stopped to stare at them as they straggled wearily across the wide, almost deserted beach.
She thought they must be drunk, they were weaving about so much.
She watched them suspiciously as they plodded through the soft, dry sand all churned-up with trippers’ footprints.
Then, they climbed slowly up the wooden steps to the promenade and disappeared from sight.