

GOD'S PROMISES ON THE BRINK and a hero brought down to earth with a bump
(Genesis 22–23)
The story so far, Act I: From creation to Abraham
With Genesis 1–3 we could begin with Genesis 1.
With the two stories of Abraham in Genesis 22–23 we cannot properly start with them, but must quickly trace ‘the story so far’.
Only if we put them into their context in the larger narrative, can we see what is going on and feel their full force.
But where does the story-so-far begin?
Not with Abraham, but back where we have already been, in the World of God's making and the Garden of his planting.
It starts with a vision of a world where all is in God's good order, where all is very beautiful and God's delight.
It begins with a Garden where, with the creation of the woman, all is harmony and joy, intimacy and self-giving.
So very quickly, as we have seen, this is spoiled.
And so very quickly beyond Eden things get much worse.
No sooner are we out of Eden than we find ourselves in a field stained with a brother's blood (4.1–16).
Abel's offering is accepted by God and Cain's rejected.
As with the prohibition to do with the tree in the midst of the Garden, God gives no explanation.
He chooses to remain inscrutable.
But Cain immediately interprets his act as an acceptance of his brother and a rejection of him.
The man in Eden, Cain's father, at first accepted God's prohibition without question, and he and the woman only misread God's motives when prompted by the snake.
Cain leaps at once to disastrous conclusions, and the consequence is not the eating of fruit now, but jealousy and cold, calculated murder, fratricide.
When he is challenged he lays the blame, like his father, at God's door, but with a new and terrible cynicism and with an outright lie.
To God's question, ‘Where is Abel your brother?’ he replies, ‘I do not know,’and then, ‘Am I my brother's keeper?’
(There is an emphasis in the Hebrew not generally conveyed in our versions.)
‘You, God, are my brother's keeper, and look what a mess you have made of the job!’
That is Cain's unspoken accusation.
Even without it his question encapsulates all that is selfish and ruthless among human beings.
With it, it reaches towards the dead centre of the tragic side of human nature.
After this it comes as little surprise to learn that ‘the earth was corrupt in God's sight, and the earth was filled with violence’(Gen. 6.11).
In the most terrifying story in all Scripture God decides to begin again with a single family, this time with one whose head, Noah, has shown some signs of righteousness.
The Flood of Genesis is no ordinary flood on an extraordinary scale.
To suggest that it could be or has been ‘proved’ by archaeologists is to do the story a great disservice.
It describes something of quite another order.
God withdraws the limits he imposed in Genesis 1 on the vast waters, both those placed above the firmament and those below.
Once more they become waters of chaos and engulf and destroy God's whole creation.
Only the continued succession of days and nights, and a crowded ark bobbing on the surface of the waters, prevent a complete return to the state of things before God began his great work of creation.
After the Flood is over, God blesses Noah and his sons with the familiar words, ‘Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth’(9.1).
We are not quite back where we began, for human dominion over the earth is different now.
Then it was a case of keeping things in God's fine order, and only plants and their fruit were to supply human beings with food.
Now men are to be hunters and predators.
‘Every moving thing that lives shall be food for you,’ God tells Noah and his sons.
The declared results remind us more readily of the spoiled world of Genesis 3 than those of Genesis 1 or 2: ‘The fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every bird of the air, upon everything that creeps on the ground, and all fish of the sea’(9.2).
In other respects, however, the new beginning, the new creation, for that is what it is, seems bright enough.
But there is a second and hidden flaw.
The human beings who survive the Flood come from the old corrupt, violent order.
Noah himself is beyond reproach, it is  true.
His sons, however, are not, and almost immediately Noah is humiliated and disgraced by one of them, and the story returns to the language of the curse (9.20–27).
Noah's cursing Canaan reminds us all too clearly of the cursing of Cain.
As it did after Cain, the scope of the story now enlarges rapidly.
From the sons of Noah emerge a host of peoples, and some, migrating from the east, settle on a plain in the land of Shinar (11.1–9).
‘Come,’ they say to one another, ‘Let us build ourselves a city, and a tower with its top in the heavens, and let us make a name for ourselves, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth’(11.4).
Who are they afraid of?
Of other peoples?
If so, then we are reminded of the violent earth before the Flood.
Of God?
Then we must recall the fear of the couple in the Garden.
Whichever the case, things are so awry that God himself is afraid and immediately jumps to the conclusion that they mean to seize the power that properly belongs to him.
There are stories in other places of men storming heaven.
The story of the Tower of Babel is not one of them.
The human aspirations expressed are modest by comparison, like those of the woman underneath the tree in the midst of the Garden.
But God ‘misreads’ what is going on (how is that for audacious storytelling!) and is conscious only of the threat to his domain.
‘…this is only the beginning of what they will do; and nothing that they propose to do will now be impossible for them’(11.6).
So he confuses their language and scatters them over the face of all the earth.
The fears of the city builders were, it seems, justified after all, and it was God they had to fear.
It is as if God, embittered by the recalcitrance of humanity, has turned to behaving in the same manner as that imputed to him by the serpent in the Garden in its dialogue with the woman.
It is as if he is intent only on protecting his own interests.
But that cannot be so (not, at least, if we take note of the rest of Scripture), and indeed it is not.
The story begins again.
The story so far, Act II: From Abraham to Isaac
For a third time it starts with a single family, indeed, as in the Garden, with a single couple, Abraham and Sarah.
There are no children to spoil things as there were with Noah.
There seems no prospect of children, since Sarah is barren.
What Abraham receives instead is a command, ‘Go from your country and your kindred and your father's house to the land that I will show you’, and promises: ‘And I will make of you a great nation, and I will bless you, and make  your name great, so that you will be a blessing.
I will bless those who bless you, and him who curses you I will curse; and by you all the families of the earth shall bless themselves’(12.1–3).
There is no explicit mention of a child to be born to him and Sarah, and there will be none for another three chapters (not until 15.4).
But none of the promises can be fulfilled without first a child being born, or, to be more precise in Abraham's patriarchal world, a son.
The Abraham narratives are dominated by the birth of this son, or rather by its delay.
Not until they are almost over is he born.
Meanwhile his birth comes to seem more and more impossible and Abraham on several occasions brings everything to the brink of disaster.
Abraham has gone down in Christian tradition as one of the great men of faith.
St Paul and the writer of the Letter to the Hebrews are primarily responsible for that, but their judgement is derived not so much from Genesis as from Jewish writings of the period between the Old and New Testaments which turned Abraham into a plaster saint.
The portrayal of Abraham in Genesis is much more complex.
It avoids stereotype, it is closer to reality, and though less comforting perhaps, it is much more interesting, and in the end more profound.
Abraham certainly begins magnificently.
When told to leave all behind, his past, his roots, his culture, his sense of belonging, his status and position in society and the family, the friendship, support and love of those close to him, everything except for Sarah, his wife, and Lot, his nephew, he goes without a moment's hesitation.
But soon he is forced by famine to go down to Egypt, and when he is about to cross the border he resorts to a ploy which knocks him straight off any pedestal we might have erected for him.
He says to Sarah, ‘I know that you are a woman beautiful to behold, and when the Egyptians see you, they will say, ‘This is his wife’; then they will kill me, but they will let you live.
Say you are my sister, that it may go well with me because of you, and that my life may be spared on your account' (12.11b-13).
We do not need to be feminists to see this as blatant and shocking selfishness.
He is intent only on saving his own skin.
Sarah's feelings and the consequences for her are not considered.
But it is considerably worse than that, as the story quickly makes clear.
Sarah is taken into the Pharaoh's harem.
What now the prospects for the promises of God?
It is true we have not yet been told, nor has Abraham, that Sarah will be the mother of the son on whom everything depends.
But we have heard of no other wife.
It appears that the promises of God, his plans for a new beginning for  his world, are locked up in a Pharaoh's palace.
God has to go to the rescue.
The immediate result is a confrontation between an angry and bewildered Pharaoh and Abraham.
Abraham, a rootless nomad, meets the king of the most sophisticated culture in the Ancient Near East, one regarded by his people as a god incarnate.
It would seem to be all over.
But Abraham still has God on his side, and the Pharaoh lets him go, and Sarah with him.
It is a narrow escape, but a few chapters later we find Abraham doing it all over again, this time in the city of Gerar (ch.
20).
The king there is Abimelech, and Sarah finds herself in another royal harem.
A second time God has to intervene.
In the course of Abimelech's questioning of Abraham it emerges that he has been claiming Sarah is his sister at every place they have been!
Undoubtedly there is humour here, but however much we laugh we must not forget what is at stake, nor fail to appreciate the danger into which Abraham has brought not only Sarah, but the grand purposes of God.
In another story, between those concerning Abraham's escapades in Egypt and Gerar, we find him going to war (ch.
14).
Lot is captured in a sacking of Sodom, and to rescue him Abraham goes into battle with 318 men against the combined armies of four kings who have already routed those of five others.
Family loyalty demands he attempt to rescue his nephew, even if it means, as the story suggests it does, a round trip of between three and four hundred miles.
The nomadic tribesmen of the contemporary Middle East would still understand this story well enough.
But given its setting, we must not allow ourselves to be blinded by Abraham's bravery, nor, when we read of the resounding success of his venture, by his military prowess.
The son on whom all depends is still not conceived.
Abraham does not just risk his life in this campaign.
He wears the promises of God underneath his battle dress, and puts them in danger of being hacked to pieces with his own body.
As the Abraham narrative wends its way through these and other events, the birth of the son of the promise is made to appear more and more unlikely.
We had notice of Sarah's barrenness even before it properly got under way(11.30).
At the start of chapter 16 we are reminded of it again, and things seem so hopeless now that Sarah urges Abraham to have a child by her Egyptian maid, Hagar.
According to ancient custom it would be possible for Sarah as wife to claim the child as her own.
A child is duly conceived, but before ever it is born, there is a breakdown of relationships between Sarah and  Hagar, and Hagar has to flee into the desert.
She flees for her life, yet she goes to almost certain death.
It is vital to remember that we have not yet been told that Sarah will be the mother of the son of the promise.
For all we know, and for all Abraham and Sarah know too, it is Hagar who carries in her womb the plans of God for the redemption of the world.
Yet it is she whom Abraham hands over to Sarah to do with as she pleases, and who is treated so cruelly by her mistress that she is forced to escape into the sands.
There is no thought anywhere for Hagar, for her unborn child, or for the purposes of God.
God is left to look after all of them by himself.
As a result Hagar is saved and restored to Abraham, and her child, Ishmael, is safely born.
Soon we learn he is not the son of the promise, nor is Hagar to be the mother of that child.
The larger purposes of God were not at risk of dying of thirst in the desert after all.
Yet the story of Hagar's flight furnishes another example of Abraham treating the promises of God very lightly, to put it at its mildest.
When we, the hearers and readers of the narrative, and Abraham, are told by God that he will have a son by Sarah, we learn that Abraham will be a hundred years old when the child is born and Sarah is already ninety (17.17).
They inhabit a world emerging from a period when human beings are said to have lived for hundreds of years.
Abraham's grandfather, Nahor, is said to have lived 148 years, and Abraham was born when his father, Terah, was seventy (11.24–6).
But when Abraham hears that he and Sarah will have a child he finds the news preposterous.
He laughs, and clings to the notion that Ishmael is the child of the promise (a child whom he had allowed when still unborn to be driven into the wilderness to die!).
God has to repeat his promise: ‘No, but Sarah your wife shall bear you a son, and you shall call his name Isaac’(17.19).
In the next chapter it is Sarah's turn to hear the happy news (Abraham does not seem to have passed it on!).
God appears to her and Abraham in the form of three men.
(What is there is God himself.
What they see is three men — the Hebrew makes this clearer than the English.)
Sarah overhears her husband being told that she will have a son in the spring.
She is past the menopause and she and Abraham have long since given up sexual intercourse.
Like her husband she laughs the news out of court (18.10–15).
With Abraham's and Sarah's laughter the storyteller is indulging in another play on words.
Isaac, the name to be given the promised son, means ‘he laughs’.
Thus their laughter is prophetic.
It is also  readily understandable.
Their laughter is our laughter.
The promise is ridiculous.
Yet their laughter remains open to censure.
Sarah is caught out laughing and promptly denies it.
At least she does not recognize who she is talking to, for God is in strange disguise.
Abraham, in the previous chapter, is in no doubt at all.
He laughs while prostrate before his God, in the attitude of reverence and worship.
Mocking laughing in this position is truly shocking.
God is treated with loud contempt.
Abraham and Sarah in these chapters are ambiguous characters.
They are by no means all bad, but they are certainly not all good.
Despite their astounding obedience at the start of their story, they belong to the old order, and betray its features: deceit, fear, including fear of God, selfishness, thoughtlessness, recklessness, cruelty and shocking disbelief.
This is all too familiar.
If God is truly to begin again, then he must start with a child born out of the blue, a child most decidedly of his making.
With Isaac there is a possibility of a new order being established.
With Isaac God can look forward to a world over which he can again clap his hands in delight.
When finally he is born, Sarah cries, ‘God has made laughter for me’(21.6).
Looking at the sweep of the whole narrative from Genesis 1 outwards, we can say that God has made laughter for himself also, and for the whole world.
Isaac is God's laughter incarnate.
That is why the story of the binding of Isaac in chapter 22 is so bewildering.
On several occasions before Isaac's birth we have seen the purposes of God brought to the edge of disaster by Abraham.
Now we read of the most direct and serious threat of all.
And it comes from God himself!
We have arrived at chapter 22, but before we deal with it in detail, we must look quickly at another story that lies between Isaac's birth and his coming so soon and so close to death.
Sarah's laughter turns to ruthless jealousy (21.8ff.).
When Isaac is still very small, she sees Ishmael playing with him.
The scene is an entirely innocent one, yet it provokes Sarah to her greatest act of cruelty.
‘Cast out this slave woman with her son,’ she commands Abraham, ‘for the son of this slave woman shall not be heir with my son Isaac.’
The order is uncompromising, and disconcerts Abraham.
But God then intervenes, not on the side of Hagar and Ishmael, as we might expect, but in support of Sarah.
Hagar and her son are indeed to be cast out, and God explains the place their banishment will take in his larger purposes.
Ishmael will be the ancestor of a nation, but one quite distinct from Isaac's people.
So Hagar finds herself once more in the desert.
Her meagre supply of water runs out, and she puts Ishmael in the shade of a bush to die.
She sits some way off, and waits for death.
Here the story turns, for the child cries and is heard by God.
The ‘angel of God’ calls from heaven: ‘What troubles you, Hagar?
Fear not; for God has heard the voice of the lad where he is.
Arise, lift up the lad…for I will make him a great nation.’
The assurances made to Abraham were not empty ones, as they cannot be where God is concerned.
God shows Hagar a well.
Thirst is banished, and the desert becomes their home.
When Ishmael is old enough to marry, Hagar not surprisingly finds a wife for him in her own country of Egypt.
She will have no more truck with Abraham and his kind!
It is a poignant story this, and an unnerving one.
We will find it echoed in several places in chapter 22.
The binding of Isaac
Near the beginning of Shakespeare's King Lear we, the audience, learn that Lear's two elder daughters, Goneril and Regan, are false, while his youngest, Cordelia, is true.
Goneril and Regan bear their father only flattering words, and lust for their own power.
Cordelia loves him.
We know the truth of the matter.
But Lear does not, and we sit and watch helplessly as his not knowing leads to chaos in his kingdom, to madness, and to death.
Shakespeare's technique, to let us into a secret that the hero will only discover for himself at the end, is a common one in playwriting and storytelling.
It is the technique employed in Genesis 22, and it creates enormous tension and suspense in the narrative, even though the ending is mercifully not that of high tragedy.
‘After these things God tested Abraham.’
That is how it starts.
We at once are privy to the secrets of God's mind.
But Abraham is not.
He will learn of them at the end, when it is all over, and even then only indirectly.
Meanwhile we, and God too, must wait to see if he passes the test or not.
After the stories of the last few chapters, since the point when the promises were first given, our confidence in Abraham's reliability has been shaken nearly to pieces.
God calls to Abraham, ‘Abraham!’ and he replies, ‘Here am I.’In chapter 12, when it all began, there was only monologue.
By now God and Abraham have been through a great deal together.
Dialogue is appropriate.
Next, as before, a command.
‘Take your son, your only son, whom you love, Isaac, and go to the land of  Moriah, and offer him there as a burnt offering upon one of the mountains of which I shall tell you.’
The storyteller himself would have us recall the command of chapter 12.
The Hebrew words translated ‘go’ in 22.2 are lech l'cha .
Nowhere else does this phrase occur in the Old Testament except in 12.1.
Lech means ‘go’ by itself.
L'cha , literally ‘for yourself, softens the command.
There is a courtesy in the divine speech, an appeal for Abraham's co-operation, that was distinctly lacking in chapter 21 and Sarah's abrupt ‘Cast out this slave woman with her son.’
But courtesy is not everything.
The divine command is truly terrible.
It was bad enough when Abraham was asked to sacrifice his past.
Now he is being asked to sacrifice his future, and, if we remember the course of the story so far, God's future for the world.
The horror and the pain of it are hinted at in the progression, ‘your son, your only son, whom you love, Isaac’(this is the order in the Hebrew).
Isaac is not Abraham's only son.
But God is not lying.
He is simply looking at things from Abraham's point of view.
Ishmael was driven away with his mother into the desert, and has not returned.
For all Abraham knows, he is dead.
God's calling Isaac his ‘only son’ would seem to confirm it.
The words add horror to horror.
In chapter 12 Abraham was given a reason for his going, for the promises came hard on the heels of the command.
Here, like the man in the Garden when the prohibition was delivered, or Cain when his offering was rejected, he receives no explanation at all.
Of course,we know that Abraham is being tested.
But ‘Take…go…offer’ is all Abraham gets.
We now expect protest, more dialogue.
There is none.
Instead we have the details of Abraham's preparations.
He gets up early in the morning, saddles his ass, cuts the wood for the sacrifice, and taking two young servants and Isaac with him, he sets off for the place of which God has told him.
As his going was in chapter 12, it is all so matter-of-fact!
No space was devoted then to Abraham's feelings, nor is it here.
No space is devoted here to anybody's feelings, not to Isaac's, nor the servants'.
As for Sarah, she is entirely forgotten in this story.
In chapter 17 it seems that Abraham did not tell Sarah that she would be having a child.
Now he does not tell her that he is going to put a knife to that child's throat and burn his body to ashes.
If he does tell her, then we do not hear about it, nor do we know of Sarah's reaction.
The story's silence concerning Sarah is one of its most terrible aspects.
As its days go by, we are left to imagine for ourselves Sarah's anxiety.
One thing is certain: if Abraham has not told her of the divine command, then even her worst fears will not allow her to guess what is afoot.
There is one curious feature of Abraham's preparations.
It is a three-day journey to the land of Moriah, yet he cuts the wood for Isaac's funeral pyre before he sets off, and takes it all the way with him.
Isaac will himself carry it up the mountain where the sacrifice is to be made.
Is there really no wood to be found on the way, or even on the mountain itself?
We cannot answer that question.
All we can say is that the burden of the wood adds further poignancy to an already heart-rending story, and throughout the journey acts as an all too visible reminder to Abraham of the act he is about to commit.
The journey is a long one, but it is hurried over in a few words.
Once Abraham can see the place where he will kill his son, the pace of the narrative slows right down.
He tells the servants to stay put, and says that he and ‘the lad’ will ‘go yonder and worship’, and then return.
What unspoken horror is in that word ‘worship’!
No wonder that Abraham cannot bring himself to name Isaac, or even refer to him as his son.
He dissembles when he talks of their return, too.
He expects to come back alone.
But the servants cannot be told that.
Nor can Isaac.
More reporting of preparations.
The wood is taken off the ass, and laid on Isaac.
He is a beast of burden, an animal for sacrifice, and like a man on the way to Calvary bears on his back the means for his death.
‘So they went both of them together.’
Twice these words occur in this last part of the journey, and frame a little dialogue of extreme simplicity, which surely must rank as one of the great moments in biblical storytelling.
Isaac addresses ‘his father’ Abraham: ‘My father!’
‘Here am I, my son.’
‘Behold, the fire and the wood; but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?’
‘God will provide himself the lamb for a burnt offering, my son.’
Twice the word ‘father’; twice the phrase ‘my son’.
Thus the dialogue and its frame emphasize the bond between the two of them, and thereby further underline the horror of the sacrifice of which they speak.
There is great irony in those last words of Abraham's, ‘God will provide…’
Some have seen them as a fine declaration of faith, but they are not.
‘The lamb’ which Abraham means is Isaac.
God has commanded him to sacrifice his son.
That is all he knows.
When they reach their goal, Abraham goes calmly about the business of preparing Isaac for slaughter.
He does not hunt high and low for an animal to use instead.
He gives us no sign that he believes God will provide a substitute at the last moment, no sign of a conviction that all will be well in the end.
Does this mean that this story is not about faith, but faithlessness?
Does it mean that Abraham no longer has  any trust in God's promises?
The story does not allow us to answer those questions for certain.
But if Abraham's trust has gone, God has given him cause.
In chapter 21, in the account of Sarah's cruelty and Hagar's and Ishmael's banishment, God appeared to Abraham on the side of the oppressor, not the oppressed.
Though he reassured him about the boy's future, his calling Isaac his ‘only son’ when he commands him to go to the land of Moriah might well suggest those assurances were empty and meant nothing.
Abraham would seem to be dealing with a God who has his own cruelty, and who cannot be relied upon to keep his promises.
After all the command to sacrifice Isaac would appear of itself to back that up.
The promises of chapter 12, repeated at intervals before Isaac's birth, must mean nothing.
But Isaac has no knowledge of the divine command his father has received.
He must take the words ‘God will provide himself the lamb for a burnt offering’ at their face value.
For him they are a declaration of faith, and an answer to his bewilderment.
In the end his taking the words literally will be proved correct.
Though Abraham does not know it, he has spoken the truth!
It is Isaac, who understands nothing of what is going on, who in fact understands here, while his father, who thought he understood, understands nothing.
That is the greatest irony of all.
When they reach the place of sacrifice, the details of the final preparations are given in the same matter-of-fact way that the initial ones were.
The spot is not already a sanctuary.
Abraham must first build an altar.
(How the agony is prolonged!)
The wood is laid on the altar, Isaac is bound and then ‘put’(the word in the Hebrew is as colourless as that: it is as if he is an object for slaughter, no longer a human being, let alone Abraham's son) on the wood.
All is now ready.
Abraham puts forth his hand, and takes the knife ‘to slay his son’.
The words balance the earlier ‘put’, and remind us of the truth.
They begin to give the colour back to Isaac's cheeks, but they are as far as the storyteller will go.
As at the start of this story there is no mention of the feelings of those involved.
Isaac, unlike Ishmael underneath the bush in the desert, does not cry out.
There is no protest from him or his father.
No words of any kind pass between them.
The appalling actions are done in complete silence.
It is so strange, it is like the awesome silence which in the minds of the ancient Israelites sometimes preceded divine revelation.
And so indeed it is.
The ‘angel of the Lord’ calls from heaven, just as he did when Ishmael was so near death.
‘Abraham, Abraham!’
The name is called twice now, for the matter is doubly urgent.
‘Here  am I.’ The silence is broken, and dialogue resumed.
Then another command: ‘Do not lay your hand on the lad or do anything to him; for now I know that you fear God, seeing you have not withheld your son, your only son, from me.’
Abraham has passed the test, Isaac is saved, and the purposes of God are brought back from the edge of the abyss.
Earlier in the story Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw ahead of him the place where he thought he would kill his son.
Now he lifts up his eyes again, and sees the animal that is his son's salvation, a ram caught in a thicket.
He sacrifices the ram, and then gives a name to the place, ‘The Lord provides!’
The word is the same as he used before in his dialogue with Isaac.
Then he did not mean what he said.
Now he does.
The name is a cry of relief and joy.
It marks the only point in the entire story where Abraham's feelings are allowed to come anywhere near the surface.
The angel of God (at this stage in Israelite writing just another way of referring to God himself calls) a second time: ‘By myself I have sworn…because you have done this, and have not withheld your son, your only son, I will indeed bless you, and I will multiply your descendants as the stars of heaven and as the sand which is on the seashore.
And your descendants shall possess the gate of their enemies, and by your descendants shall all the families find blessing, because you have obeyed my voice.’
The old promises are thus repeated, and the threefold use of the word ‘descendants’ would seem to rub it into the mind of the bewildered Abraham that indeed Isaac is saved.
making sense of God
But if Abraham is bewildered, so are we.
What in heaven's name has been going on?
The question is not exactly easy to answer, and is made initially more difficult by the repetition of the promises at the end.
On all the occasions they have been made before, they have been unconditional.
When first God commanded Abraham to leave everything behind, he did not wait to see the order obeyed before giving the promises.
But now, after he has commanded Abraham to leave everything behind a second time, he waits until Abraham has passed the test.
It would seem that the birth of Isaac has made all the difference, and might hold the clue to our question about what has been going on.
While Isaac is still unborn, the promises speak only of the future.
Admittedly we find Abraham as early as chapter 13 walking through the length and breadth of the Promised Land, thus appearing to take legal possession of it.
But that act has more to do with the future than the present, as chapter 23 will make abundantly clear.
Only with the birth of Isaac does the world of God's promises begin to become reality.
In that world there is laughter, joy and fulfilment, but also new demands.
The man and woman in the Garden were not free from God's demands.
For life with God to be enjoyed there, those demands had to be met.
Everything depended on the man's and the woman's obedience.
So it was with Noah in God's second beginning, and so it is now with Abraham in his third.
Without obedience, all will be spoiled.
Without it, when he was first called, God's new plans for the redemption of his world would not have got under way at all.
Now that those plans have at last come to some fruition, Abraham's obedience must be tested again.
Love always makes demands.
We all know that.
Complete love, such as God's is, demands all.
We know that too, perhaps, though if we do, we do our best to forget it.
Yet in the face of this particular story such sentiments can seem like pious claptrap.
The demands made of Abraham here are so very terrible.
If we suspected a cruel God in chapter 21, then surely we have got one now.
Any sensitive reading of a story demands a feeling for how far one is permitted to push the significance of its details, and an awareness of those questions that can properly be asked of it, and those which cannot.
I suspect that the theology of Genesis 22 is not to be pushed very far, that cautious theology has here been sacrificed on the fine altar of dramatic tension and powerful storytelling.
It is one of the glories of the Old Testament that its writers are seldom over-careful about what they say about their God.
They prove time and time again the risks they are prepared to take.
There is, however, one thing more to be said.
The Abraham narrative has made it abundantly clear that Isaac comes out of God's bright blue.
He is sheer gift.
The story of his binding makes clear that he remains so, and that he must be accepted as such.
Later in the Old Testament we are told how Job, robbed of everything, at first reacts by declaring, ‘The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord’(Job 1.21).
Those words may seem too hard for us to take, but God requires Abraham to act them out in the land of Moriah.
If he regards Isaac as his own and not God's, as the woman and the man in the Garden came to regard that tree as their own and not God's, then all will be ruined.
If he treats his son  truly as God's, more God's son than his own, and is prepared to hand him back, then God's new era will surely dawn, and Abraham can give it a fitting name: 'The Lord provides!’
Genesis 22 would teach us not to underestimate the demands of God.
It would teach us also not to underestimate the sheer abundance of the world of God's promise.
The words of the Johannine Jesus, ‘I came that they may have life, and have it abundantly’, are in the end apt comment on this story.
Bartering for a burial plot
Genesis 22 has, not surprisingly, provided inspiration to many artists.
Among them is the First World War poet, Wilfred Owen, who wrote the following lines, under the title, ‘The Parable of the Old Man and the Young’.
So Abram rose, and clave the wood, and went,
And took the fire with him, and a knife.
And as they sojourned both of them together,
Isaac the first-born spake and said, My Father,
Behold the preparations, fire and iron,
But where the lamb for this burnt offering?
Then Abram bound the youth with belts and straps,
And builded parapets and trenches there,
And stretched forth the knife to slay his son.
When lo! an angel called him out of heaven,
Saying, Lay not thy hand upon the lad,
Neither do anything to him.
Behold,
A ram, caught in a thicket by its horns;
Offer the Ram of Pride instead of him.
But the old man would not so, but slew his son,
And half the seed of Europe, one by one.
Owen uses the story of the binding of Isaac to comment on the war in which he was fighting, and has given it a vicious twist at the end.
In a very different, but no less brilliant way the compiler of Genesis gives the Abraham narrative a final twist by following the story of the binding by one concerning Abraham's purchase of a burial plot.
Abraham's death is not recorded till chapter 25, and he features, too, at the start of chapter 24.
But chapter 23 gives us the last piece of true  storytelling in which Abraham is centre stage throughout.
It occupies a very prominent place in the narrative, therefore, and we might expect something particularly fine and solemn after the heroics of chapter 22.
For Abraham was a hero there.
Though we found ourselves asking whether the story was about faith or faithlessness, we were left in no doubt about Abraham's stature at the end.
He passed God's test, and a test of the severest kind at that, and received God's high praise.
Surely the story that follows must sustain the high note that has been reached.
But if we think that, we have not reckoned with the mischief of the compiler.
He brings Abraham down to earth with a bump, by giving us a subtle piece of comedy in which he features as something of a country bumpkin and gets, to use unsubtle language for a moment, ‘right done’!
Sarah is dead, and Abraham must find somewhere to bury her.
By the terms of his dealings with God the whole land is his.
He has walked the length and breadth of it, taken possession of it.
But what goes on between God and the individual is not always taken notice of by society at large.
God's ‘legal transactions’ are not the law of the land, not of Abraham's land at any rate.
By the law of the land he is a resident alien (23.4).
By the law of the land, not only does he possess none of it, he does not even have the right to own any of it.
For that right he must negotiate with the citizens of Hebron.
If it is given, it will change his status among them.
He will belong.
He will no longer be an alien in his own land.
The story concerns itself with those negotiations.
To understand it, it helps to have had some experience of a bartering society.
The outcome of bartering is almost bound to be determined by the starting points of the parties involved.
In this particular case Abraham is at a very distinct disadvantage.
He has a certain reputation in Hebron (though not as much as the exaggerated courtesy of verse 6 would suggest), but no political power.
If his legal status is to be changed, he must rely on the generosity of the citizens.
To start negotiations having to rely on the generosity of the other party is not to start in the strongest of positions!
Furthermore, his need is very great.
The ancient Israelites set great store by proper burial.
It is imperative for Abraham that a burial site be purchased, and quickly.
Sarah's corpse in that climate will not wait.
The citizens of Hebron, by contrast, hold all the trump cards.
There are many more of them, for a start.
They have the political power, they establish and run the legal system.
They do not just know the ropes: they make the ropes.
They also have all the sophistication of city-dwellers.
Courtesy and hospitality, it is true, would demand that they pay heed to this alien in his great need but their obligations extend no further than that.
Abraham makes his request: ‘Give me land enough among you so that I may bury my dead properly.’
He does not mean ‘give’ in the accepted sense of the word, of course.
Such a demand would be unthinkable in the circumstances.
He means ‘sell’, but etiquette leads him to avoid the word.
The citizens of Hebron understand what he means, though one of them will use that word ‘give’ to his own advantage later.
'Bury your dead in the best grave we have,’ is their first response.
The first response of any seller in a strong position is bound to be an impossible one, and so this is.
Abraham, the alien, cannot possibly bury Sarah in their finest grave.
The offer would seem at first sight to be an extremely generous one, but those who make it know it cannot be accepted.
All it achieves is to give them an air of generosity, and so put Abraham at an even greater disadvantage in the rounds to come.
Anyway, it does not fulfil Abraham's requirements.
He is asking to buy property among them.
He is asking to be no longer an alien.
However fine the grave is for Sarah, if it is not his, then his status will not change at all.
Furthermore he has a particular site in mind, as he reveals in the next round of the negotiations.
‘…entreat for me Ephron the son of Zohar, that he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he owns; it is at the end of his field.
For the full price let him give it to me in your presence as a possession for a burying place.’
Now it is clear what he wants.
Ephron is among the citizens present.
The remaining negotiations must be between him and Abraham.
It is an uneven match.
Ephron picks up Abraham's ‘give’ and uses it three times in his opening offer.
‘No, my lord,’(such courtesy again, and such artful courtesy too, as we shall see!)‘hear me; I give you the field, and I give you the cave that is in it; in the presence of the sons of my people I give it to you; bury your dead.’
When Abraham said ‘give’, he meant ‘sell’.
When Ephron says ‘give’, he means ‘give’…and he does not mean ‘give’.
A student at the theological college where I teach once told a most illuminating story when I was conducting a seminar on this passage.
He had spent several years in the Sudan and he gave us a tip: ‘Never take a taxi there,’ he said, ‘without fixing the price for the journey before you get in.’
On one occasion he had failed to do so, and had had to start negotiating when he got to his destination.
‘How much is  that?’ he had asked.
‘Give me whatever you like,’ the driver had suggested.
‘How about —?’ and he had quoted a ridiculously small sum.
My friend, the student, could not have begun to agree to that, and of course the taxi driver would not have allowed him to.
At the end of some noisy haggling he had ended up paying the driver way over the odds.
The Ephron of our story, like the Sudanese taxi driver, does not mean what he says, as he makes abundantly clear when Abraham insists on paying a proper price for the field and the cave.
‘My lord,’ he replies, still with the utmost courtesy, ‘listen to me; a piece of land worth four hundred shekels of silver, what is that between you and me?
Bury your dead.’
There we have it!
Slipped in as if it is a mere trifle, a quite exorbitant price!
We know just how exorbitant it is from references elsewhere in the Old Testament.
Omri, a king of Israel in the ninth century, for six thousand shekels acquired the entire site for his new capital city of Samaria (1 Kings 16.24).
The prophet Jeremiah bought a field at Anathoth and paid just seventeen shekels for it (Jer.
32.9).
Of course, an absurd price is exactly what we would have expected Ephron to suggest in the circumstances.
Now, surely, the hard bargaining will begin.
But no.
Abraham is caught in Ephron's net.
He has offered to pay the full market price.
Ephron has told him the land is worth four hundred shekels.
To refuse to pay that would be tantamount to accusing him of lying, and such an accusation cannot be countenanced in these circumstances.
Secondly, to refuse to pay would be to deny the exalted status that Ephron and his fellow Hittites have accorded him.
They have called him ‘a mighty prince’ and ‘lord’.
Mighty princes can afford to pay four hundred shekels for a cave and a field.
Abraham is in search of status in Hebron, and in any case the fear of humiliation will encourage him to pay.
Thirdly, and perhaps most importantly, to try to beat Ephron down to a lower price would surely be to heap dishonour on Sarah.
He cannot, ‘mighty prince’ that he is, appear to suggest that she, his ‘princess’, is not worth four hundred shekels.
The silver has to be weighed out, all four hundred shekels of it, and indeed it is.
We could have guessed that Abraham would end up paying over the odds, but not as much as this.
The clever Ephron has taken him for a very long ride indeed.
The story of the purchase of Sarah's burial plot is comedy, and comedy frequently takes delight in debunking heroes.
Abraham is made to look foolish.
But why?
Just for entertainment's sake?
Well, make no mistake about it, these stories were designed to entertain, and this one clearly meant to amuse.
But it is entertainment with a serious intent.
The Old Testament does not go in for saints.
Genesis does not go in for saints (though Joseph will, perhaps, approach that status).
It is too clear-eyed about human nature for that.
It is too clear-eyed also about the holiness and the goodness of God.
There is only one hero, and he is God.
The compiler of Genesis would not have us forget that.
There is one last irony.
The purchase of Ephron's field and cave represents the first step towards Israel's actual possession of the Promised Land.
It is not exactly an auspicious start!
A WRESTLING MATCH WITH GOD and two brothers so nearly reconciled
(Genesis 32–33)
Isaac: the tragedy and the hope
Genesis has very little to tell us about Isaac.
We have waited so long for him to be born, and such fine promises rest on his shoulders.
Yet apart from the story of his binding, a long account of the finding of a wife for him, for the bulk of which he is off stage, and a story about him on his death-bed which is primarily about his sons, Jacob and Esau, there is but one chapter devoted to him (ch.
26).
Taken in the context of the larger narrative, it is one of the most tragic chapters in all Scripture, and at the same time one charged with high hope.
All its elements have their parallels in the Abraham stories: famine, promises from God, disputes over wells, a ‘covenant’ with Abimelech, the king of Gerar, at Beersheba, and, most remarkably of all, Isaac's telling the men of Gerar that Rebekah, his wife, is his sister.
Only the last of these put him in a bad light, but it is enough.
He is as intent as his father on saving his own skin, and just as inattentive to the possible consequences for his wife and for the purposes of God.
He is manifestly a chip off the old block, and his birth has not, after all, meant a return to the bright world of God's first beginning.
The old, familiar order remains in force, and the other parallels in chapter 26 only serve to emphasize the fact.
There is the tragedy.
The hope only emerges as the narrative proceeds.
God does not begin again.
Nor does he desert his world.
Indeed a new promise is given Isaac: ‘I will be with you’(26.3).
After the episode in Gerar it is  not rescinded.
Instead, when two of Abimelech's envoys come to Isaac at Beersheba, their opening words are, ‘We see plainly that the Lord is with you.’
God remains committed to the world he has got.
The rest of the great narrative, right up to the end of the Books of Kings, and the prophetic books of the Old Testament also, will make clear what this decision costs God, and the Gospels of the New Testament will make it even plainer with their accounts of the passion and death of Jesus of Nazareth.
But the world of chapter 26 is not only familiar to us from the preceding chapters of Genesis.
It is familiar to us from our own experience.
The ambivalent world of need, high hopes for the future, conflict, disputes, peace-making, and reckless selfishness is the one in which human beings have always lived, and the one in which we find ourselves.
It is our world, too, to which God remains so firmly committed.
There is the hope.
A life of struggle
If God has problems with Isaac, he has many more with Jacob!
Nothing could make clearer the extent of God's commitment to his world than the appearance of the Jacob stories so hard on the heels of those few stories about Isaac.
Jacob's life, as presented in Genesis, is one of struggle and conflict.
They begin even before he is born.
He struggles with his twin Esau in Rebekah's womb (25.22).
The struggle continues in the light of day in two stories which tell how he, the younger brother, gets the better of Esau.
Jacob belongs to a society where a firstborn son is heir to immense and exclusive privileges.
All the status, the power, the authority, the prosperity, even the fertility of his father will belong to that son when his father dies.
The father, for his part, must make sure that these privileges are properly passed on to him by giving him a death-bed blessing.
A younger son must live in the shadow of this fine brother and serve him.
From time to time in Ancient Near Eastern literature we find protest made against such conventions.
In the Jacob stories there is no explicit complaint, despite the fact that the brothers are twins, born at almost the same moment, and so reveal the unfairness of the privileges particularly clearly.
But things are turned topsy-turvy right enough.
The first of the two stories is short and sharp (25.29–34).
Esau, the hunter, comes in from the field ‘dying of hunger’, to find his brother  boiling some lentil soup.
When he asks to be given some of the soup, Jacob seizes the opportunity, and exchanges a bowl of it for Esau's privileges as the firstborn.
The incident is absurd, almost grotesque.
As commentators have pointed out, the story provides a case of the slow-witted hunter-gatherer, who is pictured as thinking of nothing but his belly, being smartly out-manoeuvred by the more sophisticated and clever shepherd.
It reflects a despising of ‘primitive’ peoples which is still all too familiar to us.
It makes a complete fool out of Esau.
‘Thus Esau despised his birthright’ is how it ends.
But if we are tempted to share that judgement and the prejudice behind it, the compiler of Genesis would have us think again.
After the events of chapter 26 he brings us to the time when Isaac is nearing death, and to the point when the blessing of the eldest son must be given.
Isaac proceeds as if he knows nothing of the events surrounding the pot of soup.
All must be done with the required ceremony.
Rites of passage are like that.
They are things of immense significance, and have to be done properly.
Esau must prepare a special meal for his father, he must wear his best robes for the occasion.
When he comes, his father must formally ask him who he is (the blessing has to be given to the right person).
Then the meal will be eaten, the son will kiss his father, and finally the blessing will be pronounced.
The story of this particular blessing begins with the words, ‘…
Isaac was old and his eyes were so dim so that he could not see’(27.1).
Thus we are told right at the start of Isaac's frailty and vulnerability.
We will not be allowed to forget it.
All the due ceremonies are performed in their proper order…only not with Esau.
While he is out hunting, to kill something for his father's meal, Rebekah dresses her favourite son, Jacob, in Esau's clothes, and cooks a meal for him to take to the blessing.
She knows that Isaac will take Jacob's hands, and put his hand on his neck when he kisses him.
Jacob's skin is much smoother than Esau's, so she puts goatskins on his hands and arms and neck to complete the deception.
The tricks succeed.
Isaac is duped, and the blessing pronounced.
May God give you of the dew of heaven,
and of the fatness of the earth,
and plenty of grain and wine.
Let peoples serve you,
and nations bow down to you.
Be lord over your brothers,
and may your mother's sons bow down to you.
Cursed be every one who curses you,
and blessed be every one who blesses you!
(27.28–9)
Now Esau's birthright is truly Jacob's.
He leaves his father's presence, and almost immediately Esau appears with his meal prepared.
The game is up.
In a scene of the utmost poignancy we see Isaac's trembling bewilderment turn quickly to horror, and Esau's anguish become murderous hatred of his brother.
Isaac is helpless.
The blessing cannot be unspoken.
He has a blessing to give his eldest and favourite son, but it is a poor thing compared with Jacob's, so poor it is hardly recognizable as a blessing and could be taken for a curse:
Behold away from the fatness of the earth shall your dwelling be,
and away from the dew of heaven on high.
By your sword you shall live,
and you shall serve your brother;
but when you break loose
you shall break his yoke from your neck.
(27.39–40)
The story is not written in a didactic style.
Mercifully, the storyteller does not preach, nor tell us what to think.
But he uses all his very considerable art to make us feel Isaac's and Esau's pain.
It does not do him justice to say he is on their side, but he leaves us in no doubt about the horror of what Jacob and Rebekah have done.
Rebekah's scheming is as cruel and as ruthless as Sarah's treatment of Hagar and Ishmael.
Jacob's taking advantage of his father's blindness and frailty, and his deceiving him at one of the most solemn moments of his life, are reminiscent of the shame and humiliation brought to Noah by his son Ham.
Only Jacob's actions are far worse than Ham's, and coldly calculated into the bargain.
The rift between the two brothers recalls the one between Cain and Abel and would seem at first to be heading for a similar conclusion.
Only when Rebekah learns of Esau's determination to kill his brother, and sends Jacob to her own brother Laban nearly three hundred miles away, is another death of a younger son avoided.
Jacob is a trickster.
According to Esau, his very name means deceiver, cheat, one who outwits others (27.36).
Outwitting his brother and father was straightforward enough.
His uncle Laban is a different proposition altogether.
He is a trickster too.
The presence of two tricksters on stage at one and the same time is bound to make  for comedy, and so it does here.
At one or two points the Jacob/ Laban stories (chs.
29–31) approach bedroom farce.
Jacob learns what it feels like to be cheated himself, even on a wedding night for which he has waited seven years!
Laban puts the wrong daughter of his in Jacob's bed, and Jacob does not realize it till he wakes up in the morning!
Rebekah sent Jacob to stay with Laban for ‘a while’.
He ends up serving Laban for twenty years, in which time he has his wages changed ten times (and that does not mean continually increased, either).
At the finish of the contest we can just about call Jacob the victor.
Certainly he returns towards the Promised Land in very different style from the way he left it.
He left with nothing.
He returns with two wives, eleven sons and a daughter, male and female slaves, and large flocks and herds of sheep and goats, camels, cattle and asses (and Laban's household gods!).
But Jacob's wrestling days are not yet over.
His hardest and most dangerous bouts are still to come.
An encounter on the journey, and preparations for another
When, twenty years before, he fled from Esau's wrath, Jacob stumbled on a holy place (28.10–22).
He lay down to sleep, and had a vision of a grand stairway linking heaven and earth, its foot at the very spot where he was lying, and peopled with angels ascending and descending.
In his vision God appeared before him and delivered the old promises made to Abraham and Isaac.
Jacob had wrested a blessing from his father by a cruel trick.
At this holy place, without any warning, without any cool calculation on his part, he was given a far richer blessing by God himself.
No wonder he woke overcome with awe: ‘Surely the Lord is in this place; and I did not know it…how awesome is this place!
This is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.’
With the words of the promises ringing in his ears Jacob crossed the border of the Promised Land, and continued on his way towards Laban.
Now as he re-enters the Land, he is greeted by angels of God once more(32.1).
God was in exile with him in Laban's country.
That the narrative made quite clear.
But he is again in God's Territory, and he bumps into him again, as the man and the woman bumped into God in his Garden.
This time the encounter is hurried over.
It provides little more than a footnote to the account of the journey home.
It seems to us so extraordinary, yet the storyteller does not blink an eyelid.
Jacob sees  the angels, declares them a company of God's army, and calls the place of his vision Mahanaim.
That is all.
Has the company appeared to escort him the rest of the way?
Certainly it is not hostile to him, for he shows no fear.
At Bethel, the place of the vision of the stairway to heaven, God promised him that he would be with him, that he would keep him wherever he went, that he would bring him back to the Land, and would not leave him.
God kept his promise in Laban's country.
Jacob was keenly aware of that.
The vision of God's strength at Mahanaim would seem to come as timely reassurance of his protection in the dangers to come.
But if that is how Jacob reads the vision, then God is playing with him.
God is the trickster now.
It is true that Jacob will emerge more than just unscathed from the danger that fills his mind as he returns home.
Esau will pose no threat to him, but will come trailing clouds of forgiveness.
But he will meet with another danger on the road, one far greater than he could have imagined, and it will come from God himself.
If Jacob is reassured by the vision at Mahanaim, then the effects soon wear off.
Twenty years earlier he fled from an elder brother plotting to kill him.
He has no reason to suppose that Esau's feelings have changed.
He takes the precautions of sending messengers on ahead, to inform Esau of his return, and to ‘find favour’ in his sight.
The messengers are instructed to tell Esau of Jacob's many possessions, and so to make clear that by ‘favour’ Jacob does not mean material support.
It is not that that he needs, but forgiveness.
The precise terms of the message are significant.
Jacob calls Esau his ‘lord’, and himself his ‘servant’.
This is more than oriental courtesy.
It is too far removed from the contempt which he once showed his brother to be simply that.
Of course it could be merely the offspring of Jacob's fear.
It could be insincere, and betoken an attempt to flatter and manipulate the ‘stupid’ Esau.
Or else it could indicate genuine remorse, and, even more important, an acknowledgement of Esau's status as the elder brother.
It could suggest Jacob's willingness to hand Esau back his birthright.
The story gives us no clues at this stage.
We will have to wait and see.
There is no doubt at all, however, about Jacob's reaction when his messengers return.
Esau is coming to meet him with four hundred men.
That sounds like war, and Jacob assumes it is.
All assurance, all reassurance evaporates.
Jacob is ‘greatly afraid and distressed’.
He has male slaves with him, but they are no fighting force.
When eventually he meets Esau, there will be no mention of them, only of the women and children, and the servant girls.
Esau was designated  a man of war by the terms of Isaac's blessing: ‘By your sword you shall live’(27.40).
Jacob is in no position to fight him.
All he can do is resort to his native cunning and to prayer.
He divides his party and his flocks and herds into two, and plans to put one out of sight of the other.
‘If Esau comes to the one company and destroys it, then the company which is left will escape.’
Soon he will change those plans, and make them more elaborate.
His prayer is a cry for deliverance from his brother.
He addresses God as the God of Abraham and Isaac, the God who has commanded this return to the Land, and who has assured him with the words, ‘I will do you good.’
He addresses God as the God of the promises, both old and new.
He protests he is unworthy (and well he might!) of the love that God has shown him already.
‘I am too small for all the steadfast love’(that is a literal translation of the Hebrew, which is much more striking than our English versions)‘and all the faithfulness which thou hast shown to thy servant, for with only my staff I crossed this Jordan; and now I have become two companies.’
Thus he acknowledges the source of his prosperity, and claims to be unworthy of the deliverance for which he pleads.
He throws himself entirely on the divine generosity of which he has already had such rich experience.
‘Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau, for I fear him, lest he come and slay us all, the mothers with the children.’
There is no attempt to trick or deceive here.
Jacob speaks from the heart.
It is a fine prayer.
The irony of it is this: events will show that he has no need to pray for deliverance from Esau; he needs instead to pray for deliverance from God.
He now abandons the desperate plan of separating his company into two.
Instead he keeps his two wives, and their two maids, and the children with him, and divides the rest of the slaves and the animals into three parties!
These he sends ahead at intervals, having instructed the slaves what to say when Esau comes across them.
‘They belong to your servant Jacob; they are a present sent to my lord Esau; and moreover he is behind us.’
Together the presents will amount to over 550 animals.
They are gifts fit for a king, and so they are meant to be.
Jacob cannot approach Esau as a brother.
He can only approach him as a vassal might approach a great overlord, a rebellious vassal at that, who now repents his treachery and wishes to make amends.
The lengths to which he is prepared to go will become clear when he and Esau meet.
For the moment his subservience is emphasized by the repeated talk of ‘servant’ and ‘lord’.
If we cannot  guess Jacob's motives, the storyteller makes them plain: ‘I may appease him with the present that goes before me, and afterwards I shall see his face; perhaps he will accept me.’
The Hebrew is again much more colourful than the English.
More literally translated that verse runs like this: ‘I may cover his face with the present that goes before my face; and afterwards I shall see his face; perhaps he will lift up my face.’
By ‘covering Esau's face’ he means to hide from him his own guilt.
The ‘lifting up of the face’ speaks powerfully and movingly of reconciliation, more so than our grey ‘accept’ever can.
For good measure there is clearly a play on the word ‘face’.
The significance of that will become plain at the end of the next passage of the story, one of the strangest and one of the most profound in the entire Bible.
Wrestling with God
Some twenty-five miles north of the Dead Sea a wadi meets the river Jordan from the east, whose stream is called the Jabbok.
After the autumn and winter rains the stream becomes a raging torrent, flowing in places along a deep ravine.
Jacob has already sent the three droves for his brother on ahead.
Now he reaches the Jabbok, and during the night crosses the rest of his entourage over at a ford.
Presumably he has remained at the back to supervise the operation.
He is left alone in the dark.
Now it is his turn to cross.
We have been told nothing about the time of year, but for the purposes of the story we must assume that the rains have come, and the waters are high and fast, even though the women and children have got across safely enough.
So far on this journey, except for a moment at Mahanaim, we have been travelling through country we know or can imagine.
But at this point the story takes an abrupt turn, and takes us into territory that at first seems quite strange, beyond even our imagining, let alone our experience.
Without warning, without any provocation, Jacob is attacked, and ‘a man’ wrestles with him till the breaking of the day.
Since the early years of this century it has been recognized by scholars that this story had its origins in a tale about someone being attacked by the spirit or demon of the Jabbok, the embodiment of the great dangers involved in crossing the river at night after the rains.
It stems, therefore, from something primitive and far removed from almost everything else in the Old Testament, with the exception of an even stranger tale in Exodus 4.24–6.
Originally it  probably had nothing to do with Jacob, but was a local tale told in the region around the Jabbok which somehow found its way into his narrative.
It shares many features with other stories found among many peoples: a spirit or evil demon makes a sudden attack on a traveller at night; the traveller is quite unprepared, and the demon means to kill him; nevertheless, in the life and death struggle that ensues the traveller manages to get the upper hand, and before the dawn comes and robs the demon of its power, he extorts from it something of its supernatural strength.
Such ancient tales have left traces of themselves behind in fairy stories such as‘The Three Billy-goats Gruff.
The goats are attacked by a troll as they cross a river, and through their cunning and the brute strength of the biggest of them, overcome their assailant and complete the crossing to the lush pasture on the other side.
For a time this story of Jacob at the Jabbok runs true to plot.
His attacker is unnamed, mysterious.
He is simply ‘a man’.
That is a clever touch.
Knowing stories of hostile spirits as they did, the first hearers of the story would naturally, after gaining a few more of the details, have identified the assailant as the demon of the wadi.
The Jacob of the larger Genesis narrative, his mind full of the dangers of his coming encounter with Esau, and thinking that Esau is already on his way to attack him, must naturally assume at first that his attacker is his brother.
Both assumptions are wrong.
At this point the storyteller is playing the trickster.
The contest is an extraordinary feat of wrestling.
It lasts all night.
Truly it seems to belong to another world, one where contestants wrestle with supernatural strength and powers of endurance.
Yet one of the wrestlers is the all too human Jacob.
Perhaps the world we are in is the world of vision, the world of stairways to heaven, and companies of God's army.
Or perhaps the plot of a story like this demands such heroism from Jacob, never mind the unheroic qualities he has displayed before.
Certainly when Jacob appears to have his assailant in his power, it is precisely what we would expect.
The ‘man’, unable to get the better of Jacob, touches his thigh and puts his hip out of joint.
It is dark magic, such as a hostile demon might well display.
Yet still Jacob has him in his grip, and the mysterious assailant begs him to let him go ‘for the day is breaking’.
It was commonly believed that some evil spirits lost their strength in daylight.
The ‘man's’ plea is according to plot, as is Jacob's response, ‘I will not let you go, unless you bless me.’
The hero must extort something of the demon's power.
Jacob's demand for a blessing is only what we would expect, and yet it prepares us for the turning point in the story, which follows immediately afterwards, and takes us back into the clearer air of the larger narrative.
Genesis has spoken a great deal about blessing.
The first words spoken by God to creatures of his making in Genesis 1 were words of blessing.
The first words spoken by God to Abraham were loud with blessing.
The Jacob stories had their beginning in a struggle for blessing, and the power that blessing bestows.
It began in Rebekah's womb, continued over a bowl of lentil soup, and finished its first round beside the bed of the dying Isaac.
Isaac's blessing was endorsed and enlarged by God in the vision at Bethel.
Jacob's talk of blessing invites us to step out of the demon myth and fairy story, back into a land with which we have grown familiar, where human beings bump not into demons, but into God himself.
The assailant's answer to Jacob's demand represents the turning point in the contest, and in the story.
Instead of a blessing, he gives a question: ‘What is your name?’
Blessings cannot be extorted here, even though the dawn has not quite arrived.
For the first time in the contest since the initial attack, Jacob's adversary seizes the initiative.
Though still in Jacob's grip, he is not to be ordered about.
Yet in another respect the story would seem to be running still true to plot.
In many stories of contests such as these, each contestant struggles to learn the identity of the other.
He who has the name of the other will have him in his power.
All the more surprising then that Jacob should at once comply and give his name, but that is what he does.
The response of the attacker is, however, much more astonishing still: ‘Your name shall no more be called Jacob, but Israel, for you have striven with God’(or is it ‘gods’?)‘and with men, and have prevailed.’
(The name ‘Israel’ is here understood as coming from a rare Hebrew verb meaning ‘strive’or ‘exert oneself’.
In fact, we cannot be sure what it really means.)
There is a telling ambiguity in the Hebrew here, as if the attacker is playing with Jacob, and the storyteller with us.
The word translated ‘God’ is plural in form, and though in the vast majority of its occurrences in the Old Testament it means ‘God’, it can equally well mean ‘gods’, or ‘divine or supernatural beings’, including river demons and evil spirits of the night.
It could confirm, therefore, any suspicion we and Jacob may have that the wrestling match is with the demon of the Jabbok.
Alternatively, understood as ‘gods-and-men’ the phrase could simply be a figure of speech.
It occurs as that in Judges 9.9 and 13, and here it might indicate nothing more than the  all-embracing nature of the struggles which Jacob has engaged in during the course of his life.
It might signify hardly anything at all.
Yet with these same teasing words Jacob is given a new name, a new identity.
When he told his assailant his name, he told him that he was a deceiver, a cheat, one who outwits others and extorts blessings from them.
That is what the name Jacob means, as we have seen.
But he cannot extort blessings here.
He cannot be a trickster now.
Instead he must wear the name and identity of the future people of God, those who struggle with men and with God.
For surely in the end it must be God.
He it was who turned Abram into Abraham (17.5), and Sarai into Sarah (17.15), and who gave Isaac his name before he was born (17.19).
He it is with whom his people will indeed wrestle.
On the other side of the argument it is inconceivable that the ancestor of the people of God, and through him that nation itself, should receive their name from a local demon of an insignificant wadi.
It must be God.
Suspicion grows in Jacob's mind.
‘Tell me, I pray, your name,’ he asks.
Given what we now know, this is much more than the expected attempt to find out a demon's identity, though it sounds very like it.
Jacob is not dealing with a demon, and when the answer to his question comes, together with the dawn, he knows that himself for certain: ‘Why is it that you ask my name?’
And there he blessed him.
So Jacob called the name of the place Peniel,’(which means in Hebrew ‘The Face of God’)‘saying, ‘For I have seen God face to face, and yet my life is preserved.’’
‘The wrestling match is over, the assailant disappears, and the sun rises upon Jacob as he leaves Peniel, limping because of the injury to his hip.
The encounter at Bethel ended with words of blessing, with the coming of the dawn, and with recognition.
‘Then Jacob awoke from his sleep and said, ‘Surely the Lord is in this place; and I did not know it’(28.16).
The act of blessing and the dawn brought him then to his physical and spiritual senses.
So too now at Peniel.
The blessing at Bethel was given against all deserving.
So undeserving of it was Jacob, that we might have accused God then of arbitrary favour, worse, of siding with the oppressor instead of the oppressed, as once he seemed to side with Sarah and Abraham against Hagar and Ishmael.
But that is the way of God's blessing.
His generosity does not abide by our rules.
He throws his largesse to all and sundry.
His blessing always comes as a surprise, and can be recognized by its very ‘arbitrariness’ and seeming absurdity.
This abiding feature of  God's mischief got a certain Jesus of Nazareth into deep trouble, for he was that same generosity incarnate.
At Peniel the blessing runs true to form.
It is not given when it is demanded.
Generosity cannot be shown on demand, for then it is not generosity.
The blessing is given when Jacob, and we, the hearers of the story, least expect it.
Given like that it is instantly recognizable.
Now, at last, Jacob realizes the full extent of the danger he has been in all night.
‘I have seen God face to face, and yet my life is preserved.’
The words remind us of Hagar's cry, when she was first driven into the desert and rescued by God: ‘Have I really seen God and remained alive after seeing him?’
(16.13).
When dealing with the story of God's Garden, we remarked upon the danger which the ancient Israelites associated with holy things.
But if objects to do with God could be regarded as so dangerous, how much more God himself!
Even Moses, when he asked to see God's glory, was told, ‘You cannot see my face; for man shall not see me and live’(Exod.
33.20).
Jacob thought at first, perhaps, that he was wrestling with a brother intent on killing him and getting his revenge.
Next, surely, he must have thought he was up against a demon intent on destroying him for no reason at all.
In truth, as he now knows, he has been fighting with a God intent on blessing for a reason hidden in his deep purposes of redemption.
Well might he be bewildered, and go on his way limping.
In the next stage of his journey he will meet again with unexpected magnanimity.
Making sense of God for a second time
But we cannot move on to his meeting with Esau quite yet.
We must stop, as we stopped at the end of the story of the binding of Isaac, that other story about God bringing a bearer of his promises to the brink of death, and ask more about what has been going on.
We suggested with Genesis 22 that certain aspects of its theology could not be pushed very far, that theological caution had been sacrificed in the interests of storytelling.
That would seem to be the case here, where we must remember that the storyteller had as his raw material a tale about a demon far, far removed from the mainstream of Israel's talk about her God.
Yet we must be careful not to use these observations as an excuse to disregard those features of the story which do not immediately appeal, or which immediately appal.
If we do ignore them, we may find we have thrown the baby out with the bath water.
The notion of God attacking someone without provocation might well seem horrendous, and quite alien to any theology of the Cross.
It is not, however, entirely alien to religious experience.
The Old Testament bears frequent witness to Israel's sense of being under attack from her God, and being brought by him to the verge of extinction.
We Christians might want to interpret things differently, yet in his masterpiece, ‘The Wreck of the Deutschland’, the Jesuit nineteenth-century poet, Gerard Manley Hopkins, found himself writing these lines:
I did say yes
O at lightning and lashed rod;
Thou heardst me truer than tongue confess
Thy terror, O Christ, O God;
Thou knowest the walls, altar and hour and night:
The swoon of a heart that the sweep and the hurl of thee trod
Hard down with a horror of height:
And the midriff astrain with leaning of, laced with fire of stress.
Hopkins and Jacob would have understood one another.
Secondly, we might think it daring in the extreme, if not plain wrong, that the storyteller should represent God as being in Jacob's grip until nearly the end of the contest.
The picture of God at a man's mercy is surely one derived from the story's primitive origins, and no longer to be taken seriously.
But if that is our conclusion, then we miss perhaps the most profound contribution this story has to make to theology and to faith.
Are we not presented in the stories of Christ's passion and crucifixion with a picture of God at men's (and it is men's , not women's) mercy?
And since the blindness and brutality recorded in those accounts has in no wise disappeared from human society, have we not a crucified God still?
Tragically the story of God's wrestling match makes all too good sense, and a tale which bears so clearly the marks of its primitive beginnings can take us to the very summit of Calvary, and deep into the still broken heart of God.
A reunion and a parting
After the heroics of the binding of Isaac came comedy and a hero made into a fool.
After Peniel, when for a night Jacob also, so  unheroic hitherto, played a hero's part, we are given more subtle comedy and another hero brought down to earth.
Such is still the mischief and the sure grasp of reality of the compiler of Genesis.
But the account of the meeting of Esau and Jacob goes deeper than the story of the purchase of Sarah's burial plot.
There is pathos to be found in it in abundance, and images of love and great nobility of spirit.
It shows something of the best that human beings are capable of, and hints too of their tragic failure to grasp that best and hold on to it.
And it provokes disturbing theological questions.
One of the most remarkable things about the Peniel story is that the larger narrative proceeds almost entirely as if it was not there.
Even the new name of Israel is not used for some time (it reappears in 35.10 and thereafter in Genesis is used interchangeably with Jacob).
It is not enough to say that the compiler has inserted a story that once had a quite independent existence.
That is to explain why it is not picked up in the narrative, but it does not explore the more significant matter of the effect of what the compiler has done.
The immediate effect is marvellous irony.
The three droves sent on as presents to Esau have reached him, and now Esau and his four hundred men are within sight of Jacob and his little entourage.
Jacob divides his party into three groups, putting the slave women with their children in front, his wife Leah with her children next, and his favourite wife Rachel with her son Joseph last.
Then he goes forward, as he must, to meet Esau himself, ‘bowing himself to the ground seven times’ as he goes.
This is court ceremonial.
We commented earlier that his gifts for Esau were fit for a king, and such as a rebellious vassal might offer as a sign of his remorse and willingness to return to obedience.
His actions now speak the same language.
When God appeared to Abraham in the guise of three strangers in need of hospitality, Abraham greeted them by bowing himself to the ground once (18.2).
When two angels, again in disguise, met Lot in Sodom, he also welcomed them by bowing to the ground once (19.1).
Here, when Jacob meets his own brother, he meets him with all the courtly ceremony with which petty vassal princes used to greet their Pharaoh.
He, Jacob, who has wrestled with God all night and has more than survived the experience, now grovels before his brother!
It is comic.
The compiler rubs the nose of the hero of Peniel in the dust…seven times!
It is tragic, also.
Jacob's action betokens great fear, and declares louder than any words the rift that he feels must lie between him and Esau.
At the same time it has remorse about it and generosity of spirit.
Jacob's  ceremonies must surely express his subservience to his brother, as we thought his language of ‘lord’ and ‘servant’might possibly have done earlier.
No longer does he cling on to the status that he wrested from him with such arrogance and cruelty.
He hands Esau back his birthright, and soon he will make that clear in words, or, to be more precise, in a word.
But his elaborate ceremonies are also quite unnecessary, and quite misplaced.
Esau does not come for revenge, but out of love.
Showing none of the great dignity of a Pharaoh, he runs to meet Jacob, embraces him, falls on his neck and kisses him.
He does precisely what the father will do when his younger son returns in Jesus's parable of ‘The Prodigal Son’(indeed the whole of that parable finds its basis in the Jacob/Esau stories).
No wonder the brothers fall to weeping.
Reunion as charged with forgiveness as this must make for tears.
The women and children now catch up their master, and each group in turn bows down before Esau.
At least they do not perform Jacob's absurd  pantomine of prostrating themselves seven times.
They simply show the courtesy and respect demanded of them in such a society as theirs.
Nevertheless, their formality sits ill at ease with Esau's spontaneous show of love.
Jacob reveals by his first words to Esau that he belongs still to the world of their stiff courtesy, and not yet to that of his brother's gay abandon.
To Esau's asking who the women and children are, he replies, ‘The children whom God has graciously given your servant.’
Still ‘your servant’.
But if that disappoints us, the rest of his reply should not.
When Esau next asks him about the purpose of the three droves sent on ahead (it would appear that the slaves accompanying them have not passed on Jacob's message), Jacob answers, ‘To find favour in the sight of my lord.’
Still the disappointment of ‘my lord’, but that is balanced by a profound play on words.
The Hebrew word translated ‘graciously given’ in Jacob's first answer is hanan .
The word translated ‘favour’ in the second is hen .
The second word is the noun formed from the first word, the verb.
They speak of grace, compassion, forgiveness.
Jacob has discovered the grace, compassion and forgiveness of God.
His family are for him living proof of them.
Now he hopes to find the same favour in the eyes of his brother.
He is not let down.
Esau protests that he has no need of Jacob's gifts: ‘I have enough, my brother; keep what you have for yourself.’
This is a more generous protest even than it seems at first sight, for  Jacob's possessions include Esau's birthright, and Isaac's blessing that had been meant for him.
Esau may be rich and powerful (he has four hundred men with him after all), and undoubtedly he means just what he says.
But the extent of his magnanimity cannot fail to astonish, and indeed it is not lost on Jacob.
In pressing Esau further to accept his gifts, he declares, ‘…for truly to see your face is like seeing the face of God, so kindly have you received me.’
‘I have seen God face to face, and yet my life is preserved’ were his words at the start of the day.
Here and here only the storyteller glances back to the contest at Peniel.
That contest began with great fear, and ended with mercy never dreamed of before.
For Jacob reunion with his brother has begun and ended in the same way.
Now we, the readers of the narrative, know why the compiler put the story of Peniel exactly where he did, and have had another glimpse of his genius.
Jacob must insist that Esau receives his gifts, because of what they represent.
In case Esau has not yet got the message, he says to him, ‘Accept, I pray you, my gift that is brought to you,’ and he uses a new word for gift,berakah.
Berakah can indeed mean ‘gift’ or ‘present’, but its usual meaning is ‘blessing’.
It is the word we have heard so often in Genesis.
It is the word which came up time and again in the story of Jacob's tricking his dying father.
Now the truth is plain for all to see, including Esau.
Jacob was not expecting forgiveness from his brother.
Esau cannot have been expecting such remorse, such willingness to make amends from Jacob.
Such things cannot be scorned, and Esau is in no mood for scorn anyway.
He takes his blessing back.
The reconciliation is complete, or so Esau supposes.
But Jacob still does not belong to his world.
To Esau the reunion means they must now journey on together, but when he suggests it Jacob replies: ‘My lord knows that the children are frail, and that the flocks and herds giving suck are a care to me; and if they are overdriven for one day, all the flocks will die.
Let my lord pass on before his servant, and I will lead on slowly, according to the pace of the cattle which are before me and according to the pace of the children, until I come to my lord in Seir.’
Jacob was able to return the blessing he stole.
But it is not in his power to give back the blessings and the promises given by God.
The land of Canaan is promised to him and his descendants, but not to Esau.
Esau lives in the land of Seir to the south of the Dead Sea.
Jacob must follow the lead of the promises, and their ways must part.
He has no intention of following Esau to Seir, as he reveals when he leaves his brother and travels on towards the west.
His  courtesy demands that he is less than candid.
He cannot turn down Esau's suggestion flat.
He must pretend he means to catch him up.
Yet the terms of his pretence are heavy with tragedy.
His whole speech is still dictated by the formality with which he began.
Only his tears spoke of brotherly love.
For the rest he has persisted in wearing the guise of a vassal before his overlord.
Earlier we might have said his conduct and manner of speech were appropriate for one who wished to renounce the status he had stolen, and show his recognition of Esau's authority as the elder son.
But now that the truth is out on both sides, they are surely singularly out of place.
It is not just that he persists in the language of ‘lord’ and ‘servant, when Esau has called him ‘brother’, though that is significant enough.
The whole pretence about his future plans does not belong to relations between brothers, especially brothers who have just wept on each other 's shoulders, and who have shown each other such surprising willingness for reunion.
Furthermore, the excuses he makes smack of the old trickery.
Esau, with all the animals Jacob has given him, can hardly proceed at a mad gallop.
As for Jacob's animals, surely they will not die if they are driven too fast for one day.
His assertion is absurd.
Esau does not quibble.
He makes one final offer, to leave some of his men behind to escort Jacob and his party on their way.
This too is rejected: ‘What need is there?
Let me find favour in the sight of my lord.’
(as if he has not found favour enough already!)
This final courtesy also is utterly misplaced.
Esau has no further answer to make.
He goes on his way to Seir, and very nearly leaves the narrative altogether.
He will meet Jacob again, at Isaac's burial (35.29), and chapter 36 is devoted to him and to lists of his descendants.
That chapter notes briefly that he and Jacob agreed to part because the land would not support all their flocks and herds and allow them to live together.
This clearly originated as an independent account of their separation.
Still it is now part of the larger narrative, and read as that it suggests a period of peaceful coexistence before their final parting.
After that the narrative has time only for Jacob.
A scandal of particularity
But that is not the end of the story for Esau.
Genesis 36 reminds its readers that Esau was the ancestor of the Edomites.
For hundreds of years Israel and Edom were sworn enemies.
According to Kings, David waged a six-month campaign against Edom, in which he  attempted the slaughter of all adult males (1 Kings 11.15–17).
When Judah was devastated by the Babylonians at the start of the sixth century BCE, the Edomites shared with the Babylonians in the capture and looting of Jerusalem, handed survivors over to them, and caught many trying to escape (Obad.
10–14).
With many of Judah's people exiled to Babylonia, the Edomites took further advantage of the situation, moved into the southern part of the country, and established their own capital at Hebron.
Obadiah and Psalm 137 bear eloquent witness to the bitterness these actions caused.
The Edomites' new territory became known as Idumaea.
In the second century BCE Judas Maccabaeus led sorties into Idumaea in revenge for attacks on Jews, and later in the same century John Hyrcanus conquered the territory, and forced the Idumaeans to accept circumcision and obedience to the Jewish Law.
The Herods of Jesus' time and before were Idumaeans, and that accounts partly for why so many Jews despised and hated their rule.
As a result of all this Esau's name became blackened among the Jews.
He and Edom were synonymous.
Within the Old Testament itself we can see the beginnings of a move to exalt Jacob and damn his brother.
‘I have loved Jacob,’ says the God of Malachi (1.2–3; Malachi was probably written in the first half of the fifth century BCE), ‘but I have hated Esau.’
Beyond the Old Testament, in the second century BCE Book of Jubilees , Jacob is turned into a blameless, upright figure, and, dare we say it, an utter prig of a man, while Esau is a villain through and through.
The story of their reunion is hurried across.
Four hundred years later some rabbis even managed to turn Esau's running to meet his brother to his discredit.
According to them he did not kiss Jacob, but bit him on the neck!
The storytellers and the compiler of Genesis will have almost none of this.
Though some of the writing and most if not all the compilation were done not so long after the notorious events surrounding the capture of Jerusalem in 587 or 586, only in the little story of the bowl of lentil soup is Esau portrayed in a poor light.
In chapter 33 he is a noble figure of godlike magnanimity.
In chapter 27, when Jacob steals his blessing, the writer goes to great lengths, as we have indicated already, to evoke our sympathy for Esau, and to help us share his anguish.
He does nothing to hide or excuse Jacob's cruelty.
Yet a great difficulty, if not a scandal remains.
Some years ago Christian theologians coined the phrase ‘the scandal of particularity’ to refer to the apparent problems surrounding the identification of a  particular, historical individual with the Son of God.
We have a ‘scandal of particularity’ of a different kind in Genesis, the scandal of God's choosing one and not another.
When we were dealing with the blessings Jacob received at Bethel and at Peniel, we spoke of God throwing his largesse ‘to all and sundry’.
In truth that phrase does not quite fit the Jacob/Esau narratives.
The divine promises are made to Jacob and not to Esau.
Jacob is the one who with his descendants is destined for God's land, while Esau must turn aside for Seir.
Admittedly, it is not true to say that Esau is not blessed by God.
The wealth and power he clearly possesses by the time he is reunited with his brother would have been regarded by the writer and the first hearers of the story as clear signs of God's blessing.
Still it remains that there is no equivalent for Esau of the fine blessings received by Jacob at Bethel and Peniel.
Beside the bed of the dying Isaac Esau was excluded, denied, humiliated.
By the time he leaves the narrative the humiliation has gone, but the exclusion remains.
He remains a bystander on the edge of God's purposes, and one who has suffered grievously that those purposes might go forward.
Ironically those same purposes include, as we have seen, the recreation of a world where such exclusion is not to be found, but instead there is harmony, joy, and a universal sense of belonging and being at home.
At the beginning of Genesis that was well understood.
With the Jacob/Esau narratives we begin to see it being lost sight of, though the descriptions of Jacob's cruelty and deceitfulness, and the contrast made with Esau's generosity, make us think the compiler was protesting against the direction in which his material was leading him.
As the narrative proceeds beyond Genesis, and becomes enmeshed in the story of the fortunes not of Israel the patriarch, but of Israel the people of God, it will prove much harder for the writers and compilers to keep the original purposes in view.
At times they will get trampled into the ground.
We will see that happen on the site of Jericho in our fifth chapter.
In the end it will need the writer of Jonah to recall the great truth which his people found, and which the Church still finds so hard to grasp, namely that God does indeed throw his largesse to all and sundry.
TWO GIFTS OF MANNA AND QUAILS.
Why does Sinai make such a difference?
(Exodus 16, Numbers 11)
Matters of life and death: the passages compared
Our approach in this chapter must be rather different.
In each chapter so far the passages chosen for detailed comment have been consecutive.
We have been concerned with how one leads into the other, or how the second strikes sparks off the first.
Here our passages are widely separated from one another, yet parallel each other .
Our task will be one of comparing and contrasting them.
In the last two chapters we took some time to reach the chosen texts.
This time, after setting the passages in their context in the briefest possible way, we will turn to them straight away.
Our discoveries about their similarities and differences will lead us to examine other passages in Exodus and Numbers, and our desire to explain certain features of all these texts will then encourage us to look at the positions they occupy in the larger narrative, and so discuss their contexts in greater detail.
Thus we will arrive at the context from the passages rather than the passages from the context.
Though Abraham receives the promise of the land of Canaan in Genesis 12 and, by God's terms, takes possession of it in the next chapter, his descendants do not enter it as a people until the book of Joshua, and the business of conquest is not finished till David is  secure on the throne half-way through the second Book of Samuel.
In between promise and entry lie not only the stories of Isaac and Jacob, but the long story of Joseph and the other sons of Jacob, a period of 430 years spent in Egypt by their descendants, most of it in slave labour, a dramatic escape from the Pharaoh and his army, and forty years of wandering or living in the wilderness of the Sinai peninsula.
Exodus 16 and Numbers 11 both belong to that last stage of the wilderness.
They belong to a point (if three-and-a-half books can be called a point, for it lasts from half-way through Exodus to the end of Deuteronomy) of great tension in the narrative.
The promise to Abraham of a son has been fulfilled; his descendants have indeed become multiplied ‘as the stars of heaven and as the sand which is on the sea shore’(Gen 22.17).
Now we await the entry into the Promised Land, the turning of the people into an independent nation of some renown (you will remember that was the vision implied by the terms of the promises made at the start of Genesis 12), and their becoming a source of blessing for ‘all the families of the earth’.
Our chosen passages speak of the time between fulfilment and fulfilment.
In more senses than one they belong to no man's land.
In order to compare them more easily, we will set them out side by side, using the text of the RSV.
There is one complication.
Numbers 11 is a conflation of two stories which in Exodus are treated quite separately.
The story of the manna and the quails is combined with an account of Moses sharing some of his power and his duties with seventy of the elders of the people.
The second story does not find its parallel in Exodus till chapter 18.
We cannot simply remove it from Numbers 11 and put it aside, for it has been too closely intertwined with the giving of manna and quails.
Nor would we wish to ignore it if we could, for its relation to its counterpart in Exodus is both interesting and significant.
We have therefore appended the text of the relevant part of Exodus 18 to that of chapter 16.
Both passages begin with need and with complaint.
The need is real, or certainly felt to be real, and the complaints are understandable.
The desert of the Sinai peninsula as it is painted in the narrative is a harsh place.
Some know how to live in such deserts, and meet their terrible demands.
They know because they have always lived in deserts, and their parents and grandparents before them.
The desert was new to Israel.
Furthermore, they had come into it straight from slavery.
They had been born into slavery, and their parents and grandparents before them.
They were not used to exercising responsibility for themselves.
They were used to obeying orders.
If their bodies had not been quite crushed to death by the labours they had been forced to perform for their Egyptian taskmasters, then surely their spirits had been.
Those who have tried it know how hard it is to liberate the oppressed.
Subservience becomes a habit, and to step outside it is indeed a going out into the unknown, a going into a wilderness, where there are no clear paths forward, where life is precarious, and survival itself uncertain.
Yet in both passages the complaints are clearly meant to be regarded as reprehensible.
It would seem hard to know where the greater fault is to be found.
In Exodus the people's need is extreme.
They see themselves faced with starvation.
They have nothing at all to eat.
In Numbers starvation is not the problem, but monotony of diet.
The manna has already been given.
They have their regular supply.
But they have nothing else.
The taste of manna has gone sour on them.
The complaints in Numbers would seem less justifiable than those in Exodus.
Yet the terms of the complaints in Exodus are terrible.
The chapters preceding this one tell of the Passover and the miracle at the Reed Sea.
They tell of how God killed in a night all the firstborn sons of the Egyptians, and spared those of his own people.
They tell of how the Israelites were caught between the Reed Sea and the pursuing Egyptian army, and how God drove the Egyptians into the sea to drown, while leading his people across to safety.
I will sing to the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously;
the horse and the rider he has thrown into the sea.
The Lord is my strength and my song,
and he has become my salvation;
this is my God, and I will praise him,
my father's God, and I will exalt him.
(Exod.
15.1–2)
That is how the people began their great song of triumph after the crossing of the sea.
The event went down in their traditions as the greatest act of salvation ever performed by their God on their behalf.
It came to occupy the seat of highest honour in their gospel.
But here they are, at the start of chapter 16, wishing aloud that God had not passed them by on that dreadful night in Egypt,accusing Moses, accusing Moses , of bringing them into the desert to die!
The grand symphony of the song has turned so quickly into a raucous and bitter cacophony, drowning all sound of the truth.
They rub salt into God's wounds by romanticizing about the past.
The story does not tell us what the Israelites had to eat in Egypt, but it gives our imaginations enough information to work on.
We hear of forced and hard labour, of beatings and groanings, of attempts to have all male children born to the slave women put to death at birth, of the screw being given yet another turn and the people being worked to near-exhaustion.
It is a tale of naked oppression, and there are many in the world who still recognize it as their own.
We hear also of a series of disasters visited by God on the country, in order to force the Egyptians' hands.
In passages written not without humour, though theirs is the blackest of black comedy, we read of the water of the Nile turned to blood, of plagues of frogs, gnats, flies, and locusts, of the domestic animals of the Egyptians dying of disease, of a terrible outbreak of boils, of death-dealing hailstorms, and an awesome and fearful darkness.
All this, and then the killing of the Egyptian firstborn.
Sometimes it is made plain that the Israelites were not directly affected by these disasters, but we have to say that this particular Egypt hardly sounds the sort of place to romanticize about!
The Israelites' complaints are shocking, and ridiculous.
In Numbers 11 we find the same looking back to Egypt through rose-coloured spectacles.
Beyond that very little.
Only the longing for meat (some commentators have called it a lust, but the Hebrew does not pass that judgement), the claim that their appetite is gone, or their throats are dry, or, as the RSV has it, their strength is dried up (the Hebrew will sustain all those translations), and an unspecified  complaining about their misfortunes.
Admittedly, this last complaint, made at the very start of the chapter, is harsher than it sounds.
In 10.29 Moses invited his father-in-law to accompany them on their journeyings with the words, ‘…come with us, and we will do you good; for the Lord has promised good to Israel.’
The word used for ‘misfortunes’ in 11.1 is the usual Hebrew term for evil.
In such a context it speaks plainly of the blindness of the people, and their preoccupation with the needs of the moment.
While Moses looks forward to the ‘good’ to come, their minds are fixed on the ‘evil’of the present.
If we try to weigh up the two sets of complaints, bearing in mind the greater need of the people in the Exodus passage, we might say that honours, or dishonours, are about even.
But there is no comparing the ways in which God responds.
In Exodus 16 God replies with gifts designed to meet the people's need with beautiful precision, to convince them of his compassion and his desire and power to save, and to remind them of his glory.
Quails are mentioned at one point, but this story is otherwise concerned with the gift of manna.
Some commentators get so excited about identifying the stuff with an excretion of insects living on twigs of the tamarisk, that they do not have time for much else.
But that is a pity, for then they do not see the wood for the trees.
The gift of manna in Exodus 16 is pure miracle.
Its timely arrival is not the only thing to make that clear, of course.
When the Israelites go out to gather it, each of them gathers exactly the right amount for himself and his family; on the sixth day of the week a double portion is given and collected so that the sabbath rest can be properly kept; on the sabbath, appropriately, no manna appears at all; while any kept at the end of any of the first five days goes bad overnight, the half of the sixth day's gathering put aside for the sabbath keeps perfectly fresh.
This bountiful God has thought of everything!
No wonder they place some of it in a jar to be kept as one of their holiest objects, a sign for future generations of the extent of God's grace (no doubt that manna will remain fresh for ever: yet more miracle!).
Understandably, the extent of the miracle takes some time to penetrate the minds of some of the Israelite people.
Some try to keep some manna overnight early in the week.
Others go in a vain search for it on the sabbath.
They try to manage for themselves something that cannot be managed, but needs only to be accepted with proper gratitude and clear insight into the nature of the giver.
Their lack of  faith is met with Moses' anger and then with God's exasperation, but nothing more.
The offenders are not punished.
The futility of their efforts is deemed to be enough to teach them the lessons they need to learn.
In Numbers 11 things are very different.
It is almost as if we are dealing with quite another God.
In Exodus God's ‘hearing’ his people's complaints meant salvation and life.
Now it means death.
First the fire of God's anger burns so fiercely among them, that parts of the camp are destroyed (again we must not try to rationalize these events: they are meant to be seen as miraculous, and whatever we think of such miracle, we must accept the terms in which the story is written).
Secondly, at the end of the story he engineers a fall of quails that drives the people mad with greed, and turns quickly to plague in their mouths.
In Exodus the quails were mentioned only in passing.
Here the storyteller gives them his full attention.
We need to pay heed to the way he writes, for some commentators would lead us far astray.
Some of them hardly bat an eyelid, but explain that quails do migrate over the Sinai peninsula, and that they often settle on the ground in large numbers and can be caught very easily.
One might go on in that vein to explain that occasional ‘wrecks’ of birds occur (to use the ornithologists' term), where huge numbers of birds are driven off course by a storm, and end up scattered over the land in an exhausted state.
But such rationalizing simply will not do here.
According to the story the fallen quails create a pile round the camp many, many miles in diameter, and three feet deep!
Never was a wreck seen like that!
Other commentators, much more discomfited by these details than their colleagues, have suggested that the storyteller means the birds were flying three feet above the ground when they were caught!
The New English Bible and its second edition, the Revised English Bible, even introduce ‘flying’ into their translations.
Such silliness, and tampering with the text, will not do either (suffice it to say the word ‘flying’ nowhere appears in the Hebrew).
The fact is that we have entered here upon the theatre of the absurd, as well as the stage of the miraculous.
The fall of birds is meant to be seen as quite ridiculous and wholly supernatural in its proportions.
There is a vast humour in the storytelling, though it is of the most grim kind.
What is truly disconcerting about the story is the result of the fall, and the divine purpose behind it.
A fox in a  chicken run, faced with such an unnaturally generous supply of food, will release its instinct to kill until all the birds are dead, and it has far more than it can possibly cope with.
The Israelites in Numbers 11 are like foxes in God's chicken run.
They collect the quails for two days and a night!
They cannot begin to know what they are doing.
A sinister impulse to collect and to eat has taken them over.
But foxes in chicken runs get shot, and now the Israelites get the plague.
What might have seemed a revelation of God's extraordinary generosity has turned out to be another expression of his terrible anger.
Our laughter at the fall of birds becomes rotten in our mouths, and dies in our throats.
Numbers 11 ends with a fearful seriousness.
The way the storyteller handles Moses' power-sharing in that chapter is consonant with the rest.
In the parallel account in Exodus 18, Moses is prompted to act by his father-in-law's concern for his welfare.
There is no complaining anywhere, just sensitivity, a proper solicitude, and a suggestion whose good sense is immediately seen, and which is efficiently acted upon.
In Numbers the plan of the seventy elders arises as a response to a bitterness in Moses that matches the anger of his God.
Driven to despair by the people's weeping he begins to accuse God of laying impossible burdens upon him.
‘Am I the mother and the nursemaid of all this people?’ he asks.
Like Cain's terrible question, ‘Am I my brother's keeper?’
Moses' words conceal an accusation, as the emphatic ‘I’ of the Hebrew again makes clear.
Surely it is God, Moses implies, who is their mother and nurse, and as such he, or rather she, must provide food for her people.
But Moses does not show much faith in God's willingness to fulfil her duties, and sees death as the only way to find release from his burdens.
The wholly negative tone of the passage is only what we might expect from the rest of the chapter.
More hopeful, in part, is God's response to Moses.
He himself comes up with the plan of delegation, and he empowers the seventy elders for their tasks once they are chosen.
Against Moses' expectations he also takes on the task of feeding his people.
But at that point hope is cruelly dashed, for the food he supplies is that terrible mound of quails.
There is in the end very little to rejoice over in this chapter.
Salvation or destruction: further passages explored
Exodus 16 and Numbers 11 belong to two series of passages which are concerned with God's response to complaints of the people  during their years in the wilderness.
Of those texts only two, from Exodus 17 and Numbers 20, parallel one another closely in the way that Exodus 16 and Numbers 11 do, but the two series still invite comparison with one another, and that comparison once made produces some highly significant results.
The Exodus series begins on the shore of the Reed Sea.
Faced by water in front and Egyptian troops advancing behind, the Israelites panic.
‘Is it because there are no graves in Egypt that you have taken us away to die in the wilderness?
What have you done to us, in bringing us out of Egypt?
Is not this what we said to you in Egypt, ‘Let us alone and let us serve the Egyptians’?
For it would have been better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die in the wilderness.’
(Exod.
14.11–12).
Again they ignore God's responsibility for their escape, and make their liberation grounds for accusation.
Again we see how far the full process of liberation has yet to run.
Against their poverty stands the rich faith of Moses.
‘Fear not,’ he says, ‘stand firm, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will work for you today.’
More than any of the other major characters in the great story from Genesis to Kings Moses has a tendency to know what he is talking about.
The grim game of salvation is indeed played out before them.
The account of the events at the sea is made up of two versions, quite distinct from one another, but cleverly intertwined.
According to one of them God drives back the waters of the sea by a strong east wind, and causes a mysterious panic in the Egyptian camp.
Their army flees on to the exposed sea bed, and there gets bogged down.
God then makes the wind drop and the waters return, and the entire Egyptian force is drowned.
This version says nothing about the Israelites making a crossing.
Instead they stand on the shore and watch as their enemies are destroyed.
The other version, thanks partly to Hollywood, is the more familiar of the two.
Here the waters are split and piled up either side of a pathway across the sea bed.
The Israelites take this path and complete the crossing safely, but when the Egyptians pursue them along it, the walls of water collapse and drown them.
Again, if we are faithful to the terms of the story, we will refrain from any attempt to provide rational explanations of these events.
They are to be regarded as pure miracle, those of the first version as much as those of the second, although it is true that the miracle is heightened in that second account.
After the victory at the sea the triumph song, but hardly have the  last notes escaped Israel's lips than we come to the second story of complaint (15.22–7).
Three days' journey on into the desert are hurried over in a verse, and then the people run out of water.
They find some, but it is not fit to drink.
So they ‘murmur’ against Moses (the same word is used in chapter 16 and Numbers 11) and ask, ‘What shall we drink?’
Moses appeals to God, who shows him a shrub growing at the spot.
He throws it into the water, and that immediately becomes sweet.
So the people's thirst is slaked.
That is almost all.
The tale is told with the utmost economy, as if nothing unusual was taking place.
But God goes on to speak to his people of the need for obedience.
If it is forthcoming, he will protect them from the terrible plagues with which he afflicted the Egyptians before their escape.
‘…for I am the Lord,’ he says, ‘your healer.’
Thus this demanding people are reminded of the demands made of them, and given more than a hint of how terrible the consequences will be, if those demands are not met.
But God does not remonstrate with them.
The dominant tone of his speech is not threatening.
His business is that of caring, blessing, saving.
When they reach their next stopping place, they find not one but twelve springs of fresh water, one for each of their tribes.
God is indeed their healer.
There can be no doubting it.
But the people do doubt it.
Immediately after this story comes that of the giving of the manna, and immediately after that another concerning their complaining about a lack of water (17.1–7).
They have moved on from Elim, the oasis of the twelve springs, and have camped at a place called Rephidim.
There is no water at all to be seen, but this time, instead of the question, ‘What shall we drink?’, they issue Moses with an abrupt command: ‘Give us water to drink.’
Now they do not simply murmur against him, they quarrel noisily with him.
Moses does not turn at once to God, their healer, but enters into the quarrel.
‘Why do you find fault with me?’ he asks, ‘Why do you put the Lord to the proof?’
His questions reveal to the people the significance of their complaint.
It amounts to a lack of faith in a God who has done more than they could have dreamed of to demonstrate his own faithfulness.
They are in this wilderness with God, and there is no need to fear.
But the people take no notice, and instead turn again to accusation: ‘Why did you bring us up out of Egypt, to kill us and our children and our cattle with thirst?’
We have heard this before, of course, and so has Moses.
At this point he does turn to God, but only to show him that he is at his wits' end, and to express his fear.
‘What shall I do with this people?
They are  almost ready to stone me.’
The scene by now is an ugly one.
Things here are far worse than in the previous three chapters.
Yet still God wears the dress of healer.
He tells the despairing Moses to strike a rock with his rod, and water will stream forth from it for the people to drink.
Another miracle of salvation occurs.
Numbers 11 begins the second series of wilderness complaint stories.
These are more spaced out than the ones in Exodus, and the next one does not appear till chapter 14.
By this time they are approaching the borders of the Promised Land, and minds have turned to plans for invasion.
Chapter 13 records the sending of spies into the country, to discover how well defended it is.
It tells how they returned bearing a huge bunch of grapes, and with reports of a land ‘flowing with milk and honey’, just as God had promised.
But they also brought reports of strong, fortified cities, and inhabitants as big as giants, and these, as chapter 14 now makes clear, make more impact on the people than the assurances of fertility.
‘Would that we had died in the land of Egypt!’
The old cry, familiar to us from the Exodus stories, now goes up again.
‘Or would that we had died in this wilderness!
Why does the Lord bring us into this land, to fall by the sword?’
(At least they acknowledge God's part in things.)
‘Our wives and our little ones will become a prey; would it not be better for us to go back to Egypt?
…
Let us choose a captain, and go back to Egypt.’
As on the shore of the Reed Sea, they see themselves facing defeat and extermination in battle.
On that occasion Moses urged them not to be afraid, and God responded immediately by ordering the preparations for his great act of salvation.
‘Why do you cry to me?
Tell the people of Israel to go forward.’
Those were his opening words to Moses then.
In Numbers 14 we have a similar pattern.
First Joshua and Caleb, two of those sent as spies into Canaan, try to persuade the people to trust in God's protection and to have no fear.
After that comes the divine response, but this time not before the people reject Joshua's and Caleb's assurances, and threaten to stone them.
When God speaks, his words are devastating.
‘How long will this people despise me?
And how long will they not believe in me, in spite of all the signs which I have wrought among them?
I will strike them with pestilence and disinherit them, and I will make of you’(that is Moses)‘a nation greater and mightier than they.’
Thus the promises to Abraham are declared null and void.
The great experiment in redemption that began back in Genesis 12 has failed.
God has finally lost all patience and all hope.
He began with the man and the woman in the Garden.
He began again with Noah.
He began a third time with Abraham and the miracle of his son Isaac.
Now he means to wipe out his people, as he destroyed his creation in the Flood, and start all over again with Moses.
It is a fearful moment in the narrative.
But against the poverty of God's hope stands again the faith of Moses.
He intercedes on behalf of the people, and he wins some pardon from God.
It may, at first sight, not seem a great deal, but in truth it is almost everything.
The generation which came out of Egypt will die in the wilderness, but their children, and Joshua and Caleb, will enter the Promised Land.
There will after all be no fourth beginning.
The ancient promises still stand.
God remains  commited for good or for ill to his people.
Yet God's pardon does not mean we can put memories of the Flood out of our minds.
The people being addressed by this fearful God will die in the desert, all of them except only for Joshua and Caleb.
For the rest of them the promises have turned out to be empty.
They expressed a wish to die in the wilderness; they shall have what they asked for.
Twice in the account they hear the terrible words, ‘…your dead bodies shall fall in the wilderness.’
They are told that their children will have to endure years of wandering in the wilderness, suffering because of the faithlessness of their parents, until, God tells them, ‘…the last of your dead bodies lies in the wilderness’.
‘…
You shall bear your iniquity,’ he continues, ‘forty years, and you shall know my displeasure.’
He concludes with a formal oath: ‘I, the Lord, have spoken; surely this will I do to all this wicked congregation that are gathered together against me: in this wilderness they shall come to a full end, and there they shall die.’
We could not wish for greater clarity.
Moses has managed to change God's mind.
God has relented.
There is some pardon to be had, and hope for the future.
But for the moment there is no act of salvation like that at the Sea.
For the moment all the talk, such clear, unambiguous talk, is of suffering and of death.
Moses snatches God's plans of redemption from the fire of his anger, but he does not put out the flames.
as if to prove that he is in earnest, God immediately afflicts the spies who had caused such panic among the people with the plague.
Joshua and Caleb are spared, of course.
The rest die on the spot.
as if to demonstrate his terrible seriousness, he orders the people to set out the next day ‘…for the wilderness by the way to the Reed Sea’.
From the borders of the Land of Promise they must go back almost  to where they came from.
They said it would be better to go back to Egypt.
They shall very nearly have what they asked for.
But just as the people in Exodus 16, when first given the manna, found it hard to come to terms with God's meticulous generosity, so now they are blinded by the clarity of God's judgement.
They only hear half of what God has been saying.
They recognize their lack of trust in God's promises.
They acknowledge their sin in heeding the warnings and the wild stories of the majority of the spies.
But they are deaf to the rest.
The promises no longer have any substance for them, but that appalling fact has not penetrated their minds.
They turn not to the Reed Sea, but back to plans for invasion.
Again like some in Exodus 16 they try to manage things for themselves.
The result is inevitable, but this time much more tragic.
They enter Canaan without Moses and without their God.
They are defeated, and those who can, turn to flight.
It is the final twist in the story of this chapter.
It could hardly be further removed from the conclusion to the story of the Reed Sea.
Things are bad enough in Numbers 14.
If anything they are worse in chapter 16.
Near the start of chapter 14 the people spoke of choosing another leader and going back to Egypt.
Now rebel leaders appear on the scene and can be named.
The chapter is somewhat confusing, for it is a conflation of at least two accounts concerning one rebellion led by Korah the son of Izhar, and another led by Dathan and Abiram.
The difficulties and many of the details need not concern us.
It will be sufficient for our purposes to point to a few of the features of the chapter as we have it.
It does not begin as a story of the complaining of the people like the others we have looked at so far.
It only becomes that towards the end.
It starts as a struggle for power, and a challenge to Moses' authority.
Korah sets up an alternative people of God (the Hebrew term translated ‘company’ in the RSV in verse 5 and beyond is the same as ‘congregation’in verse 2 and elsewhere, which is used to refer to Israel as a whole).
He puts himself forward as its leader.
Dathan and Abiram for their part reject Moses' leadership and reproach him with these words: ‘Is it a small thing that you have brought us up out of a land flowing with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness, that you must also make yourself a prince over us?’
It is part of the great skill of the storytellers and the compilers of this material that they repeat events or speeches, but with subtle changes that give the larger narrative not just variety, but tension and further layers of meaning.
Dathan's and Abiram's words recall the  complaints of the people in three of the Exodus stories and in Numbers 14.
But never before has Moses been accused of lording it over the people (some words of Korah in verse 3 of this same chapter come close to such a charge) and never before has Egypt been called ‘a land flowing with milk and honey’.
That description is the one consistently applied by God and Moses to the Promised Land.
To apply it to Egypt is to stand the truth on its head, to call bondage freedom, and despair hope.
It is to mock the purposes of God.
Shocking though that is, it is not as surprising as God's reaction.
He threatens to destroy at one stroke the whole congregation of the people, with the exception only of Moses and his brother Aaron.
Their pleading averts such a complete disaster, and succeeds in focusing God's punishment on those who are guilty of the rebellion.
Yet that punishment is certainly terrifying enough.
As Korah, Dathan and Abiram stand defiantly at the doors of their tents with their wives and children, the ground opens beneath them and swallows them up, together with the tents and all their belongings.
The chasm then closes up of its own accord.
There is nothing to be seen on the spot but bare earth.
It is as if those families had never been.
Those who first heard this story would have understood well enough that if the rebel leaders were to be punished, then the other members of their families might have to suffer with them.
Their notions of the family as an inseparable unit would have seen to that.
But such dramatic descent to Sheol, the land of the dead they believed to be beneath the earth, could not in any way be expected, and in the story it causes panic.
Even as the people run away in terror, the fire of God's anger, which destroyed parts of the camp in Numbers 11, now consumes the 250 men who had been the closest supporters of Korah in his bid for power.
Still this appalling tale is not at an end.
The next day the people ‘murmur’ against Moses and Aaron.
We are back in the mould of the familiar complaint story.
This time their complaint is brief: ‘You have killed the people of the Lord.
It is a striking charge.
For one thing it overlooks God's clear part in the extraordinary events that they witnessed the previous day.
For another it implies their agreement with Korah that he and his followers were indeed the true people of God.
Thus it shouts their spiritual blindness, and whispers darkly of their own rebelliousness.
But that is again not enough to explain God's reaction.
Just as he did earlier in the chapter, he warns Moses and Aaron to ‘Get away from the midst of this congregation, that I may consume them in a moment.’
Moses and Aaron bravely do  not do as they are told, but this time they cannot save the body of the people from disaster.
A sudden and miraculous plague breaks out in the camp, and though Aaron, as priest, runs into the midst of the people with ritual of atonement, he cannot stop the pestilence before 14,700 lie dead.
Mercifully, the remaining two complaint stories of the Numbers series are much shorter.
The second of them in 21.4–9 recalls in its words of complaint the stories of Exodus 16 and 17 in particular, and also Numbers 11: ‘Why have you brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness?
For there is no food and no water, and we loathe this worthless food.’
It is sometimes said that only the Exodus complaint stories and the one in Numbers 20, which we will come to in a moment, deal with matters of life and death.
That is not the case.
In Numbers 11 certainly the people do not appear to be faced with starvation.
But in chapter 16 Dathan and Abiram make clear that they see only the prospect of eventual death in the wilderness if Moses continues as their leader, and in chapter 14 death in battle seems only too imminent.
Here, though it is not true that they have no food, for they still have their daily supplies of the ‘worthless’ manna, they remain without water, and, manna or no manna, death would seem to stare them in the face.
Yet how does God react but by making the desert alive with poisonous snakes!
The people's confession and Moses' intercession then result in a God-given means of protection from the effect of the venom.
But not before yet again many of the people have died.
There is no mention in the story of the giving of water, or of food beyond the manna.
The snakes and the tardy remedy make up the entirety of God's response.
The penultimate story of the series (20.2–1 3) would seem to be the only one to break the pattern.
It is a close parallel of the complaint story of Exodus 17.
Even the place, Meribah, is the same.
(Rephidim came to be renamed Massah and Meribah in the Exodus story).
The people are more expansive in their complaining, but their words merely combine elements by now all too familiar.
Only their opening wish is new: ‘Would that we had died when our brethren died before the Lord!’
That is a reference back to the events of chapter 16, and strange though it is, it is no more extraordinary than their wish in Exodus 16 that they had been killed together with the Egyptians at the time of the Passover.
At least this time they do not threaten to stone Moses as they did in Exodus 17.
It is not the people who break the pattern of the Numbers stories, but God, for he responds almost exactly as he did at Meribah before.
We have got  so used to untold wrath and destruction, but now God again brings water gushing from the rock, and the people are saved.
But alas, that is not the whole story.
Moses is told by God to take his rod and he and Aaron are to address the rock, commanding it to give up its water.
We hear of Moses addressing the people instead: ‘Hear now, you rebels; shall we bring forth water for you out of this rock?’
Then he strikes the rock with his rod, as he did in Exodus, and the water pours forth.
Now comes the sting in the story's tail.
God speaks to Moses again and to Aaron: ‘Because you did not believe in me, to sanctify me in the eyes of the people of Israel, therefore you shall not bring this assembly into the land which I have given them.’
It is another devastating speech, and it comes out of the blue.
Admittedly Numbers 14 made no mention of Moses and Aaron entering the Land, but talked only of Caleb and Joshua.
But nothing has prepared us for this divine outburst.
It is indeed not wholly clear from the passage where Moses' and Aaron's fault lies.
One can only think it is to do with their not addressing the rock.
That is the one thing they are commanded to do together (in the Hebrew the verb of verse 8's ‘tell the rock’ is in the plural) which the story does not mention their performing.
The terms of God's condemnation encourage us also to interpret Moses' address to the people as a cynical expression of a lack of trust in God's power to provide the water, and to suppose that Aaron tacitly shared his disbelief.
It is possible, too, that in striking the rock as he was told to do in Exodus 17 Moses this time has further infringed the divine command, though nothing was said explicitly about him not using his rod in that way.
When all is said and done, the passage is barely understandable.
One suspects that somewhere along the line of the story's forming there has been some attempt to draw a veil over the proceedings, and to protect the reputation particularly of the great Moses.
Four other passages in the Old Testament refer to these events, and there are hints in two of them of something more serious than we seem to have here.
Numbers 20 itself looks back in verse 24, and talks of Moses and Aaron rebelling against God's command, and 27.14 uses much the same terms.
Those do not get us much further.
but Psalm 106.33 says, ‘…for they’(that is the people)‘made his spirit bitter, and he spoke words that were rash’(the verse does not mention Aaron), while most significantly of all Deuteronomy 32.5 1 speaks of Moses and Aaron ‘breaking faith’ with God in the midst of the people, and of their ‘not revering him as holy’.
Whatever the truth of this particular matter, one thing is plain.
The primary concern of the story in Numbers 20 is not with God's supplying the water, but with Moses' and Aaron's disobedience or lack of faith, and their being barred from entering the Promised Land.
The story is not primarily about salvation, but about severe judgement, and it ends in tragedy, in hopes dashed most cruelly to smithereens.
The pattern of the Numbers series is dented, but not broken.
Sinai: an attempt at an explanation
The question that now clamours for an answer is clear: why in the Exodus complaint stories does God immediately respond by performing miracles of salvation, while in the Numbers stories he replies with miracles of devastating destruction, or, in the case of Numbers 20, with salvation overshadowed by terrible condemnation?
The solution does not lie either with the terms of the complaints made, or with the nature of the people's needs.
That, we hope, has become established already.
Indeed, we would assert most emphatically that there is nothing within the stories themselves to explain any change in the divine response, let alone a change as complete and as dramatic as the two series report.
If there is an answer, then it must lie outside the stories, and in particular in the material that occurs between Exodus 17 and Numbers 11.
Before we turn to that material we must look at the course the narrative has taken since the beginning of Genesis, reminding ourselves yet again of familiar events, and skimming through areas we have not looked at so far.
It moved from hope as high as heaven and a garden bright with love through unutterable sadness, loss, and then violence, to the return to Chaos in the Flood.
Noah's family so quickly spoiled the new creation that God then made, and after Babel God began a third time with the calling of Abraham.
Several times Abraham brought the purposes of God to the edge of extinction, Isaac's birth introduced yet further tragedy and the keenest disappointment, while how God's promises survived Jacob's cruelty and trickery we shall never know.
Between them those three patriarchs displayed all the characteristics which brought God such despair in the earlier stages of the story.
Certainly they instituted a new era of divine patience and forgiveness.
With Joseph, however, things took eventually a turn for the better.
We have said nothing so far about the Joseph story, and we  have no space here to go into any detail.
We can only say a little about how that story ended.
It ended with brothers reconciled.
Though earlier Joseph's brothers had planned to kill him, and had succeeded in selling him into slavery, the story's final scene in Genesis 50 showed sincere confessions of guilt, moving declarations of love and all fear finally removed.
This time reunion and reconciliation were complete.
There was none of the disappointment, none of the tragic pretence and exclusion that accompanied the reunion of Jacob and Esau.
The brothers' crimes against Joseph were met eventually with a forgiveness as large as Esau's, and this time the forgiveness was received, and given the response it deserved.
The bonds linking the brothers ended up stronger than they had ever been.
A new honesty, a new understanding, a new maturity of love was created in the family.
There was no equivalent to the judgement passed in the Garden, or to that passed on Cain in the field howling with his brother's blood.
In Genesis 50, and more tentatively in 45 also, discoveries were made about forgiveness that no-one had seen in Genesis before.
It ended also with reunion between father and son.
Jacob was no longer a trickster in the Joseph story, but himself the victim of the duplicity of his sons who convinced him that his favourite Joseph was dead.
When at last he came down to Egypt, Joseph showed him all the love and respect that were a father's due, all the love and respect that Ham had failed so conspicuously to show to Noah.
and that had been so cruelly denied to Isaac by Jacob himself in his youth.
Chapter 48 of Genesis formed a direct counterpart to chapter 27.
In both two sons were blessed by a dying father whose sight was failing.
In each case the younger son received the greater blessing.
Yet in one the father did not know what was going on, and was robbed of all dignity.
In the other he remained in full control of events and in full possession of his rightful authority.
If the Joseph story told of the healing of conflict among brothers, it told also of the proper fulfilment of the bond between father and son.
Thirdly it seemed to represent the beginnings of the healing of the relationship between God and humanity.
Though Isaac turned out not to be God's new Adam, it is possible to say that Joseph did.
There was a man at last who could discern the larger purposes of God, and who played his part in them to the full.
There was a man who did not insist on managing things for himself.
When at the end his brothers poured out their guilt and begged him for forgiveness, he replied with the words, ‘Fear not, for am I in the place of God?’
(50.19).
We had been waiting all Genesis for words like those.
Furthermore, when Joseph explained to his brothers the purposes of God that had been running through the events they had been caught up in, he used terms recalling the promises of Genesis 12: ‘…you meant evil against me; but God meant it for good, to bring it about that many people should be kept alive, as they are today’(50.20; see, too, 45.4–11).
If we ask who the ‘many people’ were who had been saved from famine through Joseph's foresight and planning, they were not merely Joseph, his father and brothers and their families, but all the people of Egypt.
The Joseph story provided by far the most conspicuous example in Genesis of the outworking of the promise to Abraham that through him and his descendants all the families of the earth would find blessing.
Thus the symphony of Genesis ended on a series of strong major chords that sounded high hope for God's purposes and for the redemption of the world.
The end of Genesis did not bring us back to the beginning, but it surely left us heading in the right direction.
With the beginning of Exodus all again was spoiled.
Hopes were held high for just seven verses.
Those ended with the statement, ‘…the descendants of Israel were fruitful and increased greatly; they multiplied and grew exceedingly strong; so that the land was filled with them.’
The promises of God were still on course.
But Exodus 1.8 read, ‘Now there arose a new king over Egypt, who did not know Joseph,’ and then began the story of Egyptian brutality and oppression to which we have already referred, and after that we are back with the tales of the Israelites' stubborn complaining in the wilderness with which we have become so familiar.
Hopes for a time were raised so high.
At last, it seemed, the purposes of God discovered a little human co-operation.
When those hopes are dashed so soon, not only by a cruel foreign king, but by God's own people, then the story turns to bleak tragedy, and becomes unbearable.
Things cannot be allowed to go on as they are.
God must teach his people how to fall into step with him, how to requite his love.
And so indeed he does.
In Exodus 19, after that first series of complaint stories, the people arrive at Sinai, the Mountain of God, and the rest of the material between there and Numbers 11, including the whole of the book of Leviticus, is concerned with the giving of the torah, God's instructions to his people.
He gives them now the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
That fruit, impetuously taken in the Garden, brought untold ruin.
Here, freely given on God's  Mountain, it spells unimaginable blessings of life lived to the full with God in his Land.
He first teaches his people the boundaries of their relationship with him, in the Ten Commandments.
To step beyond those will be to step outside the relationship.
Then the features of the ground inside the boundaries are mapped out.
The people are taught the implications of the relationship for their worship and their cult, for the ordering of their society, its internal politics and economics and its foreign policy, for their personal relationships with one another, and for their attitudes and inner dispositions.
They are shown how the relationship can be kept in good order and repaired by means of a great array of sacrificial rituals, and how the well-being of their society can be maintained.
With this great gift of the torah the people are in possession of the secrets of God's heart, and have the means to make of Canaan a new Garden of God.
But this people, though they are led by Moses, are not another Joseph.
In the midst of the proceedings, when they have already been given the Ten Commandments and much besides, and Moses is on the summit of Sinai receiving more torah to relay to them, they rebel.
The Ten Commandments began: ‘I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
You shall have no other gods before me’(Exod.
20.2–3).
Just twelve chapters later we hear them saying to Aaron, ‘Up, make us gods, who shall go before us; as for this Moses, the man who brought us up out of Egypt, we do not know what has become of him.’
So Aaron makes a golden calf, and when the people see it, they cry, ‘These are your gods, O Israel, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt!’
The story of the golden calf is not quite a complaint story, though it is more terrible than any of them, and as it proceeds shares many of their features, particularly those of the one in Numbers 14.
We hear of God's desire to wipe his people off the face of the earth, and begin again with Moses.
We hear of Moses' intercession, and his managing, as he will do again, to change God's mind.
But when he comes to the foot of the mountain and sees the worship of the calf for himself, we hear the sound of his anger too, and see him smashing the tablets of stone that he has brought down from the summit inscribed with God's torah.
Thus he himself acknowledges that the relationship is broken.
After that there is widespread slaughter, plague, and God's threatening to send the people on into the Promised Land without him.
His tent of meeting, the focus of his presence and means of dialogue, is pitched outside the camp, a sign  for all to see of the distance now established between him and his people.
Now at last we can begin to understand the huge discrepancy between the two series of complaint stories and the responses of God they describe.
Before Sinai, one could argue, the people had the excuse of not knowing any better.
After the giving of God's torah, they know all there is to know.
Sinai established, or was designed to establish, the mutual relationship between them and their God, and made clear its demands.
To deny the demands of a relationship is to lose the enjoyment of its blessings.
Everyone knows that, and the Israelites discovered it for themselves in the wilderness.
To deny the reality of the divine love is to enter the dark territory where it cannot be found.
They discovered that, too.
But they discovered also that beyond God's predictable anger is a surprising mercy.
A God who cannot let his people go
There is more to the story of the golden calf than the features we have already mentioned.
When God declares that he cannot accompany his people on their journey into his Land, Moses pleads with him once more, and receives the reply, ‘My presence will go with you, and I will give you rest’(Exod.
33.14).
When he then asks to see God's glory, it is God's goodness, his graciousness, and his mercy that he sees (33.18–19).
Having given Moses a glimpse of that through the fingers of his hand, God commands him to cut two tablets of stone to replace those which were broken.
On these are to be inscribed words reminiscent of the Ten Commandments, beginning with a new commandment not to make ‘molten gods’(34.1–28).
God begins again by not beginning again.
He cannot let this people go.
The book of Exodus ends with elaborate details for the construction of a new tent of meeting with all its trappings.
There is no mention of it being outside the camp, and instead we are left with the picture of the tent, filled with the glory of God, travelling with the people as they continue onwards (40.34–8).
The book of Leviticus, which follows next, is chiefly concerned with details of how the relationship between God and the people can be repaired and kept in good order.
There are elaborate rituals of atonement to be found there.
In addition rituals and procedures are laid down for those who have for a variety of reasons become ‘unclean’, and so have become cut off from the rest of the  community.
Such rituals and procedures are designed to restore them to their proper place within the people of God and within the inner circle of his blessing.
Yet more instructions are given as to how the people should live, how they should avoid oppression, and show true compassion for the poor and the vulnerable.
Those instructions include the famous ‘Love your neighbour as yourself (Lev.
19.18).
God will not help his people go.
In the midst of those terrifying complaint stories in Numbers is another chapter concerned with the offerings to be made once the people have occupied the Land, offerings which suggest a life of plenty waiting to be enjoyed there (ch.
15).
We might say it is galling for people to hear such things when they have been told they will die in the wilderness, but at least the promises of God remain very much in force for their children.
That same chapter has more to say about ritual of atonement, and chapter 18 is concerned with the identity and privileges of those who will carry out such ritual, and who will enable the people to dwell with the holiness of God without being destroyed by it.
The next chapter is concerned with further provisions for the cleansing and restoration of those who find themselves ritually unclean.
Chapter 21 does not deal merely with a desert swarming with snakes, but with another gift of water from God (v.
16), and with a series of military victories which, as we learn at the end, are God's doing more than Israel's (see vv.
21–35 and especially v.
34).
Immediately after that comes an extended narrative, containing much wit and satirical humour, about a certain Balak, king of Moab, hiring a seer called Balaam to put the invading Israelites under a divine curse (chs.
22–24).
Balak is disappointed.
The seer finds the Israelites irrevocably blessed, and the Lord their God in the midst of them.
Balaam can do nothing but pronounce God's own words of blessing upon them, while Balak grows ever more frustrated and angry.
It is quite clear that God has not let his people go.
The generation that came out of Egypt and took the part of God's bride at the wedding at Sinai (for that is what it was, as the prophet Hosea realized) do indeed die in the desert, as God said they would.
But Moses’ last act before he dies himself is to teach the torah, Ten Commandments and all, to the new generation born in the wilderness which will cross the Jordan and occupy the Land.
That is what the long book of Deuteronomy deals with.
It is abundantly clear that this God will never let his people go.
The problem that remains
There is, however, no getting away from it.
The memory of fire and plague, of slaughter, gaping earth and venomous snakes, and the great Moses barred from God's land for reasons that are hard to discern and even harder to call sufficient, still haunts our minds, and the stink of those quails will not leave our nostrils.
What are we to do with stories like these?
We may try to explain them by pointing to the place they occupy in the larger narrative.
We may emphasize that they are mingled with and followed by stories of a very different character.
But still the question remains: what are we to do with stories like these?
We can, of course, dismiss them from our theology altogether.
We can explain that they come from an age when theology and the natural sciences were not divorced from one another, when God was held directly responsible for disasters we would now call ‘natural’, and for which we would have scientific explanations to hand that did not mention God at all .
We could point out further that the ancient Israelites had not yet developed any notion of supernatural evil forces in opposition to God, and that this also encouraged them to see his hand in dark and terrible events.
We can claim that the theology of the Cross forces us now to talk of God in very different ways.
We can, however, if we dare, use these stories in our prayer.
Certainly they need very careful handling.
Such stories as these of the anger of God have encouraged self-righteousness and vindictiveness, and they still do.
They have been cruelly used to put a most unhealthy fear of God into people, or in very recent times in this country to offer absurd explanations for a fire in a cathedral, to denigrate an outspoken bishop, or to hound homosexuals and those suffering from AIDS.
Yet we can, and I believe we must, use them in our prayer.
To confront the anger of God, not to hurl it in others' faces, but in humility to confront it ourselves, is to find a knife to cut through our pious cant, and a fire to burn up our sentimentality and our complacency.
To confront the anger of God in the way the ancient Israelites dared to do, to face it as directed against ourselves and the society of which we are so much a part, is to escape the romantic pretence, the unrelieved jollity, or the easy, unthinking speech of so much that passes for Christian belief and worship.
To confront the anger of God is to find some deeper reality about ourselves and our world that we would prefer to forget.
It is to  remind ourselves of the radical demands of God, and to realize that to call the Christian gospel ‘good news’ is to concentrate on only half the story.
It is to discover something more of the pain of God, the hurt to which he is so constantly exposed, even now, after Sinai, and after Golgotha.
Above all, and most curiously of all, it is to come to a deeper knowledge of the inexplicable mercy of God, and of that fierce love that simply will not let his world go.
The writers and compilers of the stories we have been looking at in this chapter knew that.
That is why, in their work, we will always find God's mercy and love hiding beyond his anger.
To their extraordinary stories we Christians can add another, of a man on a cross, whose body is twisted in the shape of God's pain, and whose eyes blaze with his love and his anger at one and the same time.
To confront that figure is so very hard, but it is, I believe, to confront our salvation, and the salvation of the world.
TWO STORIES OF CONQUEST: Jericho destroyed, and God captured
(Joshua 6, 1 Samuel 4)
The crossing of the river
In the last chapter we started off in two relatively small pens, but then escaped and roamed all over the farm.
Our discussion this time will restrict itself much more to the two chosen passages, and will need only to take a brief look at a few details of the narratives leading up to them, and at the stories that immediately follow them.
At the end of the book of Deuteronomy Moses climbs up to the summit of Mount Nebo ‘which is opposite Jericho’(Deut.
34.1; see also 32.49), and with God's supernatural eyesight is shown by him the whole extent of the Promised Land from Dan in the north to Zoar in the south, and right across to the Mediterranean sea in the west.
Now it is time for the new generation born in the wilderness to cross the Jordan, and to begin to take possession of the Land, led not by Moses, of course, since he must die on the wrong side of the river, but by Joshua.
We, the readers of the narrative, have been waiting for this moment ever since the concluding words of the book of Numbers: ‘These are the commandments and the ordinances which the Lord commanded by Moses to the people of Israel in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.’
Truth to tell, we have been waiting for it since Genesis 12.
The references to Jericho in both Numbers and Deuteronomy lead us to expect that once the people have crossed the river the city will be the first obstacle in the way of their advance deeper into the  Land.
Those expectations are confirmed in the early chapters of Joshua.
Before the crossing is made, Joshua sends spies ahead to ‘view the land, especially Jericho’(2.2).
The rest of that chapter is devoted to the dramatic and somewhat risqué story of their hiding in the house of Rahab, a prostitute in the city, and their escaping by means of a rope let down the walls from one of her windows.
Rahab tells them, ‘I know that the Lord has given you the land, and that the fear of you has fallen upon us, and that all the inhabitants of the land melt away before you.’
In return for her help, the spies strike a bargain with her: she must tie a scarlet cord in the window so that the Israelites can identify her house, and she must gather her whole family together, so that when the city is taken, they can all be spared.
The reports duly brought back to Joshua by the spies are very different from those of their ill-fated counterparts in Numbers 13.
Nothing here to strike fear into the hearts of the people.
Quite the reverse.
So it is that the crossing is made without further ado, ‘opposite Jericho’(3.16).
The waters of the Jordan are stopped in a heap, and the people cross without getting their feet wet.
Thus the miracle at the Reed Sea is repeated.
This time, however, there is no panic, no pursuing army.
The enemy is on the other side, shut within the walls of Jericho, and the Israelites are ready for war.
This is the new generation of the wilderness, the generation which has not known slavery, and which will show no servility.
There is no ‘murmuring’ with them, no wild complaining, no harking back to a mis-remembered past, no rebellion.
Instead, quiet obedience (or, as we shall see, noisy obedience when it is required of them), as they and their God go on their way, striking not just fear, but sharp swords into the hearts of the inhabitants of the land.
The taking of Jericho: the origins of the story
When they reach Jericho, five miles the other side of the river, there is no-one to be seen.
The inhabitants are hidden behind their city walls, cowering in fear, if Rahab is to be believed.
In one respect here the story is, historically speaking, probably accurate.
When the invading Israelite tribes crossed the Jordan and arrived at Jericho, they probably did see no-one there, for the simple reason that Jericho was a deserted ruin.
Archaeologists have established that Jericho can claim to be one of the very oldest cities in the world, with a history going back all of ten thousand years.
Visitors to the site can climb down a near vertical, uneven stone  staircase through the middle of one of the towers of its ancient perimeter wall.
I know, because I have done it, and an unforgettable experience it is too.
But by the time the Israelites first passed that way, towards, probably, the end of the thirteenth century BCE, that tower, now exposed to view by the archaeologist's shovel, would have been hidden deep beneath the ground, buried beneath layer after layer of the remains of a series of settlements.
In the fourteenth century there seems to have been an unfortified village on the site, but by the end of the thirteenth even that had gone.
By then it was at most , as one commentator has put it, ‘the unfortified hangout of a local strongman’.
How then did such a story as that of Joshua 6 originate?
We cannot answer that question with certainty, but the details of the story itself would seem to provide us with several clues.
It is striking that it does not mention a battle.
There is slaughter well enough, but no battle.
The Israelites did have in their possession another account, perhaps two other accounts, of the taking of Jericho which were more conventional.
There are hints of one in the story of Rahab and the spies that we have already looked at, hints of an attack mounted on the basis of inside information gathered in that dangerous night of pleasure, or of stealthy entry into the city gained by means of Rahab's treachery.
Near the end of the book of Joshua a passing reference is made to a battle, which may or may not belong to the same account as chapter 2: ‘And you went over the Jordan and came to Jericho, and the men of Jericho fought against you…’
(24.11).
But in chapter 6 there is no fighting at all, only elaborate processions, the blowing of trumpets, and a great shout.
The disorder of battle is missing.
Everything is done with calm precision.
There are armed men at the front of each procession, and a rearguard, but they do not fight: priests play a far more prominent role in the proceedings.
There are seven priests, with seven trumpets, and the whole business takes exactly seven days.
On the seventh day they march around the city seven times.
The very word seven or seventh occurs twice seven times in the passage.
Throughout the Ancient Near East seven was a sacred number, and it turned up in every area of Israel's worship.
Two of the three major annual pilgrim festivals lasted for seven days each, one of them, the Feast of Booths, taking place in the seventh month of the year.
The sabbath was, of course, every seventh day.
The ceremonies for the ordination of priests or the consecration of altars took seven days.
Animals were often offered for sacrifice in sevens, and the blood of sacrifice was on certain occasions sprinkled seven times by the priest.
At the centre of the action in Joshua 6 is the ark, the Israelites' most sacred object of all, the box containing the stone tablets with the Ten Commandments inscribed upon them, the box upon which, so they believed, their God was invisibly enthroned.
The events have, to conclude, all the trappings of a liturgical ceremony rather than a military exercise, and that is almost certainly what lies behind the story, and what gave it its origins.
Between the Jordan and Jericho is the site of Gilgal, at one time a sanctuary of the highest importance in ancient Israel.
According to tradition, it was founded by Joshua at the time of the miraculous crossing of the river, and twelve sacred stones were set up there to commemorate the event (Josh.
4.19–24).
The people were circumcised there, marked with God's mark as members of his people (5.2–9), and the feast of the Passover was kept there (5.10).
Now the Passover was meant to be held annually, and together with the Feast of Unleavened Bread which immediately followed it, was one of the week-long festivals to which we have already referred (see Deut.
16.1–8).
When in the early days pilgrims gathered to hold the feast at Gilgal, perhaps their celebrations included a procession round the ruined mound of Jericho, where no walls were any longer to be seen above ground, with the blowing of sacred trumpets of rams' horns, and the solemn carrying of the ark.
Psalm 48.12–13 bears witness to a similar procession round the walls of Jerusalem, though in the case of Jericho it would have had the particular significance of a celebration of God's gift of the Land and conquest achieved with his might.
Men and women, young and old, oxen, sheep, and asses
Such, at least, is the likely theory of what lies behind the story.
But it is not the story itself.
For all its curiosities, what Joshua 6 describes, in the form in which we have it, is not a liturgical ceremony, but an act of war, the capture and wholesale destruction of a city.
The Jericho of the story is decidedly not deserted.
It has its own ‘king and mighty men of valour’(6.2; they appear in chapter 2 also).
It is well defended, surrounded by high walls, quite beyond the powers of the Israelite tribes to destroy by their own unaided efforts.
Though priests play a major role, what is pictured is not high festival, but the deadly business of siege, unusually short, admittedly, and with a  remarkable conclusion, but still siege.
Whatever our misgivings about the story's historicity (and we make a grave and fundamental error if we think the value of a passage like this is measured by the extent of its historicity), and however confident we might be about its origins, it asks and surely deserves to be taken on the storyteller's own terms.
The first thing to notice about this story of war is its fearful silence about the enemy.
The people of Jericho, painted in such bright colours in the story of Rahab and the spies, here feature hardly at all.
They are mentioned at the very start, and after that not once until their destruction.
That slaughter, when it comes, is reported in the baldest possible terms: ‘…the people went up into the city, every man straight before him, and they took the city.
Then they utterly destroyed all in the city, both men and women, young and old, oxen, sheep, and asses, with the edge of the sword…
And they burned the city with fire, and all within it.’
No heed is paid to their fear, their pain, their grief, their dying.
No notice is taken of their humanity.
The story pays more attention to the rescue of the single family of Rahab, and to the metallic treasures of the city, than it does to them.
After verse 2 even the city itself remains nameless until verse 25, by which time it is all over.
Such is the brutality of war, and the anonymity on which it feeds.
The storyteller knows what he is talking about.
The second and the most important thing to notice is the part played by God.
Before ever the action begins he knows and tells Joshua what the outcome will be: ‘See, I have given into your hand Jericho, with its king and mighty men of valour.’
He it is who plans what his people will do, and who instructs their general.
Joshua fills out the details of the orders, but in doing so clearly reads God's mind, for he comes in for no heavenly rebuke.
God, enthroned invisibly upon the ark, is in the midst of it all, and the walls' collapse, engineered so that the Israelites can enter the city from every side at once, is his doing.
Embedded in his initial instructions to Joshua concerning the actions the people are to take on the seventh day we find the clause, ‘…when they make a long blast with the ram's horn’.
The single Hebrew word translated ‘when they make a long blast’ is a common enough verb meaning to ‘draw’or ‘drag’.
Here it means to drag out the sound, hence ‘make a long blast’.
It is an imaginative use of the word, but what is significant about it is that it reappears in that sense in only one other place in the Old Testament, in the passage  immediately preceding God's appearance on Sinai.
There, too, it occurs within divine instructions, not to Joshua, of course, but to his predecessor, Moses: ‘When the trumpet’(the Hebrew noun there is in fact ‘ram's horn’, the same word as is used in Joshua 6.5)‘sounds a long blast, they shall come up to the mountain' (Exod.
19.13).
Even the particular part of the verb used is the same in both cases.
Such parallels are not accidental.
Clearly we are meant by the storyteller to understand the long trumpet blast on the seventh day of the siege of Jericho as heralding an appearance of God to his people rivalling the great theophany of Sinai.
The people's ‘shouting with a great shout’ or ‘raising a great shout’(Josh.
6.5 and 20; the Hebrew uses the same words in each case) confirms this interpretation.
We will meet with exactly the same words in the Hebrew again in 1 Samuel 4.5, when the ark is brought into the Israelite camp and, the storyteller reports, ‘all Israel gave a mighty shout’(it is a pity that variations in the English translations of the verses obscure the echoes in the original).
In each case the shout is far more than simply a war cry.
It is a cry of triumph, greeting God's showing himself in the midst of his people.
So the seven-day siege of Jericho ends, as most probably the great festivals of Israel did, with a grand theophany, or an appearance of God.
God has been with his people throughout.
The ark has been a sign of his presence.
But now he appears, or rather the people see the effects of his presence, the sweep of his mighty hand.
The walls fall down flat.
The capture of Jericho is clearly God's doing, and the slaughter which follows it belongs to his intentions.
This may not be obvious at once.
The putting of the city to the ban, or devoting it to the Lord, as the RSV puts it, is part of Joshua's final orders to the people on the seventh day, and receives no mention in God's initial instructions to him.
Yet the sequel to the story makes it quite plain that this appalling feast of destruction was in accordance with God's will (ch.
7).
After Jericho the next city to be attacked is Ai, but here the Israelite troops are routed, and the people of God have a taste of the fear they have hitherto inspired in others.
Joshua's instinct is sure.
He knows they have been defeated because they have offended God in some serious way, and become the victims of his anger.
In turning to God, and interceding on behalf of the people, as Moses used to do, he discovers the nature of the offence.
It is not that they showed no mercy on the streets of Jericho.
It is that someone among them has taken for himself some of the treasures of the city which were  destined for God's own sanctuary.
The culprit, Achan, is duly found, with the treasure buried beneath his tent.
Once he and his family and animals are ritually stoned to death and burned and buried under a great heap of stones, then God's anger evaporates, and the people are able to attack Ai again, and deliver up its inhabitants, men, women, and children, to the same fate as met those of Jericho (8.1–29).
God's rules of conquest
In truth we do not need the stories of Achan and Ai to show us the mind of the God of this part of the Genesis — Kings narrative.
Deuteronomy has already given us his rules of conquest.
In wars against cities outside the Promised Land the people are to enslave the inhabitants, and if they offer resistance, then besiege them and kill all their adult males.
The women and children, the cattle and treasures of these cities can be taken as spoil by the people, and kept by them as a gift from their God through whose strength they will have gained the victory.
In the case of the cities of the Land, however, the torah, the divine instruction, is more simple: ‘…you shall save alive nothing that breathes, but you shall utterly destroy them…as the Lord your God has commanded’(Deut.
20.16–17; see also Deut.
7: 1–2).
The reason for such an uncompromising policy is made plain: ‘…that they may not teach you to do according to all their abominable practices which they have done in the service of their gods, and so to sin against the Lord your God’(20.18; see7.4).
Such teaching, mercifully, does not accurately reflect what the Israelites achieved, or were able to achieve, in the conquest of the Land.
But it remains perfectly understandable, both in terms of the development of the larger narrative, and with regard to the situation of the generation for whom it was first compiled.
After the story of the golden calf, and the tales in Numbers of the people's continued recalcitrance, it is understandable that their God, yearning with such an ancient longing to enjoy requited love, should insist that they be protected at all costs from the allurements of other gods, and other religions.
A story in Numbers 25 which we did not consider in the last chapter (for it is not a complaint story) makes it even more readily understandable.
It tells how the attractions of the women of Moab, a region to the east of the Dead Sea in which the Israelites were encamped, led the people to join in  the worship of their gods, and how ‘Israel yoked himself to Baal of Peor’, the chief of the local deities (25.3).
Once again they turned their backs on the God who had brought them out of Egypt, and threw themselves into the arms of another.
The God of Deuteronomy, who instructs the new generation before their crossing of the Jordan, knows that the temptations will be far more serious on the other side.
He must do all he can to make sure he is not deserted again.
The compilers of the whole narrative, working at the time of the exile in Babylonia, were convinced that the catastrophe had overtaken their people because they and their kings had not been faithful to their God.
The ancient teaching given in the wilderness and near the banks of the Jordan had in their minds gone unheeded for centuries.
Thus they completed their great work as an act of confession for the sins of the past.
But they wrote and edited with their eyes also on the contemporary situation and on the future, with a determination that the people's faith and worship should not be swamped by the religions of their Babylonian masters, and that once back in God's Land, they should not commit the same dreadful mistakes again.
The teaching of Deuteronomy and the theology of the stories of Jericho and Ai and the rest (for the book of Joshua gives us lists of cities put to the ban) are also understandable in terms of ancient conduct of war in that part of the world, or with regard to our own contemporary warfare and religious belief and practice.
In a famous inscription dating from about 830 BCE, known as the Moabite Stone, a king of Moab called Mesha boasts of a campaign against some Israelite towns.
Among them was Nebo.
‘And Chemosh’(the chief god of Moab, referred to below as Ashtar-Chemosh)‘said to me, ‘Go, take Nebo against Israel.’
And I went by night and fought against them from dawn until midday.
And I took it and slew them all: seven thousand warriors and old men, together with women and old women and maidens, for I had consecrated it for Ashtar-Chemosh.’
In very recent years holy war has been fought between Iran and Iraq, and with a ruthlessness that has at times, with the use of chemical weapons for example, offended international codes of conduct.
In this century, of all centuries, with the unprecedented brutality of its warfare, with its invention of indiscriminate bombing, with its Hiroshima and its Nagasaki, everyone is in a position to understand Deuteronomy and Joshua, and by a most  terrible irony the Jews, after the Holocaust, are in one of the best positions of all.
There are also very many Christians who, while not wishing to engage in holy war in the literal sense, are perfectly prepared to crush to powder the cultures of those they convert, and millions more who would condemn those of other faiths as false, if not idolatrous, and who would wish to have nothing to do with them.
There are, indeed, Christians of certain sects who would have nothing to do even with other Christians, who do not, for example, allow their children to bring their school friends home, to accept invitations to their parties, or to receive presents from them, even when those friends claim to come from committed Christian homes.
Joshua 6 and the rest are most readily understandable,and that is precisely why they are so alarming .
Would that we found them totally bewildering!
It is their very familiarity which forces us to take them seriously, and to ask whether we can rescue their theology or not.
The fall of the theology of Jericho
That theology has not gone unchallenged, of course.
The vigour and profundity of the Old Testament's own challenge is at once realized when we recall how far the ruins of Jericho are from Eden, or from that remarkable declaration of faith in Genesis 1, and how completely the smoke of its destruction hides the last of the promises given to Abraham in Genesis 12.
Joshua 6 ends with a curse pronounced over the charred corpses of the city's inhabitants, promising anyone who might rebuild the city that he will do so at the cost of the lives of his own children.
Genesis 12 spoke of all the families of the earth finding God's blessing through Abraham and his descendants.
We will see in our last chapter that the little book of Jonah, too, has its own challenge to make, and a quite devastating one at that.
Further dissent is found in Jewish writing beyond the Old Testament.
In the Talmud, and therefore dating from the very early centuries of the Common Era, there is the following comment on the Exodus story of the crossing of the Sea: ‘When the Egyptian hosts were drowning in the Red Sea,’ say the rabbis, ‘the angels in heaven were about to break forth into songs of jubilation.
But the Holy One, blessed be He, silenced them with the words, ‘My creatures are perishing, and you are ready to sing!’’’
A medieval rabbi makes a similarly significant comment on the Exodus plague stories and a  part of the Passover Eve ceremonies.
At the Passover Eve meal the stories of the plagues are recited, and with each one a finger is dipped in a glass of wine and a drop of the wine let fall on to a plate.
The rabbi explains the custom by saying that Israel's cup of joy cannot be full if her triumph involves suffering, even for her enemies.
The New Testament, despite its talk of God condemning the wicked to an eternity of weeping and gnashing of teeth in the fires of hell (a level of violence, as one commentator has put it, surpassing anything spoken of in the Old Testament), has yet more challenges to offer, and not just in the Passion narratives.
In our third chapter we described Esau as ‘a bystander on the edge of God's purposes’, one who ‘suffered grievously that those purposes might go forward’.
The Gospels present us with a picture of Jesus of Nazareth searching out those left on the edge, and bringing them into the heart of God's kingdom.
They record him burning with anger against those who practised their faith at the expense of others.
In these respects this Jesus strikes at the heart of the Jacob/Esau stories, and must present the most radical challenge to the story of the people of Jericho, who are not even left as bystanders, but are trampled into God's ground and burnt to a cinder.
Yet is it not at the foot of the Cross that the theology of Joshua 6 falls and dies?
Does not the Cross reveal a God who is victor, to be sure, but only by means of himself becoming the victim of brutality?
If in the end we wish to locate God in the destruction of Jericho, should we not search for him lying in the dust with the rest of his people of that city, like them hacked to pieces?
Threat from the Philistines and from corrupt priests
In these brief forays of ours into the territory of Old Testament storytelling we do not, in fact, have to wait until Jonah to find the theology of Joshua 6 again under question.
1 Samuel 4 does not present a direct challenge to the earlier passage.
Yet as another story of war, and of God's involvement in war, it has a very different tale to tell.
Joshua 6 belonged to the very beginning of the story of conquest and settlement.
1 Samuel 4 comes well on into it.
Entry into the Land lies long in the past, and the task has become one of establishing a secure hold upon it.
The enemy threatening that task is at this point the Philistines.
We first hear of clashes between the Israelites and the Philistines in the book of Judges, and in particular in the Samson stories (chs.
13–16).
In these colourful tales, which we might almost believe were collected from early copies of ancient Israelite boys' comics, Samson wages a one-man war against the Philistines, who are represented as having control of the country.
1 Samuel 4 renews the story of the conflict between the two peoples, and that rivalry remains a major feature of the account of Saul's reign, and does not come to an end till victories won by David, described in 2 Samuel 5.
The Philistines, who via the Greek came to give their name to the land of Palestine, settled in the southern part of the coastal plain from, in contemporary terms, the Gaza Strip to Tel Aviv.
They spread there from the area of the Aegean at about the same time as the Israelite tribes themselves moved into the land from the east.
The first three chapters of 1 Samuel are mainly concerned with the birth of Samuel, his boyhood and his call.
Samuel does not feature at all in the story with which we are concerned, nor in its immediate sequels.
But there are a few details of chapters 1–3 which we should mention.
The action described in them takes place at the sanctuary of Shiloh, where the priest is an old man called Eli.
He is assisted in his priestly functions by his sons, Hophni and Phinehas.
In chapter 2 those two men are roundly condemned as ‘worthless’, as putting their own profit before the service of God, and as having sexual relations with some women serving the sanctuary.
Eli himself for the most part does not appear in a bad light, but as the one responsible for the proper functioning of the sanctuary, he is implicated in his sons' guilt, is at one point accused of sharing their greed, and is doomed to share in great disgrace about to befall his family.
In the last part of the chapter it is prophesied that Hophni and Phinehas will both die by the sword on the same day, and that Samuel will be put in Eli's place as God's priest.
Chapter 3 gives us one more piece of information about Shiloh: the sacred ark is being kept there (v.
3).
That will turn out to be of huge significance for the action of chapter 4.
In its famous account of the call of Samuel, it also repeats the judgement upon Eli and his sons.
This time it comes from God's own lips, the crime of Hophni and Phinehas is declared to be blasphemy, Eli is condemned for not restraining them, and the speech ends with a divine oath making it irrevocably clear that there is nothing these three priests can do to ward off the coming disaster.
There is a discomforting hint of what the scale of that disaster will be.
The opening words of God's speech  to Samuel are these: ‘Behold, I am about to do a thing in Israel, at which the two ears of every one that hears it will tingle’(v.
11).
The tremors to be caused by the fall of the house of Eli will shake the whole people.
Thus the storyteller and the compiler create in us, step by fearful step, a sense of foreboding, and when we learn at the start of chapter 4 that the Israelites are going into battle with the mighty Philistines, then our knees begin to tremble and we dread what the outcome might be.
Yet there is one passage in chapters 1–3 which might seem to dispel all fear, and might lead us to expect Israel to win a resounding victory.
Chapter 2 begins with a psalm (vv.
1–10).
(There are several psalms in the Old Testament outside the Book of Psalms.
We will meet another, a wonderfully mischievous example, in Jonah.)
It is known as ‘The Song of Hannah’, for it purports to be a psalm of thanksgiving sung by Samuel's mother after the birth of her long-prayed-for son, and his dedication to the service of God at the sanctuary of Shiloh.
It is chiefly famous among Christians as the clear basis for the text of the Magnificat.
Though put beautifully into the mouth of Hannah by the storyteller, it did not have its origins with her, but, to judge from its mention of the king at the end, must have been composed for national celebration at some point during the time of the monarchy.
It rejoices in the unrivalled might of Israel's God, the creator of the world, and in his habit of turning human affairs upside down and bringing the powerless to positions of strength.
My mouth derides my enemies,
says the speaker (originally, perhaps, the king) at the beginning,
because I rejoice in thy salvation…
The bows of the mighty are broken,
but the feeble gird on strength…
He will guard the feet of his faithful ones;
but the wicked shall be cut off in darkness;
for not by might shall a man prevail.
The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to pieces;
against them he will thunder in heaven.
Strong encouragement indeed for little Israel, so often in her history the football in matches played by powers far greater than her.
Put in the context of 1 Samuel 1–3, however, and the preparations for battle in chapter 4, its message is more uncertain.
On the one hand it would seem clear that the Philistines will have no earthly chance against Israel and this mighty God of hers.
These lords of God's Land, as they are portrayed in Judges, will be brought low, and poor, feeble Israel will be exalted.
Yet we hear so much in chapters 1–3 of the faithlessness of men in high positions in Israel (chapter 4 will tell us that Eli was not only high priest at Shiloh but for forty years ‘judge’ in Israel, the one in whom resided the greatest political and spiritual as well as judicial authority among all the tribes).
‘He will guard the feet of his faithful ones; but the wicked shall be cut off in darkness,’ says the psalm.
Given what we have heard about Eli and his sons, and in the light, also, of those dark prophecies of doom, what message do those words convey as Israel goes into battle with Philistia?
Do they augur victory or defeat for the Israelites?
Those are the questions the storyteller and compiler leave in our minds as we enter the action of chapter 4.
God's capture
They seem to be answered almost at once.
Battle is joined, and Israel is defeated with considerable loss of men.
But this, of course, is only the beginning of the story.
The Israelite survivors of the battle return to the camp and report the dreadful news.
The reaction of the elders is very interesting.
‘Why,’ they say, ‘has the Lord put us to rout today before the Philistines?
Let us bring the ark of the covenant of the Lord here from Shiloh, that he may come among us and save us from the power of our enemies.’
Had the Israelites been polytheists, like all the other peoples of the ancient world, a natural conclusion to have drawn from the defeat would have been that their god or gods had been overcome by the gods of the Philistines.
Their monotheism made such a notion impossible, and instead they had to blame either themselves, or God, or both.
Today we might suggest that the reason lay with them.
At this period the Philistines were better armed than the Israelites (see 1 Sam.
13.19–22), and their soldiers were more experienced and better organized.
But the elders of 1 Samuel 4 put the blame on God.
‘The Lord’ has put them to rout.
Yet it does not occur to them that God might have brought about the defeat as an act of judgement  upon them, and unlike Joshua and the elders in the story of Ai in Joshua 7, they do not bother to turn to God to discover his mind.
Instead they send to Shiloh for the ark.
Their theology is simplistic and confused.
Despite suggesting that God must have been on the side of the Philistines in the battle, they talk as if God is literally enthroned above the ark, and the bringing of it to the camp will mean the bringing of God himself.
They seem to think that all they need to do is fetch God and all will be well.
Maybe they simply see the ark as a visible guarantee of God's presence and of victory, but that understanding of it is no better, for then they turn it into an idol, ascribe to it magical powers, and leave us asking why they did not take it into battle in the first place.
Whatever their reasoning, they seek to make sure that God is on their side.
They seek to use God's power to establish their own.
Their views are readily recognizable in a world where the fuss about the Turin Shroud has reminded us of a time when high hopes and claims of miracle were commonly attached to pieces of the true cross or heads of John the Baptist, where much Christian literature promises believers great success in life if only they have enough faith in God, and where men and women of political power still try to have God and his Church on their side, and to use their authority to enhance their own.
Some readers of 1 Samuel 4 might dismiss the elders as ‘primitive’.
They are, in fact, perfectly contemporary.
At first the storyteller, with considerable mischief, plays along with them.
He hurries over the journeying to and fro.
Shiloh was some twenty miles from the camp, but the storyteller does not dwell on the sight of the Israelites (and the Philistines, too!) twiddling their thumbs while the runner and then the ark are on their way.
When the ark arrives, however, he slows the pace right down.
He gives it its full title: ‘the ark of the covenant of the Lord of hosts, who is enthroned on the cherubim’.
What fine, solemn words these are!
How well they remind us of the purpose for which the ark has been fetched!
No wonder its coming puts the fear of God into the Philistines!
The Israelite army greets it with the same great shout as bounced off the walls of Jericho and heralded their demolition.
The Philistines' camp is close enough for them to hear the noise, and when they learn its meaning they are afraid and say, ‘A god has come into the camp.’
They are polytheists, of course, and to them the ark means only ‘a god’.
Yet they have heard of this particular god, and what they have heard only increases their fear.
According to Rahab, the Jericho prostitute, the people of her city had had news of the way  the Israelites had come out of Egypt, and their hearts had melted and their courage had evaporated away (Josh.
2.9–11).
So with the Philistines.
‘Woe to us!’ they say, ‘For nothing like this has happened before.
Woe to us!
Who can deliver us from the power of these mighty gods?’
(Even worse: it is not just a god now, but gods!)
‘These are the gods who smote the Egyptians with every sort of plague in the wilderness.’
They have not quite got their history sorted out, but they are near enough.
Plagues in the wilderness will do.
All they can think of is getting the adrenalin going with some warlike talk.
‘Take courage,’ they say to one another, ‘fight,’and ‘be men.’
Twice they use those words ‘be men’, and the repetition only serves to underline their predicament.
Men they are, and men is all they can be, yet, on their own admission, they must fight against ‘mighty gods’.
Battle is joined again, and surely after this we know what the result will be.
The storyteller has included only one hint that things might turn out otherwise.
When the ark is sent for, he remarks that it is accompanied on its journey to the Israelite camp by Hophni and Phinehas.
But he does not remind us of the prophecy that hangs over them, or of the judgement pronounced by God upon the house of Eli.
Quickly he immerses us in the euphoria of the Israelites and the terror and bravado of their enemies.
Battle is joined again, and surely we know what the result will be.
But the storyteller has been using all his art to lead us up the garden path.
With the utmost economy, of the kind we have already seen used to such effect in other Hebrew narratives, he reports the battle.
‘So the Philistines fought, and Israel was defeated, and they fled, every man to his home; and there was a very great slaughter, for there fell of Israel thirty thousand foot soldiers.
And the ark of God was captured; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were slain.’
Thus the prophecy of chapter 2 and the dark words of God of chapter 3 find fulfilment, our expectations are overturned, and the elders of Israel are taught that their God is beyond their manipulation.
Much later in the books of Samuel we find another story concerning the ark which reminds us of the battle with the Philistines.
It occurs in the account of the chaotic part of David's reign when his own son Absalom is fighting to usurp the throne.
At the lowest point in David's fortunes he is forced to evacuate Jerusalem.
As he reviews the sad procession of his supporters leaving the city, he finds at the rear two priests and the Levites  bringing out the ark.
He tells them to turn back, and return the ark to its place in the temple.
‘If I find favour in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me back and let me see both it and his habitation; but if he says, ‘I have no pleasure in you,’ behold, here I am, let him do to me what seems good to him' (2 Sam.
15.25–6).
The David of 2 Samuel is far from being an exemplary character, yet here in the gloom of the surrounding narrative we have a bright flash of faith, wisdom and humility.
David has mastered the lesson which the elders of 1 Samuel 4 needed to learn.
He refuses the attempt to turn God into his puppet.
Death, birth, and death again
The rest of 1 Samuel 4 is devoted to underlining the apparent enormity of the disaster it has described.
It does it by telling two stories about the reception of the news of the battle.
The first concerns Eli.
Though he sits by the gate of Shiloh, in his blindness watching the road, he is nearly the last in the town to hear the news.
Some commentators have wondered aloud why this should have been so.
Did the runner bringing the news from the battlefield run straight past him when he reached the town?
Was silly old Eli sitting at the wrong gate?
We can safely dismiss these questions.
Eli is left nearly to the end in the storyteller's cause of dramatic tension and suspense.
It does not matter why the news reaches him so late.
It matters only that it does.
The first he knows that something is up is when he hears a great cry of anguish from the town.
The runner has gone into it and told the story of the battle.
Like the Philistines when they heard the shout greeting the ark's arrival in the Israelite camp, Eli asks, ‘What is this uproar?’
Like the Philistines he is filled with terror.
The storyteller has already told us that he has been watching the road, his heart trembling with fear for the precious ark.
Unlike those of the Philistines his worst fears have been realized, and the cry he hears go up in the town is not for the ark's arrival, but for its capture.
Dead on cue the runner hurries over to Eli to answer his question.
Again the story demands the coincidence that he is on hand, and can catch the question above the uproar.
Again such implausible details do not matter.
They help to make the story, they do not mar it.
To increase the suspense the storyteller again slows the pace.
He tells us first of Eli's great age and of his blindness.
Then the runner introduces himself.
Then Eli asks how the battle has gone.
Then, and only then is the devastating news given to the old man.
Quite deliberately the storyteller has not reported what the runner told the people of the town.
We have learned only that he told the news, and that the people cried out in anguish.
To have given full details at that earlier point would have been to remove the sting from the report to Eli, and spoil its shock.
The words of the runner to Eli are very close to those the storyteller used himself a few verses before to describe the outcome of the battle.
But there are subtle differences, and one of particular significance.
‘Israel has fled before the Philistines, and there has also been a great slaughter among the people; your two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the ark of God has been captured.’
No mention now of the numbers of troops or military units slaughtered (the Hebrew term translated ‘thousand’ in verse 10 might well mean military unit in that context).
That, to the high priest of the sanctuary of Shiloh, is not the most important item of news.
There is mention of Hophni and Phinehas, of course.
But now they do not come at the end of the list.
There is a fearful crescendo in the messenger's speech, such as we noted in the command of God to Abraham in Genesis 22.2.
The worst news of all is left till last.
Eli has been trembling with fear for the ark.
No word has been said about his fears for his sons.
It is as if he gave them up for dead when they left Shiloh.
All his fear is concentrated on the ark which he, being too old and frail to accompany, delivered to their charge.
If he now grieves for them, we do not hear of it.
Indeed there seems no time for such grief, for at the news of the ark he collapses, falls backwards from his seat, breaks his neck, and dies.
So a further part of the prophecy of chapter 2 and the divine judgement of chapter 3 comes to its dark fruition.
But still the house of Eli has not seen the last of it.
The news of the capture of the ark, and of the deaths of Eli and Phinehas, is taken to Phinehas' wife, nine months pregnant with his second son.
Not surprisingly the shock brings on premature labour.
She is safely delivered of a son, but despite the encouragement of the midwives she takes no notice of the baby.
There is no joy at this birth, no laughter, only grief, the naming of the child, and then the death of the mother.
The woman is not given a name herself.
The story is not interested in her for herself.
But nor is it interested in her son, only in the timing of his birth and his name.
With almost her last breath she calls him Ichabod, saying, ‘The glory has departed from Israel!,
The storyteller explains her words by referring to the deaths of her  father-in-law and husband, as well as the capture of the ark.
But in the last sentence of the story he has her say, ‘The glory has departed from Israel, for the ark of God has been captured.’
No mention of Eli and Phinehas now.
Clearly it is the fate of the ark that has provoked the name Ichabod, and that has led to her death, just as it killed her father-in-law.
‘The glory has departed from Israel’ is meant to be an explanation of the name Ichabod, which means either ‘No Glory’, ‘Where is the Glory?’, or ‘Alas for the Glory!’.
The word ‘departed’, used in the RSV and other versions, does not quite convey the sense of the Hebrew verb, which means ‘gone into exile’.
There is a hint in the Hebrew of a future homecoming not given by the more final-sounding ‘departed’.
Yet it is the merest hint of hope in a story of otherwise unbroken tragedy.
It is but the momentary flicker of a candle in the dark.
‘Are we still the people of God?’
Why does the capture of the ark cause quite so much consternation?
That might seem a needless question to ask.
We understand how deeply people can become attached to sacred objects.
We can imagine the horror that would ripple through Christendom if the Turin Shroud were stolen, even though its direct connection with Jesus has been disproved by the scientists.
We know that a nation's sense of its own identity can become bound up with material objects, the identity of the British with the Crown Jewels, that of the Greeks with the Elgin Marbles, that of the people of Hungary with the Crown of Stephen.
Yet the significance for the ancient Israelites of the capture of the ark went beyond the scope of such attachments.
It posed for them the question, ‘Are we still the people of God?’
1 Samuel 4 began with the Israelites being defeated in battle and with their elders talking of God fighting on the enemy side.
When it reported the result of the second engagement, it used a word which the Philistines in their terror had applied to what God had done to the Egyptians.
Unfortunately the RSV is forced by the sense of the narrative to obscure the play on words by translating the term as ‘plague’ the first time round (v.
8), and ‘slaughter’ the second (v.
10).
‘These are the gods,’ say the Philistines, ‘who smote the Egyptians with every sort of plague (maccah ) in the wilderness.’
‘So the Philistines fought,’ says the narrator, ‘and Israel was defeated…and there was a very great slaughter (maccah ).’
The Hebrew  conveys, as the English cannot, the notion of tables being turned, of the people of God becoming now the enemy of God.
Israel has, in God's eyes, so it seems, become another Egypt, deserving of a similar fate.
Such, at least, is the suggestion of that play on words.
Put it together with the talk after the first battle, and add to it the understanding of the ark as the throne of God, as the visible guarantee of God's presence with his people, the symbol of his covenant relationship with them, as their wedding ring, we might say, and you have then something to explain the consternation of Eli and the wife of Phinehas.
Can Israel still be the people of God, or has God chosen the Philistines instead?
That is the question this chapter leaves us, and it is the question that it left those who first heard the larger narrative being read.
For them it was a particularly poignant one.
They, or their parents or grandparents, had seen Jerusalem captured, its temple destroyed, and the ark of the covenant taken into exile by the enemy.
They had heard, or heard of, prophets such as Jeremiah or Ezekiel speaking of God being behind the disaster, of him fighting on the enemy side.
‘Are we still the people of God?’ was for them very far from being an academic question, but was in urgent need of an answer.
A God too hot to handle
It finds an answer in many places in the larger narrative, and one of those places is in the dark comedy of the two chapters immediately following our chosen passage.
If the God of 1 Samuel 4 refuses to play Israel's game, in chapter 5 he refuses to play Philistia's.
The ark turns out to be decidedly too hot to handle.
The Philistines carry it from their camp to the town of Ashdod, and there they put it in the temple of their god Dagon.
That is only what we would have expected them to do.
When one people defeated another in the Ancient Near East it was usual for the victors to place in their own temples the sacred figures of the gods of the vanquished.
It meant that those figures were properly housed, but it was also a clear sign that the defeated gods were henceforth under the authority of their own gods, and the defeated people under their thumb.
The Philistines in the narrative of 1 Samuel have no image of the Israelites' god, Yahweh, but they understand, or think they understand, the significance of the ark, and regard it as a convenient substitute.
In truth they do not begin to realize what they are dealing with, but they soon find out.
The morning after the ark is put in Dagon's temple, they discover the figure of their great god sprawled on the floor, his face to the ground, in what would have been readily seen as an attitude of worship.
They put Dagon upright again, but the next morning they find him in an even sorrier state.
Not only has he again fallen flat on the ground, but his head and his hands have broken off and lie at the entrance of the building.
Two days before Dagon seemed Yahweh's conqueror.
Then he became Yahweh's worshipper.
Now he is Yahweh's sacrificial victim.
That will not do, and when, to make matters considerably worse, bubonic plague breaks out in the town, the people of Ashdod decide to get rid of the ark.
So it goes south to Gath, but it takes the plague with it, together with an unearthly confusion and terror.
It goes north again, to the town of Ekron, but the same things happen there.
‘Send away the ark of the God of Israel,’ the people cry, ‘and let it return to its own place, that it may not slay us and our people’(5.11).
An understandable reaction, and it is understandable, too, that none of the other towns of Philistia bid to house the ark instead.
Thus it turns out that chapter 6 is concerned with the elaborate preparations for the ark's return, and with its re-entry into Israelite territory.
Before the ark disappears from the narrative for the time being(it does not play a major role again until its triumphal entry into Jerusalem in 2 Samuel 6, though it does feature in another battle with the Philistines in 1 Samuel 14), it leaves behind one more reminder that it is not to be trifled with.
The first place it reaches in Israelite territory is Bethshemesh.
There some of the inhabitants commit some kind of sacrilege which it is hard for us now to decipher.
(The RSV seems clear enough when it speaks of them looking into the ark (6.19), but the Hebrew will not really bear that sense, and would suggest they merely looked at it.
But that is not sufficient to explain the subsequent outburst of divine anger.)
Whatever the nature of the crime, its consequences are all too plain.
Seventy people die on the spot, and the town, far from celebrating the ark's return, finds itself in mourning.
Exactly like the Philistines of Ashdod, Gath and Ekron, its people decide to get rid of the ark as quickly as they can.
So men come from nearby Kiriath-jearim to collect it, and there at last, without accompanying plague, confusion, or slaughter, it comes to rest.
To those who first heard the narrative in its finished form the significance of these last few stories must have been abundantly  plain.
If 1 Samuel 4 left them asking whether they could still regard themselves as the people of God, chapters 5 and 6 reassured them that their God had certainly not gone over to the Babylonians.
Indeed, their conquerors would soon find him too much to handle, and his term of exile and the exile of his people would eventually come to an end.
Yet the last in the little series of stories about the ark would have recalled to their minds the story of chapter 4, and would have reminded them that though they were irrevocably, for better for worse, for richer for poorer, the people of God, they did not have God in their pocket, and could never keep him there.
If Joshua 6 represents God as mixed up in humanity's games of power and violence in a way that is denied by the Crucified God of the Gospels, 1 Samuel 4–6, in both its tragedy and its comedy, would declare his refusal to play along with us on our terms, and his insistence on doing his own thing.
Whether we would today happily regard bubonic plague, panic, and slaughter as examples of his doing his own thing is another matter, of course.
But even if we do not, we must surely take seriously the witness those chapters bear to the freedom of God, particularly since we are still so prone in our self-important humanity to attempt to manipulate him.