

Population During the Inter-War Years
In 1942 Richard and Kathleen Titmuss wrote that:
The present war is the first war the people of this country have waged with a birth-rate below replacement level.
Although the 1914–18 war quickened the speed of the decline in fertility and resulted , during a loss of around 600,000 unborn children who would otherwise have been brought into the world, at no time did the rate touch the low level at which it stood in 1939.
We entered this war with a little over 41,000,000 souls or roughly 4,500,000 more than in 1914.
Nevertheless we had over 2,000,000 fewer children under 14 to care for, but 2,500,000 more people over 60 to provide for, before the last war.
We have even 1,500,000 fewer children than we had at the time of the Boer War….
This was just one of several anxious comments about the changes which had occurred in population during the inter-war years.
G.F.McCleary's book,The Menace of British Depopulation and Eva Hubback's,The Population of Britain were other publications which were even more almost alarmist about the future viability of the British population.
The fear was that Britain's population would decline rapidly, that it would be dominated by an aged population with few people of working age coupled with a rapidly decreasing birth rate.
In the final analysis there would be a dramatic decline in population, with deaths exceeding births — a foretaste of which had occurred in the early 1930s.
It appeared that, without changes in policy, Britain would be on the way to racial suicide.
The  contemporary concern was so great that a Royal Commission on Population was set up in 1944 to examine the problem of Britain's declining rate of population growth.
These concerns, of course, provoke many questions.
What were the reasons for Britain's declining population growth rate?
How justified were the alarmists in their doom-laden prognostications?
What were the social and economic implications of the slow down in population growth?
How important were the depressed economic conditions and unemployment in accounting for the slow down in population growth?
Was it the prosperity of an acquisitive society prepared to forsake children, or the depression which accounted for the inter-war population trends?
The Pattern of Change
The concern about population trends emerged as it became evident that population growth was declining and that the birth rate, in particular, was falling rapidly.
By the late 1930s, the birth rate was about three-quarters of what it had been at the end of the First World War.
Death rates had also declined, though not as sharply, and had it not been for the inward migration of population in the 1930s the decline in population growth would have been more marked.
In fact the population of Great Britain only increased by about four millions during the inter-war years, about half the level of growth which might have been expected had the rate of growth of the late nineteenth century continued.
It appeared that the rapid growth associated with the British industrial revolution had come to an end and that the theory of demographic transition, which predicted a phase when death rates and birth rates fell to low levels, was correct.
In addition, it became clear that there was a substantial restructuring of population as regional migration occurred to the expanding light industry areas of the Midlands and the South East and from the declining industrial areas of Scotland, Wales and the North.
The importance of this development has been the subject of some debate.
John Stevenson feels that this urban migration was important in restructuring the population of Britain, although Glynn and Oxborrow argue that this internal migration was less marked than it had been in the nineteenth century — being about one third of its former level.
Presumably, therefore, internal  migration exerted no more impact, and probably less, on the British population structure than it had in the nineteenth century.
Notwithstanding the reservations of Glynn and Oxborrow it is clear that population growth rates were less than one third of their nineteenth century peaks and the fact is that there was a substantial loss of population from the old industrial areas to the new ones.
At least a million people of working age migrated to the  the South East during the inter-war period, and Wales, as a whole, lost both its natural increase in population and an actual loss of about 450,000 people.
Other depressed areas also lost much, if not all, their natural increase in population.
Internal migration, even at a relatively low scale, exerted a profound impact upon a British population which was slow to increase.
The Reasons for the Decline in Population Growth Rate
Only four factors can determine the rate of population growth — migration, the age of marriage, death rates and birth rates.
By and large, the first three factors can be discounted for the inter-war years and it is clear that the most important factor was the decline in birth rate.
Migration may have been a factor in the 1920s, though the level of net migration from Britain was somewhat less than it had been in the previous two decades.
In addition, for the first time in generations, as Table 4.2 indicates, there was an actual net inflow of population to Britain during the 1930s, a factor which would, of course , have increased Britain's population growth rate.
And as a whole it is clear that the inter-war period saw Britain's population increase, rather than decrease, as a result of migration.
Equally, changes in the proportion of people married in particular age categories does not appear to have contributed to any significant decline in population increases.
Broadly, there was stability in the marriage rates from the 1870s to the 1940s, although there appears to have been something of a minor dip in those getting married in the late 1920s and 1930s.
It would appear that there was some increase in the marriage rates among those in their early twenties during the early 1920s, perhaps because of the delays caused by the First World War, and after 1934, when the domestic economy began to revive from the worst excesses of the slump.
Since death rates also declined, and therefore more people were surviving into middle and old age, it is evident that population increases should have been higher.
Death rate was not a significant or relevant factor in explaining the slow down of population growth.
It is clearly birth rate which is central to any explanation of population trends during the inter-war years.
The fact is that the birth rate declined by almost half between the 1900 and the late 1930s, and by an even higher proportion when compared with nineteenth-century levels.
But why did it decline?
There are several possibilities.
In the first place, the decline might simply be seen as an inevitable feature of the maturity of any industrialized society.
The theory of demographic transition suggests that as nations move towards maturity that the decline in death rates, occasioned by higher living standards, will be followed by a decline in birth rates to a more or less similar level.
In other words, there was something inevitable in this decline — although it must be noted that other industrialized nations, such as the United States, at a similar stage in their economic development have not necessarily followed the same pattern of development.
Alternatively, it is possible that the decline occurred because of the economic conditions of the inter-war years.
The deep economic depression, particularly of the late 1920s and the early 1930s, may  well have discouraged the continued raising of large families and encouraged the greater use of birth-control techniques.
As Beatrice Webb wrote of birth control and the economic conditions:
The practice arose in the last decades of the nineteenth century within the ruling class.
Since the Great War, 1914–18, it has been  practiced by wage-earners, suffering from long periods of unemployment and underemployment, so drastic that it seemed abject folly to produce children who could neither be adequately nourished nor sufficiently educated to secure a satisfactory livelihood.
As a prominent socialist, Webb had a vested interest in explaining developments in the way she did.
Nevertheless, there seems to be ample proof that the depression exerted some short-term downward impact upon birth rates, especially in the early 1930s at the height of the depression.
And the 1949 Royal Commission on Population suggested that the struggle for security and social promotion in society, the ‘Social Capillarity’, as it was referred to, was a sufficient explanation of the downward trend in population growth since the mid- and late nineteenth century.
Thirdly, it is also possible that the advances in birth control operating within the climate of an ‘acquisitive society’ might well have permitted couples to plan their family lives in such a way as to allow them to enjoy the consumer benefits of society.
Put bluntly, it is possible that couples decided to ‘have baby Austins rather than baby boys.’
Now these alternative explanations are not exclusive of each other and, obviously, may vary from region to region.
It is possible that against a long-term downward movement of population, perhaps sparked off by a variety of economic concerns, the economic depression helped to determine the immediate attitudes in some of the old declining industrial centres just as the prospect of prosperity, and the accumulation of consumer goods and property, may have stimulated a desire to control family size among the population of the expanding industrial centres of the Midlands and the South East.
In addition the development of birth-control techniques provided the opportunity for the above changes of attitudes to be encouraged.
The pro-birth control movement had begun in the late nineteenth century with the formation of the Malthusian League and the trial and work of Annie Besant and Charles Bradlaugh, events which  encouraged the dissemination of knowledge about birth-control techniques.
Subsequently, millions of pamphlets were circulated on birth control.
Eventually, in 1921 Marie Stopes opened the first birth control clinic.
Her purpose was to establish a pilot project which might encourage the government to use its antenatal clinics and infant and maternal welfare clinics, of which there were more than 2,000, to distribute information on birth control and contraceptives; the Ministry of Health was by that time offering financial aid to the 400 local authorities who ran such clinics and could have forced them to become centres for birth control.
Stopes's fundamental conception of the role of the clinics led to a heated political debate during the inter-war years as the issue was fought within political parties and in parliament.
Support was widespread in all the major political parties and among the MPs of all parties, though not initially sufficient in number to achieve Stopes's objective.
The situation changed quickly.
By the late 1920s the activities of birth control groups ensured that the matter was openly discussed, the matter being almost a compulsory subject for discussion in the local meetings of the Women's Section of the Labour Party.
In 1928 Marie Stopes sent one of two horse-drawn caravans outfitted as birth control clinics into the mining areas of South Wales where the majority of workers were suffering from unemployment and reduced hours.
The second caravan was sent north and was burned by ‘a disgruntled Catholic woman in Bradford.’
In addition the Workers Birth Control Group, led by Frida Laski, carried the message of family limitation to Wales and Durham.
Other groups were also attracted to support the gospel of family limitation.
Eventually, in 1930, several local authorities, including Poplar and Shoreditch, began to instruct their medical officers to provide information on birth control.
Shortly afterwards, the Ministry of Health suggested that birth control information could be given at maternal and child welfare centres on medical grounds.
From the summer of 1930 onwards, birth control facilities at least became more openly available, although they were often provided in a grudging and limited fashion.
At first the gospel of family limitation appears to have been spread most effectively among the middle classes before it percolated through to the working classes.
Nevertheless, there is a question mark about how widespread such knowledge was among the  working classes.
Did they in fact have access to the new birth-control methods or did they practice older nineteenth-century birth-control techniques, more suited to the pockets of the working class?
There is ample evidence that in the Victorian and Edwardian ages working-class women were knowledgeable about techniques by which they could control family size.
Angus McLaren's study of the Lancashire textile workers, whose fertility was less than other working-class groups in the nineteenth century, suggests that many of the miscarriages which were reported, and many which were not reported, were probably the result of abortion achieved through the use of Epsom and Glauber salts or similar substances.
Indeed, McLaren makes two main claims.
The first:
…
knowledge of abortive techniques was widespread in factory districts and spreading due to the interchange of information in the mills, to increase in therapeutic abortions carried out by surgeons, and to the publicity of quacks for their abortifacients.
The second point is that factory women were well versed in appraising the advantages and disadvantages of additional family members.
Therefore, he suggests:
…
in contrast to the middle classes, in which by the second half of the century contraceptives were available and effectively used, abortion was becoming a ‘back-up’ method of birth control; in the case of working-class women, without safe contraceptives, it was a basic means of family planning.
Working-class women had always had recourse to abortion; but in the case of the last century it was particularly likely, first, where married women workers worked outside the home and hence paid a key role in determining their families economic stability; and second, where the dependence of the family on the women's wage led to a reappraisal of family strategy.
The demand for child labour in the textile areas could have been... an inducement for workers to aim for high fertility.
What has not been adequately appreciated, however, is that a whole constellation of social forces — high infant mortality rates, loss of mother's income, the fluctuating utility of child labour — could equally well encourage fertility control.
Similar views have been expressed by Patricia Knight who explored the subject of women and abortion in Victorian and Edwardian England.
She suggests that abortion was probably the most prevalent form of contraception for working-class women  before 1914–25 She also notes that chemist shops sold quinine, which could be used as a spermicide or as a drug to procure abortion, that a wide variety of drugs were used to achieve abortion, and that advertisers offered many female pills, such as Widow Welch's Female Pills and Towle's Pills, which were, in effect, abortifacients.
If such knowledge and techniques were readily available in pre-war years then it is obvious that the same techniques were known about and used during the inter-war years.
It may be true, as some suggest, that working-class budgets would not stretch to paying for the regular use of new birth-control methods but old, tried and cheap techniques might still be used.
Even infant mortality figures, as implied by McLaren, may have partially reflected the need of working-class families to reduce their family size.
Equally, the new ideas and advice offered by the Marie Stopes clinics and by the Family Planning Association, which was established in 1930 and had sixty-six clinics by 1939, would have been very limited.
Marie Stopes's books, Married Love and Wise Parenthood may have sold widely in the early 1920s but the main readers were almost certainly the middle class.
Richard Allan Soloway's excellent study of the birth control movement between 1870 and 1930 may well reveal the extent to which these groups were concerned about the need to spread knowledge about birth control amongst the working classes but, it would seem, in the light of more recent research, that such concern was inappropriate.
Soloway's comment that, ‘The birth control groups found it difficult to persuade the middle and upper-class membership of the feminist organizations that access to the contraceptive methods was a genuine problem’, seems both ill-founded and unnecessary.
Indeed, it seems highly likely that working-class families would have controlled family size through the old, rather than new, techniques.
The evidence of the 1949 Royal Commission on Population on the use of birth control techniques, recognised to be inadequate on the matter, suggests that only 40 per cent of women married between 1910 and 1919 used some form of birth control at some time in their marriage compared with 66 per cent of those married between 1935 and 1939.
In addition it was suggested that only about a quarter of the earlier sample of women had used birth control methods other than withdrawal compared with 57 per cent of the latter group.
It seems unlikely, given the delicate nature of  such a survey, that the true extent of birth control would be revealed and hardly likely that those surveyed would own up to the use of abortion, an activity which had been illegal, though widespread, since 1803.
Birth control was clearly more widespread than the Royal Commission could possibly reveal.
Birth rates began to decline for all social groups as a consequence of changing attitudes towards economic conditions and opportunities.
In the case of the working class — possibly more than the middle class — the unemployment of families and the depressed economic conditions that prevailed during the inter-war years encouraged the reduction of family size, even though there were still many areas where the birth rate remained high or increased, almost oblivious of the economic conditions.
It seems doubtful, except in the case of the more prosperous areas, whether the acquisitive nature of society was as important to the working class as was the need to survive and adjust to the depression.
Strikingly, however, the average size of manual worker's families exceeded that of non-manual workers by a large and consistent margin of just 40 per cent throughout the early twentieth century.
All sections of British society were clearly reducing family size — though for varying reasons if one accepts Angus McLaren's analysis.
The Alarmists and the Consequences of the Decline in Population Growth
Richard and Kathleen Titmuss attempted to assess the economic and social consequences of the changes they had noted.
In dramatic form they suggested:
As some industries become redundant others will be required to expand.
Arm-chairs and bedroom slippers instead of children's foods is one extreme instance of the change-over from the requirements of youth to those of old age.
the demand for basic necessities, such as bread, will diminish as the need for the semi-luxuries of old age rises.
Educational requirements will decline as the burden of old people increases.
In fact, innumerable changes will result affecting agricultural, housing, medical, clothing and amusement policies.
Broadly, we may say that industry will have to be far less rigid; indeed much more flexible in adapting itself to change than it has been for the past twenty years.
Others predicted that the population of Britain would fall to around 18 to 20 million by the end of the century, with catastrophic effects as a diminishing workforce was burdened with a rapidly increasing number of old-age pensioners.
It was deeply felt that the economy would no longer be viable and that demand would decrease since the aged would be unable to afford the type of demand required to sustain industry.
Many of these predictions were, of course, irrational and some economists, most notably J. M. Keynes saw in decreasing population growth the opportunity for per capita output to increase rapidly.
The real problem, according to him, was the need to ensure that unemployment was not allowed to persist by increasing effective  demand through government expenditure and, when required, supplementing existing consumer and investment demand.
Others, particularly socialists, were convinced that the downward trend in population growth was not, in itself, a problem since the key to the future prosperity of Britain was to be found in the redistribution of income to ensure that all enjoyed an income sufficient to enjoy healthy life.
This had been the view vehemently advocated by the Independent Labour Party in the 1920s and by Oswald Mosley, when he was a supporter of the Labour Party during the 1920s.
Some sections of the Trades Union Congress still felt that the central problem of the inter-war years was unemployment and that, in a way, a slow down in population would not be a bad thing.
Others, including Richard and Kathleen Titmuss, suggested the need to regulate future population in such a way as to help the overall development of the economy.
Family allowances were, indeed, suggested as a necessary feature of such a policy and were, incidentally, provided for the second child and subsequent children after the Second World War.
The Royal Commission on Population also tended to endorse the view that a stationary population was possibly not a bad thing considering the way in which the economy could be regulated.
But it also noted that population would continue to rise over the next thirty years and presented the view that the state should plan future population growth by offering family allowances and income tax relief to those contemplating families along with the development of special services for the benefit of children and mothers.
Moreover, it supported the introduction of such measures in order to ensure that social inequality was removed and that more children from the deprived families survived their childhood.
It concluded:
Public policy should assume, and seek to encourage, the spread of voluntary parenthood; it should also assume also that women will take an increasing part in the cultural and economic life of the community and should endeavour, by adjustments of social and economic arrangements, to make it easier for women to combine motherhood and the care of the home with outside interests.
We submit in subsequent chapters proposals for assistance to families in cash and services.
these proposals we regard as doing no more than initiating a programme of family welfare which will have to be kept under continuous review and modified and expanded in the light of experience and deeper knowledge.
In the final analysis, these more sober views were vindicated by events; population continued to increase steadily, after an upward surge in the late 1940s, and some of the views expressed by the Royal Commission on Population were accepted.
Conclusion
Some vital areas of information, such as the extent to which modern and traditional birth-control methods were used, lack any firm, accurate or trustworthy evidence.
As a result, it is not easy to arrive it conclusions about the reasons for population trends during the inter-war years.
It is difficult to assess whether or not unemployment and economic conditions were vital to the decline in the size of working-class families, or whether the prospect of purchasing new consumer goods conditioned the responses of the working classes.
However, certain points can be made.
In the first place, it is clear that the working class, along with the middle class, was reducing its fertility — although there were one of two exceptions in some of the most depressed industrial towns.
Secondly, this decline in fertility did occur in depressed industrial towns and among industrial groups whose prospects of unemployment were high and whose access to the ‘acquisitive way of life’ must have been limited by the fact that they were receiving some form of unemployment or health benefit and struggling to survive.
In Jarrow, Stockton-on-Tees and other industrial towns it seems unlikely that the prospect of acquiring wealth and property would have exerted much influence upon working-class families struggling for survival.
Thirdly, however, it is likely that the ‘acquisitive way of life’ will have operated amongst the middle class, the working class employed in the new expanding consumer industries, and those migrating from the old industrial areas to the South East and the Midlands.
Fourthly, it is obvious that the overall decline in birth rate and population growth which was occurring as part of the demographic transition to small birth and death rates was greatly exaggerated by the poor economic conditions and the unemployment of the inter-war years.
It was the speed at which the decline occurred which led to wild suggestions that Britain was on the verge of a race suicide.
In the final analysis, there were many factors operating upon population trends in the inter-war period.
Unemployment and economic depression were significant among these, particularly  within the working class in the declining industrial centres who had.
had the knowledge which would permit them to regulate their population increases from the beginning of the industrial revolution, and before.
One should not assume that the decisions of working-class families would be substantially affected by new methods of birth control or by new ideas.
They had always had the potential to control their fertility and did so when necessary.
The economic collapse of the late 1920s and early 1930s provided that necessity, and the results were to be seen in the exaggerated downward movement in population growth.
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
The First World War saw the rapid rise of trade union membership from 4 million in 1914 to about 6 million in 1918.
By 1920, trade union membership reached its inter-war peak of about 8 million.
This growth in membership, which had been fairly rapid since about 1906, was the result of a variety of factors, particularly the improved economic conditions, the high demand for labour and the high wages which were paid in war time.
Moreover, as the war continued, the government was increasingly dependent on the support of union officials and the status of trade unions rose to a level which had previously appeared inconceivable.
The Webbs, the historians of British trade unionism, sensitive to this change, emphasized the point, noting:
…
revolutionary transformation of the social and political standing of the official representatives of the Trade Union world — a transformation which has been immensely accelerated by the Great War.
Such a situation was tolerated by the government in a climate which accepted that the economy had to be controlled.
Nevertheless, it was obvious that the impetus which the trades unions had gained would lead to conflict with the government once attempts were made, by government and employers alike to remove the wartime regulations and return to the competitive situation of the pre-war world.
Such conflict became increasingly likely after 1920 when unemployment rose as British trade failed to recover to its pre-war level.
Faced with the intense competition of foreign trade  competitors, employers resorted to attempts to reduce monetary wages, an action which was given an additional downward twist by the Baldwin government's decisions to return to the gold standard and to reflate the pound in 1925.
Indeed, it was this government action which encouraged employers to attempt to reduce the wages of workers by 10 per cent; causing the coal lock-out/strike and General Strike of 1926.
A galvanized trade union movement facing the problems of high unemployment and constant wage reductions was bound to find itself in conflict with both employers and government in the inter-year years.
The General Strike is often taken as the symbol of the industrial relations of these years — and is seen as an event which brought to an end the militant trade unionism of almost two decades.
Thereafter, it is argued, trade unionism was defeated and the ‘Trades Union Congress, which didn't have much support before 1926, had even less support afterwards.’
Indeed, the militancy' of the 1920s is often compared with the relative quiescence of trade union action during the 1930s.
But are these generalizations justified?
Did unemployment, economic depression and the General Strike reduce trade unionism to a pitiful weakness?
Had the trajectory of Labour's industrial growth been altered by the events of 1926?
Did the General Strike marginalize the romantic image of Industrial militancy, as Dame Margaret Cole has suggested?
Were the defeats of the coal strike/lock-out and the General Strike vital in permitting the Government to return to the political economy of normalcy, which was referred to in Chapter 1?
Can the General Strike be seen, in any sense, as the revolutionary strike which the Communists were anticipating?
And, was the defeat of the General Strike a watershed in British industrial relations?
The Immediate Post-War Years, 1919–25
Trade union membership continued to grow until 1920 — even though there were reverses for the movement, such as the government's decision to ignore the advice of the Sankey Commission of 1919 and to return the coal mines to the coal owners in April 1921.
The wartime machinery of industrial relations still survived — particularly the Whitley Councils which had been  competitors, employers resorted to attempts to reduce monetary wages, an action which was given an additional downward twist by the Baldwin government's decisions to return to the gold standard and to reflate the pound in 1925.
Indeed, it was this government action which encouraged employers to attempt to reduce the wages of workers by 10 per cent; causing the coal lock-out/strike and General Strike of 1926.
A galvanized trade union movement facing the problems of high unemployment and constant wage reductions was bound to find itself in conflict with both employers and government in the inter-war years.
The General Strike is often taken as the symbol for the industrial relations of these years — and is seen as an event which brought to an end the militant trade unionism of almost two decades.
Thereafter, it is argued, trade unionism was defeated and the ‘Trades Union Congress, which didn't have much support before 1926, had even less support afterwards.’
Indeed, the militancy of the 1920s is often compared with the relative quiescence of trade union action during the 1930s.
But are these generalizations justified?
Did unemployment, economic depression and the General Strike reduce trade unionism to a pitiful weakness?
Had the trajectory of Labour's industrial growth been altered by the events of 1926?
Did the General Strike marginalize the romantic image of industrial militancy, as Dame Margaret Cole has suggested?
Were the defeats of the coal strike/lock-out and the General Strike vital in permitting the Government to return to the political economy of normalcy, which was referred to in Chapter 1?
Can the General Strike be seen, in any sense, as the revolutionary strike which the Communists were anticipating?
And, was the defeat of the General Strike a watershed in British industrial relations?
The Immediate Post-War Years, 1919–25
Trade union membership continued to grow until 1920 — even though there were reverses for the movement, such as the government's decision to ignore the advice of the Sankey Commission of 1919 and to return the coal mines to the coal owners in April 1921.
The wartime machinery of industrial relations still survived — particularly the Whitley Councils which had been  formed in order to bring employers and employees together in an attempt to resolve differences without industrial conflict.
But in 1920 the economy began to decline, unemployment rose and the government committed itself to following the advice of the Cunliffe Committee to return to the gold standard by 1925.
These deflationary policies of various governments added to unemployment at a time when Britain's foreign trade was depressed.
Employers therefore resorted to the reduction of costs, most particularly in wages, in order to compete in world markets at a time when it appeared that rising unemployment made their action possible without major conflict.
Employers constantly gnawed at the high level of wages which had been built up during the First World War.
They frequently attempted to reduce the basic wage of workers and to reduce the cost of living addition which had been paid throughout the war and in the immediate post-war years.
Indeed, it was estimated that the wages of Britain's twelve million workers were reduced by about £5 million per week between 1921 and 1925, although higher estimates have also been made.
But this had not improved Britain's competitive position, and all it did was reduce the home demand for products, thus increasing unemployment further.
Ben Turner, of the General Union of Textile Workers and soon to be President of the TUC, wrote in 1925:
It's as much home trade we are suffering from as the lack of foreign trade.
In fact the reduction in home trade is far bigger than the reduction paid out exports, and this is accounted for by the ten million reduction paid out now would give a right big fillip to trade.
Trade unionists increasingly saw underconsumption as the cause of stagnant trade, for, as the manifesto of the woollen textile workers stated on the eve of the 1925 textile lock-out: ‘There is no greater fallacy today than to think we could get back to prosperity by reducing wages.’
Even before the General Strike there was evidence that trade union leaders were beginning to challenge the notion that wage reductions could solve Britain's economic difficulties and an increasing willingness to threaten industrial action.
Up to 1925, however, industrial action had not appeared to work and threatening postures had not generally been successful against employers.
Indeed, trade union membership fell by more than 20 per cent, about 1.7 million in 1920 and 1921, in a period when there was more industrial conflict than at any other rime in the inter-war years, other than in 1926.
The implacable opposition of employers had forced wages down despite the most determined efforts of the trade unions.
This quick decline in trade union power appears to have occurred because of the combination of both internal weakness and external pressure.
Apart from the difficulties presented by unemployment and the trade depression, already referred to, some of the leading trade unions found it impossible to submerge their differences in a joint defence against the onslaught of both employers and government.
The most famous evidence of this is offered by the events which led to ‘Red Friday’ in April 1921.
Following the end of the First World War, the leading question in the mining industry was whether or not the state would return the coal mines to their pre-war owners.
The Miners' Federation of Great Britain, which had passed resolutions in favour of both workers' control and nationalization, supported state control and in order to avoid industrial conflict the Lloyd George Coalition government set up a royal commission, chaired by Lord Sankey, to investigate the coal industry.
Although the Sankey Commission produced four different reports, the majority report — upon the casting vote of the chairman — recommended that the coal industry should continue under national control.
However, David Lloyd George decided that a majority of one was not sufficient, even though he had given an undertaking to implement the majority report.
The consequence was immediate; the Yorkshire miners struck, unsuccessfully, in July 1919 and some 200,000 miners in South Wales and Monmouth threatened to strike in sympathy.
In the final analysis, this sympathetic support did not transpire.
Yet the frustration which this ‘betrayal’ caused among coal miners was to dominate the industry for many years to come.
As one historian has noted:
The bitterness and the troubles of the coal mines for the next seven, or for that matter twenty-seven years, derived in great part from the feeling of both miners and owners that they had been betrayed.
Vernon Hartshorn, then a Derbyshire MP and a South Wales miners' leader, asked in the Mouse of Commons:
Why was the commission set up?
Was it a huge game of bluff? was it ever intended that if the reports favoured nationalization we were to get it?
….
That is the kind of question the miners of the country will ask, and they will say they have been deceived, betrayed, duped.
Although there were several disputes during the next twenty months, it was not until the coal mines were formally handed back to the coal owners, on 31 March 1921, that serious conflict ensued.
On the following day, the coal owners locked out those miners who would not work at lower rates of pay — of up to 49 per cent in the badly affected export area of South Wales — and attempted to suspend national agreements.
The government also issued regulations under the 1920 Emergency Powers Act and recalled troops from Ireland and abroad in order to quell the miners and their potential allies.
The government feared that the Triple Alliance, forged between the Miners' Federation of Great Britain, the National Union of Railwaymen (NUR) and the National Transport Workers (NTW) at the beginning of the war, whereby each union offered sympathetic strike support under certain circumstances, might be used to widen the dispute.
It need not have had such fears.
The expected support of the NUR and the NTW on Friday, 15 April 1921 never occurred, and that day became the infamous ‘Black Friday’ of Labour history.
Although Ernest Bevin's Transport Workers had not come out on strike the real opprobrium of the Labour movement was held for Jimmy Thomas, the railwaymen's leader, whose opposition to sympathetic strike action had been vital to the collapse of the Triple Alliance.
He had not helped his cause when he ‘trotted blithely down the steps to greet eager reporters with the news ‘ Its all off boys’’ and added, to cries of ‘Jimmy's selling you’the  ripost that ‘I've tried boys, I've done my very best.
But I couldn't find a bloody buyer.’’
The immediate outcome of the failure of the Triple Alliance was that the miners were left to fight alone.
Eventually, they were forced to accept some significant wage reductions, although the French invasion of the Ruhr, and the consequent interruption of coal output, plus the American coal strike of 1924 helped to reduce and delay the downward trend of coal prices and the rate of decrease in the wages of coal miners.
It was to be 1925 before the downward pressure in wages was to again produce the threat of major industrial conflict in the coalfields.
Yet there were other consequences.
One was that the wage levels of other industries were forced downwards.
In 1921 the employers won back the 5 per cent concession made in 1920 to the woollen workers and successfully reduced the cost of jiving addition to wages, paid since the First World War, over the next four years.
Similar actions were repeated frequently in other industries.
Another consequence was that the TUC was forced to push through its reorganization and to form the General Council, an alternative to its Parliamentary Committee, as its executive body.
The real purpose of the General Council was to explore the possibility of establishing effective cooperation between unions.
At first, however, it focused upon the need to settle inter-union disputes and it only gradually acquired the right to call for joint industrial action from Congress.
By 1925, however, it was strongly pushing forward the idea of forming an Industrial Alliance by which threatened unions could call upon the sympathetic strike support of other TUC unions.
Indeed, the left-wing and Communist demands for ‘All Power to the General Council,’ in 1924 and 1925, helped the General Council to strengthen its demand for an ‘Industrial Alliance’.
Gordon Phillips has stressed the way in which this objective, and the General Strike, can be seen as an ‘expiation of 1921’.
Yet the trade union movement faced many difficulties in the early 1920s.
Some unions, most notably the Miners' Federation of Great Britain, were reluctant to invest the General Council with the power to call all unions out on sympathetic strike action and unemployment made it difficult for it to fight against wage reductions.
Nevertheless, in 1925 a determined effort was made by the TUC and other unions to reverse the trend.
In many ways the stimulus for this came not from the miners but from the wool and worsted textile workers who fought against further wage reductions in 1925.
The summer of 1925 was hardly the most propitious moment for the textile unions to make their stand against further wage reductions.
Trade unions were already suffering, and the implementation of the decision to return to the gold standard augured badly for the staple export industries.
Yet, in April, the Executive Committee of the National Union of Textile Workers (NUTW) declared its intention of demanding a restoration of the 5 per cent on base wages lost in 1921 and that the cost of living addition should be altered every three months — an action which would benefit the textile workers.
This action was endorsed by the National Association of Unions in the Textile Trade (NAUTT) and the matter was put to the employers who responded by suggesting that British industry was less competitive than it had been before the return to the gold standard and the reflation of the pound, and suggested that wages should be reduced by 8 per cent.
The seeds of conflict were sown and, despite offers of mediation from several quarters, the employers issued notices of reduction of wages on 24 July 1925.
From that moment the lock-out, or standstill, in the textile trade began.
It lasted just over three weeks and the immediate conflict was only resolved by the intervention of the Ministry of Labour and its Minister, Sir Arthur Steel-Maitland, who requested that the employers allow the existing wage rates to continue until a Court of Investigation, which was to be set up, reported upon the woollen and worsted textile trades.
When this body, which was composed of an independent chairman and two representatives from both sides, eventually reported it suggested that there should be no change in conditions and wages in the industry.
The significance of this dispute should not be lost.
In the first case there were probably between 135,000 and 170,000 woollen and worsted textile workers involved in the dispute, although estimates go up to 240,000, and every union and all sections of the textile workforce were unified in the action which they took.
This was a remarkable achievement in an industry which was notorious for its local variation, the disunity of its workforce and the general weakness of its trade union organization.
Secondly, the outcome of the dispute was seen as a victory for the workers in their attempt to prevent wages being reduced further.
Even before the Court of Investigation confirmed the workers' stand, the trade unions had smelled the scent of victory.
On the eve of the agreement to call off the dispute the Yorkshire Factory Times commented that the wage retreat had at last‘been stopped’.
 Presumptious as this was, the feeling was abroad that government policy, as well as the employers' stand, had been defeated:
wages, said Mr Baldwin, have ,to be brought down.
This is not simply an incautious and unconsidered statement by Mr Baldwin, a slip of the tongue: it is the settled and deliberate policy of the governing class, who have entered upon a course of action which has for its object the deliberate intensification of unemployment as a method of forcing down wages.
The article even invoked the views of John Maynard Keynes as evidence of the foolishness of the government's approach.
Combined with the temporary solution of the coal crisis in 1925, which will be discussed later, the anticipated textile victory buoyed up the whole of the trades union movement.
Herbert Tracey reflected that the ‘defeatist’ mood of the trade unions over the last few years had been transformed.
Now it was felt that the General Council of the TUC had struck a blow to maintain minimum wages for all workers by its support of the woollen and worsted textile workers.
But the message went further for it was felt that the lesson to be learned was that living standards could be maintained if unity prevailed: ‘With the help of the Trade Union Movement, mobilized by the TUC General Council, they were enabled to secure a victory which they could not have won if they were left to fight alone.’
In other words they could overcome the debilitating impact of high unemployment and the government's attempts it deflation which had clearly weakened the trade union movement's powers of resistance during the early 1920s.
The moral seemed obvious: the reversal of the onslaught on wages and the defence of a minimum wage, if not the establishment of a living wage, could be secured by an alliance among unions.
It was felt that if such unity could be achieved in the poorly organized wool textile trade then it was even more likely that it might be achieved in better organized industries.
Indeed, the threatened coal strike of 1925, which occurred at more or less the same time, seemed to confirm this impression.
There was, indeed, strong support for collective action with unions within specific industries and between the unions of all industries — something which the TUC encouraged through its new journal Trade Union Unity.
This strategy was particularly evident in the more famous coal dispute of 1925.
The events which led to this began on 30 June 1925 when the coal owners decided that they would abolish the national minimum wage, cut wages by about 10 per cent in order to compensate for the government's return to the gold standard with a reflated pound, and to maintain standard profits no matter how low  wages fell.
The miners refused to accept such changes and the General Council of the TUC committed itself to sympathetic strike action from Friday, 31 July.
The intransigence of both coal owners and the union ensured that conflict was inevitable, and with it the threat of a wider conflict whereby the TUC would at least call for a coal embargo from its constituent unions.
Faced with the immediate prospect of a serious coal dispute and fuel crisis the Baldwin government decided to provide a nine-month subsidy to the coal owners, during which time a royal commission, the Samuel Commission, would investigate the coal industry.
The fact could not be hidden that the government, despite its earlier refusals, had decided to intervene to avoid serious industrial conflict.
Friday 31 July 1925 henceforth became known as ‘Red Friday’.
There was much euphoria among trade unionists.
The results of both the wool and worsted dispute and the coal dispute convinced some that the tide of wage reductions had been changed and with it, perhaps, the course of unemployment.
The Yorkshire factory Times , Journal of the wool and worsted textile workers, confidently predicted that the:
General Council's action in support of the miners and wool textile workers  signaled a turn in the tide, the beginning of a definite stand against the policy of wage reductions which economic conditions have enabled the employers to impose in the last four and a half years.
But there were many who were under no illusion that the victory had been won and the tide had turned.
Herbert Smith, President of the Miners' Federation of Great Britain, maintained that the 1925 coal dispute had been ‘an affair of outposts.
It was a mere skirmish.
The main battle has still to be fought and won.’
The Communist Party of Great Britain, whose policy at this time was one of ‘All Power to the General Council’, also posed a question and offered an answer:
Thirty-four weeks to go — Thirty-four weeks to go to what?
To the termination of the mining agreement and the opening of the greatest struggle in the history of the British working class.
We must prepare for the struggle.
In 1925, then, it appeared that the position of the trade unions and the pattern of industrial relations were about to change.
On the one  hand, trade unionists were increasingly confident that the period of post-war wage reductions was about to be halted, even if a battle remained to be fought.
As a result there would be more employment and an improvement in the condition of working-class life.
On the other hand, there remained the conviction of many employers and Baldwin's Conservative government that wages would have to be reduced in order to maintain profits and to fight international competition.
It was the threatened industrial conflict of 1926, the General Strike, which promised to resolve the matter, one way or another.
General Strike, 1926
The General Strike, which lasted for nine days between 3–12 May 1926, was without doubt the most important industrial conflict of British inter-war history.
It is the only instance in British industrial history when the vast majority of the organized working class have given their industrial, financial and moral support to one group of workers for any length of time.
Indeed, it is the only occasion on which there has been a substantial national strike in support of any industrial group of workers in Britain.
Historians have been fascinated with the event and have written extensively on its causes, meticulously recorded the events, and speculated about the consequences of its collapse for British industrial relations.
On the fiftieth anniversary of the dispute, in 1976, several books appeared on the subject, producing a surfeit of published research to which there has since been no significant addition.
As a consequence of this research historians know very well the variety of factors which led to the dispute — many of them already outlined in the earlier sections of this chapter.
They are very aware that the problems of the coal industry combined with the clash between government policy and the policies of the TUC ensured that there would have to be some type of conflict in 1926.
They are also aware of the regional and local variations in the support for the General Strike.
They disagree strongly about its consequences: was it a watershed in British industrial relations, as some Communist writers would have us believe, or did it barely change the course of TUC and trade union policy, as Gordon Phillips has argued?
The main argument presented here is that the General Strike was partly, but significantly, a consequence of the determination of  successive governments to reduce wages, thus increasing unemployment in the short term, in the hope of strengthening the pound and returning to the gold standard — a view which has already been developed in Chapter 1.
Secondly, it must also be appreciated that there was substantial unity within trade union ranks and that, despite the suspension of the strike on 12 May, the unions had signalled their intention not to accept further wage reductions without some resistance.
In this respect it seems unlikely that successive governments were given the opportunity to return to normalcy in the manner which they wished.
Thirdly, it is doubtful whether the General Strike could be regarded as the watershed in British labour history, which it is sometimes claimed to be, or that it changed in any significant form the pattern of industrial relations.
The context within which the General Strike occurred was one in which the Baldwin government had returned to the gold standard and within which employers in exporting countries were faced with the need to reduce costs, and thus wages, by about 10 per cent.
This had been the cause of the 1925 dispute, and the situation had altered little between 31 July 1925, ‘Red Friday’ and 1 May 1926 when the coal lock-out began.
The only change in the intervening period had been that the government had prepared for the threatened dispute while the Samuel Commission deliberated about the way in which to make the industry more efficient and profitable.
The government had divided the country into twelve divisions, circulated Circular 636 in November indicating the responsibilities of local authorities, passed a Preservation of Public Order Act and received from the Home Secretary, in February 1926, the statement that ‘little remained to be done before the actual occurrence of an emergency.’
Turning to propaganda, the government attempted to open up the constitutional issues and the Home Secretary, Sir William Joynson-Hicks put the matter starkly, if exaggeratedly, when he commented, at a meeting on 2 August 1925 at Northampton that:
I say to you, coming straight from the Cabinet councils, the thing is not finished.
The danger is not over.
Sooner or later, this questions has to be fought out by the people of the land.
Is England to be governed by Parliament and the Cabinet or by a handful of trade union leaders?
In comparison the trade union movement did little until the subsidy ended on 30 April 1926, even though it was expected that the Samuel Commission would be unable to offer a compromise  which might be agreeable to both coal owners and unions.
Indeed, when the Samuel Commission reported in March 1926, it was only able to offer the then unacceptable recommendations that the ‘amalgamation of small units of production is both desirable and practicable’ and that miners should accept further wage reductions as a temporary measure until such reorganization occurred.
This was never likely to offer a basis for a wages agreement and the employers issued notices giving the reduced wage rates on 30 April and 1 May 1926, when the subsidy ran out.
In consequence, a special meeting of the TUC on 1 May 1926 undertook to support the coal miners through sympathetic industrial action, giving the General Council primary responsibility for negotiations:
…
provided that there was the fullest consultation between the two bodies in respect of any developments which might occur, and no settlement would be reached without the miners' consent.
And for two days officials from the General Council discussed with the Government the possibility of extending the subsidy.
But negotiations were broken off by the government on 3 May once the compositors at the Daily Mail refused to set the type for an editorial on ‘For King and Country’.
The General Strike began, at a minute to midnight, on 3 May 1926.
From the start, there was much confusion about who should come out on strike to support the miners.
The General Council of the TUC had decided that only essential, front-line or group one, workers such as railway workers and printers should be called out.
In fact, many non-essential, second line or group 2 workers such as those in textiles came out, although the General Council never called upon their services throughout the dispute.
The reticence of the General Council was deliberate for it feared the violence which might ensue if all workers came out and was alarmed at the prospect of mass defections leading to the rapid collapse of the dispute if it did not immediately meet its objectives.
For, they believed that
…
once the strike has reached its highest point…then we shall have dribblings back to work here and there, and possibly large desertions.
Given the lack of clear and early advice, the General Council's policy was ignored and many second line workers came out  in support of the miners.
This lack of organization was compounded by the fact that many trades councils set themselves up as councils of action to run the dispute it the local level.
They often came into conflict with the local Transport Committees, formed from the local branches of the main transport unions, who correctly maintained that they alone had the right to issue permits for the movement of essential items which would otherwise have been held up in the dispute.
This confusion of responsibilities had forced the National Transport Committee, Unity House, London to circulate a telegram on 7 May, with the approval of the General Council, to the following effect:
We instruct ill local transport committees review permits which have been issued No trades council or Labour Party Council of action, strike committee or trade union branch has authority to deal with permits.
Please convey to all concerned.
In addition, there was great variation in the areas of support and the surviving local strike records offer a confusing and changing picture of strike activity.
Apart from the coal areas, where sympathetic strike action was strongly evident, and the rural areas, where it was not, the rest of the country displayed immense diversity.
In London, there were both areas of strong support for the strike, like Battersea, and areas where that support was extremely limited — although far fewer in number.
In Yorkshire, the coal areas and Halifax, Huddersfield, Skipton and many other textile towns supported the strike almost l00 per cent, while where was much less support in Bradford, Leeds and Wakefield.
In the South East the unlikely towns of King's Lynn and Eastbourne were evidently strongholds of the strike while Aldershot, Maidstone, Dorking, Lowestoft and Yarmouth displayed only lukewarm interest.
The role of the government in publishing the British Gazette , its resort to middle-class volunteers and the use of troops obviously reduced the impact of the strike in many regions.
The Economic League, formed in the winter of 1919 to 1920 in order to lead a counter-attack by British capitalism against the rise of a mass labour movement, also added greatly to the difficulties of the General Council.
It was obsessionally hostile to trade unionism and Arthur McIvor has written:
During the General Strike, the League collaborated with other employers' organizations, such as the FBI, to provide information to the government on coal stocks and shortages, the availability of transport and the organization of strike-breaking operations.
Indeed, regional Leagues played an active role in strike-breaking, encouraging the enrolment of volunteer workers, providing lorry drivers and transporting foodstuffs, and publishing news-sheets and leaflets attacking ‘the pernicious influence of the reds’.
In the coalfields, the district League organized a more sustained propaganda campaign, touring the colliery villages with ‘flying squads’, vilifying ‘Cookism’, supporting the Spencer brand of non-political company unionism and propagating the League's new slogan: ‘every man is a capitalist’.
There is little doubt that the effectiveness of the strike was greatly impaired by its internal difficulties and external opposition.
The 400 or 500 councils of action which were formed were ridden with dispute and inefficiency.
It is alleged that these problems made Leeds one of the worst organized towns in Britain.
Indeed, Emile Burns' survey of the councils of action, after the dispute, revealed the great extent to which they were badly organized and the degree to which in  Middlesborough , for instance, ‘each trade acted on its own’.
The capitulation of the General Council on the 12 May, and its decision to call off the strike without any guarantees that those involved would not be victimized, might also be seen as evidence of failure.
But there was also much evidence of trade union unity and success.
About two million workers had come out in support of the miners, a number which represented almost half the total which the TUC could have called out in support of the miners — and more than it did.
There was also a great spirit of unity among the workers and, although the statements were coloured with rhetoric, it was emphasized that at Wolverhampton, ‘The whole of the workers stood firm and were prepared to fight to the bitter end’ and that at Hull there was ‘Alarm — fear — despair — a victorious army disarmed and handed over to its enemies.’
In Bradford, it was even suggested that the General Strike might be seen as a victory:
we do not say that the Government has been defeated by the General Strike, for it was not directed against the Government.
But we do say that its object [has]been gained, and that after all the stir and excitement, the inconvenience…we are back where we wished to be, and with the miners' case under negotiation.
The last comment was obviously wrong, although there remained a rather threadbare conviction that something had been achieved.
This view could not easily be maintained as the evidence mounted that, despite their negotiations with Sir Herbert Samuel and the TUC's meeting with the Prime Minister on 12 May, the strike had been called off without any guarantees that those who had been involved would not be victimized by employers and that there would be no immediate resumption of negotiations between the coal miners and the coal owners.
Still, there had been unity of sorts.
Little of that spirit of unity could, however, be attributed to the activities of the Communist party.
Though it claimed some influence upon the councils of action in the North East and in London, its impact was minimal.
The presence of its members was normally tolerated because they supported the industrial action of the TUC, 1,200 of them being arrested during the dispute, and because some of its leading figures, such as Robin Page Arnot who did sterling work in organizing the councils of action in the North East, were active in the dispute.
Their influence was usually patchy and short-lived.
In Yorkshire, Shipley was one of the centres of Communist activity but most of its members were arrested early on in the dispute.
There was also some violence when the Castleford Communists marched on Leeds, and there were several arrests of communist agitators from Castleford.
Typical of these arrests was the case of Isobel Brown.
The Yorkshire Observer , shortly after the end of the General Strike, reported:
At Pontefract yesterday Isobel Brown, who said her last permanent address was Moscow, was committed for three months in the second division for having delivered a speech at Castleford on Wednesday likely to cause disaffection.
She admitted she had come from London to gain recruits for the Communist Party, but denied any attempt to stir up strife.
None of the efforts of the Communist Party amounted to anything of a significant revolutionary threat about the General Strike and it was Winston Churchill, editing the Britain Gazette for the government, who drummed up more revolutionary potential than really existed.
The General Strike, a title not used by the TUC, was simply an attempt by the General Council of the TUC to support the miners against a wage reduction.
A few activists might have seen it as more than that, but that was never the view of the General Council.
It may well be argued that the government was able to defeat the General Strike by its propaganda campaigns, the arrest of Communist activists, the use of volunteers and by sheer patience, in allowing the General Council's Negotiating Committee to spend several futile days negotiating the Samuel Memorandum in the hope that it would provide a basis for a settlement.
But in the final analysis, though the TUC lost some credibility and membership, the government was never able to push forward and capitalize upon any victory it achieved.
This was most evident in the fact that the provision banning sympathetic strike action in the 1927 Trade Disputes and Trade Unions Act was never tested in the courts.
In many respects the whole General Strike could be seen as an inevitable development which served notice to government, employers and trade unions that each party was not to be taken lightly.
In what respect, then, can the General Strike be seen as a watershed in British industrial relations?
It has been suggested by some that the government and employers were left free to reduce wages and to rationalize industry, and trade union membership did decline from 5.5 million in 1925 to about 4.8 million in 1928.
Railway workers and bus drivers were victimized by employees and forced to sign documents indicating their intention to leave their unions, and the miners in many districts, though by no means all, found their wages reduced in the wake of the defeat of the miners in November 1926.
By the late 1920s and the early 1930s, governments were encouraging employers to rationalize coal along the lines laid clown by the Samuel Commission, whereby small units would be incorporated into larger units and be closed, as in shipbuilding, cotton and other industries.
It is clear that the views of the unions were ignored.
Equally, employers in the wool and worsted industry, having failed to get wage reductions in 1929, forced the textile unions to accept a 9 per cent reduction in wage rates in June 1930, after a ten-week lock-out.
There were clear losses for the trade union movement, and a reversal of fortunes for several years, which was amplified by the deepening depression of the late 1920s and early 1930s.
Nevertheless, as Gordon Phillips has argued, the pattern of trade union activity and industrial relations was not altered by the General Strike.
It should be remembered that there was no prosecution brought under the 1927 act right up to its repeal by a Labour government in  1946.
The decline in trade union membership, and the marked decline in strike activity were already occurring before 1926, as indicated by Table 5.
1.
Individual trade unions also reflected this continuous decline throughout the 1920s and early 1930s; the coal miners' union declined from 936,653 members in 1921 to 885,789 in 1925 and to 554,015 in 1932 while, for the same dates, respectively, trade union membership in the railway unions fell from 560,875 to 528,764 and 399,184.46 There also appears to have been no let up in the determination to forge a more effective industrial alliance — even though the General Council stopped short of another general strike.
In addition, the pace of wage reduction fell and only one-eighth of the amount was taken off the weekly wage bill between 1930–3 as was taken from the net weekly wage bill for 192 1.47 Also, there was little to suggest that the pattern and the style of industrial relations was greatly altered by the General Strike: the number of workers on strike and the number of days of work lost were already declining well before 1926 and there was a rise of industrial militancy in the late 1920s and early 1930s as unions attempted to resist the further wage cuts being advocated by employers.
This is not to deny that there were not some major setbacks.
The mining dispute, which had provoked the strike, continued from the end of April until November 1926, when the miners and their families were effectively starved back to work despite the financial support of those unions affiliated to the TUC.
There is no denying the suffering of the mining families and the deep hatred which was further nurtured between the miners and the coal owners.
The striking miners received no relief though, ‘The wives did get a few shillings from the Parish Relief (which all had to be paid back when the strike ended).’
The younger men ‘started what was called jazz bands’ through which to win prizes and raise money for the strike effort.’
The local branches of the miners' union set up soup kitchens, with much local help from butchers and shopkeepers.
But it was all to no avail.
As Kenneth Maher, a miner from Caerphilly, reflected:
Towards the end of the strike things were awful.
No coal, no clothes.
we were in rags and a lot of us had no shoes.
I remember going with my mother and my brother to a colliery tip about four miles away.
The weather was getting very cold.
It took us a day to pick two buckets of tiny bits of coal.
The tip had been picked clean.
Then after eight months the strike collapsed in Nottinghamshire.
There was a drift back to work.
But in South Wales it wasn't going to be as easy as that.
The miners went back to work completely crushed — worse off than before.
The Powell Duffryn Company came into its own, buying pits up for a few thousand pounds, shutting them down, throwing hundreds out of work.
Thought for the community never entered into it.
In the pits they didn't shut down they put their own breed of managers, under-managers and deputies….
These bosses never mixed with the rest of the community, nor did their wives.
They were a law unto themselves.
There is no denying that the miners suffered a humiliating defeat, but was this true of the wider trade union movement?
1927–1939 — Until the 1960s historians generally accepted that the trade unions were on the retreat, relatively toothless and passive, throughout the rest of the inter-war years which followed their defeat in the General Strike.
The victimization which occurred, the loss of trade union membership, and the wage reductions all seemed to confirm this impression.
The calm industrial relations which occurred in 1927 and 1928 also suggested that the militancy of earlier years had evaporated in the wake of defeat.
Dame Margaret Cole, for instance, suggested that the General Strike killed off the ‘romantic vision of workers' control’.
Clearly, there were some changes and in some industries, most notably coal mining, national wage negotiations disappeared in November 1926 after the collapse of the miners' resistance to the coal lock-out, to be replaced by district agreements.
This meant that wages fell sharply in the coal exporting districts of South Wales and the North East but remained the same in the new and expanding south Yorkshire coalfield, where new and deeper mines were producing high quality coal for the home market.
Nevertheless, there were many signs that the unions, while still losing members, were still maintaining their resistance against wage reduction.
Neither side of industry was seeking confrontation after the General Strike, and even Baldwin's government was reluctant to pursue the draconian legislation advocated by some Conservative extremists in the autumn of 1926.
Indeed, the TUC began to view the prospect of trade unions being involved with the state and the employers in running and regulating the economy.
The short-lived Mond — Turner talks advocated this new spirit in industrial relations, which can be viewed as an extension of the concept of the General Council acting as representative of the whole trade union movement in national industrial matters.
These arose out of the feeling that trade unions had to become  involved in other spheres of influence if they were to offset any serious injury which might befall them as a result of the General Strike.
But, in addition, there arose the possibility of some common agreement with industry over the fact that the economy was being run to the advantage of the City as opposed to industry.
The decision to return to the gold standard, and to operate it, often necessitated the rise of interest rates which acted as a burden upon the exporting industries just as the reflation of the pound had made exporting more difficult.
By the end of 1926, the General Council was advancing the argument, with some justification, that the General Strike had only been an attempt to warn employers that the problems of industry could not constantly be tackled at the expense of the standard of living of the workers.
Such a view helped trade union leaders to think in terms of coming to some type of arrangement with industrialists who were feeling the pinch of economic policy.
George Hicks was well attuned to this possible linkage when, in his presidential address to the 1927 Trade Union Congress, he asserted:
…
much fuller use can be made…of the machinery for joint consultation and negotiation between employers and employed….
It is more than doubtful whether we have seen the fullest possible development of machinery for joint consultation in particular industries.
And practically nothing has been done to establish effective machinery of joint conference between the representative organizations entitled to speak for industry as a whole.
Within a few months, similar statements were being made by the king, Stanley Baldwin, Ramsay MacDonald, Ernest Bevin, and a whole host of trade unionists.
Indeed, Ernest Bevin, speaking at a union dinner, maintained that, if there is a new conception of the objects of industry, then there can be created in this country…conditions which will minimize strikes and probably make them non-existent for 25 years.’
By January 1928 the preparatory negotiations were going on between the TUC and the Confederation of Employers Organizations and the Federation of British Industries, the two main employers' organisations.
The implacable opponents of the past were now, due to a common necessity, moving towards establishing a harmony of interests.
Sir Alfred Mond, of the Federation of British Industries, and Ben Turner, President of the General Council of the TUC, entered into  discussions while their respective bodies debated their attitude to the new alliance and the proposals which were being made.
The Mond — Turner talks attempted to form a common alliance between the employers and the unions on such matters as unemployment, outlining remedies such a development fund, colonial development, more liberal trade facilities, export credits, augmented pensions for those retiring at sixty-five, the raising of the school-leaving age, and, above all, ‘the substitution of modern plant and techniques for existing machinery and methods’— in consultation with the unions and with measures... for safeguarding workers displaced by rationalization.’
Yet, although the leaders of both sides of industry worked hard to achieve a common agreement on policies to present to the government the talks, and the influence they exerted, began to wither away after a couple of years, and did not survive into the 1930s.
The worsening economic situation, and a dramatic increase in industrial conflict between 1929 and 1932, served to sour the possibility of a long-term consensus between employers and trade unionists.
Nevertheless, as already suggested, wages did not decrease at the height of the slump of 1929 to 1933 at anything like the level of reductions which occurred in the early 1920s and some type of stability and balance was being established.
Trade unions, despite a loss of membership and their apparently weakened position, appear to have performed more effectively after the General Strike than before — which suggests that employers were more reluctant to become embroiled in major industrial conflict and that the unions were, themselves, asserting their rights in more effective and varied ways.
The defeat of the TUC in the General Strike did not have the disastrous impact which trade unionists feared.
On the contrary, unions appear to have been more effective and even the loss of trade union membership may be a consequence of the inability of the unemployed trade unionists to pay their unions fees rather than due to a loss of sympathy with the unions.
Trade unions, in fact, did rather well during the 1930s.
Professor H.A.
Clegg has examined the reasons for this in the early 1930s and suggested that employers were not well organized at this time and that there were fewer jobs being lost in the early 1930s than in the early 1920s.
In a particularly perceptive passage, he captures the essence of the problem faced by many employers:
Most firms in most industries were not facing disastrous losses, nor even the prospect of disastrous losses.
The worst hit firms might decide that they must have a reduction in pay in order to stay in business.
Their colleagues, or enough of them, might agree that a reduction in labour costs would improve their prospects too, so that negotiations with the unions could begin.
However, when the unions proved reluctant to make concessions, the employers would have to contemplate the possibility of a lockout.
Those who were not hard pressed and in no immediate danger of running at a considerable loss might have no strong incentive to vote in favour of a course which threatened them with heavy losses in the immediate future.
The conditions of 1930–3 were unfavourable to unity among employers.
Trade unions were in fact in a much stronger position in 1933 than they had been in 1921 or 1922.
There had been many amalgamations, the Transport and General Workers and many other large unions had absorbed small unions to form a formidable barrier to employers, there was less interunion rivalry and the authority of the General Council of the TUC was accepted and practically unchallenged.
Such Communist opposition that existed, as among the London busmen in the Transport and General Workers, had been marginalized by the post 1926 attempts to remove Communists from trade unions and from trades councils.
By the late 1930s the trade union movement was, in fact, recapturing its lost membership.
As indicated in Table 5.1, trade union membership rose by 43.34 per cent between 1933 and 1939, at a time when the economy began to recover and when unemployment was falling.
But even more important than that was the fact that trade unions were now exercising new areas of influence and were better organized.
In particular, they exerted more power within the Labour Party, were increasingly respected by the National government, and were moving towards the reduction of interunion rivalry.
Trade unions exerted a considerable influence upon the Labour Party, especially after the introduction of the new Labour constitution of 1918.
They held a majority of seats on the National Executive Committee.
However, they chose not to use their power to interfere too obviously with the policy decisions of the Labour Party and left Ramsay MacDonald to lead his parliamentary colleagues more or less as he wished.
There was also a National Joint Council, which brought together representatives of the General Council the National Executive Committee of the Labour Party and  the Parliamentary Labour Party, to act as a co-ordinating body for the Labour movement.
In fact it rarely met in the 1920s.
But the position began to alter after the General Strike, when the trade unions began to take a more dominant role in Labour politics.
The National Joint Council, which was renamed the National Council of Labour in 1934, acquired a new constitution, whereby the General Council was allowed as many representatives as the other two organisations.
Throughout the 1930s, Ernest Bevin was the dominant figure on this body as he was at Labour Party conferences, shaping Labour's domestic and foreign policy.
It was he who, as we shall see, ultimately replaced George Lansbury as the leader of the party with Attlee and who got the Labour Party to move from its general support of peace and pacifism towards the need to prepare to meet the threat of war with European fascism.
All three National governments, which operated under the premiership of J. Ramsay MacDonald (1931–5), Stanley Baldwin (1935–37) and Neville Chamberlain (1937–40), displayed increasing respect for the trade unions in the 1930s.
This was reflected in many ways.
For instance, Ramsay MacDonald offered knighthoods to both Arthur Pugh and Walter Citrine, in respect of their work for trade unionism.
Both accepted what might have been regarded as a rather dubious honour.
By the late 1930s, the TUC was being drawn into discussions with the government and textile unions were drawn into the task of reorganizing the cotton industry, through the Acts of 1936 and 1939.
Also, the amalgamation of unions which occurred at a rapid pace throughout the inter-war years greatly improved the organization and effectiveness of the trade union movement as the years progressed.
But one of the most significant developments in inter-union relations was the ‘Bridlington Agreement’ passed at the TUC Congress in 1939, which laid down that no union should attempt to organize workers at any industrial establishment where another union was already represented and negotiated on behalf of the majority of the workers.
Conclusion
Unemployment posed serious problems for the British trade union movement during the early 1920s.
Wages fell rapidly and the unions, despite their involvement in many long and protracted  disputes were unable to staunch the outward flow of members and funds or to stave off the savage monetary wage cuts which occurred.
Ironically, the situation changed remarkably after the General Strike.
Far from being the moment when British trade unionism all but collapsed, the General Strike — even though there were other factors at play — sounded a warning to employers that trade unions would resist further wage incursions and that the cost of too muscular an industrial policy could be high.
Thereafter, despite the high unemployment years between 1929 and 1932, trade union membership remained remarkably resilient and recovered sharply during the improving trade situation of the late 1930s and trade unions were drawn more centrally into negotiation with national employers negotiations and with the National government.
Unemployment, therefore, exerted a powerful, but short-lived, impact upon trade unions and the pattern of industrial relations.
While the General Strike might be viewed as a watershed by some historians who feel that the trade union position worsened considerably after 1926, this was clearly not the case; trade unions were less frequently attacked by employers after 1926 than before and the pace of wage reductions slowed considerably.
However, there was no change in the strategy and policies adopted by the General Council of the TUC.
The purpose behind the formation of the General Council continued to be the need to unite trade unions into an industrial alliance to defend the wages and conditions of workers.
The General Strike in no way deflected it from that course and it is difficult to see that event as an historical watershed in the evolution of trade union policies and attitudes.
What is remarkable about the inter-war years is the consistency of trade union policies and the forthright manner with which the General Council pursued its intention of forging an effective industrial alliance between its member unions.
There were no sudden changes in direction even though employers and government began to modify their attitudes towards trade unions in such a way as to encourage negotiations at the highest level.
Far from bringing about the denouement of inter-war trade unionism, the General Strike reasserted, in the fullest form possible, the potential power of trade unionism.
It had a cathartic effect upon government and employers and permitted the working classes at least to protect, if not improve, their standard of living.
SOCIAL CLASS AND INEQUALITY
George Orwell wrote, at the beginning of the Second World War, that:
There is no question about the inequality of wealth in England.
It is grosser than in any European country and you have only to look down the nearest street to see it.
Economically, England is certainly two nations, if not three or four.
But at the same time the vast majority of the people find themselves to be a single nation and are conscious of resembling one another more than they resemble foreigners.
Patriotism is usually stronger than class-hatred and always stronger than any kind of internationalism.
Except for a brief moment in 1920 (the Hands off Russia movement) the British working class have never thought or acted internationally.
For two and a half years they watched their comrades in Spain slowly strangled, and never aided them by even a single strike.
But when their own country (the country of Lord Nuffield and Montague Norman) was in danger, their attitude was very different.
His main point was that the marked differences in income and wealth persisted between the social classes throughout the inter-war years had provoked little animus and a remarkably timid response from the working class.
This indignant representative of the impoverished upper classes sought explanations in terms of patriotism, the indifference of the working class and the upward and downward extension of the middle class which began to smudge the divide between traditional class divisions.
But it should be remembered  that his was an extremely impassioned and subjective response of a man who had fought in Spain, toured some of the depressed North and committed himself to the increasing intellectual and left-wing policies of the Independent Labour Party.
But how justified were Orwell's complaints?
Was inequality of income and wealth still gross?
How did the high level of unemployment affect the pattern of income and wealth?
Did the working class accept their circumstances without demur?
Were class barriers collapsing?
How did the life of the working class, and other social classes, change?
The Distribution of Wealth and Income
There is little evidence suggesting that unemployment and the poor economic conditions did undermine the overall economic position of the working class during the inter-war years, although monetary wages were reduced constantly until the mid-1930s and wages did decline as a proportion of home-produced income during the early and mid-1930s.
After an initial successful assault on wages by employers in the early 1920s, the trade unions revealed remarkable resilience in staving off wage reductions after the General Strike, as has already been suggested.
In addition, there were some significant increases in the proportion of income going to the salary earners, suggesting the growth of the service and professional section of society, and a general worsening of the position of those who relied upon profits in the 1920s and early 1930s.
There was a similar gradual change in the distribution of wealth, but, as Orwell suggested, the inequalities of wealth remained gross.
The fact is that the rich retained most of their income and wealth, although there was, quite clearly, some transference of wealth and income from the very rich to the middling rich sections, as indicated in Table 6.3.
W.D.
Rubinstein has demonstrated, the rich managed to protect and retain most of their wealth and income despite the more democratic nature of society in the twentieth century and the challenge posed by two Labour governments during the inter-war years.
The great landowners, such as the Bedfords, Derbys and Sutherlands kept their high position in the realms of the landed rich, despite the decline of inter-war agriculture, and the Rothschilds and the Sterns consolidated their financial position through their work in the City of London.
The immediate post-war gloom about the decline of the landed families, as sales of landed property reached a crescendo in the early 1920s proved to be ill-founded, even though the Duke of Rutland and other landed aristocrats, did dispose of substantial parts of their estates.
Notwithstanding such erosion, landed wealth showed remarkable resilience and several landed estates were proved at more than £2 million during the  inter-war years; the eighth Duke of Northumberland, for instance, leaving more than £2,500,000 in 1930.
Yet, although there remained gross, indeed obscene, inequality in the distribution of wealth, substantial social changes were occurring.
Indeed, the changing economic conditions and unemployment did help to alter the balance of social classes and some of the experience of class life.
Although much remained unaltered, there is no denying that some significant changes were occurring.
The Classes
Orwell was not alone in observing that England was two, three or four nations; J. B. Priestley had already made much the same observation in his English Journey .
Priestley's famous observations focused upon the differences between the England of ‘cathedrals and minsters’, industrial England, and the new post-war England of ‘arterial and bypass roads, of filling stations and factories that look like exhibition buildings.’
In effect, he suggested that the social and economic divisions were more than ones of mere occupational group.
There were clear regional and local distinctions, with their variable impact on economic prosperity, which imposed themselves upon the income, cultural and status divisions which had emerged in the nineteenth century and persisted into the twentieth.
Yet, though the concept of class is vague, with social and economic divisions acting only imperfectly to distinguish social groups, the major occupational categories persisted in giving a sufficient basis for social distinction during the inter-war years, even though many differences between social classes were blurred at the margins.
Indeed, this lack of distinctiveness owed something to the changes which had occurred during the inter-war years.
In 1934, there were 8,600,000 families, about 73.5 per cent of the total number of families in Britain, living on less than £4 per week.
Six million of these families were estimated to earning less than £100 per annum— a very low figure indeed considering that the nation's provision for a family of five in 1935 was 29s 3d (£1 46p) from the Unemployment Assistance Board and 36s (£ 1 80p) in 1936 — giving an annual income of between £74 and £90 per annum .
The majority of these were members of the traditional working class, employed in the staple industries of mining, textiles, shipbuilding, iron and steel and engineering.
They represented about half the total  number of families of the country and more than 60 per cent of the population, and were those which were most afflicted by the economic ravages of the inter-war years.
It was from this section of society that the bulk of the unemployed came.
It was they who were scrutinized by Orwell, the Pilgrim Trust and other social investigators.
Boyd Orr's malnourished population was drawn almost entirely from this section of the working class and it was their lives which changed little during the inter-war years as Carl Chinn, and other writers have noted.
Although, as suggested earlier, their standard of living was higher it had been before 1914 their social position and status remained unchanged.
The children of this section of society were still, as already noted, subject to infant mortality rates at least twice as high as those for the children of the middle classes.
In addition, they rarely had the opportunity to escape their environment for they were rarely educated beyond the age of fourteen, the statutory minimum age established by the Fisher Education Act of 1918.
The Hadow Report of 1926, which dealt with the education of the adolescent, paved the way for the school-leaving age to be raised to fifteen and contemplated the possibility of secondary education for all, on the basis of the tripartite system accepted by the 1944 Education Act.
Yet it should be remembered that the school-leaving age was not actually raised until after the Second World War and that the suggestion that they should receive secondary education was tainted by the official assumption that the children of the working class were innately less intelligent than their middle-class brethren.
Indeed post-elementary Hadow schools into which many of them were moved into after 1926 were offering much the same education as the old elementary schools had offered for those children between the ages of eleven and fourteen before 1926.
Little had changed, and the school conditions and the opportunities for working-class children to do well were always subject to environmental limitation.
Ellen Wilkinson referred to this situation in her history of Jarrow.
She particularly noted the squalid condition of many schools.
Emphasizing the parsimony of the government and the  the economic impact of poverty she wrote:
There are things which cannot be done even with a 4shillings; 5d education rate when that only produces £22,000, and when, even with the Government grant, there is only £75,000 to spend.
The elementary school buildings are out of date and some are insanitary….
Several of them have not yet got  electric light, which makes modern developments, like school films, impossible.
In many the class-rooms are simply partitioned cubicles in what used to be a large hall….
The sanitary and washing arrangements are primitive….
The Board of Education will not pay more than 20 per cent.
towards the cost of renovating old schools.
It is impossible for Jarrow to raise the 80 per cent or the amount needed for new schools; so the children will continue to suffer….
In 1936 a survey of Jarrow elementary school children was undertaken by an educational psychologist….
Her conclusion was that 20.6 of the children were of high intelligence for whom special provision should be made in central or secondary schools.
No average for the country is available for comparison, but compared with other areas where similar surveys have been made this figure is regarded as a high one.
Unfortunately only 8 per cent of the children can go on to higher [secondary]education.
In many cases, the parents of the brighter children wished them to go to the secondary school in Jarrow, an overcrowded building housing about 400 pupils in which good scholarship results were achieved, but there were serious difficulties facing their children:
To do home lessons on the edge of the table on an overcrowded kitchen is not helpful to concentration on a mathematical problem.
The Headmaster in an interview said rather surprisingly that he considered this a greater handicap than any actual malnutrition among secondary pupils.
As a consequence of the difficulties of poverty in which many working-class children were raised, education did not often provide an escape route for them and many, particularly in towns like Jarrow, faced the prospect of juvenile unemployment.
It was this working-class section of society who lived in poor rented, often slum, accommodation, were subject to serious ill-health, and denied the possibility of holidays.
Their entertainment, as Ross McKibbin has stressed, came from gambling on horse racing, a feature of working-class financial commitment which never appears in the working-class budgets gathered by social investigators.
As McKibbin stresses:
Mass betting was the most successful example of working-class self-help in the modern era.
It was at every stage of proletarian institutions and bore all the characteristics of the British working class.
Although illegal it was almost entirely honest.
The aspirations of the working class were narrow; they simply wanted to escape their immediate poverty and to secure some basic improvements in life.
As one housewife explained:
…
if I won bigger money, I should go in for a new house, which would be built to our own idea, so that we could get a bigger scullery….
Why do they build such small sculleries which make washday a dread.
In short, it was the poorer sections of the working class who were trapped in poverty with little prospect of escape.
It was they whose immediate vision was one of attempting to escape from the grind of poverty, and whose children were confined to the lowest levels of education offered in the elementary schools and the secondary, or ‘post-Hadow’, schools.
Ellen Wilkinson, with the passion of a true crusader who had become an MP for Jarrow, captured the essence of the life of this section of the working class when she wrote:
Bad housing, overcrowding, underfeeding, low wages, for any work that is going, household incomes cut to the limit by public assistance, or Means Test or whatever is the cutting machine of the time…these mean disease and premature death.
No goodwill speeches, no glowing perorations about ‘the patience of our people under misfortune’ alter the plain fact that if people have to live and bear and bring up children in bad houses on too little food, their resistance to disease is lowered and they die before they should.
Their babies die too, at an unnecessary and an easily-  preventible high rate.
She further examined the appalling rented accommodation in which the working class were forced to live:
No money spent by the tenants or Council on insecticides seemed able to keep down the swarming beetles in rotting woodwork.
The roofs leaked, the walls were damp.
Paper hung away in long strips.
In some houses the fire grate was loose in the wall and looked liable to fall away at any moment…perhaps when full of live coals and with a pan of boiling water.
It is true that some of these poorer working class families were moved into council houses but, as Orwell, M'Gonigle and others have noted, the high rents and rates tended to reduce their living standards and death rates remained high because of lack of income.
Poverty surveys were directed at this section of the working class.
Yet, while the traditional working class had little prospect of improving their economic and social opportunities, this was not so for the two and a half million or so families whose income varied between £2 and £4 per week.
Indeed, once families were earning over £3 per week in the Midlands and the South East, where the car industry and the new consumer industries were developing, they had the prospect of a much improved standard of living and a significant improvement in their life opportunities.
With this went the prospect of renting better housing, of buying the new consumer items, and for those on £4, with small families, the prospect of buying their own semi-detached houses — although it was manual workers who earned more than £4 who were likely to do that.
They might even enjoy an annual seaside holiday week.
Most certainly these were the sections of the working class who were beginning to benefit from the trend towards paid holidays, which was eventually formalized, after the Amulree Report, and the Holidays with Pay Act of 1938.
Arthur Exell, who worked at Morris Radiators, supplying components for Morris Motors at Cowley in the 1930s, has recorded his experiences as a working man in a new and expanding Morris Motors.
There were obviously difficulties at first, when there were no trade unions and ‘the factory was run by a mixture of tyranny, favouritism and paternalism’.
But pay was good.
The sheet metal workers, who cut sheet metal to the design of the drawings of the part of a car, earned 2s 6d (12p) per hour, and did a lot of overtime at one and a quarter time, which means that many of them would have been earning £6 or £7 per week, and be well over the arbitrary divide of £4 suggested as a line for the divide between the working class and the middle class.
The polishers, and several other groups could also reach that level of pay.
But below these skilled aristocrats of labour were men in the press shop, who would design a press to mass produce a part, and others who would more likely earn 1s 6d per hour, or less, based upon a piece-work arrangement.
Even with overtime £3 15s to £4 would be about their maximum weekly pay.
Although Exell's reminiscences are coloured by the fact that he was an active Communist and trade unionist, they cannot hide the fact that the pay in the new industries was generally good when compared with the majority of the working classes — and very high in periods of prosperity.
The situation of these workers was very little different from that of the members of the middle classes and, indeed, many of them, in income terms alone, were, from time to time, effectively within that social category.
By 1934 there were about 2,500,000 families, or 21.3 per cent of the total, who might be regarded as middle class, based upon the criterion of £4 to £10 per week.
At the worst they were little better off than the best paid sections of the working class and at the best they were able to afford a distinctively different education for their children and adopt a lifestyle which aped their financial betters.
Their ranks had been much augmented by the expansion of the salaried sector — managers, clerks, school teachers and civil servants.
During the 1920s their proportion of the home-produced income had increased, though it dipped in the 1930s owing to the salary cuts imposed on teachers and civil servants in the wake of the 1931 financial crisis.
It was middle classes who were the major beneficiaries of the economic and social changes which occurred during the inter-war years.
In the 1920s their financial position improved and, despite the reductions of income in the 1930s, the cheap money policy which followed the abandonment of the gold standard and the move to protection, permitted them to obtain cheap mortgages to buy the thousands of three-bedroomed semi-detached houses which were being built in the South and the Midlands at between £400 and £450.
It was they who bought the new consumer items produced by the new industries and who, as already suggested, were the first to practice family limitation on a significant scale.
In education, it was the children of the middle classes who took about three-quarter of the places at grammar schools.
At the peak of economic and social wealth and position were the upper classes, the 617,000, or 5.2 per cent, of families who earned £10 or more per week and often gained their income from profits and rents.
At the bottom end of the scale this category could include high salaried officials.
At the top it included the wealthiest landowners and industrialists in the land, such as Edward A. Guinness, brewer, who died in 1927 and left £13.5 million and Sir John R. Ellerman, shipowner and financier, who died in 1933 leaving £36.7 million.
To this social category, good housing, and a good grammar school or public school education for their children, presented no problem.
It was the upper classes who sent 60,000  children to public school every year and who did not recognize the need to control family size in the way in which the middle classes did.
During the inter-war years their fortunes had fluctuated a little, dipping in the 1920s, but by the 1930s their incomes were expanding again.
In addition, there was some distribution within the income range towards the middling rich, earning between £5,000 to £10,000, rather than the very rich, as indicated in Table 6.
3, although this middling category were clearly affected by the economic crisis of the early 1930s when their profits and rents were probably affected greatly by the Wall Street Crash and the ensuing impact upon industry and finance throughout the world economy.
Some of Orwell's complaints were clearly justified.
The inequality of wealth and income was still gross, although the rise of unemployment does not appear to have worsened the position of the working classes.
There were clearly changes occurring, and the borderlines between social classes, never very clear at the best of times, were probably less precise than they had been before the First World War — though class barriers were by no means collapsing in the real world of health, education and social opportunity.
But did the working class accept their continued relatively poor conditions without demur.
Class Conflict
Orwell felt that, by and large, the working class accepted their circumstances without seriously attempting to improve them.
In other words, class conflict was limited.
Yet other commentators have stressed the degree of class conflict evident in the General Strike of 1926 and the hunger marches of the 1930s.
Which picture is correct?
Was there a high level or a low level of class conflict during the inter-war years?
The problem with Orwell is that he could only think of class conflict in terms of major insurrectionary conflict.
There has been no time in British history when this has ever occurred, although from time to time insurrectionary events, such as the Jacobite risings and Chartism, have appeared to threaten the Establishment.
As already stressed, the National Unemployed Workers' Movement and, its mentor, the Communist Party of Great Britain, failed to find the revolutionary spirit which they felt was being dampened and  re-channelled by the Labour Party.
The fact is that class conflict provided little or no revolutionary potential in Britain and that apathy was far more potent a force among the British working class than action.
The political ambitions of the working class had normally been channelled through parliamentary and constitutional routeways.
Therefore, while there was support for hunger marches and the General Strike, there was nearly always an emphasis placed upon the constitutional nature of such conflict and, in any case, the working-class interests were always operated through the trade unions to the Labour Party, which emphasized its acceptance of parliamentary politics.
Given the parliamentary situation which existed, when Labour governments were minority ones in the House of Commons, and when the National government could not seriously be challenged in the 1930s, it is hardly surprising that working-class protest exerted a marginal impact upon the distribution of wealth and income in Britain.
The parliamentary straightjacket which the Labour Party had placed itself in was inimical to violent change.
It should also be recognized that the working class was an extremely diverse social group and that it was fragmented and variegated.
One should not expect it to have operated in a unified or uniform manner.
And, of course, it rarely did.
Yet, there was demur at the problems which inequality caused, even though it was rarely effective.
Conclusion
Orwell's general contention is clearly correct — inequalities of wealth and income persisted and remained marked during the inter-war years.
Nevertheless, there were changes and social class divisions may have become more blurred.
And, above all the working class acquired for itself a political party, the Labour Party, to improve its position.
Though Labour's success was limited to, and by, its parliamentary approach, it used its enhanced relationship with the working classes to develop, particularly in the 1930s, policies to deal with the unemployed, fascism and the Spanish Civil War.
This strengthened bond gave new meaning to politics in the age of unemployment.
SECTION III: POLITICS IN THE AGE OF UNEMPLOYMENT
PARTIES AND GOVERNMENTS
Unemployment dominated British politics during the inter-war years.
Every election, apart from the one in 1918, was fought over the problems of the unemployed — and even the ‘coupon’ election of 1918 focused upon the debate concerning the need for social reform.
The problems which unemployment presented to political parties and governments have already been outlined; the dramatic high-points being the collapse of the second Labour government in August 1931 and the abandonment of the gold standard in September 1931.
But what is not often appreciated is that unemployment, and its attendant social problems, helped to reshape the political balance of power of the age and was an important factor in the creation of a new two-party system in which the Labour Party replaced the Liberal Party as the progressive force of British politics in opposition to the almost omnipotent Conservative Party.
Historians have been divided as to the reasons for the political changes of these years.
Some have maintained that the Liberal Party was being rapidly undermined before the First World War and that its decline was almost inevitable, others, however, assume that it was the First World War which was responsible for the decline of a vapid Liberal Party — the divisions within Liberal ranks creating the political vacuum into which the Labour Party slipped.
Whichever view is accepted, most historians believe that the new political structure of the inter-war years was largely determined by 1918, and  the unemployment of the inter-war years is not crucial to either explanation of the structural changes which occurred in British politics.
Yet unemployment undoubtedly helped to speed up the Liberal decline and Labour rise since it highlighted the rigidity of the immediate post-war Liberal Party which was clearly unwilling to adapt its policies and ideas on free trade to the new demands of the age.
The new advanced economic policies of the Lloyd George Liberals, which emerged in the late 1920s, were developed too late to arrest or reverse the Liberal decline.
The political transformation of Britain was dramatic.
The Conservative Party, in various guises, was in government for eighteen out of a possible twenty-one years.
During the 1920s and early 1930s, the Labour Party was its serious challenger, to the extent that the Conservative Party was forced to offer social reform in order to meet that challenge.
The Liberal Party, no longer a serious political challenger by the late 1920s, meandered through the inter-war years in a state of deep division and shock.
The fundamental political changes of the inter-war years were probably inevitable by 1918, though their pace may have been determined by the level of unemployment and the extent of social and economic reform.
Yet many questions remain.
The problem of historians is to  analyse the reasons and the precise timing of the changes.
At what point did the Labour Party take over from the Liberal Party as the second party of government?
How seriously did the Conservative Party take the Labour challenge?
And, in  focussing upon the events of the inter-war years, precisely how important was unemployment in shaping the political changes which occurred?
The Labour Party
Historians have long debated the reasons for the rise of the Labour Party.
As indicated above, at one extreme, some believe that its emergence was entirely due to the internecine conflict of the Liberal Party during the First World War, occasioned by David Lloyd George's replacement of Asquith as Prime Minister in 1916.
It is argued that the vacuum which this created permitted the Labour Party to emerge.
Its development is therefore regarded, by some, as a mere accident of war.
At the other extreme, many historians believe that the Labour Party had simply inherited working-class support from the Liberals owing to the fact that trade unions had  changed their allegiance when it became obvious that only an independent Labour Party would act in their interests.
This second group of historians would therefore argue that the Labour Party was emerging before 1900, and certainly not later than the famous Taff Vale case of 1900 and 1901 — when trade unions appeared to lose the right to strike without facing the threat of financial penalties.
Thereafter, they believe that the growth of Labour was practically inexorable given the political circumstances of the times — aided by the increase in the electorate from seven to twenty-one million, following the introduction of the 1918 Franchise Act.
The former view tends to ignore the fact that the Labour Party was deeply-rooted in trade-union politics before 1914, while the latter overlooks the great potential which the war had for destroying old values and arrangements.
Although the two main explanations of Labour's growth will remain irreconcilables, the fact remains that the Labour Party did emerge to become the second party in the political system by 1922, and a party of government by 1924.
Its rapid post-war development was based upon its close association with trade unionism, already firmly established before 1914, and it seems likely that the First World War simply speeded up the process of political change.
It is also fair to suggest that the Labour Party benefited from the rising unemployment of the 1920s for it claimed, successfully in the 1920s, that although it could not solve unemployment, which was a product of a capitalist society, it would at least ensure that the unemployed were guaranteed a level of benefits which would ensure healthy life.
This commitment, never really tested in the 1920s, was to help Labour strengthen its credentials a the party of the working class.
But how deep-rooted was the Labour Party's political growth?
Was its growth inexorable?
Recently, Christopher Howard has challenged the view that Labour's organization was effective in the 1920s: ‘The image of a vibrant expanding new party was illusion.
Labour was fortunate that its opponents were deceived.’
He added that, ‘Widespread electoral support bore little resemblance to restricted party membership, however, and disappointments were common.
Unwittingly, Howard appears to accept that Labour's growth was inexorable, within the context of the times, for he argues that it occurred despite the poor level of party organization throughout the country.
Presumably the working class were voting for the Labour Party since  they saw it as their party and did not need to incentive of a party machine.
Yet, while accepting that the working class was wedded to the Labour Party it should not be ignored that such support was also nurtured by a much improved Labour organization, despite Howard's contrary view.
Ross McKibbin and Bernard Barker feel that the Labour Party was making determined efforts to improve both its national and local organization and that, despite some obvious difficulties, it succeeded in doing so.
McKibbin, in particular, acknowledges the strengths and weaknesses of the new constituency and party organizations but stresses the overall general improvements which were achieved.
To him, however, the overriding developments were the increasing centralization of party organization and the growing predominance of the unions.
The party could only go as far as the unions would allow and their influence was apparent at all levels.
It was the union organizations in both urban and rural constituencies which guaranteed continuity and finance: ‘What emerged was informal, often improvised, but remarkably tough.’
In addition, though the party offered its electorate little it was committed to moral ideas and personal liberation to such an extent that it excited passionate enthusiasms.
According to McKibbin, the Labour Party became the vehicle of working-class aspirations by the early 1920s.
Since the party was dominated by trade unions accepting it meant accepting an intricate network of loyalties rather than accepting socialism: Idealism was in fact rather less necessary, or sustaining, than loyalty within a trade-union dominated Labour Party.
These loyalties were galvanized by initiatives at both the national and local level.
The National Executive Committee (NEC) reorganized its activities by appointing four standing subcommittees — organization and elections; policy and programmes; literature, research and publicity; and finance and general purposes.
Egerton Wake became the party's national agent and vigorously pursued the policy of giving direction to the rest of the movement, through the organization of regional and local conferences.
Indeed, by 1922 each of the party's nine regions had organized at least three regional conferences, many of which were addressed by Wake, Arthur Henderson, the secretary, and a ‘star speaker’.
Advisory Committees were set up by the NEC on 13 March 1918 in order to help to develop the Party's policies on a wide range of issues and  began to publish reports and statements which added to the corpus of Labour policies.
The Party also acquired a paper,The Daily Herald.
Also in the wake of the 1918 Franchise Bill, the Party formed a Women's Section under Dr Marion Phillips and appointed regional organizers to attract to newly-enfranchised women.
There were many difficulties, but there is no doubting that Labour's national organization began to improve.
Even the most cursory of examinations of the minutes of the National Executive Committee of the Labour Party indicates the feverish activity which was occurring in the immediate post-war years and, in these early days, it was to be expected that mistakes would be made and that new directions would be sought.
One Labour Party circular, issued in June 1923, stressed:
The results of the [1922]General Election have brought forcibly before us the primary importance both of securing the votes of women electors and of getting a large number of women to take part in an electoral campaign.
My Executive is of the opinion that it is essential both for winning and retaining Parliamentary seats that special attention should be given to the whole subject….
There was certainly no complacency among Labour's national leaders, quite the contrary.
The records of local Labour parties reveal that Labour's feverish organizational activities were not confined to the national party alone.
This was abundantly clear in the textile district of the West Riding.
Here, the detritus of pre-war Labour politics was quickly absorbed into the more unified Labour Party organization which emerged after 1918.
Constituency parties were formed for all the major industrial constituencies.
The rather amorphous Huddersfield Labour movement was transformed into the more clearly defined Huddersfield Divisional Labour Party in the spring and summer of 1918.
The Colne Valley Divisional Labour Party was formed in June 1917, the Leeds City Labour Party reorganized itself in April and May 1918, and promoted the formation of constituency parties in the six divisions which made up Leeds, while constituency parties were formed for all four of the Bradford seats in April 1919.
This reorganization of the local Labour movement was greatly fostered by the appointment of full-time agents, the creation of provincial Labour newspapers and the attempts to create women's sections.
The fact is that the Labour Party had a well-established base for  the parliamentary success which it sought during the inter-war years.
It was this base which, allowing for the unusual circumstances of the General Election of December 1923, permitted Labour to form its first government early in 1924.
Unfortunately, this was an episode which dented the confidence of some of Labour's more extreme socialist supporters due to the fact that Labour was only kept in office, as a minority government, owing to the support of the Liberal Party.
During its short period of administration, of less than ten months, it accomplished little of real importance — other than the passing of the Wheatley Housing Act which provided generous housing subsidies to both private and public builders and stimulated the council house building boom of the 1920s.
The first Labour government singularly failed to do anything about the level of unemployment, although it made it easier for the unemployed to obtain unemployment relief and extended benefit.
However, this failure appears to have made little difference to the fortunes of the Labour Party.
Although Labour was defeated in the General Election of 1924, the election which saw the publication of the ‘Zinoviev Letter’ with the allegation that it revealed the Communist intention to stir the masses of workers to revolution through using the Labour Party and the Anti-Soviet treaty, its vote increased by more than one million, or about 24 per cent, even though the number of Labour MPs was reduced from 191 to 151.
Between 1924 and 1929, when out of office, the Labour Party clearly strengthened its position.
The economic situation and the persistence of unemployment did help but the most obvious factor pushing Labour forward was the General Strike, which occurred between 3–12 May 1926.
The Trades Union Congress had called the strike in order to support the coal miners who had been locked out by the coal owners, who were attempting to impose wage reductions upon them.
Although the strike was called off, amid bitter controversy, it did benefit the Labour Party.
The reluctance of some Labour leaders, most notably Ramsay MacDonald and Philip Snowden, to be too closely associated with the dispute gave the impression that the Labour Party was not fully behind the strikers — although the records of most local Labour parties deny such an impression.
In addition, Baldwin's Conservative government took sweeping action against the whole of the Labour movement through the Trade Union Act of 1927, which, among other things, outlawed  ‘sympathetic’ strike action.
Nevertheless, there were benefits and compensations for the Labour Party.
Trade unionists were incensed with the act and mounted a campaign against it in 1927.
Though it was relatively unsuccessful it confirmed and strengthened the trade union connection with the Labour Party in much the same way as the Taff Vale judgement had acted as an annealing force between the trade unions and the Labour Representation Committee in 1901.
More trade-union sponsored Labour candidates were put forward in the 1929 General Election as unions recognized the failure of industrial action.
Ramsay MacDonald, putting the matter rather bluntly, noted that trade unionists had come to acknowledge that, ‘Labour could solve mining and similar difficulties through the ballot box.’
Nevertheless, it was the economic climate, as much as the renewed trade union and working-class support for Labour, which contributed significantly to Labour's victory in the 1929 General Election.
Unemployment had continued to remain at more than one million, despite the fact that Britain had returned to the gold standard and free trade in 1925 — actions which, it was suggested, would revive world trade and reduce unemployment.
The Labour Party, dominated by the free trade philosophy of Philip Snowden, offered more of the same and was barely distinguishable from the Conservatives in the economic policies they offered — except for the Conservative Party's references to ‘safe-guarding of industry,’ a code-phrase for selective protectionism.
What distinguished Labour from the Conservatives was the prospect that an overall parliamentary majority would signify the end of capitalism and the beginning of socialism — even if the commitment to the gold standard, free trade and balanced budgets remained.
Indeed, Philip Snowden reflected upon this cautious and measured approach in his manifesto to the Colne Valley electors in 1929:
We shall not deceive the people by saying the task of National Reconstruction is easy, or that it can be accomplished in a twelve month [period].
But we do pledge ourselves to undertake the task with energy and determination, confident that in the full-time life of our Parliament we can make a great advance in industrial prosperity.
in social well-being, and in a juster distribution of the fruits of Labour.
The Labour Party is a Socialist Party It is opposed to force, revolution and confiscation as a means of establishing the New Social Order.
It believes in progress and in democratic methods.
In the event, Labour had no mandate for socialism.
It was returned to office in May 1929 with 287 seats to the Conservatives' 261 and the Liberals' 59.
Although the party had secured only 8,360,000 votes compared with the 8,664,000 who voted Conservative, it had won most seats in parliament and it became inevitable that it should form a second minority government, once again relying upon Liberal Party support to keep it in office.
The economic and social problems of the second Labour government have already been outlined in the first chapter.
It is sufficient here to merely reiterate two points.
The first is that the Wall Street Crash of October and November 1929, and the economic impact which it exerted upon the world markets, increased unemployment to three millions, about a quarter of the workforce, and created the financial problems which Philip Snowden faced in trying to balance the budget in 1931.
Secondly, the second Labour government collapsed in August 1931 as a result of the unwillingness of the Cabinet to wholeheartedly approve of Snowden's demand that unemployment benefits should be cut by 10 per cent.
During the inter-war years there was no clearer indication of the potency of unemployment in political matters.
The fact that a Labour government collapsed as a result of the economic and unemployment situation, caused a precipitate decline in Labour fortunes once Ramsay MacDonald decided to continue as Prime Minister at the head of a National government.
During the rest of the inter-war period, and indeed ever since, Labour politicians and commentators have attempted to explain why Ramsay MacDonald ditched the second Labour government and formed a National Government.
This decision has provoked much animus among many who knew him and believed in him, sustaining the view that he had planned to ditch the Labour government.
It has long been an axiom of the Labour Party that MacDonald's actions in 1931 marked him as a traitor to the cause.
William Lawther remarked that MacDonald was ‘bereft of any public decency’.
Harold Laski accused him of ‘betraying his politics’ and ‘betraying his origins’.
The Labour Party, in order to distance itself from its estranged and inconsistent creator, shrouded his name and reputation with invective.
A popular catch at the time ran:
We'll hang Ramsay Mac on a sour apple tree,
we'll hang Snowden and Thomas to keep him company;
For that's the place where traitors ought to be.
There was also the obituary written by J. S. Clarke and sent to MacDonald, which ran:
Here lies Ramsay Mac
A friend of all humanity,
Too many pats upon the back
Inflated Ramsay's vanity.
The blarney stone he oft-times kissed,
But departed in his glory;
Having been born a socialist
He died a bloody Tory.
Naturally, Labour supporters have shrouded MacDonald's name in treachery.
L. MacNeill Weir, in his book The Tragedy of Ramsay MacDonald , was the main critic, suggesting that MacDonald was an opportunist, a liberal rather than a socialist, that he schemed to ditch the Labour government, and betrayed the Labour Party.
Although such charges stuck for many years, and still colour the attitudes of Labour supporters towards MacDonald, it is clear, as David Marquand has indicated, that they are largely without foundation.
Many may have felt betrayed, but there is little to suggest that MacDonald was any the less of a socialist than others, nor is there hard evidence to suggest that he schemed to bring about the collapse of the Labour government.
Marquand's view is quite clear; MacDonald's decision to form a National government was a product of his concern for national interests:
All his life, MacDonald had fought against a class view of politics and for the primacy of political action as against industrial; for him the logical corollary was that the party must be prepared, when necessary, to subordinate the sectional claims of the unions to its conception of the national interest.
To Marquand, MacDonald's real fault was that he held on to his nineteenth-century principles for too long.
His almost religious conviction that the preservation of the gold standard was essential to British economic growth, plus his belief in the primacy of the state over party, ensured that he lacked ‘the ability and willingness to jettison cherished assumptions in the face of changing realities.’
He was not prepared to take a gamble.
The economic problems caused by unemployment led to the collapse of the second Labour government.
The political repercussions  of the events were devastating for the Labour Party.
Its catastrophic election defeat of 1931, when the party was reduced from 289 MPs to a mere 52, was an inseparable consequence of MacDonald's betrayal.
But such a decline was illusory — caused largely by the unusual circumstances of the 1931 General Election.
Within a year Labour was recapturing some of the political ground which it had lost at the local elections in November 1931.
By 1933 it had recovered all the municipal seats it had lost in 1931.
Early in 1932 it began its new ‘A Million New Members and Power’ campaign.
Within a year its individual membership had risen by about 100,000.
In January 1933 it set up a central By-Election Insurance Fund to help needy constituencies to put forward candidates.
The improved organizational and propaganda activities saw Labour recover many of the parliamentary seats the party had lost in 1931 at the 1935 General Election.
In fact, its parliamentary representation rose from 52 in 1931 to 154 — though some had hoped for between 200 and 250 seats.
Thereafter, the party made steady progress during the late 1930s as it campaigned for a policy of collective security against the threat of European fascism almost, it seemed, in the face of the complacency of Neville Chamberlain's National government.
There were many reasons for the revival of Labour fortunes.
For one thing, the election defeats of 1931 had exaggerated the real losses of the Labour Party.
For another, the Labour Party had changed its policy in the mid 1930s from one advocating ‘no more war’ to one which was prepared to meet the challenge of fascism.
But one should not ignore the fact that the Party was also developing its economic policies and identifying closely with the unemployed.
They campaigned strongly against the Household Means Test which had been imposed by the National government at the end of 1931, and a Policy Sub-Committee of the party, influenced by Hugh Dalton and Herbert Morrison, attended to the issues of unemployment, banking, housing and transport.
These policies were underpinned by the oft-stated general commitment to the introduction of a planned national economy and the desire for the ‘socialization of industry’.
The whole package of policies was presented in a series of leaflets and pamphlets, such as for Socialism and Peace and Labour's Immediate Programme (1937).
This commitment and activity was quickly transmitted to the  local level.
Very quickly, the local Labour parties identified with the social issues of the day.
There was widespread opposition to the Household Means Test, and Labour representatives occupied positions on the Public Assistance committees, in the hope of nudging up relief provisions.
Its councillors were responsible for many public works schemes.
In addition, they were responsible for many slum-clearance and house-building schemes — the most notable of which occurred in Leeds during the mid- and late 1930s.
The slum clearance schemes, and the construction of the Quarry Hill flats were largely stimulated by the short period in which the Leeds City Labour Party held control of the City Council.
It is therefore true to say that by the mid-1930s, the Labour Party was truly, as it had never been before, the party of the working class.
Nevertheless, the party could not entirely dissociate itself from the events which led to the formation of the National government, even if the chief villains, as far as it was concerned, were now in political opposition.
The fact was put neatly by Barbara Betts, later Barbara Castle, when reporting upon the Labour Party Conference in October 1931: ‘It was almost as if it feared to probe too deeply lest it should be disillusioned as to the integrity of Uncle Arthur [Henderson].’
But changes of leadership in the 1930s, from Arthur Henderson to George Lansbury and, finally in 1935, to Clement Attlee tended to give Labour a less tainted and more youthful image.
This may not have been immediately obvious from the results of the 1935 General Election, for the Party had only just accepted Attlee as its leader on the eve of the election.
Yet, during the late 1930s, Labour's clear hostility towards European fascism, and its support of the Republican side in the Spanish Civil War confirmed it to be a party which was prepared to face up to fascism.
It marked it out as a patriotic party, in contrast to the general image it had earned during the 1920s.
Recent work has concurred about the basic unimportance of Mosley and the British Union of Fascists.
After the Olympia meeting of 1934, which saw the clash between the communists and the fascists, there was little interest in the movement and, as Stuart Rawnsley suggests, it was only a small hard-core of supporters who remained.
There were, in fact, few centres of fascist support outside London, Manchester, Birmingham and Leeds.
Even in Leeds, occasionally suggested as one of the most powerful and well-organized of fascist centres, there were actually only 100 to 200  fascists.
Indeed, when Mosley addressed a meeting of 1,500 people at Leeds Town Hall in May 1934 it was estimated that only about 400 fascists were present, ‘most of whom had come to Leeds by bus.’
The Labour Party rightly dismissed the fascist challenge in Britain.
What it could not ignore was the threat of European fascism.
Although some Labour politicians clung to the belief that peace could be maintained, most had come to accept that war was inevitable by 1936, confirmed in their opinion by the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War.
Under Attlee's leadership, the Party was drawn, almost inexorably, to a commitment to collective international security and its implication that war was necessary in order to curb aggressor nations.
There were groups, such as the Socialist League, which disagreed with the policy line being developed.
But the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War resulted in the 1936 Labour Party Conference at Edinburgh support collective security, though it did not approve of rearmament.
Also in that year, Ernest Bevin became the Chairman of the General Council of the TUC and Dr Hugh Dalton became Chairman of the National Executive Committee of the Labour Party.
The right of the Labour movement were now firmly in control.
In 1937 Dalton and Attlee got the Parliamentary Labour Party to support the armed forces estimates and the Labour Party Conference, at Bournemouth, supported rearmament.
There was now a new firmness in British Labour Party policy which ultimately permitted them to enter Winston Churchill's Coalition government in May 1940.
For the Labour Party, the inter-war years proved to be successful ones.
It was during this period that it became the second major party in British politics, and Britain's leading progressive party.
There were clearly many factors for this success.
Most obviously, its rising trade-union support ensured that it was to become the party of the working class, a process which was speeded up by the split within the Liberal Party during the First World War.
It also seems likely that unemployment and other social problems contributed further to the view that Labour offered the only alternative to the failures of capitalism — no matter how illusory that viewpoint may have been.
Combined with other factors, the economic situation in Britain ensured the continued success of the Labour Party, despite the political setbacks of 1931.
The Conservative Party
The Conservative Party was the only other major political party to do well out of the inter-war years.
Apart from a short period between May 1929 and October 1931, it was the largest political party throughout the inter-war years.
However, this fact is not always recognized since the Conservative Party was often subsumed in office in Coalition and National government arrangements.
In fact, there were only two short periods, of ten months in 1924 and of about two years and three months from 1929 and 1931 when it was out of power.
It also produced three Prime Ministers, Andrew Bonar Law (1922–3), Stanley Baldwin (1923, 1924–9, and 1935–7) and Neville Chamberlain (1937–40).
Throughout its inter-war history, the Conservative Party owed a great deal to Stanley Baldwin who, as Middlemass and Barnes have suggested, was a political giant rather than a political  pigmy .
As Robert Blake has confirmed, he helped to rebuild the organization of the Conservative Party and to make it more a party of the people by reorganizing the central Office of the party and by encouraging local parties to at least consider the selection of working-class candidates.
Indeed, he concludes by suggesting:
The truth was that the Conservative party under Baldwin had managed to recover a large area of that middle ground in politics which is the key to electoral success and which they lost in 1206, after being in possession for nearly twenty years before that.
By the mid-1920s they no longer had the harsh appearance that they had developed in the immediate pre-war years…
The Conservatives seemed to lack compassion.
Under Baldwin the picture was different.
Their social composition did not, it is true, greatly change.
The movement of the business men, bankers, industrialists into the party…continued….
The Conservatives were still the rich man's party.
But there was a new awareness of social problems, a new consciousness of poverty and unemployment.
The fact is that the Conservative Party did become closely involved in the problems of the poor and the unemployed — although their efforts were often seen as less than caring.
Most certainly, Stanley Baldwin's first major political concern as Prime Minister was to tackle unemployment.
He had already gained experience of some of the economic problems of the post-war economy in his role as minister at the Board of Trade, from April  1921 to October 1922, and then as Chancellor of the Exchequer from October 1922 until May 1923.
When he became Prime Minister he was all too aware of the difficulties which British industry was facing.
Before becoming Prime Minister, he had been developing policies designed to ‘safeguard’ British industry.
In effect these were subsidies designed to protect British industry from the competition of even more heavily subsidized goods from abroad.
But the commitment of governments was to the gold standard and free trade and, in 1922, Baldwin reflected that, ‘a free trade country, such as we are still, finds it very difficult to argue with a country that has a tariff weapon in its hand.’
When he became Prime Minister he was determined to rectify the situation and, switching to the traditional Conservative policies of the early nineteenth century, he decided to call a general election and go to the electorate with a policy of protectionism.
In November 1923, he stated:
…
the crucial problem of our country [was unemployment].
If we can fight it I am willing to fight it.
I cannot fight it without weapons.
I have for myself come to the conclusion that owing to the conditions which exist in the world today, having regard to the economic environment, having regard to the situation of our country, if we go on pattering along as we are we shall have grave unemployment with us to the end of time, and I have come to the conclusion that the only way of fighting this subject is by protecting the home markets.
The electorate, still besotted with a belief in free trade, rejected Baldwin's campaign for, although the Conservatives were the largest parliamentary party, they were outnumbered by Labour and Liberal MPs who were committed to free trade; the first Labour government was formed as a result.
Yet Baldwin never regretted his action.
Indeed, in 1935, he reflected of the 1923 General Election:
Rightly or wrongly I was convinced you could not deal with unemployment without a tariff.
After the war opinion was more fluid and open on political grounds the tariff issue had been dead for years and I felt it was one which would pull the party together, including the Lloyd George malcontents.
There were, indeed, good political grounds for reviving protectionism.
In the first place protectionism had been traditional Conservative policy before the emergence of free trade and Joseph Chamberlain had revived some sympathy for the idea in the early  twentieth century.
The revival of the policy was also calculated to deal with those ‘Lloyd George malcontents’, such as Austen Chamberlain, who objected to the Conservative Party removing Lloyd George from office in 1922.
It was obviously felt that protectionism, a policy which Austen Chamberlain's father had encouraged, might attract Austen and his supporters back to the centre of the Conservative Party.
It was also rumoured that Lloyd George might advocate protectionist policies and Baldwin make have called the general election and fought it on protectionist policies in order to undermine any such move by Lloyd George.
Yet the move failed and the Conservative Party dropped the policy for the rest of the 1920s.
The Baldwin government which was returned to office in 1924, after the collapse of the first Labour government, was committed to free trade, the gold standard and rationalization.
As was indicated in Chapter 1, it was during this period that Britain officially returned to the gold standard and free trade.
But the anticipated world trade revival was relatively minor and did not help to reduce unemployment in Britain's staple exporting industries.
Unemployment thus remained at well over one million; more than 10 per cent of the workforce.
Nevertheless, this particular Conservative administration did offer social policies which were designed both to indicate its commitment to dealing with social problems and to undermine the challenge of Labour.
Indeed, according to Clement MacIntyre, the Conservative Party did change the orientation of its policies between 1922 and 1931:
There was a realisation that the mantle of radicalism had been seized from the Liberal Party and that the main political division of the twentieth century would not be between the Tories and the Liberals but between Labour and anti-Labour.
Accordingly, policies were re-written and strategies revised, firstly, to reflect the changes needed if Labour was to be kept at bay, and, secondly, to accommodate the non-Labour supporters of the old Liberal Party within the modern Conservative party.
The task of the Conservatives was to kill off the Liberals as a credible third alternative and then project the Conservative Party as offering a dynamic alternative to socialism.
Indeed, Conservative spokesmen, and particularly Baldwin, called for economic recovery based upon industrial peace, national unity and class harmony.
It was the fear of Labour which led the Conservatives to abandon the Lloyd George Coalition government in  1922 and to anticipate the new social policies of a ‘new Conservatism’ during the 1920s.
It was this concern which was most evident in a timely article in the Fortnightly Review , in 1922, which stated that:
…
if the return to Conservatism is to be something more than the transient apparition of a spectre from the past, and its voice in national affairs not merely to be a sepulchral warning against the dangers of rash courses, the Conservative leaders must bestir themselves to some purpose…[the Conservative Party]must be ready to meet the programme of the Labour Party not simply with a non-possumus but with an alternative which will in some measure satisfy certain of the needs which Labour is concerned to satisfy, and at the same time avoid the perils with which it insists Labour policy is beset.
The message was clear, the Conservative Party would have to broaden its policies in order to attract the newly enfranchised working-class voter and remain in power.
Indeed, the Conservative Party did begin to widen its potential appeal by issuing a plethora of pamphlets in the 1920s:Aims and Principles (1924),What Unionists have done for Workers (1925),What the Conservative Government has done for Education (1928) and What the Conservative Government has done for Health (1929).
Baldwin suggested that there should be more working-class Conservative candidates, and began to consider and develop social policy within his 1924 to 1929 administration.
He spoke of ‘a new age, in which people can come together’, directed his administration to deal with the reorganization of pensions, housing, the improvements to maternity homes and the reorganization of the poor law.
Yet there was always an element of complacency about an administration which enjoyed a substantial parliamentary majority.
By the late 1920, following the General Strike and the problem of dealing with the Poor Law authorities, Baldwin decided that the Conservatives would fight the 1929 General Election on its past record rather than a future commitment to major social reform.
Baldwin fought what became known as a ‘Safety First’ campaign.
There have been many attempts to explain Baldwin's 1929 election programme.
The traditional one is that both the Conservative Party and government were in decline in the late 1920s and that the party leaders were ‘too supine to do anything about this loss of prestige.’
Michael Bentley suggests that the actions of the  Conservative leaders were deliberate for the, ‘Conservatives made a conscious attempt to eradicate all traces of policy in order to appear stolid and silhouette Lloyd George as a very dangerous thing.’
More recently, Philip Williamson has suggested that, in contrast to both the other views put forward, Baldwin's policy was a well-thought out campaign:
So ‘Safety First’ was not a substitute for lack of ideas and policies: it was deliberately chosen by Baldwin from a number of possible election platforms.
It was not defensive, but a calculated attempt to discredit Lloyd George.
It relied heavily on Baldwin's leadership and on the success over the years in persuading the new democracy not to be seduced by socialist abstractions, trade union militancy or Liberal demagogy, but to accept Conservative values as the guarantee of liberty and secure social improvement.
And it was expected to be successful.
Most certainly, the Conservatives relied upon a theme song which combined Al Jolson's hit song ‘Sonny Boy’ with the dependability of Baldwin, the first few lines of which ran as follows:
When there are grey skies,
We don't mind the grey skies,
You'll turn them blue
Stanley Boy.
when friends forsake us,
Let them all forsake us,
You'll pull us through,
Stanley Boy.
And Williamson suggests that this line of approach may have been influenced by an important letter sent to Baldwin, by W. Bridgeman, which stated:
I…hope that you will not attempt to outbid L[loyd] G[eorge] or the Socialists in a vote-catching programme…it is folly to attempt a competition with irresponsible people, and I believe LG's proposals have given us an opportunity of attacking, instead of defending, ourselves….
I feel sure we can win if we show no signs of panic, and our only safe course is to depend on our record, and make as few promises as possible.
Such reliance upon Baldwin and the dependability of the Conservatives did not work, and produced within the Conservative Party internal divisions which saw Neville Chamberlain being suggested  as a possible alternative to Baldwin and the emergence of the Empire Party, led by Lord Beaverbrook and the press barons, as a challenge to Baldwin's leadership.
But Baldwin weathered these political storms with some adroitness and found that the economic policies he favoured emerged, almost naturally, out of the collapse of the second Labour government in August 1931.
From then onwards, and throughout the 1930s, the Conservatives operated within the National government and pushed forward the type of protectionist policies which both Baldwin and Chamberlain favoured.
The Ottawa Conference of July and August 1932 paved the way for increased trade between the nations which formed the British Empire and thus effectively operated a system of protection.
The Import Duties Bill of February 1932 also imposed a general tariff of 10 per cent on almost all imports, and the Import Duties Advisory Committee, which it formed quickly, raised the tariff to 20 per cent on manufactured goods, to between 25 and 30 per cent on luxury goods and to 33 per cent on chemicals and a wide range of other goods.
As suggested in Chapter 1, these measures were not, in themselves, particularly successful in reducing unemployment although they possibly helped to promote the housing boom of the mid- and late 1930s.
Throughout the 1930s the Conservative Party was the great beneficiary of the popular support for the National governments which were formed.
In the 1931 it raised its parliamentary representation from 261, achieved in 1929, to 472 in 1931 and 387 seats in 1935.
From 1935 to the Second World War it was their leaders who assumed the office of Prime Minister.
In the final analysis the economic policies pursued in the 1930s, and already outlined in Chapter 1, were those dictated by a massive Conservative parliamentary majority.
The Liberal Party
Ironically, it was the Liberal Party which offered the only serious alternative to the free trade solutions of the 1920s and the protectionist policies of the 1930s — though it was always too weak to make any significant contribution to the economic policies of the country.
Indeed, the inter-war years saw the continued decline of the Liberal Party and the persistence of factionalism.
As a result the expansionist economic policies favoured by David Lloyd George found little support amongst electors and, thus, in parliament.
Historians have always been fascinated by the decline of political parties.
In the twentieth century the most dramatic political collapse has been that of the Liberal Party.
For many its decline began before the First World War, as a consequence of its inability to maintain the trade-union and working-class support in the face of the challenge of the Labour Party.
For others, mainly committed Liberals, that decline began in 1916 when Lloyd George replaced Asquith as Prime Minister of the wartime Coalition government.
On balance the evidence suggests that the Liberal decline began before the First World War, but there is no denying that the war speeded up this process.
It challenged the shibboleths of Liberalism — free trade, the gold standard, retrenchment and peace — all of which were abandoned during the war.
But, above all, it divided the Liberal Party for in 1916 David Lloyd George replaced Asquith as Prime Minister of the Coalition government.
For the next seven years Asquith's old free-trade section of the party was detached from the Lloyd George supporters.
The split was disastrous for Liberalism.
In the 1918 General Election Liberal representation in parliament fell from the 272 of December 1910 to 151.
In the 1922 General Election, following the decision of the Conservatives to withdraw their support for Lloyd George, Liberal representation was further reduced to 116.
The fact is that the Liberal Party declined quickly.
The divisions ran deep and Sir John Simon, in the Liberal Magazine , of August 1921, said of Lloyd George:
…
he incurs Liberal criticism because he sometimes acts like an unprincipled and like an undependable person….
Cleverness, ingenuity, adroitness!
There has been nothing like it in human history.
But, after all, character is more than cleverness.
Sticking to a principle is more than adroitly shifting from one position to another.
And, in the view of Liberals, Mr Lloyd George has shown himself a faithless trustee of their traditions and beliefs.
The re-union of the Liberals, forced by the action of Stanley Baldwin in calling the 1923 General Election on the issue of protection, seemed to have worked briefly with a revival in the political fortunes of the Liberal Party.
But the dramatic decline to 40 MPs in the 1924 General Election was effectively the electoral sign that the Liberal Party was no longer a realistic party of government.
This was clearly a moment of major concern for the Liberals.
The party was evidently re-united, although deep divisions remained, and ostensibly offering the economic message of free trade which the nation still wished to hear.
Yet it was unable to convince the electorate of its political viability.
What direction was the party to go in?
The traditional Asquithian-Liberal section of the party, which dominated the constituencies believed in the need to reiterate the established Liberal shibboleths.
Exactly this point was made by the Cabinet Committee of the Leeds Liberal Federation in 1921, and adhered to throughout the 1920s.
It suggested that it was:
…
strongly of the opinion that the time has arrived when hasty experiments of a socialistic character, no matter how well intentioned — involving heavy public expenditure — should be scrutinised very closely….
It believes that the Country needs a return of the sane principles of ‘peace, retrenchment, and reform’, which formed the basis of Liberal policy a generation ago.
Indeed, few annual reports of Liberal organizations missed the opportunity to reiterate the need for free trade, peace, sound finance and a modicum of reform.
From 1917 onwards, many referred to the need for proportional representation and some charged the Labour Party with fomenting class warfare through its parliamentary and municipal campaigns.
By 1926 and 1927 local Liberal parties were beginning to note that the Labour Party was responsible for ‘dark passages’ in the history of Liberalism.
Yet they did little to counter the challenge of socialism.
Dr Michael Bentley has suggested, in his book The Liberal Mind 1914–1929 and in at least one article, that the real problem of the Liberal Party was this lack of flexibility and willingness to think beyond the old shibboleths in a day and age which required new initiatives.
Local Liberal Party records bear him out in his assertion of this fixity of purpose and he would appear to be correct in his estimation that:
Nagging fears and doubts, as well as a shrewd eye for the main chance, had sent some of their number into other parties to leave behind a group of stalwarts to insist that there was a liberal way out of the dilemma, a middle way.
‘Look neither to the right nor to the left, but keep straight on’, Asquith had told the faithful in his resignation speech of October 1926.
But those who obeyed had little enough to focus their blinkered eyes upon by 1929.
In a sense they were victims of a paradox; they had chosen their middle way in order to retain their identity; yet it was to be this very middle way which convinced others that they had relinquished it.
Everyone believed in liberalism but no one was actually for it — such was the view of one ‘lively socialist’ after the election of 1929.
Liberals were left to pretend that what they were saying was the fruit not of compromise but of virtue.
The advantage of their ‘straight road’, according to Donald Maclean was that it was hard to get lost by following it.
The disadvantage was that ‘the liberal bridle-path’ could be seen, let alone followed, only by liberals.
The fact is that many Liberals, and especially those in the local constituencies, adopted something of a larger mentality towards change.
This meant that most Liberals remained resolutely opposed to the idea that the Liberal Party had to change its policies to fit the new problems facing society.
This meant that the views of David Lloyd George carried little political weight within the Liberal Party, and thus within the country.
David Lloyd George had returned to the Liberal fold in 1923 and  accepted his position as second in the Party to Asquith until he assumed the role of leader in October 1926.
But even before he became leader he was already promoting a new approach to social problems of the day.
With the wealth which he had accumulated he began to finance the formulation of a major innovatory social and economic policy based upon four publications —Coal and Power (1924),Land and the Nation (1924 ‘Green Book’),Britain's Industrial Future (1928 ‘Yellow Book’) and We Can Conquer Unemployment (1929 ‘Little Yellow Book’).
These proposed innovatory Keynesian policies were distinct from the economic policies of the Labour and Conservative parties, for they demanded the use of bank credit, the ending of private land ownership, and the use of public works programmes to swallow up over half a million unemployed over a short period of time.
These policies even contemplated the nationalization of industry, in rather more detail than had ever been considered by the Labour Party.
Land and the Nation was a rather trenchant report based upon a private investigation into the ownership and use of rural land.
It was financed by Lloyd George, without reference to Asquith, and argued that the state should gradually take over the land through committees whose purpose was to ensure that reforms were made to revive the economy of the countryside.
In essence it was a development of policies which Lloyd George had advocated at the beginning of his political career.
Yet this restatement of his views won him political support from Liberals who looked askance at this quasi-nationalization programme.
Coal and Power called for an integrated and rationalized scheme for power, a follow up to the Liberal Manifesto of 1923 which suggested that coal and power supplies should be placed under the control of a public board presided over by a minister.
This scheme effectively came into existence in Baldwin's second administration with the formation of the Central Electricity Generating Board in 1926.
Yet the last two publications were far more innovative and important.
The first of these,Britain's Industrial Future , being a report of the Liberal Industrial Inquiry of 1928, was one of the most far-sighted economic documents of the inter-war years.
Influenced by J.M. Keynes, one of its fourteen authors, it argued for expansionist economic policies financed by the state through a Board of National Investment and a vast public works programme.
It was believed that such measures would stimulate industry and increase  employment in the short-term until Britain's economic markets were restored by the revival of world trade and increasing cost-effective output:
There are two important fields of action in which we can work for the restoration of a vigorous and healthy economic life.
On the one hand, we must use all possible means to regain old markets, to ,open new ones up, and to encourage international trade on the basis of the division of labour; and on the other, we must endeavour to awaken in British industry a spirit of joint endeavour….
The energetic pursuit of these two policies should in the long run ensure a substantial improvement in the employment situation.
At the same time these results are likely to be slow, and if we are right in our conclusion that we are faced at the present time with a certain amount of abnormal employment of a quasi-permanent character, then it is not sufficient to solely rely on the gradual improvement of productive efficiency.
Definite and energetic steps must be taken in other directions to restore the balance of our national economic life….
Since the slump of 1921 there has been a prevailing tendency, occasionally interrupted but invariably resumed before there has been time for a real recovery towards parsimony and restriction.
This has been the result partly of monetary deflation, but also of a muddle-headed confusion about the meaning of economy — namely .
the idea that every form of avoidance of expenditure quite indifferently of whether it consists of really wasteful expenditure or of a capital investment in developing the nation's productive resources, is alike ‘economy’….
A nation's labour force is by far the most important part of its daily accruing resources, and an inability continued over several years to direct some 10 per cent of it or more to any useful purpose not only involved a disastrous impoverishment of the nation, but is in itself a demonstration that the machinery for directing the available labour into appropriate fields of enterprise has broken down…we put, therefore, in the forefront of our proposals a vigorous policy of national reconstruction embracing within its scope, inter alia, the rehabilitation of agriculture, still the largest of our national industries; an extensive programme of highway development; afforestation, reclamation, drainage, electrification, slum clearance and town development, and the development of canals, docks, and harbours.
Although this report was ahead of its time, it is also interesting in respect of the fact that it brought together both the traditional and new Liberals.
It was the first time, since the 1916 split, that all the major political leaders within the Liberal Party — David Lloyd George, Sir Herbert Samuel and Sir John Simon — had placed their names upon a major economic report.
This report was evidently wide enough in scope to appeal to both free-trade and interventionist Liberals.
It was this policy, in popular and amended form, which was offered to the electorate in early 1929 as ‘We Can  Conquer Unemployment’.
The main focus of this shorter document was the employment of 600,000 men, at a cost of £250 million, through a vast building programme of roads and houses.
Although the Liberals improved their position in the 1929 General Election, winning 59 seats compared to the 40 in 1924, their new-found unity and imaginative economic policies had not worked.
Thereafter, the party began to splinter and decline.
It supported the new Labour government but many Liberals felt that such a course of action was unwise.
Most Liberal MPs, except Lloyd George and his family clan, joined the National government and supported it after its general election success in October 1931 from which they improved their position.
Yet the Conservative dominance of the new government, and their move towards protectionism, alienated Sir Herbert Samuel and the free traders who left the National government in September 1932.
This left the Liberal Party in total disarray — with the Simonites within the National government and the Samuelites and the Lloyd George sections in opposition.
The 1935 General Election drove home the fact of their sad decline, for only 21 Liberals won seats in 1935.
As Bentley rightly asserts, the Liberal Party generally reverted to its traditional free trade policies when all the experimentation was over — policies which were always popular in the local Liberal parties.
Only David Lloyd George attempted to offer anything different, with his New Deal in 1935.
Lloyd George had launched his programme at a lecture delivered at Bangor on 17 January 1935.
In effect he offered a revised and updated version of his 1929 manifesto We Can Conquer Unemployment .
He also drew inspiration from Roosevelt's New Deal.
Yet, apart from a few family friends, there was little support for such views.
By this time, Lloyd George was  passè .
His main supporter was Philip Snowden, a life-long advocate of free trade and Gladstonian economics who had become his close friend, was in a similar category.
Writing to Lloyd George, Snowden encouragingly argued:
The crusade you are beginning for a great and united national effort to revive industry and to rescue the mass of our population from hardship and suffering of unnecessary poverty deserves, and I believe will receive, the support of earnest and sympathetic men and women of all parties and of that large and increasing number of electors who have no party affiliations.
This is a time for action…the country is waiting for an inspiring lead on a programme of courageous national reconstruction.
However, on another occasion, Snowden explained that his free-trade and budgetary views had not changed but that the surplus they had earned now permitted the nation to financially support ‘Lloyd George's New Deal’.
Yet history records that the nation was not waiting for a programme of national reconstruction.
Two statesmen who were were in the political wilderness by the mid-1930s were hardly likely, or able, to challenge the unthinking protectionist attitude of a National government which enjoyed a substantial parliamentary majority.
The British public were cautious and it took the Second World War to inspire a new, and more forward-looking, attitude to the problem of dealing with the economy and unemployment.
Conclusion
There is no doubting that unemployment and the economic depression dominated the politics of the inter-war years.
Every major political party was faced with offering solutions to these problems and governments were measured by the effectiveness of their actions.
Unemployment was obviously a factor in bringing about both long-term and short-term political changes.
Unemployment problems put paid to Labour's political prospects in the early 1930s just as much as it had helped the party to rise to political power in the 1920s.
Protectionist policies, designed to deal with unemployment, temporarily ended the rule of the Conservative Party at the end of 1923 just as surely as it helped the Conservative Party to political dominance in the 1930s.
Unemployment thus helped to shape the politics of the age, and some political changes were clearly the result of the problems it raised, although long-term social changes were clearly evident in permitting the Labour Party to replace the Liberal Party as the progressive party of British politics.
Yet though the issue of unemployment exerted considerable impact upon British politics it does not appear that Britain's political parties came up with much in the way of a meaningful solution to the problem.
The real problem of inter-war British politics was that no major political party, except a small section of a much diminished and effete Liberal Party, was willing to take the political risk of expanding the economy out of the slump by the use of government intervention to stimulate and regulate the economy.
The Labour  Party was besotted with the free-trade policies of Philip Snowden, and the Conservative Party wavered between free trade and protectionism.
Both parties believed in the need to balance the budget and to operate deflationary measures.
Apart from the Lloyd George Liberals, and a few socialists and Oswald Mosley, there were no significant supporters of more expansionary policies.
With economic vision so blinkered it was to be expected that the economy would be allowed to drift with the market situation and without significant and positive government direction.
But it should be remembered that such hesitation was an endemic feature of British politics during the inter-war years and was even exhibited in the 1930s when fascism, that other major problem of the age, threatened to consume Britain and Europe.
REACTIONS TO BRITISH AND EUROPEAN FASCISM
Fascism was a product of the deep-rooted social and economic crisis which developed in Europe following the First World War; a period which saw high unemployment, inflation and social instability.
Yet, although Britain suffered severe economic depression and rising unemployment, her economic plight was much less marked than that of Germany and Italy.
Perhaps for this reason Britain experienced little in the way of a fascist movement in the 1920s; only a few small and insignificant fascist groups, hostile to the Bolsheviks or the Jews, emerged at that time.
It was not until the 1930s that a more effective fascist organization, the British Union of Fascists (BUF), was formed under the leadership of Oswald Mosley, at a time when Britain was attempting to deal with the unemployment of between 20 and 23 per cent.
When the BUF developed it created something of a stir as the various political parties adjusted to its presence.
There was, indeed, quite a furore over its activities, and particularly at the violence associated with its Olympia Meeting of June 1934.
Nevertheless, recent work on Mosley and the BUF has concurred about their basic unimportance.
It seems likely that both the concern of political parties and of the public at the activities of the BUF was totally out of all proportion to its importance and to  the political challenge which it presented; as John Stevenson and Chris Cook wrote ‘British fascism was almost a non-starter’.
Nevertheless, Mosley's fascist movement merited concern and attention, not least because its emergence seemed to mirror events in Europe.
In the end, however, it was European fascism, not British fascism, which exerted most impact upon British politics during the 1930s.
The British Union of Fascists
Sir Oswald Mosley formed the British Union of Fascists in October 1932 as a vehicle for his program which was designed to bring about the economic renaissance of Britain.
His ‘fascist’ ideas had first been shaped by the First World War, which he felt Britain should not have entered.
To Mosley, the war had brought an end to traditional party politics and had demonstrated the need fur central economic planning.
If Britain was to avoid future wars, she had to strengthen her economic and military position and to develop her relations with the Empire in order to deter would-be aggressors.
Armed with such views, Mosley entered upon a turbulent political career which saw him move from being the Conservative MP for Harrow in 1918 to, after several political adjustments, becoming Labour MP for Smethwick in 1926.
Mosley's economic philosophy was quickly expressed in Revolution by Reason (1925).
It advocated a battery of economic and social measures to revive Britain, including the nationalization of the banks and the extension of credit to consumers in order that demand could be increased and that the economy would revive.
But planning was deemed essential and Mosley wrote:
We propose first to expand credit in order to create demand.
That new and greater demand must, of course, be met by a new and greater supply of goods, or all the evils of inflation and price rise will result.
Here our Socialist planning must enter in.
We must see that more goods are forthcoming to meet the new demand.
These ideas were developed further when, as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster in MacDonald's second Labour government, Mosley was involved in the work of the ‘Thomas’ Committee to deal with unemployment.
Dissatisfied with J. H. Thomas' lack of initiative, he put forward his own schemes in the ‘Mosley Memorandum’, advocating greater expenditure on public works, some forms of tariff protection, the raising of the school-leaving age and the encouragement of early retirement.
Mosley resigned in May 1930, when these schemes did not find favour in government circles.
But he pursued his policies within the parliamentary Labour Party and the Labour Party issued the ‘Mosley Manifesto’, develop his policies into a full-scale plan in January 1931, under the title ‘A National Policy’.
This, more developed, scheme outlined the much criticized recommendation of setting up an inner Cabinet of five which would carry out the needed programme of economic reform.
At first, Mosley's outspoken criticism of the second Labour government attracted support and interest from a variety of MPs, ranging from Nye Bevan to Harold Macmillan.
He could not, however, turn this sympathy to good effect and his New Party, formed in March 1931 with the aid of £50,000 from William Morris, the later Lord Nuffield, failed to attract widespread political support and collapsed into political oblivion at the general election of October 1931.
It was only after a trip to Italy in early 1932, to see how fascism operated there, and with the support of Lord Rothermere and the Daily Mail , that Mosley renewed his efforts to form a new party designed to instil discipline into the nation, to generate a ‘classless brotherhood’ and to meet the challenge of communism.
Launched on 1 October 1932, the BUF quickly acquired the trappings of European fascism — the ‘black shirt’ uniform, the commitment to action, the violent conflicts with the Communists and the Jews, and the emphasis placed upon strong leadership.
Whatever its economic intent, the fact is that Mosley's fascist movement became associated with the type of violence and anti-Semitism which had become the hallmark of European fascism.
The most obvious events of this type were; the conflict between the fascists and the communist at the Olympia meeting in June 1934, the ‘Battle of Cable Street’ in October 1936 and the fascist election campaigns in the East End of London in 1937.
5 All involved conflict, often violent, between the fascists on the one hand, and the communists and Jews on the other.
The Olympia Meeting of 7 June 1934 was one of the major turning points in the history of the BUF.
It was arranged as a grandiose meeting of fascists and their supporters, in anticipation of a triumphant mass meeting at the White City, London, in August.
About 1,200 fascists marched to Olympia on the day and the  meeting was attended by about 10,000 potential supporters and 2,000 ‘blackshirts’, half of whom were acting as stewards.
But, from the start, the event did not go according to plan.
There was a rival demonstration by about 2,000 Communists and, according to various estimates, 500 Communists managed to get tickets into the hall.
They interrupted events from the start of the proceedings and, exaggeratedly, for Mosley did manage to make his speech, one of the Communist marchers, who did not manage to get into the hall reported:
So effective was our penetration into Olympia that despite repeated attempts, Mosley was unable to make his speech because of the noise and the fighting between his stewards supporters and the anti-Fascists.
In the end, many of the Communist opponents were ejected from the hall.
But it was the manner of that ejection which offended many.
Many were kicked and beaten by eight or more stewards before being flung into the street: ‘In nearly every case they were bleeding from the head and face and their clothing was badly torn….’
Though Mosley interpreted the actions of the fascists at Olympia as the ‘only guarantee of free speech in Britain’ that was not how the press, the politicians and the public saw the matter.
They saw the fascist stewards as the Nazi storm troopers trampling upon liberty and were quick to dissociate themselves from the image which the BUF had gained.
Lord Rothermere and the Daily Mail withdrew their support, Conservative MPs who were present vied in their condemnation of the actions of the fascist stewards, the government considered the need to take steps to improve public order, and the public were persuaded to perceive the BUF as an extension of the fascist danger in Europe.
Such visions were amplified by the continuance of fascist violence.
The most dramatic evidence of this was the ‘Battle of Cable Street’ on Sunday 4 October 1936, when a march through the East End of London by the fascists prompted an anti-fascist demonstration, violence, and the injury of seventy people and eighty-eight arrests, eighty-three of whom were anti-fascists.
In the wake of this violence the National government pushed forward with the Public Order Act which, among other clauses, prohibited the wearing of uniforms for political purposes in public places or at meetings.
Did this signify the end of British fascism?
Indeed, why did British fascism fail?
Many reasons have been offered, including the threat of European fascism, the events at Olympia, the introduction of the Public Order Act in 1936, military uniforms, the stability of the political system, the economic recovery of the 1930s and the occurrence of the Second World War.
It may have been that its conflicts with the communists exaggerated its importance.
A.J.P. Taylor sees its decline more in terms of the failure of leadership:
Mosley was in fact a highly gifted playboy.
From the moment he modelled himself on Mussolini, he resembled nothing so much as an actor touring the provinces in a play which someone else had made a success of in London.
watching newsreels of Mosley on the march through the East End recalls the memory of another Londoner.
Oswald Mosley aspired to be the Great Dictator, Sir Charles Chaplin played the role better.
Yet it might also be argued that the major political parties ensured that, despite the attention which Mosley attracted, the fascists were going to be marginalized.
The Labour Party and Fascism
The most perplexing problem facing members of the Labour Party in the early 1930s was how to reconcile their advocacy of peace with the urgent need to deal with the threat of European fascism.
This concern was adumbrated in the early 1930s by the rise of Oswald Mosley's British Union of Fascists.
Historians have varied in their interpretations of how the Labour Party approached these problems and the effectiveness of its responses.
Michael Newman argues that the Labour party adopted the view that fascism only emerged where parliamentary democracy was not well established.
Since such a system seemed well founded in Britain it chose to ignore British fascism, unlike the Communist Party, which was prepared to fight the BUF on the streets at Olympia and Cable Street.
Broadening out his topic, he concludes:
In this sense, Labour's respect for the constitution and its willingness to collaborate with an increasingly strong State against ‘extremism’ of the Left as well as the Right did not save Britain from fascism: it merely helped capital at the expense of the working class.
His view is that since there was little chance of a fascist state being  formed in Britain the Labour Party ought to have been prepared to tackle fascism in a militant way and to strike a blow against the constitutional approach to politics which simply strengthened capitalism.
In rejecting such an approach it was left to the Communists to challenge both British fascism and capitalism in the 1930s.
Yet, such a view argues that the Labour Party should have gone against its declared policies, on the assumption that they could not work, and maintains that it was dilatory in its attitudes towards and actions against British fascism.
Neither proposition is necessarily correct.
The Labour Party subsequently achieved some measure of socialism under Attlee, despite the hostility of capitalism, and the Labour Party was well informed about the real strength of the fascist challenge.
Quite rightly, the Labour Party did not wish to exaggerate the importance of a fringe political group which it had investigated in a detailed national survey, based upon a circular to the secretaries of its constituency organizations in 1934.
The Labour Party was well aware of the limited challenge of British fascism and could discriminate between the threat it posed compared with the more serious threat of European fascism.
This survey highlighted the fact that there were few centres of fascist support outside London, Manchester, Birmingham and Leeds — areas where there was a significant Jewish presence or where Mosley exerted some personal appeal.
Even in these areas, no political successes were achieved in the local.
elections despite the determined efforts of fascist groups in the late 1930s.
This thinness of fascist support was particularly apparent in Yorkshire.
Bradford was ‘not troubled with them’[fascists], ‘The Movement does not receive much support’ in Dewsbury, and there appear to have been only a couple of modest meetings in Huddersfield.
Elsewhere, there may have been more support.
It was claimed that there were about 350 members in Sheffield, ‘50 wear uniform’, and in Harrogate the fascists ‘appear to confine their attention to younger members of the Tory Party, particularly those interested in sports, rugby and golf players (the boisterous kind of young bloods).’
It was feared that the fascists might be ‘gaining considerable ground’ in the Harrogate area.
Nevertheless, any fears about Harrogate and Sheffield becoming centres of fascism proved unfounded.
In Leeds, thought to be one of the most powerful and well-organized centres of fascism, it was suggested that there were  only 100 to 200 fascists and no regular outdoor meetings, though it was noted:
The Fascists have very large premises at Devonshire hall.
I am informed by one of our Councillors that they are surrounded with Barbed wire.
He also says that about 50 or 60 fascists are drilling there regularly.
The fact is that fascist support was limited to the extent that all the fascist groups in a particular region were forced to work together in order to ensure a good attendance at meetings.
This was particularly evident in Leeds.
When Mosley addressed a meeting of 1,500 people at Leeds Town Hall in May 1934 it was estimated that about 400 fascists were present ‘most of whom had come to Leeds by bus.’
Even in the East End of London, a Jewish area which was the stronghold of British fascism, support was limited.
Though fascist candidates put forward a strong campaign in the London County Council elections of March 1937, their six candidates for the three two-member divisions of Bethnal Green North East, Shoreditch and Limehouse were defeated and they received less than 20 per cent of the vote.
Stuart Rawnsley's work on the membership of the BUF has also emphasized the limited extent of fascist support, especially after Olympia.
In addition he has stressed the crankish nature of many of its supporters and the fact that it drew that support from only a very small section of the working class — even though they may have formed a significant proportion of the BUF's small membership of between 5,000 and 40,000 members throughout the 1930s.
Some working-class members, particularly in south Lancashire, were apparently attracted because they were unemployed.
It is clearly dangerous to be too sweeping about the type of support which fascism received, for the evidence is far too diffuse and fragmentary, but it would be fair to accept Wal Hannington's point that the allegiance to the trade unions and the Labour Party prevented the working class and the unemployed being attracted to fascism though he felt that, ‘Every locality where the unemployed remain unorganized is a potential breeding-ground for this country, just as it was in Germany.’
The trade unions, trades councils and local Labour parties informed their members about the dangers it presented and energized their opposition — albeit in the form of peaceful protest.
The Labour Party was concerned at the threat which fascism posed to its traditional areas of support but the results of its 1934 circular emphasized the limited nature of British fascism.
Yet, while it could play down the challenge of British fascism it could not ignore the threat of European fascism.
As a result, the Labour Party was forced to alter many of its once-cherished policies during the mid- and late 1930s.
Throughout the inter-war years Labour politicians had been concerned with the preservation of peace.
They posed numerous questions.
Could European peace be guaranteed by disarmament?
How would Germany be prevented from entering another major international conflict?
Could French fears of, and hostility towards, Germany be removed?
To these questions they offered three policies for peace in Europe: disarmament, collective security through the League of Nations and the restoration of German territories stripped away by the Treaty of Versailles.
They accepted that these policies would provide the basis for peaceful co-existence between nations.
Yet mutual distrust persisted between France and Germany, Hitler rose to power in Germany, the Italian intervention in Abyssinia revealed the contempt of Italy for the League of Nations, and the Spanish Civil War, the subject of the next chapter, presented the stark challenge of fascism.
Some Labour politicians continued to cling to their previous peace strategies but by the late 1930s the majority had come to accept that war was inevitable — a view confirmed by the events in Czechoslovakia, Austria and Poland which preceded the outbreak of the European war.
This change of attitude created problems for the large and cumbersome structure of the Labour Party, where the commitment to peace was a deep-rooted and sensitive issue.
In a slow, confused, grudging process of adjustment the Labour Party attuned itself to the fight against fascism, and eventually the need to abandon its emphasis upon political independence.
It was Ernest Bevin and the trade-union movement which forced the change of direction.
At the Hastings Conference of 1933, the Party had declared its commitment to two potentially contradictory policies.
It supported a resolution opposing war by ‘organizing working-class action, including the general strike’ and yet accepted a resolution committing it to a general reduction of armaments within the security of the League of  Nations's commitment to take action against aggressor states.
The difficulty was that Labour could  have found itself supporting military action against a fascist state at the same time as it threatened a general strike against war.
In fact the Labour Party was deeply divided on how to maintain peace.
Arthur Henderson, Ernest Bevin, Dr Hugh Dalton, Clement Attlee, and their supporters, favoured disarmament based upon collective security.
The young Hugh Gaitskell, who had become aware of the dangers of fascism on his visit to Austria in the summer of 1933 and was greatly influenced by Dalton, summed up the attitude of this group by arguing that a general strike against all wars was ‘an invitation to the fascist aggressors.’
A second, rather small, group led by George Lansbury, the party leader advocated pacifism.
A third, composed of ex-members of the ILP, favoured an international general strike to prevent conflict and the need for working-class institutions to offer a revolutionary socialist programme.
A fourth, dominated by Sir Stafford Cripps and the Socialist League, a body founded in 1932 by a large minority group of the Independent Labour Party which refused to leave the Labour Party, favoured a ‘united front’ with the Communists against fascists.
Cripps explained that the fascist threat was serious and that Communist hostility towards the Labour Party had ceased.
They had ‘disavowed any intention, for the present, of acting in opposition to the Labour movement in the country, and certainly their action in many constituencies during the last election gives earnest of their disavowal.’
These factions came into conflict at the, 1935 Labour Party Conference.
This took place at Brighton in the climate of Italian aggression against Abyssinia and Ernest Bevin, with the support of the trade-union movement, swept away the protests of Lansbury and Cripps' Socialist League to win conference support for collective security through the League of Nations sanctions, including, if necessary, military sanctions against Italian aggression in Abyssinia.
Bevin, with the support of the major trade unions, dealt brutally with George Lansbury and his pacifist reservations, effectively forcing him to quit as leader of the Labour Party.
Rather dramatically, Dalton recorded that Bevin ‘hammered [Lansbury]to death.’
The 1935 conference also provoked two major, and related, controversies: the Socialist League mounted a major challenge against the conference policy and constituency parties began to protest that the block-vote of trade unions was limiting their  influence within the party.
Sir Stafford Cripps linked the two movements by operating in both.
Defeated at the 1935 Labour Party Conference, the Socialist League and Cripps attempted to forge an alliance with Tribune (formed to further the ‘united front’ against fascism), the Communists and the Constituency Labour Party Association through a new, ‘united front’campaign.
The international events of 1935 and 1936 tended to confirm the views of both extremes of the Labour Party.
Bevin and Dalton felt that Franco's invasion of Spain with his fascist forces justified rearmament, while Cripps and the Socialist League continued to support the ‘united front’ campaign since the National government was considered to be untrustworthy.
As a result the Edinburgh Conference of 1936 passed resolutions leaving the Labour Party supporting collective security but opposing rearmament.
Nevertheless, the Spanish Civil War did make a difference for the conference condemned the non-intervention policy adopted by the major powers, for it was being flouted by Italians, Germans and Russians, and recommended that the Spanish republican government should be allowed to buy arms.
After the conference, the Socialist League continued to oppose rearmament, opposed sanctions against Italy threatened as a result of the Italian invasion of Abyssinia, and advocated a policy for the Labour movement of preparing for the ‘mass resistance to war’, by which was meant a general strike.
In January 1937 it patched together a new ‘united front’ campaign in association with the ILP, the Communists, the Left Book Club and Tribune, around a programme of defence for the Spanish Republic, opposition to rearmament by the National government, support for the struggles of the unemployed and the affiliation of the Communist Party and the ILP to the Labour Party.
The campaign was in defiance of the Labour Party ban on joint work with the Communists and the Socialist League was condemned by the party, its members being forced to choose between disbanding the organization of expulsion.
The Socialist League was thus dissolved in May 1937.
The failure of the ‘united front’ campaign persuaded the left of the anti-fascist movement to reconsider its strategy.
The direction of the campaign moved towards a broader ‘popular front’ to be drawn up between the left in Britain, France and the Soviet Union.
When this campaign faltered the idea of the ‘popular front’ was extended to include an alliance between the Labour Party, the Liberals and some  dissident Conservative opponents of the National government, such as Winston Churchill, who were expressing their opposition to appeasement with Hitler and Mussolini.
In this climate, Cripps decided to mount a ‘popular front’ campaign in 1937 and 1938, in order to encourage Labour to enter a coalition government with anti-fascist and anti-appeasement Conservatives and Liberals if a split could be engineered within the Conservative Party.
Indeed, such a split appeared possible in February 1938 when Anthony Eden resigned from the National government because of the attempt by Neville Chamberlain, the Prime Minister, to recruit Italy as an ally against Germany.
At that time, as George Orwell reflected, the campaign appeared to be exerting some impact upon British politics for, ‘In England the Popular Front is only an idea, but it has already produced the nauseous spectacle of bishops, Communists, cocoa-magnates, publishers, duchesses and Labour MPs marching arm-in-arm to the tune of ‘Rule  Brittania ’.
The ‘popular front’ idea was, however, rejected by the Labour Party, which wished to maintain its political independence, mindful of the general election which was due in 1940.
As a result Nye Bevan and Cripps, with several others, were expelled from the party.
Their rank and file supporters were also rooted out of the Labour Party in a flurry of activity throughout 1939.
The fact is that after 1936 the tide had turned to the right in British Labour politics.
In that year Bevin became Chairman of the General Council of the TUC and Dalton was made Chairman of the National Executive Committee of the Labour Party.
In 1937 Dalton and Attlee got the Parliamentary Labour Party to support the armed forces estimates and the Bournemouth Conference supported rearmament.
There was now a new firmness in British Labour Party policy.
Although the Labour Party was fragmented in its approach to foreign affairs, and slow to respond to events in Europe, it did strongly oppose Fascism and appeasement even before the 1937 Bournemouth Conference.
The right wing within the party had shown more realism about the events in Europe than the left wing.
Nevertheless, there remains the issue of the ‘popular front’ and the ‘united front’against fascism — both of which were anathema to a Labour Party hostile to the Communist Party.
It also feared that a coalition with the anti-fascist forces might create similar problems  to those which the Labour government of 1929–3 I faced when relying upon Liberal support to carry out a legislative programme.
The Conservative Party and the Threat of Fascism
What of the Conservative Party, how did it react to the challenge of fascism?
The answer would appear to be with less determination than Labour and with fewer changes in policy.
By and large, the mainstream of the Conservative Party attempted to ignore British fascism and to appease European fascism.
As already indicated, the Conservative party was the dominant member of all three National governments which operated from August 1931 until the Second World War.
Throughout the 1930s the main body of the party, whether led by Stanley Baldwin or Neville Chamberlain, tended to disown the British Union of Fascists while attempting to appease European fascism.
It was the fringe of the Conservative Party, and those prominent politicians who moved to the fringe, who disagreed with one or more of those policies — ranging from the Lord Rothermere, the press baron, to Winston Churchill and, eventually, Anthony Eden.
Some Conservative support for the BUF was evident from its early days and was most obviously stated through Rothermere's Daily Mail which, on 8 January 1934, contained an article entitled ‘ Hurrrah for the Blackshirts’.
This article inaugurated Rothermere's massive press campaign which helped to thrust the BUF from comparative obscurity into the limelight.
Some Conservative MPs began to attend fascist meetings and, as already suggested, there were some young Conservatives who supported fascism that developed in relatively middle-class towns such as Harrogate.
Nevertheless, fascism does not appear to have gained a strong or permanent foothold within most Conservative constituency parties.
In areas where fascism had made a significant challenge its presence was likely to be embarrassing.
For instance, in Leeds it was the Conservative leader who intervened in a press debate and it was declared that, ‘His attitude is anti-fascist and anti-communist.’
In addition the fascists threatened ‘to oppose Vyvyan Adams, the Tory MP for West Leeds, who has been so active in the House of Commons in asking questions re the Fascists.’
Also, the support of many of those conservatives who flirted with fascism came to an abrupt halt after the Olympia meeting.
Rothermere withdrew his  press support and Conservative MPs, who revealed some interest in fascism, joined the clamour of condemnation.
Indeed, three Conservative MPs — W.J. Anstruther-Gray, J. Scrymgeour-Wedderburn and T.J. O'Connor — had rushed straight from Olympia to Printing House Square to hand in a letter which subsequently appeared in The Times .
They declared:
…
were involuntary witnesses of wholly unnecessary violence inflicted by uniformed Blackshirts on interrupters.
Men and women were knocked down and were still assaulted and kicked on the flour.
It will be a matter of surprise for us if there were no fatal injuries.
These methods of securing freedom of speech may have been effective, but they are happily unusual in England and constituted in our opinion a deplorable outrage of public order.
It was such violence as this, and that perpetrated at Cable Street, which encouraged a Conservative-dominated National government to introduce a Public Order Act at the end of 1936.
If the Conservatives dismissed the British Union of Fascists without too much concern — and most could see no good political reasons for embracing the fascist faith — they could not dismiss the threat of European fascism so easily, and attempted to accommodate it instead.
The fact is that the majority of the Conservative Party supported the appeasement line, through the National government, from before the Abyssinian crisis of 1935 to the Second World War.
It is impossible, in a short space, to full convey the complexities of international diplomacy throughout these years.
Nevertheless, the fundamental issues can be clearly stated.
British governments continued to accept the need for collective security under the Covenant of the League of Nations.
Ostensibly, they accepted the need for disarmament and the maintenance of the peace by sanctions, and even military action, organized by the League of Nations against aggressor nations.
Therefore, formal protests were made when Hitler announced compulsory military service in 1935 and an increase in military forces, in contravention of the Treaty of Versailles, and when Italy invaded Abyssinia.
But in reality such protests were conducted at a low level in order not to interfere with normal, and reasonably good, relations which British foreign secretaries wished to continue and nurture with the offending nations.
In the case of the Italians, Sir John Simon, the Foreign Secretary, passed on a friendly warning to Mussolini in February and  March 1935.
Later, Anthony Eden, by that time in the Cabinet as Minister of the League of Nations Affairs though still a Junior Minister for Foreign Affairs, went to Rome with the intent of offering Abyssinia territory in Somaliland in return for conceding some of its own territory to Italy.
As David Carlton has written, this plan ‘represented a willingness to buy off a bully with territory to which he had no legitimate claim.’
The plan failed and the Italians invaded Abyssinia in October 1935.
In the case of Germany, Simon and Eden travelled to Berlin to have talks with Hitler in March 1935.
Evidently, the concern for collective security was not to be allowed to interfere with normal international relations.
The process of appeasement had begun in earnest.
Yet the course of appeasement was by no means straight.
Baldwin's National government had gone to the electorate in November 1935 against the backcloth of the Italian invasion of Abyssinia, which raised public concern, and a Peace Ballot carried out by the League of Nations Union which indicated that the British public wanted peace and disarmament but was prepared to contemplate military sanctions against aggressor nations.
The issue of sanctions against Italy was, therefore, to the fore and the evidence that Sir Samuel Hoare, the Foreign Secretary, had been negotiating with Pierre Laval, his French equivalent, to arrange a plan to settle the Italian — Abyssinian war by giving one-third of Abyssinia to Italy was not well received.
Indeed, though the Cabinet had agreed the plan in December Hoare was forced to resign, and replaced by Eden.
Yet the policy of appeasement continued throughout 1936.
As David Carlton stresses, Eden was not the most unequivocal foreign secretary.
He changed his mind several times about the possibility of oil sanctions against Italy, hoped to be able to win concessions from France, to avoid conflict when German troops unilaterally moved in to remilitarize the Rhineland in March 1936.
His mild reaction to the tearing up of the Treaty of Versailles was perhaps explicable by the fact that he saw such events as inevitable and because the Foreign Office was locked into a policy of appeasement.
Carlton describes the situation thus:
Eden was prepared in principle to make concessions not only to Hitler but also to Mussolini if matters could be so arranged as to involve no loss of face.
But whereas he had come to the conclusion by the beginning of 1936 that Mussolini was probably not the man to play this game, he remained  cautiously optimistic that Hitler might be.
He was, therefore, at least until 1938 much more inclined to be hostile to Italy than to Germany.
In retrospect this seems to betoken an odd sense of priorities….
Yet in the years before 1938 Eden was obviously closer than his critics to public sentiment.
For nothing done by Hitler in the external sphere during Eden's time at the Foreign Office aroused any public reaction remotely comparable to that which engulfed Hoare over Abyssinia.
The detailed record does tend to suggest that Eden was not the consistent anti-appeaser which he claimed to be.
Throughout 1936, Eden pursued a wavering and temporizing course on sanctions against Italy.
He was also partly, though not wholly, responsible for the ‘non-intervention’ policy which Britain and France pursued with regard to the Spanish Civil War, even though it was being blatantly ignored by Germany, Italy and Russia, and though it denied a legitimate Republican government the right of access to the world market for arms with which to defend itself.
There were two motivating factors behind many of these actions of appeasement.
In the first place, many of the leading figures in the National government feared the rise of communism in Germany, Italy and Spain rather more than they feared the rise of European fascism.
Secondly, they realized too late that European fascism was the real threat to peace and that Britain needed time to accomplish her rearmament.
And, is will be suggested in the next chapter, most Conservative politicians were quite happy to see communist and anarchist groups within the Spanish Republican groups beaten by the fascists and their own internal squabbles.
Their affinity with the right rather than the left allowed them to overlook the genuine nature of the fascist threat.
Nevertheless, there were a few Conservative politicians who fundamentally disagreed with Conservative policy.
The most famous and obvious dissenter was Winston Churchill who, in his years in the political wilderness, was a great critic of both Stanley Baldwin and Neville Chamberlain.
His main concern was that the National government had not sufficiently registered the fact that if Spain fell into fascist hands France would then be surrounded by fascist powers — Germany, Italy and Spain.
Since Britain was committed to defending France in the case of an invasion, it was obvious to him that Britain would be drawn into a future European war unless fascism was thwarted.
Churchill was soon joined in expressing such a marginal Conservative view by Anthony Eden, one of the leading appeasers of the 1930s.
Throughout 1937 and early 1938 relations between Neville Chamberlain, the Prime Minister, and Eden had been strained — largely due to the fact that Chamberlain favoured the policy of enlisting Italian support against Hitler, a policy which was in direct contradiction to that pursued by Eden.
Eventually, Eden resigned in February 1938 allegedly as a result of Chamberlain's attempt to make an agreement with the Italians without informing him, although Carlton puts the ball firmly in Eden's court, suggesting that ‘Essentially…his departure sprang from an unwillingness to treat with Mussolini.’
He was fortunate to be seen as an anti-appeaser by the time Chamberlain was negotiating with Hitler and coercing the Czechs into surrender during the Czechoslovakian crisis of September 1938.
Yet David Carlton feels that too much should not be made of the gathering of opposition to Chamberlain's National government policy of appeasement.
The fact was that Churchill and Eden were not of like minds and did not associate closely until Churchill became Prime Minister in 1940.
Instead, there was a loose group of 20 or 30 Conservative MPs who identified with Eden and a similar group, including Brendan Bracken, Duncan Sandys and Robert Boothby, who identified with Churchill.
Their position as outsiders was not transformed until the outbreak of the Second World War when it was Chamberlain's ardent supporters, the ‘appeasers’ who became the outsiders and the ‘guilty men’.
Conclusion
Though Labour joined with the Conservatives in May 1940 to fight the Second World War, under Churchill's leadership, it is clear that despite the almost obsessive concern of the public about the threat of European fascism it was only the Labour Party, slow and cumbersome in its rate of change, which actually squared up to the necessity of facing fascism with military sanctions if necessary.
The Conservative Party, which dominated the National government, operated a policy of ‘appeasement’ to which there was only limited and fragmented opposition from within its ranks.
Perhaps a more determined effort by the Labour Party, and a willingness to operate a ‘united front’ against the fascists might have  forced the National government to change its policy, but that seems unlikely.
For one thing, the Labour Party leaders would not contemplate an alliance with the Communist Party, which they rightly feared was merely aiming to use Labour to gain political support and which was involved in almost needless violence against the supremely unimportant British fascists.
For another, there was little or no chance that the National government, working with a very large Conservative majority, would be in danger of political defeat even on the matter of ‘appeasement’.
In addition, it might be noted that British fascism had not substantially changed the attitudes of Britain's major political parties and it could be argued that there was still much equivocation in government as to whether or not Mussolini or Hitler represented the biggest threat.
In the realm of secret diplomacy it would appear that public opinion had only a very minor role to play.
What is remarkable is how impervious a government can be to changing public opinion when insulated from the threat of political defeat by a substantial parliamentary majority.
It is clear the National government's right-wing attitudes and its hostility to the threat of communism could override public concern within the context of its parliamentary supremacy.
This was particularly evident in the case of the Spanish Civil War.
THE IMPACT OF THE SPANISH CIVIL WAR
The Spanish Civil War, which began in July 1936 when General Franco's fascist troops from Morocco landed in southern Spain, exerted a major impact upon the international political scene and, nationally, upon the attitude of the right and left in Britain.
K.W. Watkins has written that:
Probably not since the French Revolution had a foreign event so bitterly divided the British people, and this at a time when national unity was essential for our survival.
This view contrasts sharply with the disillusioned, almost pessimistic, reflections of George Orwell who wrote in England Your England that there was no true internationalism amongst the British working class.
Apart from the ‘Hands off Russia’ campaign of 1920 he feels that the British working class had never thought or acted internationally and, ‘For two and a half years they watched their comrades in Spain slowly strangled, and never aided even with a single strike.’
In a footnote he does point to the aid they gave with money through the various aid-Spain funds but also derides this contribution, emphasising that ‘the sum raised…would not equal five per cent of the turnover of the football pools during the same period.’
Orwell felt that the bulk of British public opinion was behind Chamberlain's foreign policy of ‘non-intervention’, dissension being voiced by only a few thousand left-wingers, some of  whom went on to fight in Spain.
In a recent article, C. Fleay and M.L. Sanders have supported Orwell's general stance attacking the Labour Party policy on the Spanish Civil War as being as ‘torpid and as ambivalent’ as that of the National Government.
The Spanish Civil War has thus been the real focus of recent debate surrounding the British reaction to European fascism.
It has raised three major questions.
Firstly, what was the impact of the Spanish Civil War upon British public opinion?
Secondly, was the Labour Party ambivalent in its attitude towards the Spanish Republican government?
Thirdly, why did the National government adopt a policy of non-intervention which, as implied in the previous chapter, aided the fascists at the expense of the legitimate Republican government of Spain?
The Spanish Civil War
The Spanish Civil War began in July 1936 when a Moorish legion invaded southern Spain in support of General Franco's attempt to overthrow the socialist-dominated Spanish Republican government.
This action ended an uneasy truce which had existed between the various political parties following the creation of the Spanish Republic in 1931 after King Alfonso's flight from Spain.
The situation had begun to deteriorate markedly after the elections of February 1936 returned an coalition of Liberal republicans, socialists, anarchists, communists and Trotskyists to power, even though the right-wing parties had won a small popular majority.
The coalition was uneasy, law and order broke down, there were murderous attacks upon the clergy, churches were looted and destroyed, and there were several major strikes.
In this situation, General Franco and part of the army decided to lead a coup d'etat, their action being provoked by the murder of Calvo Satelo, a right-wing politician, on 13 July.
The first detachment of the Moors and foreign  legionaires crossed from Morocco to the Spanish mainland on 19 July, an action which coincided with military revolts in Seville, Cadiz and Barcelona.
To most Western observers the Spanish Civil War was simply a conflict between the supporters of the Republican government and Franco's fascist rebels, supported by Germany and Italy.
It was in fact more complex and multi-layered encompassing Basque and Catalan independence movements, a landlord — peasant struggle and  a civil war between communist and anarchist groups in Catalonia.
George Orwell wrote of the civil war within a civil war, for he was present when this conflict erupted in Barcelona.
There was also religious conflict.
Quite often Catholic groups gave support to Franco against the Socialist Republican government, on the grounds that the latter was responsible for the burning of churches and the murdering of Catholics.
But one should not ignore the fact that there were many Catholics who found themselves opposing Franco because of their support for the independence movements.
These subtleties of the war did not entirely evade the British public.
Pro-Republican Catholics did express their opinions in newspapers such as the Leeds Citizen .
There was deep concern by Catholics at the bombing of Guernica by German planes in support of Franco's cause.
Nevertheless, it was the basic European conflict between fascism and socialism which was reflected most in the concern of the British public.
As Watkins wrote:
The Spanish Civil War was a mirror into which men gazed and had cast back at them not a picture of reality but the image of hope and fears of their generation.
For many it became the supreme moral issue of their time.
There is no doubt that part of the Catholic community in Britain reacted strongly to the destruction and damage of Catholic churches.
Indeed, Eoin O'Duffy, who led an Irish contingent to Spain to help Franco, maintained that they had gone to fight the battle of Christianity against Communism, a view which was confirmed for them by the Irish Dominican father, Revd Paul O' Sullivan when he said:
You are fighting in God's holy name, for God's glory, in God's defence, to save our holy Faith, to save Christianity to save the world from the fiendish atrocities which have been perpetrated in Russia, in Mexico and now in Spain.
Equally, there is no doubt that trade unionists were fervently hostile to the actions of Franco.
Accounts of atrocities on both sides clearly helped to partly divide British public opinion along social, religious and economic lines.
Some obviously saw the events in Spain as fascism limbering up for an even greater conflict; Spain was seen as an experimental laboratory for the arms, equipment and strategy of the fascist powers.
Many of those who went and fought for the Republicans were not always clear about why they were there, except that they felt a revulsion against fascism and a general feeling that they had to do something in the face of the frustrations of the 1930s.
Jason Gurney, who joined the International Brigade, wrote of such feelings:
The despair we felt at our inability to control our own destinies was not concerned solely with the rise of Fascism throughout Europe and the danger of it in or own country; the Depression had proved that the ruling class could not control the system it had itself produced.
Many others who went to Spain would have concurred.
Before the National Government banned Britons going to Spain at the beginning of 1937 there were already more than 600 men in the British Battalion of the International Brigade, organized by the Communist Party of Great Britain, while others, such as George Orwell, identified with the Independent Labour Party activists who fought with POUM, a Catalan anarcho-syndicalist group.
Yet others fought and identified with a plethora of socialist and anarchist groups who fought on the Aragon front, in the defence of Madrid, and at the battle of Jarama in February 1937.
But they were gradually forced to withdraw from Spain.
Orwell returned in 1937, disillusioned after the conflict between the communists and anarchists in Barcelona.
The British section of the International Brigade withdrew from Spain with the full organization on 15 November 1938.
Thereafter, the fascists rapidly captured the major cities and the war came to an end on 1 April 1939.
British Public Opinion and the Spanish Civil War
The impact of the Spanish Civil War on British public opinion must be seen within the wider context of the international events of the 1930s.
The rising tide of European fascism began to concern the British public, as well as some politicians, from the mid-1930s onwards.
The Abyssinian crisis, referred to in the previous chapter, was the first really serious issue which moved British public opinion against fascism.
It clearly influenced the League of Nations Union ‘Peace Ballot’, held in June 1935 and involving about eleven and a half million people, the majority of whom voted in favour of disarmament and the need for collective military action against aggressor nations should economic sanctions fail.
It also dominated  the general election of November 1935 and influenced government foreign policy throughout 1936.
And it was against this backcloth of public concern that the Spanish Civil War began on the 19 July 1936.
The Spanish Civil War exerted a profound impact upon British public opinion, despite Orwell's contrary view.
Although few British citizens fought in Spain, and there was little in the way of public protest and demonstration, there is ample evidence of public concern — particularly for the Spanish Republican government.
The need to halt fascism began to be seen almost as a life and death matter.
This affected not only the dedicated left and the organized working class but the whole of British society.
The size and range of the relief activities undertaken shows the strength of public support for the Spanish Republican government.
At the national level there was a National Joint Council for Spanish Relief, chaired by the Duchess of Atholl, a Conservative MP, though dominated by Liberal and Labour.
This committee acted as the co-ordinator for the activities of many other organizations, including the Spanish Medical Aid Committee, the Spain Foodship Youth Committee, the League of Nations Committee, the Peace Pledge Union, and various local councils of action and ad hoc bodies.
Most towns had Aid Spain Committees, which collected tins of milk, bars of soap, money for medical aid as well as holding meetings to explain the cause of Republican Spain.
While many of these bodies were underpinned by Labour and working-class support it should be recognized that they attracted support from across the social and political spectrum.
As a result twenty-nine food ships — the organizing of which proved to be a good way of strengthening support, were sent to Republican Spain during the three years of the civil war.
Collections for medical supplies were also undertaken and the first British Medical Unit of doctors and nurses, organized by the Spanish Medical Aid Committee, left for Spain as early as August 1936.
Several towns raised money to send their own ambulances to Spain bearing the town name.
The Spanish Medical Aid Committee reviewing the situation at the end of the first year had sent out forty-seven ambulances, eighty trained personnel, had constructed two base hospitals and several field hospitals and had set up a convalescent home — the Ralph Fox Memorial Home in memory of a well-known author and critic who had died in action in Spain during 1936.
About ten months later, in a report to an  International Congress at Paris it was stated that the Spanish Medical Aid Committee had helped to set up nineteen hospitals throughout Republican Spain, some front-line hospitals and seventy-two ambulances.
There were in fact many organizations supplying help to the Republican government.
They raised money in a variety of ways, from auctioning sketches of Picasso's Guernica to showing, up and down the country, the films The Defence of Madrid and Spanish Earth .
British miners raised £80,000 for Spain, the Labour party Spain Committee collected £49,000.
Some towns, such as Bradford, provided facilities for Spanish refugees.
Indeed, Bradford set up a home for Basque children up Manningham Lane, though it was largely financed by the Trades Council.
Several writers have rightly reflected the widespread nature of the political support for the Republican government and accepted C.L. Mowat's comment that the various ad hoc bodies which emerged ‘were, in effect, ‘popular fronts’ drawing in members of all parties.’
Support for the Republican government was widespread throughout all the social classes and across the political spectrum.
This contrasts sharply with the limited support for the Spanish fascists.
In fact when the Daily Mail launched an appeal for an anti-red ambulance it did not raise sufficient money to send even one to the Spanish fascists.
Nevertheless, it was the British Labour movement which was the backbone of support for the Spanish Republican government.
Yet this fact does not seem to have impressed Orwell and some other, more recent, writers.
The British Labour Movement and the Spanish Civil War.
The crux of the criticism directed at the Labour Party, in particular, is that while it provided food and medical help it did little to try to persuade the British government to end its policy of non-intervention towards Spain.
This view has been expressed most effectively in an article by Fleay and Sanders.
In their work on the Labour Spain Committee they conclude:
The party's identification with the cause of the Spanish Republic was never translated into practical aid for winning the war.
whether possible or not, it was never contemplated The Labour party leadership failed consistently to put principle into practice, while the rank-and-file opposition to party  politics, as expressed by the Labour Spain Committee, confused imperatives and failed to effect a radical change of policy.
Watkins comes to a similar conclusion, although he argues that the Labour Party's hostility to working with the Communist Party was the reason for its failure to force the National government to abandon its non-intervention policy.
These criticisms are, in many respects, justified although it would seem a bit far-fetched for historians to believe that the Labour Party, even in alliance with the Communist Party, could have forced a National government with an overwhelming parliamentary majority, to have capitulated to external pressure.
In addition to which, the Labour Party was facing the anguish of having to adjust its attitude towards peace and disarmament, commitments which had been established in the wake of the First World War, when faced with the threat of European fascism and the Spanish Civil War.
The process of change was never likely to be easy.
The real problem was that although Ernest Bevin and the trade union movement had swept away pacifist opposition, and won conference support for collective security for the League of Nations at the Labour Party's Brighton Conference of 1935, it was by no means fully committed to rearmament.
Indeed, throughout 1936 there was much confusion in Labour Party ranks.
This is beautifully illustrated by the actions of the Bradford Trades Council, whose secretary was also the secretary of the Bradford Labour Party.
In 1937 it's Year Book reported:
Having in mind the proposals of the Government for a very considerable increase in the armaments of the country, and also the piling up of armaments in other European countries with a consequent danger of war, the Council in March passed a resolution calling the TUC to discuss measures which might be taken to oppose such an armament programme and to prepare plans for action to prevent the outbreak of war.
In the same source a later piece was written on Spain, which noted:
We have witnessed a further attempt on the part of the Fascist element in Spain to supersede the democratically elected Government of the People of Spain by force of arms.
The magnificent fight which the Spanish workers have waged against the Fascist…has been the wonder of the world…. the Council organized a Mass Meeting in Bradford to place the true facts before the public, and also opened a Spanish workers' Relief Fund in conjunction with the TUC Solidarity Fund….
We wholeheartedly condemn the Government's policy of Non-intervention which has permitted the Fascist countries of Italy and Germany to pour into Spain vast amounts of arms, ammunition, men, whilst it has denied the Spanish Democratic Government the legal right to purchase necessary supplies to defend the State.
By its attitude the ‘National Government’ has done much to advance the cause of Fascism
The Labour Party's confusion was a result of the rapid change of events.
At first the party supported the policy of non-intervention, advocated by the French and British governments in August 1936, and gave this policy its cautious support at its conference in October 1936.
The trade unions dominated the conference and endorsed the policies of their leaders.
By that time, however, the constituency parties were complaining of trade-union domination at conference, and formed the Provisional Committee of Constituency Labour parties to challenge this feature of Labour conferences.
The rejection policy of non-intervention by many of the constituency Labour parties tended to become tied in with their challenge to the trade-union domination of the Labour Party, and probably lost its impact and relevance in the wider debate about party democracy.
As a result the Labour Spain Committee had to be formed in March 1937 to fight the battle for the rejection of non-intervention within the Labour Party.
It had three main purposes.
Its first objective was that of urging the National Executive of the party to call a conference of the whole Labour movement in order to reassess their policy.
Secondly, it wished to mount a national campaign to force the National government to allow the Spanish Government to buy arms.
Thirdly, it wished to co-ordinate all anti-fascist groups supportive of the Republican government into one single movement.
The effectiveness of the Labour Spain Committee was impaired both by the fact that it was  was associated with the movement in the constituency Labour parties and also because it was effectively advocating a  a popular front against fascism, which the Labour Party continued to reject throughout the 1930s; after the political disasters of 1931 it wanted no treating with its political enemies whether of the left or the right.
The Labour Party leadership also felt that the British people were not, as yet, ready for war: ‘In Great Britain the position was that no Government would be able to secure public support for any action which the people believed would lead to war.’
Nevertheless, whilst a joint campaign with the Communist Party and other political organizations was entirely out of the question, the Labour leadership felt compelled to adjust its policy with regard to Spain.
Shortly after the Edinburgh Conference, the National Council of Labour, which brought the executives of the TUC and the Labour Party together, agreed that the Spanish government should have its commercial rights restored.
By June 1937 the National Council of Labour, effectively speaking for the Labour Party, decided to reverse its Edinburgh policy and to oppose non-intervention.
This policy was confirmed at the Labour party's Bournemouth Conference in October 1937.
In addition, the conference was forced to accept the need to organize a campaign to compel the National government to drop its policy of non-intervention, an action which led to the formation of the Spain Campaign Committee.
Fleay and Sanders feel that this committee achieved remarkably little, placing no significant pressure on the National government to drop its policy of non-intervention.
Its main work appears to have been the organizing of humanitarian aid to Spain, such as the ‘milk for Spain’ appeals.
Indeed, as part of this campaign Yorkshire Labour town constituencies had sent over 150,000 pints of milk to Spain and more than 10 tons of pasteurised milk by February 1938.
In addition, the Secretary of the City of Leeds Labour party, A. L. Williams, in assessing the contribution made by his organization between March 1937 and March 193a noted:
…
the Labour Party in Leeds had done quite a lot of work in support of the Spanish Government.
Last year, nearly £300 had been collected for the Spanish Fund, and within the space of a month, including Xmas no less than three large indoor meetings had been held, of which one was the Town Hall meeting at which one of the largest collections ever received at a Labour meeting in Leeds was taken up.
Also the division had been responsible for organizing 5 cinema meetings and a number of smaller meetings during the campaign weeks.
All these meetings concerned themselves with the Spanish question.
Given the Labour Party's lack of political action on the Spanish issue it is hardly surprising that the Labour Spain Committee renewed its efforts to call for a national conference, which it organized in October 1938.
On this occasion, it once more called for the formation of a popular front against fascism, which did not endear it to the leadership of the Labour Party.
The Labour Party's response to the Spanish Civil War was clearly more humanitarian than political.
It was confused, slow to change — a factor amplified by the fact that there was no party conference between October 1937 and May 1939 — and deliberately hostile to the idea of working with other anti-fascist groups.
Its opposition to the Communist Party, in particular, prevented it from even attempting to mount a mass political campaign in favour of the Republican government.
Yet is also harboured doubts about whether there was widespread political support for the Republicans.
Labour leaders doubted whether they had convinced the population of the need to support Republican Spain:
If our propaganda has failed, it has failed because we have been unable to arouse the British people in such a way as to make them feel that the cause of Republican Spain was their cause in such a measure that they would take every risk, even the risk of war to make the Republican cause in Spain prevail.
In fact a series of public opinion polls, conducted between February 1938 and January 1939 revealed that between 57 and 78 per cent of those who expressed an opinion favoured sympathy for the Republican government, and even a willingness to take action against Franco's fascists.
Only between 7 and 9 per cent expressed sympathy for Franco.
The Labour Party quite clearly underestimated the extent to which the British public was horrified by the rise of fascism in Spain.
The National Government and the Spanish Civil War
Given the extent to which the British public supported Republican Spain, why was it that the National government kept to its policy of non-intervention?
Was it because of its natural sympathy for the right and its hostility of the left?
Was it because its parliamentary majority prevented any real possibility of its position being threatened?
Was it because of the commitment of both Stanley Baldwin and Neville Chamberlain to the process of appeasement?
Alternatively, was it due to the fact that the Labour did not mount an effective campaign against its position?
There is no doubt that the majority of the Conservative MPs in the National government were quite pleased with the developments in Spain.
Their main concern in 1936 was the threat of socialism and  communism in Europe and in Spain.
The burning of churches by the Spanish Communists and Russia's increasing support for the socialist-dominated Republican government: some of these were quite clearly pro-Hitler and pro-Mussolini.
A significant proportion supported the appeasement policies being put forward by Chamberlain.
As suggested in the previous chapter, only a few agreed with Churchill and with Eden, after his departure from the National government, that fascism posed a major threat to Britain.
Although the Labour party failed to mount a sufficiently large campaign against the non-intervention policy, there seems little doubt that the government would have continued along its agreed course.
Perhaps, as with the Abyssinian episode, public opinion might have been sufficient to temporarily deflect the leaders of the National government from their chosen course, but it seems unlikely that Chamberlain's government would have been so easily, or temporarily, blown off the course of appeasement.
The fact that the Labour Party did not lead public opinion as strongly as it might have done meant that the National government had an easier ride than it might otherwise have expected.
Conclusion
The Spanish Civil War clearly conditioned British public opinion to the impending threat of conflict with European fascism.
It was, as already suggested, the mirror into which people looked to have their fears reflected.
Without doubt the sympathies of the British people were with the Spanish Republican government — and they demonstrated their support with a humanitarian response.
But the National government was locked on course for appeasement and, with the parliamentary majority which it enjoyed, there seems little doubt that even a powerful political campaign by the Labour Party, in league with other anti-fascist groups, could have changed its policies.
For the left, the Spanish Civil War proved to be something of a crisis.
For the right, the real crisis came when appeasement proved to be a bankrupt policy as Britain drifted towards war in September 1939.