

FARMERS WEEKLY
26 July 1991
75p
MORE THAN 265,000 READERS EVERY WEEK
FREE POWER FARMING WITH THIS ISSUE
SHEEP: HOW TO MEET MARKET NEED
COUNTRY CAR SPECIAL: IT'S A BUYERS' MARKET NOW
CONTENTS
OPINION
LETTERS
TALKING POINT
NEWS
BUSINESS
Meat is better value for money than ten years ago, according to Meat and Livestock Commission research.
North-east farmers launch beef and lamb quality assurance scheme.
MARKETS
MACHINERY
Machinery to help hill farmers stole the limelight at the Royal welsh Show — we announce the medal winners .
Mobile sheep dip eases chemical disposal problems .
Health and safety Executive's five year fatal accident report gives rise for concern .
ARABLE
Blind grain sites in cereals — cause for alarm?
. In the first of our series of harvest round-ups we provide an over-view of progress to date .
Attention to strategies can provide answers to the blackgrass problem .
Controls on straw burning get the full backing of the law this season — here's what to do .
LIVESTOCK
Protein and CGIs determine cattle sale prices .
Mastitis resistance in Norwegian Reds .
East of England Show results .
Texels come in three shapes and sizes (p54–55).
Royal Welsh Show technical and business topics (p56–57).
Livestock sales — see classified.
SHEEP SUPPLEMENT
Our special pull-out centre section explains how to select quality lambs to meet the precise needs of the market once the variable premium has been abolished.
FEATURES
Vehicles for off- and on-road use feature in our special Country Car features.
Although times are tough for manufactures and dealers in the motor industry for farmers it means there are plenty of bargains about.
ON OUR FARMS
LAND
FARMLIFE
Rachel's dairy organic style .
Farm tourism: Still scope in the south-west .
And meet Sue Lloyd Jones who teaches the B&B trade .
Crossword .
Farm Women's Club .
From bouquets to high tech .
NEXT WEEK
DRIVING ON THE RIGHT LINES?
Four finalists in the Tractor Driver of the year Competition get set for the deciding test at Silsoe Research Institute.
TAKING STOCK OF TREES
Where do you get the best trees?
How should you treat them?
How should you plant them?
Those are just a few of the questions answered in the second part of our series about trees on the farm.
STRIVING FOR QUALITY LAMB
Our report about the sheep farmer of the year category of the 1991 Agricultural Awards focuses on the aims of three flockmasters whose family farms rely on their expertise.
Above: Looking for a new set wheels?
Now is a good time to buy as our Country Car feature explains .
Right: Selecting quality lambs to meet the precise needs of the market will be critical once the variable premium has been abolished.
Our special supplement (centre pill-out) explains how you can cope.
Below: A dying practice — as harvest gets under way growers are reminded that straw-burning now has the force of the law against it .
FARMERS WEEKLY OPINION
ACTION NEEDED NOW TO CUT ACCIDENT TOLL ON THE FARM
Last year 64 people were killed while working on UK farms.
That statistic makes agriculture the country's second most dangerous industry.
There is a one-in-328 chance of an employee being killed in accident while working on the nation's farms.
In manufacturing, the risk is four times lower.
Why?
Both industries use heavy and complicated machinery.
But children don't die in factories any more.
Last year three children were killed in farm accidents.
The reports about how people died make horrifying reading.
But worse is the fact that the same accidents happen time and time again.
Unguarded pto shafts, clearing machinery while it is still running, failing to switch off engines, and removing fallen and hung-up trees still exact their toll on the lives of our workforce.
When will the industry learn that it's a dangerous occupation and safety should be paramount?
A lax attitude to accident prevention cannot be justified by the perennial excuses of financial hardships and pressure from high work-loads.
Farmers should not be tempted to risk their own lives, or those of others, by cutting corners.
When a business is under pressure it may be tempting to allow young, inexperienced or retired workers to help out.
Don't succumb.
Instead ensure that you and your employees have access to the best training and keep on top of latest developments.
The Health and Safety Executive must be commended for its attempts to cut the death toll.
But leaflets and videos are useful only if they are heeded and acted upon.
The campaigns must be backed by prosecutions which match the severity of breaking the Health and Safety at Work Act.
Last year's average fine of £297 is too low, particularly for those who flout the law continuously.
Those farmers who compromise on safety must be hit hard, where it hurts — in the pocket.
A wet harvest could be the last straw
Stop-start combining, with most wheats still some way off ripening, comes as quite a change compared with the past two years.
Ideal conditions then saw steady progress and plenty of time to experiment with different ways of getting rid of straw.
Now it seems we are back to normal, with catchy weather frustrating attempts to get on where crops are fit, and further kicking of heels in prospect once the winter barleys have been cleared.
With every hot day in July worth so much more than one in the mists of September, the later start threatens to take the gloss of what, at first glance, seems set to be a good harvest.
Added to the stop-go harvest is the dramatically expanded linseed acreage which means combines could still be grinding away well into October unless August brings big changes.
Dealing with large volumes of unwanted straw remains one of the biggest headaches for many growers.
Although it is still legal to resort to the matches this season, provided the job is done properly, a late harvest followed by a wet autumn could come as a nasty reminder that cereal-growing is not the doddle many would have us believe.
Sheep industry in painful transition
Flockmasters need no reminding that an industry which grew like Topsy over the past decade, has now entered a painful sort-out period.
Variable premium, the EC mechanism which encouraged expansion, some of it too indiscriminate on the breeding front, has only six months to live.
The UK's much needed lamb export trade to the Continent might rally promptly when the final curtain falls, but it would be unwise to expect too much too soon.
What hard-pressed commercial producers must do from now on, is to make doubly sure that the terminal sires and female replacements they select, will deliver the type of lambs demanded by an increasingly discerning market.
And there are still useful premiums to be obtained when the breeding, feeding and final selection are correct.
Latest developments at the all-important nucleus breeding and selection level, and tips on selecting finished lambs for market are just two of the topics covered in this week's Sheep Supplement.
The overall message is that those who get their genetic, technical and marketing acts together will survive and prosper.
Producers must believe in their ability and not succumb to despondency.
Mobile dip offers pollution solution
The disposal of used sheep dip is tightly controlled to prevent chemical polluting local watercourses.
Indeed the regulations are now so strict that some hill farmers and those with unsuitable land are having a problem getting rid of unwanted, surplus dip.
Diluting it and mixing in it into slurry lagoons or spreading it at a low rate on grassland was a method used in the past, but even that may not be possible now.
One way around disposal difficulties may be a new contract dipping service (see page 38).
Its operators bring the dip to the sheep and take away the left-over chemical which is disposed of at an approved site.
Could this be the answer to preventing pollution on difficult terrain?
Useful tips from Royal Welsh Show
Major and minor shows alike have been forced to broaden their appeal to keep the turnstiles clicking and cover rising costs.
There's nothing wrong in that for the new faces, without exception, are all food consumers.
The risk is that a show's technical and business farming content can be eroded in the process, and that must be avoided at all costs.
So top marks to the Royal Welsh Show and its research and technical exhibitors for a laying on an instructive menu for livestock producers.
Topics covered included the latest knowhow on breeding, business recording, costing and analysis, and ways in which to minimise and avoid the risks of silage liquor pollution (see page 56).
The advice available was well worth the cost of an entry ticket.
We'll have full details of the show results in next week's issue.
Resist the temptation to blame herbicides
Many things are blamed for poor blackgrass control and there is a growing tendency to condemn herbicide  resistance.
But before jumping to that conclusion it is worth pondering whether the weed is more resistant to husbandry practice rather than the herbicide.
Poor seed-beds, dry conditions and spraying at the wrong time or the wrong rate could all explain the appearance of the yield-sapping weed.
Consider those possibilities before writing the problem off as resistance.
Having said that, this season has seen the best conditions for controlling the weed for some time.
So, if you still feel herbicide resistance is to blame, this is the season to test for it.
Where blackgrass heads protrude above your crop it may be worth mailing a handful of seed to ADAS to have it checked (see page 42).
But be sure to consider your husbandry practices.
What price advice?
ADAS advice is free, provided it is about something deemed to benefit the ‘public good’.
In everyday terms that means ADAS should provided at least some free advice on tackling pollution and other conservation matters.
Unfortunately ADAS is failing to deliver.
According to the National Audit Office only one ADAS region has a working strategy to define and deliver free ‘public good’ advice.
In other areas farmers can expect a second rate or near nonexistent service.
According to the NAO, in one division conservation work had slipped to an almost negligible level in 1989/90 because of pressure of work, a high level of vacancies and lack of expertise.
Could it be that ‘public good’ is being sacrificed to make good the ADAS cash shortfall from the public purse?
Seeing Red…
Some animal performance yardsticks — like weight for age and lean versus fat content — are inherited strongly.
Others including resistance to various diseases are inherited weakly, and the question is whether they are worth including in a breeding programme or not?
Norwegian Red breeders have plugged away at mastitis resistance for the past 20 years.
They now claim a 1% reduction in this disease, compared with an estimated increase of 1.5% if they had not stuck it in their selection index (see page 49).
That policy seems to have done the Norwegian Red, some of which are black, no harm in other respects.
The national herd average yield is about 6400 litres, with the best producing more than 10,000 litres.
Spoilt for choice
Texels have established their slot as terminal sires capable of delivering lean and meaty lambs to suit an increasingly selective trade.
So much so that supporters now have three distinct types, with inevitable gradations in between.
Jeremy Hunt (see page 54) delves into breeders' claims and the basic differences between the Dutch and French types and the latest Belgian Beltex variant which has literally ‘muscled in’ to complicate the commercial flockmaster's choice.
Correct decisions on choice will depend to large extent on the type of dam to be mated and the prices that regional and national market outlets will pay for the crossbred progeny.
Into the milky fray
A week before the Milk Marketing Board agm it is a fair bet that there will be plenty of reports about who is likely to be chairman of that august organisation by the end of next week.
Comments about back-stabbing, vote splitting and skullduggery will be heard.
Self-seeking publicists will no doubt be pushing their views.
Rather than enter this fray it could be better to wait and see what the outcome of the vote is.
For a start it is a closed event, with nominations not disclosed in advance.
And it is the outcome of the vote that counts, not the lobbying in advance.
Publicists will do their own lobbying, they need no help.
And it is only when the vote is over that we will know how the MMB will be run in the coming year, and if there will be any change in the way decisions on the future of the board are taken.
Cutting hire costs
The benefits of short-term machinery hire have been known in the UK for some time.
Other European farmers are now being offered the service and that could help to reduce the rates UK farmers are charged.
FARMERS WEEKLY Farms cannot justify owning a combine indeed, we have contract-hired one from Agricultural Plant Hire since 1972.
That company is now looking across the Channel to extend the working life of its hire machines.
If hiring costs can be reduced by machines working longer, it could become an even more attractive proposition.
Heads says you have the kids, tails I have the combining.
READERS' LETTERS
Why can't the public be more like us?
Sir, Why does the general public
1.
Think that farmers wives still wear sackcloth aprons and wellingtons?
2.
Say —‘You don't look like a farmers wife (rosy cheeks and wellies again).
3.
Think that your fields are refuse tips?
4.
Think that crops in our fields are a free larder?
5.
Think that a the farmer is having a day off if he is seen in town?
6.
Think that field entrances are ideal picnic areas (when we are about to enter to harvest a crop)?
7.
Think that we are all rich?
8.
Want the agricultural shows filled with fairs and cheap sideshows so they can enjoy themselves?
9.
Envy our lives when the sun is shining and forget us when it is wet and stormy.
10.
Refuse to accept the fact that the gambolling lamb in the field is their future Sunday lunch.
 Mrs M Lewis  
The Royal — Europe's tower of Babel
Sir, John Rennie, as editor of the FARMERS WEEKLY Business Section, normally enjoys a fine reputation for his accuracy.
However, reading his piece (Market Place, July 112) I wonder if he was at the same Royal Show as I was.
Of course, I agree that the livestock information centre offers an excellent service, but I am not able to agree with the rest of his item.
The reason the Royal Show is international is not because we say it is; it is because the international visitors choose to visit the Royal Show and that is what makes it the most international agricultural show in the world.
If you must compare us with Paris, then look at the international visitors figures.
Paris: 18,600 visitors from 116 countries, ie 4.6% of visitors.
Royal Show: 26,513 visitors from 123 countries, ie 13.2% of visitors.
I freely concede that numbers alone mean little —it is the quality of the visitor that counts: Ministers/deputy ministers/senior officials, 112 (1990: 37); commercial officer/agricultural attaché, 89 (64); overseas ambassadors/high commissioners, 54 (21); international press corps, 60 (54).
Whether overseas countries have pavilions at the show is surely not the point, what is important is the number of countries represented by the exhibits.
This year, the Royal had nine overseas pavilions, but 51 countries were represented on exhibitors' stands and, contrary to the impression of John Rennie's piece, we sold 97% of the space to a record 1546 exhibitors.
What John Rennie does not consider is the buying power of the audience to the Royal.
In 1990 69% of farmers had made a purchase within seven months of their visit to the Royal, 81% were likely to make a purchase within 19 months of their visit.
With the show as buoyant as it is in these times, you will perhaps see why I have questioned his assertion that it is a local show and why I can absolutely refute the suggestion that we needed to discount.
About 1300 journalists registered at this years' show, and you have only to read the number of column entries and to hear the radio and to see the television to know that the content of this year's Royal Show stands second to none in the technical content of agricultural exhibitions across the world.
It seemed quite strange to read an allegation about the Royal Show being merely a big local show placed on the same page in FARMERS WEEKLY as a paragraph mentioning the fact that German ministers were at the Royal Show to forge links between the UK farmers and farm businesses.
 Robin Hicks  
Send a cow sends right Royal thanks
Sir, May I express through your columns Sends a Cow's gratitude to the many people in our beleaguered industry who generously supported us at the Royal Show this year.
A natural tendency in times of recession is to batten down the hatches and look after our own needs, but as we sold raffle tickets in aid of our livestock projects in Uganda, people at the Royal certainly supported our scheme with cheerful generosity.
Robert Cooper has donated a magnificent Normead heifer as the first prize to the draw, and Dalgety Agriculture sponsored all the printing and promotional costs along with Herdwise, which is supplying the second prize of 10 semen straws.
It is evident, too, that everyone is doing this at a time when thoughts of recession could easily exclude any charitable action.
May we thank the Royal Agricultural Society of England too, and especially Emma Leonard, for their staff's support at the Royal Show Dairy Unit, and John Longman who had donated his award winning Farmhouse Cheddar Cheese as a third prize.
With all the uncertainty and anxiety in our industry at the moment, it's good to see that we've not forgotten the needs of African farmers who anxieties are often far more acute than our own.
The draw to this raffle, which includes cash alternatives, is due to take place at the Dairy Event in September.
Until then there are still tickets available at the Send a Cow office at the address below.
 Gerald Addicott  
The £ sign is something all farmers understand
Sir, David Thornley (Talking Point, June 21) makes many excellent points about British cattle breeding.
Among them he indicated the need for genetic indices to be expressed in £ value —‘farmers seem to understand the £ sign very quickly’.
I believe this to be most important if we are to have rational investment decisions and efficient allocations of resources.
However, even when the genetic indices are expressed in money terms, farmers and their advisers will need help to interpret them for their own individual situation in these early days.
For example, if a CGI is worth £1 a point a lactation, our calculations suggest a farmer who does not breed his own replacements can afford to pay about £2.50 per extra point when purchasing a calving heifer.
A farmer rearing his own replacements and with a static herd size who purchases a calving heifer of roughly similar merit to his existing herd can perhaps afford about £4 per extra point.
A breeder purchasing a calving heifer of sound type and of genetic merit far above his existing herd can probably afford about £10 per extra point.
Purchases of prospective ET donors merit individual calculations.
Type and longevity are much harder, but not altogether impossible to cost.
Costings now reveal that until recently the approach which placed emphasis on type longevity and the value of the bull calf netted virtually the same money as higher production strategies, and farmers following these routes were not irrational.
However, with semen import restrictions off and markets opened up, that has changed with a vengeance.
We believe sound type is essential these days, but the opportunity is rising very fast.
Longevity seems set for the next few years, at least, to have, at best , a sharply reduced economic value.
Until now all sides in the cattle breeding debate have managed to avoid talking in money terms.
Is this why we have made so little progress?
Recent changes and developments have been very promising, but reinforcements will be needed.
 Andrew Chadwick  
Acid water trouble corrodes pipework
Sir, I wonder if any of your readers has found a problem with a private spring water supply that is too acid?
Mine comes from peaty moorland and the pH is too low with the result that over the years copper pipework corrodes in places, especially at low points.
Has anyone found a safe, practical way of raising the pH level so this doesn't happen?
An alkali will obviously have to be introduced to neutralise the acid and I am toying with the idea of lime in one form or another.
Has anyone found something else that works?
 G T Montgomery  
ADAS needs to join the real world
Sir, I wholeheartedly agree with Dr Stephen Smith's comments (News, July 12) on behalf of the NFU that charges for advice services to our hard pressed farmers should be realistic.
However, I should remind him (and possible many farmers) that comparable and cheaper alternative sources of advice are already available.
Myself and other independent advisers throughout the country provide practical advice and solutions to problems such as complying with COSHH and pollution regulations.
The cost of advice is often tailored to individual circumstances and situations.
Initial advice on pollution regulations is, in  fact, given free.
It is, however, a disturbing aspect of what are, after all, statutory regulations, that many farmers are reluctant to attempt in any way to address these problems.
This I believe stems largely from scaremongering and misleading information given to the industry from various sources.
This does not mean, however, that complacency is the answer.
What is required is to maintain a degree of perspective when approaching any problem areas, such as COSHH regulations or pollution control.
If ADAS wishes to continue to provide the service that it has done for many years to our industry, and as an ADAS spokesman said ‘not to price itself out of the market’, then it needs to join the real world.
 M J Dunwoodie  
Pollution problems are not so very bad
Sir, Congratulations to Catherine Paice on reporting of the many pollution problems faced by farmers throughout the UK (Features, June 21).
It is symptomatic of the depressed state of industry that so few of the individuals interviewed had anything positive to say about their experiences.
There is no reason why with good advice from an independent consultant, such as a member of the British Institute of Agricultural Consultants (BIAC) or ADAS, that attitudes shouldn't be more positive.
Many farms I have visited over the past 10 years have needed little more than a re-organisation of their existing system and some basic drainage alterations.
An initial appraisal of pollution problems should point out not only all the work required to prevent a pollution incident.
Such small works can be carried out without applying for grant and, therefore, the whole farm does not have to comply with the regulations.
Some farms do, however, need to undertake large capital schemes to satisfy the regulations.
It is not always in the interest of farmers or agents to go directly to companies with an interest in selling equipment or attempt to design a system themselves.
There is a great deal of high quality equipment on the market at the moment, but there is probably more which is either inferior or unsuitable for the purpose it is sold for.
Only by retaining an experienced independent consultant can a farmer make first a judgement about which way to go and secondly an objective purchasing decision.
I was glad to read late in the article of the NRA's positive attitude to the potential problem, and hope that farmers will take this as a sign that the task of improvement of farm waste management systems is not as dire in every case as many people would have us believe.
 Peter W Danks  
Cutting comments on hedge husbandry
Sir, I thought it appropriate as someone with 11 years' tree planting and habitat management experience to pass on some hedge-cutting tips.
The following recommendations will save time, diesel, and money.
Avoid flailing the vegetation in the gaps in the hedges because it prevents natural regeneration.
Furthermore, as more gaps appear so the hedges gradually shrink.
If you want ‘free’ hedges it is important to leave one side of a bank or ditch uncut to allow recolonisation.
Many hedges, repeatedly flailed to the ground, will return if left uncut.
If hedges were cut only every other year, they would be bigger and better for wildlife.
A hedge less than 5–6ft tall is, in my opinion, not much of a hedge at all in wildlife, game, and landscape terms.
And hedges flailed every harvest are devoid of the berries bigger hedges sport, which are important winter feed for birds.
Lastly, avoid flailing the vegetation in ditches where possible; these are good habitats for nesting wild game, not to mention other wildlife.
Many farmers place too much emphasis on tidiness.
Tidiness is a death-knell for wildlife.
 Andy Rees  
The ministry dissembles on lumpy goat disease
Sir, I Crawford, director of ministry veterinary field services makes some most inaccurate statements (Letters, June 28) concerning the state veterinary officer Mrs Laura Brough, who was responsible for the veterinary controls for a batch of imported Boer goats while they were in farm isolation in Lancashire in 1987.
The facts are as I reported them for FARMERS WEEKLY on Apr 27, 1990.
During their period of farm isolation the goats intermittently exhibited large abscesses which are the obvious clinical symptoms of lumpy goat disease, Caseous lymphadenitis.
These large abscesses were pointed out by the farm manager to Mrs Brough, who photographed them.
Whether or not she reported this condition to the divisional veterinary officer and showed him photographs, I do now know.
The fact is that nothing was done about the matter, and the goats were released from farm isolation by the ministry with subsequent disastrous results for me and for others.
So far, the ministry has chosen not to explain why it did not act over this matter, to admit that it made a mistake, and to fully compensate all those who have suffered trauma and considerable financial losses as a result of its negligence.
To whom in particular the blame for this disaster should be attributed, it is for someone in the ministry with all the facts at their fingertips to determine.
 Michael Gaisford  
Plough market not as good as French think
Sir, It was interesting to note in FARMERS WEEKLY (Machinery, July 12) that according to your report, the French plough maker Naud has spend the past two years investigating the potential of the UK market.
Apparently Naud has discovered that there about ‘1700 semi-mounted ploughs sold in the UK’, presumably annually, and that they wanted to be a big part of that market.
Kverneland (UK) Limited reckons to have in excess of 50% of the UK semi-mounted market, but we certainly do not sell anywhere near 850 of these units each year.
I would therefore be grateful to learn from Benoit Rudloff, who is buying these 1700 ploughs or, as I suspect, respectfully suggest to Mr Rudloff that maybe has had picked up some duff information over the past two years!!
 A A Hird  
She bashed her bank with our bit in Business
Sir, It is a sad reflection on the high street banks' attitude to their customers that I had to rely on FARMERS WEEKLY for financial information vital to the overall profitability of my farming business.
A splendid, concise article in your Apr 26 Business section alerted me to the underhand profiteering of at least one of the high street banks at its farmer customers' expense before the scandal broke in the national press and before the Chancellor of the Exchequer carpeted the bank bosses.
Believe it or not, even my own branch manager was unaware of changes made in the charges on my account (through computers, of course) by his head office and unsurprisingly, the customer — me — was never told.
Armed with FARMERS WEEKLY information (read out to him over the telephone) I was able instantly to negotiate a return to quarterly charging with my branch manager and a reduction of ½%; in the cost of my borrowing over base rate.
This means I have more than paid for my FARMERS WEEKLY subscription for this year…and probably several to come.
Congratulations FARMERS WEEKLY, it was an excellent and timely piece of informative reporting.
 A McLean Williams  
Cancel the newspapers and grow your own veg
Sir, Your occasional reader, Mrs Dinwiddie, fortunate enough to live in rural Scotland, seeks guidance and reassurance about food sold in Britain (Letter, July 12).
There's only one sure way to know what one eats, and that is to grow it oneself.
Yet there's been no increase in demand from advocates of ‘organic’ vegetables for the tens of thousands of allotments that lie untended throughout our land.
No, they're too idle, expecting others to do as they demand; it's just not possible.
I've always grown vegetables for pleasure or necessity, and (despite what purists suggest) when pests strike they thrive even after spraying with boiled rhubarb leaves or marinaded fag ends or whatever, one reaches for modern chemicals to save the crop.
My local butcher's sales of beef are down because of‘mad cow’ disease, and pork because of ‘blue ear’.
Interestingly his steak, bacon and sausage sales are buoyant because, although many of his customers have become various experts on stock disease, they don't realise where the latter come from!
At the mere suggestion of health risk our government (of whatever persuasion) is always swift to remove it, by using public funds for crop/stock control and/or destruction.
Are other governments, many of the countries from whom we import food, so quick to act and risk rocking their economies for the health of the British?
Although I admire Mrs Dinwiddie's concern for her family, I remind her that had she been a mother less than 80 years ago, when there were no  modern crop chemicals, animal health products, food preservatives, human vaccines and modern medicines it is unlikely that her complete family would have survived childhood.
She could cancel her newspapers and for a few pence from a local jumble sale acquire an old-fashioned cookery book, and a heavy stew pot.
Using one with the other, buying Scottish beef, pork and lamb, with fresh vegetables (organic or not) she will feed her family cheaply, wholesomely, and safely.
It will thrive and love her for it.
Mine has.
 Tony Ibotson  
Organic premium — a disguised subsidy?
Sir, Mrs Dinwiddie (Letters, July 19) raises the valid point that the premium for organic food can be seen as an environmental subsidy.
Perhaps this successful example of a real market reflecting environmental concern will not be lost on policy makers.
Generally speaking, however, the free market is not capable of taking good care of the environment.
That, not economic meddling, should be the function of government regulation.
Otherwise, the tolerant British public is paying three times over for its cheap food; once in the shops, twice in its taxes, thrice in its support of the common agricultural policy's dumping practices.
How cheap is it?
Not until the bureaucratic nonsense of the EC is inevitably replaced by an expanded EFTA, free exchange rates and an expansion of world free trade, will prosperity improve.
At present we have a government trying to run a free-enterprise economy having willingly hamstrung itself by fixed exchange rates and penal interest rates.
Meanwhile, Greek tobacco growers (producing a poisonous and addictive drug), Italian milk producers (non-implementation of milk quotas) and Dutch illegal farm subsidies continue to make a laughingstock of attempts to standardize legislation throughout what is probably the most heterogeneous group of small countries to be found anywhere in the world.
Since it is setting out to achieve what it is not possible to achieve, uniformity (always dangerous) will be maintained only by the serious erosion of individual freedom.
Is that what you signed up for?
I certainly didn't.
The most that Europe can hope to achieve, or should aim for, is an expanded economic free trade area made up of sovereign states all contributing to a cultural diversity that is economically stable and ecologically sustainable.
 Stuart Pattison  
TALKING POINT
The common agricultural policy is in urgent need of reform…but absolutely not in the form proposed by the EC Commission, says NFU president David Naish.
The common agricultural policy has great achievements to its credit.
It has played a part in cementing European unity.
It has secured supplies of high quality food at affordable prices.
Farmers too have played their part with distinction.
We should be proud of our productivity record and promote our willingness to adapt our industry to meet the challenge of CAP reform to the needs of today.
The NFU has long urged a reform the CAP.
We have pressed our European colleagues to face up to the need for change.
In May, European farmers agreed a practical and coherent response to the commission's February paper on CAP reform.
That all 12 member state farmers' organisations spoke with one voice was of major significance — the commission and the Council of Ministers should heed and build on that cohesion.
But in July the commission opted for policies which are disastrous for professional family farms, expensive for taxpayers, unlikely to remove surplus production, and bad for the countryside.
The commission says that its price policy ‘must be based on the need to meet inevitable competition on its domestic market and on world market’.
But it intends to protect the incomes of the smallest European producers, many of whom are only part-time farmers.
The better-structured, more competitive farmers would be thrown to the wolves.
What a crazy approach!
Can they not see that Europe's farmers would be forced down one of two routes.
The very small would be hooked on permanent subsidies.
The very large would survive only through ever more efficiency with little priority given to proper care of the countryside or the environment.
The typical professional family farm, the backbone of the British industry, would be trapped between the upper and the nether stones.
I find it unthinkable that this should happen.
Ii also find it appalling that the commission should discriminate between farmers so blatantly.
First, by concentrating its cuts on crops grown here — only tobacco of the Mediterranean crops has adverse measures proposed.
Second, by concentrating compensation on very small producers it discriminates against our structure.
Third, the impact of its package would be most severe on cattle farmers — an important sector of our agriculture already in deep financial difficulty.
Fourth, specialist producers, more common here than in the rest of the EC, will face greater income cuts than those with mixed holdings.
But it is not enough simply to reject the MacSharry package.
We must continue to put forward an alternative framework within which British farmers can take commercial decisions over the best way to use their skills and resources, play their part in sustaining our rural economy and the countryside, and compete fairly within Europe.
We have to acknowledge that the new CAP will need to be compatible with a GATT agreement.
From now to the end of the year we can expect governments to make a big effort to secure a settlement.
The communique from the recent G7 meeting pledged that leaders would remain ‘personally involved’ in the discussions on trade reform.
What a pity it is that the US government negotiating teams are allowed to give the impression that progress in the world trade negotiations is being held up solely by the intransigence of European farmers.
What we as farmers say to the contrary is often ignored because we are seen as having an interest to represent.
European political leaders need to give a clear explanation of where the Community stands — a requirement which the MacSharry proposals simply do not meet.
Failure to reach a settlement would lead to enormous problems for European agriculture as protectionism spreads.
I am convinced that our suggestions for reform of the CAP offer meaningful concessions to our trading partners without undermining Community preference.
Subsidised EC exports cause the greatest resentment.
A voluntary supply management programme would enable us to cut them back.
Not only would world markets benefit but EC taxpayers would not be asked to spend money in such a wasteful way.
The coming months will see tough bargaining on both the GATT and the CAP.
The outcome will be vital for the future of British farming.
The NFU's duty is to do everything in its power to secure the long-term position of the industry within the European and world markets.
I promise that commitment.
•David Naish was elected president of the NFU this year.
He farms about 440ha (1100 acres) at Budby between Nottingham and Sheffield and in Netherthorpe, near Worksop, Notts.
The farms are principally arable and a ewe flock produces early lambs.
He also finishes 1500 store lambs which are fed on arable by-products in the autumn.
NEWS
Edited by John Harvey 
Promises of free advice have not been honoured
Promises from agriculture ministers to Parliament about ADAS giving free advice to farmers have gradually been ditched since the 1986 Agriculture Act.
Evidence collected by the Council for the Protection of Rural England shows that assurances given by ministers — including John Gummer, now Minister of Agriculture — have been watered down.
CPRE assistant secretary Andy Wilson says that as ADAS becomes a privatised agency ‘there must be a firm recognition of the service's public good function.
Public good means free conservation advice (to farmers) on wildlife, the landscape, amenity and pollution’.
The ministry currently says that ‘public good’ advice given on initial visits to farms will be free of charge.
CPRE's evidence shows that during the committee stages of the 1986 Agriculture Act, Mr Gummer said that conservation advice would not be charged for.
During one committee meeting, the minister said: ‘We are footing the bill, and one of the things we are footing the bill for is conservation advice.’
By last year, in a letter to CPRE, junior environment minister David Trippier said: ‘Charges have been introduced only for the detailed conservation and environmental services which ADAS now provides; for example, full guidance on design, planning, management and budgetary aspects of conservation projects together, if necessary, with supervision of the work concerned.’
Dudley Coates, an ADAS director of regional management, said in another letter to CPRE written in 1990: ‘If site-specific, detailed, design, planning, management and budgetary guidance, or supervision of on-site work are requested, these would all be provided as chargeable services.
For example, if a client requested a comprehensive report on the construction of a farm pond, detailing what needed to be done and how to do it, this would be provided as a chargeable service.’
Mr Wilson said the CPRE and others fought hard to have a requirement in the 1981 Wildlife and Countryside Act that ministers should provide free advice on conservation.
‘Normally, a farmer asks for advice because he can see an economic outcome such as growing a better crop.
He is responding to market signals.
But for most conservation and environmental issues, there is no market, so it is not in the farmer's interest to buy some advice.’
* The Ministry of Agriculture will restructure its regional offices, cutting running costs by £2m a year, and at a cost of 200 jobs.
The shake up includes ADAS in time for its launch as an executive agency next April.
There will be nine regional service centres in Bristol, Cambridge, Carlisle, Crewe, Nottingham, Northallerton, Reading and Worcester, and one in the West Country.
Not many farmers knew that…
Almost half of 750 farmers in a survey were unaware that ADAs provided free public good advice.
ADAS and the National Audit Office commissioned the survey to assess the impact of the service on farmers.
The results showed that 49% of farmers did not know that ADAS offered public good advice.
The survey also found that 59% of those using ADAS's public good advice had received it while dealing with grant applications.
The figures are contained in a National Audit Office report called Advisory Services to Agriculture , which was published earlier this year.
The report found that by the end of April this year, ADAS had not agreed a corporate plan with the Ministry of Agriculture covering both the service's commercial and public good work.
Public good work is defined as free of charges.
The report also found that the ministry had still to define detailed objectives for public good work, and there was concern that ‘a pro-active approach to environmental advice would not be possible in 1990/91 because of staff shortages’.
Among ADAS's five regions, the NAO discovered that only the south-west had a strategy for delivering public good advice on pollution, diversification and conservation.
‘In one division in midlands and western region, conservation work had slipped to an almost negligible level in 1989/90 because of pressure of work, a high level of vacancies and lack of expertise,’ says the report.
‘Midlands and western region has been particularly concerned with the problem of targeting the resources available for public good advice.’
SUMMARY
A plea for more ESAs
More environmentally sensitive areas could be on the way — if agriculture minister John Gummer can persuade the Treasury to give him the cash 
Who's MacSharry?
Special profile of the EC farms commissioner who has sent shockwaves through Europe 
Set for grain record
Europe's grain harvest looks certain to hit the record books, so does the surplus grain mountain which can't be moved on world markets 
Mighty meaty…
According to Meat and Livestock Commission statistics meat is better value for money than ever 
Court report
A moorland farmer may lose all after mistreating stock 
Badgers in focus
Badgers: loveable, cuddly creatures or disease carrying pests?
FARMERS WEEKLY's special investigation into badgers, bovine TB and crop damage 
Machinery mangles
Farming is now the second most dangerous industry in Britain.
Only construction workers face greater risks than farmers and the staff.
Counting the cost of the killing fields 
Harvest home?
Not yet, but the winter barley is coming in 
Royal Welsh Show
Exhibits at the show explained the latest breeding techniques, business analysis and how to steer clear of pollution 
Texel tip-offs
Texel sheep come in three shapes and sizes.
The differences between Dutch, French and Beltex explained  
ENVIRONMENT
More ESAs on cards if funding is found
There will be more Environmentally Sensitive Areas if the Ministry of Agriculture can win funding from the Treasury in the Autumn public expenditure round.
Agriculture minister John Gummer revealed his intentions in a meeting held on Tuesday with the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds.
‘I have asked English Nature and the Countryside Commission for advice on priorities should it prove possible to designate new ESAs,’ he said after the meeting.
Positive contribution
It is not yet clear whether any new ESAs will be managed in the same way as existing areas.
The NFU says it is possible that farmers may have to make a more positive contribution in return for conservation cash.
Existing ESA payments are calculated as compensation for not intensifying production.
There is pressure from conservationist groups to make farmers earn their pay, perhaps by building stone walls or reverting to more traditional husbandry methods.
There are many possible sites for new ESAs.
The REPB wants a further 11 designated.
They would be in the North Kent grazing marshes, an extension to the South Downs ESA, the Hampshire Avon Valley, the River Burn catchment in Northern Ireland, the North Staffordshire Moors, the whole of Anglesey, the Forest of Bowland near Preston, Orkney and Shetland, and both the Inner and Outer Hebrides.
‘We think our proposals are quite modest given that some organisations want the whole countryside designated an ESA,’ said a spokesman for the RSPB.
However, there are doubts about the Treasury's willingness to fund a large increase in Ministry of Agriculture spending.
The expenditure negotiations this autumn are expected to be the toughest for many years.
The NFU says the ministry's ESA plan comes as no surprise.
‘ESAs are seen as a flagship in MAFF and the government's environmental profile,’ said a spokesman.
Co-op investigation
Police are investigating a £3m deficit at Craven Grain, the Leominster grain co-op which last week accepted the resignation of general manager Brian Muxlow.
New chairman Robert Corbett says most of the losses seem to stem from incompetent grain trading.
Accountants are also investigating book-keeping practices which allowed the deficit to remain undiscovered.
Nearly all the co-op's 157 members attended an angry meeting on Tuesday.
‘Some of our members are owed nothing, some have been overpaid and some have not yet been paid for the 1990 harvest,’ said Mr Corbett.
Part of the scandal only came to light when an eagle-eyed bank clerk spotted changes made to the bank destination information on an authorised cheque from Craven Grain.
Welsh Office attacked
The Welsh Office has been accused of complacency over food poisoning outbreaks in a damning new report by an all-Party Commons committee.
The report also condemned Clwyd Area Health Authority and Delyn Borough Council for not co-operating during the salmonella outbreak in north Wales in the summer of 1989, claiming that a breakdown in relations between the two bodies had culminated in ‘open hostility’.
The MPs said ‘considerable public confusion’ was caused by conflicting information and advice issued by these two bodies.
But the Welsh Office and its ‘complacent attitude’ was the main target of the select committee of Welsh affairs in its report on the outbreak.
Some 640 people suffered illness as a result of food poisoning in the outbreak.
IN BRIEF After pleading guilty to polluting a brook and killing 2200 fish, Dyfed farmer Geraint Bowen, Wolfsdale, was fined £375 on each offence and ordered to pay £819 compensation and £400 costs by Haverfordwest magistrates.
A group of Yorkshire farmers has applied to the UK Trading Standards Office for approval to use the British Standard ‘kite mark’ as an endorsement of the quality of their beef.
Quality Beef Growers of York says it will be supplying 30,000 carcasses a year to retailers.
The Trading Standards Office will scrutinise its operation over the next 18 months.
The Ramblers Association has held a practice mass trespass on Thurlstone Moor, South Yorkshire.
The event was part of the build up to Forbidden Britain Day on Sept 29, when the ramblers plan mass trespasses at dozens of locations.
Agriculture minister John Gummer has given the go-ahead to the establishment of a new Central Science Laboratory on a greenfield site at Sand Hutton, near York.
Work on the £75m project, which will replace existing laboratory facilities at Slough, Harpenden and Worplesden, will begin in 1993, and is due for completion in 1996.
Sweet smell of success…
Henry Head (in the background) managing director of Norfolk Lavender watches the start of the lavender harvest in its field in full bloom at Heacham in Norfolk.
Warm sunny weather is essential during harvesting of the crop to enable the plant to make its fragrant oil.
Heavy rain can be a complete disaster.
Run by a family enterprise, the business is the last full-scale lavender farm in England.
MACSHARRY PROFILE
Mac won't be turned
Ray Macsharry's plans to reform the common agricultural policy are sending shock waves through European farming communities.
Anthony Garvey profiles the Irish politician with ambitions that extend beyond the duties of the commission — perhaps to the top job in Irish politics.
‘He's the nearest thing we've produced in this country to a Margaret Thatcher.’
That's how one Irish farm leader sums up commissioner Ray MacSharry, the former minister for agriculture, whose radical reform plan for the CAP has set alarm bells ringing in his native country.
‘He brings the same singleminded approach to the job,’ says Donal Murphy, secretary of the Irish Creamery Milk Suppliers' Association, which represents mainly the dairy sector and is the second largest farm body in Eire.
‘Unfortunately, just like Mrs Thatcher, he's not for turning, which is the biggest problem of all.
‘The only way to change Ray MacSharry's mind, so far as I can see, is before he makes it up.
That's where our government has fallen down.
We should have had our case prepared and presented to him, spelling out what we wanted and what we could not accept, before he took his decision.
Now it will be almost impossible to shift him.’
Steely determination
The Irish have good reason to remember the steely determination of the 53-year-old Mr MacSharry, the man headline writers dub ‘Mac the Knife’.
It is the second time he has earned the label.
As minister for finance for two years from 1987, he rescued the tottering Irish economy with a ruthlessness that earned the admiration of even his political opponents.
Hospital wards — and even hospitals — were closed down to cut public expenditure.
A series of hairshirt budgets caused shock even his own Fianna Fail party with their severity.
But Mr MacSharry made no concessions, even rejecting appeals from his fellow Cabinet ministers.
One ex-minister recalls: ‘He would just say, ‘if I give in to you, I will have to give in to everybody’, and you knew that was that.’
The MacSharry medicine, painful and unpalatable though it was, restored the seriously ill patient.
The Irish economy began to enjoy one of the highest growth rates and lowest inflation levels in the EC.
Mr MacSharry collected his reward, the EC commissionership, and departed for Brussels, taking with him a big reputation.
When he won the agriculture portfolio, the one he wanted, Irish farmers were delighted.
Now that delight has turned to shock and anger.
They recall that as minister for agriculture in 1980 Mr MacSharry had stood alone among his EC colleagues in resisting efforts to impose a milk super-levy, restrict intervention and introduce quotas on sugar production.
Once he vigorously defended the CAP, now he is dismantling it.
But the shouts of betrayal don't bother Mr MacSharry.
After a lifetime in politics he knows all about the rough and tumble of public life.
He has confidence in his own ability and judgement, having climbed from humble beginnings on a small farm in County Sligo, in the west of Ireland, to a £100,000 a year job among the top decision makers in Brussels.
He left school with little more than basic education, then struggled to earn a living as a cattle mart dealer and haulage contractor before going into politics full time.
Financial insecurity, once the big driving force, has been eased by the salary, perks and pension of the commissionership, according to his friends.
But Mr MacSharry, described as being ‘difficult to get to know’, still works extremely hard and plays little.
He doesn't drink, and proudly displays a lapel badge proclaiming the fact.
He recently kicked a lifetime habit as a chain smoker, a typical example of the famous MacSharry willpower, say observers.
And while others socialise in Brussels, he returns to the family home in Sligo.
His only form of recreation, according to colleagues, is poker.
Mr MacSharry will be well prepared for the battle ahead.
According to farm leader Donal Murphy: ‘He is a very impressive commissioner, absolutely on top of his brief.
If you want to challenge him about anything you had better have your facts right.
He has no time for wafflers.’
Civil servants who worked with him in Dublin were equally impressed.
‘He would check out everything himself and even query figures in documents prepared by top experts,’ said one.
Among the men facing Mr MacSharry across the table in Brussels will be his former Cabinet colleague, Michael O'Kennedy, the current Irish minister for agriculture.
Both have ambitions to succeed Charles Haughey as the next Irish Prime Minister.
There are two other candidates in the field, finance minister Albert Reynolds and foreign minister Gerard Collins.
But the smart money is on Mr MacSharry, despite the current protest storm over the CAP cuts.
Many observers believe that by the time he steps down in Brussels, at the end of 1992, most small Irish farmers will have accepted his pension plan and he can return as the hero of rural Ireland.
Mr MacSharry has insisted that he will not return to Irish politics after his Brussels term ends, but intends to farm in his native Sligo.
No one is taking such a declaration at face value.
Among Fianna Fail members, Mr MacSharry is seen as the man with the courage and determination to revive the party's flagging fortunes, just as he did for the Irish economy four years ago.
As one of the party's rural Deputies put it: ‘If Ray proves he can do the toughest job in the EC, and he has, wouldn't it be foolish not to give him the opportunity to run this little country of ours?’
Modern version of a sheep ‘drove’ along the A40 at West Wycombe, Bucks.
These 1400 Mule ewes were being moved back after dipping on D K Farms, West Wycombe, an 800ha (2000-acre) sheep and dairy farm.
Hi ho, hi ho it's off to win we go…despite a row in the Dexter lines  when the breed award went to a cow which finished only second in its class, the diminutive breed dwarfed all other dairy classes at the East of England Show.
PROMOTIONAL FEATURE
ENTERPRISE FARMING
British feast at Fancy Food Fair
More than 150 British food and drink companies, offering everything from speciality chocolates to game soup, took their wares to New York in early July to tempt North American trade buyers seeking new products.
The occasion was the bi-annual Fancy Food Show, which attracts more than 30,000 visitors and is one of the principal routes into the US consumer market.
In its eighth year at the event, Food from Britain led a contingent of 17 companies to show the diversity of British foods — among them luxury boxed fruit cakes, chocolates, cheeses, shortbread and biscuits, jams, mineral water and smoked salmon.
North America ranks second only to France as the UK's most important food and drink export market.
In 1990, £627 million worth of British food and drink crossed the Atlantic, to win a positive sector trade balance of £162 million.
British companies, which are now considered to be leaders in the value-added sector, come to the show to expose their products and learn about this dynamic market.
In contrast to the retailer-led UK scene, the main competition in North American is with the powerful US branded manufacturers who dominate the arena.
‘North America presents a great source of opportunities for British food and drink companies as American consumers seek out more ‘European flavours’,’ said Tony Matthews*, FFB's North America director.
‘The tenacity of the exhibitors who also participate in British retail promotions across North America is now beginning to show real returns.’
Thumbs up for Ulster exports…
The men who spearheaded the British food marketing effort in Europe have been helping Northern Ireland's food processors and manufacturers' expansion plans.
Working with the NI Industrial Development Board, Food from Britain organised a two-day ‘export clinic’ in the province, so that companies could pick their brains on the overseas potential for their products.
‘We saw 16 companies in a series of half-hour meetings over the two days,’ says FFB's European director, Roy Edleston.
‘About two-thirds of them had already broken into the European market, particularly France, but were seeking new outlets: the rest were starting from scratch.’
Mr Edleston said that the products most likely to succeed were those which displayed quality standards, innovation and added value in a unique way at a reasonable price.
‘And we had some fine examples in Ulster — from a poultry producer marketing an ‘eggburger’ to some excellent cakes and added value meat dishes,’he added.
The clinics will be followed in October with a visit by 28 Northern Ireland companies, jointly organised with the Local Enterprise Development Unit, to the ANUGA international food trade exhibition in Cologne, Germany, to evaluate the strength of European competition.
The visitors will also take the opportunity to visit retail outlets in Cologne, Amsterdam and Brussels as part of the FFB familiarisation programme.
Cash & carry bonus for British meat
Food from Britain with the Home-Grown Cereals Authority has just started a series of promotions of British meat through leading catering cash-and-carry outlet Booker, in conjunction with the Meat and Livestock Commission and CPC (UK) Ltd, the maker of Knorr products.
Three promotions are planned in the chain's 150+ butchery outlets: beef, which is now under way, pork and lamb which will follow in the autumn.
More than 275,000 recipe leaflets have been produced and mailed to key catering customers, giving eight new recipe ideas.
These are backed up with in-store materials such as posters, vinyl stickers and product label recipes.
Catering customers are being encouraged to ask for British meat, with price incentives and free samples of Knorr stocks and sauces.
Success will be measured according to the increase in sales of British meat throughout the Booker butchery outlets and results will be published in 1992.
Flour power
Strong and plain, brown or white, wholemeal or self-raising — all types of flour, of course.
And customers in one of the UK's leading supermarkets have been discovering how to produce tasty bread, pizzas and pastries in a special free leaflet distributed in Sainsbury stores.
Produced by Food from Britain and supported by the Home-Grown Cereals Authority, 250,000 leaflets were distributed via the eggs and bakery ingredients departments, backed up by special price offers on selected items.
FFB's Euro team at the export clinic with Sir Eric McDowell (centre front), chairman of the IDB.
•Viewers who can pick up BBC 1 Wales' transmission can see Tony Matthews' verdict on the chances of Welsh food in the North American arena on ‘Farming in Wales’, Sunday July 28 at 10.00 am, when he comments on the products on display at the Royal Welsh Show Food Hall.
Here, right, he shares some British smoked salmon in New York with Baroness Trumpington.
EUROPEAN NEWS
BRUSSELS BRIEFING
Edited by Trevor Hayes 
Farm jobless still rising, says report
Agricultural unemployment among farmers and their employees will continue to grow, according to an official report by the European Commission.
It says farm jobs in the EC's 12 member states have fallen by an average of 2.8% every year for the past 30 years.
In the future there will be fewer farmers and farms able to generate sufficient income to survive from farm production alone.
The decline in agriculture is likely to accelerate, says the report.
Farm production is still increasing faster than demand, and farms will feel the squeeze as the EC tries to match supply and demand.
Environmental pressures, particularly in northern Europe where the intensive use of agro-chemicals has boosted production, will also further constrain farmers.
The report says future policies will give even greater emphasis to protecting the rural environment than increasing the pace of economic development.
‘The end result is likely to be fewer farms and fewer farmers able to generate an economically and socially acceptable income from farm production alone,’ says the report,Unemployment in Europe .
Domestic product proportion
Agriculture now contributes only 3.4% of Community gross domestic product, compared with 5.4% in 1970.
Among the EC's 166 regions there are only 17 where agriculture provides more than 10% of the regional product, and none where it generates more than 30% of the gross value added.
It is estimated that some 9m now work the equivalent of a full year in agriculture — of which 65% are men and 35% women — although nearly 18m still have an attachment to the land.
Over half of the people involved in agriculture are self-employed, compared with 10% in industry and 15% in the services sector.
One fifth are family workers, and only one quarter are paid employees.
The most striking feature is that the agriculture sector has by far the biggest proportion of workers over 55 years old.
More than 30% are in that bracket, compared with 10% in industry generally.
Less than 40% of the agricultural workers are under 40 years old, compared with 60% in industry.
Cereal stocks all set to soar up to 40m tonnes
By Trevor Hayes
Total EC stocks of cereals, including those in intervention stores, could shoot up to 40m tonnes after this year's harvest.
EC grain traders say consumption is unlikely to rise, and the amount sold on the export market is also likely to remain the same.
Their pessimism comes amid estimates that cereal production could reach almost 190m tonnes by the end of the '90s unless action is taken, warns the European Commission, following forecasts drawn up by officials in Brussels.
Guy Legras, boss of the commission's agricultural directorate, has also said the Community risks having an overhand of up to 28m tonnes in intervention next year, compared with 18.6m tonnes in intervention as present.
Total stocks, including those in intervention, are some 32m tonnes.
EC traders estimate that this year's harvest could shoot up to 166.8m tonnes — excluding the former East German sector.
That is almost 10m tonnes above the EC's harvest estimate of 157.5m tonnes.
If the estimate from COCERAL, the EC grain traders' lobby, is correct, then producers, unlike last year, would not be able to escape the effects of the stabiliser mechanism.
Automatic price cut
That imposes an automatic 3% price cut if the harvest overshoots the maximum guaranteed quantity of 160m tonnes.
On top of that, a super-levy of up to 3% — depending on the actual size of the harvest — would have to be imposed.
If the former German Democratic Republic is included in the figures, then this year's harvest could reach 177.7m tonnes, according to COCCERAL.
The commission's estimate is between 175 and 176m tonnes.
Broken down into the different crops, the figures put soft wheat at 75.68m tonnes (compared with 72.9m tonnes last year), followed by barley, 44.6m tonnes (45.7m); maize, 27.4m tonnes (22m); durum, 9.3m tonnes (7.1m); rye, 3.1m tonnes (3.3m); oats, 4.4m tonnes (4.6m); sorghum, 0.51m tonnes (0.45m); and triticale 1.5m tonnes (1.1m).
Oilseed production is likely to be about 12.8m tonnes, compared with 12.4m tonnes last year.
French milk cash
French dairy farmers enjoyed a 9.3% rise in revenue last year, according to the French ministry of agriculture.
Income on livestock farms remained stable while combined beef and dairy units saw revenue fall by 4%.
The figures do not take into account the drought payments.
IN BRIEF The Soviet Union's grain harvest has been hit by drought and fuel problems, and there are predictions that the harvest could be between 195 and 200m tonnes, compared with last year's 218m tonnes.
But Soviet deputy farm minister N Averyanov said they would find it difficult to make up the deficit from imports because of the lack of hard currency.
Meat production in the Soviet Union was down 12% in the first part of this year, while milk production has fallen by 10%.
US farm incomes will fall this year, the US Department of Agriculture Research Service predicts.
Livestock sales are down 1%, while turnover on dairy farms could fall by up to 10%.
A drop in net cash income of 5% is expected, with producers in the west and south central regions expected to fare slightly better than those in the north-east and mid-west.
Chickens are being blamed for an estimated 6m cases of salmonella poisoning a year in Germany.
A leading microbiologist says people should only eat eggs from salmonella-free flocks.
More than 30% of cows culled in Holland were slaughtered because they failed to become pregnant.
Animals that produced insufficient milk were sold.
COMPARATIVE MEAT PRICES
Meat is better value for money than ever — MLC
Meat is better value now than it was 10 years ago, according to the latest issue of the Meat and Livestock Commission's Meat Demand Trends .
The price of all meats fell more in real terms than all foods — rising in price 15% less than inflation over the past 10 years — and are now 13% cheaper than a decade ago.
Prices also rose relatively less than those of other proteins, such as fish, cheese and eggs.
Home-killed lamb is the best value, says the MLC.
Prices fell 24% in real terms over the decade, followed closely by poultrymeat.
Prices rose 44%, compared to inflation which rose 89%.
Pork is 17% cheaper in real terms than in 1980 and beef, which has experienced the largest price swings over that time, is now 15% lower in real terms.
Comparing trends in cuts of meat for 1985 to 1990 with the changes in the five years before, the price of expensive beef cuts rose more than the cheaper cuts, reversing the trend of the early 1980s.
Expensive cuts of lamb also increased to a larger degree than cheaper cuts, apart from the cheapest cut, breast of lamb, which rose most of all.
‘Evict gypsies or else…’
A Herefordshire farmer risks a prison term for contempt of the High Court if he fails to remove gypsy caravans from his land.
Mr Justice MacPherson said there was a possibility John Davies had not fully understood the terms of an injunction granted in October last year requiring removal of the mobile homes.
But the judge added: ‘The time has come when Mr Davies has to realise that if the caravans are not removed from the site he may well go to prison, because he will be in contempt of the court order.’
The farmer's counsel, Ian Jack, confirmed that caravans were still in place on his land at Auberrow, Wellington, Herefords, but their occupants had ‘nowhere else to go’.
LIVESTOCK PROSECUTION
Ill treatment charge brings lifetime ban
A moorland farmer may lose his land and his home after being convicted at Pickering on Friday of ill-treating both his cattle and his sheep.
Kenneth Smith, 46, who farmed 36ha (90 acres) of land owned by the Forestry Commission, was banned from keeping animals for life after pleading guilty to a total of 14 charges.
His solicitor, Stephen Wilcock, said that as a result of the court's decision, Mr Smith could be forced to leave the family's home at Low Raindale Farm, Stape, near Pickering.
The magistrate gave Mr Smith a conditional discharge on each count, but he was ordered to pay prosecution costs of £1800.
Richard Rowntree, the chairman of the bench, told Mr Smith that if they had taken the view that the ill treatment of his stock had been deliberate, their decision would have been a lot different.
The charges, he added, would have warranted a severe sentence.
It was a case, he said, which had aroused a lot of public concern, and it was clear that Mr Smith could not cope in looking after his stock.
Mr Rowntree went on: ‘It is very sad for you and for the animals.’
Mr Graham Venn, prosecuting on behalf of the North Yorkshire Trading Standards Department, said vets first became concerned when they visited the farm in April last year.
Cattle were emaciated, under nourished and in poor condition.
At further visits one cow had to be shot and another put down to relive suffering.
The vets said there were piles of rotten hay and straw strewn about the fields.
During winter Mr Smith should have fed his stock 60 bales of silage.
He only used 16.
In March this year, a vet found a cow dead in a bog and sheep infested with maggots.
Mr Wilcock told the bench that Mr Smith was not a cruel man, and that it was not his intention to cause his animals suffering.
He lived a very isolated existence and was something of a recluse.
Two witnesses, his sister, Mrs Rosalie Temple, and a friend, Mr James Robson, said that Mr Smith was an old-fashioned farmer living in an old-fashioned world — a house which hadn't been altered for decades and which still depended on spring water.
Mr Smith, they added, had been depressed since the death of his father 11 years ago, and he found it hard to work the farm alone.
Milk contaminated
Scientists are stepping up tests to find the source of dioxin contamination which has brought financial ruin to two farmers.
Industrial fallout is one suspected source for the contamination, but the farmers in Shuttlewood, near Bolsover, Derbyshire, cannot claim compensation until the cause is traced.
Gordon Rockley and Russel Merkin are each losing £1000 a week pouring away milk supplies.
The two farms have been unable to sell milk for nearly four weeks, and farmers' leaders are becoming increasingly concerned about the apparent lack of progress in solving the mystery.
The NFU is pressing the government to pay compensation to the men, who say they are not to blame for their predicament.
The ministry confirmed high levels of dioxin in the milk following tests carried out in March, and said some of the dairy products entered the food chain but there had been no public health risk.
War stockpile to shrink
The government is to scale down food stockpiles for use in the event of war, agriculture minister John Gummer has announced.
His disclosure in a Commons written reply comes after changes in civil defence policy after the ending of the Cold War.
Mr Gummer said: ‘A phased reduction in the size of the strategic food stockpile would now be appropriate.’
He added: ‘An orderly run-down will be set in hand over the next five years, leading to a smaller, more flexible stockpile consisting principally of ready-to-eat food rather than raw commodities.’
Stocks of emergency feeding equipment are also to be reduced.
The stockpile of raw and processed food, and emergency field cooking equipment has existed since the Second World War.
The government is to keep plans for gathering food after any attack on the country, and for distributing commodities at times of crisis.
Cutting along…24ha (60 acres) of barley under the combine at Home Farm, Gravely, Cambs.
Combine driver Rob Greaves was very surprised that moisture content for this time of the year was only 13.5%.
BADGERS SPECIAL
Does Badgers Bill make them over-protected?
Badgers will soon enjoy greater legal protection.
FARMERS WEEKLY's South-west correspondent John Burns asks how the changes in the law will affect farmers and their livestock.
From about late October this year it will be illegal to willfully damage a badger sett in Great Britain — although there will be exemptions under licence for some farming and fox hunting practices.
Earlier this month the Badgers Bill completed its passage through both Houses of Parliament, and by now should have royal assent.
The new law will become effective three months from when it receives royal assent.
The sponsors of the Bill — a group of conservation and animal welfare organisations — wanted to protect badger setts as well as the animals themselves.
In particular, they wanted to strengthen the law against badger digging.
To ensure the Bill's smooth passage through Parliament, they readily agreed to concessions for farmers and fox hunters.
The outcome is that fox hunts will need a licence from the Ministry of Agriculture before they can temporarily block setts to prevent foxes hiding in them during a hunt, or to dig out foxes which succeed in entering a sett.
Farmers, too, will need a licence from the ministry if they wish to interfere in any way with a badger sett.
According to Barney Holbeche, Parliamentary adviser for the NFU, which negotiated some of the concessions, the new law will also make it quite clear that the ministry cannot unreasonably refuse a licence.
That has always been the case in theory, but the new law removes any doubt.
Another concession won by the NFU was clarification that inadvertent damage to a sett would not lead to a prosecution.
Consultations between the agriculture departments and the Home Office are in progress to develop procedures and criteria for issuing licences.
Under previous legislation the procedures usually involved consultation between the agriculture departments and the then Nature Conservancy Council.
Very few licences to take or kill badgers causing damage to crops or stock were issued in practice.
By late October the NFU will have guidance notes on the amended Act available for its members.
Free advice on the law relating to badgers and on how farm damage caused by badgers can be tackled is available from the ADAS wildlife biology units.
The new legislation amends the Badgers Act 1983, which becomes the Badgers Act 1991, and effectively ensures that badgers are as well protected by law as are species on the verge of extinction.
Whether badgers merit so much protection is a much-debated point among farmers in areas such as south-west England, where badgers are plentiful and do cause damage on farms.
At a recent meeting of Somerset and South Avon NFU's executive committee, members were concerned about what they think is a growing population of badgers.
Examples were given of machinery overturning on land undermined by badger workings; a horse and rider both suffering broken bones when the horse put a foot through the roof of a badger tunnel; a nine-month-old calf breaking its neck when it fell into a sett; a young lamb trapped in a sett; extensive damage to spring grazing pastures by badgers grubbing for worms; wheat crops flattened and eaten or soiled by badgers; and numerous examples of TB in dairy herds close to large badger populations known to be infected with TB.
In every case the farmer reporting evidence said he was not against badgers in principle, but wanted either adequate compensation for the damage they did or someone to control them, because they had no natural predators.
Such is the confusion about what action can be legally taken — and so politically sensitive is the subject of badgers — that the NFU's policy adviser for the south-west region, Anthony Gibson, advises members to take no action themselves other than to hand the reports over to the ADAS wildlife biology unit.
Mr Holbeche suggests the badger is now ludicrously over-protected as a result of lobbying by influential animal welfare and nature conservation groups, so that the public now thinks badgers are nice cuddly creatures which can do no wrong.
In a book called Problems with badgers?, the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals acknowledges that badgers are a nuisance for farmers, but suggests the damage they do is often exaggerated.
The society says badgers sometimes climb trees to take fruit, may raid vineyards, take sweetcorn, and eat or roll on cereal crops.
‘But these forms of damage are usually seasoned and localised, and are easily prevented by excluding the badgers with an electric fence…however the cost of the control often exceeds the losses incurred.’
The book also says that although badgers will scavenge from sheep and lamb carcasses, and eat afterbirths, they rarely kill lambs.
‘On investigation most complaints about stock-killing by badgers cannot be substantiated, although convincing the farmer may not be an easy task.’
Shallow tunnels running from setts out into fields are a frequent cause of concern, says the book, and are best dealt with by breaking in the roof of the tunnels and filling in the trench created.
Although the book was updated in 1990, it is probably now wrong in stating that ‘no licences would be required for this action’.
The Badgers Act 1991 has changed that position along with a number of others, and the RSPCA intends to publish a leaflet to bring the book right up to date.
Hands tied on wheat damage
Badger damage to wheat crops costs Tony Berry at least £1000 a year, yet he cannot see any legal way of preventing it.
This year on his 100ha (250-acre) Boomer Farm at North Petherton in Somerset, he has 44ha (110 acres) of wheat.
Of that, 36ha (90 acres) is land which supports six groups of badgers.
The soil, derived from old red sandstone, is easily worked and free-draining and the farm includes many steep banks, often wooded.
Together these add up to good badger country.
Once the wheat reaches the milky-to-cheesy ripe stage, the badgers begin to eat it and damage a lot more by flattening it.
From then until harvest the size of the flattened areas steadily increases until it totals well over 1ha (2.5 acres), or about 3% of the wheat area.
Suggestions that he could avoid the damage by protecting the wheat fields with electric fencing do not impress Mr Berry.
He thinks they would cost too much in capital outlay and year-round maintenance.
He is an agricultural science graduate from Oxford University and feels competent to assess evidence and act logically.
But that approach does not apply in the case of badgers, it seems, and he is baffled by people's emotive concern for the animals, which are not an endangered species.
Yet people ignore the plight of, say, the several species of bat which are on the edge of extinction.
Brock blamed for TB in dairy herd
Brothers Jan and Roger Rowe have changed their farming policy because of TB which was, they think, brought on to the farm by badgers and then picked up by grazing dairy cows.
They used to have a profitable business rearing surplus Friesian heifer calves for sale in-calf. but since TB was found in their herd in January 1986 they have had two periods at Whalley Farm, Whittington, near Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, when they were not allowed to move cattle off the farm, except for immediate slaughter.
The second period lasted more than 14 months and they dare not risk being caught again with so many cattle subject to movement restrictions for such a long time.
Apart from the strain on accommodation and feed stocks, having to keep dairy cattle on instead of selling them as planned means exceeding milk quota, possibly at great cost.
There is also the hassle of more frequent TB-testing of the cattle.
Most herds are tested for TB every three years but the Rowes' cattle have been tested 14 times in the last five years.
Reactors to the TB test were first found in their herd in January 1986 but after only three months they got the all-clear again.
The next break-down occurred in the spring of 1989 and took over a year to clear up.
The results from the most recent test included two ‘inconclusives’.
If the re-test proves positive the farm will be closed up yet again.
It is a prospect the Rowes dread and one which adds weight to Jan's claim that unless something is done to eliminate the badgers carrying TB, there will never be a long enough period between outbreaks in the herd to do any sensible farming.
When TB was first found in the herd in 1986, Ministry of Agriculture trapping and testing of the 200 badgers in the area around the farm showed 20% of them carried TB.
‘So obviously there is a reservoir of TB there,’ says Jan Rowe.
‘We are not allowed to take action to control the badger population and so there is always a risk that the disease will creep back in again.
Earthworms are the main item in a badger's diet and cow grazing pastures just happen to be a good source of earthworms.
So it is not difficult to see how TB could spread from badger to cow.’
Jan Rowe says he has nothing against badgers in general and he appreciates that they are not affecting very big areas or all that many farms when viewed nationally.
‘It seems unfair that a few farmers should have to carry the cost of the consequences of what is after all a national policy.
Politically we are on a hiding to nothing in the long run and so I guess the only satisfactory way forward would be to leave badgers completely alone and compensate farmers in full for badger-related losses, including consequential losses.’
But even that approach has drawbacks.
Mr Rowe has seen a badger which died of TB.
‘It was an awful sight.
It was covered in weeping pustules and had been isolated from the group.
There must be a strong case for action to prevent that sort of suffering in any animal, let alone the potential risk to human health.’
The alternative approach is to identify and eliminate TB-infected badgers, and there has been much interest recently in developing a TB test for use on live badgers.
Disease link is under scrutiny
The link between badgers and tuberculosis in cattle has been a source of much conflict between farmers and badger protection groups.
The bovine TB bacterium was first isolated from a badger in June 1971, some 20 years after farmers in Cornwall had been ridiculed for suggesting that badgers were involved in the spread of TB to cattle.
Since then much research has been done into the basic biology of badgers as well as the epidemiology of TB in badgers and cattle.
The controversial policy of gassing entire badger populations known to be infected with TB has been and gone, and today two lines of research are being followed.
One is to eliminate any badgers with TB and for this much hope is pinned on the development of a test for TB which can be done on live badgers.
That work is jointly funded by the Ministry of Agriculture and the Milk Marketing Board.
The results of field trials with a live test are currently being evaluated and the Ministry refuses to comment on them.
The other approach is to let the TB take its course in the badger population and compensate farmers for losses they may suffer as a result of TB spreading to their cattle from the badgers.
With this in mind, there is a project at one site in the Cotswolds where a population of badgers known to be infected with bovine TB is being left alone to see what happens to the badgers and also to herds of cattle in the area.
The farmers concerned will have good compensation terms if there is a TB breakdown.
The latest published figures on the origins of TB infection in confirmed herd breakdowns in Great Britain show that south-west England has a much higher incidence of breakdowns and badgers account for a high proportion of them.
Big population in south-west
Badgers are widespread throughout mainland Britain though they are less common in upland areas, East Anglia and parts of northern England.
They are particularly common in the south and south-west of England.
In one part of the Cotswolds, for instance, there are over 20/sq km (more than 60/sq m).
The most recent estimates suggest that Britain has a population of about 250,000 adult badgers and 105,000 cubs.
Whether badgers merit greater legal protection is a much-debated question among producers in the south-west where damage to farms is known.
Above: Tony Berry shows one of many badger runs into a wheatfield.
Below: Ears of wheat chewed by badgers.
Jan Rowe and part of his dairy herd which have, he is convinced, been infected with TB.
The banks in the background are home for many badgers.
SCOTTISH AFFAIRS
SMMB should take steady-as-you-go path — chairman
By Allan Wright
A steady-as-you-go approach to the future of milk marketing was advocates by chairman Andrew Howie and approved by producers at the annual meeting of the Scottish Milk Marketing Board.
More than 200 farmers applauded former board member Logan Forrest, Duns, when he called on Mr Howie to inject some backbone into his English colleagues in the battle to retain the collective strength of the marketing boards.
The chairman said it was obvious that any English move to a voluntary co-operative would have irresistible implications for Scotland.
‘The danger is that it is perceived that your board is already committed to change.
That is not the case.
However, we are committed to a full examination of all the issues and to a round of producer meetings later this year,’ he said.
Later, Mr Howie forecast that the boards would still be around in four years' time.
‘Before there is any possible move to a voluntary co-operative the government will have to guarantee enabling legislation so that board assets can be transferred, a suitable transition period to avoid chaos in the market, and clearly defined terms for a poll of producers.’
All that was assuming the government did not take direct action to dissolve the boards.
Such action was a possibility.
‘But we believe a secure future can best be achieved by continuing to take full advantage of the collective marketing strength of producers, whether acting voluntarily or through the current statutory scheme,’ he said.
The board has, however, bowed to EC and government pressure to put some distance between itself and its commercial wing, Scottish Pride.
That has been done by turning a division into a wholly owned subsidiary limited company with its own board of directors and separate accounts.
The move has yet to win government approval.
Scottish Pride, which markets dairy products, including a newly launched instant capuccino coffee for use in microwave ovens, made a profit of £1.9m on a turnover of £83.5m.
Profit was down by more than £1m.
Scottish Farm, responsible for the board's increasing role in the liquid milk market, also showed a 30% drop in profits, to £1.43m on turnover of £81.7m.
The livestock division profits were also down, by 60,000, to 300,000.
For the first time in recent years, payments to producers showed no increase, at 20.2p/litre, although Mr Howie pointed out it was the best figure among the five UK boards.
Board member remuneration has been increased by 7.7%.
CAP reform plan No
Scottish NFU bosses say the MacSharry CAP reform plans are flawed because they discriminate against large-scale farmers.
‘The smaller you are, the more you will be protected,’ said SNFU director general Scott Johnston.
‘If the proposals go through as they are, a higher proportion of Scottish output would be harder hit than any other region of the EC.’
Mr Johnston said this week's reform talks were no more than the overture to a long debate that would run into the winter and become embroiled in GATT negotiations.
He welcome Mr Gummer's stance on discrimination, but urged the minister to come forward with concrete alternatives.
The Scots fear discrimination most in the livestock sector where lower limits on qualifying numbers for production subsidies would be particularly painful.
Bridge to easier travel
Buyers will have easier access to the 125,000 store lambs that will be auctioned in Caithness and Sutherland during August after the opening of the Dornoch Firth bridge.
‘This crossing will considerably reduce the journey time to and from the northern counties of Scotland,’ said area NFU secretary, Ian Thomson.
‘The development has been eagerly awaited by everyone but none more so than the livestock producers of Caithness and Sutherland, who depend so much on sound transport links with customers in the south.’
Sikhs and leeks…
Ranjit Singh and Kuldip Baljit are part of the casual labour force gathering a leek harvest on Culham Farms Estate, Hurley, Berks.
The land is rented by William Emmett and all 60ha (150 acres) is down to vegetables.
BUSINESS
Edited by John Rennie 
Benefits of one year set-aside
Payment is not the main attraction of one-year set-aside, says Martin Bent of Wye College.
Mr Bent says the scheme should not be dismissed by farmers achieving high cereal gross margins, as the £121.20/ha (£48.50/acre) payment can be trebled by the refund of cereal co-responsibility levy on grain sold from this year's harvest.
And he recommends big cereal farmers to register now, because the final commitment does not have to be made until the end of August, when an accurate assessment of how much levy can be saved is known.
‘The scheme will be more attractive to producers with more than 80ha, who are exempt from small-producer refunds,’ says Mr Bent.
A farmer with 100ha (250 acres) of arable land, 75ha (185 acres) growing cereals yielding 7t/ha (2.8/acre)(paying £6.71/t levy) and achieving an average gross margin of £600/ha (£240/acre) would lose £167, or £11/ha (£4.40/acre) by setting aside 15ha (37 acres) of their poorest land.
But by increasing the area of cereals by 5%, there would be a net profit of about £70, though Mr Bent says a drop in yields of 0.5t/ha (0.2t/acre) would mean a net loss of more than £400.
He also points out that there can be other benefits from the scheme.
Timeliness and attention to detail on the remaining cropping can be improved and it could allow machinery replacements to be delayed.
But the benefit of a second one-year set-aside, if the scheme is extended, would be less because the reduced area of cereals harvested in 1992 would reduce the co-responsibility levy refund.
He admits there is a downside.
There is always the chance, he says, that 1992 will produce record yields, and high commodity prices.
In that case the gross margins would have been underestimated.
But the scheme will give a ‘for sure’ element in the budgets.
So though it won't provide a killing in one year, it may cut risk, he concludes.
•In contrast with the UK ministry, France is granting a FR800/ha (FR320/acre) national premium to encourage set-aside.
Claas works late
The Saxham, Suffolk, base for the Claas UK parts division is now working 24 hours, seven days a week, for the next seven weeks to provide a harvest back-up.
Customers can call Saxham (0284–763100) at any time.
Malting trade is on course for a quality harvest
By John Rennie
Quality, premiums, yields and timeliness are what the grain harvest is all about and so far it looks as if the malting trade may turn out not too bad.
Though most merchants say it is too early to come up with a firm idea of the trade, the initial reports on quality suggest some low nitrogens and good bushel weights, at least for the Puffin that seems to predominate at the moment.
Initial reports on Pipkin are less promising, though.
But barley yields seem to be good.
Now that the very first crops are out of the way, most crops would appear to be over the 6.25/ha (2.5t/acre) mark.
Most traders, by the middle of this week, were still waiting for confirmation from maltsters on the accurate nitrogen tests.
But quite a few samples are thought to have nitrogens of about 1.4%, and for that quality of sample the suggestion in the trade is that a premium of up to £20/t could be available, though this is compared with a spot feed market that has been weakening over the past week.
The pressure on feed prices came after a big Chinese order, for 1.7m tonnes of EC wheat, turned out to be largely coming from French intervention stores.
Both wheat and barley spot and new crop prices have come down in consequence.
Early reports from the EC harvest, suggesting the corps may be considerably bigger than last year's, with trade estimates ranging up to 180m tonnes, have done nothing to improve confidence or prices either.
Another rise in EC grain intervention stocks is likely, says the Home-Grown Cereals Authority.
But any gloom on the grain front is as nothing compared with the problems for the oilseed rape harvest.
Apart from the difficulties caused by the weather, few farmers are happy with the way oilseed rape is being priced and traded this harvest.
Normally about half the crop is traded early.
But as the season's prices are going to depend on the official harvest estimate, most traders are only prepared to offer two-stage deals, with perhaps £200/t now and the balance to come after October.
Not surprisingly, few farmers like this and are holding back from selling.
As a result, some traders are offering schemes to put rapeseed into store and sell it later, as a way of getting rapeseed moving over the coming weeks.
Irish beef finishing
Irish beef processors are being encouraged to set up finishing plants in Britain and on the Continent.
The idea is being proposed by the Irish Industrial Development Authority as part of a new strategy for the industry, prompted by the EC curbs on intervention and the collapse of the Goodman Group last summer.
The aim is to develop a strong export industry based on a small number of processors who are not heavily involved in intervention schemes.
According to an executive director of the Industrial Development Authority, Sean Donnelly, Irish processors are at a disadvantage as they are too far away from overseas retail outlets, especially the big supermarket chains in Britain, France, Germany and Italy.
Welsh market plan
Welsh sheep farming needs a properly structured finished stock-marketing organisation, says Food from Britain.
A business plan will be published in the autumn, it announced at the Royal Welsh Show this week.
David Button, FFB agricultural development director, said discussions showed a ‘potential disaster lurking around every corner’.
There was little structure to the market, Welsh Lamb Enterprise was seeking new markets but with no control over supplies, producer groups were operating mainly as dealers, and producers got neither the information they needed nor the returns.
FFB plans to devise a business capable of controlling supply from the producer to the retailer.
Producers should hold not less than 60% of the shares, it says.
SUMMARY
Red meat now better value
Home-killed lamb is the best value, reveals a Meat and Livestock Commission report, which says meat is better value now than it was 10 years ago and has risen in price 15% less than the rise in inflation 
Forest expansion urged
A first assessment of the non-market benefits of woodlands has been completed by the Forestry Commission.
It urges an expansion of forestry, based on its new costings, and says recreational values can now be assessed making community forests more viable…page 28
Pig price stays low
Both UK and European pig prices have been falling and recovery is some way off.
The UK may have longer to wait than other countries, since a flush of lamb marketings is likely this autumn to beat the ending of the variable premium.
UK pork and other meat will then have to compete with very cheap lamb 
Vining pea hopes
Slow pea harvesting may boost prices by using up stocks that have been depressing the market 
Decoupling problems
Achieving perfectly decoupled farm support is almost impossible, says the Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics…page 30
Land prices must fall
Farm trade reforms via the GATT talks would lead to substantial falls in land prices, claims Cambridge economist Michael Murphy.
Profit maximising analysis shows rents should also fall by 50%…page 30
Harvest difficulties
1991 is not proving the easiest of years for the grain harvest and prices are under pressure, too.
Some big crops are now forecast, both at EC level and in the UK  
EC PIG PRICES
US maize compromise
Dutch customs officials have agreed a temporary compromise in the row over imports of maize gluten containing high proportions of maize germ, which should restore trade to Rotterdam.
No maize gluten has been imported through Rotterdam for the past three months, after Dutch customs started to impose 100% levies on maize gluten which contained maize germ.
Maize gluten from the US is exempt from import levies, but maize germ is not.
Increasing amounts of maize germ, sometimes up to 40%, had been found in maize gluten shipments.
The EC imports 4.5 to 5m tonnes of maize gluten annually, most of which is used by Dutch and German traders.
Rotterdam handles by far the largest proportion of that.
At the time the UK feed industry was concerned the situation should not escalate, but, in fact, it has had little impact on trade.
Most of the UK's maize gluten supply is imported direct.
UK market collapse is reflected by the figures for Europe
By Ruth Kiely
The current collapse in UK finished pig prices is being reflected across Europe, due to higher slaughterings and the release of stocks stored under the Aids to Private Storage.
The EC markets are closely linked, points out the Meat and Livestock Commission, and, although the sudden, sharp fall in UK prices was largely irrespective of other European markets, a similar move in Continental prices was expected within a short time.
Danish pig prices were stable during the latter half of June, at just under 102p/kg, but started dropping about 1p/kg a week from the beginning of July.
The Dutch market, which like Denmark's is export driven, only more so, and is heavily reliant on bacon exports to the UK, began a rise at the end of June, but last week prices dropped 7% and the fall looks like continuing.
There is no doubt that competition from cheaper European pork helped depress the UK pig market.
The subsequent fall in UK prices greatly closed that gap, prompting the export dependent Dutch and Danish to further lower their prices to maintain a price differential of some kind.
According to Agra Europe, 75,000t of pork was taken into APS at the beginning of the year on six- and eight-month contracts.
About 11,000t of that was released in June, and the remainder is expected in July and August.
Only in Germany, MLC's reports show, have pig prices improved, and there is no sign of any drop from the current 107.5p/kg.
After the huge rise in German slaughterings and consequent drop in price at the end of last year following reunification, east Germany cut its pig herd by almost half in six months.
If the German market remains firm, which the MLC considers likely since last year's problems of reunification have been largely overcome, this could bring some stability to the rest of Europe's markets.
The MLC expects European pig prices to fall further this summer, before recovering in the autumn, when there are fewer pigs on the market.
But the UK may have to wait longer for any improvement.
With the end of the lamb variable premium in January, MLC predicts a flush of lamb marketings this autumn.
UK pork, and other meats, will then have to compete with very cheap lamb.
Profit from forestry
Some of the non-market benefits of forest plantings can now be calculated in assessing the economics of forestry, allowing a more comprehensive overall rate of return to be worked out, says the Forestry Commission.
The last comprehensive study by the government of the case for forestry expansion was in 1972, it says, since when much has changed, in agriculture, in appreciation of the environment and in the understanding of the uses of forests and woodlands.
As a result, the commission has published papers looking at future forestry policy, and putting a fresh case for forestry expansion.
Though some benefits and costs cannot yet be valued, particularly wildlife habitat, and landscape conservation and enhancement, estimates of recreational values and of carbon storage can be calculated, and these, for some types of forest such as community forests, can make a big difference to the ‘social profitability’ of the investment, the commission says.
This fuller analysis of the costs and benefits raises rates of return, especially on lowland forests.
Community forests can achieve returns of 5–7%, while native broadlands in the lowlands can achieve returns of 4–5% where the amenity value of the land in its existing use is not high, the Forestry Commission says.
And in the uplands conifer forests can achieve returns of 6% where there are some additional recreational benefits and job creation is valued.
The commission is urging an expansion in forestry, ideally in many types of location.
These include small forests very close to town, designed as urban woods with public access the main aim, mixed forests in the upland/lowland margins where high productivity can be combined with diverse species to produce forests that are valuable commercially, socially and environmentally, and small woods on farms for sporting, landscape enhancement of barer areas and new wildlife habitats.
It also urges restoration of native woodlands.
CAP REFORM
North-east puts quality first for beef and lamb
Quality assured beef and lamb is now available from the northeast of England.
A group of farmers in the region have launched North country Primestock to offer the meat trade a consistent supply of quality assured lamb and beef.
The initial target of 120 members for the co-op has already been achieved and the group is aiming to market 70,000 lambs and 6000 head of beef cattle in its first year.
It is also looking at the interest being shown by producers in Yorkshire and Cumbria.
Brainchild of Northumberland farmer and MLC Commissioner Donald Curry, North Country Primestock is a production and marketing coop operating to tight specifications and including farm assurance standards covering stockmanship and animal welfare, housing and handling facilities, feed and breeding stock.
Only animals born within the Primestock membership will be eligible for sale through the system but the co-op will be developing opportunities for the sale of breeding and store stock between members and offering the advantages of a group-buying programme.
Three-way partners
A number of contracts have already been negotiated with retailers but the group will operate in a three-way partnership with both processors and retailers.
Ear-tagged lambs traceable back to source at every stage will be delivered by approved hauliers to processors, who will check them against retailers' specifications.
On Tyneside, branded farm assured Northumbria lamb is about to go on sale at a leading retailer.
The group will also investigate export markets for both lamb and beef.
Parliamentary Secretary David Curry says the way forward is the way charted by Primestock.
Farmers have to come to terms with the market and look upon wholesalers and retailers as allies, not enemies.
The big food chains are now showing more interest in buying British, he says but are operating in a competitive environment and need to define their margins and their supply lines.
Under the Food Safety Act, they have an obligation to show everything they sell is a wholesome product on which the consumer can rely.
That means controlling sources of supply.
The key for farmers to do business is for them to deliver assured quality; there is then a premium at the end of the line and no need to form Continental style co-ops, the minister adds.
Incomes and land prices will fall after GATT talks, warning
Land prices and farm incomes would fall substantially in the wake of agricultural reforms from the GATT talks, says Cambridge economist Michael Murphy.
Using profit maximising analyses and based on a model of a mainly cereal farm in the eastern counties he has calculated the likely impact of various assumed changes in the economics of farming.
The results, in his annual report on farming in the eastern counties show that under unilateral abandonment of EC farm support, as measured by producer subsidy equivalents, the total farm gross margin is almost halved.
The loss a farm, before miscellaneous on-farm and off-farm income, would be between £28,000 and £33,000, depending on type of tenure.
Before applying the impact of support charges, his model farm produced a farm gross margin of £101,000 under farm income-optimising calculations.
He points out that this was about 5% more than the level of performance during the years 1988 to 1990.
Calculating the changes under multilateral abandonment of protection requires some assumptions on world prices, in particular that they would rise by more than under unilateral action.
But he says the US farmer will tend to set the price level in world grain markets and those will remain low.
On that basis and assuming costs were held at 1989/90 levels with no allowance for possible changes in unit costs of inputs, the loss a farm would be between £23,7000 and £28,000, depending on type of tenure.
Looking ahead, farm costs would be cut as farming adjusted to the changes, bringing the financial balance of the farm back.
But that would require rent reductions for tenants of about 50%, less paid labour would be used and, for owner occupiers, the average 188ha (470-acre) farm would fall in land value equity by between £200,000 and £300,000.
Mr Murphy also calculates the impact on small farmers — those farming less than 40ha (100 acres).
His figures show that even at 1990 inputs and output the occupier's surplus from farming is less than £300, becoming about £6000 after allowing for all sources of income.
But post GATT the occupier's surplus from arable farming falls to £1500 and after allowing for other income total income would be only about £4000.
Those unable to obtain off-farm income would be unlikely to carry on farming, he points out.
Decoupled support view
Perfectly decoupled farm income support is almost unattainable, says the Australian Bureau of Agriculture and Resource Economics.
Enhanced farm incomes will affect the farmers' production decisions and capacity, but policies can be designed which have much smaller impacts on production, consumption, trade and world prices than do many of the existing policies, the bureau adds.
Decoupling enables governments to provide income support without distorting production, consumption and trade, and depressing world prices.
ABARE says some policies, such as lump sum payments not related to production or to input use, or production entitlement guarantees (PEGs), which provide budget financed support on limited quantities, are far less distorting than most current policies.
It points out that certain elements of US policies for grain are now partly decoupled, since there is now an element of reducing support by reducing the quantities on which support payments would be made.
Under the 1990 legislation, it says, some decoupling is achieved by, for instance, the relatively low levels at which loan rates are to be set, the substantial limitation on the quantities of supported crops that are eligible for the deficiency payments and the limitations placed on changes to the area and yield bases.
ABARE estimates that well designed decoupled policies in the EC and in the US would benefit the Australian wheat and feed grain industries by almost 30% of their value of production in a low price year such as 1990/91.
‘Professional’ farms in peril
Denmark's EC Commissioner, Henning Christophersen, fears the MacSharry proposals for CAP reform will remove the incentive to farm professionally.
In an interview on Danish radio, the former liberal minister of finance said that, although the proposals in their current form had ‘improved a lot’ since the commission started discussing Mr MacSharry's plan three months ago, they still presented a danger of destroying farming as a professionally run industry.
‘I have taken great pains to stress that aspect in the sometimes heated discussions,’ he said, adding he was not enthusiastic about the original proposals and still had serious reservations.
‘But if the EC Council makes further amendments, the proposal could have the deplorable effect of discouraging farmers from farming.
That is, in my opinion, the most serious problem of all,’ he said.
College profits hit
Despite a rise in income from commercial farming in the past five years, profits have almost halved at Newcastle University's Cockle Park farm in Northumberland.
Since 1985, the stock capacity has been doubled.
And the area devoted to cereal cropping has increased, helped by the rental of 81ha (200 acres) of restored opencast grassland from British Coal.
Income has risen to about £400,000, but profit has slipped from a peak of almost £60,000 in the mid-1980s to a modest £34,391 in the 1990–91 financial year, on about £350,000 of tenant's capital deployed.
The upsurge in overhead costs is a continuing challenge to farm management farm manager Donald Routledge told visitors at a research and development open day.
A breakdown of the farm accounts shows that £148,857 is swallowed up by direct costs, £173,965 in overheads and £36,596 in rental and finance charges.
Ewe premium plan
Common agricultural policy reform proposals would introduce the ewe premium headage limitation over three years.
In the first year full premium would be paid on 450 ewes, 920 in Less Favoured Areas and 33% of premium on the rest.
The ceiling would be lowered in successive years to 400 ewes and 830 in LFAs, the rest receiving 17% of premium, and finally to 350 ewes and 750 in LFAs.
Ashford market started the only Friday lamb sale in the south-east last week.
About 300 graded lambs sold to an average 124p/kg.
The US farmer will tend to set the world grain price, says economist Michael Murphy.
MACHINERY
Edited by Mick Roberts 
Small manufacturer has mower to offer big units
A small independent manufacturer has developed a new mower-conditioner with a capacity to match the demands of large livestock units and contractors.
Ashley Knibb and Terry Kelloway, have been working on the K2-8 mower conditioner for three years, since they left a main grassland equipment manufacturer to set up their own company.
Last year the prototype was run as a simple mower and tested on several farms in Bucks.
This year a conditioner was added and it has cut more than 325ha (800 acres).
Mr Kelloway says there have only been minor teething problems and he is satisfied the machine is ready for production.
Designed for large livestock units or contractor work, the K2-8 gives a 2.5m (8ft 4in) wide cut, using twin drums each with five blades.
The drums are independently suspended and are said to give a consistent cut and easy movement over undulating ground.
The conditioner has a single rotor with pivoting U-shaped tines which toss the grass upwards as it leaves the cutting blades.
That gives a box-shaped windrow which can be adjusted to different widths.
Manganese steel is used on all ground contacting and crop conveying surfaces to give extra durability.
The mower is lifted using two hydraulic rams which raise the drums and wheels in sequence to give a ground clearance of 450mm (18in).
A hydraulic ram on the drawbar allows it to move from the offset working position to directly behind the tractor for road transport.
The pto drive runs in a near straight line from the tractor with equal angle joints claimed to give quiet running and allow a tight turning circle.
A patented taper roller bearing in the drum is also said to give easy assembly and dismantling.
Adrian Tutt of Middle Farm, Charndon, near Bicester, has been using the prototype K2-8 to cut 20ha (50 acres) of horse feed hay.
He says the machine is making an excellent job and he believes one of its positive assets is its strength and durability.
Mr Kelloway has been developing a rear cross conveyor, which will allow two swathes to be combined in one row.
Prices start at £7000 for the mower and £8750 with conditioner attached from K-Two 
Elevator makes a neater pile
With a new automatic slewing facility, Swift Lift claims its latest elevators will make neater piles when storing grain, potatoes, onions and other tender root crops.
The new TS Interstore offers maximum slewing up to 14m (46ft) using wings on which the main elevator automatically swings back and forth.
Starting at one end of the wing, the elevator moves across the pile while it is continuously delivering the crop.
A delay timer, variable between zero and 180 seconds, holds the elevator at the end of the slew, allowing the corners of the store to be filled evenly.
The wings are folded manually, but the slewing arc can be varied to fit different sheds.
To complete the uniformity of the pile, one of the wheels is fitted with an electric motor which when activated manually will pull back the elevator from the heap in increments down to 25mm (1in).
Edward Clarke, managing director of Swift Lift, says the evenness of the pile is particularly important when handling crops which are still carrying a high soil content.
If soil builds up in a ‘cone’ it will heat and eventually rot the crop.
The Interstore TS elevators come in three different lengths, 9m, 10.5m and 12m,(29ft 6in, 34ft 6in, 39ft 6 in), with a circular hopper fitted as standard.
Single, two-speed or variable speed drives are available on the new Interstore.
Mule the best new equipment at Royal Welsh
The best new piece of equipment at the Royal Welsh Show this week suitable for upland farming conditions sounded as if it should have four legs rather than four wheels.
The Kawasaki Mule 2010, which takes all terrain vehicles (ATVs) a stage further in their development, won the D Alban Davies Award.
It is a purpose-built four-wheel-drive low-ground-pressure vehicle capable of carrying 500k in its rear tipper body, in addition to driver and passenger up front.
Powered by a 535cc, single-cylinder, air-cooled engine, and with infinitely variable speed belt-drive, it costs £4800.
Highly commended were: The robust Bateman European Cattle Weigh Crate; the Matthews cattle lifting cradle; Parmiter's belt feeder attachment for its Shear Grab silage cutter; the Ritchey Tagg Co's calf and sheep holder; and Ritchie (Implements) loader-mounted big round bale squeezer arms with cutter attachment.
Full report and pictures next week.
UK is missing ‘eastern’ boat
British machinery companies are not making a big enough effort to promote their products in the recently opened markets of Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland, according to an export consultant.
John Colman runs a consultancy which specialises in marketing agricultural equipment throughout Europe.
He regularly visits eastern Europe and has just returned from Czechoslovakia.
‘German, Italian and French firms are picking up business while the British are being left behind,’ he claims.
Newly formed cooperatives are particularly looking for forage, livestock handling, grain drilling and grain drying equipment,’ he says.
Demand for second-hand equipment is high, and British dealers would do well to take a look at the opportunities, he adds.
‘Previously the large, prairie-style farms tended to go for big, American-style equipment, but the new, smaller units are looking for smaller new or used European-sized implements.
‘The eastern European farmer does not need lectures on how to farm, but our mechanisation and technology is of great importance to him,’ claims Mr Colman.
NEW EQUIPMENT
Show debut for a far reaching British mower
While many manufacturers are feeling the pinch of recession and contracting, a new British company has launched its first product.
Warwicks-based Turner World Mowers' first UK-designed and built machine is the Reachmaster 800SE long reach mower, shown for the first time at the recent Association of Drainage Authorities show.
The machine has a maximum horizontal reach of 8m (26.6ft) and a 1.2m (4ft) wide cutting head.
In the cab is a single joystick control which operates all four sections of the arm, including: Lift/lower for the first arm, the same for the second arm, hood angle, and telescoping in and out.
The control box also has a single button for cutterhead operation, emergency shut off and rocker switches for slewing and sensor control.
The 800 SE version, which costs about £15,000, is also equipped with the firm's Master Control system, which senses the terrain and adjusts the height of the hood automatically.
Four sensors on the hood follow the ground contours and send signals to the processor, which then instructs the rams to raise or lower, accordingly.
The machine can work on either side of the tractor.
A hydraulically powered rack and pinion swings the machine through 210°.
This means the cutter hood is positioned further forward than normal rear-mounted cutters, says the firm.
An electronic sensor constantly monitors the oil pressure in the arm and provides a break-back with auto-return.
The machine fits on to the tractor with Technorton quick hitch couplers.
The oil tank is made from polypropylene and is not part of the main frame.
The company says this makes it less prone to fractures.
Smoother tool moves
A new electro-hydraulically controlled damping system can help prevent implements bouncing during transport.
Massey-Ferguson has introduced the device as an option on its 3000/3100 and 3600 series of tractors.
It can also be fitted to existing machines.
The Active Transport Control uses a nitrogen accumulator in the hydraulic lift circuit to smooth out shock loadings caused by the implement bouncing on the lift arms.
It is operated by a switch in the cab.
The firm has also introduced a new front linkage with lift capacities of 3500kg (7715lb) for fitting to the latest 3670 and 3690 tractors as well as the 3680.
For the 3000 and 3100 series is a 2200kg (4850lb) capacity linkage.
All the front linkages in the three ranges can be fitted with a pto which is operated by a electro-hydraulic clutch and works at 1000rpm in both directions.
It uses a six- or 21-spline shaft.
Disposing of those dipping problems
Disposing of liquid dip after treating sheep is a perennial problem on many livestock farms, but a new mobile dip unit should ease the task.
The Mobidip is a contract dipping service which is based around a trailer unit.
The ready-mixed dip is transported to and from the farm in a sealed vacuum tanker.
The device won the 1990 prototype machine gold medal and the 1991 new machine award at the Dublin Spring Fair.
Batches of 10 to 16 sheep are walked on to a platform which is 450mm (18in) off the ground.
This chamber is then sealed by doors at each end, which are lowered hydraulically.
The chamber is then flooded from below with 3375 litres (750gal) of dip, which is pumped in from a nearby vacuum tanker.
The sheep float to the top of the chamber in 22 to 33 seconds.
The animals stay in the dip for the statutory full minute and the dip is emptied, in 22 seconds, through a filter back to the tanker.
A batch of sheep is loaded, dipped and discharged in about 2 minutes 15–30 seconds, which means up to 300 an hour can be handled.
Charges are £95 for a call-out and the first 100 sheep; after that it's 40p for each extra animal.
‘It is about twice as fast as conventional dipping,’ claims Glyn Williams, UK distributor of the franchise.
‘Also, a big advantage is the operator takes the dip away.
Some farmers have no means of disposing of dip.
The contractors take it away and dilute it before spreading it thinly on the soil.’
The Mobidip is not sold, but operated by franchised contractors.
Mr Williams plans to cover the country with about 21 operators.
Chopper clinic will keep units in trim condition
The forthcoming straw-banning ban will have straw choppers running to their limits.
So to provide a back-up service, Rekord has built a ‘Chopper Clinic’ at its Atherstone, Warwicks, base.
For £80, engineers will balance the rotors on any tractor- or combine-mounted chopper.
A fuller service will include inspecting and repairing the whole unit and adding new knives.
Alf Dean, Rekord's general manager, says two problems regularly occur with the choppers.
Firstly, spurious makes of knives can vary in weight by more than 40g compared with the recommended ones.
This will give the rotor an imbalance, which is noticed particularly at high speed.
Secondly, bent rotors are common, because objects such as spanners, bird scarers and even old bikes get into the choppers!
The balancing service is available through Rekord dealers or through Rekord  
EASY-HANDLING
Opening up barrels with pump-action
Lifting and pouring cumbersome oil barrels can be an irksome task, but there are now several options to make the job easier.
The Swedish-made Werax is used for opening and emptying standard drums without the need for removing the standard cap.
The device clips to the outer ring of the drum cap, sealing the outlet.
When fixed it secures to the standard ‘Trisure’ cap.
Unscrewing the control valve opens the cap and allows the contents to flow out.
The cap is retained in the unit and used to reseal the drum.
The Werax costs about £60.
The advantage of the system, says the importer, is the way barrels can be stacked horizontally and emptied from that position.
There is no need to pour or pump the liquid, and the Werax connector can be used on another barrel after tapping.
Werax is sold by Morguard Industries 
All types of oil can be handled by the new Hytek lever barrel pump.
It operates at a rate of 0.45-litre (0.8pt) per stroke, and will fit in to the standard 2in (50mm) BSP neck of 205-litre (45gal) barrels.
A two-piece telescopic suction pipe adjusts to fit all types of container.
The steel piston is fitted with brass piston rings which, says Hytek, makes for longer life.
The pump is fitted with an anti-drip nozzle and costs £19.90 from Hytek GB,.
The 5GDC Barrel Pourer from Baelz Equipment cradles a 25-litre or 5gal barrel.
It holds either round or square drums, made from metal or polyethylene, and allows liquids to be poured slowly without splashing or spilling.
Price is £39.90.
SAFETY AT WORK
Death toll puts farming high on UK danger list
Although the number of people working on the land falls every year, the latest five-year figures show farm fatalities are not decreasing.
Niall McDiarmid reports on a worrying trend.
On average one person dies in a farm accident every week.
Just one gruesome statistic which shows agriculture is one of the UK's most dangerous industries.
Although the number of fatal accidents on farms has fallen to about 60 a year, Carl Boswell, the Health and Safety Executive's chief agricultural inspector, says it is proving very difficult to cut the tally further.
Though the death toll appears to have remained static, it is, in fact, rising.
For there are fewer people working in agriculture and this is pushing the incidence rate back up.
A related survey has shown agriculture is the UK's second most dangerous industry.
The risk of a death through a work related accident in an average 40-year working life is one in 328, compared with one in 1246 for manufacturing and one in 3733 for the service industry.
Only construction has a worse record, where the risk is one in 252.
But Mr Boswell says the worrying trend which emerged from an analysis is the risk self-employed farmers are prepared to take.
The fatality incidence rates per 100,000 stands at 11.5 compared with 4.2 for self-employed construction workers.
Of the 350 cases brought to court every year, 90% result in a successful prosecution, says the HSE.
But the average fine for employers breaking the Health and Safety at Work Act last year was just £297 — much lower than fines imposed on large manufacturing companies.
Would there be fewer deaths if more farmers were taken to court, and faced higher penalties?
‘We need a firm approach, and that may mean we should prosecute more,’ says Mr Boswell.
‘I think the fines should be higher but I can't change the magistrates' rulings,’ he adds.
Mr Boswell says the same hazards often re-occur.
Problem areas include unguarded or damaged pto shafts, clearing balers when they are still running, handling animals and removing fallen or hung-up trees.
‘Most of the accidents are very basic.
It seems the industry is just not learning because we are continuing to see the same accidents we saw 30 years ago,’ says John Summerscales, deputy chief inspector.
Fatal accidents involving children on farms always make distressing reading, but Mr Boswell can't see an end to those horrific accidents.
‘If parents don't warn their children about the dangers, we are going to have more toddlers killed.’
One accident the HSE highlights as a plain lack of common sense involved a child who was left in the cab of a tractor while the operator dismounted to add bedding to a pig pen.
The child climbed out of the cab and became caught in the unguarded pto of the attached implement.
Two areas the HSE sees as hazardous in future are ATVs and two seats in tractor cabs.
‘We recognise ATVs are useful tools in upland areas, but evidence from abroad suggests if they are used incorrectly they can be dangerous,’ says Mr Boswell.
As a result of these worries, the HSE is working with the Scottish Centre for Agricultural Engineering to analyse ATV stability.
Referring to dual seats, the HSE has long advocated that tractor cabs should only be occupied by one person.
‘The standards for cab design have been set for one person, so we foresee problems with having two seats,’ says Mr Boswell.
Horrifying accidents involving unguarded pto shafts continue to happen every year.
But Mr Summerscales says operators' grumbles that the guards are not strong enough to match harsh agricultural work cannot be supported.
‘If any other part of the machine broke the farmer would be down at the dealer causing a song and dance.
The guard is a part of the machine, so go back and claim a new one if it breaks while still under warranty.’
One accident involving an 18-year-old farmworker highlighted the need for more training for employees.
The young man was killed after becoming entangled in the unguarded rotors of a power harrow while attempting to remove a stone.
He had been employed for only three weeks.
‘I deplore the attitude that people can be taken on without any training,’ says Mr Boswell.
Retired farmers continue to become involved in serious accidents in all aspects of agriculture.
‘Many farmers won't let go, and turn up when the pressure is on, such as at harvest time.
But they forget they are less agile and machinery has changed since they last worked, and they get caught out.’
INNOVATIONS
Tackling tyre replacement
Anyone who has struggled to remove a rear tractor tyre or large trailer tyre will be pleased to see a new American innovation which eases the task.
The Wheel Wheeler slides under the punctured tyre when it is raised off the ground.
With the nuts removed, the handle is lifted and the tyre will slip off the hub and can be transported away.
To refit a wheel, the tyre is picked up and can be rotated on the pivoting platform to re-align the holes to the studs.
It is then raised to the correct height and slid on to the hub.
The Wheel Wheeler can cater for tyre sizes 8.25 × 20 to 12 × 22.5.
Price is £118 from Airo UK 
Grab three bales
The latest bale grab is designed for handling three Heston 4600 bales.
To make this smaller-sized bale easier to handle, Mick Moulton, of Moulton Engineering, developed the BBG 2 grab to pick-up three bales with an adjustable length bar.
The latest grab, the BBG 46, will now pick up the bales in either direction, allowing the operator to cross stack them for safer transport and storage.
Mr Moulton says the BBG 46 is of lightweight construction and suitable for use with medium-sized front-end loaders.
The grab uses 12, 450mm (18in) spikes to hold the bales in place.
Dealership change
The Ford New Holland dealership in the Taunton, Somerset, area has been taken over by Jewells, part of the Kellands group.
The area was previously served by Hawkes, which closed down earlier this year.
The new branch is at Perry Farm, Nynehead, Wellington.
This mower conditioner is designed for large livestock units and contractors.
Stores are neatly filled by an automatic slewing system on this new elevator.
Microprocessor control on this long reach mower keeps the hood floating over undulations.
Maximum reach is 8m, and it works either side of the tractor.
Hydraulically operated doors are lowered to seal the chamber on this new mobile dip.
The dip liquid is pumped in from a vacuum tanker.
Barrels of all types are opened and emptied by this new device.
This cradle prevents splashing.
Wrapped or bagged round bale silage is shredded and discharged through a chute on the Teagle Tomahawk feeder.
It costs from £3800 from Teagle Machinery 
Evidence shows more deaths may result from the improper use of ATVs.
This 11m (36ft) wide ring press was built by Farm Farce Engineering for Fonthill Farms, Wilton, Wilts.
Equipped with 70 cast rings it has two outer wings which fold hydraulically.
Pivot points near the centre of the wings are said to keep the cast rings hard on the ground, regardless of undulations.
Price is £11,000.
ARABLE
Edited by Charles Abel
Blind cereal grain sites may be a yield threat
By Andrew Blake
Blind grain sites showing up on the ears of some cereal crops could trim yields and perhaps downgrade stands intended for seed.
The symptoms, especially noticeable in some spring barleys, range from the odd missing floret to distinctly tapered ears in some wheats where the top and bottom few spikelets have failed to set seed.
There is some varietal difference in the severity of the effects, but reports suggest this is localised and there is no apparent consistency.
Experts are blaming cool, wet weather throughout June, perhaps coupled with late frosts.
The consensus is that although conditions at flowering were similar to those years which triggered the Moulin saga, a repeat with any particular variety this season is unlikely.
Failure to achieve a good set because of poor pollination cuts potential output, but it is thought compensatory growth in fertile grain sites can offset this.
The blind sites do, however, provide entry points for secondary fungi which may speed senescence and spoil grain quality.
According to the National Institute of Agricultural Botany, blind sites are only marginally worse than in the past two years, and so far there have been no reports of problems in seed crops.
However, Semundo plant breeder Richard Gregory says empty florets are very noticeable in the company's spring barley trials near Huntingdon, Cambs.
‘They gape in the sun,’ he explains.
A subjective scoring shows some big differences between varieties, he adds, with Blenheim being particularly badly affected.
Some varieties still in selection have up to 50% of their florets still open.
Wheat in three further local trials are also throwing up some very irregular-looking ears, in some cases with less than 50% grains set, says Mr Gregory.
The troubles in the wheat are probably due to the ‘terrible’ conditions in June.
But late frosts may have hit the barleys, he believes.
Simon Phillips, trials manager for Lincs-based New Farm Crops, has noticed some blind grain sites in his barleys, but no varietal differences.
‘We've seen quite a lot of completely sterile ears in winter barley, which is due to frost on secondary tillers.
It's all visually worrying, but I don't think we should be too concerned about it yet.’
Most wheats in his area look ‘superb’ and a plant's capacity to compensate for blind sites should not be forgotten, he adds.
Bees blamed for poor bean setting
A cold, wet June which kept bees confined to their hives is being blamed for poor pod set on spring beans.
According to the Arable Research Centres' Justin Smith, some growers in Bedfordshire have been so disappointed with the insect pollinators' efforts that they have ploughed up their crops to put in linseed or leave fields fallow.
‘In some commercial crops there were only one or two pods per plant,’ he says.
In the company's variety trials, the set has ranged from what he describes as a good normal 75% of available flowers to as little as 20%.
Seed rate difference
‘We've also seen quite a difference in our seed rate trials, with the lower rates giving a better pod set, possibly because bees have been able to get into the crop.’
A surrounding commercial crop where the farmer used a comparatively high sowing rate has less and less podding towards the centre of the field, he points out.
‘It all points to insect activity as the key.’
Frosts may also be implicated.
‘The later varieties seem to be doing better, maybe because they escaped or because the bees were more active,’ says Mr Smith.
Now's the right time to check on blackgrass
Blackgrass control has generally been good this season.
So now is the ideal time for growers who suspect they may have herbicide-resistant strains of the weed to get them checked, says ADAS's James Clarke.
‘Seeds collected now can be tested for resistance either this year or at some time in the future,’ he says.
That will allow changes in herbicide susceptibility within a population to be monitored, he explains.
Resistance has been confirmed in most counties where blackgrass is a problem, and is causing increasing concern.
But Mr Clarke points out that there are many other reasons for poor control.
Those include poor seed-beds and treatments incorrectly applied, either at the wrong rate or timing, or under too dry conditions.
ADAS offers two tests, using the active ingredients chlorotuluron and fenoxaprop-ethyl as representative of the two main groups of anti-blackgrass products.
They cost £80 and £90 each, respectively.
At least 2000 seeds are needed, and only ripe material that falls easily from the heads should be collected.
These should be placed in a paper envelope (not polythene) and labelled with the grower's name, address and field identification.
ADAS says that because the test relies on germinating, growing and spraying seed under controlled conditions, some results may not be forthcoming until the new year.
To arrange a test growers can either contact an ADAS consultant or send their seed direct to Blackgrass Resistance Test 
Dates all set for Cereals '92
Next year the national cereals and combinable crops event returns to the RASE farm at Stoneleigh, Warwicks.
Cereals '92 will take place on June 10 and 11, 1992, at Crewe Farm, adjacent to the site of the Royal Show.
The event is being organised by the Royal Agricultural Society of England, ADAS and the Home-Grown Cereals Authority, in association with FARMERS WEEKLY.
Lloyds Bank is the main sponsor.
CHEMICAL INSPECTION
Register for pesticide staff
From next year your agrochemical salesman or adviser could have a new set of professional letters after his name.
A professional register organised by the British Agrochemical Standards Inspection Scheme aims to raise the professionalism of personnel in the eyes of farmers and public.
From Jan 1 agrochemical salesmen and advisers currently BASIS qualified will be eligible for membership of the register.
To qualify, individuals will have to attend at least one refresher course each year to keep abreast of the latest developments in the industry.
Barry Orme, BASIS chief executive says training should be progressive.
‘We would like to see qualified people who are technically up to date.’
The present BASIS qualification is similar to the driving test, he says.
Once the certificate is gained there is no further check on the proficiency of the person.
A compulsory annual refresher course — in-house courses already run by some companies could be eligible — will overcome that, he adds.
Mike Cahill of the merchants' organisation UKASTA sees clear benefits.
‘Those committed to maintaining and improving standards will undoubtedly be interested in the scheme.
I feel it is a desirable step,’ he says.
Pea viners hit by weather
Catchy weather is proving troublesome for pea viners.
But the later start to harvesting could help eat into surplus stocks that have threatened to keep prices low.
Cool damp conditions producing lots of leaf and fewer peas in each pod have seen ‘dirty’ yields of only about 3.8/ha (30cwt/acre) on early varieties, says Richard Marshall, production director of Lincs-based Branston Produce.
‘Normally we'd expect about 2t/acre.’
Heavy rainfall, such as 17mm (⅔in) in one night on a Hampshire operation, is making progress difficult, he said.
Brian Scott, secretary of the Processed Vegetable Growers' Association, comments: ‘It isn't easy and yields are very variable.
Some crops have very long straw and even with modern machines it's a bit like hitting a brick wall.’
Another problem is that the rain has advanced many crops, telescoping the harvest, he explains.
However, it is still too early to predict the season's overall ‘pack’ and its effect on returns.
Starting dates, after two exceptionally early seasons, have returned to the more traditional early July point.
That could benefit producers by allowing some inroads into carry over of frozen stocks from last year.
Earlier this year there were calls from growers to cut area to help match supplies to demand.
But Mr Marshall says that while there may have been a 15% reduction in area, overall output may be only 10% lower.
That is because producers have tended to drop the lower-yielding varieties, he explains.
HARVEST ROUND-UP
Low-pressure ‘barometer’
As unsettled weather continues to frustrate efforts to start harvesting for many, we canvass the views of our ‘barometer’ growers and provide an overview of progress to date.
SOUTH WEST
Harvest started on Monday for Tony Lister, our barometer grower in the south-west, who manages W H Bond's Bake Farm at Trerulefoot, Cornwall.
Halcyon barley came in at 24% moisture initially, but soon dropped to 19%.
The first 6.5ha (16 acres) yielded about 6.8t/ha,(2.7t/acre) allowing for moisture content, he says.
Specific weight was 68kg/hl off the combine, improving the 72kg/hl after taking out 1.5% screenings over a 2mm screen.
It is hoped the Halcyon will be of malting quality for sale in August/September.
Winter oats for milling are now ripening quickly and could be ready by Aug. 7.
But wheats are very slow to turn and have developed a lot of ear disease during recent damp weather, reports Mr Lister.
In south Devon, Michael Pearson says he's trying to avoid catching ‘combinitis — a disease that can severely damage your pocket by increasing drying costs’.
On Monday he put two combines into 18ha (45 acres) of Plaisant barley to clear it before winds knocked the heads off.
By leaving the tramlines, which were still greenish, he had a sample at 16% moisture.
Next morning rain stopped combining.
John Sluggett, who farms near Probus, mid-Cornwall, says he will be at least a week before starting on winter barley.
The oilseed rape, desiccated on July 20 with Roundup (glyphosate) will probably be ready at a similar time.
Nearby on the coast at Porthscatho, farmer/contractor Howard Emmett started harvesting barleys on July 17.
One of his own fields yielded nearly 6.3t/ha (2.5t/acre), but another only 3.7t/ha (1.5t/acre).
His oilseed rape is seven to 10 days away.
SOUTH EAST
‘Dead slow’ and ‘not even started’are comments summing up the frustration over harvest progress in the south and south-east.
Hopes that harvesting which started over the weekend would continue, though, were thwarted by mid-week rain and a shortage of crops fully fit.
FARMERS WEEKLY's south-east barometer grower, Ashford-based Peter Maylam, has no winter barley, but was planning to desiccate oilseed rape this week.
Typical of many in the south, his flattened rape looks ‘like a rough sea’.
A second vertical knife has been bought.
‘We're at least two weeks later than last year,’ he says.
Although the crops look well, he has had to spend more on chemicals this year.
Intake of the first winter barleys was expected to be ‘some time this week’, at the Woodchurch Farmers Supplies co-op not far from Mr Maylam.
‘We had our first samples in on July 10 last year,’ says manager Jeremy Exley.
Diseases in oilseed rape and winter beans, as well as wet soils after more than 180mm (7in) of rain in June, are helping to paint a ‘rather gloomy’ picture this year, he adds.
At least one crop of winter beans has been completely wiped out by chocolate spot, ADAS confirms.
Further west, nitrogens in the few crops of Puffin barley so far harvested are said to be on the low side.
Torrent and Pastoral have been giving up to 7.5t/ha (3t/acre), says Nick Matthews of Chichester merchant Bartholomews.
‘So far they've had good bushel weights.’
Some crops of oilseed rape are still very green and some way from desiccation, according to Simon Brown of Hampshire Grain.
MIDLANDS
Combines are just beginning to move in the midlands, with harvest start dates well adrift of last year's.
First foray for barometer grower Frank Dakin, at Brewer's Oak, Shifnal, Shropshire, came on Monday.
For the past two years he has begun on July 10.
‘Every day we're delayed is quite serious, because it concentrates the autumn workload,’ he says.
Pastoral barley on light land, giving a ‘good average’ yield in excess of 6.3t/ha (2.5t/acre) was coming in at 13.5% moisture —‘better than expected’.
‘It's down in patches, but picking up quite easily.’
Some six-row barleys have been cut on light land south of Worcester, but little else has come under the knife, according to John Sturt of Midland Shires Farmers.
‘We had our first barley in on July 5 last year — we're a good three weeks behind.’
First intake at Gloucester-based West Midland Farmers came last week with a crop of Gaulois — at 54–55kg/hl specific weight described as ‘a bit thin’ by trader Philip Smith.
Yields were estimated at 6.8–7.5t/ha (2.7–3t/acre).
Much of the barley in the area has gone flat, he says.
Wheats, ‘looking very good’, are at least a month away.
EAST
The real start to the East Anglian cereal harvest was made earlier this week.
Although some winter barley growers jumped he gun last week, little was cut as crops were not fit.
Barometer grower Michael Barratt made a start on the MMB Partnership's farm at Toseland Hall, St Neots, on Monday.
First to be harvested was Torrent.
‘The start is much later than lasts year,’ says Mr Barratt.
Cargill Agriculture's Cambridgeshire-based Philip Simpson saw the first sample of Torrent a week ago.
Coming off the combine at 15% moisture, he says it looked good.
Our other barometer grower in the east, Brian Mitcham, Shrubbery Farm, Hessett, near Bury St Edmunds, plans to start harvesting winter barley next week.
‘The Halcyon still has green straw and has not fully necked over yet, so is some way off.
But the Puffin is closer,’ he says.
The wheats look good, with Apollo just beginning to turn, he adds.
NORTH
Winter barley is ripening rapidly on the heavy lands of North Humberside, and combines were expected to move from mid-week onwards, according to barometer farmer John Fenton, who manages Yokefleet Farms, Blacktoft.
He reports seeing one crop of heavy land barley harvested last weekend.
Yield was just under 7.5t/ha (3t/acre), with 19% moisture.
Winter wheats are now beginning to turn, but on the heavy land none is likely to be harvested before Aug 22, he predicts.
‘Prospects look very good, with yields at least as good as last year, if not a little better,’ he adds.
In the early area of the Vale of York, near Boroughbridge, grower Andrew Chester says he is about halfway through his winter barley.
The 5.7t/ha (46cwt/acre) yield from the first field was below expectations, due to pigeon and crow damage in some lodged areas.
SCOTLAND
Harvest will be about 10 days behind last year on most farms in Scotland, reckons barometer grower Ian McLaren, of Fintalich, Crieff.
‘The weather has been dreadful, 5in of rain in June and almost as much this month.
I'm hoping to begin my own winter barley at the end of the month.’
Veteran farmer William Robertson, Oudenard, Bridge of Earn, is probably the first farmer to have his combine working in Scotland this year.
He has harvest two thirds of 12ha (30 acres) of Plaisant variety barley.
Although he acknowledges that the moisture content is high, he says the extra drying costs are offset by catching the crop before it sheds any ears.
‘The barley yielded more than 4t/acre last year, and I'm told it could be even higher this year,’ said Mr Robertson.
His secret is getting the crops sown early.
WEED TRIALS
Blackgrass pest can be beaten
Blackgrass has built up to such levels in some of its traditional heavyland haunts that some cereal growers are now reporting severe problems in controlling it.
But evidence from a trial in Essex this season suggests there is no need to give up the struggle.
It can be beaten by adopting a system of integrated crop management.
That was clearly demonstrated by the Ciba-Geigy trial run on David Lennox's Billet's Farm at Great Wigborough.
The ground used was where herbicide in the previous winter wheat had failed to provide any real control of blackgrass.
Wheat seed-beds were prepared by ploughing or by using a power harrow for deep or shallow cultivations.
Herbicide was applied at various timings, from early pre-emergence in the autumn to late post-emergence in the spring.
Herbicide success was related to the way the seed-bed was prepared.
The ploughed area had about 300 plants a sq m, compared with 1800/sq m where deep cultivations were used and 2400/sq m where the land had been shallow cultivated.
‘The trial shows that by careful choice and timing of cultivations and herbicide applications it is possible blackgrass control even in areas where the yield-robbing weed is out of control,’ explains Ciba-Geigy's Andy Pigott.
‘This is particularly true in the area of the trial, which is close to Peldon, where resistant strains of blackgrass have been seen for a number of years.
‘But cereal growers adopting the integrated control approach must appreciate that input costs are increased and a high degree of management is needed if the best results are to be achieved,’ he adds.
Even on heavy soils where seed-beds are hard to manage, ploughing is best as populations are reduced.
Early herbicide treatments provide the best control, because older grass weed seedlings are more difficult to kill and also compromise yield.
‘Autumn weed control is essential,’ say Mr Pigott.
‘We have evidence that once past December wheat growers having to cope with difficult blackgrass populations can lose £100/ha for every month the weed is left unchecked.’
The company says farmers not achieving good control from their herbicide should not automatically blame resistance.
They need to check that all cultural factors and management decisions are right.
In a survey last year of farmers where poor chemical control was experienced, most of the 33 fields sampled were free from resistant strains.
Ten of the fields sampled were in the notorious Peldon area.
* Host farmer for the trial, David Lennox found an effective approach to blackgrass control on the field alongside the demonstration site.
Straw from the previous wheat crop was chopped and spread before the heavy soil was deep cultivated.
Avadex (tri-allate) granules were applied before crop emergence.
Shortly afterwards, when the crop was at the two-leaf stage, a tank-mix of Hytane (isoproturon) and Trifluralin (trifluralin) was applied.
STRAW BURNING
‘Fire men’ to feel the heat this harvest
As harvest looms, growers who are over-enthusiastic with the matches when the combines have finished had better watch out.
Tight controls covering the burning of all crop residues now have the force of law behind them.
The Crop Residues (Restrictions on Burning) Regulations 1991 allow for fines of up to £2000 for each offence.
According to an NFU spokesman, the legislation reflects local bye-laws and incorporates much of the unions' own code of practice, which until now have together governed straw and stubble burning.
Straw burning will be outlawed altogether after the 1992 harvest.
Last year there was a 36% reduction in the area of straw burnt, and ministers hope many more growers will stop burning.
Detailed guidance notes outlining the conditions which must be met to stay within the new law are being issued to all farmers.
For example, no weekend or bank holiday burning is allowed.
Growers aiming to burn must make every reasonable effort to notify county fire brigades, district council environmental health departments, occupiers of all adjacent premises and, in some instances, air traffic control of their intentions between one and 24 hours in advance.
At least two responsible adults must supervise the burning and a mobile container(s) with at least 1000 litres of water must be on hand at the site.
At least five fire-beating tools must be available, and all vehicles used in the operation must carry fire extinguishers.
Only 10ha (24.7 acres) of cereal straw or stubble, or 20ha (49.4 acres) of other crop residues may be burnt at any one time.
The exception is where sufficient men and machinery are available to handle simultaneous operations at least 150m (500ft) apart and protected by a firebreak.
A firebreak at least 10m (33ft) wide for cereal straw and stubble, and at least 5m (16ft 6in) wide for other residues, must completely surround the area before burning starts.
No burning at all within 100m (330ft) of a motorway, dual-carriageway, A-road, or railway line is allowed.
‘The main point is that some of the advisory things have become law,’ says the spokesman.
A second section offers help to burn safely and keep risk and public nuisance ‘to the absolute minimum’.
‘Safe, nuisance-free burning is essential if farmers are to win consideration for the difficulties after 1992,’ the notes explain.
Beet a path to Shepton Mallet
Working demonstrations of lifting, chopping and clamping will feature at the first UK National Fodder Beet Day, Steanbow Farm, Pilton, Shepton Mallet, Somerset, on Tue, Oct 29.
Presentations will concentrate on growing, harvesting, storage and feeding as well as the economics of the crop as a bulk feed, concentrate substitute and profit-improver.
Tucking into Puffin…harvest gets under way late last week on limestone brach at L W van Geest's Crossroads Farm, Empingham, near Stanford, Lincs.
With a moisture content of 14.5%, the grain went straight to the merchant.
Farm manager Robert Love said it was an unusually early start.
(Harvest round-up — page 44).
New face at FARMERS WEEKLY…= Angus McKirdy joins the Arable Section after five years in the agrochemical industry.
He has a biology degree from Napier College, Edinburgh, and a postgraduate diploma in crop protection from Harper Adams Agricultural College, Shropshire.
Laid crops and unsettled weather put the brakes on harvest for many growers this week.
Here Martin Farrant of Manor Farm, Drayton St Leonard, Oxon, tackled Torrent winter barley — final moisture content was 16%.
The effect of cultivation technique on blackgrass.
Numbers were a lot lower in the ploughed foreground than the minimum cultivation area behind.
Countdown to the ban…fading memories of smokey summers and pictures like this will soon be all that's left to remind growers of straw burning.
LIVESTOCK
Edited by Harry Hope 
Selective buyers prefer performance potential
By Angela Taylor
Protein, index and pedigree ruled the day at the fifth Hayleys Invitational Sale in Essex last week, with breeders failing to dig as deeply into their pockets as in previous years.
Not even the best lots could break through the five-figure barriers, as UK buyers become more selective about the cattle they buy.
As in the rest of Europe, breeders are now looking for young stock with high genetic potential and are no longer settling for the fancy animal with a borderline production pedigree.
Equally, breeders are passing over animals which they now feel are no better genetically than the dairy replacements they have at home.
This was reflected in the prices paid for the average in-calf and maiden heifer, which at times made no more than a good commercial first-calver at Carlisle.
Inevitably, the lost that set the buyers alight were the North American and European imports, but it seems mere novelty value can no longer secure the top prices.
As more breeders being to use cow genetic index as a benchmark of genetic potential, they are looking for animals with pedigrees to make significant advances in their herds.
As a result, the top lots all had predicted CGIs between 900 and 1150 points — the black-and-white breed average is about 500, and animals over CGI 730 are in the top 1% of the UK population.
The growing awareness of the importance of breeding for protein was also reflected in prices paid for animals in the sale — heifers with low protein percentages in their pedigrees were punished severely.
The highest prices were invariably paid for daughters of dams with protein figures in excess of 3.3%.
The Starbuck dam of the most eyecatching young heifer, Cherry Crest B Star Kaboo (predicted CGI 1084), recorded a two-lactation average 3.8% protein.
The quality of the pedigree was rewarded by a sale price of 6500gns.
Young stock by the US sire To-Mar Blackstar were in considerable demand.
Of the 12 lots making more than 3000gns, half of them were the typically clean-boned, quality daughters of this protein and production sire.
The top prices, however, were paid for two seven-month-old daughters of Rothrock Tradition Leadman, from Canadian consignors Cormdale Farms in Ontario — Allstar Leadman Marcie, out of A Valianat Mars SWD Marcie, with a projected CGI of 1071 points was snapped up by a German buyer for 7500gns, and Genesis Leadman Dora, out of Nowerland Chief Doris, with a projected CGI of 1131 points, was sold to Eire.
Show quality animals were also in demand.
But once again they were backed up by substantial pedigrees — a stylish first lactation daughter of Roybrook Tempo, Watergate Tempo Rosetta already classified VG is out of top production and inspection cow Murlone Ultimate Rosetta.
In her sixth lactation, she produced 13,205kg milk at 3.77% fat and 3.21% protein.
Health and wealth
Dairy herds with a good health status enjoy reduced costs and losses, improved staff satisfaction, improved milk quality and higher profits.
Advantages are listed in the National Committee on Danish Cattle Husbandry annual report for 1990.
It states that a 100-cow herd with an average health standard calls in the veterinary surgeon 140 times a year.
An analysis of vet visits reveals 56 for mastitis, six teat damage, 10 drying off, seven help at birth, 10 placenta removal, 10 reproductive disease, four ketosis, five milk fever, 10 feed-related disease, eight legs and feet, and 14 for other diseases.
Genetic merit pays
Dairy cows of superior genetic merit generate margins up to 30% higher, regardless of the feeding and management methods used.
Milk can be produced at lower cost from cows with the highest genetic potential in either low or high feed input systems.
The benefits, based on the use of breeding indices to select sires and dams with high breeding values, were explained by Dr Geoff Simm of the Scottish Agricultural College, citing results from the SAC Langhill herd, Edinburgh.
He was speaking at a Reading University dairy information systems (DAISY) meeting held for veterinary surgeons.
‘The maths may seem complicated, but breeding indices work very well and are very easy to use in practice.
Breeding values also help to predict future levels of milk production, which makes it easier to deal with quota restrictions,’ he said.
One CGI point was worth £1 a lactation.
Compared with the national average of about 450, Dr Simm figured that the top 5% of herds at 650 CGI were expected to achieve an extra £200 a cow a lactation.
For the 100-cow herd this was worth £20,000 a year.
Mandingo goes into history
American Holstein sire Fisher Place Mandingo has just gone into the record books as the best selling bull in the history of AI in the US.
The bull has been so popular with commercial producers that over 900,000 doses of semen have been sold so far, and there are already more than 30,000 milking daughters in the US alone.
Mandingo has outsold both his sire SWD Valiant and Carlin M Ivanhoe Bell, two of the most influential North American bulls.
In the UK, Genus Breeding have now sold over 25,000 doses since the bull became available in 1988.
Mandingo has been promoted as a sire of tall, deep-bodied, show quality cows, and has a current converted production proof of +903kg milk, 27kg (-0.11%) fat and 23kg (-0.01%) protein.
As a value for money sire he has a PIN index ranking of £54 and a semen cost of £15 a straw.
Maintaining the Mandingo connection, the breeding directors of Genus have just purchased Singing Brook Steady Mandy from the same cow family, as an embryo donor cow for its MOET herd project.
Mandy is also a half sister to the hot young bull Singing Brook Ned Boy Mascot, tipped to feature prominently in the latest US sire rankings published later this month.
Milkminder for May
The Genus Milkminder sample of over 4200 producers showed increased margins for Maya, based on improved milk quality and reduced feed costs.
Compared with May 1990, butterfat was up 0.02, protein 0.05 and lactose 0.03%, resulting in a milk price of 15.5p/litre.
The average concentrate feed price was down £6, to £133/t, and margin over purchased feed improved to £1821/ha (£737/acre), a rise of £89.
This was despite a 16kg increase in cake input to a 1496kg rolling average.
ADAS Milk Cheque results for May tell a similar tale.
The sample showed milk yields up from 18.6 litres a cow a day in April to 19.5 litres in May, with 75% of the milk coming from forage.
Margin over purchased feed was £70.20 a cow and MOPF a litre down from 13.96p in April to 13.39p/litre in May.
The annual rolling average yield was up from 5540 litres in April to 5587 in May, with cake consumption down marginally at 0.25p/litre.
The increase in yield and a slight fall in cake costs resulted in a further increase of £5 a cow in MOPF.
INFECTION RESISTANCE
Norwegian Red resists mastitis…
By John Burns
Selection for resistance to mastitis and good fertility at the same time as selection for milk yield and quality is proving effective in the dairy cattle population of Norway.
At a Royal Show briefing, Egil Hersleth of the Norwegian Red Cattle Society said that the Norwegians had included mastitis resistance in their selection index for about 20 years, and in that time had reduced its incidence by 1% in the national herd.
Geneticists estimated that had they not selected for mastitis resistance the national incidence would have increased by 1.5% over that period.
Further genetic progress on mastitis resistance is expected because the weighting gives to it in the Norwegian breeding programme has recently been more than doubled.
Semen from some of the top bulls in Norway is available from Advanced Breeding Ltd, run by Prof John King, the former head of what was the AFRC's Animal Breeding Research Organisation.
It was first improved into Britain two years ago, and the first Norwegian Red crosses were born here last year.
Prof King predicts that those crossbreds will perform well because of the Norwegian selection procedure.
There, significant genetic process can be demonstrated for milk yield and quality, as well as other features like mastitis resistance, fertility and growth rate.
No such British progress
Such genetic progress cannot be shown in British breeds, claims Prof King.
And while the UK red-and-white breeds might seem the obvious target for NRF salesmen, Prof King believes breeders of black-and-white cattle who shy away from the extreme Holstein type may find the NRF of interest.
He says it must be significant that when, in the 1970s, semen from top British Friesian bulls was used in Norway along with Holstein semen from Canada and USA, the British Friesian had no impact on the population.
Since that date there has been no demonstrable genetic progress in the British Friesian, maintains Prof King, whereas a lot of progress has been made in Norway.
The Norwegian cattle breeding system has resulted in a national herd average of about 6400kg of milk, with the best herds averaging over 10,000kg, and some individual cows reaching 15,000kg.
Free integrated feed package
Mixer-feeder wagon maker Richard Keenan, Coxley Wells, Somerset, is setting up a new Keenan Nutrition division to provide a free integrated feed management package.
Contents will include monthly performance costings and ration planning services for all buyers of Keenan Easi-feeders.
Nutritionist Hugh Kerr will head a team of nine full-time staff.
EAST OF ENGLAND SHOW
Dexters put up a big challenge in dairy classes
By Michael Gaisford
A big turnout of diminutive Dexters dominated the dairy cow classes at last weeks' East of England Show at Peterborough.
With close to 100 entries, there were more Dexters than entries in all the other dairy breeds added together at the show.
Although they did not win the interbreed dairy championship, which was taken by D M Hodge's Holstein Friesian Fenfield Capricious, a Dexter group entered by Mrs P J Weaver did win the dairy team award.
A row also broke out in the Dexter lines at the show after the judge awarded the breed championship to a cow that came only second in its class.
The class winner, the National Trusts' Wimpole Home Farm, objected, but the judges decision to award the breed championship to Mr & Mrs R E Munn's & Miss L Bottura's cow Whitegates Cindy was upheld by the show stewards.
Beef classes at the show were generally stronger than the dairy entries, and chief steward Peter Horrell said that next year consideration was being given to making all the purebred beef classes EBL free.
Some of the beef classes were judged by an Argentinian, M Rodman, who said that he was particularly impressed with the easy-to-manage British breeds like the Angus and Hereford, and that there was scope for wider use of them in his country.
Sheep entries set a new record, and topped 500 for the first time.
IN BRIEF The Royal Show round-up presentation caption (Livestock, July 12) should have read: Baggrave Farms' Charolais bull Caylers Crackerjack and D E Evans' cow Lappingford Tulip, and not as stated.
John Thompson, who runs 98 Friesian-Holstein cows as the main enterprise with cereals and sheep at Silvermoor Farm, Alnwick, Northumberland, is the national Genus Milkminder manager of the year.
The competition judges were impressed by a simple but effective system, good use of resources including home-grown feed, grass use and excellent milk hygiene.
Cambridge Veterinary Sciences, Littleport, Cambs, has launched a rapid five-minute Mastcheck 24-test pack for subclinical mastitis detection, claimed to be more accurate and reliable than cell counts alone.
It is recommended for on-the-spot checking for animals before they enter the herd and those with repeatedly high cell counts.
The 24-packs are available from major animal health distributors.
Winners of the commercial prime lamb class at the Kent Show were G J and H L Pieters' pair of Texel crosses; res, HH A Chisenhale-Marsh's Texels.
TEXEL SPECIAL
Difficult choice when good rams come in threes
Thinking about changing to a Texel terminal sire for next year's lamb crop?
Which one?
Texels come in three basic models — long, short and ‘beefcake’.
You can either stay traditional with the French, go shorter and thicker with the Dutch, or choose the ‘fringe muscle man’ the Beltex.
Jeremy Hunt reports.
The French Texel is too much like a Mule — too big and too long.
A controversial statement born out of years of experience with the shorter, smaller Dutch Texel by its most well known UK devotee, Robin Slade.
Over the years Mr Slade, from his home at Weekfield Farm, Exton, Dulverton, Somerset, has accounted for an array of wins with Dutch Texel-sired entries in carcass competitions at national primestock shows.
If his achievements reflect the value of the Dutch Texel, then the breed is being vastly under-rated as a terminal sire.
In six appearances in carcass competitions at the Royal Smithfield Show he has taken three major championships and three reserves; his lambs have triumphed at the Birmingham Primestock Show ‘umpteen times’ and topped the lot at the first national Welsh Primestock Show last year at Builth Wells.
Talk to Robin Slade and you know he's a man who's studied his sheep; not from the point of view of winning awards with animals at the other end of a halter, but from a desire to produce the ideal carcass with that all-important round muscle.
For him the Dutch Texel is the original Texel; it comes from the island of Texel and has been bred there for many generations.
This has produced a Texel, referred to in Holland as the Texelaar, that breeds consistently true to type and when used as a terminal sire leaves progeny of level quality.
‘The Dutch Texel has been bred pure for so long that its characteristics of extra hindquarter muscling, minimum bone and minimum fat are stamped firmly on to its crossbred progeny,’ says Mr Slade.
He has used ‘other Texels’ and has been disappointed with the grading results.
he says they have been far behind and came nowhere near the 70–78% of E grades achieved by the crossbred lambs by the Dutch Texel.
Individual rams bred by Mr Slade have produced 92% of E grade lambs in crossing trials.
Rams from the Weekfield flock used in Wales on Welsh Mules produced 32% E lambs.
When the Dutch Texel × Welsh Mule females were crossed back to the Dutch Texel the E grade level increased to 60%.
Mr Slade's extensive breeding programme within his flock of 400 pedigree ewes has convinced him that terminal sires do not have to be ‘big and long’.
‘The most popular breeding ewe is the Mule.
She's a big, long sheep, and if you put a ram on her of equal proportions all you're doing is stretching the ewe's progeny through their back.
‘This means the muscles go flat instead of round and the butcher ends up with an inferior eye muscle.
Any butcher will tell you he wants round muscle every time, not long and flat.’
He maintains that the smaller, shorter, heavier muscled Dutch Texel is the ideal terminal sire for the Mule because they are so completely different in conformation.
‘The greater the difference in appearance between sire and dam in a crossing combination, the better the progeny,’ says Mr Slade.
He feels more affinity with the Beltex than the French Texel and says the word ‘Beltex’ has been conjured up by UK interests.
‘The breed is primarily a Dutch Texel.
I have stock with grandparents from pure Dutch-bred sheep bred in Belgium, and Belgian breeders do buy some stock themselves from Holland.’
With a double muscled trait in existence within his own Weekfield flock for many years, Mr Slade wonders why the Beltex is attracting so much interest.
Gigot quality all important
Matt and Ruth Martin have no doubts about what a good Texel should look like.
Size and length are important, but it's the gigot that breeders must never lose sight of.
Mr and Mrs Martin's Burble flock, run at 153m (500ft) above sea level at Southwaite, near Carlisle, began, as did many of today's most successful flocks, in the late 1970s.
Convinced of the Texel's potential, despite the breed's bumpy start in the early days when too many part-bred rams were passed off as pures, the Martins ensured they would take time in selecting sound foundation stock.
That policy of maintaining strict 
‘quality control’ is maintained even today.
The flock has been closed to females since 1980 and the Martins still deliberate long and hard over future stock sire purchases, which usually involve an inspection of the sire and dam beforehand.
About 85% of the flock is derived from three foundation females — a ewe and her twin lambs — from John Jamieson, Dumfries.
Now numbering 70 ewes — all PI — the flock has achieved wide showing success and gained a reputation, especially in the midlands and south, for the quality of its rams.
The Burble Texels are truly representative of the French type; they're upstanding, powerful sheep, with length and good, well developed hindquarters.
Mr and Mrs Martin are concerned about the trend for more size in this type of Texel, fearing that in pursuit of more frame and height the strength of the gigot may be lost.
Going too far
‘We believe the French Texel must be a strong sheep and have size, but if breeders take it too far they may lose the qualities that are fundamental to the breed as a successful crossing sire for the commercial producer,’ says Mrs Martin.
A group of shearling rams, currently being prepared for sale this season, is widely considered to contain some of the best sheep the flock has ever produced.
Those rams clearly show the power of the French type and its appeal to the commercial lamb producer looking to put conformation into his prime lambs.
Most noticeable in those shearlings was the exceptional hindquarter development, verging on double-muscling in some individuals.
‘The double-muscle trait is there even in the French type,’ says Mrs Martin.
‘The man who is looking for a breed to put shape into his lambs only has to talk to butchers who deal in this type of Texel-sired carcass and look at the successes achieved in carcass competitions.
Beltex can't be ignored
If you need muscle in the right places, you need the Beltex.
That's the opinion of Lancashire flockmaster Alan Barnes, who has now added the Beltex to his string of pedigree breeds.
As a committee member of the Beltex Sheep Society UK, one of the two rival societies promoting the breed in Britain, Mr Barnes is naturally convinced that of all the Texel types available to the commercial prime lamb producer the Beltex has the most to offer.
Being advertised as ‘the shape of things to come’ by Mr Barnes and his fellow society members, it certainly cannot be ignored.
With attention constantly focussed on the hindquarter, it seems logical that the Beltex, with its double-muscled gigots, has buyer appeal.
He's convinced that other Texel types have concentrated too much on length, heads and bone, and as a result have lost hindquarter muscling.
Members of the BSS UK have recently been to Belgium to select another importation of 60 sheep; all are ordered for pedigree flocks in Britain.
‘We've been extremely selective in the sheep we've chosen.
Yes, the hindquarter double-muscled trait is important and is the breed's main attribute, but we've been looking too for stock with good overall conformation, with loin and fleshing that we feel is vital to any successful terminal sire breed.
In addition, particular attention has been paid to legs and mouths,’ says Mr Barnes.
The BSS UK dismisses any suggestion that use of the Beltex as a terminal sire will lead to more lambing problems; so far those who have used Beltex rams for crossing report no more incidence of assisted lambings than would normally have been dealt with.
Some criticism, too, has been levelled at the breed's movement, based on its muscling characteristics.
Mr Barnes replies: ‘I cannot stress enough that we have sought sheep to import into the UK that are able to move freely without any signs of stilted action.
There is no reason for anyone to be concerned about the ram's ability to work because he can't get around his ewes.
The types we are aiming for are active and free-moving.’
John McIlwraith, Balig, Ayr, chairman of the BSS UK, says the Beltex is the terminal sire that can deliver the right type of lamb at the right weight and with a conformation that is accepted in Europe as second to none.
The BSS UK has data available from OVISCO, a Belgian lamb marketing group which conducted a survey on 122 pure Beltex lambs put through the group's slaughterhouse for export.
They classified: E+ (5%), E (16%), E-(20%), U+ (28%), U (22%), U- (5%).
There were 92% of the lambs in fat class 2; the average carcass weight was 25.2kg.
ROYAL WELSH SHOW
Welsh Black gloom
The '90s have not started well for Wales's native cattle breed, but the halving of the Royal Welsh Black entries to 41 had more to do with the recession and choice of judge than the breed's current popularity.
Cattle bred by Richard Tudor Jones, acknowledged as one of the best breeders and judges around, are widespread through registered herds.
But a show rule dictating that no cattle in which the judge had an interest could be exhibited eliminated many entries.
‘The high cost of attending a four day show has also influenced the decision of many breeders to stay away this year,’ said breed secretary Dai Davies.
There was also, he admitted, a feeling of depression and frustration among breeders over the ban on exports through BSE restrictions.
‘There are indications of breeders turning to cross-breeding, and at one sale earlier this year only one third of bull entries are sold.
Without exports to put an edge on the market breeders find it more profitable to put a Charolais on their Welsh Black cows.’
Pre-ban export deals raised prices overall, registrations increased and the breed was on a high.
In his view there was no justification for continuing controls that were hurting Welsh Black breeders badly because there was strong interest in Germany and Scandinavia.
‘We now know that BSE exists on the Continent and there has not been one case in a Welsh herd.’
Recession-bruised sheep producers worry and wonder
The tough climate for both buyers and sellers was hard to forget at the Royal Welsh Show but researchers and advisers did their best to pinpoint improved breeding methods, business analysis and anti-pollution tactics, to help cut costs and improve margins during the recession.
Robert Davies reports.
The false, fixed smiles of the salesmen on the machinery avenues and the grey-suited men on bankers' row at the Royal Welsh Show contrasted sharply with the frowns of recession-hit livestock producers trying hard to stay in business.
Sheep producers, in particular, found it difficult to escape worries about continuing fixed and variable cost increases and the ending of the sheepmeat variable premium that put a floor in the market.
‘They feel like tightrope-walkers whose safety net is about to be taken away,’ said the Meat and Livestock Commission's Welsh regional sheep specialist, Brynmor Morgan.
‘They know they have no option but to stay in the job and try and do better, but the harsh truth is that those who have high production costs and low productivity will not survive the next three or four years of rapid transition.’
The sheep industry was poised for far reaching change.
On the plus side, Welsh flockmasters could exploit the ending of clawback and their proven expertise and natural climatic advantages to supply Continental customers.
But they must control unit production costs and respond more to market specifications.
‘It is extraordinary how many producers have no measure of the physical and financial performances of their own flocks, or those achieved by others operating under similar conditions,’ said Mr Morgan, who operated one of three computer terminals used to give farmers visiting the show some ideas to improve efficiency and profit.
‘We are offering free 30-minute sessions to farmers during which we talk them through their production and marketing systems using whatever figures they know.
This gives us the opportunity to compare their results with MLC targets and actual results from recorded farms, before suggesting general advice on the options available for improvement.’
Each participant received a detailed print-out and encouragement to join MLC's Flockplan scheme.
‘Of course we are trying to recruit new people to Flockplan, but we are doing so in the knowledge that having a detailed analysis of flock performance and an independent adviser standing at his shoulder, can help a sheep producer improve efficiency and profit enough to recoup the cost many times over.’
Flockmasters had to forget the last decade when seat-of-the-pants management brought reasonable returns from a supported market.
Change was unstoppable and they had to stay ahead of the game.
Genetics in the ring…
Frequent criticism of the dearth of technical demonstrations at the Royal Welsh prompted MLC's regional beef specialist, Brinley Davies, to stage a third day livestock ring presentation of practical genetics.
‘All sectors are under severe financial pressure and can benefit from using genetics to boost productivity, but the technology available is not widely understood, or used by many farmers,’ Mr Davies said.
‘This is clearly demonstrated by farmers who simply use the bull of the day rather than reading up the figures and selecting the best sire for their needs.’
The same was true of breeders who chose sires by eye alone, or, even worse, on price.
The demonstration using cattle and sheep from competitive classes, explained the identification of genetic merit, heritability and how it could be exploited through group breed improvement schemes, embryo transfer and artificial insemination.
New halfbred ewe with French blood makes its debut
Does the sheep industry need yet another new half-bred breeding ewe?
Whether flockmasters wanted it or not, one was on view for the first time at the Llanelwedd event.
The yet-to-be-named F1 cross was bred using Est-a-Laine Merino semen on Hardy Specklefaced ewes at the ministry's Pwllpeiran experimental farm at Cwmystwyth, Dyfed.
Farm director Lyn Powell explained that the original intention was not to produce yet another crossbred ewe to compete with Mules and other well established halfbreds, but to explore the possibility of producing fine-woolled wethers to graze moorland and rough grazings that would never be improved because of environmental pressures.
The French breed used hailed from north-east France.
Its wool was not as fine as that of Merinos from Spain, or the southern hemisphere, but it was noted for its hardiness and foraging ability.
Ewes weighed between 70 and 90kg and produced fleeces weighing up to 6.5kg.
He was also intrigued by the breed's ability to breed all year round, and to drop rangy lambs that could be taken to 18kg with little risk of over-fatness.
‘So our objectives changed.
We are now evaluating the performance of wether lambs from the first cross to be finished under hill conditions, and we will use the first cross females for early lamb production without using sponges.
‘This is attractive for when the variable premium goes many farmers will look at early lamb production, which has not been profitable enough in the past when the cost of spongeing was included.
There is also the question of consumer reaction over interference with natural production by using hormones.’
Provided the new cross did the job well, it could establish a novel niche market and not compete with existing half-breds.
First results from the lambs born to the 76 ewes that conceived as a result of using frozen Est-a-Laine semen were satisfactory.
Born in late March they had excellent birth coats and survived very wet conditions well.
When they were weighed in June they averaged 23.9kg compared with the 20.5kg of Bleu du Maine crosses managed in the same way.
‘The potential appears to be there to get a vigorous fast-growing, good conformation, first cross wether lamb and, provided the ability to lamb out of season is inherited, it also implies a ewe lamb capable of natural early lamb production,’ Mr Powell added.
WPBS shows how to cut silage effluent risks
Centrepiece of the Welsh Plant Breeding Station's exhibit was an ingenious model to bring home the pollution timebomb ticking away in silage storage areas.
The working-scale model included part of a farm with a stream running through and including three clamp silos from which effluent poured in exactly the same proportions as from clamps containing grass treated in different ways.
Flow rates were based on data collected by Dr Raymond Jones.
From unwilted grass treated with acid, 200 litres/t of grass poured out.
This was more than twice the 80 litres/t volume running from grass that was ensiled with 50kg/t of sugar beet plus an inoculant, and 10 times the 20 litres seeping from grass wilted to 30% dry matter.
Aware but stumped
‘Farmers are aware of the problem but are stumped by what to do about it.
The model is designed to show that it is possible to reduce the volume of effluent produced.
But we are also emphasising that proper provision must be made to collect, store safely and dispose of even reduced amounts.
The model also showed that taking advantage of the loophole in new anti-pollution regulations to store big bales, piled 19m (62ft) from a stream is a obviously very risky business.
‘Our results show that just as much effluent can be released from big bales as from clamps and the fines for polluting waterways are just as severe.
The advice we are offering is how to use wilting, absorbents and inoculants to reduce the effluent problem.
We have shown over several seasons that they can help.’
The exhibit also featured the use of improved clover varieties to cut nitrogen inputs and ways to reduce the leaching of slurry nitrogen by digestion and soil injection.
‘The large number of non-farming visitors to the show gives an opportunity to show how research scientists are helping farmers protect the environment and avoid pollution as well as producing food as efficiently and economically as possible,’ said WBPS spokeswoman Pat Twigg.
•Show results next week 
Taking a lead…
Nick Kirby from Inimex Genetics (left) and sale organiser Peter Padfield with the top-priced lots in the fifth Hayleys Invitational Sale, Genesis Leadman Dora (left) and Allstar Leadman Marcie.
Norwegian Red breeders claim progress on mastitis resistance.
Top dairy champ was D H Hodge's Holstein Friesian Fenfield Capricious.
Texel fan Robin Slade says the Dutch type stamps quality on its progeny.
Matt Martin's Texel shearling rams are based on the French type.
Pedigree breeder Alan Barnes backs the Beltex for muscle in the right places.
The BSE ban has hit Welsh Black breeders hard, says breed secretary Dai Davies.
Many producers have no measure of flock physical and financial performance — Brynmor Morgan
Lambs by the Est-a-Laine Merino out of a Hardy Speckledfaced ewe.
Pwllpeiran director Lyn Powell explained the thinking behind an Est-a-Laine Merino cross on Hardy Speckledfaced ewes.
COUNTRY CAR
IT IS GOOD BUY TIME BUT DON'T WAIT TOO LONG
Finding different ways to describe a miserable unchanging pattern is becoming as difficult for the car market as it is for the weather men.
‘Continuing abysmal’ describes both, with no signs of the sales slump in cars improving.
Bad news for hard-pressed manufacturers and dealers; bargain time for buyers prepared to shop around.
The more so this month, which by tradition brings exceptional offers for buyers who would rather save money by relieving dealers of unsold ‘H’ models than covert the snob value of driving the same model with a ‘J’plate.
Some dealers will consider silly prices to empty their forecourts — Ford has slashed prices by up to £2000.
The same applies to used cars, particularly the larger, plusher, thirstier models.
If you are in the market for a change of car, count your pennies and go shopping.
Otherwise, be patient, the market is not going to get better in a hurry, though buoyant exports and frantic adjustments by manufacturers to sales strategies could mean that today's bargains will not last forever.
If you are just happy to dream, feast your eyes on this selection of motoring marvels, as seen through the eyes of our motoring correspondent, Peter Jones.
On road and off, the new Shoguns will enhance their reputation here.
A day driving them over Spain's hilly, winding roads, and around a slippery off-road course, told a convincing tale.
To be able to sell every vehicle that lands at a UK port and, as a result, to enjoy buoyant prices for used models, has long been the happy position for Mitsubishi's UK importer, Colt Cars.
Only the quota on Japanese vehicles prevents a true head-to-head with the class-leading Discovery and the Isuzu Trooper that has cashed in so successfully in this growth sector of the market.
Will the Shogun's true sales rating here ever be known?
The new version will keep the Shogun well in contention in its two basic short- and long-wheelbase versions.
Least changed are the engines.
The super smooth 2.5-litre intercooled turbo-diesel, quite the best of the bunch, is pepped up 4bhp to 98bhp; the 3-litre V-6 petrol has been breathed on to the tune of an extra 8bhp, at 147bhp.
Most changed is the transmission.
Mitsubishi still clings to the option of being able to use only rear-wheel-drive on the road, claiming it's quieter and less expensive on fuel and tyres.
But at a time when the swing is to full-time 4 × 4, they have added a central viscous coupling so that in 4 × 4, on road or off, the power goes to the wheels with the most grip without transmission wind-up and all that entails, which can be locked for extra traction off-road.
Again, using a lockable free-wheel differential in the front axle not only eliminates free-wheel front hubs but also allows the 4 × 4 to be put in or out at up to 62mph.
Final addition is a button that electro-pneumatically locks the rear differential to help out on the serious off-road stuff.
The Spanish off-road course had a slippery surface, rather than seriously deep mud, but with a tyre-scrabbling incline that needed everything locked, it was sufficient to play the variations and show off the advantages.
Even so, an ‘old’ Shogun managed the same course.
It's all a matter of driver ability and confidence.
Little can influence the former, but the new Shogun inspires the latter.
Suspension on all models now follows the trend set on the previous V-6 — independent double wishbones and torsion bars up front; links and coils behind.
The coil springs are now tapered so that the more the load, the firmer the ride appears.
Power-assisted steering is speed related but retains ‘feel’, is easy to handle and pleasant to use.
Disc brakes are fitted all round, and ABS may well become an option here soon.
Another future option will be ability to vary the ride in three stages from soft to firm.
A slight but hardly worthwhile difference could be detected on the test cars.
All this is mounted on a touch new ladder chassis which adds nearly 70mm (3in) to the three-door SWB and half as much (30mm) to the five-door LWB.
The more rounded body, still distinctly Shogun with perhaps a more Americanised flavour, has increased dimensions in all but height, which is slightly lower, like the bonnet.
It adds up to a drag factor that is 13% ‘slippier’ through the air, which helps economy and reduces wind noise.
Inside is relatively unchanged.
You ride high and comfortably, with everything conveniently to hand.
Clutch, gears and brakes continue to operate with car-like ease, a factor appreciated by ladies and leisure drivers.
The new Shogun comfortably retains its place in the market, and bargain prices will continue to be hard to find.
TROOPERS EDGE INTO FRONT RANK
Amid all the talk and sales buzz about the new up market 4 × 4s — Discovery, Shogun, G-Wagen etc — Isuzu's Trooper has barely received a mention.
Used to playing second fiddle to its Mitsubishi rival and happily mopping up any disappointed Shogun buyers who failed to get their hands on one of the current quota, the Trooper has still etched itself a firm place in the off-roader scene and remains, as it usually has been, an underestimated vehicle.
When General Motors took a 40% share of Isuzu there were rumours of the Trooper becoming a Vauxhall, but it didn't.
It does provide much of the mechanicals for the Brava pick-ups, now labelled Vauxhall not Bedford, and doubtless will contribute in no small measure to Vauxhall's new Frontera 4 × 4 due out in a month or two.
Now with the Discovery and Shogun edging up market, the Trooper appears to have been left behind, rather like the now dated Nissan Patrol.
For example, a three-door, turbo-diesel Discovery now costs £17,675 and the Shogun equivalent £17,989.
The Trooper 2.8 three-door, turbo-diesel costs £13,988 (Nissan equivalent £13,690), both cheaper than Daihatsu's top estate at £15,325.
Of those, the Trooper's got the edge and for the first time leads its own sub-section of 4 × 4 off-roaders.
Among the LWB five-door, turbo-diesels the same applies — it's at least £2000 cheaper than the Discovery and Shogun versions.
They have now got superior 4 × 4 transmissions, diff locks and the rest, and doubtless would leave the Trooper literally standing when the chips were down off-road.
You still have to choose two- or four-wheel-drive high ratio or low ratio 4 × 4 on the Trooper, although front freewheeling hubs lock or unlock automatically and limited slip differentials make their contribution.
But most buyers need to ask themselves how often — if ever — they need such ultimate traction, and what else they could do with £2000.
And with the Discovery and Trooper enjoying heavy demand in short supply even in the current buying slump, there may even be a better deal still on a Trooper.
Make no mistake, it will serve the needs of most 4 × 4 buyers in style.
I say this after renewing acquaintance with the SWB three-door, 2.8-litre turbo-diesel, still by no means disgraced by its revamped rivals.
Its efficient quick-start system soon had the 95bhp unit buzzing.
There's a useful 159lb ft torque at 2100rpm just after the turbo comes on stream, and the lighter three-door has all the power it reasonably needs, even though it is not as smoothly delivered as the Shogun's.
Before the turbo comes in at 2000rpm, it's decidedly sluggish and there's no mistaking when this happens.
But gear it to stay between 2000 and 4000rpm and it soars away.
I didn't mind using the gears to achieve this, because clutch and gear change are as slick as a car's — ladies take note.
The umbrella-type hand-brake that just from under the dashboard is something else, however.
It seems flimsy and awkward compared with the good-old lever, and I didn't get used to it all week.
But it works, as do the disc brakes all round, positively and with a light touch.
The Trooper's wishbone and torsion-bar front suspension, and live rear axle on cart springs, can't match the coil spring combinations of the rivals but, that said, it's still a good compromise.
It pitches and bobbles on some roads, and bounces over the potholes driven fast.
At a sensible pace, however, it copes well enough.
Inside there are few complaints; it's not luxurious, but it's far from basic.
I preferred the sensible siting of oil pressure, fuel and temperature gauges across the middle of the dashboard to the gimmicky inclinometer, altimeter and so on, of the Shogun.
The front passenger could do with sturdy grab rail on the dash.
Both rivals could learn from the Trooper's 70:30 opening rear doors — always one of its best features for versatility and ease of use.
Try pulling one of the other's single doors open on a mountain in a gale waiting for a gust to catch it and snap the stay.
Watching the Trooper disappear up the road, I reckon it could go on trooping for a long time yet at the right price, with very little needing doing.
SOLIHULL REGAINS INITIATIVE
Solihull is the Aunt Sally of the world of four-wheel-drive.
Its Range Rover, Discovery and Defender (Land Rover 90 and 110 to you and me) are there to be shot at.
They are the ones to beat.
The threesome dominates every sector of the 4 × 4 market except the low-cost fun machines.
Having, with spectacular lack of vision, left the door open to the Japanese in the early BMC-British Leyland doldrum management days, Land Rover's lethargic parent suddenly realised it had missed the boat in a rapidly expanding market sector, and did something about it.
They moved the Range Rover up market, consolidated the traditional Land Rover and introduced the spectacular Discovery to scoop the honours and sales in the popular middle ground.
Over the years Solihull has perfected the art of stepping-stone marketing — improving models just when the opposition thought it had caught up.
The latest facelifts make the point.
Having plunged into the heartland of the Japanese-dominated midrange 4 × 4 sector with a Discovery pared to three doors and with an excellent new turbo-diesel or the old carburettored V-8 petrol to compete on price, they have now set about protecting the upper echelons by adding doors three and four and the injection version of the stalwart V-8.
The extra doors make all the difference.
Clambering over folded front seats at this height is inelegant, if not impossible.
The excellent fold-away seats six and seven accessed by spring-loaded rear step make this an excellent  people (school run) vehicle.
Forget about Conran's original chic pale blue interior.
New sensible Bahama beige is ideal for concealing the ravages of muddy boots.
The removable zip bag stowage between the front seats has gone.
It's now a rubber-lined tray with a mini-console jutting up in front, housing switches for mirrors, head-lamp height and a coin tray.
Unfortunately, it doesn't quite double as an arm rest.
Accommodation generally is first class; it's like sitting in a roomy conservatory.
Rear passengers perch high, which is fine except for the long-bodied, who have to duck the head to make the best of the view.
The air conditioning occupies the glove compartment, but there are plenty of other storage cubbyholes.
Intermittent rear wipers and fingertip radio controls under the steering wheel are valuable additions.
The pair of tilt or liftoff glass sunroofs (£335 extra) can be stored in a zipped pocket on the back of the rear seats, and a retractable load space cover keeps prying eyes at bay.
While the superb turbo-diesel is always likely to be the best seller, the V-8i adds the sparkle — up from 145 to 164bhp.
Extra torque (from 192 to 211lb ft) adds incredible flexibility, allowing pull-away from 10mph in fifth all the way up to 105mph.
Getaway time to 60mph is close to 11 seconds, and mid-range overtaking has extra zest.
It's all at a price, however.
I managed about 18mpg, but excessive ‘wellie’ will cost you dear.
If filling the tank is a worry, you need the turbo-diesel.
No problem stopping, helped by disc brakes all round, now ventilated up front.
Ride is a reasonable compromise considering its dual role; supple and smooth when surfaces allow but it rolls majestically cornering fast — no wonder there are ample grab handles.
Higher ratio power steering gives tighter turns, but the tendency to slight wanderings on the straight is still there.
So is the hum and whine, despite being muted further by extra sound-proofing.
The heavy clutch and cumbersome gear change remain the worst feature.
Four models are now offered — three- or five-door, with either turbo-diesel or V-8i, from £17,675 to £20,895.
With the 3.9iSE Vogue, the Range Rover continues happily to wear the crown.
Having created the luxury 4 × 4 niche, it has no intention of relinquishing it to recent pretenders in the form of the revised Shogun, G-Wagen and Land Cruiser.
If you can afford to pay £34,450, then flaunt it and enjoy it, because it's got what the others haven't — image and class.
And at 15mpg at best, you'll need a deep pocket.
But with 185bhp and 235lb ft torque on tap, the venerable, burbling, bored-out V8i is an engine to enjoy.
Its ability to trickle along at three-figure revs is legendary, and it has that thumping great reserve of power if you need it.
MUTUAL HARI-KIRI BY NISSAN
Nissan, having launched two attractive new models in the Primera, which replaces the Bluebird, and the new Sunny (now called Pulsar), and having established a highly productive and effective factory in the north-east to make them, now seems to be attempting to undo all it has achieved by going to war with the key to successful sales, the dealer network.
Nissan's success in the UK hitherto has been due almost entirely to a totally independent company founded back in 1968 by an East European named Octav Botnar.
His Nissan UK has exclusive rights to sell Nissans here.
At a time when Japanese cars were a joke, his faith and perseverance founded the Nissan dealerships and built up the business.
He has undoubtedly prospered.
Now the Japanese parent wants to run the whole show here and Mr Botnar, not unnaturally, is digging in his heels.
So Japan is setting up its own dealer network.
Battle is joined and lawyers are rubbing their hands in anticipation.
The customer, of course, has suffered as a result.
Prices of the new ranges fell foul of the haggling over the figure at which Nissan would sell its cars to Mr Botnar and what his Nissan UK would then charge buyers.
Both sides blame one another and the result has been chaotic sales, at a time when the slack market has been a big enough handicap anyway.
Which is a pity, because the Primera is too good a car to suffer in the sidelines.
As a replacement for the angular Bluebird, it's on another planet.
Though at least the Bluebird was distinctive to look at, whereas the Primera looks like a successful cross between several of its rivals.
Viewed from the front it could be any make; it's from behind that it establishes a look of its own with a high, rounded tail.
I think it's quite stylish.
Inside is deceiving.
It feels compact and rather smaller than it actually is.
In fact, the headroom figures are better than some rivals.
You sit deep within the shoulder-high window sills.
Some passengers felt too enclosed, but the driver's seat on this model could be heightened, which solved the problem for me.
The interior generally was pleasant enough plastic and well laid out.
No complaints either about the vital bits.
The 2-litre, 121bhp injection engine is smooth and responsive, with ample power both to 0 to 60mph in 9l6 seconds, and to top out at 125mph.
Yet it's flexible enough to pull away in fourth gear from 1000rpm.
Accurate, well weighted power steering helps; so does the knowledge that ABS braking of the discs all round is there for the asking.
The suspension generally is good, especially cruising fast on the open road, and the car ‘flows’ through the bends.
But on less even surfaces it can be a bit bobbly.
Sportily firm, is the phrase that comes to mind — though you can feel the bumps, they're nicely cushioned.
Comprehensively equipped with electric windows (one touch up and down for the driver), central locking power mirrors and so on, the finish reflects the fact that they take a bit of trouble up in Sunderland.
This version was listed in the spring at £12,796, with the range from £9995 to £17,000.
Where the two fighting Nissans will settle them is anybody's guess.
If the Primera does as well as the old Bluebird — 325,000 sold here helping to top 1.8m Nissans sold here in 22 years — they won't complain.
It's got the pedigree to do it, if they sort out the marketing.
NO SMOKE WITHOUT FIRE
BMW is the first manufacturer to offer a no-smoking option in its new 3-Series.
At no extra cost you can have a storage box and vehicle socket in place of the ashtray and lighter.
by no means the most beguiling feature about this outstanding car, but a unique offer that could be a trend setter.
The new ‘baby’ BMW — the third edition since it evolved in 1975 — remains first and foremost a driver's car.
Behind that badge you feel a bit special.
While still the baby it's slightly larger, wider and higher than the former model.
And it holds more luggage in the 15.4cu ft boot.
The 325i uses the same 6-cylinder, 24-valve engine as the 5-Series.
It's a lot of engine for a car of this size and having direct drive fifth gear (like the 5-Series) increases flexibility still further.
BMW also claims it is quieter, safer, needs less servicing, handles better and is more fuel efficient.
It has a catalytic converter, of course, and is said to be 80% recyclable, so you don't know where a bit of BMW will pop up next.
The 325i costs £21,250 and is joined initially by the 318i with an improved version of the old 4-cylinder engine at £14,950.
To come soon are the 316i (£13,950) and the 320i (£17,580).
SAAB'S TAXING SOLUTION
Cramming in the goodies but keeping the price below the £19,250 tax barrier has been occupying car makers, Saab among them.
The Swedish firm's contribution is the 9000XS (hatchback or DC saloon) which, unusually, includes air conditioning and a compact disc player for £19,245.
With alloy wheels, elm burr veneer fascia, metallic paint, central locking, electric tinted windows and door mirrors among its features, it's a handsome package and a joy to drive.
Power is supplied by the latest 2-litre, 16-valve 130bhp engine.
The offer is limited to the end of the year.
So convinced is Saab of the value of air conditioning in our climate that it intends offering it instead of a sun-roof as a no-cost option on other models.
Every Saab now has a catalytic converter.
The UK company is making much of its service.
What you see is what you pay, says the fixed-price service menu.
And every Saab dealer is now bound to down tools and help you out without prior booking if the job takes less than an hour.
AUDI FAMILY PLANNING
Audi designers had a strict brief for the new 100.
It was to be no bigger than its predecessor and retain the family shape.
So you'll have no difficulty in spotting it — smoother, more substantial, but unmistakably Audi.
It feels more compact and less roomy than the old one but the figures belie this.
The launch model had the new 2.8-litre V-6 24-valve engine, 174bhp offering 135mph and an 8-second 0–62mph dash.
With five-speed manual or four-speed automatic, front-wheel drive or the famous Quattro 4 × 4 with Torsen differential, it's a potent package.
But it is as dashing or as docile as you want, giving a ride that is firm but supple.
All the appropriate comforts and conveniences are included, among them power steering and ABS with disc brakes all round.
The 2.8 Quattro will set you back £26,160 or £23,523 manual 2 × 4.
In 2.3 five-cylinder form it stands at £19.247 (Quattro £22,125).
And due about now (July) the 2-litre from £18,135 followed by two diesels and an estate.
MALAYSIA AND KOREA CATCH UP
Motor manufacturing progresses ever upwards in size, speed, sophistication — and price.
But plenty of people either can't pay, or won't pay on principle.
For them the choice has been an entry level model pared to the bone, the used car lot or an east European ‘cheapie’.
Now Korea and Malaysia offer an even more attractive niche.
Engine and transmission are the most difficult bits for emerging car makers to get right, but those two have done what embryo tractor makers in Europe did years ago — repackaged ‘last year's’ mechanicals from a successful make.
Both Korea's Hyundai and Malaysia's Proton did a deal with Mitsubishi and two new marques were born in what has been a couple of the success stories of the recent years.
They sell here as well packaged ranges, undercutting rivals by three and often four figures, and with many of the usual extras built in.
Hyundai, founded 23 years ago and with eight years in Britain, offers five models, 23 variations in all, ranging from the £5822 X2 hatchback to the £15,274 Sonata saloon.
The range includes the new 1.6 Lantra in the hotly contested Ford Escort category.
I have been driving the best of the best-selling model, the X2 1.5 hatchback, updated at the last Motor Show.
It's a close relation of the original 1972 Pony but now, 10cm (4in) longer and a fraction wider, it marks how much the design has changed.
The 1.5-litre injected engine with catalytic converter delivers 82bhp.
It is lively, flexible and responsive — a little noisy perhaps but not annoyingly so.
Clutch and gears are slick and smooth confirming its Japanese pedigree and the front disc and rear drum brakes are light and positive.
On the road it handles well.
The ride is on the firm side but no more so than some of its rivals and better than others.
Power steering is nicely weighted retaining plenty of feel.
Urban thirst is put at 31.8mpg.
Fixtures include electric windows all round (but manual door mirrors), steering wheel and driver's seat adjustable for height leaving a full five fingers above my head at full height.
Four-speaker radio/cassette, clock, sun visors which slot neatly into roof recesses and a wide dashboard with shelf on top add up to an interior only let down by its rather cheap plastic finish.
Roominess in this size car is always a compromise.
Open the hatchback and the boot space is small, in the interests of extra knee-room for rear passengers.
And when the 50/40 rear seat back is lowered the seat doesn't tip forward so the extra space has a sloping floor.
Outwardly it's not a bad looker and at £8684 is excellent value.
you can buy a 1.3 carburettor version for less than £6000.
Slightly more angular but no less capable is the latest Proton, our fastest growing franchise.
First models only arrived from the Kuala Lumpur factory in March 1989 but it has since doubled budgeted sales here (topping 18,000 by the end of 1990), outsold Hyundai and Seat, and has a higher market share than several more illustrious name.
Why?
It may lack a certain flair, it may have a garish badge, it may still be cheap and cheerful inside (there are now some very attractive leather-look plastics about) but it is proving to be a reliable, easy-to-drive family car with lots of equipment as standard and rock bottom prices.
My test car was the top-of-the-range 1.6 Aerodeck SE (a hatchback to you and me) but at £9299 including delivery, plates and road tax, it's a saving well into four figures over, say, the market leading Ford Escort.
It tops a range of 10 saloons and hatches which start with the 1.3GL saloon at £7149.
New this year are the Mitsubishi engines with three valves a cylinder boosting power by 16% to 85.5bhp.
It's a lively unit capable of topping 
100mph with a 12.5 sec 0 to 60mph and useful mid-range torque.
Although the clutch is Japanese-smooth the gear change, though slick, is a bit too clonky.
Ride is smooth enough.
Some surfaces can make it bobble a bit, though not enough to put you off.
And it handles well on independent coil suspension with roll well controlled.
Electric front windows, front seat height variation leaving three fingers above my head to the manual glass sunroof, power steering on 1.5 models and good control layout complete the picture.
Undoubtedly an attractive package backed up by a six-year power train and bodywork warranty, two-year manufacturer's warranty, two years RAC membership, windscreen replacement service and low-cost insurance.
So which is it to be, Hyundai or Proton?
My advice is don't choose one without first looking at the other, it's that close.
Then tick off carefully your list of comparisons and priorities.
BASIC MOVE MADE BY BAVARIANS
Rarely do car makers add to the bottom of their ranges.
Hotted-up versions — yes; open top coupés —yes; ‘specials’ of all shapes and prices — yes; they're all standard sales boosters.
But tack on a model below the basic?
BMW has — and it's an interesting move, especially for those who covet a 5-Series on a low budget — a ‘5’ for just over £17,000!
It's all to do with the £19,250 tax bracket and engines below 2 litres.
Putting the old eight-valve 1.8i engine from the 3-Series in a 1.5t ‘5’ would seem like a recipe for dawdling.
Not necessarily so.
I expected a struggle to keep up with the hearse; instead, its response surprised me.
It's not going to press you back in the seat on acceleration or break any speed records, but it's far from sluggish — a 119mph top speed, in fact, and 0–62mph in 12.8 seconds.
The old eight-valve, four-cylinder 115 bhp engine still retains a quiet refinement, revs willingly and pulls away with a clean pick-up.
Overtaking needs a bit more planning, but for those who have long since given up the chase and opted for a more dignified life, this is a lot of car for the money plus a BMW badge to ride behind.
What do you do with the extra seconds you save burning rubber, anyway?
This is no watered down BMW either.
It shares the same spec with its six-cylinder cousins, including electric windows, power steering, central locking and electric door mirrors.
There are disc brakes all round.
The five-speed manual gearbox is smoothness personified, and the urban thirst is put at a remarkable 34.9mph for a car of this size.
BMW has made powerful, rear-wheel-drive 5-Series cars since the early 1970s.
Current models, launched in 1988, are the third generation, slotting in between the sporty 3-Series and the luxurious 7-Series.
Any suspicion that the German company is lowering its sights with the 518i is quickly snuffed out by the introduction of two new six-cylinder engines introduced at the 1990 Motor Show.
Injected, catalysed, with 24-valves apiece and an individual coil on each plug to speed the spark, the 2-litre 150bhp and the 2.5-litre 192bhp engines enhance the company's reputation for building arguably the smoothest ‘6’ s in the business.
My 525i was 16% more powerful than its predecessor and capable of pushing the car to 143mph, or streaking from 1 to 62mph in 8.6 seconds.
It's quick and quiet with it.
Only wind disturbs the peace when you press on.
The rev counter has to approach the red line before the engine becomes noticeable.
So confident is BMW of its fuel efficiency and smoothness that fifth gear is now direct drive instead of an overdrive, an interesting move that adds flexibility to performance when pressing on, and the ability to trickle along and pull away in high gear with a minimum of protest.
At the same time there's a new sparkle to low rev performance.
Urban ‘thirst’ is 20.9mph, but the on-board computer showed a 26.9mph average for my far from leisurely 400 miles at the wheel.
Handling and ride in the 5-Series is already legendary, and this engine is better able to make the most of it.
Inside you sit well, the trim is all that is should be but, after driving in some more modern interiors, are the buttons and switches as handy as they might be?
And on a car of this class the steering column ought to adjust for rake as well as reach.
No complaints about roominess up front but, surprisingly for what ought to be a five-seater, three in the back would need to be qualified weight watchers.
The extra room is in the boot, instead — it's enormous and opens to bumper level.
A BACK SEAT NOVELTY
Citroen's new Escort-sized ZX slots between the AX and the BX in the most competitive sector of the market, where one-third of UK cars are bought.
Resisting the temptation to go over the top with innovation (suspension is coils and dampers not hydropneumatic), the designers have still managed to introduce some novelties.
The rear suspension deforms slightly on corners, allowing the rear wheels to steer up to 3° in the same direction as the front wheels.
Inside, the rear seat squab can be slid 7in to and fro to give a choice of more rear leg room or extra boot space, and the back rest tilts through 30°.
You won't notice the first, except in crisper handling; you can't ignore the second, which with 60/40 split rear seat increases versatility no end.
Low prices will help sales — from the £8680 1.4 Reflex, through the £9710 1.4 Avantage and the £11,140 1.5i Aura, to the £12,670 1.9i Volcane hot hatch capable of 0–60mph in 7.8 seconds and 127mph.
Five-door models only at present, three-door, estate and diesels to come.
Comfortable, easy to drive, attractively priced and finished in a solid, quality build, it's already looming ever larger in the rear-view mirror of its rivals.
The Shogun V-6, five-door model — one of a range which sells and sells.
A tough new ladder chassis adds 3in to the three-door Shogun SWB.
Solihull's Discovery — one of a threesome that dominates every sector of the 4 × 4 market except the fun bugs.
Worth considering — the Trooper comes £2000 cheaper than its rivals.
As a replacement for the Bluebird, the Primera is on another planet.
Hyundai on the outside, but Mitsubishi under the bonnet and chassis.
The BMW 525i is 16% more powerful than its predecessor and capable of pushing up to a speed of 143 mph.
ON OUR FARMS
Report by John Lambkin
As the leading farm journal, FARMERS WEEKLY is unique in running four commercial units.
It also has a ‘French connection’.
Each week we report their activities.
EASTON LODGE
Thinking out pig policy
Proposals to replace our dry sow accommodation could not have come at worse time, with pig prices falling through the floor, and I suppose some would say that we are reacting plenty soon enough.
However, by 1998 the kind of sow stalls at Easton Lodge will be prohibited and an alternative method of accommodating the dry sows will need to be provided.
To this end we asked Martin Beckett our regional pig adviser from ADAS to look into the alternatives.
One of our first thoughts was to accommodate the sows outdoors, so for comparative purposes he has made the assumption that new purpose-built accommodation for 220 sows would be likely to cost £400 a sow.
£88,000 amortised over 10 years at 13% interest would result in an annual charge of £16,192 so it is against this figure he has compared outdoor accommodation.
Mr Beckett makes the point that before embarking on such a venture the land would need to be fully assessed to determine the stocking rate.
For budgeting purposes we agreed to take a figure of 20 sows a hectare (8/acre) or 11ha (27.5 acres) in total.
Assuming sows and gilts remain in the service house until after the point of first return then there is a total requirement of 14 paddocks each containing two huts capable of holding eight to nine sows each.
The budget in the table assumes the cost of sow huts, water and fencing, tractor and trailer have all been amortised at 13% over five years.
An allowance has been made for extra labour.
The difference between the annual cost of a purpose building at £16,192 and outdoor management at £1352 is an apparent saving of £2669.
The other assumption was that the performance of the sows would be the same on both systems while acknowledging the need for extra feed at 100kg a sow in order to maintain condition outdoors.
We have been told by the Cotswold Pig Development Company that they believe the ‘White F1 hybrid sows’ would stand up to outdoor conditions.
If, however, there was an increase in returns and still births producing a reduction in numbers born alive by one piglet less a sow a year, the figures would be very different.
Another point of paramount importance is, of course, our minimal disease status — could this be maintained in a partially outdoor unit?
The margin foregone for each pig not finished could be £25 and, therefore, on 350 sows this would result in a loss of £8750 and on this basis it could be better to provide the alternative housing, comments Mr Beckett.
In reality, however, it might be easier to find the £12,230 capital to finance the outdoor venture than the £88,000 for the alternative indoor housing.
The hard fact is that whatever road we choose to travel this becomes a direct cost to our business without adding a single penny to output and, therefore, profitability.
Our industry seems to be completely beset by legislation of one sort or another.
Although it does not add to our profitability it appears to be what consumers want.
VIMER
Silly season for meetings
Pre-harvest is the silly season for meetings in France, writes Tim Green, and we are bombarded with invitations to attend meetings for all manner of services allied to farming.
I have to be selective, especially these days when margins are being squeezed continually and time away from home is time lost.
Spare time will be even more scarce shortly because we will be losing one full time man — Graeme, our student from Durham, leaves at the end of July.
Twelve months ago when Graeme joined us I had hoped that we could generate enough business to justify an extra man.
Unfortunately, the downturn in farming has more than outweighed any increase in turnover.
Salaries over here are not dissimilar to the UK and we have no obligation to provide housing, however, what does sting is the level of social security payments.
On top of a worker's take-home pay, we are charged 53% of it in social security payments — that is 15% employee's contribution and 38% employer's.
The bill for that arrives every three months and you have to pay fairly quickly.
If payment is not made by the due date then 10% is added to the bill no excuses are accepted…
With reduced cow numbers (courtesy of quotas) and some investment in fencing and sheep handling, I hope we shall be able to cope with our reduced labour force especially as Chrissie is out teaching more and more.
It is interesting to see that of the Brits farming in France most of us have wives teaching English as a way of earning extra income.
French administration dies every year in the month of August when the civil servants go on holiday.
Cows are not officially recorded in the month of August and the results for July and September are averaged — very useful…
Annual milk summary
Before our milk recorders disappear on holiday they do bring the annual summary for our milk year which is always interesting reading.
For the year ending Mar 31, 1991, we have made mainly useful progress with the herd average moving up 770kg to 7320kg a cow of standard milk (ie corrected to 3.8% butterfat and 3.2% protein) or 7400kg at 3.89BF and 3.03 protein uncorrected.
That improvement came despite last year's drought and reflects our better feeding regime using the complete diet feeder.
We have also tightened up our management in other key areas of milk production.
There are now fewer production falls during the critical late summer.
On the debit side we have dropped one day on the calving interval to 376 days, although not a disaster we had been trying to improve that but our heifers are calving at 28 months instead of two years three months.
Hopefully, the recent addition of a young Limousin bull will help us mop up stragglers next spring.
He is pedigree and from a very good herd of quiet beasts owned by a friend; the price will be FF8400 (about £840) delivered.
Before he is moved he will be blood-tested for brucellosis and leucosis and he will be re-tested on arrival at Vimer.
To conclude on our milk recording results the most intriguing item is our group results graph which shows annual milk yield on one side and average milk yield at first recording on the other.
We have 7320kg on one side and 32.4kg on the other.
What I don't understand are the two farms at the bottom of our group.
One averages 3800kg, with a first recording of 17.3kg and the other is 3350kg at 19.5kg.
The fact that their milk yields are low is their concern but to pay £22 a cow to find out seems a little extravagant…
Weaners in the piglet nursery at the Easton Lodge pig unit come under the watchful eye of John Knighton, the farm's head stockperson.
FW TRAVEL OFFER
An American dream
Here's your chance to see some of the best dairy cattle in the world while taking in the sights on our coast-to-coast autumn tour of the USA.
San Francisco, Yosemite National Park, New England in the fall, Disneyland and VIP treatment at the world's number one dairy show are just some of the highlights on our FARMERS WEEKLY tour to the USA.
Organised in conjunction with Farm Tours and World Wide Sires, our two-week trip combines spectacular sightseeing and superb hospitality with visits to top dairy breeders' herds in Vermont, Ohio and California and a visit to the World Dairy Expo in Wisconsin.
Our tour begins on Saturday, Sept 28 with a mid-morning North West Airlines flight from Gatwick non-stop to Boston, arriving 1.15pm local time.
We will then travel by coach through the golds and reds of a New Hampshire autumn for the first of two nights at the Town and Country Inn, Gorham, north of Massachusetts.
Sunday morning sees us on the way to one of the prettiest corners of the state of Vermont to visit top breeder's herd VT Pond View.
On the return journey we will drop in on Lylehaven Farms and Connant Acres, both herds with an established reputation for producing show cows and exporting top quality genetics around the world.
Next morning we will head back to Boston visiting three breeders' herds on the way, before catching a mid-afternoon flight to Columbus, Ohio, for a two-night stay in the nearby Quality Inn.
On Tuesday there is the chance to visit Select Sires, one of the leading AI and embryo transfer centres in the world.
Next day we will be visiting John Beckman's Applenotch herd at Minster, Ohio, and international judge Lauren Elysass will be our host in the afternoon when he shows us around Quiet Cove Farms.
Following these herd visits we will travel across the rolling countryside of Ohio, Iowa and Illinois towards Chicago where we will be staying at the Comfort Inn, Des Plaines.
Any budding gangsters can also savour the Chicago nightlife.
Thursday morning sees us en route to America's dairyland, Wisconsin, for a three-day visit centred on the World Dairy Expo in Madison.
Holsteins, Jerseys, Ayrshires and Brown Swiss — the cream of the North American dairy cow population — compete for top honours at what is regarded as the world's leading dairy show.
For the ladies who fancy a break from cows, the Expo Ladies Committee has a specially organised programme of sightseeing and shopping.
Before the judging on Friday afternoon there is a chance for everyone to visit one of Wisconsin's finest herds at Crescentmead Farms.
And then it is down to serious show business with the climax on Saturday afternoon when the Expo champion is announced.
During the two days we have as our base the international visitors lounge.
There will be an evening buffet preceding the World Classic Sale on Friday and, afterwards, our joint tour organisers World Wide Sires will be throwing a party at the Sheraton Hotel to which the group has been invited.
Following an afternoon reception hosted by the State of Minnesota on Saturday we fly to San Francisco for a two-night stay at the Quality Inn Suites Hotel.
Sunday will be kept free for you to enjoy the sights of one of the world's most fascinating cities.
A trip around the bay under the Golden Gate Bridge, a visit to Alcatraz, riding the cable cars and dining out on Pier 49 are just some of the attractions of this jewel in California's crown.
The start of our second week takes us to the Nappa Valley and the heart of California's cheese and wine country.
Visits to Sleepy Hollow and Ocean View farms are followed by a tour around Dave Vivian's family-run cheese factory at Sonoma.
Try leaving without sampling his Sonoma Jack cheese in the huge door-stop sandwiches on offer in the factory shop!
Monday evening will be spent in Modesto before an early start for one of the highlights of the tour Yosemite National Park.
Captured in stark black and white by California photographer Ansel Adams, Yosemite looks just as good in colour so bring plenty of film.
Using Fresno as our base, the next two days continue on a grand scale with a visit on Wednesday to Ruanne Dairies, where more than 3000 cows are milked in one herd, and to the Harris Beef Lot where over 100,000 head of beef cattle are finished every year on just 16ha (40 acres).
The visit is completed by a meal in the Harris Ranch restaurant to sample the final product.
On Thursday morning we leave Fresno and head south into the Sequoia National Forest, home of the country's largest redwood trees.
Our fascinating day among the gentle giants is completed by a drive down to Los Angeles where we will stay for the next two nights in the Anaheim area of the city.
Our last day of farm visits will be spent in the Chino Valley when one of the ports of call is Alcadena Dairies, milking 8000 cows on the edge of an ever expanding Los Angeles.
Saturday finds us enjoying our last day in North America in the company of Mickey Mouse and friends at Disneyland.
On Sunday morning the return flight to Gatwick leaves at 10.30am with a connection in Boston, arriving back in the UK at 7.40am Monday, Oct 14.
The cost of the tour, which includes all flights, surface transport, twin bedded accommodation in three star equivalent hotels, courier services and all farm visits is £1425 + £10 tax + £40 insurance.
For those who want to have a winter holiday with a difference watch this space for details on our 10-day tour to Canada and the Toronto Winter Fair, Nov 9–20.
One of the highlights of our US tour has to be Yosemite National Park (left).
Combine spectacular scenery with visits to the breeders and leaders in the dairy cattle industry like Select Sires in Ohio (above).
LAND AND FARMS
Cash buyer finds reasonable prices hard to come by
By Catherine Paice
Realistic prices are still hard to find in the land market, according to a would-be farm purchaser whose quests for a viable farm has taken up most of his time and energy for over a year.
Robert Stern, currently farming on a tenancy just outside Evesham, Worcs, is a cash buyer.
Like others in his position, he wants to continue farming but has to question the logic and timing of a considerable investment.
Mr Stern has not flinched from talking to buyers, sellers, advisers, consultants, accountants, friends, farmers and agents in his determination to buy at what he considers a reasonable price.
As each day passes, he appears to be thrown further back on his own heels.
‘The land market, like everything in farming at the moment, is a muddle,’ he says.
Reason tells him he is mad to want to continue farming, but the desire to do so leads him to rationalise the decision as best he can.
Last month, he made an offer for more than 800 acres in the M4 corridor.
He was dismayed by the vendor's agents who confirmed they and their client were determined to hold out for double the offer.
The farm is still for sale.
Mr Stern's costings tell him it is not worth paying more than £750/acre for bare arable land if he is to make a reasonable living.
ADAS, with other consultants and economists, has agreed with him.
His own money has been hard-earned as a shrewd farmer and dealer, with timing on his side as the property market hit a peak in the late 1980s.
He cannot see why cash which has earned him monthly interest running into five figures should be squandered for the sake of a perceived way of life that is now beset by escalating economic and political pressure.
‘Farming is an investment of time, money and purpose in life,’ he said.
‘Present values are lower than they have been for some time, and are sticking.
But the gap between net farm income and land values is wider than ever.
Agents are doing a marvellous job in the face of adversity but current affairs and the depletion of rollover funds are undermining values more than they want to admit.
‘I would like to farm, and to earn a reasonable income from it.
To make this possible, I would need 500 acres at £1500/acre including a house and buildings.’
Despite falling values, farms are not selling because those involved, including agents, are not adjusting to economic reality, according to Mr Stern.
Family estate put on offer
The launch of a Berkshire estate with a good, family house and 920 acres will be one of the best tests yet of the market between £3m and £5m.
The Inholmes Estate has little competition in its particular class.
Similar properties tend to have got a little stale, some not having taken account of weaker demand with their original asking prices.
Lane Fox and managing agent Peter Rapson have put a £4m price tag on Inholmes with its neo-Georgian house, at least two other dwellings and its own village.
The vendor is the third generation of the family who has lived there since 1919, and is understood to have decided to sell rather than continue to face the task of maintaining the estate.
Its accessibility — three miles from junction 14 of the M4 — combined with the privacy afforded by its parkland and woodland should attract attention, says Lane Fox.
Cradley draws lots of interest
The Duchy of Cornwall has agreed to buy the 1900-acre Cradley Estate in Herefordshire from Mercantile & General Reinsurance.
Interest was such in the traditional, let estate that agent Lane Fox called for best and final offers and received them from close to 10 different parties.
News leaked out locally and was confirmed last week by the Duchy, which will take on five let farms, a vacant farmhouse at the centre of the estate, and woodland with in-hand sporting rights west of the Malvern Hills.
Like all Mercantile and General-owned farms, two of which were sold last year and a fourth is also under offer, it had been well-maintained.
The guide price for Cradley was £1.75m, and market sources believe it sold for about £1.9m, suggesting a yield less than 4.5%.
Inholmes: Testing the property market for estates.
SALES BY AUCTION
Woodhayne Longhorn peak to 1000gns…
Interest in Longhorn cattle is now based on much more than the breed's aesthetic appeal.
That was clearly borne out at the dispersal of the Mr and Mrs R E White's Woodhayne herd where the talk of the sale was a 1000gns bid for a nine month old heifer calf.
But topping the event, which drew a large crowd to Banbury Stockyard, were cattle from noted breeders J Close and Sons that sold to 1800gns.
The Woodhayne herd, established in 1984, has benefited greatly from some top class foundation cattle and the influence of the bull Rousham Gulliver, a son of the prepotent Gorse Favourite.
It was this depth of breeding that encouraged such lively bidding for the Woodhayne stock which sold to 1200gns for Woodhayne Citrine, a Gulliver sired cow offered with a heifer calf by Mavesyn Midas.
Buyer was C Cook, Crawley, Sussex.
It was guest consignors Messrs Close who paid the 1000gns for the nine-month-old heifer calf Woodhayne Euclase.
She was also by the Mavesyn sire.
Two top bids of 1800gns came from Fishwick stock.
Both were claimed by D S Pleavin, Chester.
He secured Fishwick Mona, a daughter of Honeywood Edmund and out of Fishwick Jeanna, a heifer that won the RASE breed title at 14-months-old.
His other smart female acquisition was Fishwick Modesty.
Joining these two, Mr Pleavin also took home Fishwick Mandy at 1500gns, another out of a Royal Show title dam.
It was interesting that Fishwick Mona had just returned from the Great Yorkshire Show where she had stood third in a strong yearling heifer class.
Phil Evans consigned one heifer, Linton Judy, that made 1000gns to W D Roberts, Tregaron, Dyfed.
Four unregistered cows with calves at foot from Hithercroft Farms sold to 810gns.
Averages: Woodhayne — seven cows and heifer calves, £1167; served heifer, £651; four maiden heifers £564.37 and two bulls £630.
Fishwick — four maiden heifers £1575.
Hithercroft — four cows £627.37.
Linton — served heifer £1050.
(Thornborrows)
Liskeard for Dorsets
The Dorset Horn and Poll Dorset Sheep Breeders Association held an official show and sale at Liskeard, Cornwall.
There were 810 breeding ewes, ewe lambs, and rams on offer.
Top price in the ewe section went to W L French, who sold a pen of nine reg Poll yearlings at £69 a head.
Leading the ram bidding was a Poll ram lamb from and Mrs A D Turvill that made 190gns.
Non reg Poll hoggets £45–£60.
(Kivells)
Numbers up, averages down for Suffolk sheep
By Jeremy Hunt
Averages eased but more sheep were sold at the Suffolk Sheep Society's national show and sale at Stoneleigh last week when bidding peaked at 5600gns on a trade where selectivity was the order of the day.
‘The changes facing the industry with the ending of the variable premium in a few months time made buyers highly selective,’ said auctioneer Michael Walton who managed to extract an average £1000 for ram lambs against a 1990 figure of £1209.
‘Producers were prepared to pay good money for quality stock and the number of sheep sold this year was higher than in 1990.’
Shearling rams also showed a drop in average price with 21 at £599 compared with 16 at £847 last year.
But females were up in price.
The 33 shearling ewes levelled at £335 against £309 in 1990 while 26 ewe lambs averaged £263 compared with £248 12 months ago.
Top at 5600gns was a son of Cairness Royal Choice from the Haverfordwest, Dyfed-based flock of R G and R A Jones selling to M W and S Attwell, Redditch, Worcs.
The Thomas partnership, who admitted to having high expectations for their ram lamb, received an average of £1686 for five sold.
Top flock average was £2043 for seven from A E Weaver and Sons, Perrinpit Farm, Frampton Cotterell, Glos.
The flock also sold the day's second highest entry taking 5000gns for a son of the 12,000gns Fordafourie Ferrari to Dublin District Milk Board, Co Meath, Eire.
There was a large contingent of buyers from Eire who took 32 rams in total.
Other flocks selling at 4000gns or more were: J Walton and Son, Rosedean, Northumberland who sold at 4800gns to Fordington Farms, Alford, Lincs; A C Lee and Co, Fordafourie, Aberdeenshire who received 4400gns for a ram lamb to Gerry Osbourne, Co Carlow, Eire.
John Greensit, Thirsk, North Yorks was also in the top band at 4000gns for a ram lamb to Bob Howlett, Co Wexford.
Show champion was from Gordon Wilson, Bogs of Paithnick, Keith, Banffshire which realised 2200gns.
‘We are in the midst of a period of considerable change,’ said breed society president Wilson McCracken, Co Antrim.
‘I'm confident we have nothing to fear in the market place provided we continue to aim for the type of quality sheep that we have seen in the best forward at Stoneleigh.’
(M Walton in Association with U A Pedigree.)
Gall Charollais dispersed
Charollais sheep enthusiasts paid up to 2000gns twice when the Gall flock of J Maxwell and Sons, Lockerbie, was dispersed including guest consignments from the Netherallan and Broomhouses flocks.
It was Netherallan stock that topped the trade.
A 2000gns call came from Clive Morse, Llanadeilo, Dyfed for a shearling gimmer.
Mr Morse, a major buyer at the sale also paid 1400gns and 1350gns for other Netherallan shearling gimmers.
A Netherallan shearling ram shared top price.
It was secured by P Arwyn Thomas, Whitland, Dyfed.
Ewe lambs from the flock went to 1500gns for an entry taken by Clive Morse.
Gall stock reached 1850gns for a ram lamb bought by J J McCambridge and Son, Co Antrim who also took the highest priced Gall shearling shimmer at 1000gns.
Leading bid for a Gall ewe was 1200gns coming from McAlister Bros, Ballymena.
Safon ram fixture set for Wales
Seven top Suffolk breeders are to hold their third sale of rams under the Safon name — Safon being a Welsh acronym for quality.
The producers are all members of the Meat and Livestock Commission's Sheepbreeder scheme and are aiming to satisfy the customers' demand for lean meat by giving farmers access to rams of known performance.
All the rams on sale have recorded growth rates and are ultrasonically tested for muscle and fat depths.
They will be drawn from the top 50% of the lean selection index of each of the seven participating flocks and given a full veterinary inspection before the sale.
The event, to be held on August 27th at Ruthin Cattle Market, Clwyd, North Wales starts at 6pm and will be run in conjunction with Ruthin Farmers Auction and Clough and Co.
Top price at Banbury Market's Oakley Limousin sale was Oakley Countess at 7500gns.
She was bought by Kelvin Holdcroft, Chatsworth Farm, Horton, near Leek, Staffs.
(Thornborrows.)
Farmlife
RACHEL'S DAIRY ORGANIC STYLE
Rachel's Dairy has grown slowly from selling pots of cream in local shops to a distribution network that covers a large chunk of Britain.
The farm, organically cultivated since the 1940s, can support all the family and gives employment to local people, says Judy Steele, after a visit to Borth.
Every journey starts with a single step, but a slip, not a stride, started Gareth and Rachel Rowlands' dairy enterprise at Brynllys near Borth, Dyfed, on the road to success.
Gareth broke his leg while he was clearing snow in 1982 and the milk from the herd of Guernseys could not be got away, so Rachel got out the separator and sold cream locally.
It proved so popular that she continued.
The business includes beef, sheep and a farmshop, but the dairy has never stopped growing from its small beginnings and the Rowlands are about to open a factory unit nearby.
The farm has won an ADAS marketing award and was featured in FARMERS WEEKLY in March.
Brynllys has been farmed organically by Rachel's family since 1942, but until 1982 all the milk went off in the tanker with everybody else's, putting the lie to the old chestnut that organic producers must have a premium.
With the family reaching working age it seemed sensible to take advantage of the expanding market for organic produce and increase the chances of supporting them all from the farm.
Rachel, who grew up milking cows and has a qualification in dairying, has gradually added to the range of Rachel's Dairy products.
The skimmed milk was fed to pigs but the Rowlands eventually decided it could be used more profitably and began to make low-fat yogurt and cottage cheese.
The dairying operation is now so large that it will soon need to be run as a separate company, and all three of the Rowlands' children are involved in the enterprise.
Rachel looks back to her first batches of yogurt: Two gallons, then five gallons, then a churnful, sold to local shops.
Belonging to a small community has been a great asset.
‘Every time we went out to eat we would ask the proprietors ‘do you mind testing our product?’
And we got a generous response.
It helped in the early days,’ she says.
The Rowlands had always wanted to farm and revelled in the return to a rural community in 1966 after a sojourn in suburban England, where, Gareth says incredulously, he had to pay to play rugby.
The organic system is a personal choice.
They never thought for a moment about reverting to conventional agriculture, although Gareth had come from a research job with ICI.
‘Organic farming is just another part of British agriculture,’ he says.
‘We can't all go organic.’
Mastitis seldom occurs.
The cows are always milked by members of the family and they can usually spot mastitis in the first 24 hours.
It is treated simply.
A high pressure hose is used to increase blood supply to the udder, which helps fight infection and has a massaging action.
Even if the mastitis has been present for more than 24 hours antibiotics are not used, but a cure takes longer.
‘Worming is not necessary,’ says Gareth.
‘Rotation is the  secret.’
Until recently the system contained no permanent pasture.
Most of the fields are still part of a long rotation based on grass, cereals and a conservation ley with Italian red clover.
Hedges are left tall to encourage predatory insects and wildlife.
‘We all marvel at the Red Kite,’ says Gareth, ‘But we don't marvel at the little beetles which are the reason it's there.’
‘We have a population of beetles that eats slugs,’ adds Rachel.
Gareth firmly believes there is a balance to be achieved between disease and wipe-out which is not yet fully understood.
Organic farmers know it works, but they can't give scientific reasons.
Sheep and beef cattle are also part of the system.
The market garden is managed on a shared basis, as are the bees, whose honey is sold in the shop.
Surprisingly the Rowlands have found wildlife on the farm has increased considerably since undisturbed areas were put aside and permanent pasture established.
Seven species of birds of prey have been observed.
The farm has been open to the public free of charge for about five years, though groups pay a small charge.
There are valuable opportunities to make contact with future customers and to explain what farming is all about.
Both Gareth and Rachel enjoy talking to their visitors and eventually they will leave the management of the farm and dairy to their children and concentrate on showing the visitors how it works.
Gareth and Rachel Rowlands (right) allow visitors to walk round Brynllyys, their organic farm, freely as they always spend money in their shop.
Richard Morgan and Heather Evans make butter in the dairy at Brynllys.
Heather Evans making butter at Brynllys.
Rachel's Dairy will soon move from the farm to a new factory.
FARM TOURISM
STILL SCOPE IN SOUTH-WEST
There is still potential for slow growth in farm tourist accommodation in the West Country, according to a study commissioned by the West Country Tourist Board.
Although about 350 farms a year become involved in providing accommodation, a fairly high percentage opts out, usually for family reasons, so there has not been much growth in the past 15 years.
It's encouraging to learn that tourists come to farms to enjoy what is already there; they are interested in walking, visiting open farms and buying produce, rather than in specific entertainments.
There's ample scope for extending an accommodation enterprise by devising farm walks and selling your own produce, or perhaps growing and marketing something new.
Informal chats with guests provide an excellent opportunity to meet consumers and answer their questions about farming and food production.
The study suggests that farmers should capitalise on the general public's interest in conservation and green issues by considering plans to encourage wildlife, allow public access and use the farm environment as a resource for guests.
Golf course get the thumbs down — the study says they have little to do with farm tourism — and further farm museums, rare breed centres and farm attractions which need a large number of visitors to service a high capital investment should not be encouraged.
Quality can be more important than price for bed-and-breakfast customers and there is a demand for more en suite bathrooms as long as they can be fitted without changing the character of the house, and for secluded, self-catering accommodation with a rural character, rather than multiple units.
Guests are interested in visiting in spring and autumn, but not in winter.
The largest group of customers are families with young children, followed by retired couples.
In Europe farm tourism is marketed with high quality materials and administration which Britain would do well to emulate.
The British tourist authorities' overseas offices report growing interest in farm tourism from Germany, Holland, France, Australia, and the USA.
The Farm Holiday Bureau is in a good position to promote farm tourism nationally and through links with similar organisations in Europe.
Its work in training, promotion and striving for improved quality is praised.
‘Recruitment to local farm groups and the Farm Holiday Bureau should be stepped up and assisted,’ says the study.
Berni Miller, chief executive of the Farm Holiday Bureau, says she finds the report encouraging and feels that it broadly reflects the way the industry round the country is moving at the moment, although business in other regions is less seasonal than the West Country.
It would also be hard to adopt a pricing policy which truly reflects the quality FHB members have to offer in a market as difficult as the current one, she thinks.
‘The potential for farm accommodation round the country is huge,’ she says.
‘There are many low grade operations around, but those registered with the Farm Holiday Bureau and the regional tourist boards have their quality endorsed, and that is what the customer is increasingly looking for.’
 Judy Steele 
•A 16-page summary of the study of farm tourism commissioned by the board is available from: the West Country Tourist Board  
A typical West Country farm.
Tourism is still an option, especially if it uses the farm environment, says a study.
Teaching the trade to her students…
Sue Lloyd Jones is ideally qualified to teach farm-based tourism — she's a farmer's wife and a business studies lecturer.
As well as explaining the financial challenges of starting up a new business, Sue makes sure her students have thought through the effect it will have on their lives.
Judy Steele reports.
‘The income from a tourist enterprise is valuable and must be respected by the rest of the family,’ says Sue Lloyd Jones, who teaches a farm-based tourism course at Coleg Powys, Newtown.
‘It may be as important as the income from the corn or the lambs.’
Extra cash is not always the students' first priority.
‘They sometimes want to use their time more productively without getting a job off the farm,’ says Sue.
The course is financed with money from the European Social Fund, so there are no fees.
It attracts both long-standing operators brushing up their skills and complete newcomers.
It covers choosing an enterprise, identifying customers and the sort of holiday they like, finance, publicity, marketing, legal requirements and using fresh farm produce.
There's also the opportunity to visit several thriving tourism enterprises.
Every student has the option of taking the City and Guilds farm-based tourism certificate and of gaining a food hygiene certificate.
‘It's very difficult to get farmers' wives to take exams,’ says Sue.
‘When they come in I ask them what skills they've got, and they almost always say ‘none’.
So we write lists, and we find that they've probably got more skills than most people.
I try to get them to realise their own abilities.’
The last group all took the certificate, and there was 100% pass rate.
‘Some of these ladies may never have taken an exam in their lives,’ says Sue, ‘and getting the certificate does a lot in terms of confidence building.
They are able to go out and market the product they've got, and farmers are traditionally bad at marketing.’
Not all Sue's students go on to start up their own enterprise, but that doesn't worry her.
‘It's quite a responsibility running a course like this,’ she says.
‘I'm encouraging people to diversity, so I've got to let them know what the pitfalls are.’
If they go away with a positive decision against starting up a tourism enterprise, Sue feels she has been able to help them avoid an expensive mistake.
‘They may have decided that they mightn't like the loss of privacy or wouldn't feel happy handling the money,’ she says.
There's the opportunity to take a cookery course as an add-on, and Sue's first students have requested another course this year on the role of the evening meal.
They will partly design the course themselves, concentrating on using local produce and designing menus so that preparation can be fitted in round all the other pressures on a farm.
‘I try to include other members of the family too,’ says Sue.
‘On the course which is currently running (in the evenings) I have about 50% men.’
Husbands and sons may need telephone training, she says.
If they answer the phone and say they don't know anything about the bed-and-breakfast bookings, a customer could be lost immediately.
It's also necessary to help people to see their own area from the visitor's point of view, so they need an idea of the sort of customer they are likely to get and the things they will want to know.
The course is not just about starting a new enterprise, it's also about raising the standard of enterprises that already exist.
Sue feels that 1992 and the opening of the Channel Tunnel will present new challenges and greater competition.
Powys already receives a good proportion of overseas visitors, and she is thinking of adding basic foreign language courses.
‘I think the course is a success partly because I am a farmer's wife myself,’ admits Sue.
‘Attendance figures are excellent.
My students see that I can manage to get to work every day, and I think they would feel guilty if they did not turn up too.’
Sue Lloyd Jones, business studies tutor and farmer's wife, was ideally qualified to design the farm-based tourism course she teaches at Coleg Powys.
RURAL SCULPTURE
Live wire with eye for sheep
Hard-working farmers and country people don't always have time to appreciate the beauty in a line of animals on the move.
But Sophie Ryder is a sculptor who finds artistic merit in the more mundane aspects of rural life.
She is exciting a lot of comment with a one-woman exhibition at the Yorkshire Sculpture Park.
The centrepiece of her work is a flock of 32 sheep made from wire, a material she has made her own.
This isn't sculpture from the gimmicky, pile-of-bricks school as anyone who has taken the trouble to observe how a flock behaves will instantly recognise.
Set on a slight, grassy slope in an enclosed corner of the park the sheep look as much a part of the landscape as the leaves on the trees.
Because she has caught the subtle variations of movement and behaviour within the general flow, the sculpture has life and drama.
It is an astonishing piece of work on such a subject.
Fighting stags, goats, hares, horses and dogs are all depicted in the exhibition created from wire, which she twists and weaves into shape.
Occasionally the odd bed-spring goes in where it suits.
Sophie got the idea of using it in France when she made a scarecrow for a friend.
It is not her only medium.
She has several bronzes on view, including a fine sheep and boxing hares, which are a joy.
She lives on a farm in Wiltshire with her husband and daughter and her exhibition is on until Aug 26, 1991.
If you can get along to see it (entrance is free) you will never see sheep in quite the same light again.
The Yorkshire Sculpture Park is in a lovely setting at Bretton Hall, between Wakefield and Huddersfield, off the A637, close to the M1.
It is open daily from 10am until 6pm.
 Tom Montgomery 
Wire wool takes on a new meaning when you see Sophie Ryder's flock of sheep at the Yorkshire Sculpture Park.
YOUNG FARMERS
ROUND-UP
A stock judging team from the north-west area won the British Holstein Society's Royal Show contest for the seventh time in the nine years during which these competitions have been run.
This year's North West B team — Alan Errington, Andrew Robinson and Jane Eastam — beat the Scotland South A team by two marks.
North West A was third.
The individual award winners were 
The society is launching its BHS Futures Club this year for young British Holstein enthusiasts of less than 26 years of age.
•Harrogate District YFC, N Yorks, will be holding its annual barbecue tomorrow (Sat, July 27) at Rudding House Farm 
•Harlston YFC won the stock judging trophy at the Royal Norfolk Show.
The team from Diss YFC was runner-up.
Toy sales a ‘business’ or not?
Mice and fisherwomen in Welsh costume made by retired farmer's wife Edith Rees, sell like hot cakes at her local church and school fêtes.
At one fête alone last year they raised £179 but this year all her work could be in vain.
The local trading standards officer says Mrs Rees could be prosecuted if her mouse novelties or toys are sold at the fete as usual.
The problem lies with the interpretation of the regulations governing the safety of toys.
Toys sold by way of business must meet BS5665 (1989).
Generally, toys made and given to raise funds at a local fête or bazaar would not be considered as being a ‘business’, unless, like Mrs Rees of Moor Farm, Walwyns Castle, you live in the vicinity of Haverfordwest, Pembrokeshire.
‘It is a grey area but I would say if these toys are sold at a fête or bazaar then they are being retailed.
It would be up to the courts to decide on the matter,’ says her local trading standards officer, Mr Slater.
Unlike his predecessor, he has told Mrs Rees she cannot allow her toys to be sold.
Nor will he class them as novelties (which are exempt from the regulations) despite the fact few are bought for children.
‘Teenagers love them as keepsakes and most of the fisherwomen are bought by old ladies who can remember the real fisherwomen of the area,’ says a perplexed Mrs Rees.
‘I used recycled material mainly from my grandchildren's clothes and I use all the proper stuffing.
They say using old material is all right but it must not burn.
They object to a little cotton apron on the mice which is made from a baby's dress — it was suitable for a baby but not for a stuffed mouse to wear!’
The trouble is local authorities are autonomous when it comes to applying trading standards but Haverfordwest seems out of step with other councils on the issue.
Lyn Skelton of the Local Authorities Co-ordinating Body on Trading Standards says: ‘The regulations only apply if toys are sold in the course of business and it is the definition of ‘course of business’ that is the crux of the matter.
‘In my view toys made and donated for fêtes and bazaars would not be defined as ‘course of business’.
But if they were sold through a charity shop in the High Street that would be seen as a business.’
For Mrs Rees the dilemma remains.
She doesn't want to risk prosecution by becoming a ‘test case’.
Meanwhile, all the effort she has put into her creations will be wasted if local good causes are not allowed to benefit from selling them.
 Tessa Gates 
FWC chat at the Royal
There was a party atmosphere on the FARMERS WEEKLY stand at the Royal Show on Tuesday afternoon as Farm Women's Club members from Cornwall to Northumbria, from Carmarthen to Lincolnshire gathered for tea.
Joan Warren and I tried to label each member as she came in, and the visitors' book was passed round, but we inevitably missed people, so a head-count was impossible.
Business visitors looking for editorial staff seemed bemused to find themselves in the middle of such a busy and, it has to be said, chatty event.
Old acquaintances were renewed and new contacts made.
Club stories were swapped.
The friendship network that is the FWC was in full swing.
The caterers worked at full stretch and their kettle just managed to keep pace with the demand for tea.
We did not offer the all-day hospitality of previous years but were delighted to see members at the tea parties we organised, and enjoyed chatting with visitors to our stand in the Women in the Rural Community tent.
 Judy Steele 
ROYAL SHOW ROUND-UP
Big bouquets for contest winners
FARMERS WEEKLY's Farmlife section had its own stand in the Women in the Rural Community exhibition.
Here we ran a daily contest in association with Interflora, a service which has sent fresh flowers and customers' greetings from one end of the country to the other for almost 70 years.
Interflora florists can send flowers worldwide so the team at the Royal were quite unperturbed that about 10% of showgoers are international visitors.
Contestants were invited to complete an entry coupon with four simple questions — all the answers could be found somewhere on the stand — and at the end of the day a draw was made and bouquets sent by Interflora to the first three correct entries drawn from the bag.
Dried flowers on an edible rockery
Anne Ballard often raids the larder to find food to bake rock hard and add texture to her dried flower arrangements.
‘My family never know what they will find in the oven,’ she says.
Anne trained at the Constance Spry School and trades under the name Farmhouse Flora.
She produced dried flower arrangements for sale — each an individual design — and runs courses in flower arranging at Church Farm, Shrawley, Worcs.
Anne was one of 18 women running successful small enterprises with stands in the Women in the Rural Community exhibition.
They were there to help women seeking advice on how best to develop their talents along with organisations such as the Women's Farm and Garden Association, the National Council for Voluntary Organisations, the Women Returner's Network and several agricultural colleges.
The Prince of Wales and Baroness Trumpington, Secretary of State for Agriculture, were among those taking an interest in this section of the New Farm Enterprises area.
High-tech pupils scoop the news
Among the news teams scouring the show for stories was a group of 14 12- to 13-year old pupils from the Brewood-Wheaton Aston School, Staffs.
Nine of the children came to the show each day and had their own press room in one of the loose boxes on the RASE Children's Farm.
Here they wrote up their interviews and observations, edited them, created artwork and designed and printed their pages.
It was all part of their information technology training, a component of the national curriculum.
All the work was carried out on their computers.
They gave copies to selected show visitors — forwarding a specially bound copy to the Prince of Wales — and pasted copies on the door of an adjoining box.
One of the ways in which the children at the school develop their computer skills is by keeping weather and farm records.
Pupils regularly record statistics from the county's educational farm, a 10ha (25-acre) working unit near their school.
Brewood has been a county agricultural training farm for almost 100 years.
It's now run as a dairy farm with a herd of 16 Ayrshires — the second-best in Staffordshire, says Derrick Golland the country's advisory teacher on environmental subjects.
It also has breeding ewes, fattening pigs and a couple of goats, but no pet animals, says Derrick though 8000 children visit the holding each year.
Under the guidance of Mike Groom, the school's curriculum leader for information technology, Brewood-Wheaton Aston pupils feed the farm records and general information into a computer.
That is stored in a database and any Staffs school with the right technical facilities may log into it and get up-to-date details of the farm.
Through that system they learn a lot about agriculture and the farm stock as well as technology skills and when they make a farm visit are well prepared for what they are going to see.
Taking tea at the Royal Show was a chatty affair for FWC members.
These are the champions!
The final pulls in the NFYFC tug of war championship sponsored by Shell UK Oil took place in the grand ring on Wednesday afternoon when County Durham's ladies team (pictured with their trainer above) overpowered Bedfordshire's, and Yorkshire's muscular men's team out-pulled the team from Staffordshire.
Interflora florist Judy Graham makes the draw at the end of Tuesday afternoon watched by Amy Wheelton (centre), Ann Rogers of FARMERS WEEKLY and Interflora's, Paul Woodman and Mike Oakden.
Anne Ballard presented one of her arrangements to the Prince of Wales.
Pupils at work in their press room, a loose box on the Royal Agricultural Society's Children's Farm.
It was electronically linked to their school.
Once again Royal show fashions ranged between formal-summer-outfit-with-hat to skimpy suntop and shorts, but the lady who turned the most heads at the show was probably international visitor Isha Kamara as she made her stately progress around the show bearing her bag upon her head.
Not only good for the deportment, this exercise frees the hands for programmes, literature and eating cooling icecream.
Gwent has a good record in the Young Farmers' Clubs Efficiency with Safety contest and a team from this county took the handsome glass trophy again this year.
L to R: Richard Westbury, Bob Morgan, Jon Cole and Nina Jenkins received the award from Frank Leggatt of Shell UK.
POWER FARMING 26 JULY 1991
THE MACHINERY JOURNAL FOR ARABLE AND LIVESTOCK FARMERS
HOME-MADE TRACTOR GETS TO WORK
SAME ANTARES 130 GOES ON TEST
SAFER SPRAYING SYSTEMS ON THE WAY
PUTTING SLURRY UNDERGROUND
IN THIS ISSUE
SPRAYER SAFETY
The simple act of getting chemicals from container to spray tank can leave operators prone to contamination.
We look at two systems that aim to keep operators and chemicals well apart.
WELSH GIANT
What do you do if you want a 250hp tractor but can't afford new and don't want second-hand?
Simple — build one yourself.
All you need is £8,000 and about two months hard graft, as one Clwyd farmer found out.
ON TEST
Same-Lamborghini is currently producing some of the most high-tech tractors on the market.
In our latest tractor assessment, we look at the Antares 130, a tractor with more electronic features than a Royal Navy battleship.
OUT OF SIGHT…
Spreading slurry above ground with a tanker and splashplate may be quick and easy, but it isn't the most environment-friendly of techniques.
We look at one of the more fashionable alternatives, underground injection.
Does out of sight mean out of mind?
BUYERS' GUIDE
This month we look at tractors, still the main item of tackle on almost all farms.
We list all the models on the market — an astonishing total of 514 models from 28 makers.
Also:
Inventions competition.
Norfolk inventiveness.
Workshop test.
Classic machinery.
Subaru Estate tested.
Alternative fuels.
Tractor spec guide.
Tractor developments.
OPINION
What future for farm shows?
How are the toes of your shoes these days?
Are they scuffed and dented and badly in need of a polish?
Or are they gleaming and pristine like a cabinet minister's?
We suspect that the latter may be the case.
Not because of some remarkable upturn in rural shoe-care standards, but because farmers seem to be going to agricultural shows less these days and doing less tyre-kicking when they get there.
Or rather, they're going, but not with cheque book in hand and buying intentions in mind.
They are interested in what new machinery is available, certainly, but at the moment it's a case of window-shopping rather than parting with hard cash.
The logical outcome of all this is that some machinery firms are finding that the cost of exhibiting isn't matched by extra sales.
Many are reacting by slimming their presence at shows drastically and pulling out of some altogether.
This year's Royal Show showed how widespread this move to cut costs is.
There were pull-outs across the whole size spectrum, but it was the absence of firms like Case IH, Kidd and Claas, once show-going stalwarts, that drew most attention.
When questioned, many of these firms said that they were having a radical re-think of the way in which exhibiting money was spent.
Specialist events and working demonstrations, in particular, seemed to be the places where more of it would be heading in future.
More money is also likely to go into small on-farm demonstrations of individual new machines.
The chief attraction of these events is the type of farmer that goes to them.
Better to have only 1,000 farmers at an event, but almost all of them intimately involved with growing a particular crop, the logic runs, than 10,000 farmers of whom only a small proportion will be interested in particular machines.
So expect some big changes to the type of tackle you will see at different events over the coming years.
Calling all inventors
Farmers' ingenuity in designing new bits of farm machinery and modifying existing tackle has always provided a rich source of features for this magazine.
However, the most we could offer these determined inventors was a chance to be well-known by their peers for a week or two.
Now we can offer something more, though.
On page 5 you will see details of a new invention competition being run by Power Farming and Farmers Weekly .
We are interested in all time and money-saving designs from farmers, workers and contractors and will award a first prize of £1,000, two second prizes of £500 and all three third prizes of £250 for the best of the crop.
Enter now!
FRONT COVER:Jonathan Tomlinson's home-built 250hp tractor has speeded up silaging on the family livestock farm at Holt, Wrexham, and for contract work.
It gathers puzzled observers wherever it goes, too .
FAF FARM INVENTION COMPETITION
YOUR CHANCE TO WIN £1,000!
Look along the rows of machinery at any farm show and you'll see a lot of professionally-made equipment.
Paintwork will gleam, welds will be even, hydraulic pipes neatly threaded about the machine.
Looks as if it was designed in a multi-million pound research and development department?
Maybe, but there's a pretty good chance that it came from a farm workshop.
Many useful farm-built machines never leave the farm, though.
Perhaps you have one doing sterling service, that you would like others to see.
If you think you have, we want to hear from you.
Farmers Weekly and Power Farming , in association with FAF and the Royal Smithfield Show, are running an inventions competition with a first prize of £1,000, two runners-up prizes of £500 and three further prizes of £250.
More important, if your machine is good enough it could be taken up by a commercial firm and go into production.
So if you've built an item of farm equipment that helps you do your job better, then let us know.
It doesn't have to be newly built, though we are limiting entries to machines built in the past five years.
Nor does it need to be big or expensive looking.
What we are looking for is evidence of imagination, lateral thinking and the designer's ability to solve technical problems.
It should also have measurable benefits on the farm.
To enter the competition, which is sponsored by FAF, send us details of the machine, plus photographs or drawings.
Use this form to tell us exactly how it has helped you on the farm or even in your contracting business.
Judging will take place in October and winners will be notified soon after.
The 10 best entries will be displayed on our stand in the Royal Smithfield Show in December.
SPRAYER DEVELOPMENTS
NEAT SOLUTIONS ON SAFETY
Pouring neat chemicals into the tank is a big area of potential contamination for sprayer operators.
But two new devices now available mean they will soon be able to put some distance between them and the chemical.
Five years ago, Richard Garnett, a machinery lecturer at Holme Lacy College of Agriculture, had a rather good idea.
Instead of sprayer operators having to pour out chemicals by hand, he figured, why not fit a syringe system that keeps man and chemical well apart?
He built a prototype in 1988 and won the £7,000 first prize in the Douglas Bomford Trust Golden Jubilee competition the same year.
Then followed the painstaking process of finding materials that would stand up to the tough usage and getting the whole thing done at a reasonable price.
Three years on, Mr Garnett has set up a company — Wisdom Agricultural — to make and market the device.
His Wisdom closed transfer system (CTS) has gone on the market for £560 and he expects it to find a ready market amongst arable farmers and growers.
Moreover, the arrival of COSHH laws means that this type of engineering solution to contamination problems is soon likely to be much in demand.
How it works
At the heart of the system is what looks like a giant syringe.
This consists of a clear, chemical-resistant tube with a hand-operated plunger inside that draws chemical from their containers.
‘The device looks simple, but it took a long time to find companies that could make it,’ he says.
‘It actually took 7 months of enquiries to locate the right type of pesticide-resistant clear plastic from Germany.’
To work the system, the operator first takes the normal cap from the spray container to expose the foil seal.
He then screws on a special connector which has a blade underneath to cut the foil.
Two pipes are then attached to this connector.
A large one takes away neat chemical and washings.
A small one allows air in to take the place of the liquid and also supplies the jet of water for rinsing the inside of the spray containers.
The next step is to invert the spray container and slide it on to a rack.
Here, the operator has two choices.
If he wants to use the whole of the container, he simply turns a tap to allow all the contents to be sucked into the spray tank.
Once the pack is empty, another tap is turned on to send water to the rinsing nozzle inside the container.
This can be dilute spray from the main spray tank or clean water from a separate tank, depending on how clean the operator wants to leave his containers.
‘We recommend that users turn the tap on and off three times to give full rinsing,’ he says.
‘Ideally, the first two rinses should be with the circulation water, then 0.5–1 litres of clean water can be used for the final rinse.’
‘We have tested the system with a 10-litre Dicurane container and found that this leaves it 99.99% clean.
In Holland that is enough for the containers to be legally disposed of as domestic waste.’
If he only wants to use a part-pack, the operator pulls the lever to suck neat chemical into the transparent tube.
Graduations on the side of the cylinder show him exactly how much chemical has been sucked out, and there is none of the fuss of using a measuring jug.
Once the right amount is in the cylinder, another push on the lever sends the chemicals into the tank.
The part-empty container is then taken off its rack and put back on the ground briefly to allow the hoses to drain back into it.
The two hoses are then disconnected, though Mr Garnett recommends that the cap be left on until the pack is needed again.
He suggests that operators should have four or five caps so that refitting of the normal container cap can be avoided altogether.
Fitting the system is a fairly simple matter and all components come on a frame which can be simply attached to most sprayers.
Plumbing it in on most sprayers involves running a supply pipe from between the pressure relief valve and tank return line.
A 37mm (1½in) rigid delivery hose runs to the tank.
The system easily plumbs into existing induction hoppers.
However Mr Garnett can also supply a hopper to go with the CTS for an extra £150.
As well as providing a conventional means of mixing powders, it has a spear system which allows soluble bags to be disposed of without the operator having to handle them.
Mr Garnett's system is available as a retrofit for all makes of sprayer.
However, at the time of going to press, Berthoud, Chafer and Degania are also offering them as original equipment on their sprayers.
Mr Garnett expects other makers to follow suit.
Compatible containers
One of the great hurdles to previous attempts to design a closed transfer system for chemicals was the sheer variety of different container openings.
Things are much better now, with all larger chemical companies moving over to two standard cap diameters of 63mm and 45mm.
‘Even if a company comes out with a new cap, we can still make an adaptor before it goes on sale, says Mr Garnett.
Spun aluminium containers are also being phased out and replaced with plastic ones, probably with a 45mm cap.’
Looking further ahead, Mr Garnett has made provision for using refillable plastic cartridges of chemical with his device.
These would have a foil seal which would be automatically pierced by a cutting edge before use.
Potential sales of his device could be huge, says Mr Garnett, who has made two trips to the US to visit officials from the California Department of Food and Agriculture and  the Environmental Protection Agency.
Two Californian importers have already ordered 800 Wisdom systems by February 1992 and say that orders for the following year could be 10 times greater.
California is said to use five times the amount of chemicals of the UK.
In Europe, pressure is growing to make it mandatory to have some form of closed transfer system for chemicals.
CEN, the European equivalent of the British Standards Institute, already says it intends to make engineering controls on spray transfer mandatory.
With COSHH in place and environmental pressures growing, there seems little doubt that spray transfer will be the subject of fresh UK regulations before too long.
When that happens, Mr Garnett will be ready with his Wisdom.
WHEN IT PAYS TO HAVE A PUNCTURE
Unscrewing spray container tops and pouring the neat chemical into the spray-tank is often the most contamination-prone part of the whole spraying process.
But you can avoid it by simply leaving the tops on.
That's the logic behind Schering's Packman closed transfer system for sprays, which was first unveiled in the spring of last year.
It neatly sidesteps the whole process of undoing and pouring spray by allowing operators to puncture the cans and then let the spray be rinsed straight into the sprayer.
In practice, spray containers are laid in a wire basket inside a sealed container.
The operator then turns a handle to allow three or more spears to puncture the cans and allow their contents to run into the bottom of the hopper.
Water is then fed into the hopper and the dilute liquid fed into the sprayer.
So far, sales of the Packman have not been massive, admits the company.
But this is not entirely unexpected, since the Packman's big benefit is improved safety and safety is always a poor selling point.
‘We find that sales are beginning to pick up now,’ says Schering's Les Cook.
‘Mostly, we find that Packman is being bought by larger, more safety-conscious farmers, especially where there is pressure from operators who have been on COSHH and FEPA courses.’
‘Most are used as free-standing units at the fill point, but we do have a few on bowsers and sprayers.
We do remind people that they need one cylinder of piston diaphragm pump per spear, if they are running it off their sprayer, though.’
Nicholas Doig, who farms with his father Dennis at Overy Farm, Eccles, Quidenham, Norfolk was one of the first people in the UK to fit a Packman to a crop sprayer.
They have 342ha (800 acres) of arable, mainly down to wheat, barley, sugar beet, linseed, maize and rye, as well as a 120 head dairy herd.
Four months ago they replaced their old 12m (40ft), 1,400-litre (370gal) sprayer with a 24m (80ft) 2,500-litre (660gal) machine.
They also took the opportunity to fit a Packman to one side of the sprayer to end the chore of filling the sprayer manually for ever.
Why did they decide to buy a £1,200 closed system for transferring spray when it can be done by hand for free?
‘We expect to have the sprayer for five years, and the way the law is changing, closed transfer systems will probably soon be compulsory anyway,’ thinks Mr Doig.
‘Safety was 50% of the reason; the other 50% was the extra convenience of the unit.’
Before the arrival of the Packman, filling sprayers at Overy Farm was done in much the same way as it is on thousands of farms across the country.
There was no induction hopper so all filling was done by hand.
It was difficult to avoid splashing oneself when filling, admits Mr Doig, and often difficult, too, to have the chemical all in the tank by the time it was full of water.
This was especially true with some sugar beet sprays, which can involve putting 20 5-litre packs into the 2,500-litre sprayer tank.
Getting all this into the tank in the 20 minutes it takes a 50mm (2in) diameter pipe to fill the tank can be physically arduous.
Moreover, pulling the foil tops off the spray containers can be very awkward with gloved hands, as many sprayer operators will ruefully admit.
Overall filling times haven't been changed by the arrival of the Packman, since it is still the job of filling with water that generally takes up most time.
But getting the chemical into the tank is now done in much less time, says Mr Doig, and the 2,500-litre sprayer can be filled with water and the contents of nine or ten packs of typical wheat herbicide in less than 15 minutes.
One of the Packman's most important claims is that it can handle all types and sizes of chemical pack.
So how has Mr Doig found its versatility in practice?
‘All containers seem to puncture without any particular problem’ he believes.
‘We were sceptical about packets, though, and didn't think all the powder would dissolve, but it seems to be fine.’
The farm uses a variety of chemical packs, including powders like Goltix in packs, occasional metal cans for Metasystox, bags of manganese, water-soluble packs and oily sprays like Optica which can be difficult to hose out in a conventional way.
All seem to have yielded to the Packman's spears without too many problems.
‘Rinsing is always done with clean water,’ Mr Doig adds.
‘We rinse for 10–15 seconds three times for difficult products and 5–10 seconds twice for easy items.
‘If anything, containers were left in for too long to start with, though often it works well to leave the containers rinsing while you're doing something else like working out field rates.’
One of the drawbacks of the Packman is that it can't handle part-packs, without them being undone and poured in conventional fashion.
But Nicholas Doig says he doesn't find this a particular problem.
‘We don't often use part-packs anyway, but when we do we simply pour the chemical into a jug then into the hopper.
‘Empties are saved up and locked away in an old spray store,’ adds Mr Doig.
‘We take them once a year to a council rubbish dump.
We find we don't waste spray either; there's often a half to a quarter inch of spray left in bottom of the container with conventional pouring.’
Richard Garnett shows how to draw a set amount of chemical out of the spray container with his closed transfer system.
Richard Garnett also sells an induction hopper with a basket for dealing with bags of powders.
The spear breaks the pack and allows water to surge out of nozzles above the spear-end to rinse it.
Valves in the special cap that screws on to the spray container allows chemical to be sucked out and air and rinsing water to be drawn in.
The cap also acts as a stopper on part-packs.
Nicholas Doig with the Schering Packman closed transfer system fitted to the farm's 2,500-litre trailed sprayer.
He kept it on the sprayer to avoid having several machines at different fill-up points.
Even quite thick-walled chemical container packs are pierced by the unit.
It helps to keep the spear-ends sharp.
On this unit, three spears are wound down to puncture the packs.
The contents are then rinsed out and the liquid piped to the sprayer.
OUT OF THE FARM WORKSHOP
MIX 'N' MATCH TRACTOR CUTS COSTS
Daunted by the £60,000 price-tag of a new 250hp tractor, Clwyd farmer-contractor Jonathan Tomlinson built his own.
The cost?
A mere £8,000, plus two months of hard graft.
Anyone who has travelled the country lanes around Holt, near Wrexham, may well have seen a tractor working that they couldn't quite identify.
It has some bits from Case IH, some from David Brown.
Still others come from Ford, JCB, Volvo and Massey-Ferguson.
Sounds like a sudden burst of co-operation between the world's tractor makers?
Not really, for the bits were put together by Clwyd farmer and contractor Jonathan Tomlinson, and the cooperation took place in the farm workshop, rather than in some corporate boardroom.
Mr Tomlinson farms West End Farms, near Holt with his father, grandfather and brother Richard of Lower Park Farm, Rossett.
They have a 200-head dairy herd and about 180ha (450 acres) of grass and arable, but get more work out of their machines by doing 550ha (1500 acres) of contract silaging each year.
Contract silaging needs high horsepower tractors and Mr Tomlinson had already boosted the output of the farm's Ford 6700 tractor from 80 to 175hp by putting a turbo-charged 6-cylinder lorry engine in it.
This muscle-bound conversion worked well, except that the tractor got too hot during protracted work, even though it had been fitted with three radiators.
Last winter, though, Mr Tomlinson started work on his biggest project yet — to build a 250hp tractor that could do justice to the farm's ultra-high output Mengele SH4ON forage harvester.
A new tractor of this size would have cost £60,000, a sum that West End Farm couldn't justify.
Building a tractor from scratch would have been an impossible task, he admits, were it not for the fact that tractor-pulling expert Alan Williams live nearby.
He helped by doing much of the specialist machining work and designing many of the one-off items needed to marry up the different parts.
The first part to arrive in the West End Farm workshop was a 20-year-old back-end from an International 806 tractor.
This was once fitted to a range of IH tractors from 80–200hp, so Mr Tomlinson knew it would be strong enough to take the power from the engine.
Including the gearbox, it cost him £1,000.
Next came the engine, a 250hp Cummins 6-cylinder naturally-aspirated unit from a big lorry.
Its cubic capacity is a massive 14 litres, compared to the 8.3-litre engine fitted to Case IH's current 250hp Magnum 7140 tractor.
With that much capacity available, it takes a lot to drag down the engine's revs.
‘When we do silage work, this engine is barely ticking over and it uses less fuel over the same acreage than a Ford 8210,’ 2 he says.
‘Our 175hp Ford 6700 goes into the row of grass at 2,600 to 2,800revs, but once you drop it on to the row, the revs soon drop to 2,000 to 2,000rpm.
‘With this engine, we rev it to 2,200rpm before we go into the row and it then drops by just 100revs.’
Though the engine was 17 years old and had been used to pulling 40-tonne loads at 60mph, Mr Tomlinson didn't need to touch it.
However a special fuel pump had to be found to make the tractor suitable for farm work.
Building a tractor from scratch is largely a process of jumping endless technical hurdles, and one of the first problems was fitting the clutch.
The 355mm (14in) twin plate unit that came with the gearbox couldn't be fitted into the space available, so Mr Tomlinson had to write a cheque for £800 to buy a special Case IH single plate unit.
Alan Williams made a special steel flywheel, and this was then bolted to the standard Cummins one to give the two halves of the clutch.
‘All this could have been done in commercial machinery shops, but it would have cost a fortune,’ he says.
The next hurdle was finding a front axle.
A second-hand ZF tractor axle would have been ideal, were it not for the likely 12,000 price-tag and the fact that they're hard to get hold of.
But a good substitute was a £500 axle from a one-year-old burnt out JCB digger.
This was a happy find, he says, because it is a strong axle with plenty of lock available.
However it can't just be bolted on to the tractor, and Mr Tomlinson had to spend further hours in the workshop matching it to the tractor's backend and getting the gearing right.
It is adaptable to 4WD, but Mr Tomlinson hasn't fitted all-wheel-drive yet.
It's a fairly involved job, since the output shaft on the front axle are on different sides of the tractor.
Also, he hasn't actually needed the extra drive yet since the big tyres and 7-tonne weight give good grip from the two driving wheels.
So far, so good.
But Mr Tomlinson then had to build his own chassis for the tractor, another job which isn't done in an afternoon.
The two halves of the chassis can also slide apart by 46cm (18in) to give extra space to fit the clutch.
It's just a matter of undoing four bolts on each side.
Would that all tractor makers fitted  such a feature!
Finding and fitting wheels to the fledgling tractor — now called the JFT — sounds relatively easy — but it certainly wasn't.
‘At the front, the JBC front axle has five-stud hubs at either end, but we couldn't fit standard JJCB five-stud wheels because they're too small,’ he points out.
‘So we fitted a 10-stud centre from a wagon using alternate studs and welded JCB rear wheels to that.’
Things also had to be changed around at the rear, with more 10-stud lorry wheel centres, this time welded to Ford rims.
Tyres fitted are 16.9 × 28 fronts and then massive 30.5 × 32s on the rear.
Bodywork panels tend to be difficult to make in the farm workshop because most people don't have the equipment to bend sheet steel into the right shape.
But Mr Tomlinson built his own bonnet, mudguards and steps up to the cab and set in louvred vents either side of the bonnet to let out the heat produced by the massive engine.
The cab came from a Massey-Ferguson 1200 and cost £600, and a solid steel radiator surround from the same model was turned upside down and fitted to the new tractor.
That's what gives the JFT tractor its distinctive looks.
Mr Tomlinson also used the hand-pumped hydraulic system for raising the bonnet from the original lorry.
‘We would have converted it to run off the engine, but the trouble is that if the engine broke down, you wouldn't be able to get the bonnet up to look at it!’
Lorry engines like the Cummins are commonly fitted with a 24v electrical system to allow a bigger starter and battery to be used.
So Mr Tomlinson kept the 24v wiring and also extended it to power the worklights on the front and rear of the cab.
‘It's like daylight when you switch them on now,’ he admits.
However 12v also had to be wired in to power trailer lights and in-cab equipment so the tractor is now permanently dual-wired.
There are three batteries, two for the 2 4v system and one for the 12v.
There are two alternators, too, to keep everything charged up.
The MF cab didn't have an air-conditioning system attached to it, and Mr Tomlinson was keen to have one fitted.
So it was a stroke of luck when a friend scrapping an old Volvo car gave him a complete system to fit to his tractor.
Another useful by-product of using a lorry engine was the air compressor that came with it.
That now does useful work, powering a pneumatic grease gun, a tool that Mr Tomlinson says has halved the time it takes to grease up the Mengele forager each morning.
However he never considered fitting air brakes to the tractor.
There was no need, thanks to the high specification level of the 20-year-old International back-end.
‘These are the original brakes and they can lock the wheels at full speed,’ says Mr Tomlinson.
Braking is done on the high speed gears, not on the slower-turning output shafts, he explains.
Since it's easier to stop a high-revving, low-torque shaft than a slow-turning high-torque one, they're apparently stunningly effective.
Useful though it is for many jobs, the sheer power of the big-capacity Cummins engine puts a fair bit of strain on other parts of the tractor.
The standard hydraulic pto, in particular, couldn't take the torque.
‘You would hit a gob of grass, but the engine revs just wouldn't drop, so it would put strain on other components,’ he says.
‘We burnt out the pto three times last year, but luckily it only takes an hour to change it.’
Now the standard pto has been replaced by a beefier home-made version.
The old hydraulically-activated system had 10 small clutch plates, whereas the new one has a bigger 23cm (9in) flywheel and four big plates.
The new set-up gives more surface area, says Mr Tomlinson, and should last much longer.
It wouldn't be disastrous even if it gave out in mid-field, he adds.
For the whole unit is bolted to the back of the tractor and it takes a mere ½hr to change it — and no need for a limp back to the workshop!
One of the weaknesses of the old IH rear-end was its limited lifting power; farmers didn't need huge lifts 20 years ago.
So Mr Tomlinson had to boost the lifting abilities of his tractor by disconnecting the original internal ram and adding bigger external rams.
The two 10-tonne rams came from an old Volvo dump-truck and are connected to a cross-shaft at the top.
At the bottom is a converted pick-up hitch from a Ford.
Lifting capacity at linkends is 10 tonnes — more than enough for West End Farm's needs.
Interestingly, too, both are double-acting and allow the driver to push implements down as well as lift them up.
so they have been very useful for giving extra pressure on the farm's subsoiler and home-made 3.6m (12ft) pasture aerator.
Heavy-duty arms from an old David Brown tractor are also fitted.
Final touches to the tractor included fitting the two original air intakes and filters from the lorry.
On the exhaust side, stainless steel piping was run to a large lorry exhaust on one mudguard.
Exhaust pipe and shield alone cost £300.
The whole tractor was painted in Case IH colours to celebrate its IH ancestry and the cab plumbed in to the rest of the tractor.
The new giant tractor has brought a welcome boost in power to West End Farm's farming and contracting businesses and has become something of a local landmark.
It has covered 1000ha (2,500 acres) of silaging work and nothing — pto apart — has had to be modified.
Fuel consumption is gratifyingly low thanks to the low degree of strain on the big engine — 11.2 litres/ha (1gal/acre) of diesel on silage work compared to 22 litres/ha (2gal/acre) when the job was done by an off-the-shelf 110hp tractor.
It has also allowed him to boost outputs with the Mengele forager, an important benefit for a contractor needing to cover as many acres in a year as possible.
‘You would need a big self-propelled forager to get bigger workrates then we get with this,’ he adds.
Total cost in parts was about £8,000, which sounds decidedly reasonable for a 250hp tractor.
On the other hand, you don't produce something like this in a week and the time taken would deter all but the most committed workshop man.
Unlike most farm-built machines, the JFT tractor was built in one go.
Mr Tomlinson says he spent two months solidly working from 5.30am in the morning until 10.30 in the evening, including weekends.
If anyone can beat that for stamina, we'd like to hear from them!
Jonathan Tomlinson with his 250hp JFT tractor and the farm's Mengele forager and Griffith silage trailer.
Wherever it's working, the JFT soon gains one or two interested observers, says Mr Tomlinson.
The front axle came from a one — year-old burnt-out JCB digger and cost Mr Tomlinson £500.
A second-hand tractor front axle would have cost a lot more.
Original air intakes and filters came from an old lorry.
The cab was from an M-F 1200 and link arms came from a David Brown.
Above: There's a lot to see in the engine compartment, including two alternators to supply the 12v and 24v electrical systems.
Right:Two rams from an old Volvo dumper give 10 tonnes of lift at link ends.
The pto is designed to withstand the engine's high torque.
ROYAL NORFOLK REPORT
WINNERS SHOW THE WAY
County shows are much about glitzy new tackle, high-stepping horses and ladies in fine summer hats.
‘Them as do’ don't usually get much of a look-in.
Which is why the NORMAC stand at this year's Royal Norfolk Show made a pleasant change.
Lined up were finalists from a new, Best Kept Tractor competition and the pick of the club's long-standing ‘Ideas’ entries.
The new contest aimed to highlight operator care at a time when tractors are expected to serve longer.
And it certainly did — entry quality was impressive and the finalists' machinery outstanding.
An idea for other shows to borrow?
1: How's this for four year's old and 7,758 hours on the clock?
Not Pat Holmes, but his TW25.
Mr Holmes took the Best Kept Tractor award with a unit that's no wallflower, ploughing 2,500 acres per year with a 16in 5-furrow plough/press combination, foraging 200 acres with a JF machine, baling 5–6,000 Hesston big square bales and handling a fair measure of subsoiling and cultivation besides.
Service has been all on-farm in the workshops of owners JAPE Wright, Brettenham, Thetford.
Replacements have been confined to a new head gasket around 3,000 hours and one each of pto and main clutches.
How's it done?
By regular pressure washing followed most times with a polish, sticking closely to 150-hour service times and running an eye and rag over everything in any spare moments, explained Mr Holmes.
Runners-up were Steward Walden's five-year old 6665-hours Fendt 614, followed by Richard Gilbert's equally old Renault 80–12.
2: the NORMAC/RNAA Farm Machinery Ideas contest brought out some neat solutions.
Farmer/engineer Mr David Bliss took two prizes back to Harleston, with top spot going to his modifications for a Kongskilde 300 sucker-blower.
Fed up with breaks in loading to clear the cyclone's inner screen, he fabricated a case and relocated the unit above the main chamber (above).
Chaff and grain can no longer build up on the screen, air flow stays constant and the main turbine blades (over £100 each) aren't assaulted by small and/or shattered grain.
An inner spiral has also been added to deflect swirling grain from the cyclone's inlet pipe, minimising wear.
Unit output isn't improved but work/rate benefits from break-free operation.
3: Second place silver-plated medals were shared by two entrants.
Mr Bliss took one with his pick-up hitch modification — a steel collar welded round the hitch hook to spread the download of a trailer ring, saving the need for often-difficult ring replacement and adding to safety.
The hook shown had been in service for four years and showed very little wear.
4: A second silver-plated medal went to Barrie Nickalls' low ground pressure sprayer/spreader.
Build around a forward-mounted Transit diesel engine and Land Rover axles and a mini-digger cab, the unit was built over the winter.
5: One of six bronze medals, a special safety award and the prize for best NORMAC member's invention went to William Wennington of Great Melton, Norwich.
Owners Rea C Richardson benefit from his onboard beet harvester jack, which was made from an ex-Moreau ram with home-brewed framing.
An old plough disc forms a foot and oil comes from the harvester's elevator motor drive.
On operating a diverter valve the ram extends, jacking the harvester for quick, safe track changes when opening out a field.
6: Simple but effective: adding band spraying nozzles to the front of a nine-row self-steer Standen rear hoe picked up a bronze medal for Philip Kew, Bank Farm, Saddlebow, Kings Lynn.
Work is at around 2.5mph and the system saves about two-thirds of chemical compared with overall application.
MACHINERY TESTING
THE SAME ANTARES 130
Same-Lamborghini has become well-known for its modern looking tractors and high-tech electronics.
This month's Profi/Trekker/PF test assesses whether reality matches image.
Cars, cameras, motorbikes and hi-fis may be getting to the stage where only the keenest enthusiast can tell them apart, but tractors remain mercifully different from each other.
The age-old tradition of having one colour per make helps, but the variety of uses to which tractors are put should ensure that they never become facsimiles of each other.
Italian firm Same-Lamborghini has done its bit for variety over the years, with a series of innovations that suggest that its research and development department gets a bigger budget than many other companies' equivalents.
No surprise, then, that the Same Antares 130 is a bit different from the herd.
For a start, it is the only tractor on the market with an electronic push-button throttle.
It also has a genuinely modern feel to it and boasts a gearbox with a mind-boggling 72 gears (36 forward + 36 reverse).
When it comes to putting the finishing touches to the tractor, though, this Italian firm still has something to learn from other makers.
This new range of tractors was launched in Italy at the end of 1989, when the Antares 110 and 130 ousted the Laser.
But it took some while for the tractors to become available in other markets.
The attractive design comes form the hand of Giugiaro, the famous Italian car design firm.
If you want to impress your friends, you can nonchalantly steer them towards the small plaque on the side of the bonnet.
Engine
Another way that Same bucks the usual trend is in having an air-cooled engine.
The Antares 130 is no exception, with a six-cylinder unit of exactly 6,000cc in capacity and with a bore and stroke of 1005 and 115.5mm.
Power output on paper should be 127hp.
Power output at the pto is 113hp at 2,500 engine rpm, while maximum torque peaked at 459Nm at 1,400 revs.
Expect to get 321Nm of torque at the pto at maximum power, giving a torque-rise of 43% at a revs-fall of 44%.
Same itself says that pto outputs should range from 120–122hp, so our model was a bit low.
What all this means in practice is that the engine seems a pretty good performer.
Same-Lamborghini makes much of its unusual one-fuel-pump-per-cylinder arrangement, which it claims should give good fuel consumption.
In practice, thought, the Antares 130 was slightly thirsty and turned in a pto fuel consumption figure of 265g/kWhr. given a 20% power loss between engine and pto, this gives a fuel consumption figure for the engine of 238g/kWhr.
It must be said that our test tractor was fresh off the stocks, so fuel consumption may improve as the engine loosens up.
On the other hand, all Same and Lamborghini engines undergo an initial running-in process in the factory at Treviglio, so that may not happen.
Electronic throttle
One feature of the Antares that gained it a helpful blast of publicity when it was launched was the novel electronic throttle.
When the driver pushes the throttle button or puts his foot on the pedal, there is none of the usual mechanical linkage there to swing into action.
Instead, human actions cause electrical impulses to be sent to an electronic governor on one end of the engine.
Since electrical pulses zinging down a wire are more regular and predictable than a steel cable moving inside a plastic cover, the result should be more precise control of engine revs and better fuel consumption.
But what's it like in practice?
Press the foot throttle and you wouldn't really guess that all this electronic wizardry was at work.
Reach for the hand-throttle, though, and you'll experience a bit of a shock.
The shock is that the hand throttle, beloved of tractor makers for 80 years has gone.
In its place are three buttons set into the right hand cab pillar.
There is a square blue button in the centre, with a red, upward pointing arrow on top and a downward pointing one below.
These work as follows.
After reaching the desired revs by using the foot throttle, the driver then pushes the centre button.
He can then take his foot off the pedal as the revs will now stay at their preset level, rather like a cruise control in a car.
Fine-tuning of the rpm level is done by pressing the top button (rpm up) or bottom button (rpm down).
If the driver suddenly needs to call for extra revs, he can overrule the settings at any time by pushing the foot pedal.
When he takes his foot off the pedal again, the revs will fall back to their preset level again.
A second push on the central button removes the setting altogether and allows the driver to return to foot control of the tractor.
The system is a well thought-out one and seems to work well.
Our test tractor did have some difficulties in keeping the revs constant down at the 700–1,000rpm mark, but this was an early model and Same UK says the problem has been cured on current machines.
Transmission
The six-speed gearbox on the Antares is well synchronised, but shifting gears is not as easy as it could be.
In particular, the positions of each gear are rather vague and more-than-average effort is needed to shift from one to another.
Running-in, which in this case is not done in the factory, will probably do much to solve the stiffness.
Same's total of 36 forward and 36 reverse gears is made up from three groups, each with six gears and the whole thing doubled by a high-low splitter.
The three groups consist of two synchronised higher ratios, and then one unsynchronised ratio.
A creep box is an option.
Shifting between the gears in these two lower ratios can only be done with the tractor at a standstill, so it doesn't matter that they are unsynchronised.
But the group selector, like the main gear lever, does ask for more than average effort from its user.
However, the U-pattern shift without clearly marked neutrals does make the work easier.
The high-low button on the gear lever is a pleasure to work with; so is the forward-reverse selector.
Both are well positioned and the high-low well synchronised.
All 36 forward speeds can also be used in reverse, too.
We were surprised to find that 18 of the 36 gears are underneath 2.5mph and 10 of them are above 7.5mph.
That leaves 8 in the main working band from 2.5–7.5mph which was fewer than we expected.
However, in practice there was enough choice of speeds and the steps in between each were fine.
Rear hitch
The three-point linkage fitted to our German-specification Antares managed a maximum lift of 6,220kg (13,684lb).
This is a healthy figure, but it was measured with the lift arms at their uppermost position.
With the arms lowered, which is the position in which many implements have to be picked up, the available lift is 4,446kg (9,780lb).
So Same's solution is to provide more force for high-up hitching than for low-down hitching.
The Bosch-made electronic controls are easy to understand and operate, as are the hydraulic levers.
But Same should give the driver some means of knowing which lever works which hydraulic coupler.
Of the three spool valves, all can be used in single or double-acting mode.
Look down at the floor of the cab, and you'll find a lever on the left hand side for using the Antares' fuel-saving mode.
This gives 540pto rpm at an engine speed of 1,750 revs and 1,000 pto rpm with the engine at 1,900 revs.
Nearby is also found the lever for engaging ground-related pto.
The knobs on the right hand side of the cab used for engaging and disengaging the front and rear ptos are pleasant to use, we noted.
The front pto runs at 1,000rpm only.
Axles and diff locks
SBA is an optional extra on the Antares 130 and controls the automatic operation of 4WD and differential locks.
Four-wheel-drive cuts out when the tractor's forward speed goes above 9.3mph and is re-engaged when it drops below 8.7mph.
The electro-hydraulic diff-locks on front and rear axles, on the other hand, automatically disengage when one of the brake pedals is pressed.
The same happens if the tractor's forward speed goes above 9.3mph or if the front wheels turn more than 20deg.
A combination of the two will have the same effect.
So if you're travelling at more than 6.2mph and you turn the wheels more than 5deg, then the diff-locks will cut out.
What is interesting about the system is that the driver can decide for himself — by pressing a button — whether or not he wants to use these features.
For instance, he can choose to work with the 4WD and diff-locks in the usual way — both functions have their own button and can be engaged and disengaged under full load.
Brakes are fitted to both front and rear wheels and involve oil-immersed discs.
They are, not surprisingly, hydraulically operated and certainly seem to work very well.
Monitors
In spite of our happy experiences with SBA, the electronic throttle and the electronic linkage, we did have some problems with the Same's performance monitor.
We liked its ability to self-diagnose and the scope for switching off the radar if necessary.
Equally, the Same active wheelslip system, which automatically begins to lift the rear linkage once wheelslip edges above 18%, works well.
But some of the data shown by the monitor didn't seem to make too much sense.
We can't really see, for instance, what help it is to the driver to know how much time he spent with wheelslip above the preset 18% limit.
The steering wheel can be adjusted in both horizontal and vertical planes.
Steering on the Same is direct and doesn't involve too much effort — as long as you are unballasted.
With 400kg of front weights attached, the effort required to turn the wheel does increase markedly especially at low revs.
We measured the turning circle at a little under 13m (43ft) with 4WD engaged and a little under 12m (39ft) with the tractor in 2WD mode.
That's about what you'd expect for a tractor of this size.
In spite of its beefy appearance, the Antares does not actually weight in that heavily.
It tips the scales at 4,800kg (4.7 tons) and manages a power-to-weight ratio of 26hp/tonne.
Maintenance in the Same should be problem-free.
If we had to cite a bad point, it would be the hard-to-reach drain plug on the rear axle housing.
That's about all.
The layout of the Same's engine, which leaves a lot of space beneath the bonnet, does help here.
The diesel filter caps — there is one each side — are thoughtfully positioned on the front edges of the cab and the tank overall holds 230 litres (60gal).
Unlike many tractors, filling it didn't require climbing experience, we're pleased to report.
Cab
Let's start with the good points.
The entrance to the cab is wide and the view in all directions is good, though the cab side-pillars could be narrower.
In general, the controls are well-positioned and maximum noise level is 79dBA.
So the cab has the wherewithal of a pleasant working environment.
However the quality of some of the fittings in our test tractor left something to be desired.
In particular the fitting of trim around the doors and working lights was not as good as it should be.
This poor finish was disappointing in a cab that in other respects works so well.
However, it must be said that our test tractor was one of the first to come into Germany, so perhaps some early trim problems are to be expected.
Same-Lamborghini's UK importer agreed that there had been some problems with the quality of cab fittings on some early models.
But these problems have apparently been ironed out in the current batch of models.
In conclusion
The first thing that you notice about the Antares is its modern looks.
You can thank Giugiaro for that.
When you use the tractor you begin to notice other things — the electronics, the automatic control of 4WD and diff-locks, the electronic linkage, the performance monitor, but most of all the electronic throttle.
It makes control of the fuel pump that much more precise.
Same-Lamborghini is the first firm to fit this feature.
The 6-cylinder engine has impressive characteristics and the 36 forward, 36 reverse gearbox offers speeds for every conceivable task.
Moreover, the synchronised forward-reverse lever and the electro-hydraulic high-low splitter are definitely good points.
On the minus side, the performance monitor took time to become familiar with.
Also, the lift capacity, which looks good on paper, may disappoint if you are using very heavy implements.
To be fair, Same-Lamborghini UK did say that it hadn't had any complaints about lifting capacity here.
Quality of finish wasn't too good at many points on our test tractor, either, but we have to assume it was largely because our machine was one of the first off the production line.
Assuming that Same can cure these quality-control ills, then there's not much else left to be negative about on this most modern of 1990s tractors.
The Same Antares 130 plus Gem sprayer on Bob, Chris and John Germany's Lodge Farm, Norwell near Newark, Notts.
They bought it last August for general farm work on the 445ha (1,100-acre) all-arable farm.
Skinny row-crop tyres show off Antares' rear-end.
Three spool valves are fitted; all can be used in single or double-acting mode.
Controls for electronic linkage, diff-lock and 4WD engagement are well laid-out.
Diff-locks click out when speeds or steering angles exceed preset limits.
Two large side panels, which are removed by undoing two knots, cover each side of the engine compartment.
Once removed, access is good.
Changing of cab air filter is done from the outside, so there's no need to cover the seat with a fine coating of dust.
The Same's electronic throttle, here partly obscured by sprayer black box at top, replaces familiar hand lever.
It had some problems in holding revs steady at the bottom end of the rpm range.
A minus point is that the oil-filter cap can only be reached with the covers off.
Same fits an active wheelslip system which automatically raises the linkage if wheelslip exceeds the preset 18% limit.
Not all data provided was that useful.
Despite extensive use of electronics elsewhere, the dashboard retains the familiar analogue tractometer.
Steering wheel adjusts in both planes, though you shouldn't need to raise it to get out of the cab.
PLUS AND MINUS POINTS
Plus
•
Constant power engine
•
Useful electronic throttle
•
Smooth hi-lo change on gear lever
•
Auto control of 4WD and diff-locks
Minus
•
Lift capacity could be better
•
Revs variable at low rpm
•
540–1000 lever outside cab
•
Some cab fittings not well made
ON TEST
TWELVE-IN-ONE SCREWDRIVER
What's wrong with an interchangeable-blade screwdriver, asks Andrew Pearce?
Nothing in theory, but a lot in practice.
The idea is fine.
One handle plus a range of blades equals coverage of many different fasteners, easy portability and savings on toolbox space.
But somehow, poor execution usually means the maths don't add up.
A pleasant change, then, to find Wera's offering.
Its Rocko Vario interchangeable-blade system forms part of a comprehensive range.
All sorts are on offer: handles in conventional or ‘T’ form, with or without a ratchet.
Blades to cover all sorts of fastenings; slot-head, Phillips, Posidrive, hex head, Torx and eyescrews.
There's even a toolholder for small taps, and bitholders (magnetic or not) for hex screwdriver bits.
All of these are available alone, in an array of sets or in any combination of the user's choice.
We looked at a conventional handle, a mix of slotted/Philips/Posidrive blades, an extension and a ratchet ‘T’ handle.
All but the latter pack into a leather-backed wallet (picture).
Prices were £4.99 for the conventional handle, £7.08 for the extension and £20.37 for the ratchet ‘T’ handle.
That totals £44.98, or £24.61 without the ‘T’ handle.
Handles are made from a light, textured synthetic material and provide a slightly ‘grippy’ surface.
Comfort is good, oily hands don't slip easily and handles withstood a belting after a spell in the freezer.
Both designs carried a 10mm hex extension, letting a spanner be used for extra twist.
The ‘T’ handle's ratchet is interesting.
No teeth are used; instead, an internal cam provides positive locking.
No slip was found under normal working torques, and the ‘stepless’ action allowed for very small twist reversals before drive picked up again — useful in a confined space.
Ratchet adjustment is by knurled ring.
Drive direction can be changed but the ratchet can't be locked out: operation was positive but fiddly.
Blades are in 6mm hex-section alloy steel, sliding past an internal spring ring holder to snuggle deep in the handles.
Fit was pretty good, leaving a trace of cheap-feeling rock in the ‘T’ handle, but none in the conventional unit.
Blade identification is etched in the shank near each tip, and seemed pretty permanent.
Blade tips are unplated, so carry no covering to flake off.
Wear wasn't apparent over a two-month test, during which the system was used exclusively.
A socketed extension adds 140mm (5.5in) to overall blade length and is a worthwhile extra.
Drawbacks are the introduction of a bit more slop in the system and the potential for reduced access in tight spots.
In practice neither proved a problem.
Given a blade-interchange system that inspired confidence, day-to-day convenience certainly went up.
Rather than rooting out a selection of screwdrivers before going away from base, the pack and ‘T’ handle were thrown in.
Between them they covered most common sizes and types of screw, with the ‘T's extra torque-passing ability proving very handy.
The only snag — and it's a big one for farming — was restricted blade size for slot head screws.
A 6mm diameter shank means a 7mm — wide blade is the most that will slide up into the handle, and that can't cope with big screws.
Thus the Rocko-Vario outfit can't take the place of the individual screwdrivers.
Instead it draws together the common smaller sizes and provides easy mobility.
Single-ended slot blades would get round the problem, but aren't on offer;; Philips/Posidrive bits aren't restricted in the same way.
Other minor gripes were the (understandable) lack of drive-through capability and the wallet's plastic front, which soon started to split.
An all-leather version would make much more sense.
To finish, another suggestion.
Why not build a dayglo-colour band into each handle and blade?
That way, there's less chance of leaving expensive tools on a machine and more chance of finding them quickly after they're dropped.
Twelve screwdrivers in one.
A leather wallet holds three double-ended blades, an extension and a conventional handle and costs around £25 (bottom).
A ratchet ‘T’ handle adds more twist and £20.37 (top), a blade magnetiser (right) £7.50.
CLASSIC TRACTORS
MINIMAL CULTIVATIONS?
The 1922 Once-Over tillage system allowed users to plough, power harrow and inject carbon dioxide to boost nutrient uptake.
But few farmers were brave enough to buy it.
David Anthony reports.
The Once-Over tillage system was one of the earliest attempts to use engine power to reduce the number of cultivations needed to make a seedbed.
The minimum cultivation system was developed by the Scientific Farming Machinery Co of Minneapolis in the United States, apparently working with the Once-Over Tiller Corporation who manufactured the machines.
The system was based on an ordinary mouldboard plough with a vertical rotor added for each of the mouldboards, and with a series of curved cutting tines on each of the rotors.
As the mouldboards lifted and inverted the soil, the tines on the powered rotors broke up the furrow slices.
The result, the company claimed, was a combination of ploughing and cultivating to produce a seedbed in a single pass — which explains the Once-Over name.
The system was developed over a period of about 10 years and arrived on the market in three stages.
The first production version appeared in about 1916, following several years of research and development, and was designed as an attachment for a horse drawn single furrow plough.
Power for the rotary cultivation unit was provided by an air cooled petrol engine mounted on the plough.
It is difficult to believe that the idea was successful.
Weed control must have been a major problem for a one pass cultivation system before the development of herbicides, and the extra weight of the rotor unit and the engine must have made the plough difficult to handle at the headlands.
Stage two in the development programme was a self-propelled version.
This was demonstrated as a prototype in 1917, and the production model arrived two years later.
It was designed with two driving wheels at the front and a single wheel beneath the driver's seat at the rear.
The machine was ‘perfectly balanced’, the Scientific Farming Machinery Co claimed, with the engine ahead of the front axle to put 95% of the weight on the driving wheels for maximum traction.
The power unit for the Once-Over tractor unit was four cylinder water cooled engine which started on petrol and was switched over the paraffin after a warming-up period.
The power output at 900rpm was 25hp and the maximum pulling power was 3000lb, enough to handle the two-furrow plough unit in the most difficult soil conditions, according to the company's publicity.
The engine also drove the two rotors, with power transmitted through a shaft from the rear of the engine to individual gear drives.
The drive mechanism could be disconnected to allow the plough and rotors to be removed, freeing the tractor unit for other work.
Some features included in the Once-Over design were remarkably advanced for a tractor manufactured before 1920.
They included a differential lock for the front wheels, and a power lift to raise the plough and rotors at the headland.
The power lift appears to have worked with a cable attached to the rear of the plough, which was raised as the other end of the cable was wound on to a shaft.
Another advanced feature was the electric starter motor provided for the engine, and the Once-Over was possibly the first tractor with this equipment.
Safety was clearly a much lower priority for the design team.
If the tractor hit an obstruction there was no much to stop the driver falling forwards and on to the rotor blades.
The third and last phase in the Once-Over development programme came in 1922 with the addition of a gas injection system to the plough and cultivator unit.
The gas chosen for the injection process was carbon dioxide, which was available in large quantities as a cheap by-product of a number of industrial processes.
The CO&sub2; was released as the soil was in contact with the rotors, using the exhaust from the engine to help carry the gas into the soil flow.
This produced a chemical reaction which released ‘phenomenal’ quantities of plant nutrients, the company claimed.
A supply of gas was carried in a special container attached to the plough, and it was released into the soil through hollow tines on the two rotors.
As the CO 2 was released it reacted with moisture in the soil to form carbonic acid, and the acid attacked the soil to release the supply of nutrients.
The Scientific Farming Machinery Co appears to have been somewhat vague about the precise nature of the chemical reaction which produced such a bountiful supply of plant nutrients, and they were also reticent about the amount and composition of the nutrients released.
They were, however, quite emphatic that there are large quantities of plant nutrients locked away in the soil structure.
These would be released by the acid formed by the CO, and this would achieve heavy crop yields on most soils without additional fertiliser application.
It is not clear from the surviving reports of the Once-Over system if the manufacturers had much evidence to support the claims they made for the CO process.
The majority of farmers were probably sceptical and decided not to invest in the system, because the Scientific Farming Machinery Co appears to have ceased trading a year or so after announcing their new gas injection equipment.
TRANSPORT
GOING UP IN THE WORLD
In the four years since we looked at the Subaru estate, it's gone upmarket with a bang.
Andrew Pearce reports.
Price alone shows the difference between today's Subaru estate and the model we looked at four years ago.
In 1987 a top-line GL cost £8,889, whereas today's equivalent GX Legacy is £116,346.
Much more than the name has changed.
The current model is longer, wider, heavier, faster, thirstier; progress of a sort.
It's also visually much sleeker, from pinched-down nose to rounded rump.
There's more glass, but kit car white-spoke wheels have been ditched.
Under the bonnet the old flat-four has grown to 2.2 litres, though a 1.8 version is still available.
Both motors have sprouted 16-valve heads and fuel injection (single point on the 1.8) and have their exhaust gas cleaned by three-way catalytic converter.
you can buy a car without a ‘cat’, but it costs more.
Good marketing — buying nothing for something.
Brakes are now all-disc with ABS standard on the 2.2s.
And replacing on-demand 4WD is a full-time system, which uses a central viscous coupling to apportion drive as needed and prevent wind-up.
Performance, economy
In 2.2-litre form as tested, the latest engine has 134hp and 139lbf ft torque.
Both are well up on the old 1.8's 89hp and 101lbf ft, and (even allowing for an extra 234kg/516lb of flab) power/weight ratio has improved by 19%.
It certainly shows.
Helped by gearing that's a trifle lower and a torque peak shifted down to 3,200rpm, the Legacy can be booted around on little throttle; engine response to small pedal movements is swift and crisp.
But that early promise isn't carried through, as flooring the pedal produces little extra urge.
The 16-valve unit isn't particularly free-revving.
Odd to that there's significant vibration through the clutch pedal and gear lever, as a flat four is inherently one of the smoothest-running layouts.
In fact a thread of coarseness runs through the powertrain, making itself felt particularly during clutch engagement and when the motor's spinning hard.
Low-revs pulling power is to be had, though the motor prefers to see upwards of 2,000 on an easily-read tacho before it tries hard.
Overall performance falls in the middle bracket and is respectable for a normally-aspirated car.
There's good torque for clean response and brisk pick-up after shifting gear, but high-end engine output is nothing startling.
The bottom line has the Legacy streets ahead of the old GL.
Transmission behaviour is OK, with a light clutch and short-throw lever.
Demerits were an over-long clutch ‘bite’ zone, a slightly obstructive shift action and (on the 5,000-mile old test car) some off-idle roughness producing transmission unit.
By modern standards overall gearing of around 20 miles/1000rpm is low.
A help to fifth-gear flexibility, but one that does little for motorway fuel consumption — cruising at 80–85mph for most of one tankful (unleaded only) produced 26.5mpg.
Consumption over a very mixed 700-plus miles come to an unexceptional 27.6mpg.
Noise, handling
Subaru pick-up owners who jump into a Legacy will feel right at home, for the family's noise signature is unmistakeable.
But the Legacy is decently quieter.
Up to 4,000rpm on a light throttle (ie most of the time), engine noise is distant.
Under harder acceleration it intrudes, finishing up as a deep, rough-edged sounding beat at full throttle.
Some of this noise turns up unexpectedly when cruising around the motorway limit, and the only answer is to go faster or slower.
Otherwise the Legacy is a decent but not notably quiet cruiser; significant engine, wind and tyre noise are all there.
Driven unladen, estate cars are often stiff-legged.
Not this one; it rides easy with only a trace of load-carrying compromise.
Body control over crests isn't 100% though, suggesting damping could be better.
The old front-drive model couldn't muster much dry-road grip and was a terrible understeerer in the wet.
Permanent four wheel drive and wider tyres have sorted all that out; now high grip dissolves into mid power-on understeer in very fast bends, with the tail moving out slightly as adhesion comes.
This altogether much safer-feeling arrangement is marred only by a transitory, tip-toe uncertainly as the car turns into faster corners.
It may have to do with initial body roll, which (despite anti-roll bars) is still significant.
Stopping the Legacy isn't a problem.
ABS-modulated brakes produce brief tyre squawks in hard stops, but refuse to be flustered by driver panic.
As seems common with such systems, the pedal is mushy under pressure.
Towing capacity has stayed unchanged at 1,200kg/2,645lb (braked).
Between them, the good-torque motor and sound brakes feel well able to cope.
Accommodation
There's no longer a wash-through basic estate on offer.
What you get now is plush; hard-wearing fabric seats and deep-pile matting.
Those seats are more supportive than before and offer good height adjustment.
Front legroom is good and a tilt column means most people will get comfortable behind the wheel.
Headroom front and rear is no problem, though the outcome of deep flanks and a space-making ‘turret’ roof is a profile like a baby hearse.
With the split-fold rear seats down a decent load bay appears.
Coffin room is limited by space-pinching rear wheel arches, but loading height is decently low.
Interior stowage room hasn't been stinted, with cubbies, slots and trays everywhere.
Although Subaru claims the Legacy is pitched into the ‘compact, luxury executive class’, standard cabin equipment isn't all that brilliant.
Neither was the paintwork, whose ‘orange peel’ finish didn't impress.
That aside, the rest of the car was well put together and felt solid.
Electric windows and mirrors, central locking, rear heating, rear wash/wipe and a tilt wheel are on all models, but today's hard-pressed executive has to find another £701 for a sunroof and £1,092 for air conditioning.
The move upmarket has brought with it a character change.
The old estate looked quite ready to swap tarmac for mud; this one has a distinctly more suburban air.
So, in deference to the body-coloured front spoiler and natty factory-fitted mudflaps, rough-road work was confined to tracks.
No problem.
The suspension loved it (clonks from the front notwithstanding), the body sills and sumpguard slithered over bits where tractor rutting had cut deep, the whip aerial beat a tattoo on the roof and road-biased Semperit tyres found grip.
Low range felt more like a gesture to off-road work than a useful step-down in speed.
Still, on-the-move shifting was simple and even a small gearing drop helps.
Nothing was knocked off or bent by track work.
Not even the flexible front spoiler, though it looked to have been playing bulldozers.
In summary
Strengths
•
Strong, flexible engine
•
Part-throttle liveliness
•
Build quality (paint excepted)
•
Accommodation
•
Load space
•
Driving position
•
Secure all-weather grip
•
Ride quality
•
Strong ABS brakes
•
Dual-surface capability
•
Easy to drive
Weaknesses
•
Engine coarse for ‘luxury’ price
•
Noise under power
•
Wheelarches take load space
•
Fuel economy not the best
•
Road clothes suggest caution off road
•
Turn-in feel
Subaru's new Legacy a smooth looker, though its ‘tackle-anything’ air on previous models has disappeared.
INJECTION SYSTEMS
GOING UNDERGROUND TO SOLVE A SLURRY WORRY
When it comes to the disposal of slurry, farmers are going underground.
But that may not be such a bad thing, says Ian Marshall.
Farmers are under pressure from tough legislation in many areas of agriculture, but nowhere more so than in slurry disposal.
they are being encouraged to cut smell and run-off, and reduce the emission of ammonia into the atmosphere.
Changing from a conventional tankers splashplate to a low-trajectory nozzle is one way of making slurry spreading more environment-friendly.
But these will only reduce smell and run-off, not cure them, and they won't have much effect on grass contamination.
Injection does seem to offer a more certain solution to smell and pollution.
Putting slurry underground reduces run-off and lowers the amount of smell and ammonia evaporation.
There are two kinds of injection.
Deep injection takes place at typical depths of 150mm (6in) and shallow injection at a typical depth of 50mm (2in).
Shallow injection is a more recent technique and several manufacturers offer suitable machines, according to Mike Hann, a lecturer in agricultural engineering at Silsoe College.
‘This approach involves making a series of slots in the ground into which the slurry is discharged,’ he says.
‘If most of the material can be contained within the slot, then grass spoilage and odour emission are reduced.’
‘However shallow injection is best suited to getting rid of dirty water because the material has to be liquid enough to flow down narrow tubes.’
While it has the advantage of putting slurry at plant root level where it can be used quickly, it cannot bury the same volume of slurry or reduce the smell as much as it can with deep injection.
Compared to conventional spreading, injection does give farmers a better chance to reduce their nitrogen bill, adds Mr Hann.
‘You retain more of the nitrogen, as less is lost through emission into the atmosphere.
Trial work has shown that on grassland particularly, there are definite benefits from injection.’
‘Farmers still seem to regard the fertiliser value of slurry as an unquantifiable bonus though,’ he says.
‘They will write slurry into the nitrogen bill only when someone discovers a really practical way of showing what's in it.’
There are drawbacks to injection too, Mr Hann points out.
To start with you need an injector, which will in turn need extra tractor horsepower.
Typical power requirement is 20–30hp/leg, so a 4-leg injector will need 80–120hp.
That might not be a problem to arable farmers or larger livestock men, but it will rule out the small livestock farm.
A second drawback, at least for livestock farmers, is surface damage.
This is caused partly by the heaving of the soil when the tine passes underneath, but mainly by the two sides of the slot not falling back together again after the injector has passed.
‘A press-wheel behind the tine helps a lot, and in good conditions works beautifully.
But as the ground dries, some slabs of earth will turn round and then be left sitting above ground,’ he says.
‘You can also find that grass dies back at the edges of the slot.’
Knowing when to carry out injection is also important.
Winter injection used to be popular, until experts found that wet soil often didn't absorb the slurry properly and increased the danger of run-off.
So for grassland farmers, the best time is probably February–March when the ground is moist but can still be run on.
However arable farmers have fewer restraints on when they can inject.
Once a grower has decided to use injection, he has a choice of three types of tackle to carry it out with.
Tanker-mounted injectors are the most common, but there are also tractor-mounted injectors fed from a tanker running alongside and injectors fed from an umbilical hose system.
What is needed for all application techniques is an accurate, low-cost method of setting and maintaining the spread rate.
Metering systems are available from specialist electronics firms but they are expensive and can be fitted only to tankers which use positive displacement pumps.
However, Silsoe College has developed a system which, when commercially available, will be cheaper than those devices currently on the market, it says.
Details are scarce but it uses a dopler meter and flow dividers and will work with vacuum tankers.
Tanker-mounted
This is the simplest of the systems available.
It involves fitting the rear of a standard tanker with a parallelogram linkage and then mounting a three, four or five tine injector unit to it.
It is the simplest and cheapest way of injecting since there is generally a slurry tanker already on the farm.
It involves only small changes to existing slurry disposal practices, the chief one being that slurry is applied through injectors rather than through a discharge nozzle.
However it still causes as much damage to the ground as conventional spreading and the heavier tractor needed to pull the injector may mean that damage to the ground is increased.
‘On grass,’ says Mr Hann, ‘where you inject into wheel markings you get more damage, as the tine is being pulled through ground on which there has already been some surface shearing.
Compared to other systems, it is not very efficient and you will get less slurry on per day.’
Separate tanker
This is a relatively uncommon sight, either for slurry or sludge disposal.
The tractor's linkage carries an injector unit which is serviced by a number of tankers shuttling to and from the slurry store.
In the field, the tanker runs alongside the injector and feeds it via a short length of  hose.
The system is a heavy user of both men and machines and so is probably better suited to contractors and larger farmers.
However, it does give high workrates and reduces soil damage significantly.
Umbilical hose
This is state-of-the-art injection.
It comprises a tractor-mounted injection unit in the field which is fed through an umbilical hose running from the storage point.
The complexity of the system depends on the number of permutations of hose length available.
Trial work suggests that the technique has a number of advantages over other forms of injection.
For a start, it allows spreading to be carried over a longer period during the winter months (Table 1 ).
It also gives higher workrates (Table 2 ) and lower power requirements and fuel use.
Field studies suggest that there is a yield benefit, too, as reduced tractor wheelslip and soil compaction should lead to less damage to soil and crop.
Some of these studies showed that the wheel-ruts caused by umbilical hose set-ups were only half as deep as those produced by the equivalent tanker-based equipment.
Soil damage can be reduced further by fitting lgp tyres.
These benefits translate in theory to an increase in grass yield of approximately 600kg/ha (5cwt/acre) in favour of the umbilical injection system, or around £36/ha (£15/acre) if you assume a value of £60/tonne for dry matter.
Moreover, the system can be as basic or as sophisticated as required.
Mr Hann: ‘You can still have as simple a system as the tanker going to and from the store, parking up on the headland, connecting up and then injecting.
‘It's accepted that the towing tractor will stand idle for some of the time, but at least you aren't taking tankers into the field,’ he adds.
‘That brings in another advantage — the period when you can inject is increased, as soil damage and compaction are greatly reduced.
‘The obvious next move is to pump the material straight from store to injector.
But it is very difficult to blow slurry straight down a tube, so a small tanker or nurse tank is placed between the two.’
The technique involves a network of irrigation pipes running from the store to a point on the headland.
A pump at the store provides the motive power and typically will send slurry through 1000m (⅔rds of a mile) or more of pipe to a nurse tank on the headland.
There is no great limit on pipe length, though obviously the further you go the greater will be the head and pump size needed.
But there are irrigation pumps available which will pump slurry for miles.
‘In principle, it's similar to old-fashioned organic irrigation — where you can go with that, you can go with this.
But instead of a hosereel going up and down the field, you have a tractor and an injector.’
Umbilical hose systems sound expensive, if only because of the long sections of pipe needed.
But these costs have to be compared to the high potential throughput of the system.
‘The difficulty is knowing what you compare these costs to,’ says Mr Hann.
‘The rate of work with an umbilical hose system is much higher than that you could achieve with one man and a tanker driving from store to field.’
‘If it's a biggish farm with a lot of slurry, the initial capital cost is, of course, much higher.
But setting aside those factors, the overall running costs of injection do begin to come close to those of conventional spreading, over a period of time.
(Table 3 ).’
Generally, the lower the slurry's dry matter content, the easier it is to move.
If the material will go through the pump, it will generally go through everything else.
And, injecting sludge, the technique has proved feasible on slopes of up to 12deg.
The Vredo range of shallow grassland injectors comprises four models.
Working widths are 2.8m, 3.2m, 4m and 5.6m (9ft 2in, 10ft 6in, 13ft and 18ft 4in) respectively, and they can be retrofitted to any tanker fitted with a positive displacement pump.
Slurry is injected into a 20mm (0.75in) wide groove which can be up to 60mm (2.3in) deep, and on all models, the slot is opened by a pair of discs mounted on a flexible arm, a feature which is said to ensure precise depth control.
BKW's 5,000-, 7,000- and 9,000-litre (1,000, 1,500 and 2,000gal) capacity tankers can be retro or factory-fitted with the company's four or six-tine injectors, which feature a slimline leg and share incorporating a spring release mechanism.
Slurry is metered to the tine by a positive displacement pump, which is said to give accurate application rates, and hydraulically-driven axles are offered as an option.
BKW also offers an umbilical system in which the injectors are tractor mounted and fed through 200–600m of abrasion resistant hose.
Outputs are said to be up to 1 million litres (200,000gal) /day.
The Grant shallow injector is offered with working widths of 3m, 4m and 5m (10, 13, 16ft), and comes with 12, 16 and 20 injectors respectively.
Operating depth can be varied between 30mm and 150mm (1 and 6in).
All models incorporate a chopper/distribution pump which pulse-feeds the material to the injectors, themselves mounted on pairs of hydraulically-lowered, parallelogram arms.
These are swivel-mounted to facilitate cornering, and a constant working depth is maintained by a hydraulic accumulator, whose pressure is set by a hydraulic handpump.
Running a tanker alongside the tractor and injector unit is one way of applying slurry.
It does give high work rates, but is probably better suited to larger farmers and contractors.
Samson's grass incorporator has 14 shallow injectors across a working width of 4m (13ft).
Each injector is suspended on a pivoting arm and depth control is hydraulic.
Table 1: Comparison of the number of working days on which slurry application machines couldn't be used because the ground was too wet.
The data was taken from trials at Silsoe College of tanker and umbilical hose systems between October 1 and March 31 in three years — 1986/7 (average rainfall), 1987/8 (wet) and 1988/9 (dry).
Table 2: Comparison of slurry application times for tanker and umbilical injection equipment with conventional surface application, operating in a 10ha field situated 500m from slurry store.
Table 3: Computer model illustrating operating costs of alternative disposal options, both with and without grant aid, on a mixed farm producing 10cu m of pig slurry and 6cu m of cattle slurry/day (1,500 pigs and 100 dairy cattle).
ALTERNATIVE FUELS
POWERING NEW IDEAS
What's going to fuel our tractors when the oil runs out?
A visit to the sunny south coast provided some answers for Andrew Pearce.
Gulf war or not, the world doesn't want for oil — yet.
But when it does, alternatives had better be in place.
Now, Shoreham-by-Sea looks an unlikely place to find the answer to anything, let along global problems.
But this slightly shabby bit of England's south coast is home to one of the world's top consulting engineering companies.
Ricardo International plc has been in engine research and problem-solving for 75 years, and the world's biggest motor names bring their problems to Ricardo's door.
Thus the company is uniquely placed to sum up current interest in alternative fuels for diesel and petrol engines.
Research is currently being driven by the need to reduce pollution rather than fears of immediate oil shortage.
So what's cooking on the alternative fuels front?
The alcohols
Contenders here are primarily ethanol and methanol.
Methanol is derived from fossil fuels — coal, natural gas, heavy oil, etc.
Burning these releases stored carbon are CO&sub2; into the air, contributing to the greenhouse effect.
Ethanol, though, is derived from green plants — biomass.
It's more eco-friendly, as (a) the plants are a replaceable resource, and (b) burning ethanol distilled from them doesn't add to atmospheric CO 2 .
Carbon is taken from the air by plants and stored, made into ethanol, put through the engine and released to air again — no net gain.
After much excitement in the early 1980s, interest in biomass fuels dropped.
Now it's reviving again as part of vehicle companies long-term strategy, says Ricardo, with much USA-based activity centred on methanol.
In an engine this burns very cleanly, giving soot-free combustion and producing fewer lung-damaging, smog-producing oxides of nitrogen (NOx) than conventional fuels.
Methanol is also very detonation-resistant, allowing efficiency-boosting high-compression ratios to be used.
And it brings oxygen into the engine for better combustion.
But the snags to stand-alone alcohol fuel use are many.
Cold starting is poor as alcohols don't evaporate well.
Methanol is particularly toxic by skin contact (giving service implications), and unpleasant stuff like formaldehyde is produced as alcohols burn.
They also chew rubber in the fuel system and offer little lubricity.
Another minor snag is that they have only around half the energy density (energy per gallon) of fossil fuels, so much bigger vehicle tanks are needed.
If the ‘green’ biomass approach is taken there's the problem of finding enough ground to grow crops for ethanol, and this had better not involve chopping down large areas of rainforest.
But some countries can and do make the stuff — Brazil for one uses alcohol/diesel and alcohol/petrol mixes, and the USA has had ‘gasohol’(petrol with 10% ethanol) for some years.
Alcohols can be used directly in a diesel engine if an ignition-boosting cetane improver is added.
But short-term, mixes with conventional fuels are the way alcohols are likely to go, says Ricardo.
Used with diesel, alcohols cut crude oil use and help with emissions, yet engine power stays much the same.
Plant oils
Plant oils — sunflower, rape, soy, etc — can be used direct in slightly-modified diesel engines or mixed with conventional fuel.
Power output stays the same or drops slightly.
But unless certain sticky components are first extracted chemically, fuel system bits soon clog.
Engine oils can be diluted, too.
Burning plant oils means less soot and pollutants in the exhaust, doesn't add to atmospheric CO 2 build-up and the material itself is biodegradable.
But although Austria (for one) produces modified rape oil commercially at a yield of 1,000-plus litres/had, Ricardo says interest from its customers has dwindled.
Plant oil fuels are likely to stay fairly localised, they predict.
Gases
Options here are:
•
The methane-rich fuels, like North Sea-type natural gas and biogas; the latter from landfill sites, industry, slurry digestion plants, etc.
•
The propane-rich fuels — liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) or propane.
•
Hydrogen.
Natural gas forms easily the biggest world reserve of methane-rich fuel.
It's relatively cheap and currently much is wasted by flare-off at extraction.
Propane-rich fuels come mainly from oil extraction and refining, and can be burnt either in spark-ignition motors or dual-fuel units.
The latter are modified diesel engines using a short squirt of conventional fuel to encourage injected gas to burn.
In spark-ignition (petrol-type) engines all gas fuels have a lot to offer, and natural gas produces the cleanest burn of the lot.
Its high resistance to detonation allows high compression ratios to be used and thus offers potential for more power than petrol; little or not particulate emissions come out the exhaust pipe and CO 2 production is relatively low.
And by using either lean-burn combustion systems (where fuel burns in an excess of air) or an exhaust catalyst, very low emissions of toxic gases are possible.
By contrast, gas can't be burnt alone in a diesel-type compression-ignition engine.
But teamed with diesel oil in dual-fuel units, the result is less NOx and particulates plus no performance loss.
So how close are we to seeing dual-fuel powerplants in tractors?
Not very, despite the fact that gas can substitute 50–80% of diesel oil.
The main problem is energy density.
Even in their most compact forms (compressed or liquefied), gases have only around one-quarter of the energy per unit of petrol or diesel.
Fuel tanks thus need to be huge or range is limited.
Handling and storage aren't simple, either — the choices for natural gas are compressing it to 200-plus bars or liquefying at -167deg C. Liquefied propane is easier to handle and already accepted, particularly in places like cold stores, where toxic exhaust build-up would be tricky.
But cylinders are still bulky and not too readily available.
Refuelling with gas from a bulk supply takes time, too: maybe 15 minutes.
Constrained by the above, current gas fuel work is directed at short-haul transport like city-based buses and delivery vehicles.
Here, low pollution outweighs shortcomings in range and turn-round time.
The third gas — Hydrogen — is a law into itself.
Using it as fuel deletes transport's contribution to the greenhouse problem at a stroke, as hydrogen burns to give just water vapour and NOx.
Other attractions include easy mixing with air and easy ignition at wide mixture ratios.
But it can't stand high compression — a major drawback to power output.
NOx production is substantial too, but controllable by lean-burn techniques and catalysts.
And though it's one of the most abundant elements on earth, not much hydrogen is chemically free.
Burning fossil fuel in power stations to split it from water is daft, though water or wind power might be long-term alternatives.
A great deal of research effort is going into overcoming hydrogen's shortcomings, mainly because it's such a clean fuel.
The biggest hurdles are safe handling (the fire risk is appalling — see the R101 airship crash) and an energy density even lower than methane.
Hydrogen is a long-term prospect, says Ricardo.
Designer fuels
Existing fuels are relatively cheap, easy to handle and very energy-dense.
So rather than chasing alternatives, why not ‘tune’ what we have to minimise smog-producing fractions and maximise catalysable elements?
It's being done —‘reformulated gasoline’ is available in the USA.
Though there's not much room for manoeuvre, every little helps.
Low-sulphur diesel oil is on the way; see later.
Diesel — the survivor
The modern diesel engine offers high efficiency, low fuel consumption, low CO 2 emission and long service life.
The breed (and its fuel) has a lot of life in it, says Ricardo.
No complete substitute is on the horizon, either short or long-term.
So the pollution problem remains.
It's being tackled from three angles: more efficient burning to reduce output at source, exhaust after-treatment and devising cleaner fuel.
Research is driven by political directives.
So when the USA moved the goalposts by setting still-lower targets for particulates and NOx, new avenues had to be explored.
The NOx/particulate balance makes a difficult see-saw for diesel engine researchers to ride.
Raising injection pressures brings particulates down but puts NOx up; the same goes for many other design changes.
Fuel consumption isn't helped by chasing minimum pollution, either.
But trucks meet current US standards using a battery of tricks — turbocharging, intercooling, high compression ratios, high-pressure fuel injection, low swirl combustion chambers, light-load timing advance, low sulphur fuel and low lube oil consumption.
The latter two are vital in controlling particulate (soot) emission, as burnt oil and sulphates make up a significant chunk of the black stuff that swirls away from the exhaust stack.
Sulphur goes on to produce acid rain.
Ricardo's 12-litre test unit approaches the next hurdle: US Federal 1994 emission standards.
But to clean exhaust gases further requires fuel with a much lower sulphur content than the current brew, plus some form of exhaust-mounted particulate trap or catalyst.
The oil companies can come through with the fuel, but it'll cost more.
On the trap/catalyst choice, Ricardo says the way forward lies with an inherently clean-burn engine tied to a purpose-designed, simple catalyst.
Though traps can cope with a wider range of exhaust effluent, they're more expensive and hard to maintain satisfactorily.
Not all gloom
Europe lags some way behind the US in demanding clean diesels, and agriculture is down the timeline from trucks.
But stronger legislation will arrive here.
When it does, there will be plusses other than cleaner air:
•
Better low-speed torque from electronic control of fuelling and variable-geometry turbochargers.
•
Better torque back-up giving better ‘driveability’.
•
Electronic injection control to make cold starts easier and idling more stable.
•
On-board engine condition monitoring and fault diagnosis available.
•
Less frequent oil top-ups from improved oil-burn control.
Minusses there will be, too.
Not the least of these is increased fuel consumption — the search for minimum NOx output means retarded injection timing, and that hurts efficiency.
Solving this one is an entertaining little challenge, and it remains to be seen how much electronic control of fuelling and turbocharging can help.
Current research centres on trucks, implying big-displacement, big-horsepower engines.
Tractors are caught in the ‘100hp dilemma’: today's simple (often un-turbo-charged) motors provide outputs around this figure with good driveability and relatively low cost.
To meet tough emission laws they'll need the full technological fix that truck motors are getting, and that's complex and expensive.
The answer may be to decrease capacity and cylinder number but wring more power from what's left — a solution that may damage fuel consumption, durability and driveability.
Swings and roundabouts, checks and balances: who'd be a research engineer?
Alternative fuel use is gathering pace in countries like Austria, but the UK lags behind.
Gasoline (petrol) engines are low on particulate emissions, as are LPG or natural gas/biogas variants.
The latter score in having up to 25% lower specific fuel consumption and much lower CO 2 output.
Current direct-injection diesels are comparatively high on particulate output, though specific fuel consumption is good.
Visible exhaust smoke is particulate matter, but it's not only carbon.
Tighter control of the dimensions of the cylinder bores and the piston ring pack under running conditions is necessary to bring down the contribution of unburned oil, while low-sulphur fuel will help reduce output of acid rain-causing sulphates.
Ricardo's spark-ignition gas fuel research has shown good results from two designs.
Lean-burn units use a pre-chamber (top) to concentrate part of the fuel charge for fast ignition by conventional plug, then the bulk of fuel is burnt very cleanly in excess air below.
Direct-injection diesels can be converted to gas operation using the Nebula piston (right), which concentrates existing swirl in an open chamber for low NOx-output combustion.
SPECIFICATION GUIDE
LEARNING THEIR LINGO
Confused by DIN, SAE, torque back-up and the like?
This guide should help you feel your way through the minefield of tractor specification details in manufacturers' sales leaflets.
Power — DIN, SAE or BS rating?
The German DIN system measures engine power at the flywheel with all ancillaries (fan, air cleaner, standard exhaust, etc) connected, and units are kW or metric hp (ps).
DIN rating gives a reasonable guide to engine power as installed, particularly as it's a ‘production average’ figure, or should be — some manufacturers actually quote peak figures but quality them by saying that an individual engine may vary within stated limits, while others don't bother with the nicety.
SAE ratings are quoted in imperial hp or kW, and generally give peak power for a bare engine.
Thus they don't reflect available power once the engine is in the tractor.
Neither do British Standard (BS) figures, which again relate to an engine without power-sapping auxiliaries fitted.
As test conditions are less rigorous, an engine rated under the BS system will show higher output than under the other two.
When comparing engine powers, make sure all are measured by the same system or convert one to another (imp hp × 1.014 = metric hp or ps; imp hp × 0.746 = kW; ps × 0.736 = kW).
Tractor specification has to be considered, too: air conditioning, powershift transmission, etc all drain engine power, reducing what's available at the wheels.
Power has also to be looked at in the light of engine capacity and tractor weight.
Given two engines of equal power, the biggest capacity one (highest cc number) is likely to be the lowest-stressed.
Where two tractors are of equal power, the heavier will probably need to be in a lower gear to pull the same weight.
PTO Power is generally lower than engine power through driveline losses.
It's not always easy to compare like with like, as some makers give pto power at rated (=maximum governed) engine rpm while others give it the revs equivalent to  shaft speed(s).
The latter approach better reflects working conditions.
Engine capacity is often constant through a family of motors, with power output adjusted by fuelling, turbocharging, etc.
Generally big-capacity engines have more cylinders, as smaller pistons/valves weigh less, are easier to control and generate less vibration.
Moving from a four to a six of the same capacity means smoother running, as individual cylinder explosions are less powerful and a six is inherently better balanced.
Torque is the force that, instant by instant, pushes the tractor along.
The force-push of expanding gas on the piston is multiplied by the leverage effect of the conrod, then again by the leverage-increasing effect of gear pairs before it reaches the driving wheels.
The more torque an engine has, the bigger load it can pull in the same gear or the higher gear it can use for a given load.
Bigger capacity engines produce more torque as more fuel is burnt per firing stroke, giving a bigger push to the piston.
Turbocharging is one way of pushing more air into an engine, thus allowing more fuel to be burnt and more power developed.
Energy from hot exhaust gases spins a turbine which is mounted on a common shaft with a compressor.
Turbocharged engines generally produce more power and torque for a given capacity than non-turbo-charged (naturally-aspirated) engines, and have better specific fuel consumption (fuel used per kW/hr).
Service intervals (especially oil changes) may be shorter with higher-quality oil needed.
Engine stroke has an effect on torque but isn't the yardstick it once was.
A long-stroke engine has a long con-rod, which acts as a longer lever on the crank.
Thus long-stroke engines were traditionally high-torque engines, but modern short-stroke turbocharged units can produce as much torque (and usually more) by giving the piston a bigger shove on each firing stroke.
Torque back-up or rise gives a clue to what will happen when an engine, spinning at full (rated) or pto speed, meets an increase in load — a boggy patch or hill.
Engines with good torque back-up handle a wide load changes without the need to shift gear.
Working at or close to maximum rpm, an engine is relying entirely on power (= torque × rpm) to overcome resistance and/or accelerate.
As load increases, engine rpm drop.
To maintain progress that power must stay the same, so torque must increase.
An engine with good torque back-up will not lose as many revs for a given increase in load as one with poor back-up.
Typically, torque rise figures are 10–15% from rated speed to peak torque for non-turbocharged diesels, 15–30% for turbocharged diesels and 25–60% with charge-cooled turbo diesels.
Gears allow engine torque to match load/speed requirements.
Ratios should be spaced so on changing up, the engine operates in the area of steep torque rise.
Splitter systems give ‘half gears’ between main ratios.
Clutchless selection by switch or lever keeps the outfit rolling, while de-clutching usually means a stop if load is heavy, eg in draught work.
Powershift and semi-powershift transmissions allow clutchless shifting over entire gear range but absorb more engine power than conventional gearboxes.
Fluid clutches are convenient to use but also take power.
Wheelbase is the horizontal distance between front and rear axle centres.
Long wheelbase tractors are more stable with heavy rear loading and need less front weight to balance a given load, but do tend to be less manoeuvrable.
Ride comfort may be better, too.
Weight is a function of construction and complexity.
Tractors with all the options (air conditioning, etc) weight more as well as having less surplus power for pulling.
High tractor weight on narrow standard tyres means more compaction, though possibly better traction in some circumstances.
A hydraulic system operating principle has certain consequences.
Open-centre systems are most common.
They're relatively cheap, but need engine rpm to deliver full output and are best when handling one operation at once.
Closed-centre systems are more expensive to build, less sensitive to engine rpm, less wasteful of engine power, have sharper response and can cope better with simultaneous demands.
Brakes are either wet discs (lubricated and cooled by oil) or dry discs or drums.
Wet brakes are always within an axle; dry brakes may be internal or external.
Wet brakes offer long service life through oil immersion and aren't affected by external water.
Dry brakes need relining and adjustment — and with shoe types balancing — more often and are sometimes prone to ‘grabbing’.
External designs are easiest to work on but most prone to interference from mud and water.
Hydraulic systems offer self-adjustment and more stopping power for a given pedal effort.
Model designation is truly a topic for mind-readers.
Someone, somewhere probably studied just how different companies choose their model series, and in all probability the men in the white coats took him away.
Logic doesn't often come into it; sometimes the numbers reflect engine power, sometimes not.
Occasionally a series starts this way, then veers off on a tangent to do with steering wheel size or some other imponderable.
Often makers try pulling a fast one by giving a tractor a number that's bigger than its actual horsepower.
Mainly it's a guessing game, with model series stored only in the heads of salesmen.
Linkage lift depends on engine power and hydraulic capacity, and should be sized to give spare capacity over the heaviest item on the farm — allowing for extra wet-soil loading where appropriate.
High lift force may mean reduced lift arm travel, or need extra-cost assister ram(s).
BUYERS' GUIDE TO TRACTORS
This year's Buyers' Guide to Tractors appears against a back-drop of falling sales and continued shuffling amongst tractor makers and importers.
Tractor sales in 1990 dipped to 18,148.
This was 9% down on 1989 and the lowest figure since the Agricultural Engineers Association began collecting records.
Main reasons seem to be persistent low profitability among farmers and their uncertainty about the future.
One of the shocks of 1991 was the news that Mercedes is to stop production of MB-tracs next year and has ditched plans for a replacement.
But as one name disappears another rises — JCB.
Its range of two high-speed tractors officially goes on sale this month.
Meanwhile the company set up to market the Landini marque in the UK has gone and the Italian range has come under the Watveare wing.
Swedish maker Valmet — never one to stay with one importer for very long — has moved out of the Benson camp and set up its own UK importer.
Doubt remains, too, over the future of County tractors.
This old established British maker was also part of the Benson group, but is now up for sale.
No word on a definite buyer, though.
At the other end of the size scale, Fiat Geotech's takeover of Ford New Holland has now been signed, though changes to the two product lines still seem a long way off.
Our guide covers tractors of 30hp and above and crawlers of over 40hp.
Note that a number 2 or 4 after the model indicates whether the tractor is two-wheel-drive or four-wheel-drive.
Power ratings are in DIN, unless otherwise stated.
TRACTOR DEVELOPMENTS
MARQUES OF REFINEMENT
JCB may be grabbing the limelight with its Fastrac high-speed tractor, but other companies have new models or refinements out this summer.
Massey-Ferguson, for one, has added new models to its already large range with the launch of the M-F3690 and M-F3670.
The first of these has a turbocharged 190hp 7.4-litre engine, made by Finnish company Valmet, and a strengthened transmission and back axle.
The smaller M-F3670 has a six-cylinder 6.6-litre turbo engine with a 16 forward and 16 reverse gearbox.
The firm's Autotronic system for controlling diff-lock and 4WD engagement and its Datatronic performance monitoring set-up are also fitted.
Massey has also added an electronic device on its 6-cylinder tractors for automatically raising and lowering semi-mounted ploughs at the headland.
Called Dual Control, it calculates where to lower or raise the plough to get a straight edge on the headland.
French maker Renault, meanwhile, has added two more models to its curiously-named Tractor range.
The 90–34 and 90–34T are cheaper versions of the MX and TX tractors.
Both are powered by 83hp 4-cylinder MWM engines and have 24 forward and 24 reverse gearboxes.
A dashboard-mounted lever allows the driver to make easy direction changes.
Italian firm Same-Lamborghini brought over a pair of tractors for the Royal show with its extraordinary Global Monitor video system first seen at the Italian Bologna show.
This uses a video camera mounted on the tractor roof matched to a monitor screen on the dashboard to give the driver a view of what's going on behind him without the need to turn round.
One of the main aims is to reduce backache, and the camera has a zoom facility to allow drivers to see implements close-up.
On top of that, Same has replaced the usual set of analogue and digital dials found on most dashboards with a graphic display on the same TV screen used for the video camera.
Details of tractor and field performance are shown in the form of graphs and barcharts.
Tractor development isn't just going on in the west either.
Czechoslovakian maker Zetor took the opportunity at the Highland Show to launch its 9540.
The 95hp model marks something of a departure from the firm's policy of offering basic, no frills tractors at low prices.
Changes in the political and economic structure of formerly Eastern Bloc countries are said to have prompted firms like Zetor to look to close the technology gap between themselves and Western counterparts.
It has four wheel drive as standard and a new turbocharged engine that is said to meet all current EC emission standards.
Unlike previous Zetor gearboxes, which only had synchromesh on higher gears, the new tractor is all synchro.
The cab is new, too, and a 16 forward and 4 reverse gearbox is fitted.
Exact price has not been set, but the 9540 is expected to cost about £20,000.
That's about £5,000 cheaper than most similar-sized tractors, points out Zelor.
The Zelor 9540 now sports an all-synchro gearbox.
Its Czech maker is aiming to close the technology gap between Western and Eastern machines.