

CHAPTER 1
The train seemed to hang back on its journey through the forest, as though fearing an ambush.
Mungo Stone had the sensation that instead of threading on to the horizon, at any moment the ever-narrowing rails might simply come to a dead end among the trees.
When that happened, he could imagine the pines closing in on all sides, sealing the locomotive and the carriages in a green tomb; invisible even from the air.
What would he do, he wondered?
How would he get his bearings among those identical, silent columns?
Who would hear his cries for help?
Distracted from these unnerving thoughts by a dramatic flash of white further up the line, Mungo stood and craned his neck out of the window.
Flying low across the track was a formation of swans — five of them at least— their anxious, elongated necks rigid with effort; their great wings beating in slow motion.
Mungo remembered the old superstition that seagulls were the souls of dead sailors, and wondered whether these magnificent birds might be the spirits of lost travellers, doomed forever to haunt the scene of their disappearance.
Telling himself to stop being stupid, he settled back and concentrated instead on his fellow passenger.
In the opposite corner was a portly man in a baggy tweed suit.
His shiny brown shoes had fine cracks in them, like an old oil painting, and the expanse of leg showing above the left sock was pale and hairless.
The man's face was a glistening red, as though he had smeared it with Vaseline.
He was reading a newspaper.
Every so often he would clear his throat, exaggerating the effect by leaving his mouth open as he did so:
‘Hhurrnh, hurr!’
It was not unlike the tone of the engine; a rumble from the boiler of the beast.
The man did the same again as he turned the paper, revealing to Mungo the front page with its lurid headline: ‘BIRD'S HEAD CLUE TO GIRL'S DEATH.
What on earth was all that about, Mungo wondered?
Did the dead girl, whoever she was, possess the head of a bird?
If so, what sort of bird?
A budgerigar?
A toucan?
A vulture?
And how did she eat spaghetti through a beak?
Or had she perhaps been pecked to death?
Hardly, he thought.
It would take a predator the size of an eagle to do that, and this was not exactly the highlands of Scotland.
No, it was probably something odd like a bird's head brooch found near the body, or the design on a rare coin in the victim's pocket.
‘Hhurrnh, hurr!’
The redskin turned the paper inside out and started to read another story.
Deprived of gruesome speculation, Mungo looked at his watch.
Staring at him from its face was Rock Hardy, the hero of his favourite comic-strip.
Rock was a roly-poly detective who looked like a no-hoper but who always outwitted the opposition with sly brilliance.
According to the great sleuth, the time was 3.17 pm.
Ten minutes to go and then…
And then what, exactly?
Why had Mungo agreed to stay with a cousin he had never met?
What had possessed him to surrender to his mother's nagging?
She had said it would do him good.
Ten days with Emily would do him good!
How could she possibly know, since he had not set eyes on the girl?
They might hate each other.
Emily might have the head of a crow and no sense of humour.
In any case, things that did you good were always boring.
Cross-country running did you good; and haddock; and sitting quietly in deck-chairs.
And what sort of name was Emily, anyway?
No one had been called Emily for a hundred years.
Suddenly Mungo felt dread in his stomach like indigestion.
Until now he had postponed thinking about the visit.
It was the way he always dealt with unwelcome prospects.
For the sake of a quiet life he had given in to an unreasonable request and only now did he fully realize what it meant.
Ten days in an alien village with a total stranger and her totally strange family.
True, Emily's mother was his own mother's sister, but his sole contact with her was a book token every Christmas; a token never quite generous enough for the book he wanted.
He might as well have picked a family at random out of the telephone book and stayed with them.
He might as well have descended on the Palace, announcing that he had come for a stay.
He was tempted to fling open the carriage door, with its new leather strap, and roll down the shingle embankment to freedom.
That would give the redskin something to ‘hhurrnh hurr’ about.
The thought, however, evaporated almost before it had formed.
The dark outline of the forest was enough to discourage even the boldest mutineer.
The train groaned and eased its aches as it drew into the small station.
Mungo took his scuffed cardboard suitcase off the rack made of knotted cord, wondering whether to say goodbye to his fellow traveller.
Deciding against, he stepped on to the platform and shut the door with care, as though prolonging the act might delay his arrival.
Ahead was a bridge, its underside blackened by the smoke of countless locomotives.
A gangling porter with long sideboards emerged from the station buildings, gave the train driver a casual thumbs up, and blew a short blast on his whistle.
Longing now to jump back on board, Mungo watched as the mighty engine woke from its doze and heaved itself back to wakefulness with  huge, slow piston strokes.
The sooty plume from its stack flattened as it grumbled under the bridge, and Mungo caught a last glimpse of the redskin, still absorbing scandal and sport.
There was no sign of Emily.
Apart from the porter, who was now heading back to a door marked Waiting Room, the platform was bare.
‘Excuse me,’ Mungo said.
The porter did not even pause in his stride.
‘Excuse me!’
This time the porter turned his head, like a tortoise, while the rest of him was still facing his warm refuge.
‘I've come to…
Do you happen to know where Mrs Pinnegar lives?’
Mungo noticed that he had an angry spot on the side of his nose.
‘Who?’ the tall figure said, looking truculent.
‘Pinnegar.
Mrs Mary Ann Pinnegar,’ Mungo repeated.
‘She's got a daughter called…’
‘Up the top, on the left,’ the porter mumbled, covering the remaining ground to the waiting-room before Mungo could bother him again.
Mungo had a view of a tantalizing fire through the briefly open door.
The blaze reminded him that he was beginning to feel cold.
Well, what a great welcome!
Hungry, chilled, two hundred miles from home, and no one to meet him.
So this was what people meant by ‘northern hospitality’!
Heading for the Way Out sign, which guided him through a gate in the white fence bordering the platform, he started up the steep station approach.
Even here the forest was in evidence.
On either side were slender pine trees, almost seeming to meet over the roadway.
Such sky as was to be seen between them was as grey as a school sweater.
Kicking at pine cones on the path, Mungo was halfway to the top of the slope when a slight figure appeared round the corner of the station entrance.
Despite the chilly autumn afternoon, she was wearing a thin old-fashioned dress which came  down almost to her ankles.
She advanced a little way and then simply stopped, her head inclined, her eyes appearing to take in every detail of him.
For several moments they stood in silence.
The girl was pale and intense, her expression revealing nothing.
Finally Mungo could bear it no longer.
‘You Emily?’ he said.
She nodded.
Mungo walked towards her.
‘Mungo.…’
Before he could introduce himself, Emily turned and began to walk back the way she had come.
‘Hang on a minute,’ Mungo said.
‘Is this how you usually greet long-lost cousins?’
Emily shook her head.
‘You're the only one,’ she said.
‘Lucky old me,’ Mungo said, more to himself than to her.
As they reached the entrance gate, he felt it was time to add: ‘Look, this wasn't my idea, you know.
I didn't even want to come.’
Emily pointed.
‘It's over there,’ she said, indicating a white house across the road, while apparently ignoring Mungo's statement.
Resting against the corner of the building was a large triangular boulder.
As they approached, Mungo asked:
‘What's that, for heaven's sake?’
‘The devil's mounting block,’ Emily told him, with no hint of a smile.
‘What's he want a mounting block for?
I thought he could do anything.
If he needs a leg-up to get on a flipping horse…!’
Again, Emily paid no attention.
‘You must be starved, lad; come on in.’
In contrast to Emily, her mother was warm and welcoming, though at first sight she seemed lean and severe.
Her wispy grey hair was tied back in a bun, and she wore a cotton housecoat which crossed over at the front and tied at the  waist.
She took Mungo's case, hung up his mac and led him to a fire as lively as the one in the waiting-room.
‘Sit yourself down and let's get some tea inside you.
Stanley!
Come and say hello to your nephew.
He'll not be a minute,’ she explained to Mungo, ‘only we've a bantam gone missing on the batters.
It happens all the time.’
Mungo nodded, though he had not the faintest idea what she was talking about.
While Mary Ann busied herself in the kitchen, and the uncommunicative Emily disappeared, he took in his surroundings.
The room was large, with a red-tiled floor.
On either side of the grate were black ovens embossed with the maker's name.
The mantelpiece bore a strange conglomeration of objects, including a huge brass shell-case, probably from a tank, Mungo thought, and a white mug with a blurred inscription.
No item of furniture matched any other.
There was a low-slung sofa with a faded loose cover; a rocking-chair with canvas strips hanging out of the bottom; and a broad oak table on metal castors.
In one corner was a strange life-size wooden cut-out of a black boy holding a tray.
There were two stern clocks on the walls — neither of which agreed with the time according to Rock Hardy — and a set of coloured prints showing dreary desert scenes.
It was like a neglected museum in a very poor country, where they hoarded the things no one else wanted.
As Mungo peered at the tank shell, a voice behind him said:
‘They will go laying on the batters, the blighters.’
Mungo spun round to see a thin, stooped figure in blue dungarees.
He looked as though a cannonball had hit him amidships and left him with a hollow chest and a permanent arch in his back.
There were crescents under his eyes like bruises, and his jaw jutted out as though it were trying to overtake his nose.
Mungo supposed that this lugubrious apparition was his Uncle Stanley.
‘Sometimes they'll be gone for days on end,’ Stanley said, warming to his theme.
‘I've known them out a week.
And the eggs are all over the place.
But this one'll not be back, I doubt.’
Evidently accepting the fact, Stanley sat in the rocking-chair, motioning Mungo to seat himself too.
Mungo was not sure how to slide into the conversation, such as it was.
His knowledge of chickens was limited to the roast variety.
On reflection, living in the city, he had never seen one alive.
But that was something he could not possibly admit.
‘They've about as much sense as Dick's hatband,’ Stanley added.
Pondering this mysterious complaint, Mungo had still not found an opening gambit when Mary Ann came back beaming, with the tea-tray.
Behind her, strained and silent, was Emily, who took her cup and sat beside the wooden black boy.
‘She's a rum girl and no mistake,’ Mary Ann said.
‘The cat's got her tongue, Mungo.
If she's not in the mood she'll say nothing all night.
She's decided she's a vegetarian.
That's the latest.
Now then tuck in, there's a good lad.’
Mungo noticed Emily watching him as he took a pile of thick ham sandwiches and two enormous pickled onions.
Between ravenous bites, he did his best to answer questions about his mother and father, meant in a kindly, rather than an inquisitive way.
Stanley's jaw clicked as he chomped.
‘…
Blood's thicker than water, when all's said and done,’ Mary Ann was saying.
‘I'm very fond of your mother.
We were always close as girls.
As like as two peas.
We didn't half get up to some mischief, I'll tell you.
Little tinkers, we were.’
She chuckled at the memory.
As she cleared away the tray, Stanley picked up a newspaper and started to read.
It carried the same headline as the one Mungo had seen in the train: ‘BIRD'S  HEAD CLUE TO GIRL'S DEATH.
Intrigued, Mungo was about to ask his uncle what it meant when Stanley said:
‘Now then, our Emily, get your skates on and show him the lie of the land.
He's not come all this way to twiddle his thumbs.’
Unwilling but resigned, Emily led Mungo out.
At the side of the house, across a cobbled yard, lay an L-shaped stable block.
As Mungo hunched his shoulders and thrust his hands deep into his pockets against the dank evening mist, Emily explained that this had once been a riding school.
In a bay where the two arms of the L joined was an open vintage car.
Emily switched on a bare bulb overhead.
‘Lagonda’ it said, above the car's radiator.
‘The police use it,’ Emily explained.
‘What for?’
Mungo asked.
‘It's a bit ancient for a car chase.’
‘They have a thing called a skid-pan; covered in grease.
It's where they practise.’
Then, looking at the Lagonda, Emily went on: ‘My Dad used to teach people to drive in it.’
In one breath she had tripled her communication average, Mungo thought.
Things were looking up.
‘What happens in the stables now?’ he asked.
‘Nothing.
It's just storage mostly.
My Dad's a compulsive collector.’
Emily clicked another switch and Mungo understood.
In the first stable, off the bay, was an astonishing display of unrelated bric-a-brac.
All the items had in common was dust.
It was as though the unwanted debris from a dozen mansions had been dumped in a single, overcrowded space.
There were tarnished brass bedsteads; curved swords in beaded scabbards; caricatures of beaky men in top hats; piles of willow-pattern plates; a stuffed pike, barely visible in a filthy glass case; books with pages freckled by damp; boxes of cricket balls bearing small silver shields; a photographic enlarger; scoring boards for billiards; hatstands; teapots  with chipped spouts, and numerous other objects which Mungo was unable to identify.
Once again he was aware of Emily's gaze as he marvelled at the confusion.
To his left was a long, shadowy, cobbled passage running beside what looked like barred loose boxes.
Pointing to the far darkness, he said: ‘What's at the end, there?’
Emily turned, putting her hand on the switch.
‘It's getting cold,’ she said.
Stepping out of the stables, she opened the half-door of the Lagonda and got in on the driver's side.
Mungo climbed up beside her.
After a moment's pause he said: ‘I didn't mean to be crabby — about not wanting to come.’
‘It doesn't matter,’ she replied.
He looked at the small glass dials on the wooden dashboard.
‘I keep seeing that thing about the girl and the bird's head,’ he said.
Emily made no reply.
‘Why a bird's head?’
Mungo persisted.
Emily's voice was quiet and measured, as though she were making an effort to remain calm.
‘They found this girl…’ was all she said at first.
‘Who's ‘they’’?'
‘An old man called Mr Brazendale and his wife.
They were out for a walk.’
‘How do you know their names?’
Mungo asked.
‘Are we talking about here, in the village?’
Emily nodded.
‘And?’
Mungo said.
‘They found her, that's all…by a wood.’
‘Who was she?
How old was she?’
Suddenly Emily was angry.
‘What's it to you?’ she blazed.
Then, unfastening the car door, she ran off.
Terrific, Mungo thought!
So the art of conversation is dead after all.
Easing across to the driver's seat, he imagined himself starting the magnificent old car and driving home, there and then, without pausing to ask any more questions.
Something about his secretive  cousin, however; the warmth of Mary Ann's welcome; and the recent tragedy with its peculiar symbol, tempted him not to be hasty.
CHAPTER 2
The following morning Mungo woke early.
The bed, probably another of Stanley's acquisitions, sagged in the middle.
On the mantelpiece, above the small fireplace, was a framed certificate, issued by the ‘Ancient Guild of Foresters’.
At the bottom there was a name written in tea-coloured ink: ‘Joshua Rainbow Pinnegar’.
Who would christen a child ‘Rainbow’ Mungo wondered?
The boy must have had a terrible time at school.
No doubt he had signed himself ‘Joshua R. Pinnegar’ or, wiser still, left the ‘R’out entirely.
Gathering up the eiderdown and drawing it round his shoulders, Mungo tiptoed to the window over the cold lino.
Nosing aside the dingy curtains, he peered at the village.
Across the road was a single-storey hut: A. ZAMOYSKI — SHOE REPAIRS, read the sign.
To the rear of that was a large field, bounded on the left by the railway line, and at the back by the ever-present forest.
From here, the mass of trees looked as solid as a cliff-face.
Over to the right was the main street, with a grocer's shop on the corner and a straggle of grey houses.
Mungo was puzzled by the place.
Why was it here at all?
Why had the first inhabitants worked hard to make a clearing, and settled where nature did not want them?
There was no river; no coal mine; no interest.
It was simply a dull dot on a map.
Well, at least he supposed it was.
He had tried to pinpoint the village before leaving home but had failed to find it.
Still speculating, Mungo headed along the landing to the bathroom.
Through the half-open door he could see an old man sharpening a cut-throat razor on a strap, stroking it up and down in rhythm.
Wearing only pyjama bottoms, he seemed not much taller than Mungo, but his chest and shoulders were immensely strong, like those of a boxer.
His thick white hair was cut short and unevenly, so that in parts it stood up in clumps.
When he was satisfied that the blade was true, he held up his left arm, pinching the tip of his nose between thumb and forefinger, and with the other hand began to shave his lathered upper lip.
Curling his toes in a vain attempt to frustrate the inhospitable lino, Mungo watched, fascinated.
Soon the old man became aware of his presence, turned, and winked.
‘I'll not be long, lad,’ he said.
Then, offering the razor:’ I'll lend you this if you want.’
Mungo smiled.
Could this be J. R. Pinnegar?
If so, no one would ever have dared to tease him about his middle name.
Breakfast was a meal and a half: porridge with cream; bacon and rich-yolked eggs; deep-yellow farm butter on thick fresh toast, and mugs of sweet tea.
There was no sign of Emily, but Mungo felt comfortable in the presence of Stanley, Mary Ann and the old man.
‘It's a rum name, is ‘Mungo’,’ the latter said.
‘Give over, Jos,’ Mary Ann said.
‘You can talk.’
To Mungo she said: ‘No rummer than Rainbow, is it, love?’
Mungo shook his head, pleased to have his suspicions confirmed.
‘Aye, well, that's true enough,’ Jos conceded.
‘There was an explorer,’ Mungo tried to explain.
‘Mungo something.
My Mum couldn't remember his second name.’
‘She always was a bit doolally,’ Mary Ann said, smiling.
Stanley, who was reading a paper, said to Mary Ann: ‘Tell our Emily she's not to go far.’
‘Why?
What's brought this on?’
Mary Ann asked.
‘Just think on,’ Stanley said.
‘According to this we've to keep an eye out for anything — or anybody — suspicious.
‘Cheerful Charlie,’ Mary Ann said, rolling her eyes.
Stanley put down his paper and glared at her.
Mungo noticed that he shaved his black eyebrows.
‘I had a horse once, ‘Cheerful Charlie’,’ Jos said to no one in particular.
‘Aye, we know, Father,’ Stanley said, as if hearing the story for the umpteenth time.
‘Died on the public weighbridge,’ the old man continued.
just went on his knees and popped his clogs.
Funny thing.’
After breakfast, in the courtyard, Mungo came across Jos again.
He was lying under a pummelled blue van, with only his grease-streaked head and shoulders showing.
Even in this weather he was wearing a sleeveless vest.
The grey hairs on his chest were smeared with oil.
‘What are ‘batters’?’
Mungo asked.
Jos reached for the pockmarked chrome bumper and pulled himself free.
‘Come here,’ he said.
‘I'll show you.’
The old man led him through a gate on the opposite side of the yard from the stable-block.
Mungo found himself in a small, wild garden with a rickety greenhouse whose roof was as green as pond-slime.
Marking the boundary was the railway line, sunk in a cut below high banks.
‘There,’ Jos said, pointing to the bushy slopes that flanked the track.
‘That's where he loses all his chickens.
They go and lay on the batters and very often they don't
Taking advantage of the moment, Mungo said: ‘What's all this about the girl?
In the papers?’
Jos looked hard at him.
‘Emily didn't seem to want to talk about it,’ Mungo said.
Jos picked up a length of cane.
‘It's a bad do,’ he said.
‘She'd not been long in the village.
When they found her there wasn't hardly a mark on her.
Just a pinprick on her left arm.
But when they came to lift the body, there was this bird's head.
Just the skull, like.’
Mungo wondered why the old man kept his voice down.
Who could possibly overhear them in a garden?
‘Well, haven't they any idea who did it?’ he asked.
Jos shook his head, turning to go back to the van.
‘Did Emily know the girl?’
Mungo said.
‘Oh, aye,’ Jos replied.
‘They were quite pally.’
As they passed through the gate into the yard, he added: ‘If I was you, lad, I wouldn't be too nosey.’
Later, left alone, Mungo considered the advice.
Sitting behind the wheel of the Lagonda, he tried to understand why the old man had discouraged him.
perhaps the villagers were too saddened to want reminding of the case?
If so, he could sympathize with them.
Or maybe they resented a stranger poking his nose into their affairs?
It was a bit late for that, since the press had got hold of the story anyway.
Could the locals be protecting someone?
No, that only happened in films.
But what other motive could there be for silence?
It was a few moments before an answer occurred to him.
Suppose the locals were simply afraid?
Afraid of what, though, he asked himself?
Were they scared of it happening again?
Unsettled by the riddle, Mungo finally decided that Jos had probably shut him up just to get some peace.
Reaching for the Lagonda's gear-stick, which was outside the driver's door, he accelerated into the lead.
Crowds lining the banked track cheered as he wiped the sweat from his forehead with a red handkerchief.
Thirty-five laps into the race he was beginning to feel faint from a combination of thirst and sunstroke.
The fuel gauge had gone on the blink shortly after the start, but pulling in for a pit-stop would cost him precious seconds.
The pain in his ribs, three of which had been crushed in a recent collision, was almost unbearable.
Mungo gritted his teeth.
Lapping a straggler, he forced himself to focus on the shimmering surface.
The steering-wheel juddered in his hands.
The stench of fumes was overpowering.
And still the torpedo-nose of D'Annunzio's 12-cylinder road-going missile filled his rear-view mirror.
Hang on!
At all costs he must…!
‘Coming?’
A spectator, on the track?
What were the stewards thinking about?
Mungo swung round.
Emily was standing beside the stationary Lagonda, holding a bicycle.
There was another, with a cross-bar, leaning against the wall.
Mungo felt sheepish.
How long had she been there, he wondered?
Had she seen the whole, ridiculous daydream?
‘Where?’ he asked.
‘You'll see,’ she said, seeming more relaxed.
They headed down beside A. Zamoyski — Shoe Repairs — and past the bowling green which had an old railway carriage as a pavilion.
Two women were playing, in men's white hats.
As the bowl left their hand, they would break into a genteel, bent-kneed run, concentrating on the jack.
The road dipped and reared, with trees on either side.
Again Mungo had the sensation that the village was no more than a clearing; a space borrowed from the forest.
Emily hunched forward over her handlebars, tense and determined.
Even she, however, was defeated by the last steep hill.
Both of them got off and walked.
At the top, there was an expanse of fields stretching to the tree-line, and a small lake on which, even from here, Mungo could count five swans.
Abandoning their bicycles they began the long trudge to Emily's mysterious destination.
Mungo wanted to ask about the dead girl, but rather than risk another deep frost, he said:
‘Don't you get fed up of all these trees?’
‘No,’ Emily said.
‘I like them.’
‘But there's nothing to like,’ Mungo persisted pushing his luck.
‘They just stick up.’
‘Well you could say the same about people.’
‘Yes,’ Mungo replied, ‘but at least people talk…sometimes.’
‘How do you know trees don't?’
Emily said.
‘Well, it's not very likely, is it?’
Mungo appealed to her good sense.
‘I mean, what would they talk about, for heaven's sake?
They never do anything.
‘I say,’’ he said, imagining tree-conversation, ‘that was a nice drop of rain we had last night.’’
‘Only a human being could think of anything as boring as that,’ Emily said, smiling for the first time.
‘They might only say important things.’
‘Such as?’
Emily would not be drawn further.
‘I don't know; things that are important to them.’
She paused.
‘Jos used to work in the forest.
He was lent to a forester when he was a child.’
‘Lent?’
Emily nodded.
‘His parents were too poor to keep him so they lent him to a forester.
In return for Jos's labour he gave him bed and board.’
Mungo thought of the small boy farmed out to a stranger.
The work would account for his obvious strength.
‘Tough life,’ he said.
Emily did not reply.
‘What's up here anyway?’
Mungo asked after a pause.
‘Patience is a virtue,’ Emily said.
Presently they came to a stone wall, beyond which was a huge symmetrical mound.
Mungo followed Emily over.
Now he could see that the mound had an entrance, marked by a boulder as large as the mounting block.
To either side of it, slim stone tiles had been layered, end on, with incredible skill, fanning like birds' wings from the top of the entrance to the foot of the  mound.
Mungo noticed that the boulder itself bore a reddish scorch mark, and that the ground in front of it was blackened.
‘This is it,’ Emily said, watching for Mungo's reaction.
‘It's the burial mound of a chieftain.
They call it ‘the long barrow’.’
‘Who was he?
Do we know?’
Mungo asked.
Emily shook her head.
‘The original unknown warrior,’ she said.
‘It looks as though somebody's had a fire here,’ Mungo said.
‘Maybe,’ Emily answered.
‘Why would they do that?’
Emily shrugged: ‘Who knows?’
Following her along the well-worn path to the side of the mound, Mungo could see that the tomb extended for perhaps sixty feet, falling gradually all the way from the high-point of the entrance.
Covered in lush grass, it looked like some great smooth-skinned monster poised to spring.
Hollowed out mid-way was a small chamber which contained seven standing stones, now clamped to the walls with metal hoops.
Mungo went in, while Emily hovered outside.
There was a musty smell and a deep silence.
Above all there was a feeling of strength.
This would be here as long as the world, Mungo thought.
Unlike feeble human houses, this would witness the earth's dying day.
‘The strange thing is, the stones don't come from here at all,’ Emily was saying.
‘The quarry was miles away.
No one can tell how they got here.’
‘Maybe Jos brought them in his van,’ Mungo said, looking round, hoping to make her smile again.
Too late.
She had moved out of hearing.
Before leaving the chamber, Mungo turned back to take in the scene; to fix it in his mind.
He found that by staring, and then blinking, he could ‘photograph’ objects.
Sometimes the image would only remain a few seconds.
Occasionally  he could recall it in detail much later.
Concentrating hard in the stillness, he shut his eyes on the ancient resting place.
Walking back across the fields, he suggested that they stop by the lake on the way.
Emily was reluctant but finally relented, agreeing to make a five-minute detour.
The afternoon was drawing in and the water was choppy under the keen wind.
Emily was slightly ahead of him as they approached the fringe of brown reeds.
‘Have you got friends?’ he said.
She half turned but thought better of it.
He was being impertinent, he knew that; nevertheless he asked the question again.
‘Have you?’
‘I don't need them,’ she said in a quiet voice.
‘Everybody needs them,’ Mungo said.
‘I don't,’ she repeated.
‘Well, who do you tell things to?’
Mungo went on.
‘Who do you have a laugh with?’
Emily was silent.
‘Haven't you ever had a friend?’
Mungo said, in what he hoped was a sympathetic tone.
‘I mean ever?’
‘Yes,’ she said, so subdued that Mungo could barely hear.
He noticed too that her shoulders seemed to convulse.
Was she shivering?
Mungo drew level.
Was the wind making her eyes water or were they tears?
She hid her face from him.
Mungo was embarrassed.
‘I…
I'm…
There's no need to…’ he stammered.
There was a pause.
‘Look,’ he said at last, ‘the point is, I'd like to be your friend.
Even if you don't need one.’
‘We'd better get back,’ was all she said.
At the white house Emily's father was furious.
‘I thought you were told not to go far, young lady.
Eh?’
His shaven eyebrows worked themselves up and down as he shouted.
‘There's Rose found dead, maybe  murdered, and you're out gallivanting in the dark.
It's just plain asking for trouble.’
He turned his anger on Mungo.
‘And you're not much better, young man.
What the hell do you think you're playing at?
Eh?’
‘He's a guest, Stanley.
Leave over,’ Mary Ann said.
‘I don't care what he is,’ Stanley insisted.
‘I'd tan his backside if he was mine.’
‘Well, he's not yours,’ Mary Ann said, with a smile for Mungo, ‘so just you leave over.
Emily, would you get my glasses for me, there's a love.’
Relieved, Emily left the room, head down.
‘Fancy a game of darts, lad?’
Jos said to Mungo, breaking what was left of the ice.
Mungo beamed.
Jos led him across the dark yard to a set of double doors, near the old Lagonda.
The room was bare except for a ping-pong table on folding trestle legs.
The playing surface was made of ill-fitting planks.
‘One of Stanley's efforts,’ Jos said.
‘For an ironmonger he's not much idea.’
‘Who plays on it?’
Mungo asked.
‘Nobody,’ Jos replied.
‘Nobody can.
The ball flies all over the place.
You'd put the umpire's eye out.’
He grinned.
‘Now then, this is more like it.’
He opened a cupboard at the far end to reveal a dartboard.
Here and there the stuffing bulged, but for the most part it was in reasonable shape.
Jos took six plastic-flighted darts out of a dirty half-pint beer mug and, handing three to Mungo, said: ‘Middle for diddle.’
After ten minutes, Mungo was trailing.
The old man had an unorthodox style but remarkable judgement.
Wrist cocked, he sighted with care before loosing the dart in a sudden jerk.
Mungo watched him pile up the treble twenties, thinking of the small boy adopted by the woodcutter.
How old was he?
Mungo had no idea.
It was like trying to age an oak.
Square on his feet, Jos looked as though he could hold off a steamroller.
He threw with such power that Mungo half expected his darts to go through the board and stick in the wall.
‘So you've been up the barrow,’ Jos said out of the blue, as he lined up on the final double.
‘What was she doing taking you there?’
‘How do you mean?’
Mungo asked.
‘I mean, why not?’
‘It was near there they found the body,’ Jos said.
In bed, Mungo reviewed the day.
All in all it was not turning out as badly as he had feared.
Jos and Mary Ann were easy to talk to, even if Emily and Stanley were not.
And he felt sure that Emily, at least, would come round in the end.
He had enjoyed the visit to the burial mound.
But above all, the fate of the girl, Rose, was more and more intriguing.
So many questions and, as yet, not a single answer.
Why the bird's head?
Why the pinprick on the left arm?
Why the reluctance to talk about her?
What had she been doing on her own up there by the long barrow?
Or had her body been taken there after…?
As he ran through the list, he could just make out the wording of the certificate over the mantelpiece: ‘Ancient Guild of Foresters’.
Mungo closed his eyes, summoning back the image he had tried to capture in the barrow.
It seemed darker now.
He was alone.
The standing stones were grouped round him like sentinels, their heads bowed, their feet rooted in the earth.
Mungo sensed that they longed to burst their bonds; to throw off the restraining metal hoops and re-join their mute companions in the night; to return, perhaps, to their native quarry.
The air was damp, unwelcoming.
He was not wanted here.
This was no place for the living.
The longer he stood, in his mind's eye, the more the walls seemed to close in on him, ready to seal him in their cold, inescapable embrace.
As he searched the memory, he was drawn to one stone in particular; a large one on the right; the third  from the opening.
It compelled him to look closer; to feel the smooth, damp surface; to grasp the ring of iron that held it prisoner; to look into the black space behind it.
What lay there in the shadows?
Had it been there always?
Was it part of the burial ground's unknowable secret?
What was the stone telling him?
CHAPTER 3
‘I'll call you Stone,’ Emily announced.
Two days after Mungo's arrival she was beginning to sound more friendly.
‘What if I don't want to be called ‘Stone’?’ he said.
‘I'll still call you it anyway.
Mungo's such a stupid name.’
Mungo felt like saying: ‘Well, Emily's not much better,’ but opted instead for peaceful co-existence.
They were standing in Mr Zamoyski's shop, amid the smell of leather, polish and, faintly, feet.
It was no more than a wooden shed, with shelves layered round the walls, and a counter.
On two sides were boxes containing new shoes, while on the third were dozens of repairs awaiting collection.
Emily was turning over their labels, to the accompaniment of Mr Zamoyski's hammering from the back room.
She and Mungo had already passed the time of day with him.
Suddenly Emily grew tense.
She was holding a white slip-on shoe with a strapless back.
‘What's up?’
Mungo said.
When there was no reply, he joined her, reading the label.
‘McGarry’, it said.
‘So?’
Mungo raised his eyebrows.
Very slowly, Emily replaced the shoe.
‘It was Rose's,’ she said.
‘And she was the friend you meant?
The girl they found?’
Emily nodded.
‘I'm sorry,’ Mungo said.
At last, however, she seemed prepared to talk.
‘I had a strange…
I don't  know what it was, exactly…a strange feeling about the barrow,’ he went on.
‘It kind of wanted to tell me something.
Sounds mad, doesn't it?’
Just as Emily was on the point of replying, the hammering stopped and Mr Zamoyski emerged from the entrance to his workshop.
He was thick-set, with thinning hair brushed back, a magnificent walrus moustache and several missing teeth.
Emphasizing each word as though it were followed by an exclamation mark, he announced, grinning: ‘Here — is — Zamoyski!’
In that moment, Emily turned, wrenched open the front door, with a clang of the coiled bell overhead, and escaped.
‘Blast!’
Mungo said, under his breath.
Looking bewildered, with one hand on his chest which was covered by a scarred leather apron, Mr Zamoyski asked: ‘Something I say?’
‘No,’ Mungo reassured him.
‘I think it's something I said.’
‘She is sad lady, since…’
Mr Zamoyski shook his head.
‘No good here.’
His hand moved to his heart.
‘What was she like, Rose McGarry?’
Mungo asked, gambling that, unlike the others, Mr Zamoyski might open up.
Mr Zamoyski shrugged.
‘I did not like,’ he said.
‘My missus did not like.’
‘Why?’
Mungo asked.
‘Why didn't you like her?’
Mr Zamoyski put a thick, grimy finger under his nose and tilted back his head.
‘You mean she was snooty?’
Mungo interpreted.
Mr Zamoyski nodded.
‘Very…important.’
‘So she wasn't very popular?’
Mr Zamoyski folded his beefy arms.
‘No,’ he confirmed.
‘But why do you think she was…?’
Mr Zamoyski unfolded his arms, shrugged and turned again to the back room, ending the interview.
‘I am not policeman,’ he said.
Later, sitting in the Lagonda with one hand on the steering wheel, Mungo tried to recall what he knew about the dead girl, apart from her name.
She had been a friend of Emily's; possibly her only friend; but if Mr Zamoyski was right, she had not been generally liked.
She was a newcomer to the village.
She sometimes wore white shoes.
Most people preferred not to talk about her.
And her body, bearing one tiny mark, had been found with a bird's head, near the barrow.
That was it.
Mungo could understand why the police investigation was making so little progress.
He wondered who had seen Rose on her last day, and where?
And was there any connection between her and the standing stones?
If not, why were they so much on his mind?
Indeed, why was he so drawn to the case?
It would have been simpler, and possibly safer, to ignore it.
It was unlikely that anything he might discover had not already come to light.
Worse still, involvement might lead him into actual danger.
Presumably killers did not take kindly to amateur detectives.
No, the sensible thing to do was to put it out of his mind and never refer to it again.
And yet the reluctance of the villagers to discuss Rose's unexplained death had lured him like an irresistible hint of treasure.
Despite the nagging of common sense, Mungo knew he would never be satisfied until he found some answers.
He reasoned, therefore, that he must bide his time.
And having reached the decision, he felt a strong desire to see the stones again; to understand their meaning.
But how to visit the place on his own, without arousing alarm or suspicion?
His thoughts were interrupted by Mary Ann, calling his name.
Presently she appeared in the rearview mirror.
‘So that's where you're hiding,’ she said.
‘Only Jos has got some calls to make and he was wondering whether you'd like a ride?
He'll take you to see your  grandma.
You'll have to look sharp, now.
He wants to get off.’
When Mungo joined the old man, he was revving the van.
‘Hop in, lad,’ he shouted, over the engine roar.
‘All aboard the Skylark.’
Mungo slammed his door and the van lurched forward.
Jos was wearing yellow leather gauntlets which looked totally out of place in such a decrepit vehicle.
Every so often he would rub the condensation off the windscreen with them.
Meanwhile the wipers worked at different speeds, and one travelled in a shorter arc than the other.
The gears complained with a loud grind at every change, and there was a strong smell of petrol.
None of these imperfections, however, appeared to concern Jos in the least.
Brow furrowed in concentration, he willed the van up the steep hills.
Beyond the fields near the long barrow, Jos turned into a grassy drive next to an enormous beech tree.
Parking in front of an open barn, he led Mungo down a path to the farmhouse, which was flanked by a black wooden lean-to.
Before Jos could knock at the door, it was opened by a tiny old woman bent at such an angle that she could not see them without straightening up, her head cocked to one enquiring side.
‘Now then, young man,’ she said to Jos, ‘who've we got here?’
‘Do you mean to say you don't know your own grandson, Alice?’
Jos said.
‘Ee,’ she said, ‘my eyes are going.’
Taking Mungo's hand in hers, which was clawed with arthritis, she drew him into the house.
Her difficulty in identifying Mungo was hardly surprising, since they had only met once before, when she had come to stay.
Mungo remembered seeing her teeth in a glass on the bedside table.
With an effort she turned to Jos, who had followed  them a short way.
‘You'll stop for a cup of tea, Jos?’ she said.
‘No, ta,’ Jos replied.
‘I'll have to get off.
I'll pick him up presently.’
Addressing herself to Jos, but winking at Mungo, Alice said: ‘Well, just you mind you behave yourself now.’
In the sitting-room, polished and on display, Alice sat Mungo on one side of the fire, while she perched on the edge of an armchair opposite.
Her hands, with their swollen knuckles, rested on her knees.
Because of her stoop she was forced to contemplate her thick stockings, the colour of cocoa.
‘Mango, is it?’ she asked.
‘Mungo, Grandma.’
‘I knew it was summat of the sort.’
For several minutes they talked of this and that.
Alice asked after her daughter, Mungo's mother, and complained about the price of bread.
She spoke of the pain in her hands, neighbours who had passed on, and twice asked Mungo what school he was going to now.
At one stage she somehow got on to the subject of coal and said she simply did not believe it came from wood.
Why could it not have been there always, hard and black from the start?
Mungo did not have an answer.
Eventually she said: ‘You boys are always hungry,’ and brought him a piece of cold apple-pie from the pantry, with a pool of cream beside it.
After a second helping, Alice took Mungo into the lean-to.
Along one side were deep bins with sloping lids.
Opening the nearest, she revealed a store of golden grain.
‘Go on,’ she said.
‘Put your hand in.’
Mungo was tentative.
‘Go on,’ she urged.
‘Don't be frit.’
This time he plunged his arm in up to the elbow.
To his surprise he could feel a warm egg, which he drew out.
It was a glorious, deep brown.
‘It's my hidey-hole,’ she said, creasing into a smile.
‘Out of the rats’ road.’
As she showed him the barn, they began to talk of the forest.
Like Jos, her brother had worked there as a boy.
When they were children, she said, the villagers had been afraid of the forest folk.
They were silent and full of secrets, rarely mixing with strangers.
People believed they knew things that could never be shared; mysteries too deep and powerful for outsiders to understand.
‘Do you know what they did at Christmas and Easter?’ she asked, enjoying Mungo's obvious interest in the story.
‘They were just about the only times we set eyes on them,’ she went on.
‘You've never seen anything like it.
They'd come into the shops covered in Christmas decorations.
They had them wound round buttons, tied in buttonholes, pinned to their sleeves; anywhere they could hang them.
Glass balls, little angels, satin bows, sprigs of holly; all kinds of bits and bobs.
Just like kids.
Just standing there like big kids.
Saying nothing.
Great red faces, not smiling.
They used to give us the creeps.’
She made a gesture with her crippled hand as though brushing away a cobweb, to dismiss the memory.
‘They were a queer lot and no mistake.’
Then, putting her knuckles to her head, indicating her brain, she added: ‘Between you, me and the gatepost, we used to think they had a screw loose.’
‘Why Christmas decorations?’
Mungo asked.
‘I don't know, I'm sure,’ Alice said.
‘Goodness knows what possessed them.’
A thought occurred to Mungo.
‘Did you know Jos in those days, Grandma?’
‘Certainly I did,’ she said.
‘Jos was one of them.
He was smaller than the rest, but strong?’
The question was an appeal to Mungo's imagination.
‘He was like a young cart-horse.’
She stopped in the path, remembering; her head tilted to one side.
‘When he was older — he'd perhaps be twenty — there was a champion strong-man came to town; Alfred Emblow.
He had these weights — dumbells like — and he said if anybody could lift them over their heads, he'd give them a gold watch.
Well, you never saw such a sight.
They all tried.
Big lads they were and all.
Not a one could do it.
Then Jos upped and had a go.
You should have heard the crowd.
Some of the girls were sweet on him.
He was only a little 'un, but he got one weight over his head all right.
We didn't half cheer him on.
He couldn't manage the other though.
Couldn't get it higher than his chest.’
Alice did a small, frail mime to show how Jos had struggled.
‘So this Alfred Emblow steps forward,’ she went on, deepening her voice a tone to impersonate the strong-man, ‘and says: ‘Well done, young man.
I wouldn't have credited it.
You see, the weights are uneven,’ he says.
‘There's not a man alive could lift them.’
So we all shouted: ‘Give him the gold watch any road!’
And the strong-man holds his arm up to quiet us down.’
Alice crinkled into a smile.
‘What I am going to do,’ he says, ‘is make a special presentation, to mark this brave effort.’
And he gives Jos a watch.
We could see it wasn't gold, mind you, but it was quite a thing, all the same.
We've none of us ever forgot it.
Come on in,’ she said, starting to walk again.
‘You'll catch your death out here.’
Mungo wondered whether she had been one of the girls who was ‘sweet’ on Jos.
Holding back he said, on impulse: ‘Grandma, I just want to see the lake, before I go…
I collect feathers.’
It was a lame excuse, he knew.
Alice turned her head.
‘Well, look sharp then.
Else you'll keep Jos waiting.’
With that she shuffled into the house.
As he crossed the stile into the first field, Mungo felt a pang of shame at telling Alice a lie.
She deserved, and probably would have understood, the truth.
He simply wanted to re-visit the barrow; to see whether he had missed anything among the standing stones; to set his  mind at rest.
He felt half excited, half afraid, as though he were delving into a hidden world; a world which preferred to remain undiscovered; which might go to any lengths to protect its secrets.
And he must be back before Jos returned to the farm.
The old man had already warned him to mind his own business.
With the first heavy drops of rain, Mungo started to run.
Black clouds were rolling up over the forest to his right, which now looked hostile, as though it were waiting for him to make a false move; to tall perhaps, so that it could advance and swallow him, like a wild animal.
Forcing his way through a gap in a hedge, he caught his hand on a thorn and saw beads of blood ooze from a long scratch.
Setting his face towards the barrow, which was still perhaps half a mile away in dramatic relief against the angry sky, he had the feeling that he was bring followed; that wherever he went, and no matter how fast he covered the ground, his every move was shadowed.
But who were his pursuers?
Were they strange, silent figures, festooned with Christmas baubles, tracking him with measured, ghostly tread; timeless, faceless, without mercy?
Breathing hard, he drew level with the edge of the lake.
A large white shape, on the nearside of the reeds, caught his eye.
He broke off to see what it was.
As he approached, it seemed to be a crumpled sheet of paper, brilliant on the cold, dark earth.
Maybe it had blown from the farm; a grain bag, or a sack of feed for the hens.
Soon, however, he realized that it was neither of these.
Recognition stopped him short.
He saw that the white apparition was a dead swan.
What puzzled him was that the beautiful creature could never have arranged itself in that unnatural position.
The magnificent wings were laid out at full stretch, as though the swan were in flight, and the head rested with a perfect profile uppermost, above the frozen curve of the neck.
It was faultless, like an illustration from a book on  heraldry, or an enormous butterfly pinned by a heartless collector.
Mungo stood panting over the body, unable to comprehend.
The rain was fiercer now, thudding into the feathers, spoiling their delicacy.
As he bent his knees for a closer look, a single spot of blood from his cut hand fell on to a wing; shocking crimson on the pale surface, spreading into a crude blotch.
Mungo reached down to hold the wing-tip in his palm.
It was as lifeless and rigid as a piece of sculpture; dispelling the illusion of flight.
Lifting further, he bent his head to look under the broad limb, once so thrilling with power.
The earth beneath was still dry, though yellowed slightly.
Resting there, in the protection of the mighty canopy, was an object which made him feel faint with fear.
It was the bleached skull of a small bird.
Mungo's heart pumped harder as he held his breath.
‘BIRD'S HEAD CLUE TO GIRL'S DEATH’.
The headline seemed to fill the stormy horizon.
A hundred questions beat on the windows of his brain.
Why a bird's head?
Why a swan?
Was this the work of Rose's killer?
Why were there no signs of violence?
Above all why had he, Mungo, ignored the warning and involved himself?
Why had he come here at all?
Why?
Why?
Why?
Recovering slightly from the terror of a moment ago, he wondered whether he dared pick up the skull.
As the newspaper said, it was a clue; the sole clue.
And here was the chance to possess it; to study it; even, possibly, to understand it.
If only he could overcome the dread and make it his.
What was it, after all?
A piece of bone.
There was nothing in it to harm him.
His nervousness was simply superstition.
Transferring the wing-tip to his scratched hand, he leaned over to take the skull.
‘Don't touch it,’ a familiar voice said behind him.
Dropping the wing, Mungo swung round, losing his balance.
Towering over him, his white head in the turbulent clouds, was Jos.
CHAPTER 4
‘Stone!’
It was Emily calling outside Mungo's bedroom door.
Mungo, who was lying on his bed reading, did not reply.
The drive back with Jos had been silent and strained.
After calling on Alice to say goodbye, the old man had made no attempt at conversation.
Soaked, confused and miserable, Mungo could think of nothing to say either.
He had disobeyed the old man, his ally, and might have forfeited his friendship.
The moment she saw Mungo, Mary Ann fussed and tut-tutted and made him have a bath.
At tea, Jos did not mention the incident, for which Mungo was grateful.
Nevertheless the atmosphere was uncomfortable.
Mungo had so much on his mind that he was unable to concentrate on Mary Ann's stories.
He needed to be alone; to start unravelling the knots.
Finally he complained of a headache and was excused.
‘Stone!’
Emily was more insistent.
Mungo predicted that if he ignored her a second time, she would go away.
The mystery that baffled him most was Jos's sudden appearance at the lakeside.
How could the old man possibly have got there so fast?
He would have had to drive to the farm, learn of Mungo's destination from Alice, and trudge after him across the fields.
Or was he a world champion sprinter, as well as a pocket Hercules?
In this peculiar place, Mungo thought, nothing was impossible.
But then again, maybe Jos had been nearby all the while?
At the barrow, or…?
But what would he be doing in the middle of nowhere…unless he was keeping an eye on Mungo, to see that he  was safe?
In the end, Mungo reasoned that the old man had probably been driving along, had somehow caught a glimpse of him, and had taken a short cut from the road.
‘Stone!’
Emily had lowered her voice again, until it was almost pleading.
‘Let me in.
Please.’
Mungo put down his book and opened the door.
In one hand Emily had a glass with half an inch of darkish liquid in the bottom, and in the other a plate of shortbread biscuits.
She looked at him as if to say: ‘Truce?’
Mungo let her pass and shut the door.
They sat on the bed with the plate between them.
She handed him the glass.
‘Jos says this is what you need.’
‘What is it?’ he asked.
‘Just drink it,’ she said.
Mungo took a sip.
The bitter taste was soon followed by a fireball racing down his throat and into his stomach.
He bared his teeth in a grimace.
‘Whisky?’ he asked.
Emily nodded.
‘It's the stuff to give the troops, Jos says.’
‘Well, the troops are welcome to it,’ Mungo said.
‘It's disgusting.’
‘There's gratitude for you,’ Emily replied, teasing.
Mungo smiled.
‘If it's so great, let's see you drink it,’ he said.
‘No thanks.
I tried it once.
It gave me hiccups.’
They both laughed.
Mungo put the glass on the floor and offered her a biscuit, taking one himself.
The contrast between her former shyness and this new warmth was abrupt, but most certainly welcome.
He felt bold enough to ask her: ‘What made you run out of Mr Zamoyski's?’
She shrugged.
‘Just remembering, that's all.
Seeing that shoe…’
Mungo understood.
He should not have needed to ask.
‘Look,’ he said, deciding to trust her, ‘can I tell you  something?
Something…private?’
‘I can t see what's to stop you,’ she said.
‘You won't tell anyone?
Emily shook her head.
‘This afternoon, I found another body.’
The statement had an extraordinary effect on Emily.
Such colour as there was drained from her face, and what was left of the biscuit fell from her hand.
Her expression seemed to say: ‘Please, tell me it's not true.’
Seeing that he had frightened her, Mungo tried to soften the blow.
‘No, not that kind of body.
It was a swan.
By the lake.’
Emily appeared to relax a little.
‘The thing is,’ Mungo went on, ‘under it was this bird's skull; like the one they…’
Emily was shivering.
Mungo thought she must be having a fit.
Picking up the glass he put it to her mouth.
‘Drink it!’ he said.
She shook her head.
‘Drink it!’ he insisted.
She sipped, coughing as she did so.
He took back the glass.
The shivering seemed to have subsided.
Emily clasped her hands until the fingertips turned red.
Mungo wanted to put an arm round her shoulder, but knew he would embarrass her.
Gradually she grew calmer.
‘Are you OK?’ he said.
She nodded.
‘If you'd rather, we won't talk about it,’ he said.
‘Only I don't know who to tell.
Should I tell the police, do you think?’
Emily looked at him.
‘What's there to tell?’ she said.
‘Swans do die, you know.
Or maybe you townies don't know.
And the skull thing could have been there anyway.’
She sounded surprisingly matter-of-fact.
If the whole business was so easily explained, why had she been so affected by his first mention of it?
Perhaps she had suffered a small fit after all, or could it have been a touch of fever?
Was it something to do with being a  vegetarian?
Mungo had never known one before.
More likely, anything that reminded her of her friend's death probably upset her.
Nothing could be more natural.
‘I suppose so,’ he said.
But what about the unusual position of the swan, he thought?
Had he imagined that?
Or could the shape have been re-arranged by the fierce wind?
‘My Dad's going to an auction in the morning,’ Emily was saying.
‘He wants to know if we'd like to?’
‘What're they like?’
‘It's a strange ritual,’ Emily said.
‘You go in with a whole lot of money and you come out with a whole lot of junk.
The sellers don't want it and the buyers don't need it.’
‘Sounds like school,’ Mungo said.
‘Exactly,’ Emily agreed, with an eager smile.
‘I can't wait.’
The following morning there was a newcomer at the breakfast table.
He was a bony young man with slicked-down hair and a stiff white collar several sizes too large.
His Adam's apple went into convulsions every time he swallowed and his lips were unusually full.
Judging by occasional snorts, he had a severe dose of catarrh.
Mary Ann introduced him as ‘Mr Cottle’, announcing that he was ‘a traveller in jelly’.
Mr Cottle looked up to acknowledge the reaction to this information, but at once looked down again when he saw Mungo and Emily grinning at each other.
Quick to spot the problem, Mary Ann explained that Mr Cottle was a commercial traveller who sold jelly powders and junkets, and very successful he was too.
Mr Cottle blushed and then snorted into a handkerchief to hide his confusion.
In fact, added Mary Ann, they were thinking of making him Area Manager.
Wasn't that so, Mr Cottle?
Whereupon the traveller in jelly  uttered a sound somewhere between a groan and a hiccup, and studied the design on his tie.
Mungo caught Jos's eye, and knew he had been forgiven.
The old man winked.
‘Where's today then, Mr Cottle?’
Mary Ann asked, still determined to make the traveller feel at home, though making him feel less at home with every enquiry.
Mr Cottle looked panic-stricken.
‘Where is what today?’ he was clearly asking himself.
‘The itinerary,’ Mary Ann pronounced it with care.
‘Leave him be, Mary Ann,’ Stanley said.
Not to be deterred, Mary Ann sat with her head tilted and eyes bright, encouraging a reply.
‘Mmmm?’
Summoning all his powers of salesmanship, Mr Cottle said: ‘Lymmener.’
At least, that is what Mungo thought he said.
It sounded like an all-purpose mumble; like a word Mungo had invented once which meant everything in every language.
Mary Ann's expression clouded over.
‘Oh, very nice,’ she said, without conviction.
Clearly feeling he had played a master card, the traveller in jelly folded his napkin with care, pushed back his chair with a tooth-aching shriek, and left; head down, Adam's apple at rest.
Discussing Mr Cottle as Stanley drove them to the auction, Emily said: ‘He was here when Rose…’
Mungo did not press the point.
He supposed that Mr Cottle could not be ruled out as a suspect, but he hardly seemed a likely killer.
The sale was to be held in a large country house some eight miles away.
Mungo could not explain why but he felt a sense of release at being out of the village, if only for a short time.
The worrying question marks over Rose McGarry, the events of yesterday, and Emily's obvious unhappiness had combined to close in on him; as though the world were shrinking, poised to suffocate him.
It was like watching the corn being cut in a southern village last summer.
The harvester moved round the field in a strict square, so that the standing crop grew smaller and smaller with every pass.
Around the perimeter, men with shot-guns advanced towards the centre.
Every so often a rabbit would make a desperate, lung-bursting bid for freedom, only to provide an easy target for the twelve-bores.
With the terrible impact the animals would hurtle over and over before lying still, on the stubble.
Imagining the terror of those left behind in the middle, their precious cover dwindling every moment, Mungo could bear no more and looked away.
And now, slumped in the rich-smelling old leather of Stanley's back seat, he felt like a rabbit who had escaped the human cordon.
The house, centrepiece of a great estate, had once been the home of a Maharajah.
The vast rooms were crammed with a rich man's equivalent of Stanley's jumble-filled stables.
All the furniture was on a mammoth scale; luxurious sofas the length of ocean liners, and billiard tables the size of cricket pitches.
There was even an entire suite made of glass.
Chandeliers threatened like fireworks frozen in mid-burst.
Mungo imagined them shattering, burying the floor in a tidal wave of crystal.
On most of the walls there were stuffed heads; lion, tiger, deer, something with horns like long corkscrews — and animals that looked so small and delicate…
Might as well shoot dragonflies, Mungo thought.
What species of idiot, he wondered, had found it fun to murder them, cut off their heads and use them instead of wallpaper?
The sort of idiot, presumably, who liked sitting in glass armchairs.
And why had this fearless hunter stopped at animals?
Why were the servants not  up there, staring marble-eyed, to complete the grotesque collection?
Emily was obviously thinking the same thing.
‘Spooky, isn't it?’ she said.
Mungo nodded.
‘Sick,’ he agreed.
The crowds of buyers, who apparently did not share their view, were moving out now to the lawn where the sale was due to begin in a large marquee.
Bringing up the rear, Stanley, catalogue in hand, turned and gestured with his head, as if to say: ‘Are you coming then?’
Emily called over: ‘It's boring.
We'll see you in a bit.’
Not pleased, Stanley was nevertheless reluctant to miss the start.
Frowning, he disappeared with the throng.
Mungo and Emily had the house to themselves.
‘Let's go upstairs,’ Mungo said.
‘See how the other half lived.’
Whereas the family sitting-rooms and bedrooms were heavy with drapes and solid mahogany, the servants' quarters in the attic were small and bare.
Here the items for sale were plain and simple: pine towel-rails; severe, spindly chairs; grey-topped washstands; enamel bowls; threadbare rugs.
Wandering along the landing, while Emily examined a pile of cotton bedlinen, Mungo noticed a sheaf of books tied with string, on a windowsill.
‘Lot 53’, the label said.
Taking in the titles from left to right, he at first saw little of interest:Queer Things About Egypt; Wonderful Nests , by the Rev. J. G. Wood;The Elements of Mechanism; Highways and Byways in the West Country …
No wonder they were all up here; these were guaranteed to put anyone to sleep, Mungo thought.
He was about to move on when a faded purple spine caught his eye:The Forest and the Fire , read the title.
The author's name was G. F. Westerby.
Intrigued, Mungo slid it out of the pack.
The pages were mottled with brown stains and there were numerous photographs, obviously taken by an amateur.
The same figure, presumably Westerby himself, featured in several.
He was a small, tubby man wearing a bulky suit with a belted jacket.
However, Mungo was less interested in him than in the background shapes.
They were burial mounds, all tapering like the one Emily had shown him.
In fact, facing page 119, there it was, with Westerby duly posing in front as though it were an animal he had just hunted to its death.
There appeared to be a whole chapter about the familiar barrow, including an artist's impression of the standing stones.
Calling Emily, Mungo said he must have the book.
Did she think her father would bid for him, if he promised to pay Stanley back?
Hardly bothering to look at the prized volume, Emily said it was worth a try.
As they hurried down dusty, echoing staircases, Mungo began to wonder whether he would have enough money.
How much did people pay for secondhand books?
Some, he knew, were practically priceless.
Perhaps The Forest and the Fire was sought after by collectors all over the world; the rarest lot in the sale, valued at thousands of pounds?
‘Lot 37, a pair of little bronzes.
Rather fine these, ladies and gentlemen.
Who'll start me at three hundred?’ the auctioneer boomed as Mungo and Emily rushed into the marquee.
All but a couple of the bidders were too preoccupied to notice the latecomers.
An assistant held up two small objects.
Mungo's heart sank.
Three hundred pounds?
For those!
‘Three ten — three twenty — three hundred and fifty pounds…’
Mungo could not understand how the price constantly rose while no one seemed to bid.
Emily could see his puzzlement.
‘Watch very closely,’ she said.
Mungo concentrated on the first two rows.
Gradually he noticed tiny movements which coincided with the changing numbers.
The large woman with the flashy  rings simply tipped her catalogue forward a fraction of an inch.
The bald man beside her raised his forefinger.
A younger woman with outsize spectacles behind them periodically gave a slight nod of her head.
They were all codes meaning: ‘Yes, I'll go higher than the last bidder.’
But if they were prepared to pay hundreds for lumps of metal, what might they bid for the books, Mungo wondered?
In the brief pause before the auctioneer announced the next lot, Emily spotted her father near the back of the gathering, and, heads down as though they were in a cinema, she and Mungo scuttled round and crouched next to him.
Stanley was not looking pleased.
‘How's it going, Dad?’
Emily whispered.
‘Terrible,’ he said.
‘Prices have gone mad.’
‘What was it you wanted?’ she asked, but before Stanley could answer, the auctioneer was introducing another lot.
Straining to hear, Stanley put a finger to his mouth, miming ‘shush’.
If he wasn't careful, it might be taken for a bid, Mungo thought.
He imagined a nightmare scene where every time you blinked, or blew your nose, or scratched an itch, the auctioneer would up the price, until you found you had paid eight thousand pounds for a snooker ball.
Mungo admired Emily's patience as she waited for the right moment to mention his proposition.
All the same, they had now reached lot 50; if she left it much longer the chance would be gone.
He had no need for concern.
After lot 51, a hideous hat-stand, there was more urgent whispering.
Looking at Mungo with mild amusement, Stanley nodded.
Mungo felt elated, smiling back.
At last the moment came.
‘Lot 53,’ said the auctioneer, ‘books, miscellaneous.’
The ‘miscellaneous’ sounded weary, as though he were growing tired of the proceedings already.
Mungo was glad.
Perhaps other bidders would be put off by his lack of enthusiasm.
‘Who'll start me at a pound?’
If the books really were priceless, Mungo thought, this would take a century.
He looked round; at the large woman with the flashy rings, the bald man, the other bidders.
They were stony-faced.
Not a single raised forefinger; not a flicker of a catalogue; not even a blink.
It was as if they were volunteering two minutes, silence.
‘Go on, then,’ the auctioneer groaned; ‘five shillings.
Who'll give me five bob?’
Mungo held his breath.
Still no sign of movement.
Except from Stanley, who suddenly pinched the lobe of his right ear.
‘Thank you, Sir,’ the auctioneer said, relieved.
‘Now there's a man of taste.’
There was a laugh from the experts.
Mungo had a second's anxiety.
Had Stanley really meant the gesture as a bid?
Evidently he had, since, in the unaccountable absence of any competition, the auctioneer announced that lot 53 was his.
Stanley gave Mungo a look of triumph.
In the car on the return journey, clutching the row of books like a concertina, Mungo thanked him for the third time, promising to pay him the moment they got home.
‘No bother, lad,’ Stanley said, adding: ‘We showed ‘em, didn't we?’
Mungo had never seen him so cheerful, even though he had failed to buy anything for himself.
‘What's so important about them?’
Emily said.
For the time being, Mungo decided to keep the real answer to himself.
‘It's just…
I'm interested, that's all,’ he said.
As they approached the village, Mungo felt a little like a prisoner who had been given a taste of freedom.
He sensed the dark line of the forest as a barrier, an ancient city wall encircling the community; both a protection and a gaoler.
He wondered whether the sad white  victim was still lying in the sodden grass by the lake, or whether someone had taken pity and buried it.
If they had, what would they have done with the bird's skull?
Would they have left it, perhaps, as a memorial?
And why had Jos told him not to touch it?
Mungo longed to be alone with the book; to see if, between its stained purple bindings, it held a key to any of the mysteries perplexing him.
It was some hours before he had his wish.
Mary Ann insisted on hearing every detail of the auction over tea, and afterwards, to oblige her, Mungo and Emily went to search for new-laid eggs on the batters.
When they got back, having discovered only two, Mary Ann had the cards out for a game of canasta.
She asked the traveller in jelly if he would care to join them, whereupon his Adam's apple fluttered, and he repeated the all-purpose word ‘lymmener’, which, on this occasion, they took to mean ‘no’.
He then disappeared upstairs.
The evening passed enjoyably.
Mary Ann played with girlish competitiveness, winning every game except one.
Emily seemed to be giving the cards only half her attention, teasing her mother about cheating.
From time to time Jos would look over Mungo's shoulder, suggesting tactics which invariably proved disastrous.
Finally, at just after ten o'clock by Rock Hardy, Stanley came back from the pub and Emily totted up the points.
Good nights were said.
Mungo declined a hot drink and headed for his room.
The books were lying on the bed, where he had left them.
Singling out The Forest and the Fire,which he laid on the pillow ready, he left the rest in a pile on the floor.
Having closed the thin curtains, he tiptoed over the cold lino to undress on the bedside rug.
A moth thudded into the parchment lampshade and blundered round, trying to escape.
Holding up the edge of the pillow with his left hand, Mungo reached under with his right to take out the striped pyjamas.
What he saw there, lying  on top of them, made him want to cry out.
It was a white feather.
Close to the tip was a crimson stain.
Beside the feather was a small piece of paper, with torn edges.
His hand trembling, Mungo took the note between thumb and forefinger, deliberately not touching the feather.
It bore a single line of uneven capital letters, written in pencil.
‘BORVEL NEM AKT’, it said.
CHAPTER 5
Mungo had been so unnerved by the feather and the peculiar note that it had taken him several moments to decide on the next move; not the next major move in his life, but literally the act of moving an arm or a leg.
He had felt that he was in the presence of something that wished him harm; some malign, unseen enemy who wanted to scare him into leaving.
Perhaps it had succeeded.
He could think of nowhere he would rather be than at home, with people he knew and trusted, in a place without secrets.
Now he knew what they meant in books when characters were described as being ‘frozen to the spot’.
He was frozen to the spot.
He had neither the will nor the courage to stir.
And talking of books,The Forest and the Fire still lay on the pillow where he had left it, before getting undressed.
Should he call for help?
What, and tell whoever came in that he had been frightened by a feather?
They would think him mad.
Gradually, repeating over and over that there had to be a simple explanation, he had summoned up enough confidence to take hold of the note again, and the feather.
His first instinct was to fling them out of the window; to put as much distance as he could between them and him.
On second thoughts, if he was to try and make sense of the puzzle, he would need them for reference.
Perhaps the note, for instance, was in some form of code.
Perhaps, after patient investigation, he would be able to match the handwriting.
He should certainly be able to check whether or not the feather came from a swan.
Reassured by his own calm reasoning, Mungo  placed the evidence on the mantelpiece.
Then, putting on his cold pyjamas, he had knelt by the bed.
‘Please God, make me safe,’ he said.
Taking the purple book off the pillow and laying it on the floor, he had tried to think logically.
Wherever the feather came from, it must almost certainly have been put in his room by someone who knew of his visit to the lake.
Otherwise what was the point?
That surely limited the suspects to just three; Jos, Emily and Alice.
It was entirely possible that Jos was still trying to warn him off, for his own good.
But if so, why had the old man used apparently meaningless words: BORVEL NEM AKT?
And how could Emily have been the culprit?
She had spent the entire day with him.
Or might she just have found time to sneak up here undetected?
And how would poor, stooped Alice have come all this way on such an unlikely errand?
Unable, however, to eliminate any theory, Mungo was unsettled.
He thought of Jos, Emily and Alice as his friends, and yet how could he trust them until he knew the truth of the incident?
On the other hand, did he need their friendship enough to risk his safety?
Why not simply take the hint and turn his back on the village once and for all?
More confused than ever Mungo had picked up The Forest and the Fire , turning to page 119.
There stood G. F. Westerby, looking pleased with himself, staring out over the decades, with the mysterious past behind him.
Mungo began to read:
‘Rising from the dramatic landscape like the prow of a great ship, this is one of the most intriguing of all Britain's known burial mounds.
As though carried by a mighty flood to its remote hilltop, surrounded by trees, and then abandoned as the water receded, the barrow is an almost alien presence.
In four thousand years, for that is its approximate age, it has surrendered few of its secrets.
The name of its occupant is unknown, as is the exact source of the stones used in its distinctive structure…’
It began to sound as though G. F. Westerby was going to prove a disappointment.
Heavy-eyed, Mungo had fallen asleep and into a thicket of dreams.
Hacking his way through the forest with a Japanese ceremonial sword, he had emerged into a clearing where G. F. Westerby was playing cricket with Mr Cottle.
Instead of bowling the ball, which bore a small silver shield, Mr Cottle threw it at a low-flying swan.
The wounded bird plummeted to earth like a dive-bomber, its beak piercing G. F. Westerby's chest and pinning him to the ground.
Uttering a single, feeble word: ‘lymenner’, he expired; whereupon Mr Cottle snatched the sword and cut his head off, resting it on a branch like a sporting trophy.
By now the victim had sprouted curly horns and the snout of a wild boar.
Turning on Mungo, Mr Cottle paused to blow his nose, a signal for the trees to edge in on all sides, shutting out the sky.
The weapon in Mr Cottle's hand had become a long, loosely coiled spring, lit from within as though by moonlight.
Mungo felt in his pocket and pulled out a hammer with ‘A. Zamoyski’ burnt into the handle with a poker.
Lifting his arm to strike, he felt a grip of iron round his wrist, restraining him.
And as the spring came closer and closer, the tip nearest the ground swelled into a grotesque head which reared up, confronting Mungo; its hollow eyes full of night, its mouth a cavern lined with standing stones.
Wider and wider and…
Mungo's clammy pyjamas were clinging to his chest.
The light was still on.
According to Rock Hardy it was 3.35.
The curtains bellied in the chill early morning breeze.
Though his nightmares had been disturbing, Mungo found himself thinking clearly.
Darting to the mantelpiece, he retrieved the note and the feather and dived back again under the covers, before the cold could ambush him.
‘BORVEL NEM AKT; the words meant no  more now than they had last night, and the feather looked simply ordinary.
He thought of the pattern of his visit so far; the revelation of Rose McGarry's death; the discovery of the swan; Jos's warning (had it been Jos's strong arm holding him back in the dream?); and this most recent sign, which at the very least told him that someone had entered his room, his own sanctuary.
The strange affair, which had begun by seeming distant — a vague shape on the horizon — was now moving towards him, like the coiled spring; taking the initiative, advancing on his safety, menacing him.
He considered leaving on the first train in the morning.
But that would be defeat.
Though the temptation to turn his back was strong, it was not in Mungo's nature to run away.
His tendency to stand his ground was not necessarily sensible, he reflected.
There were times when running was the wisest choice.
Perhaps this would turn out to be one of them.
Perhaps at the root of his reaction was plain obstinacy.
Whatever it was, however, he was determined not to give in.
Not yet, at any rate.
For the time being he would not merely stay but would redouble his efforts to understand.
If the threats grew too frightening, he could always reconsider.
The purple book, which had fallen on to the floor during the night, jogged his memory.
The ‘photograph’ of the burial mound in his mind's eye, still so sharp and detailed, had convinced him that therein lay something of importance.
He had been foiled in his first attempt to reach it by the arrival of Jos, and ever since it had been impossible to get away unnoticed.
But here was the perfect opportunity.
It was now 3.50.
Soon it would be dawn.
If he hurried he could easily cycle to the barrow, make a thorough search, and be back in his bed before the household started to stir at 7.
But until first light, how would he fend off the terrors of the darkness?
By telling himself that trees and night birds and the moon  could not pluck feathers or write notes, he decided; and that the best defence might lie in attack.
Excited by the idea, and by at last doing something positive, Mungo put on his shirt and trousers over his pyjamas, and added two sweaters for good measure.
Slipping the note and the feather into his pocket, he switched off the light and opened the door.
On the landing the only sound was Jos's deep snoring from the room next door.
Mungo set off, taking care to avoid the loose floorboards which he had already tried to memorize.
There was a grey glimmer from the window over the stairs.
The third step creaked as he stepped on it.
He froze for a second, praying that no one had heard.
The kitchen, which Mungo had only ever seen full of people, seemed incomplete; waiting for human activity to bring it to life.
The wooden black boy in the corner was identifiable by his white gloves in the gloom.
Turning the big key in the back door and easing up the latch, Mungo began to feel free, as though now he could make his own rules and ignore the restrictions imposed by daylight.
There was a mist in the yard.
Mungo felt it on his face.
He and Emily had left the bicycles in the room with the dartboard.
To his left he heard a low growl and a faint crunching noise.
Mungo moved towards it, surprised to find that he was not nervous.
Crouching low by the wall of the stables was a black cat, eating a bird whose wings were still twitching.
Mungo thought of separating them, but knew it was too late to save the victim.
Emerging from the tall, rickety gates separating the yard from the main road, Mungo walked the bicycle across, beside Mr Zamoyski's shop, before mounting at the crossroads for the long ride.
Since he could just make out where he was going, he decided not to use the front light, which in any case would be bound to draw attention to him.
The air felt fresh and exhilarating.
Mungo caught the strong smell of pine and rich, wet earth.
Being the first to inhale it, having it to himself, gave him a feeling of power.
This dawning, witnessed only by him, was like a nameless country, never before explored.
Freewheeling down the long hill, Mungo was aware of a large, pale shape by his right shoulder.
Turning, he saw a barn owl, flying parallel to him, though a few feet higher.
The creature's underside was startling against the indistinct background.
Equally ghostly, beyond the hedge, was a grey horse already cropping the damp grass.
The animal did not even trouble to look up as Mungo passed; probably feeling, as he did, that this part of the day was best enjoyed alone.
Despite its steep climbs, the journey seemed easy.
Mungo reached the fence overlooking the lake and the barrow at 4.25.
Allowing himself an hour at the site, he should be back at Emily's house by shortly after 6.
To save time, he decided to take the bicycle with him across the fields so that he could ride it on the smoother sections.
He noticed that hundreds of mushrooms had sprouted since his last visit, some as large as saucers.
First, Mungo wanted one more look at the lakeside to see whether or not the dead swan would still be there.
As he drew closer he counted four sleeping on the water; necks curled back, heads nestling under wings.
They drifted with every gust, oblivious in their movable dreams.
Beside the reeds, however, where the victim had lain, there was nothing.
Mungo crouched and ran his hands through the grass wondering about the bird's skull, but even that had been removed.
It was as though the creature had never existed; or had only existed in Mungo's imagination.
Could it be that he had invented the entire tableau, he wondered?
Might time itself have slipped sideways, showing him a scene from the past?
If he had been in some sort of trance,(lasting who knew how long?) that might account for the sudden appearance of Jos.
All the same, the feather in his pocket could hardly have come from an imaginary swan.
Remounting the bicycle, Mungo powered over the bumpy ground towards the barrow.
Silhouetted against the lightening sky, it seemed more majestic than ever; more a part of nature's raw force than the work of man.
Mungo felt drawn to it.
He sensed that even if he stopped pedalling, it would still somehow compel him forward.
The book described it as ‘remote’, but at this distance it seemed the centre of the world; the eye of a ferocious storm whose outer edges could never pull free; the heart of a titan, beating like thunder; an energy so awesome that it was dragging the very edges of the forest ever closer.
Keyed up with a mixture of excitement and dread, Mungo came to the stone wall in front of the barrow.
Leaning his bicycle against it, he detached the front lamp from its bracket and climbed over.
The quiet here was intense, as though the sky were holding its breath.
The bulk of the mound towered over Mungo, intimidating him.
His sense of anticipation turned to one of unsureness.
It was all very well to make brave plans but here in the presence of this brooding giant, courage ebbed away.
He glanced at Rock Hardy, finding comfort in the familiar face.
5.03 already!
He must hurry.
Approaching the boulder at the entrance, with the delicate layered stones fanning from it, he noticed that the ground seemed blacker than before, as though a very recent fire had been lit.
Bending down, he saw that although the space had been cleared with some care, there were traces of charcoal mingled with sand.
Perhaps it was a favourite spot with picnickers, though the weather was hardly summery.
Mungo turned down the right flank of the sleeping monster, towards the hole in its side.
He tried the torch.
It smiled a bleary, yellow smile and flickered.
Never mind, he thought.
The morning was getting brighter  every moment.
How many must have walked here before him?
What had they looked like, he wondered?
What had brought them to this ancient grave?
Had they come in fear, or to pay their respects, or to worship some savage god?
Mungo had a strong sensation that the dark cavity was waiting for something to happen.
This was not simply a hollow hewn out of the mound; a room to admire or to sit in.
This was a chamber made for a purpose; a purpose it was impatient to fulfil even four thousand years after it was built.
Like the kitchen at the white house, it craved the special activity that would make it entire.
Inside the barrow, Mungo shone the feeble beam of the torch on the standing stones, one by one, starting on his left.
Held fast by their iron hoops, they seemed more massive than their size; massive with an inner strength.
In their timeless silence they endured his scrutiny, revealing nothing.
Moving the light round the half-circle, he let it rest on the third stone from the mouth of the chamber on the right hand side — the one which had been so prominent in his ‘photograph’.
Blank and rugged it stared back at him, no more informative than the rest.
Playing the light on the remaining two stones, he began to think there was no point in staying.
He looked again at Rock Hardy: 5.15.
At least he had satisfied his curiosity.
Despite the prompting of his imagination, it seemed that the key to the mysteries did not lie here after all.
However, just as Mungo was lowering his head to clear the opening, something made him turn back.
The power of the third stone was insistent.
It would not allow him to go.
Shining the beam behind it, he leaned down and traced the contours of the wet surface with his hand.
Suddenly, at the base, he came into contact with a round object which felt fragile and fitted comfortably in his palm.
With care he lifted it and took it to the mouth of the chamber.
As he looked in  astonishment at the strange find, the voice of Alice was in his head, telling stories of childhood.
It was a glass ball in aged, tarnished gold; a decoration for a Christmas tree.
Mungo held it higher, like an offering, willing it to tell him more.
CHAPTER 6
Mungo had covered the homeward journey at full pelt.
Having delayed longer than he had intended at the barrow, he even pumped the pedals on the downhill sections, always anxious about the safety of the curious evidence in his saddle bag.
He had been passed by two or three cars, but consoled himself that their drivers would have no idea who he was.
However, as he approached Mr Zamoyski's shop, a man in overalls cycled round the corner, his tin lunchbox under his arm.
Mungo made an instant detour behind a hedge, let the bicycle lean on the bank, and crouched until the workman had passed.
How would he explain the mud on his tyres, he wondered?
With any luck Emily would think it was from their previous ride.
Safely back in bed, Mungo concentrated on the growing collection of odd items on his mantelpiece.
A bloodstained feather, an unintelligible note, and now an old glass ball, many weeks too early for Christmas.
It meant at least that someone had been in the burial mound, though not necessarily recently.
For all he knew the decoration could have been left there years ago, when Alice used to see the foresters in their peculiar finery.
Nevertheless, he was sure it was significant; it had almost lured him to find it.
After breakfast Mungo and Emily sat in the Lagonda.
‘You look tired,’ she said.
‘Are you all right?’
Mungo nodded.
‘Couldn't sleep,’ he said.
‘Guilty conscience.’
On the spur of the moment, Mungo decided to use  shock tactics.
Taking the feather out of his pocket he said: ‘Have you seen this before?’
Emily appeared quite unruffled.
‘I don't know whether I've seen that exact one,’ she said.
‘They're all a bit alike, aren't they?’
Then, teasing: ‘Collecting feathers are we?’
‘No,’ Mungo said, disgruntled.
‘It was in my room.’
‘So, they're laying up there now are they?
I wouldn't put it past them,’ Emily said, meaning the hens.
Was she being stupid on purpose, or did she really mean it, Mungo wondered?
‘Somebody put it there,’ he explained, holding back his trump card — the note.
‘Why on earth would they do that?’ she asked, seeming genuine.
‘Exactly,’ Mungo said.
‘They must have thought you didn't want to fight.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘In the War — the first World War — the women used to give white feathers to the men who wouldn't go and fight.
It meant they were cowards.
Jos told me.’
Mungo thought about this.
‘Why does not fighting have to mean you're a coward?’ he said.
‘Because it's obvious.
If everybody'd refused, they'd have won.
We'd be talking German.’
‘We wouldn't if the Germans had refused as well.’
‘That's stupid,’ Emily said.
‘Are you a coward, Stone?’
‘I don't really know,’ he replied.
‘You don't till something dangerous happens, do you?’
‘I suppose not,’ Emily agreed, with some reluctance.
‘Are you?’
Mungo asked.
‘I get frightened sometimes,’ Emily admitted in a quiet voice.
Soon she brightened.
‘What about your precious book?’ she asked.
‘Any good?’
‘It's pretty boring so far.
Just this fat bloke going on about how much he doesn't know.’
‘Sounds fascinating.’
Emily let the steering-wheel run  through her fingers.
‘Do you want to come and meet somebody?’
‘Like who for instance?’
‘Just somebody.
Vic, he's called.
He's a bit funny but he's all right.’
‘Well, we haven't exactly got any pressing engagements have we?’
Emily returned his smile.
‘Bikes, or walk?’ she asked.
‘Walk,’ Mungo said.
Vic's house, at the end of the village, was detached and set back from the road behind a neat lawn.
Emily guided Mungo through a gate at the side which led to a long, overgrown garden with a large, unsteady-looking wooden shed at the bottom.
Emerging from its door were two stocky men and a youth.
They wore baggy jackets and trousers, and heavy boots.
Even from this distance Mungo also noticed that their heads were shaved to a line well above the ears, like medieval monks.
As they filed through a gap in the hedge to their right, the youth glanced back over his shoulder with a furtive, almost hunted expression.
Pointing to the leaning structure, Emily said: ‘He lives in there.’
‘Who were those people?’
Mungo asked.
‘Oh, just friends of his, I expect.’
As she knocked twice and opened the door of the shed, Mungo could see what he took to be a workshop.
Following Emily in, he found himself surrounded on all sides by sagging shelves bearing rusty paint tins; jam jars containing stubby brushes; bottles half full of amber fluid, and oil cans.
Beneath them, on work benches, were tools which were obviously little used — large files, screwdrivers, pliers and the rest — with two sturdy vices bolted to the edge.
Above the shelves, on rusty six-inch nails, hung metal objects with serrated teeth, covered in cobwebs.
Seeing Mungo looking at them, Emily whispered: ‘Animal traps.
The big ones are man traps.’
Across the furthest third of the room, hanging from a thick wire, was a pair of faded curtains which reached to the ground.
The bottom three inches were filthy, from contact with the floorboards.
As Emily and Mungo paused near the door, uncertain whether to advance further, a hand appeared round the join in the curtains.
An elongated head with pronounced black eyebrows came next, and then withdrew again.
The curtains fluttered as the figure moved behind them and in a moment parted to reveal a metal bedstead with a grubby patchwork quilt, shelves jostling with books — and Vic, or so Mungo presumed.
‘Mungo, Vic,’ Emily confirmed, holding out a pale, thin arm by way of introduction.
‘Enchanté,’ Vic said.
Although Mungo's grasp of French was slight, he had no difficulty with this.
The question was, why not English?
But then, at first glance, Vic was somewhat out of the ordinary.
His dark hair, long and straight, was parted in the middle.
His slim nose appeared to take up two thirds of his face.
He wore a tight khaki shirt, buttoned at the neck, and threadbare army denims turned up at the bottom.
On his sockless feet were soiled gym shoes.
Vic stepped to the centre of what he evidently regarded as his stage.
Without taking his penetrating eyes off Mungo, he held out his hands like a graceful, unhurried conjurer to show that he was hiding nothing.
He then took from his pocket a filthy blue handkerchief, reversing it so that his small audience could examine both sides.
Unsmiling, Emily watched Mungo's reaction.
Taking the middle of the handkerchief, Vic drew it up through a hole he had formed with his other hand.
Now the cloth above the encircling fingers seemed to move, nudged this way and that by something underneath.
Pausing for the effect to register, Vic took the apex of  the handkerchief between two fingers and drew it upwards delicately, laying bare a fist holding a green creature with bulging eyes.
With his free hand, he beckoned the startled onlookers to come closer.
As they obeyed, Mungo could see that the sorcerer's apprentice was a toad, puffed up with fear or pride.
Before Mungo and Emily could focus on it, Vic made as if to throw it into the air.
Nothing, however, flew, and yet when he opened the closed hand, it was empty.
Vic inclined his head in a mock bow.
Mungo was nonplussed.
It was a remarkable trick, but the trickster was even more striking.
There was an air of complete confidence about him.
Although Mungo guessed that he was probably no more than fourteen, he seemed as old as the oldest adult.
He made no effort to be understood, or liked; no attempt to impress.
The sleight of hand had not been performed to show off; he had done it in a matter-of-fact way, as though it were no more unusual than scratching his ear.
He was an original, Mungo decided; one of the few he had ever met.
Sitting on the edge of the bed, Vic motioned Mungo and Emily to two battered, upright canvas chairs.
‘Well, how do you like our little kingdom?’ he said to Mungo.
If this was a kingdom, did Vic imagine himself to be its ruler, Mungo wondered?
The monarch of a ramshackle throne?
‘It's full of surprises,’ he said.
‘Indeed?’
Vic said.
‘Tell me more.’
‘You don't have to,’ Emily reassured Mungo.
‘Things appear and disappear,’ Mungo said.
Vic leaned forward.
‘Such as?’
Should he trust him, Mungo wondered?
‘This,’ he said, producing the feather again.
‘I found it under my pillow.’
‘Show me,’ Vic said, holding out his hand.
Mungo walked across and gave it to him.
Vic laid it in his palm with apparent reverence.
‘It's a  swan's feather,’ he said.
Then, pointing to the stain: ‘And this is human blood.’
‘How do you know?’
Mungo asked.
Emily was watching Vic, seeing how he would deal with the question.
Vic smiled with his mouth alone.
‘Trust me,’ he said.
‘I just know.’
As he finished speaking, he held the feather in front of Mungo like a sword and said: ‘Blow on it.’
Mungo hesitated.
‘Go on,’ Vic said.
‘It won't bite.’
Mungo blew.
The feather promptly seemed to vanish, presumably up Vic's sleeve.
‘There,’ Vic said.
‘That's something else appearing and disappearing.’
Emily looked at Mungo.
‘Good job it wasn't a pound note,’ she said.
Mungo decided to play his ace.
He took out the torn fragment with ‘BORVEL NEM AKT printed on it and showed it to Vic.
‘Somebody put this in my room, too,’ he said.
Vic took a brief look.
‘It spells ‘blanket mover’, if you juggle the letters.
Somebody's having you on,’ he said.
Mungo felt a blush spreading.
How pathetic, letting himself be terrified by such a simple wordgame.
He turned to Emily.
‘Was it you?’ he asked.
‘Was what me?’ she said, all innocence.
‘That stupid…’
Looking at the note to show what he meant, he was amazed to see Vic curl it up, put it in his mouth, give his cheek a light tap, and swallow.
‘Do you always eat other people's things?’
Mungo said, aware that he sounded tetchy and pompous.
‘Only when I'm hungry,’ Vic said.
just now I'm starving.’
Emily smiled.
Vic's easy manner made it difficult to be annoyed for long.
All the same Mungo thought it best not to mention  the golden glass ball.
Something about Vic's solutions
was too simple; too glib.
They might turn out to be the truth, for all Mungo knew, but he was not yet ready to take the shabby magician fully into his confidence.
How could Vic possibly have identified the human blood, for instance?
He must simply have said it for effect; after all, dramatic effects were clearly his favourite way of expressing himself.
However, Mungo also realized that most of his evidence, such as it was, had now evaporated.
He considered asking for the feather back but knew the request would sound foolish.
Having arranged to meet Vic again the next day, Mungo and Emily sauntered home.
Mungo was unable to forget the curious encounter.
‘You didn't seem very surprised,’ he said, ‘when I told him about the note.’
‘You're very suspicious all of a sudden,’ Emily replied.
‘Well, it's true.
I know it sounds pathetic but at the time it gave me a bit of a fright.’
He paused.
‘Was it you?
Did you put it there, and the feather?’
‘Why would I do a thing like that?’ she asked.
Again Mungo showed his irritation.
‘Never mind why.
Just tell me.
Was it you?’
Emily turned to him with a blank expression.
‘Well, it must have been Jos then,’ Mungo concluded.
‘I don't think so,’ Emily said.
‘Why not?’
‘Well for one thing, does it sound likely to you that he'd make up something so complicated?’
Mungo had to admit that it did not.
‘Besides…’
Emily began.
‘What?’
Mungo asked.
‘Jos can't write.’
Mungo lapsed into puzzled silence.
He was longing to ask Emily more about Vic, but having put her on the spot, he felt that this was not the right moment.
There was no more conversation until they reached Mr  Zamoyski's shop, where the cobbler was sitting on his front step, looking disconsolate.
Seeing them, he brightened at once.
Please, come, young friends,’ he said, rising to welcome them.
Mungo breathed in the rich animal smell as they followed Mr Zamoyski through to the back room.
On the bench was a last with a heavy boot on it, and an assortment of other footwear awaiting Mr Zamoyski's expert attention.
He put the kettle on, bemoaning the lack of business.
Mungo noticed that his window gave him a view of the field and the edge of the forest.
‘Is lonely work,’ Mr Zamoyski was saying.
‘All the time alone.
No good.’
‘Why do you do it then?’
Emily asked.
‘Why I do it?’
Mr Zamoyski said, and then repeated the question with emphasis.
‘Why I do it?’
He made it sound as though the reason was obvious.
‘I don't know why I do it,’ he confessed, ending in anti-climax.
‘Because I cannot be doctor,’ he said, pointing to his head and grinning.
‘I have not the mmm…intelligence to be doctor.’
He made them each a cup of tea, listing other jobs for which he was not suitable.
‘Other Polish people very clever,’ he said.
‘I am not.
I am good for…’
He mimed knocking in a nail with a hammer.
‘I am not good for…’
This time he imitated a doctor giving an injection.
Then he took a loud drink and looked out of the window.
‘Is just like Poland,’ he said, in a wistful tone.
‘Many trees.’
Mungo and Emily asked him about his childhood.
One of eleven children, he had been brought up in poverty.
He had been apprenticed to a shoemaker in his teens, but had been interrupted by the War.
When Emily asked him what it had been like then, his eyes filled with tears.
Mungo felt like patting him on the back to show him that they sympathized, but the moment passed, and anyway Mr Zamoyski might not have understood.
‘I lose my father…my mother…two brothers,’ Mr Zamoyski said.
‘Terrible…
Then I come here,’ he added.
‘To the refugee camp,’ Emily volunteered, for Mungo's benefit.
Mr Zamoyski nodded, ‘British people very kind,’ he said.
‘For strangers, very kind.’
After they had talked a while longer, he showed his young visitors out, through the shop.
‘Thank you for the tea,’ Emily said.
‘Is pleasure,’ Mr Zamoyski replied.
‘Come again, please.
For me, is pleasure.’
He smiled, showing the gaps in his teeth under the abundant moustache.
As they reached the door he said: ‘Is strange.
This shoe of the lady…white shoe…’
For a moment, neither Mungo nor Emily could think what he was talking about.
Then Mungo caught on.
‘Rose McGarry you mean?’ he said.
Emily looked troubled as she turned to Mr Zamoyski.
The cobbler nodded.
‘Yes…the lady,’ he repeated.
‘What about the shoe?’
Mungo asked.
Mr Zamoyski raised his eyebrows.
‘This shoe disappeared,’ he said.
‘How do you mean, exactly?’
Mungo persisted.
It was Emily who answered, her voice cold and precise.
‘It's obvious what he means,’ she said.
‘Someone's taken it.’
Mungo's head buzzed with a dozen more questions, but again he thought it better not to ask them.
Nevertheless, as he and Emily crossed the road, he wondered about this new revelation.
Perhaps Rose's parents had wanted the shoe back?
That was understandable enough.
But if so, why had they not walked in and asked for it?
Were they so poor that they couldn't afford to pay?
In that case Mr Zamoyski would almost certainly have handed the shoe over free of charge.
The unexpected development seemed to make no more  sense than the feather and the note; or, for that matter, the glass ball.
When they reached the yard, Emily went on into the house while Mungo watched Jos and Stanley change a wheel on the old blue van.
It was an extraordinary sight.
Instead of using a jack to take the weight, Jos turned his back on the front bumper, bent his knees and lifted the two leading tyres clear of the ground.
His muscles, though not as taut as those of a young man, bulged with the effort.
Turning his head towards Mungo with difficulty he said:
‘Saves time.’
Mungo thought of Jos, all those years ago, earning himself a watch by heaving uneven weights, surrounded by admirers.
Meanwhile Stanley made short work of undoing the nuts, pulling off the old wheel and slipping on the new.
‘Right you are, Father,’ he said, as he re-tightened all round.
‘That ought to do it.’
His face streaked with sweat, Jos straightened up.
‘By gum,’ he said.
‘I'm not as young as I used to be.
Do you want to give us a hand, lad?’
‘Now think on,’ Stanley said, leaning the discarded wheel against a wall.
‘This tread's shot at.’
With that he headed for the garden gate, rubbing his hands on a rag.
‘He's after them blasted bantams again,’ Jos said, watching him go.
‘Chicken mad.
He talks to 'em you know.’
Then, remembering his enquiry, he said: ‘Well, are you game then?’
Mungo said he was.
‘Good on you,’ the old man said, leading the way towards the stable door next to the Lagonda.
Piled in one of the stalls was a mountain of logs, which must have been delivered since Mungo had last been there.
Beside it was a smaller heap which had  already been split.
Standing in front, was a knee-high block with a large sharp axe lying across it.
Picking up the axe as though it were no heavier than a bread-knife, Jos indicated the unsplit wood.
‘You keep 'em coming,’ he said, ‘and I'll do the honours.’
Mungo set to, enjoying the work.
Keeping Jos supplied meant non-stop motion.
The old man sliced through the logs with such quick, sweet accuracy that it was almost impossible to keep up with him.
However, once Mungo established a rhythm, the production line became smoother.
‘That's the ticket,’ Jos said.
After a few minutes, Mungo plucked up enough courage to ask: ‘You know up at the lake?
When you found me?
I couldn't work out how you got there so quickly.
‘That'd be telling,’ Jos said, his tone jaunty.
‘No, how did you though?’
Mungo persisted.
‘Bear in mind I've lived here all my life,’ Jos said.
‘I know it like the back of my hand.’
He sounded so reasonable, Mungo had no option but to let the point rest.
‘Well, why didn't you want me to touch the skull?’
Already Mungo was out of breath, while Jos's swing remained effortless.
‘Best to let it rest,’ the old man said.
‘How would you like your bones being jiggered about?’
Mungo considered the prospect.
‘Not much, I suppose.’
‘Best to leave it be,’ Jos repeated.
Mungo decided not to mention the coincidence of the bird's head found by Rose McGarry's body.
He had an inkling that Jos would have an answer for that too.
Instead he put in an extra spurt to create a stockpile, giving him time to throw some finished logs on to the smaller heap.
Then, pausing to wipe his forehead he asked: ‘Jos, what was it like, in the forest?’
Jos turned, without hesitating in his stroke.
‘Hello, who's been giving the game away?’ he said, with a smile.
‘Nobody,’ Mungo said.
‘It's just Emily said you lived there.’
Jos didn't reply for a moment.
At last he said: ‘It was still.
Like a chapel.’
‘But weren't you lonely?’
Mungo said.
‘Just you and all those trees?’
‘They were why I wasn't lonely,’ Jos said.
‘Now then,’ he changed the subject, ‘let's have one or two of them big fellers.’
It was obvious that, for now at any rate, Jos was not eager to talk about his childhood.
Fully stretched, scrabbling up the mountain for the ‘big fellers’, Mungo let the thought rest.
There were other things he burned to know, however.
Carrying to the block a lump so heavy that it made his shoulders ache, he jerked his head towards the end of the stables and asked, panting: ‘What's down there?’
Jos rested his axe and helped him, before cleaving the monster with a single, crisp blow.
‘A saw,’ he said, with a glance down the passage lined with loose boxes.
‘We don't go there now.
Don't you, neither.’
Trying to sound casual, Mungo said: ‘Oh, why's that?’
‘Something happened there,’ Jos said.
‘A bad do…
Now then, have you gone on strike, or what?’
Mungo grinned.
‘What if I said ‘yes’?’
‘I should have to dock your wages,’ the old man threatened.
‘It's the first I've heard of wages,’ Mungo said, heaving another huge log.
‘Fair do's,’ the old man said.
‘Got to keep the workers happy.
A bob sound all right?’
Catching his breath, Mungo said: ‘Yes.
Thanks.’
‘Right, well no  skyving then.’
Resigned, Mungo said: ‘But just tell me.
Please.
Nobody seems to want to tell me anything round here.’
For the first time the old man stopped and folded his hands on the end of the axe-handle.
‘You're a determined young beggar, I'll say that for you,’ he said, not without affection.
‘If you must know, our Emily wasn't an only child.
She had a brother, Tom.
Into everything, he was.
Nosey, just like you…
We've a big mechanical saw up the end there.
You can sort out a fair-sized tree with it.
Any road, one day, when the lad was seven years old…it was his birthday, as it happens…
Stanley had the saw running — we used to sell a few logs in them days — when all of a sudden he hears an explosion and thinks somebody's having a go at his precious Lagonda.
So he leaves the saw running and belts out of the side door to see what's up.
Meantime little Tom wanders in, thinks he'll help his Dad — he was a grand little feller — and lifts a branch on the frame, to saw it…’
Jos broke off, looking down at the axe-head.
‘Stanley finds the police round the Lagonda.
They've got her started and she's blown a gasket.
Then he hears a scream.
He rushed back in…
Little Tom's lying in the fresh sawdust…
Stanley calls Mary Ann.
She was beside herself…
And our Emily's never been the same from that day to this…
He was such a grand little chap.’
Mungo was silent at the horror of it.
‘Emily reckons she saw him there…after,’ Jos went on.
Wanting to be sure he understood, Mungo repeated: ‘After…?’
‘Saw Tom…after,’ Jos explained.
‘When she couldn't have, like.
So we don't go there no more,’ he said again.
‘It's best you shouldn't neither.
Best to stop out of it,’ he added.
Then, after a brief pause; ‘Now, if you want them wages, let's be having you.’
As though winded by the story, Mungo climbed the mountain of logs in slow motion.
CHAPTER 7
Mungo was woken by the rain.
Accompanied by growls and booms of distant thunder, which rattled the panes, it filled the night.
For some reason he found himself wondering whether it would penetrate to the forest floor, or would the ground-cover of pine needles remain dry and fragrant?
And would the swans find shelter from the storm, or ride it out like three-masted sailing ships?
And how would the downpour sound inside Vic's shed?
Mungo imagined the strange magician conducting the thunder as though it were a mechanical orchestra.
Meanwhile, the indestructible burial mound would shrug off the tempest like a great, ageless whale.
Pausing on impulse at the mantelpiece to take the glass ball in his hand, Mungo crossed to the open window.
The curtains were wet where they had been sucked into the fringe of the deluge.
Parting them, he saw that Mr Zamoyski's shop was a blurred outline.
Mungo wished he were inside it, cosy in the leather-smell under the drumming roof.
From here the treeline was a dark mass, like the mouth of a long, low cave approached from the sea.
Mungo craned forward, turning the side of his face to the rain.
His head was drenched in a moment, but he stayed there until a flash of lightning made him withdraw.
Feeling the fragile shell of the golden ball — more delicate, even, than an egg — he was suddenly plunged back into his dream.
Unlike the vivid adventure of the night before it had been peopled by sinister shadows.
He recognized the setting as the stables: more specifically (although he had not yet been there) the scene of Jos's terrible story.
At first the walls seemed to be stacked with dense, stocky, motionless objects, but as the nightmare progressed, they began to writhe and squirm in an eerie, soundless dance.
In the centre of the room was a monstrous machine, black and towering; its huge bulk awesome with power.
Attached to one side was an enormous circular blade; a startling silver against the gloom.
All at once a single shaft of moonlight exploded through a high window and struck this disc, causing it to revolve.
Slow at first, the motion gathered speed until it was too dazzling for the eye to follow.
One of the undulating shapes detached itself from the wall and advanced towards the shining executioner as though blind to its danger.
The faceless presence, thrashing and twisting like a hooked shark, was drawn to its doom.
And now, at last, there was a sound; a high-pitched whine like a dentist's drill, building to a relentless, throbbing, sickening shriek that rocked the walls and threatened to destroy the gigantic machine with its fearsome vibrations.
Detached from its spindle, the ferocious blade would do untold violence…
Returning the glass ball to its resting place, Mungo tried to sleep.
During the day he felt able to cope with any development, however disconcerting.
At night his defences were low.
Then logic became distorted, and the sequence of events since his arrival began to look like a conspiracy.
He must fight the feeling with all his will.
This was not the Dark Ages, he reminded himself, when ignorance and superstition filled the world with demons.
This was now; there was a reason for everything; it was simply a matter of courage and patience.
It was vital to show that he was not afraid; that he would hunt the truth to the end.
Nevertheless, as he  fell asleep, he repeated his prayer: ‘Please God, make me safe.’
It was clear at breakfast, however, that God had not made Mr Cottle sate.
As the traveller in jelly walked in to take his seat, head down as though the floor were a road map, something pink was in evidence under his nose.
When he sat, it revealed itself as a sticking-plaster, like a small moustache.
Anxious not to draw attention to himself, he made a considerable performance of taking his napkin out of its ring and unfolding it.
He was just completing the operation, relieved that no one had commented on his obvious injury, when Mary Ann said:
‘Now that does look sore, Mr Cottle.’
Alerted, the entire table had no option but to stare.
Stanley peered over the top of his paper; Jos stopped chewing; and Mungo and Emily caught each other 's eye.
‘I'd have bathed it if you'd said.’
Mary Ann's kind offer did nothing to ease Mr Cottle's confusion.
A rich blush spread like a sunrise from the horizon of his stiff collar.
‘You want to watch it doesn't go septic.’
To keep himself busy, Mr Cottle helped himself to porridge from a steaming bowl.
Stanley raised his paper again, saying: ‘Nasty thing, septicaemia.’
Mr Cottle gulped down the porridge, which was still too hot for comfort.
‘Maisie Gammond had a cousin died of it,’ Mary Ann added.
Mr Cottle almost choked.
Half an hour ago he had cut himself shaving; now, it seemed, his very life was in jeopardy.
‘One minute she was right as rain.
A week later…’
Despite himself, Mungo exploded with laughter.
Had Maisie Gammond cut herself shaving too, he wondered?
Emily started to giggle.
Mr Cottle looked up, his eyes beseeching Mary Ann to find another object for her well-meaning pity.
At that moment, however, the weather came to his rescue.
Just as Jos glanced at the incessant downpour and said.
‘All right for ducks’, the telephone rang.
Stanley got up to answer it.
Taking the detachable earpiece in one hand and the upright stand in the other he said: ‘Yes…
You what?…
The toilet, you say?’
The turn of the conversation was so unexpected that even Mr Cottle tuned in to hear the outcome.
‘…
Right you are,’ Stanley was saying, ‘I'm on my way.’
Unhurried and even more sombre than usual, he replaced the earpiece in its cradle.
‘Well?’
Mary Ann said.
‘What's all that about?’
Stanley uttered the single word: ‘Floods,’ and headed for the door.
‘Shall you go down?’
Mary Ann was concerned.
Stanley nodded.
Emily said: ‘Can we come, Dad?’
Stanley was about to say ‘no’, when Mary Ann intervened:
‘Go on, love.
It'll do no harm.’
‘Come on then,’ Stanley said, relenting.
‘But you'll have to look sharp.’
Emily and Mungo left what they were eating and rushed to join him.
‘Do you want a hand?’
Jos asked.
‘Let's see what wants doing, first,’ Stanley said, taking his cap off a coatstand.
Seeing them go, Mr Cottle relaxed slightly and raised his cup of tea.
‘That's right, get it down your neck,’ Jos said, joking.
‘What with this septi…whassname it might be the last you'll get.’
Sweeping down the long hill, past a blackened church with its sooty gravestones among the trees, Stanley and  his passengers got their first sight of the problem.
The floodwater, carrying branches and driftwood, was over the roadway on the curved iron bridge.
Shops on either side, many of them temporary looking, like Mr Zamoyski's, were submerged to a depth of perhaps two feet.
Stanley stopped to assess the chances of driving on.
The windscreen wipers sounded asthmatic, fighting a losing battle against the insistent rain.
Suddenly, borne across the bridge on the muddy tide, came a rickety wooden construction like a toolshed.
Forlorn, comical, and out of place, it bobbed towards Stanley's car, its edges blurred by the storm.
Wiping the windscreen with his sleeve, Stanley exclaimed: ‘Good God almighty!’
The words were hardly uttered when the door of the craft was flung open to reveal a white porcelain pedestal with a wooden seat.
Emily burst out laughing.
Mungo turned as if to say: ‘What's so funny?’
‘It's the lavatory, from the back of Dad's shop,’ she explained in a whisper.
Mungo grinned as the rogue closet sailed past the car and out of sight, its cargo no longer private.
Stanley's ironmonger's shop, which stood beside another bridge near the centre of the small, squat town, was also made of wood.
Unlike its smaller, sea-going companion however, it had been built on blocks.
Consequently, although the brown water lapped the top of the front steps, it had not yet reached the interior.
‘Thank the Lord for that,’ Stanley said, opening the door.
Emily and Mungo followed him in.
It was like the Ark, Mungo thought.
As stout and weathered as an old vessel, it appeared to hold at least two of everything.
Small drawers, their lists of contents framed in brass on the front, stretched from floor to ceiling; nails in any length; screws ditto, tacks, washers, hinges, brackets; all stacked and still, awaiting the request that would release them from their unemployment.
Standing on the bare floorboards were thickets of useful objects with handles; serpentine scythes; mops, their heads plunged in galvanized buckets; stiff-bristled brooms, for indoors and out; carpet beaters, rakes, hoes, spades and the rest.
There were green lawnmowers too, with coats of arms on the grassboxes; clumps of cane, tied with brown twine; rolls of wire-netting, and white enamel bowls with blue lines round the rim.
They all smelt of useful newness, seeming eager to get on with the job.
Mungo had the urge to hold them; to run his finger along blades; to feel the weight of hammers; to swing sickles, and drive screws into yielding wood.
While Mungo took it all in, Emily said: ‘What'll you do, Dad?’
‘Make a cup of tea,’ her father said.
‘There's not a lot else I can do.’
Climbing the two steps in the centre of the shop, he disappeared into an office at the back.
Emily sat on the edge of the counter.
Mungo leaned both his elbows on it, beside her.
‘Bit of a disaster,’ he said.
‘It's happened before,’ Emily said.
‘Just so long as it doesn't get in here.’
‘What'll he do if he wants to go to the lavatory though?’
Emily shrugged.
‘The breast-stroke, probably.’
They both laughed.
After a pause, Mungo said: ‘I've been wanting to ask you something.’
‘That makes a change,’ Emily replied.
‘About Vic,’ Mungo went on.
‘You were right.
He is a funny bloke.’
Emily picked up a bunch of seed packets, bound with an elastic band.
She took out one marked ‘Lupin’.
‘He's a loner,’ she said.
‘Why does he live in a garden shed?’
Mungo asked.
‘He likes it there,’ Emily said.
‘His mother's dead and he can't stand his father.
It's somewhere he can do what  he likes.
He even takes his food in from the kitchen.’
As an afterthought, she added: ‘His Dad's a vet.’
‘What about school?’
‘Well, he just goes, like everybody else.
But he s not exactly what you'd call keen on it.’
Mungo paused before saying: ‘These tricks…’
‘What about them?’
Emily pulled out another packet.
This one was marked ‘Foxglove’.
She appeared to be reading the sowing instructions.
‘Are they…?
Well, are they just tricks?’
Mungo knew the question sounded lame, but how else to express his lingering uncertainty about Vic's behaviour?
‘What did you think they were — miracles?’
Emily gave him a challenging look.
‘No, not miracles,’ Mungo protested, ‘but…’
‘He spends a lot of time on his own,’ Emily said in a brisk tone.
‘Plenty of time for practice.’
Mungo hesitated before going on.
‘I thought you said you didn't have any friends, apart from…’
He stopped short, not wanting to upset Emily again.
‘He's not a friend exactly.’
Emily chose her words with care.
‘He's someone I can talk to.’
She laid down the seed packets for emphasis.
‘He's quite intelligent.’
Mungo wondered if she had left unspoken the remainder of the sentence: ‘…unlike you.’
Whether she had or not, he felt compelled to ask her a last question, even if it did annoy or depress her.
‘Did Vic know Rose McGarry?’ he said.
The mood changed.
Emily's expression was one he had never seen before.
Making no attempt to answer, she turned to him and seemed to look into his eyes and beyond.
She was calm, controlled, intense.
For a second Mungo felt almost mesmerized.
She must be re-living her sad memories with such concentration that she was somehow passing them on to him.
‘Wakey, wakey!’ cried a familiar voice.
‘Come and get it.’
Stanley sounded remarkably cheery under the circumstances.
Snapping out of his brief trance, Mungo  supposed Stanley was relieved that at least the shop had survived the flood.
While they were drinking the tea, a young apprentice arrived.
Leaving him in charge and promising to return, Stanley drove Emily and Mungo home.
By now the rain had stopped, though there was no sign of the pirate privy.
Emily got Stanley to drop them off at Vic's house; or rather his father's house, since strictly speaking Vic's address was the shed.
Walking down the path to the side gate, Mungo caught a brief glimpse of a waxy, bald head at a downstairs window.
The eyes seemed to be staring at him with peculiar intensity, as though he were a rare specimen whose every move must be observed.
Their focus was blatant and unnerving — challenging the passer-by like a caged mastiff.
‘God, is that Vic's father?’
Mungo asked Emily in a low voice.
‘He could haunt houses.’
Emily nodded, disguising the small gesture from the watcher in the house.
‘No wonder Vic lives in the shed,’ Mungo whispered.
Though they had not said what time they would arrive, Vic was ready for his guests.
Wearing a duffel coat over yesterday's military outfit, he was feeding hazelnuts to a squirrel.
The animal was so tame that it shinned up his leg and dived into a deep pocket.
There it evidently found another food supply, animating the material in its excitement as though it were a restless human hand.
Beside Vic, on the floor, was a dusty fishing basket, tied round with string.
‘Agrippa,’ he said, introducing the squirrel.
Mungo was about to ask him why he called it that, but hesitated, certain that either Vic or Emily, or both, would think him over-inquisitive.
Vic, however, was ahead of him.
‘I call him that because that's what he is, when he's holding a nut.
Come on, my friend.’
He put a forefinger in the pocket, coaxing Agrippa out.
Sure enough the creature obliged, and made the dizzy descent to the floor in an instant.
‘I was expecting you,’ Vic said, more to Emily than to Mungo.
Then, patting the basket: ‘Victuals.
A picnic,’ he added, turning to Mungo.
‘Perhaps you'd be good enough to carry it.’
Since it seemed churlish to argue, Mungo picked up the basket by the string.
He was dying to ask where they were going, but decided to follow Emily's example and pretend to be unconcerned.
When Vic opened the door, the squirrel bounded out into the garden after them, pausing to sniff the refreshed earth.
As they joined the road, an impulse made Mungo look back.
The large, pale, implacable face was still at the window.
‘We can learn a lot from animals,’ Vic said as they walked towards Mr Zamoyski's shop.
‘To take pain without moaning, for instance.
And not to want more than we've got.
Not to want anything, in fact.’
There was more in this vein as they turned right, and Mungo realized for the first time that they were actually heading into the forest.
Up to now he had been constantly aware of its dark presence, encircling the village, but nobody had ever suggested that he should enter it.
If anything they had implied the opposite.
Yet here was this unkempt figure, his long hair lank on his shoulders, leading them into the jaws of the unknown and sounding like a Bible prophet.
Mungo remembered his thoughts on waking.
The rainstorm had to some extent penetrated the tree-cover.
The ground, under its layer of pine needles, was damp and springy; the air rich with the scents unlocked by the downpour.
To Mungo's surprise, Vic paused a moment, leaned against a tree, took off his gym shoes and carried them.
‘Contact,’ Vic explained.
‘We're electric.
We need earthing.’
Jos had been right, Mungo thought.
In a way the  forest was like a chapel.
It had the same feeling of having been created for a special, mystical purpose.
Just as a chapel was more than four walls and a roof, so the forest was more than pillars and a canopy.
The space itself called for ceremony and ritual to make it whole.
Emily seemed to sense this too as she gazed at the uppermost branches.
Two or three times Mungo glanced behind him, imagining, as he had in the train, that the gap might close, cutting off retreat.
As though echoing their thoughts, Vic said: ‘They're as alive as we are, these trees.
They need food, and air, and light.
They grow; they pass on their seeds.
If we hurt them, they bleed.
They're living beings, and their greatest enemy is man.’
It was clear that Vic felt at home here; more at ease than he did in the shed.
Even his clothes seemed worn for a purpose, blending with the greens and browns of their surroundings.
He did not merely walk barefoot in the pine needles, but dug his toes in so that they ploughed a shallow furrow.
It was evident that he wanted to be not simply in the forest, but somehow at one with it; rooted in the same fertile earth.
Mungo had a vision of his dark head tilted back to drink the rain, and his outstretched palms held up to the sun.
At last they came to a clearing, where Vic headed for a mossy log.
He seated himself at one end, and Emily sat beside him.
Mungo joined them, setting the basket down in front of the nature-lover.
Vic untied the string and lifted the lid.
Leaning across, Mungo was disappointed to see only eggs and apples; three of each.
‘Does your Dad ever wonder why the hens aren't laying?’
Vic said to Emily, as he picked up an egg.
‘One of these days he'll catch you at it,’ Emily answered.
‘I don't think so.’
Placing the egg in the palm of his right hand, Vic let it roll up his forearm and then jerked his elbow so that it was propelled into the air.
Catching the egg, he then reopened his hand.
It was empty.
The  small picnic was growing smaller, Mungo thought.
‘Why did you come here?’
Vic asked, retrieving the egg from his duffel coat pocket and giving it to Mungo.
‘Because you said…’
‘No, no; not the forest, the village.’
Vic sounded impatient.
‘Because my aunt — Emily's mother — thought it was time we…’ he gestured to Emily, who was peeling off her eggshell, ‘…time we met.’
‘How very touching,’ Vic said.
‘But what was the real reason?’
‘That's it.
What other reason could there be?’
‘That's what I'm asking you,’ Vic persisted.
‘Well, I've told you.
There isn't one.’
Mungo could feel himself growing flustered.
In retaliation he said: ‘Why did you come here, for that matter?
Thought you'd do them a favour, did you?’
Emily smiled.
Vic was less amused.
‘It wasn't my idea,’ he said, handing out the apples.
After a pause he added: ‘Only we don't get many visitors, you see.’
Mungo heard himself saying: ‘I'm not all that surprised.’
Vic ignored the remark.
‘We're left pretty much to ourselves.
And we rather like it that way.’
Turning to Emily, he added: ‘Don't we?’
Emily looked first at him, and then at Mungo, without replying.
‘Well, don't we?’
There was a hint of unexpected doubt in Vic's tone.
Staring at the ground in front of her, Emily nodded.
Vic fixed his eyes on Mungo.
‘It's not like other places.
It keeps itself to itself.’
More than anything Mungo suddenly wanted to get out of the forest; to be in his room, or talking to one of the family, or anywhere.
Whereas yesterday he had been given a glimpse of Vic's charm, now he felt disturbed by this peculiar character.
Why had he wanted  to bring them here, with hardly enough to feed a rabbit?
Why did he speak in riddles; ask such annoying questions?
Who did he think he was anyway, with his ridiculous conjuring tricks for beginners?
Mungo got up, brushing the moss off his trousers.
‘Look, I'm going back.
Thanks,’ he said.
‘What's the rush?’
Emily asked, looking up at him.
Her eyes seemed to want him to stay.
‘It's not that easy,’ Vic said.
‘No?
Watch me!’
Mungo said, full of bravado to impress Emily.
Heading for what he thought was the way they had come, he was immediately confused.
Now it looked different.
The trees seemed taller and closer together; the spaces between them darker and more forbidding.
As he glanced up, the green canopy began to spin.
The trunks in the clearing had formed an ever-tightening ring which threatened to overpower him; to crush him with its living might.
The forest had cornered its greatest enemy, and would show no mercy.
In spite of the fact that he was stationary, Mungo felt breathless.
He must find a way.
He must escape.
He must…
Close to panic, Mungo felt an arm slipped through his.
‘Here, let me show you,’ Vic said.
‘The forest can be a frightening place.’
On Mungo's other side, carrying the basket, was Emily.
She was smiling.
CHAPTER 8
The following morning, as he opened his eyes, Mungo heard voices outside his window.
Drawing back the curtains, he saw a pair of men in blue overalls get out of a black police car, open the gates to the yard and give a mock salute as the driver and his passenger drove in.
Across the road, Mr Zamoyski was just unlocking his shop when the postman arrived.
Were they letters from Poland, Mungo wondered?
A few unhappy lines from long lost relatives?
How odd it must feel to be a stranger in an alien country, where even the faces on the stamps had no meaning.
Mr Zamoyski was not entirely fluent in his adopted language, and there must be few people locally, other than his wife perhaps, with whom he could speak Polish.
Here, he was probably a nation of one.
But then it occurred to Mungo that Mr Zamoyski's position was not unlike his own.
He too was an outsider in a foreign place, and he was by no means certain that all the natives were friendly.
Picking up the glass ball on his way back to bed, Mungo was still haunted by the episode in the forest.
The feeling of dizziness had been unlike anything he had experienced before.
Another few seconds and he might have fainted.
Could it have been hunger that caused the light-headedness?
Or lack of sleep?
Or the stress of worrying about the puzzle at the heart of the village?
Probably it had been a combination of all these things.
Laying the Christmas decoration on the eiderdown with care, he thought about Vic.
What had he really been saying as they sat among the trees?
Did he mean  that Mungo was not welcome here?
If so, the message reinforced Jos's earlier warning.
But why were they so eager to discourage visitors?
It could only be because they had something to hide.
They were the ones who were frightened, and in turn they wanted to scare Mungo.
But in that case why had he been invited here in the first place?
Or was Mary Ann unaware of the secret shared by the others?
And why had Vic suddenly been helpful when Mungo grew confused?
There were still many more questions than answers.
Mungo picked up his diary from the floor beside the bed.
Only four days to go and he would be out of here anyway.
Four short days.
That gave him two options.
He could coast along, asking nothing; accepting everything, like the animals Vic admired so much, and staying out of trouble.
Or he could make a determined effort to solve the mystery, whatever the risk.
It only took a moment to make up his mind.
Refusing to be beaten, he decided to tackle the problem head on; reminding himself that otherwise he would spend the rest of his life wondering.
The obvious starting point was Vic.
Mungo sensed that he was either a complete phoney or a principal player in the village drama.
There was only one way to find out which.
At the first opportunity Mungo would search his cluttered shed for any clues that might be hidden there.
As far as he could, he would keep a record of the magician's movements and see if they added up to a meaningful pattern.
After all, what was there to fear?
At the very worst Mungo might be discovered trespassing.
And what could they do to him then?
Hang, draw and quarter him?
No, they would simply tell him again to mind his own business and send him another note composed of gibberish.
‘BORVEL NEM AKT’—‘BLANKET MOVER’!
He smiled to think how gullible he had been.
After breakfast, cheered and strengthened by his new resolution, Mungo went into the yard to see what the earlier commotion had been.
The black car was parked  near the Lagonda, on which the four figures in overalls were working.
As he approached them, Mungo could see that they wore blue uniform trousers under their working clothes.
Here was a chance to put his new policy into practice.
‘Morning,’ he said to the nearest policeman, whose head was buried in the engine.
The man turned a grease-smeared face.
‘What are you doing exactly?’
Mungo said, by way of small-talk.
‘The foxtrot.
What does it look like?’
The policeman on the opposite side of the car spoke without looking up.
‘Take no notice,’ the nearer figure said.
‘He's fed up 'cos he's left his smokes behind.’
He paused.
‘We're getting her ready for the skid pan.’
‘Must be quite exciting.’
Mungo realized as he said it that no policeman would ever admit to anything being exciting.
‘Thrilling,’ the man opposite said in a flat tone, confirming Mungo's expectation.
‘It's just technique,’ the nearer man said, tightening a nut.
‘Not like you see in the films.’
‘Can I ask you something?’
Mungo said, growing bolder.
‘It's a free country,’ the friendlier policeman said.
‘Free, my backside,’ his colleague muttered.
‘You know the dead girl?
Rose McGarry?
Have you got any ideas yet?’
‘We're mobile, son,’ the nearer policeman said.
‘You'd have to ask the plain-clothes mob.’
‘But you must hear things?’
Mungo said.
The policeman opposite looked up.
He had a square face with a broken nose.
‘The voice of God,’ he said.
‘He hears the voice of God.
On a regular basis.’
The nearer policeman gave his colleague a bored look.
‘Give it a rest, Jack,’ he said, wiping his hands on an oily rag.
Then, turning to Mungo: ‘Jack's our comedian, son.
He's about as funny as  diptheria .’
Mungo grinned, and then checked himself, not wanting to upset Jack.
‘No, but you must,’ he went on.
The friendly policeman looked him in the eye.
‘Between you and me, they haven't got the foggiest.’
He rummaged in a metal toolbox, lodged against the windscreen.
‘No marks, bar a pinprick; no prints; no weapon; no motive…’
‘Nobody knows the trouble I've seen,’ Jack began to sing in a strained bass, as though completing the roll call, ‘nobody knows but Jesus…’
‘But what can it have been then?’
Mungo asked.
The friendly policeman found the wrench he wanted.
‘Crack that, son, and they'll make you chief constable.’
‘But how can you kill somebody without leaving marks?’
‘There's ways.
Why, who've you got in mind?’
Mungo was taken by surprise.
‘No, I meant the girl…
Rose.’
The friendly policeman broke off what he was doing, weighing the wrench in both hands.
‘Well, there's poison for a start,’ he said.
He raised his head and smiled at Mungo.
‘I shouldn't fret about it if I was you, son.’
‘But I can't help ‘fretting’ about it,’Mungo said to himself as he re-crossed the yard.
‘And why isn't anybody else?’
Before he had time to consider his own question, his train of thought was interrupted by Emily.
‘Feel like a bike ride?’ she said.
‘Where?’
Mungo asked.
‘Over the hills and far away.’
‘OK.’
They took the road past Mr Zamoyski's shop and pulled up by the bowling green.
‘Let's have a game,’ Emily suggested.
‘I'll thrash you.’
Leaning their bicycles against the fence, they went into the railway carriage pavilion.
There were slatted  seats along both sides, under which were numerous pairs of white, rubber soled shoes and cylindrical black leather cases bearing initials.
On numbered hooks above the benches were white hats and coats.
Mungo noticed a red admiral caught in cobwebs on the window overlooking the green.
He leaned over to free it but a wing came away in his hand.
It must have fallen into the trap some time ago.
Emily carried out two leather cases.
‘Pick,’ she invited him.
Throwing down a rubber mat to show where they should stand, Emily bowled the small white jack.
‘They'll skin us if they catch us,’ she said.
Mungo loosed his first bowl.
Travelling like a cannonball it flew straight into the shallow ditch at the far side.
‘Superman,’ Emily said.
By contrast her bowl curled in a perfect arc from the left and finished up a foot from the target, keeling over on to its side.
‘You've done this before,’ Mungo said.
Overcompensating, he left his second effort ten feet short.
‘Once or twice,’ she admitted, as her next bowl ran straight at the first, making contact with a gentle ‘klok’.
‘All you can do now,’ she said, ‘is knock both of mine out of the way.’
‘Cinch,’ Mungo said.
Taking careful aim, he sent his third bowl careering over the green.
Before it had a chance to reach Emily's neat pairing, however, it caught his own second bowl a solid crack, sending both to join the first, out of play.
Rubbing it in, Emily placed her third bowl eighteen inches to the right of the jack, scoring maximum points.
‘Very predictable,’ Mungo said, pretending to mock her accuracy.
When five games in succession had gone to Emily, he capitulated.
‘It'll be a different matter when we play darts,’ he said.
‘Definitely.
I'm better at that,’ Emily smiled.
Replacing the bowls, they pedalled on down the steep hill and up the next.
There, instead of going straight on towards Alice's farm, they turned left for The Tiger's Head, an old pub which stood off the road behind a dusty forecourt.
A long narrow sign over the front door, under a rickety porch, read: ‘Lily Garner.
Licensed to sell beer and spirits.’
Emily and Mungo leaned their bicycles against the wall.
‘They call her ‘Tiger Lil’,’ Emily said.
‘We can't go in, can we?’
Mungo said.
‘No,’ Emily replied, walking with confidence to the entrance and knocking on the door.
‘She'll come out.’
Sure enough the landlady appeared across the black and red tiled floor.
She was wearing carpet slippers with pink pom-poms on the front, a wrap-around cotton housecoat tied in the middle, like Mary Ann's, and a headscarf bulging with sausage-like curlers.
Her face, like the rest of her, was round and welcoming.
‘Well, well,’ she said.
‘Where've you been all my life, madam?’
Emily shrugged.
‘A bit of this and a bit of that.
You know how it is, Lil.’
They obviously enjoyed playing a game with each other.
‘You're all the same, you typhoons,’ Lil said.
Emily giggled.
‘I think it's ‘tycoons’, Lil.’
‘Aye well, ‘tycoons’, ‘typhoons’, they're all full of wind,’ Lil said.
Mungo laughed.
‘Lil, let me introduce Stone,’ Emily said.
‘Pleased to meet you, young man.’
Lily held out a dimpled hand with a flashy ring on the second plump finger.
Mungo wasn't sure whether he was supposed to shake it or simply admire.
He shook it.
‘Stone what?’
Lily asked.
‘Just Stone,’ Emily said.
‘His first name's so silly I won't even tell you it.’
Just so long as it's not ‘gall’,’ Lily said.
‘Gallstone’ wouldn't be a very nice name, would it!’
Mungo smiled and shook his head, agreeing.
‘What'll it be then, Mr Stone?
Mungo looked at Emily.
‘Cider, Lil,’ she said.
‘We'll have it outside.’
‘Right you are, my duck,’ Lil said, and turned to get the order.
Emily led Mungo round the back of the building, into a small garden full of blowsy, old-fashioned roses, where they shared a weathered bench.
Beyond was the edge of the ever-present forest.
‘She doesn't look much like a tiger,’ Mungo said.
‘She's great,’ Emily replied.
‘I come here when I get depressed.’
‘Is that often?’
‘Fairly.’
‘What do you get depressed about?’
‘This and that…
Being hemmed in, mostly.’
‘I know the feeling,’ Mungo said.
Emily turned to him, anger in her eyes.
‘No, you don't,’ she said.
Before Mungo could ask what she meant, Lily emerged from the back door with two glasses on a tray.
Padding across the shaggy lawn in her slippers, she was accompanied by a tortoise-shell cat which repeatedly darted at her pink pom-poms.
‘Shoo!’
Lily said.
‘She thinks I've got nothing better to do than play with her all day.’
Setting down the tray between Emily and Mungo she added: ‘There we are, madam.
Two Old Peculiars, compliments of the management.’
To Mungo's surprise, Emily suddenly leapt up and gave Lily a kiss on the cheek.
‘Mind my hair-do!’
Lily cried.
‘I'm expecting very important persons.’
‘Go on!
Who?’
Emily laughed, sitting down again.
Lily folded both hands on her stomach.
‘That'd be telling,’ she said.
‘Charlie Farnes-Barnes and a feller with two left feet.’
Surveying the garden, she went on: ‘This lawn wants mowing.
You wouldn't like to mow my lawn would you, Mr Stone?’
Mungo was about to say ‘yes’, when there was a bellow from the direction of the pub.
‘SHOP!.’
Lily rolled her eyes.
‘You see what I'm up against?’ she appealed.
‘Pig ignorant they are.’
As she turned to serve the impatient customer she added: ‘I've been in palaces and kings' houses, Mr Stone.
And just you mind you bring the tray back, madam.’
The cat jumped on to Mungo's lap, making herself comfortable.
Picking up his cider he asked: ‘What's an ‘Old Peculiar’?’
‘What, apart from Lil you mean?’
Emily said, sipping from her glass.
‘I think it's a kind of beer.’
There was silence for a few moments.
Mungo reflected that he had never seen Emily so happy.
In fact she always seemed more content when they were out of the village.
Was that where she felt ‘hemmed in’?
He hesitated to spoil the mood by being inquisitive, though he wanted so much to gain her confidence; to make her an ally in the search for the truth — if there was a truth.
Presently, taking one of the cat's forepaws in her hand, she anticipated him.
‘Does Vic bother you?’ she asked.
Mungo answered with care.
‘He's a bit…creepy.’
‘He's had a very unhappy time.
He'd rather say his mother died but she didn't.
She ran away.
Couldn't stand living with his father.
Vic thought the world of her.
He couldn't believe it.
He was absolutely shattered.
She went off with this bloke from the garage.
A complete oaf.
Vic's never seen her since.
And he's never forgiven her.’
‘Did he tell you all this?’
Mungo asked.
‘Bits,’ Emily said.
‘The rest his Dad told my Mum.’
Spotting a thrush on the lawn, the cat leapt down and gave chase.
Was this the moment to ask about Emily's  brother, Tom, and the tragic accident?
No.
What was the point of reminding her?
What could she possibly say?
Instead, Mungo referred again to Vic.
‘He seems to wish I hadn't come,’ he said, angling for support.
Emily shrugged.
‘He just likes to pretend we're very exclusive.’
‘Don't you mind him stealing your father's eggs?’
Mungo asked.
‘He doesn't believe in owning things,’ she replied.
‘He says eggs are nature's to give away, like water.
No one can own them, he says.’
Mungo thought about this.
In its peculiar way it sounded quite logical.
‘He's asked us to go fishing with him this afternoon,’ Emily said.
‘At the lake.’
Mungo had to improvise fast.
‘Er, I can't,’ he said.
‘I promised Jos I'd help him.’
Emily gave him a sideways glance.
He could not tell whether she believed him.
‘You going?’
Mungo asked.
‘Might as well,’ Emily replied, draining her glass.
‘There's nothing else to do.’
After lunch Mungo watched from his bedroom window as Emily and Vic turned at Mr Zamoyski's corner.
They made an unusual duo.
With her long cotton dress tucked up for ease of movement, Emily looked neat and easy beside the rangy, untidy figure of the young magician.
Dwarfing his bicycle, he hunched over the handlebars, his duffel coat in constant danger of tangling with the spokes.
Slung across his back were two fishing rods in a long brown sheath and strapped to a bracket behind his seat was the basket from the picnic.
When they were out of sight, Mungo touched the golden glass ball for luck and went down to the yard.
Having told Emily that he had promised to help Jos, he had better volunteer, at least.
The old man was using a  blowtorch on the garden gate.
As the layers of paint bubbled under the heat, he followed up with a broad-bladed scraper, peeling off brown sludge in smoking strips.
‘Now then,’ Jos said as Mungo approached.
‘How's my mate?’
‘Do you want a hand?’
Mungo asked.
‘I'll tell you what you can do,’ Jos said.
‘Directly I've stripped her you can give her a good sanding.
Is it a deal?’
When Jos moved round to work on the other side of the gate, he handed Mungo a sheet of sandpaper, telling him to use plenty of ‘elbow grease’.
Mungo found the work satisfying, though he was anxious not to delay long before investigating Vic's headquarters.
By the time he had rubbed the surface smooth, stopping periodically for a chat with Jos, his shoulder was aching.
‘Not bad for a townie,’ Jos said, casting his expert eye over the results.
‘I suppose you'll want to knock off now, will you?’
Agreeing to finish the other half after a breather, Mungo waited for Jos to start on the greenhouse before making his unhurried exit from the yard.
It was obviously vital that he should somehow get into Vic's shed unseen.
There could be no question, therefore, of a frontal approach.
He would have to find a way round the back.
Cutting behind Mr Zamoyski's shop, he prayed that the cobbler would not come out and greet him.
Fortunately there was no sign of the familiar face at the grimy rear window.
Crossing the road Vic and Emily had taken earlier, Mungo headed down a lane flanked by steep grassy banks.
Now that he was committed to a course of action he felt exhilarated.
The fact that he might be taking a considerable risk only added to his excitement.
He wished Emily were with him, to share the adventure; to talk about it afterwards and laugh with relief.
But although Mungo was a cousin, he was still a mere  acquaintance; for the moment her loyalty was bound to lie with Vic.
Gauging a spot which he thought might be level with Vic's house, Mungo struck up to the right on a winding path.
Sure enough, at the top, when he had found his way through a screen of brambles, he could see the tumbledown shed across an expanse of gardens.
Leading to within a few yards of it was a public right-of-way.
Putting his hands in his pockets, and trying to look as though he did this every day, he fixed his eyes on the target.
The closer he came, the more mysterious the shed seemed.
Among these well-tended plots, with their laden fruit trees, it was out of place and ill at ease; as though it had been transplanted from another age or a backward planet.
It appeared isolated, withdrawn, harbouring something which, if revealed, might shock and frighten its neighbours.
It struck Mungo as being like a time-bomb, planted even before memory, which might explode at any moment.
Squeezing through a gap in the hedge at the bottom of Vic's garden, Mungo found himself in front of the shed door which, together with the rest of the building, leaned to the left in its frame.
Making sure that he was not visible from the house, he tried the brown bakelite handle.
The door held fast, obviously locked.
Why had he not considered that possibility?
And what should he do now?
Was this his cue to make a strategic retreat, or might there be another way in?
Staying close to the wooden wall, he crept along between the shed and the hedge.
Thorns snagged his sweater from behind, and splinters hampered progress at the front.
Worse still, there was no window on this side.
Unless there was one in the back wall, he would have to abandon the entire exercise.
It would be madness to attempt entry on the flank nearest the house where the pale, sinister figure might still be on watch.
Overhanging the corner of the shed was an ancient  apple tree, with greyish mossy growths on its trunk and branches.
Most of its fruit had fallen in the long grass, where its rotting skin had been pecked and tunnelled by birds and worms.
As he craned his neck and looked up to his right, Mungo's heart beat faster.
There, under the apex of the roof, was a small window, open a few precious inches.
Getting in would be hazardous; to say nothing of getting out, but it was his only chance.
Would it be wiser to turn back now, rather than risk the appalling embarrassment of being discovered here?
Much wiser, Mungo thought.
Nevertheless he refused to concede.
With luck Vic and Emily should be gone several hours, giving him ample time to search for evidence and be back at the white house long before they returned.
Calming himself with a reminder of his earlier resolution, he started to climb the tree.
Brittle with age and affliction, the branches offered uncertain support.
One near the top snapped with a whipcrack under Mungo's weight.
Freezing for a second, he raised himself upright and, standing on a stronger limb, used another as a guide-rail.
Breaking off a stout twig, he curled a foot under the window's lower edge and lifted it as high as the rusty hinges would allow.
Holding tight with his left hand, he then leaned as far forward with his right as he dared and managed to prop the twig in the gap he had created.
Now he could see the faded curtains inside the shed and the crowded shelves beyond.
Straightening up again for a brief rest, he worked out a method of getting through the opening.
With care he should be able to dangle his right leg over the sill and follow it with his right arm and his head.
He could then swivel and, hanging by both arms, drop to the floor.
But what if there were bookshelves below?
In the event, these ended a foot to the right of him as he made a soft landing on Vic's bed.
The only mishap was that in forcing himself through the gap, he nudged  the twig and the falling window struck him on the head.
Fortunately the glass remained intact.
Now, alone in Vic's private world, Mungo at last felt like an intruder.
This was a dreadful liberty, he realized.
If, as was entirely possible, he found nothing and Vic turned out to be an innocent eccentric, this action would be inexcusable.
He himself had been unsettled to find a note and a feather placed in his room, but this was a thousand times worse.
He wondered what Vic's reaction might be if he ever found out or, horror of horrors, caught him red-handed?
The conjurer would probably put a spell on him, turning him into a toad.
Before getting off the bed, Mungo scanned the books to see what reading matter Vic preferred.
There was no sense of order about their arrangement; old  encyclopaedias , with several volumes in the sequence missing, lay next to adventure stories with torn spines, works on natural history, and out-of-date atlases.
Like Vic's clothes, they might have been borrowed — or stolen — from several sources.
When Mungo got down, he could see that more books were collecting dust under the bed.
Meanwhile, on the wall at its foot, were three cracked glass cases containing stuffed creatures; an owl, a fish and a vicious-looking animal snarling through sharp yellow teeth.
As he stared at them, fascinated, Mungo had the sensation of being watched.
Were they keeping a glass eye on him, these grotesque, moth-eaten remnants?
Or was it the presence of Vic that he felt, his uneasy aura trapped in the shed like these once-breathing specimens?
Mungo looked up and was relieved not to see a face at the window.
He checked on Rock Hardy.
To his surprise he had already been in here ten minutes.
Delay could be dangerous.
He must complete his mission and leave as fast as possible.
Parting the curtains, he went through to the front half of the room.
As he scanned the laden  shelves to left and right, there was suddenly a sound like a hundred ball-bearings being dropped from a height on to the bare floorboards.
In alarm, Mungo looked down.
Marbles, dozens and dozens of them; greens, blues, twists and bullseyes, spilling from an overturned jar like a fragmented, crystallized rainbow.
They clattered on as far as the door; under workbenches, into cracks, finding every obscure corner.
This was a disaster, Mungo thought.
He must somehow have dislodged them on his way in.
Now he must either spend countless valuable minutes retrieving the escaped marbles, or he could ignore them and leave Vic to reach his own conclusions.
Would the shed's inhabitant necessarily guess that Mungo had been the uninvited visitor?
Perhaps not.
After all, the culprit could even have been the tame squirrel.
And if he did attempt to round up the collection, he only had to miss one to arouse suspicion.
As Mungo weighed the dilemma, a white shoebox on one of the shelves caught his eye.
It looked newer than any other object in the shed.
Mungo supposed that it had been given by, or taken from, Mr Zamoyski, since Vic was clearly not in the habit of buying smart footwear.
Mungo reached up and took it down, sending more marbles cannoning across the floor as he moved a foot.
Taking off the lid, he saw a sheet of white tissue-paper.
Peeling this back from one corner, he was astonished at what lay beneath.
There, nestling on a further bed of tissue-paper, were five glass Christmas tree decorations.
Two balls — one silver, one purple; two golden bells, and a delicate, miniature, twisted walking stick.
The striking thing was that like the golden ball Mungo had found at the barrow, these were not of modern design.
With their subtle colours and irregularities, they were clearly antique.
More like jewellery than cheap baubles, they were left over from a Christmas long ago.
Should he take one, or all of them, with him, Mungo  wondered?
As proof?
But proof of what exactly?
And if he did, Vic would surely guess the identity of the thief.
Even the most enterprising squirrel could scarcely have done that.
No, the beautiful objects could not be called proof, but they were a suggestion — the merest indication — that there might be some sort of link between their present owner, the burial mound, and the foresters' custom described at the farm by Alice.
It was little enough to go on, but it was at least a beginning.
Giving the evidence a last, closer examination before leaving, Mungo noticed something he had previously overlooked.
It was obvious from the empty space at one end that the box had once contained a sixth decoration.
CHAPTER 9
Mungo's retreat from the shed was as untidy as his forced entrance.
Replacing the shoebox but leaving the tell-tale sea of marbles, he stood on Vic's bed and tried, without success, to jump and pull himself up to the small opening.
Because the twig had fallen out, he had the added problem of holding the window ajar with his head, in order to let his body follow.
Three times he tried the manoeuvre and three times he failed to haul his weight over the sill.
What if he were trapped in here until Vic returned, which might be soon?
How could he possibly explain his presence?
No.
He must either barge the door down or make one more supreme effort to leave the way he had come in.
Taking a deep breath, Mungo leapt up from the sagging mattress, clutched the sill, and heaved with all his might.
Straining his neck as far forward as he could, he managed to push the window open several inches and, with another surge, wedged himself in the embrasure; the spike on which the latch usually rested now sticking into his stomach.
By swinging his legs he was at last able to make painful progress, so that eventually he was half in and half out of the building.
Suppose Vic's father chose this moment to spray his apple tree, Mungo thought, or cut the grass?
What excuse could he use?
‘I just popped in to borrow a book’ perhaps?
Or ‘I've always wanted a bird's eye view of the garden’?
Not very convincing.
Still, a few more seconds and he would be free.
Taking hold of a strong branch, he finally cleared the escape hatch with his legs and dropped to the ground.
By the time he got back to the white house Mungo was exhausted, and the signs of his ordeal were plain to see.
His hands were scratched and dusty and there were small rips in his sweater.
Nevertheless, to strengthen his alibi, it might be a good idea to do some more work for Jos.
Fortunately, the old man was still burning paint off the greenhouse.
Waving to him, Mungo got on with sanding the unfinished side of the gate.
‘You're a beggar for punishment,’ Jos shouted.
Mungo nodded with an exaggerated movement so that the gesture would carry.
The monotonous motion of his arm released his mind to think about the discovery in the shed.
What could it mean?
Since Vic was not a forester, there was no reason for him to follow the quaint ways of the forest.
And if the glass ball found at the barrow was the one missing from Vic's set — in itself a big ‘if’— how had it come to be left there?
Perhaps Vic had simply liked the look of the decorations in an antique shop or an auction and helped himself, arguing that, like eggs and water, they were universal property?
And maybe the one in the burial mound had been dropped by someone else entirely?
There was nothing for it, Mungo thought, but to follow Vic as often as possible, in the hope that he would lead the way to a solution.
The question was, how was he to do it without arousing suspicion?
Mungo found time to change and clean up before tea.
When they sat down to eat, Emily had still not appeared.
She finally arrived some twenty minutes later looking so cold and miserable that Mary Ann ordered her straight up for a bath, before she caught her ‘death’.
‘Any luck?’
Mungo asked, as she reached the stairs.
‘Couple of tench,’ Emily said, turning to look at him.
And then, with a grin, she added: ‘Vic caught a cardboard box.’
Mungo hoped that his instant panic didn't show on his features.
Had Vic and Emily been back to the shed before she came on here?
Had they seen the chaos left by  a clumsy intruder?
Had they already guessed who it was?
By now Emily was out of sight so there was no way of knowing.
Mungo would be left in doubt throughout the meal.
Even afterwards he could only be sure if he asked her, and she would think that odd.
The whole situation was beginning to get out of hand.
‘There, Mr Cottle,’ Mary Ann was saying to the traveller in jelly, as she passed him the bread and butter, ‘this'll put roses in your cheeks.’
If anyone alive was not in need of cheek-roses at that moment it was Mr Cottle.
His face was the colour of a new cricket ball; a small graze on his top lip being the only vestige of his controversial shaving injury.
‘D-d-ddiet,’ he managed to stammer.
This, the first word Mungo had ever heard him utter, other than the mysterious ‘lymenner’, came as rather a shock, as though a pillar-box had suddenly spoken.
‘Stuff and nonsense,’ Mary Ann said.
‘Diet indeed!
With a trim little figure like yours?
You're too thin to cast a shadow.’
Mr Cottle was making a close scrutiny of his boiled egg, tapping it to excess, as though otherwise it might rise like a blunt rocket and escape.
Stanley lowered his habitual newspaper to see what the exchange was about.
‘Get it down you, lad,’ he advised Mr Cottle.
‘Else you'll never get a girl, looking like a beanpole.’
Mungo wondered how Stanley had ever got his girl, looking like a warped beanpole?
Mary Ann was still holding the plate of temptation over the table.
‘That's right,’ she said, ‘very good for your love life, is butter.
Makes your hair curl.’
‘Better pass it to my mate then,’ Jos chipped in, smiling at Mungo.
Now it was Mungo's turn to blush.
Meanwhile Mr Cottle finally gave in and took a piece of bread and butter, his hand trembling so that the vaunted delicacy looked like a ship's flag in a breeze.
‘That's it,’ Mary Ann said.
‘You'll sell more jellies than Soft Mick tomorrow.’
Mungo wondered who ‘Soft Mick’ was?
Presumably a super-salesman; a legend in the jelly world; a jelly juggernaut.
‘They reckon she'd had an injection,’ Stanley said without warning, cutting across the small-talk.
‘Who had?’
Mary Ann asked.
‘That girl,’ Stanley replied.
‘Whassname's kid.’
‘Rose, you mean?’
Everyone looked up including Mr Cottle, temporarily forgetting his embarrassment.
‘Aye,’ Stanley said, ‘Rose.
That little mark on her arm…they reckon it might have been an injection!’
‘Is that it?’
Mary Ann said, sounding let down.
‘Don't they say what it was an injection of?
I thought they had experts.’
Stanley shook his head, frowning.
‘They haven't a clue,’ he said.
‘Only as far as they know she hadn't seen a doctor.’
‘She hadn't sugar, had she?’
Mary Ann asked.
‘Not according to this,’ Stanley replied.
Seeing Mungo's bemused expression, Mary Ann explained: ‘What they call diabetes.’
She half mouthed the word, as though it were not quite suitable for a polite tea-table.
Mungo nodded, calling to mind a diabetic schoolfriend who had to inject himself daily.
But who had held the syringe over Rose, and why?
For a moment there was silence, as the others asked themselves the same worrying questions.
Finally Mary Ann spoke in a firm voice:
‘Well, I don't want our Emily seeing it,’ she said.
‘She's had enough upset as it is.’
Taking her point, Stanley folded the paper and sat on it.
Arranging to have a game of darts with Jos later in the evening, Mungo went up to his room.
He had scarcely had time to draw the curtains when there was a small, familiar tap at the door.
Opening it, he made way for Emily who was carrying a mug of tea and a plate of biscuits.
‘Have one,’ she said.
Mungo accepted and they sat on the bed.
‘Aren't you hungry?’ he asked.
Emily shook her head.
‘I think I've got flu.’
She put her plate on the eiderdown and sipped her tea.
‘I wish you'd come.
Vic's not much good at fishing.
He thinks he is, but he isn't.’
‘It's just I'd promised Jos.’
Now that he had helped the old man, Mungo felt better about the lie.
And this was his chance to find out whether Emily had been to the shed before coming home.
‘Did he really catch a cardboard box?’ he asked, all innocence.
Emily smiled and nodded.
‘His majesty was very displeased,’ she said.
‘And he lost two floats.
Hopeless.’
By her tone, Mungo could tell — or at least thought he could tell — that she had not visited the scene of the crime.
Was this then the moment to come clean, he wondered?
Should he tell her where he had really spent the afternoon?
Should he share with her the discovery of the glass ball in the barrow and its companions in the shed?
Should he disobey Mary Ann and tell Emily about the strange injection theory?
Could he now make her his partner so that they could investigate this mystery together?
Yes! he decided.
Two brains were better than one and, in any case, what was there to lose?
‘Emily,’ he said, ‘it's not true…about promising Jos.
I wanted a chance to go and look in Vic's shed.’
Emily put down her cup and looked at him with troubled eyes.
‘Why?’ she asked.
Mungo began his story.
He told her of the visit to the farm, reminded her of the discovery of the swan and the  bird's skull (though he knew this was taking a chance after her first, alarming reaction to the news), and mentioned again the note and the feather in his room.
During the description of his early morning visit to the burial mound, Emily was particularly still and intense.
‘Were you frightened?’ she asked in a quiet voice.
‘Yes,’ he admitted.
‘It felt like a place where things happen.’
‘What sort of things?’
‘I don't know,’ Mungo said.
‘Things you can't tell people about.’
Getting up, he walked over to the mantelpiece and took the glass ball, which he concealed in his hand, as Vic might have done.
When, turning, he reached the part about finding it behind the standing stone, he revealed the gleaming decoration.
The surprise worked.
Emily appeared to be spellbound.
And she was even more impressed as he recalled opening the shoebox, with its matching glass decorations and its vacant space.
The mood, however, did not last.
‘Well, great,’ she said.
‘But what does it all add up to?’
Mungo was disappointed, despite the fact that he knew the question was reasonable.
‘Maybe nothing,’ he said.’
It's just that I've got this feeling about it all.
I mean, suppose I am right and the glass ball did come from Vic's collection.
What the heck was it doing in the barrow?’
‘How do I know?’
Emily said.
‘But it's a very big ‘suppose’.’
‘Not all that big,’ Mungo said, sitting down beside her and showing her the golden ball.
‘This isn't a modern one.
It's obviously old, just like Vic's.
And his set didn't have a gold one.’
‘Well, it probably didn't have a pink one either.
What does that prove?’
‘It doesn't ‘prove’ anything,’Mungo said, disgruntled.
‘It's just dead peculiar, that's all.’
He was  bursting to add: ‘And what about Rose and the mark of the needle?’ but restrained himself, feeling that the timing was wrong.
Instead, to lighten things, he told Emily about the marbles.
She laughed.
‘His majesty won't like that,’ she said.
‘Why do you call him ‘His majesty’?’
Mungo asked.
‘You've done it twice now.’
‘Have I?’ she said.
‘Perhaps because that's what he thinks he is.’
‘And what do you think he is?’
Mungo was looking for a straight answer.
‘I've told you,’ Emily said.
‘He's someone to talk to.’
She leaned over and chose a chocolate biscuit.
‘But when you're with him — like in the forest — you don't seem to do much talking,’ Mungo persisted.
Emily shrugged.
‘It's getting a word in edgeways,’ she said.
With her free hand she took the golden decoration from him, examining it with care.
‘My Dad used to have some of these,’ she said.
A thought struck Mungo, putting him on the alert.
‘Used to?’
‘Still has, I should think,’ Emily went on.
‘Needless to say he's never used them.’
Mungo was eager.
‘Where did he get them?
Do you know?’
‘In an auction, I expect.
Like the rest of his junk.’
Telling Emily that he had to ask her father something, Mungo hurried downstairs.
In the kitchen Jos was listening to the wireless while he filled in his pools coupons.
‘What's up?’ the old man said.
‘Forgotten to put the cat out?’
‘Where's Uncle Stanley, Jos?’
Mungo asked, trying to sound casual in spite of his breathlessness.
‘Down the cellar,, Jos said.
At that moment Stanley came through the door.
‘Talk of the devil,’ Jos said.
‘Uncle…?’
Mungo began.
Stanley pulled out a chair and sat down.
‘What's on your mind, lad?’
Plunge in, Mungo thought.
No point in beating about the bush.
‘Have you got any old Christmas tree decorations, antique ones, by any chance?’
Jos frowned.
‘A bit previous aren't we?
It's months off.’
‘I have, as it happens,’ Stanley said.
‘Got 'em in a sale at…
I can't just remember now.
There's that many.
Half a dozen boxes there were.
Edwardian.
They didn't know what they were worth.’
He took a pipe out of his overall pocket and started to light it.
‘I got 'em for nowt.’
‘That's what he always says.’
Jos winked at Mungo.
‘Trouble is he sells 'em for nowt an’ all.’
Stanley eyed his father over the stem of his pipe and the uplifted match, his shaven eyebrows arched with indignation.
‘Could I have a look at them, do you think?’
Mungo asked.
‘Certainly you can,’ Stanley replied, obviously surprised and delighted that anyone should show the slightest interest in his wide-ranging collection.
‘I don't suppose you remember where they are, do you?’
Stanley puffed on his pipe and beamed.
‘On the contrary, my dear Watson.
I know exactly where they are.’
Mungo had the impression that he had been waiting a lifetime to answer that question.
‘It may look a mess in them stables but it's all in here,’ Stanley said, pointing to his brain.
‘It's a living catalogue, is this.
Just you ask me where such and such is and I can place it…just like that!’
He clicked his thumb and middle finger.
Jos said: ‘Well tell him where the boxes are, you great girl's blouse.’
Stanley puffed faster, glaring at his father.
‘That's what you get in this house,’ he said, without explaining precisely what it was you got.
‘They all think I'm daft.’
Mungo wondered whether he should deny thinking that, but knew it would sound like sucking up.
Fortunately there was no need because Stanley was more determined than ever to show off his memory.
‘You know the far door by the Lagonda?’
Mungo said he did.
‘In there, turn left, right to the end.
You'll find 'em on your right, on top of a sewing-machine table, next to a brass bedstead.’
For a moment Mungo was speechless.
But was that not the stable where little Tom…?
Jos could see his dilemma.
‘It's shortage of space,’ he said, to reassure Mungo.
‘He just uses it for storage.’
Having shown the sudden, deep interest, how could Mungo now claim that he no longer wanted to visit the stable?
Perhaps he could get off the hook by saying he would go in the morning?
Perhaps he could plead a blinding headache, or an attack of  tonsilitis?
No, too late.
He must go through with it.
In any case, what was there to fear?
Who in their right mind would avoid a road or a railway track simply because it had once been the scene of an accident?
The furthest stable was just a room, like any other, with four walls, a ceiling, and a door.
It couldn't bite.
Thanking Stanley, who said he was very welcome, Mungo walked out to the yard, watched by Jos.
The evening was still light.
Swifts jinked and swooped in the enclosed space with the grace of dolphins.
Bats too criss-crossed the liquid air with a more deliberate motion, like water-beetles.
Mungo was comforted by their presence.
Pausing at the Lagonda, he touched the steering-wheel for good luck.
When he came out, he thought, he would sit in the driver's seat and allow himself a daydream.
Turning into the stable where he had helped Jos, he breathed in the forest smell of the logs which Jos had  chopped and he had piled.
There was light in here too, filtering through the filthy windows.
Shadows lay in bars of varying widths across the passage leading to Mungo's destination.
Reminding himself that there was nothing to fear he set off, past the loose boxes with their heaps of shabby treasure.
They must have long memories, Mungo thought, lying here in permanent dusk.
Perhaps at night they shared them, talking of times long past.
He imagined the sheathed swords, formal and crusty, sharing reminiscences of life in India with the cricket balls; the photographic enlarger telling tall stories of the amazing sights it had seen; the willow pattern plates tut-tutting about scandals at the vicarage.
As he approached the end of the passage, Mungo could already see that the furthest room was in darkness.
Now he began to feel apprehensive.
The crammed loose boxes to his right seemed more menacing, as though the ugliest objects had been banished to this unvisited dungeon.
Mungo imagined them including instruments of torture, unnamed specimens in bottles, and vicious animal traps like the ones on Vic's wall.
Would the magician have put two and two together yet, Mungo wondered?
If so, what would he do about it?
Beginning to wish he had never come, Mungo stood on the threshold of the last door.
Jos had said there was a window, but it must since have been curtained.
It was even impossible to make out the enormous saw which had been the cause of the accident.
Feeling up and down the wall to his right, Mungo searched for a light switch.
At last he made contact.
Dominating the room, like the massive skeleton of some even larger beast, was the fearsome engine, sleek from its last oiling.
Even stilled, the great pistons were ample evidence of the power it could unleash, driving it like the mighty wheels of a train.
It seemed a part of nature's force, as though it had erupted from the earth  rather than being bolted to it.
Missing however was the dreadful cutting edge itself.
Mungo walked across the sawdust, stained with the oil-blood of the engine.
Finally he saw it.
Lying between the machine and the window, which was covered with black material, was a large circular blade.
Scarred with rust, its shark's teeth no longer gleaming, it looked almost harmless.
Detached from its energy source, it was simply a piece of dead metal.
Encouraged by the thought, Mungo realized that he was forgetting the point of the search.
Looking over his shoulder he saw at once the brass bedstead, and the sewing-machine table on top of which Stanley had said he would find the boxes of glass balls.
Since they were not obvious from where he was standing, he took a few steps and examined the table-top.
There were no boxes.
The surface was bare.
However a neat, dust-free rectangle in the centre showed where they had obviously lain.
Someone, it seemed, had relieved Stanley of his bargain.
Mungo had no doubt who the someone was.
Now the remaining box in Vic's shed could be used in evidence against the thief.
The crime might not be serious, but at least it would lead to a line of enquiry.
Turning for the door, Mungo suddenly found himself in the overwhelming dark.
He scrabbled for the switch, thinking it must somehow have clicked itself off.
The stubby lever, however, was down, as he had left it.
He put it up again; maybe the wiring was faulty.
Nothing.
Now that he had the information he needed, he might as well leave in any case.
He reached for the door but failed to find it.
That was strange, he thought.
He remembered it being ajar.
Edging further towards it he put out both hands.
The door was shut.
Perhaps there had been a gust while he was over by the engine?
Locating the knob, he tugged.
Nothing.
He pulled harder.
No movement.
He stepped back, pausing to think, but the more he tried to invent  reasonable explanations, the more he came back to the obvious truth: someone had put out the light and locked him in.
The question was why?
Either they wanted to frighten him, or it was a joke.
Perhaps in a minute or two the door would open again and there would be…who?
Emily?…laughing and teasing him about deserving a white feather…?
But surely Emily would not choose this, of all rooms?
On reflection, none of the family could possibly have chosen it.
Apart from scratching noises in the roof, the room was soundless.
With his back to the door, Mungo sank to his haunches.
Looking towards the middle of the room he could just make out the hulk of the engine, even more dense than the surrounding dark.
There was no doubt about it.
Whoever had done this wished him harm.
The prime suspect was Vic, though how would he know Mungo was in here?
He must have been watching, presumably after finding his hideout violated.
Alone and imprisoned, Mungo lost the battle with his imagination.
It conjured shapes out of the darkness, as it had in his nightmares.
The severed blade was raised from the sawdust by an unseen hand and re-connected to its spindle.
All at once the engine uttered a roar and the long silver pistons began to labour.
In slow motion at first, they picked up urgency until they were powering back and forth at great speed.
The wide drive-belt thrummed on its smooth wheels, with a ‘flak’ as the stapled joint passed over metal.
And now the great blade spun to a whine, while the black curtain fell away from the window, directing a blinding beam on to the bright, hungry teeth.
Its fierce shine compelled Mungo to his feet.
He was drawn in terror towards it, shielding his eyes against its splendour as he came ever nearer.
Somewhere, far away, there seemed to be a rapping at the door and someone was calling his name, over and over, louder and louder…
But as though sleepwalking, he drew closer and  closer, the blade seeming ever more deadly and more desirable.
Its dazzling, irresistible face filled the room; the sound of its anger and revenge hitting an unbearable pitch.
Mungo could feel the heat of its energy as he reached out to touch the edge of the beautiful destroyer…
All at once there was a shaft of light from the doorway.
The door itself was flat on the ground.
Silhouetted in the frame was the sturdy figure of Jos, holding a sledgehammer.
Lying dazed in the oil-stained sawdust, beside the lifeless engine, Mungo was overcome with gratitude to the old man who had responded to his fear.