

Gardeners' World
Advice, Ideas and Inspiration from your BBC experts
August 1991 £1.30
Gold Medal Award for our Chelsea show-stopper
Plants for free 100 great ways to increase stocks
ROSES our guide to the best blooms
Create a WILDLIFE GARDEN
Colour creations  Let Nigel Colborn plan your perfect garden
Name the plants and win a car!
PLUS do coco composts really work?
BBC Gardeners' World
THIS MONTH
Regulars
Garden News
The latest news, reviews and diary dates, plus free books, fly traps and watering cans.
And anyway…
Alan Titchmarsh ponders on when builders' junk became ‘architectural antiques’.
Over the fence
Swap gardening snippets on our letters page.
August action
A gentle schedule to keep the garden ticking over while you enjoy some well-earned leisure.
Gardening in tomorrow's world
Future pest control at a stroke?
The beechgrove garden
BBC Scotland's experts advise gardeners north of the border.
Help at hand
Away with vine weevil Pippa Greenwood outwits this frustrating plant predator.
Question time.
Our brainstorming BBC experts solve gardening problems large and small.
Readers' original gardening tips
Another batch of £50 cash prizes are winging their way to this month's top tipsters.
TV and Radio Guide
Don't forget when it's time to down tools and pop inside for your favourite TV and radio gardening programmes.
Next month
Sneak a preview of what's in store in September.
Practical Project
Planting by numbers
Plant in style with our beautiful collection of small shrubs and herbaceous plants.
Practical Project
Begonia leaf cuttings Take a leaf out of the experts' book with our guide to increasing your stocks of foliage begonias.
Plants
Colour creations
Some like it hot Beat the heat with Nigel Colborn as he highlights plants that won't desert their post in a drought.
Specialist spotlight
The key to success Graham Rice visits Hazel Key at her famous pelargonium nursery.
Portrait Gallery
Handle with care Roy Lancaster profiles some of his favourite prickly perennials.
Flower Garden
Cut and dried Anne Swithbank plants perennials to ensure an economical supply of fresh and preserved cut flowers year after year.
Organic Gardening
Organic Advice
How to produce organic tomato seed and greener salads, and enjoy Michaelmas daisies with using fungicides.
Green Gardening
Fair trial for fibre Geoff Hamilton scrutinises the newest cocofibre trials, and shells out on a cocoa shell mulch his lime-hating plants will love.
Competitions and Offers
Competition
Win the new Renault Clio We unveil a fantastic new six-part competition to win one of this year's most exciting models, and give you the first plant posers that lead the way to £9,180-worth of gleaming new car!
Soakerhose Offer
Our special price will whet your appetite for the dry season's gardening essential.
Back issues
Send off for the copies you missed and complete your collection of Britain's newest, brightest gardening magazine.
Points of View
Tell us what turns you on and off about TV gardening in our reader survey.
Get snapping
Win a weekend away The search is on for a photo of Britain's best windowbox, basket or tub.
Capture the winner and you and a companion could be getting away from it all in style.
Subscription offer
Our fabulous 15-for-12 offer, plus special subscriber prices for our handsome binders.
Pelargoniums offer
Two exclusive collections of charming miniature and fragrant scented-leaved varieties have been chosen for our readers.
Gardens
Wildlife Garden
Pastures new  Make a mini-meadow with Geoffrey Smith, then sit back and enjoy the wildlife it attracts.
Kitchen Garden
Kitchen Garden
Joy Larkcom wouldn't be without the distinctive flavour and looks of dill.
The 60-minute vegetable plot
As the crops ripen, Roy Lacey reflects on the success of his hour-a-week venture.
Vegetable grow guide
We show you how to grow your own cabbages
The Victorian kitchen garden
There's plenty in store for the winter months in Harry Dodson's century-old fruit house.
Under glass
Living with house plants
Carol Kurrein has advice for fern lovers this month, as well as tips on maintaining a humid atmosphere.
Gardens by design
Winning sense of style
Faith and Geoffrey Whitten tell us how they created our award-winning Chelsea garden.
TV special
Creative planting Nigel Colborn tells us how he's getting on with his TV Gardeners' World plot at Barndale.
Gardens by design
Perfect pergolas David Stevens surveys styles and settings for these lovely features.
Follow Nigel Colborn on p26
Spiky but supremely stylish: prickly perennials take the state on page 64
Welcome…
When it comes to planning a new garden, or developing an existing one, take your time and soak up fresh ideas from garden visits, books, magazines, and television programmes.
Nigel Colborn's series on Creative Planting on BBC2's Gardeners' World has provided plenty of inspiration, and now he has drawn all his ideas together for a special feature in this issue.
Taking you through garden planting step-by-step, Nigel starts by planting the backbone of the garden, and moves on to the star performers that take the stage just once a year.
This month David Stevens passes on his ideas for perfect pergolas, and you'll find plant profiles from your favourite BBC experts.
Plus there's a special feature on our Chelsea garden.
If you thought that seeds and cuttings were the only way to increase your garden plants then turn to the Gardeners' Manual for a host of practical ideas to try.
Until next month, happy reading and good gardening.
A dusty answer for those hot, dry sites on page 46
Pergolas on parade on page 52
There's an idyllic Lake District weekend for our photo competition winner, p40
The clever colour theming that won our Chelsea Fujicolor garden a coveted Gold Medal, p18
News and Views
Garden News and views
Your monthly guide to news and views from the world of gardening
Chatsworth maze open for yew
Chatsworth is the grandest of gardens, with canals, fountains, cascades and magnificent glasshouses within a 1,000 park.
To coincide with the Year of the Maze, Chatsworth's famous yew labyrinth is being opened for just a few days during the year, the next openings being on August 18 and September 15.
And on the weekend of August 31 and September 1 the celebrated park will be the venue for a popular country fair, with pipe bands, displays and a plethora of stands.
Further information available from The Chatsworth House Trust, Bakewell, Derbyshire.
Tel: 0246–582204.
Building sights
Drystone walls have long provided gardeners with plenty of opportunities to grow pretty alpine plants.
On August 4, the Lancashire drystone walling competition will be held at Jumbles Country Park, Bradshaw Road, Bolton, Greater Manchester.
It is open to professional, amateur and novice stone-wallers, and the contest gets under way at 9.30am.
Further information is available from Jumbles Country Park.
Tel.
0204–853360.
Last chance for a super-snap
Time is running out if you are planning to enter our Gardens in Focus photographic competition to win great Pentax cameras.
The closing date for all entries is July 29, 1991.
Let us remind you that there are three categories for entries: 1 Plants and flowers; 2 Gardens; 3 Gardeners.
Full details, which appeared in the May issue, can be obtained by sending an SAE to Gardens in Focus — Rules,BBC Gardeners' World Magazine , 20–26 Brunswick Place, London N1 6DJ.
And remember, full copyright for the pictures remains with the photographer.
Feast your eyes
Alfresco , by Linda Burgess and Rosamond Richardson, is a new book of lavishly photographed, mouthwatering recipes designed with outdoor eating in mind.
To tempt readers to dine among their delphiniums, we have joined publishers Ebury Press to offer ten free copies (bookshop price £16.99) in a draw.
Send your details on a postcard to:BBC Gardeners' World Magazine/Alfresco Offer, PO Box 40, Wetherby, W. Yorks LS23 7EY, by August 9.
Floral island
The island of Jersey will be a feast of flowers from July 15 to 20 during its annual flower festival.
This is a week packed with garden tours, question time sessions, gardening teach-ins and much more.
At Kempt Tower, St Ouen, 450 fuchsia varieties will be displayed in a number of setting.
Geoffrey Smith will lead a tour of the Japanese garden and waterfalls of Samares Manor.
For further information on the Jersey Floral Island Festival, contacts Jersey Tourism, 35 Albemarle Street, London W1X 3FB.
Did you know…
The giant saguaro, which inhabits the extremely hot and dry climate of the Arizona desert, can grow up to 60ft (18m) tall.
It may take as long as 250 years to reach that height.
Despite their size, or perhaps because of it, many saguaros have been stolen from the desert to be sold, at huge prices, to ornament smart Californian gardens.
The rustlers must arm themselves well, however, to be protected from this cactus's fierce spines.
A prize can
Water your plants in style this summer with the Geeco Master Gardener watering can.
Fashioned from galvanised metal with a brass trim at the base and brass rose, the traditionally fashioned can takes on an attractive, weathered patina as it ages.
We have joined forces with Geeco to offer ten cans (retail price around £35.75) in a prize draw.
Just send your details on a postcard to:BBC Gardeners' World Magazine Watering Can Offer, PO Box 40, Wetherby, W. Yorks LS23 7EY, to arrive by August 9.
Show Time
Don't miss an exhibition on the life and work of Reginald Farrer, botanist, gardener and plant explorer, at Lancaster University's Peter Scott Gallery, July 15-Aug 9, 12–5pm Monday to Friday
The wonderful world of orchids
The orchid family is positively huge, with over 35,000 species distributed throughout the world.
Their habitats are diverse, ranging from Arctic regions to the tropics, although most orchids prefer the warmer climes.
A new book,Letts Guide to Orchids of the World , looks at 450 different species, with guidelines on how to identify and cultivate these fascinating flowers, and is illustrated with over 500 colour photographs and line drawings.
Price £19.95.
Catch pests out
A greenhouse packed with pretty plants is a very cheering sight, unless closer inspection reveals colonies of whitefly and aphids, particularly troublesome pests in the summer months.
To help control them, hang Deathtrap whitefly catchers: yellow-coloured glue panels which are safe, non-toxic and odourless.
We have joined Gerhardt Pharmaceuticals to offer a pack of Deathtrap whitefly catchers (worth around £3.80) to 60 readers in a draw.
Send your details on a postcard to:BBC Gardeners' World/Magazine /Whitefly Trap Offer, PO Box 40, Wetherby, W. Yorks LS23 7EY, to arrive by August 9.
A winning team
It's rare to find the BBC TV Gardeners' World team all gathered in the same garden, but our Chelsea garden's Gold Medal deserved a special television get-together to celebrate with designers Faith and Geoffrey Whiten, who share their winning ideas with us on page 18.
Kew for jazz
Enjoy Kew's Royal Botanic Gardens after dark this summer during its three nights of jazz concerts in July.
The concerts all start at 7.45pm and will feature Alan Price on July 23, Kenny Ball and Jazzmen on July 24 and the Pasadena Roof Orchestra on July 25.
Bring a picnic and park yourself in front of the Temperate House for an evening's entertainment.
Tickets must be bought in advance: details from the Kew Box Office, PO Box 43, London WC2N 4NX.
Credit card hotline: 071–379 4444.
Gardeners' manual binders
Your monthly Gardeners' Manual is building into an indispensable reference book; send today for its special binder with the coupon on p50 
Butterfly safari
Britain has over 50 native butterflies and half a dozen regular visitors from abroad.
But 25 native species are endangered, seven to the verge of extinction.
To learn more about how to protect butterflies, join the butterfly expedition at Snipe Dales country park, Horncastle, Lincs at 2pm on Sunday August 4.
Contact Mary Edwards at the Manor House, Alford, Lincs.
Tel: 0507–463468.
Any anyway…
Whoever it was that invented the phrase ‘architectural antiques’ is no friend of mine.
I picture this character, a kind of hybrid between Lovejoy and Pop Larkin, scratching his head over a load of bulky junk to be shifted sharpish.
At some point he managed to convince us his trade was respectable, nay, even smart, and now a lump of broken stone will cost you a grand.
Now, I rather like strange things when it comes to garden ornaments.
Bits of broken gothic windows and corn grinders quorns are mother's milk to me.
Not for me your concrete nymph or your plastic heron.
I'm a man of individuality where garden embellishment is concerned.
The trouble is that so are a lot of other people, and classy people at that, which is why old Joe ‘I'm-a-dealer-in-architectural-antiques’ Soap has climbed on to the pricey bandwagon.
Time was when you could find an old millstone round the back of the shed at your local nursery and offer the owner 15 quid to take it away.
Now you have to make your own out of concrete and hardboard.
Before the trade took off I bought a small font (of the splashing rather than the total immersion variety) for 20 crisp oncers; now you'd need to check your savings before indulging in a piece of granite.
The Chelsea Flower Show is probably not the most obvious place to pick up a bargain — lead lions rampant and Medici urns atop Corinthian columns must cost more than the Governor of the Bank of England earns in a week to transport there, let alone purchase.
So I was surprised to encounter one firm with a collection of what really did look like my sort of junk.
A few lumps of stone; a matching shepherd and shepherdess plucked from Arcady, an old and battered sundial and a leaded glass cloche.
Aha!
I could do with one of those.
it had been badly repaired and clumsily painted, but these things I could remedy.
I enquired the price.
The answer: £250, in its ‘restored’ state.
Restored!
Before I could twist my face into anything faintly resembling a sneer, the vendor explained that there were four such structures in a similar state of repair and that a Frenchman had expressed great interest.
Well, he can have 'em, if he thinks they're worth it.
I'm endeavouring to acquire a passion for plastic.
The day that battered sundial he offered me for £1,650 finds its way into my garden is the day I won't need to work for a living.
Until then, I'll stick to my wristwatch, and a clay flowerpot with a geranium stuck in the top.
 Alan Titchmarsh 
Pair of chairs
Metal garden furniture has an ageless quality, and usually looks better and better as time rolls on.
This Deauville chair by Barnsley House Furnishings features a sunray patterned back and seat (£325), while the wirework chair below, by Gerry Earl, has a nostalgic, Victorian design (£225).
These chairs and others are available from the Chelsea Gardener.
Tel: 071–352 5656.
Win a car
Identity Parade  name the plants and win a car
Identify the plants above and you could be on the road to a brand new five-door Renault Clio.
£1,500 worth of garden gift tokens are also on offer to our readers.
On those weekend trips to the garden centre, have you ever longed for a car that is stylish, luxurious and spacious?
Now is your chance to win a five-door Renault Clio RT 1.4 in this marvellous BBC Gardeners World Magazine /Renault competition, in conjunction with the Horticultural Trades Association (HTA).
£1,500 worth of HTA National Garden Gift Tokens, which can be exchanged for plants and tools all over the country, can also be won.
How to enter
Each year the HTA selects 12 well-known, attractive plants to become plants of each month for that year.
We will be publishing pictures of two of these in each issue from now until January 1992.
All you have to do is identify those plants and send in your answers on a postcard together with your name and address.
If you think plant number 1 is a hydrangea, for example, write 1 = hydrangea.
The first five correct entries each month will win £50 of HTA National Garden Gift Tokens.
Answers to each part of the competition will be printed the following month.
But that's not all.
Keep a note of your answers, because in our January issue we will be asking you to name all twelve HTA plants of the year.
The first correct answer to be drawn will drive away the Clio RT 1.4.
Send your entries each month on a postcard to:BBC Gardeners' World Magazine /Renault Competition, PO Box 55, Wetherby, West Yorkshire LS23 7ET.
Reader's letters
Over the fence
Your chance to air your news, views and, of course, those gardening anecdotes
Herbs ideal for the kids
The enthusiasm of the Hopkinsons for herbs (A Taste for Herbs, June) is easy to understand.
The beauty, variety and good nature of these wonderful plants has provided a marvellous educational experience at our village school.
Herbs are ideal for children, as most of them are foolproof.
Our herb garden was designed, sown and planted by 10 and 11-year olds and has given pleasure to many people.
It brightens the utilitarian facade of our modern building and provides material for lessons.
Although it is only in its second season, the garden looks mature, overflowing with over 50 herbs arranged in four beds, complete with a central bird bath.
Pride of place goes to the massive angelica, now a blooming 6ft high outside the head's window!
We are very proud of our herb garden, and feel that every school should have one.
 Jacky Cooper (parent), Clavering Primary School, Essex 
Never too old to garden
On the subject of finding the oldest plant, what about the oldest gardener?
At 97, my mother still grows kidney beans, but now on a small scale.
Last year she had a lovely crop from her plot, which measures about 2ft by 3ft; this year she dug it over in plenty of time for May 4, the day on which she sows on the basis of an old saying: ‘the 4th of May is kidney bean day’.
She waters the plot every day and seems to have no intention of giving up, since she saves her own seed every year.
 Mrs P E Taylor, Essex 
Doggone it!
I recently began the slow change to organic gardening, following Geoff Hamilton's advice and using blood, fish and bonemeal.
However, my cocker spaniel rates it top of the list for smell.
No matter how secretive I am with it, she can sniff it out at the drop of a handfork and, of course, most of my young plants are dug up.
Any ideas?
 Mrs E Bertrand, Banstead, Surrey 
Toad in the hole
A few weeks ago I picked up a tray of plants from the greenhouse border and was delighted to see a baby toad sitting in a hallow in the soil.
I brought my family in to see him, but he crawled off to hide among some pots.
I didn't see him for several days.
One morning I saw a tray of lettuces had been disturbed.
As I poked them back in the compost moved, and I retreated hurriedly.
This happened the next day, and the next until, fed up at seeing my lettuces out again, I decided to investigate.
There at the bottom of the tray was my little friend.
Giving up, I changed the tray's label from ‘Buttercrunch’ to ‘Toad’and left him to it.
But now, a few days later, he has decided to move house and is wreaking havoc in a tray of limonium plants.
I always thought toads were a greenhouse asset.
Just my luck to get one with vandalistic urges!
 Mrs K M Poulter, Camberley, Surrey 
Pampered by pampas
Two years ago I planted a pampas grass to screen an ugly compost heap.
It has done so admirably, but it has also generated immense interest among local wildlife.
Frogs love it, and in springtime birds swarm all over it, making off with beaksful of what must be nature's most luxurious nest lining material!
 Audrey Berry, Bury 
Index link
Having been a subscriber from your first issue, I find myself already amazed at how often I refer to my various back numbers.
To make life easier in the future, will you be publishing an index?
 Eunice Goldsmith, Marazion, Cornwall 
The editor writes: An index is being prepared and will be available at the end of the year.
We shall publish details of how to obtain it.
Letter of the month
Only four, and a gardener to boot
As I sowed my seeds in April, my four-year-old son hung around pestering to have a go.
Eventually, I gave him four 3in pots, a bucket of compost, a handful of seeds and some rudimentary instructions, and ensuring peace was wonderful.
When I checked up on his progress I was startled to find that he had not only planted up the four pots but his red wellington boots as well, liberally watering both them and himself and then garnishing with sprigs of a semi-dormant fuchsia as a finishing touch.
The seeds sprouted and the fuchsia cuttings struck, and now the little red wellies look wonderful.
My son is immensely proud of them, and offers the following advice to gardeners worried about their technique: ‘Growing pretty flowers is easy if you fill your wellies full of muddy stuff and squish it down a lot.’
Easy when you know how!
 Mr S C Harrison, Yeadon, W Yorks 
Mad moggy
After destroying the nepeta last year, our cat has now discovered the pleasures of our actinidia.
Katya went crazy over it before it had broken into leaf, just as she did with catmint.
Have any other readers found this plant sends  their feline friend into a frenzy?
Incidentally, I took delivery of my pinks collection today, and was surprised to find one labelled ‘Alan Titchmarsh — white, with a pink/green eye’.
Does this explain his ‘sideways look at life’?
 C Randall, Shepperton, Middx 
Well spotted
Growing certain plants and flowers to keep pests away is a great idea.
Three years ago I planted leopard's bane, and I haven't had a single leopard in the garden since!
 R Williamson, Lenzi, Glasgow 
Hardly the daintiest of herbs, angelica can reach heights in excess of 6ft, with a three-foot spread
Wreaking havoc: could Camberley be suffering the first invasion of delinquent teenage toads?
Frogs and birds pamper themselves with plumes of pampas grass
Where to write
Send your letters to: Over the Fence,BBC Gardeners' World Magazine , 20–26 Brunswick Place, London N1 6DJ.
Each letter published will win its writer a £10 National Garden Gift Token, exchangeable at 1,500 garden centres, nurseries and shops all over the UK and any Interflora shop.
BBC Gardeners' World Magazine Reader offer Soakerhose
Use water wisely, putting it exactly where you want it with a Soakerhose.
The unique structure of this flexible, porous hose-pipe allows water to seep out and uniformly along its entire length.
You simple run the Soakerhose through the flower borders, next to a hedge, along rows of vegetables, around shrubs, or into tubs and containers.
It can even be buried in the ground to prevent wetting the soil surface and encouraging weeds.
Connect a tap, turn on, and Soakerhose releases a gentle trickle of water to the soil.
This provides accurate control of watering, so saving water too.
The Soakerhose comes in two packs — length 50ft or 100ft — both with end stoppers.
The versatile Starter Kit contains not only a 50ft Soakerhose, but also 10ft of garden hose, and a set of hose couplings, plus a flow control regulator and a 16-page instruction manual.
For the real enthusiast, the Deluxe Starter Kit combines 100ft of Soakerhose and 10ft of garden hose with T and L-shaped connectors, caps and other couplings, plus a flow regulator and manual.
The kit contains all you need to build your own watering system.
Special pack price
Save an extra £11.95 by ordering our BBC Gardeners' World Magazine Special Pack, containing Starter Kit and a 50ft Soakerhose pack at just £39.95.
How to order
Complete the coupon below and send it with a cheque/postal order made payable to Gardeners' World Soakerhose Offer.
All prices include p&p and VAT.
Please allow 28 days for delivery.
Post your order to: Selected British Products Ltd, PO Box 74, East Preston, Littlehampton, West Sussex BN16 3RR.
TELEPHONE ORDER HOTLINE  Call our hotline to place your credit card orders on 
Gardeners' Diary — Action for August
The holiday season is here, and this month brings with it a chance to relax and enjoy the garden
The Flower Garden
Taking cuttings and collecting seeds will ensure that next year's garden is even more colourful than this year's
Note any gaps in the flower borders that can be filled with other plants next year.
This is easier to do now than later on.
Cut stems of suitable flowers for dried winter displays.
Also cut attractive seed-heads such as poppies for the same reason.
Take semi-ripe cutting from a large range of shrubs, such as box, ceanothus, cytisus, escallonia, euonymus, hydrangea, spiraea, hypericum, philadelphus.
Take half-ripe cutting of woody climbers such as solanum and trachelospermum.
Choose roses from the catalogues for autumn delivery of bare-rooted plants.
Trim slow-growing evergreen hedges such as yew and holly.
Water rose bushes regularly in dry weather, dead-head any faded flowers and spray with Roseclear (ICI) against mildew, blackspot and aphids.
Plant bulbs of erythroniums, crown imperials, snowdrops and muscari as soon as available.
Prune lateral shoots of wisteria if not done already, by cutting back to four or five leaves from the main stems.
New herbaceous perennials planted now will put on plenty of root growth before winter, giving a better display next year.
Keep new plants well watered.
Winter and spring-flowering hellebores can be lifted and divided now, so they settle down before winter sets in.
Keep aster plants well watered to help prevent attacks of mildew.
Spray any mildew-infested varieties with a suitable fungicide such as Nimrod-T (ICI).
Take cuttings of violas, taking material from healthy, non-flowering basal shoots.
Give young climbing plants a helping hand by tying in new shoots
Water containers daily during spells of dry weather and feed plants weekly
Plant groups of autumn-flowering bulbs, like colchicums, in well-drained soil
Collect ripened poppy seeds for sowing (see step by step guide overleaf)
Ponds and water life
Take time out to relax by the pond; a cool refuge on hot, balmy days of late summer
Water and oxygen levels can drop rapidly in hot weather.
Leave pumped water to run night and day to increase oxygen content; add more water if needed.
Lift and divide large clumps of pond plants and marginals.
Clean biological filters if they are dirty, but avoid flushing out too many of the biological organisms which do the work.
Lawns and turf
In many regions drought has been less of a problem for lawns this year, and the mowing programme continues
August is the last month you can apply weed and feed treatments to the lawn.
Don't apply to a parched lawn, and follow the manufacturer's instructions.
If you have been away and the grass is long, just tip the grass in the first mowing, and lower the subsequent cuts gradually.
Ask kind neighbours or friends if they can mow the lawn if you are intending being away a couple of weeks or more.
If dry weather persists and your region is not subject to watering restrictions, water the lawn thoroughly occasionally, and preferably at night-time.
Sowing a new lawn can be done from late August.
Prepare the seedbed thoroughly first, being sure to eliminate all weeds.
Take it easy
Martin Latimer  BBC Radio Derby
The flower garden in August is reaching its climax.
Herbaceous borders have already reached perfection, annuals at their best and many shrubs continue to provide a good display.
The summer bedding season is in full flight now, and to maintain this tapestry of colour, it is advisable to deadhead the flowers as soon as the petals start to fade.
Patio containers and hanging baskets will particularly benefit from a high potash liquid or foliar feed this month, which will ensure they provide a continuity of flower until the onset of autumn frosts.
Above all, August is a month to take some time out to relax in the garden and reap the rewards of all the hard work you put in earlier in the season.
Gardeners' Diary
August Checklist
CUT OUT AND KEEP
Flower garden
Cut suitable flowers for dried winter displays
Take semi-ripe cuttings from a variety of shrubs
Choose your roses now for autumn delivery
Trip yew and holly bushes
Water, dead-head and spray rose bushes
Keep aster plants well watered and control mildew
House and greenhouse
Ventilate greenhouse well and damp down surfaces
Pot on pelargonium, fuchsia and other plant cuttings
Water houseplants regularly and ensure they receive enough humidity
Restart resting cyclamen corms and pot them on
Take cutting of Christmas cactus and pot them on
Carry out any necessary repairs to the greenhouse
Kitchen garden
Sow seed of sprouting broccoli, spinach beet, corn salad, lettuce, spring onions, turnips and others now
Pinch out the growing tips of tomato plants
Let onions ripen fully before lifting for storage
Start cutting sprigs of herbs for drying and storage
Remove weeds with a hoe
Pick fruit regularly
Prepare a new site for a strawberry bed
Ponds and water life
Keep water levels up
Carefully clean biological filters if they are dirty
Watch out for pond weeds which can quickly take over if not removed
If hose-pipe bans are not in force, water the lawn occasionally in dry weather
House and greenhouse
High summer is often the best time to give the greenhouse a good old clean-out, while plants can be put outside
Continue to ventilate the greenhouse freely, leaving vents open at night.
Provide shade to prevent overheating, and damp down the surfaces regularly to keep the air moist.
Dry air in the greenhouse will encourage pests such as red spider mite.
Pot on cuttings of pelargoniums, fuchsias and other plants started in spring.
Take 3in tip cutting of pelargoniums intended to be grown on as standards.
Take cuttings of regal and zonal pelargoniums.
Better results are obtained by rooting them singly in 2in pots rather than several to a larger pot.
Sow Brompton stocks in a nursery row.
Pot them up in September and bring into the greenhouse for winter flowers.
Water and feed houseplants as necessary.
Stand plants on saucers filled with pebbles which you can keep wet, to maintain a more humid atmosphere around them.
Prick out cinerarias, primulas and calceolarias that were sown last month before seedlings become overcrowded.
Restart cyclamen corms that have been resting over the summer.
Cyclamen may also be raised from seed sown now in pots and pans and put outside in a shaded cold frame.
Pot on greenhouse primulas,P. x kewensis, P. malacoides and P. obconica .
Keep the plants cool, putting them in a shaded cold frame.
Give them a slightly acid compost, and don't allow the plants to dry out at all.
Take cuttings of Christmas cactus (Schlumbergera)and flaming Katy (Kalanchoe).
Allow the cuttings to dry out for a couple of days before potting.
Pot up freesias, tulips, hyacinths and narcissi for winter and spring displays.
Carry out any necessary repairs to the greenhouse, and repaint it if needed, in dry weather.
Cherries in winter
Pot on young plants of winter cherry (Solanum capsicastrum)into 4in pots, using a John Innes No 2 or similar free-draining compost.
To obtain good bushy plants, keep pinching out the tips.
Remember to check the plants daily for any pests: aphids and red spider mite can both be a nuisance on these plants.
Gardeners' Diary — Sowing Iceland poppies
1
Turn seed-heads upside down and tap out the tiny seeds on to white paper, so they are clearly visible.
2
Sow thinly in pots or trays of well-drained seed compost.
A folded white card helps to distribute them evenly.
3
Cover with a layer of horticultural grit to aid watering and prevent caking of the soil surface.
Water well.
4
Label the pot and put on a cool bench or in a cold frame.
Thin seedlings and plant out in autumn.
There should be more space available mow to display ornamental plants
Continue to ventilate the greenhouse, ensuring vents are open at night
Carry on cyclamen
Richard Bowering  BBC Radio Wales
Cyclamen corms that were resting over the summer can be restarted now.
Soak the old corms thoroughly first, pot and all, to get them going.
Once the new growth has started to emerge, pot them on into new compost, water well and place in a light position on the greenhouse bench.
The kitchen garden
August is a month of harvest for fruits and salad crops but also the time to plan ahead for future produce
A wide variety of seeds should be sown this month.
These include sprouting broccoli, spinach beet, corn salad, Japanese onions, lettuce, spring onions, radish, turnip, winter spinach, and Swiss chard.
Spring cabbages must be sown by early to mid-August.
Choose the dwarf variety ‘Pixie’ for small plots.
Some vegetables, like beetroot, carrot, endive and winter lettuce varieties, should be sown now, but covered with cloches later to protect them to maturity.
Continue to sow salads like lettuce, radish and spring onion for cropping in late summer.
Pinch out the growing tips from tomato plants a couple of leaves above the top truss of plants.
You should only leave 3 or 4 trusses to ripen on standard outdoor types.
Onions will be ripening in the sun now, and the tops will bend over as they do so.
Leave to ripen fully before lifting for storage.
Break the roots to encourage ripening by just easing the onions with a fork.
Earth up and firm soil round the stems of winter crops of Brussels sprouts, and stake if possible.
This prevents crops blowing over in high winds.
On fine days start cutting sprigs of herbs for drying, hanging them in a shed to dry out completely before crushing for storage in screw-top jars.
Other herbs can be deep-frozen, either dry or in cubes of ice.
Keep hoeing between rows of vegetables to subdue weeds.
Remove pea haulms after cropping.
Cut down to soil level, leaving the roots in the soil.
These release nitrogen into the soil as they rot which can be used by the next crop.
Fill the space with lettuce or another vegetable.
Place a sheet of fine netting a few inches above cabbages and brassicas to keep cabbage white butterflies away.
If they can't get near the soil to lay their eggs you won't get any caterpillar damage.
Keep picking fruit regularly as it ripens.
If you water plants thoroughly as the fruits are ripening you should increase the weight of the crop.
Tie new raspberry canes in to their supports, and cut all canes that have finished fruiting to ground level.
Prepare a site for a new strawberry bed.
Strawberry plants should be on sale next month.
The area should be weed free, with plenty of compost dug in.
Spotlight on strawberries
Reg Moule  BBC Radio Gloucestershire
During July and August I propagate my strawberry plants for next year's crops.
Sink 3in pots full of good soil into the ground, in rows beside this year's strawberry plants.
Peg down runners into these pots and leave them to take root over the next couple of weeks.
Separate them from the parent plant, transferring the new plants to growbags in early September, half a dozen plants to a bag.
Leave these in a sheltered place outdoors until mid-January, when they can be brought into the greenhouse for early, hand-pollinated flowers.
There are some good varieties: ‘Elsanta’ crops in June/July, ‘Tenira’in July, and ‘Aromel’in June and again in early autumn.
To fill the gap from mid-July to mid-August, grow ‘Pandora’, which needs to be cross-pollinated by a variety like ‘Cambridge Favourite’.
Combat canker
Look out for bacterial canker on plum trees.
You will see brown spots on the leaves turning into holes.
Later, gum will ooze from the bark and branches will die back.
Spray affected trees thoroughly with Bordeaux mixture in mid-August, mid-September and mid-October.
Harvest herbs on a dry day and hang in an airy, cool spot to dry for later use
Growing tips of tomato plants should be pinched out above the top truss
Cut back to ground level raspberry canes that have finished fruiting
Remove pea haulms by cutting down to soil level, leaving the roots in the soil
Bend over the leaves of maturing onions to allow more sunlight to reach the bulbs
Gardens by design
Winning sense of style
Designers Faith and Geoffrey Whiten explain how they created our Gold Medal winning Fujicolor garden for the Chelsea Flower Show
The first-ever Chelsea Show garden venture for BBC Gardeners' World Magazine and sponsor Fuji film was a real challenge that proved to be a great success!
The garden was awarded a Gold Medal by the Royal Horticultural Society, was visited and admired by Prince Andrew, Princess Alexandra and several other famous faces, and was praised by the team of Gardeners' World presenters who featured the garden in their TV Chelsea special.
But most important of all was the enormous enthusiasm of thousands of show visitors.
Lots of you introduced yourselves as readers, chatted, took photographs and admired the garden, and many of you met designers Faith and Geoffrey Whiten.
Here they describe some features of the stylish, colour-themed garden that they conceived and created.
Simple yet pleasing
‘We know from our experience of gardens at Chelsea that we must stage an eye-catching display, yet in this garden we wanted to demonstrate lots of simple but pleasing design and feature ideas so that everyone would find something fascinating and achievable.
So we were delighted by the interested response of visitors.
Many commented on the use of space.
The shape of this 30ft by 45ft design seemed to make it appear wider and not all features could be seen at first glance.
The idea of going out in the garden to sit looking back towards the house was popular, as was the line of the path, laid in stock bricks in a colour best described as crushed strawberry.
Warming food theme
Popular, too, were the strawberry plants, both in fruit and in  flower.
Indeed, many warmed to the food theme, spotting the patio tomato ‘totem’ in another container and the pale terracotta bowls of pungent curry plant, variegated sage and thyme as well as fennel, rosemary and silver thyme in the borders.
Yet more sweet scent came wafting from the generous drifts of white alyssum that softened the open areas of stone chippings in Cheshire Pink shade — a surface that makes a practical alternative to the conventional lawn and can be defined and contained by brick edging.
Star plant
Ornamental grasses also featured here and became something of a talking point, especially Carex comans ‘Bronze Form’.
Another star plant was Osteospermum ‘Silver Sparkler’, new from Meredith's, with silvery-white flowers and variegated leaves.
‘Restful’ was the most frequent comment on the spacious patio, where hanging baskets with clouds of pink, white and green complemented pink fuchsias and white geraniums in pots.
The walls were a comfortable backdrop as well as a home for climbing plants and a cool, sheltered alcove had overhead beams shaped rather like miniature open roof timbers.
Moving water
The simple square pool offered the sight and sound of moving water where it would be most enjoyed when sitting outside, and the raised brick surround helped create a focal point with planted pots and a huge, stunning hosta.
These are just some design pointers.
We think the photographs tell their own story.
Both of hope that they include ideas to inspire and encourage those with even the smallest of gardens to create their own interesting, colourful features.’
Colour theme guide for your garden
Colour theming and co-ordination played an important part in the garden.
Here are some ideas to help you mix and match:
Choose a theme that is realistic.
We plumped for crimson and pinks with black, white and silver, and remember that it's difficult for anyone to avoid using green!
You should start with the landscape materials.
Once built they are hard to change.
We used mellow Sandringham stock bricks with crimson shading, old Darley pavers in grey tones and some black stained timber to create that smart, practical and strong look.
Highlight special features with care.
We painted timber crossbeams pale jade green to echo the verdigris colour of the metal furniture, which matched the green glazed pots.
The result was colour balance.
Match plants and accessories.
Our cushions on the three green chairs were the same dusty pink as the ‘Beacon Rosa’ fuchsias in three green pots.
Phase colour around the garden.
We used peach shades, moving on to pink and white and then darker crimson and purple.
Be bold with contrast as well as with harmony.
We used mauve Osteospermum ‘Stardust’ with fresh green ferns close to peach lilies and roses, and softened with the gentle silver foliage of fragrant lavender.
Fuji film
All the photographs in this feature were taken on Fuji Velvia, a high quality slide film which is ideal for capturing plants and garden details, giving sharp, accurate reproduction of colour.
Many were shot early in the morning to take advantage of the soft, even light, and careful attention was paid to composition, aiming for a good focus of interest and a balance between foreground and background details.
Fuji's range of films, including Velvia and the print film Reala, reflects their enthusiasm for garden photography — an interest shared by our readers, to judge from the number of people who took photos of our Chelsea garden!
Further information on film and cameras may be obtained from camera shops and direct from Roger Withers at Fuji Photo Film (UK) Ltd, 125 Finchley Road, London NW3 6JH.
Tel: 071–586 5900.
Faith & Geoffrey Whiten — a moment to relax in the garden they designed
The spacious patio area with elegant wrought-iron furniture and candle-holder.
Pink and white hanging baskets complement the ‘splashed’ leaves of the popular climber Actinidia kolomikta 
A view from the garden's raised patio pool into the alcove emphasises the subtle blending of plants, materials, glazed earthenware pots and even cushions — with a sense of style
Path from the patio, showing dramatic use of shape, texture and colour, with hosta, phormiums, foxgloves, annuals and Osteospermum ‘Silver Sparkler’
Soft peach tones of the new groundcover County rose, ‘Sussex’, blend well with lily ‘Cote d'Azur’, and both these lovely plants are highlighted by the red brick path
The charming new Pride of Place plant,Osteospermum ‘Stardust’, a runaway success
Practical project
Planting by numbers
This month's guide to easy planting is a small display of dwarf shrubs and perennial plants with interesting foliage and colourful flowers
Creating a bed of small sun-lovers
This collection of dwarf shrubs and herbaceous perennials is ideal for a gently sloping site as shown in the photograph.
Choose a spot where they can bask in plenty of sunshine each day.
The plan shows how you can plant up a similar small area, roughly 4ft each way, to produce a long season of colour.
Many of the plants have interesting leaf textures, too.
The main requirement for these plants if a free-draining soil.
All of them should be easily obtainable from good garden centres.
A
2 x Cotton lavender  Santolina chamaecyparissus forms a mound of fine, silvery foliage and little button-flowers of yellow.
Height and spread: 18–24in.
B
2 x Dwarf purple berberis  Berberis thunbergii ‘Atropurpurea Nana’ makes a neat, round bush of attractive coppery-purple foliage, accompanied by tiny yellow flowers in spring.
Height and spread: 18–24in.
C
1 x Purple sage  Salvia officinalis’‘Purpurascens’has velvety, grey-purple leaves  and spikes of blue summer flowers; it makes a lax bush which can be pruned back in spring.
Height and spread: 2ft.
D
1 x Thymus ‘Silver Queen’ This thyme makes a neat and attractive small bush of grey-green, variegated leaves, topped by spikes of small, mauve-pink flowers in summer.
Height and spread: 9–12in.
E
1 x Stachys byzantina  The soft, strokeable bunnie's ears, or lamb's tongue, forms an evergreen (or ever-silver) mat of downy foliage with spikes of mauve-pink summer flowers.
Height and spread: 18 to 24in.
F
1 x Rudbeckia ‘Goldsturm’ The invaluable coneflower bears vivid yellow, daisy-like flowers with a black cone in the middle, from high summer into autumn.
Height 2ft, spread 1ft.
G
3 x Geranium sanguineum  The bloody cranesbill produces fresh mounds of deeply cut leaves each year, and masses of bright magenta summer flowers.
Height 12in, spread 18in.
H
1 x Dwarf purple berberis  Berberis thunbergii ‘Atropurpurea Nana’(for description see point ‘B’ above).
I
1 x Sedum spectabile ‘Brilliant’ Produces dense, flat heads of vivid pink flowers in late summer, which darken as they age, above the fleshy, greeny-grey leaves.
Height and spread: 18in.
J
3 x Tanacetum densum amani  At the front of the arrangement, this forms a low mat of silvery-white, finely cut foliage.
It throws up sprays of tiny, buttercup-yellow flowers in summer.
It dislikes wet soils, particularly in winter.
Height and spread: 8in.
K
3 x Festuca glauca  The blue fescue makes neat hummocks of steely, grey-blue grass, and is ideal for planting at the front of borders.
Height and spread: 6–9in.
If you have a larger area to plant than that shown in the plan, increase the quantities of plants used, or try some others, too.
Planting and care
1
Choose a sunny site.
This planting plan is suitable for either sloping or level ground, but these plants all need to have free-draining soil.
Aeration and drainage on cold, wet soils can be improved by digging in generous amounts of pea-sized grit and well-rotted manure.
Add compost to poor, gravelly or sandy soil, too.
2
Clear the ground of all perennial weeds (particularly couch grass, ground elder and bindweed) before you plant.
3
Set out the plants in informal groups.
Add a couple of handfuls of general fertiliser (blood, fish and bonemeal or Growmore) to the area being planted.
4
Water young plants as necessary in dry weather.
Mulch around them with shredded bark or similar bulky material to keep weeds down.
Deadhead spent flowers.
Lightly trim the santolinas and sage in spring.
Others to try
Some alternative plants which would blend in well are described below.
Santolina virens
Like cotton lavender, but with green foliage and lemon flowers.
Height 2ft, spread 3ft.
Geranium subcaulescens
Forms a cheerful little mat of vivid magenta-pink flowers with black eye, above deeply cut foliage.
Height 4in, spread 12in.
Tanacetum argenteum
A low mat of bright silver, finely cut leaves, topped by tiny white summer flowers.
Height 6–9in, spread 8in.
Variegated Salvia ‘Icterina’ would be a brighter alternative to the purple sage
A favourite of bees and butterflies,Sedum spectabile ‘Brilliant’
Like metallic blue hedgehogs, the compact mounds of Festuca glauca 
Promotion
The good life
Choosing the right car is a hard task, especially one that fits a better quality of life.
We tested the Volvo 460 on two readers who succeeded in the bid to get away.
Sue and Richard Buddery moved into their idyllic hideaway in the Surrey countryside 12 years ago, surrounded by tranquil gardens that contribute to a stress-free life.
Here, they can combine a professional career with the joys of rural living: Richard's practice as a chartered surveyor is an easy eight minutes' drive away, just long enough to ‘listen to the traffic reports and think of all those people on the M25!’
The lasting solution
Choosing the right car to fit both Sue and Richard's busy days is a demanding task.
We asked Volvo, famed for cars that outlast the hardiest perennials, to find a solution.
The suggested the distinctive Volvo 460, which we duly put to the test.
Sue and Richard instantly commented on how relaxing it was to drive: smooth handling and seats designed to orthopaedic specifications make for a comfortable journey.
‘Especially in the back,’ said Richard, ‘which is important when you still have to match the standards of your clients' company cars.’
Sue normally drives an estate car but found plenty of room in the Volvo 460 — just as well with all three children home for half-term.
The spacious boot coped admirably with everything they could cram into it in one week — picnic hampers, the weekly shopping, even the latest buys from Sue's visits to the garden centre.
She was pleased to see that the 460 uses unleaded fuel, helping her bid to escape the city smoke.
Richard thought the car ‘very well designed, with the intelligent features you'd expect from Volvo.’
After a weekend trip to Salisbury, he added: ‘I'm impressed with the smooth engine performance, and the fast acceleration made motorway driving easy.’
The body design won high marks too.
‘It has very sleek styling,’ said Sue.
‘Combined with the taut steering it's great for narrow country lanes.
Power steering makes Guildford's tight parking spaces a lot easier too!’
A taste for the spectacular
We can't give away Sue and Richard's dream home, but we can offer BBC Gardeners' World Magazine readers a taste of the good life.
We've got two adult tickets (children's entry is free) to give away to the spectacular Green Autumn Flower Show in Harrogate on September 13–14, 1991.
And to ensure you get there in style we'll lend you the Volvo 460 for the weekend!
Phone 0839 168114 to place your entry now, and for further information on the Volvo range.
Calls charged at 34p/per minute cheap rate, 45p/per minute at other times.
Spacious yet stylish, the Volvo 460 is at home in town and country
TV special
Creative planting
We follow BBC expert Nigel Colborn as he faces his TV challenge: to create a small garden for Gardeners' World at Barnsdale
How easy it is to be expert in theory!
Tucked away in the imagination, my planting ideas are all absolutely brilliant and flow from brain to magazine page as smoothly as dew running down an iris leaf.
But when Geoff Hamilton handed me a chunk of Barnsdale to turn into a well-planted garden, I had to put my money where my mouth was.
Outlining the plot
Of course, I've built my own garden up from scratch and am somewhere near getting parts of it right.
But I've been at it for 15 years.
The plot Geoff gave me, roughly 40ft by 20ft, was to be transformed into a garden within a single run of the Gardeners' World programmes!
The layout was already there but I have to admit that, given the choice, I wouldn't necessarily have designed the garden that way.
The little round lawn with its grass path was so bitty that I was tempted to remove it altogether, and the two paved areas seemed too small to accommodate much more than a deckchair.
However, my brief was to make a virtue of necessity, as we all have to do from time to time, and concentrate on the planting.
Planting is a crucial part of any garden.
Terraces, walls, lawns and borders all play their parts but it is only by judicious planting that we can ensure as much joy in January as in June.
Summer colour is easy to achieve, but what about shape?
Harmony?
Winter outline?
How do you ring the changes so that the mood alters, not only from month to month but from one part of the garden to another?
The answer is clever planting.
If you love plants, the chances are you buy them on impulse and then wonder where to put them.
I know I do!
But, if you plan your planting, and especially if you are building up a garden from scratch, it pays to think in terms of shape, colour and texture, and then arrange the plants with these factors in mind.
Shaping my ideas
Plants, it seems to me, fall into three main categories: outline plants, understorey and star performers.
What I call outline plants form the backbone of your garden.
They're likely to be trees or shrubs which show up in winter but become a backdrop for the rich summer display.
They come in various shapes: erect, for instance, or conical, or rounded or with horizontal, spreading branches.
The knack of outline planting is to arrange a selection of these shapes in groups that are pleasing to the eye.
At Barnsdale, I divided the rectangular site by planting a barrier of outline shrubs across the main border.
I grouped together a holly, the erect purple beech ‘Dawyck Purple’ and a rounded golden conifer.
In time these three will form a screen so that I can arrange for a complete change of scenery on either side.
I planned to amplify this change of mood by having different colour schemes.
To the west, I've gone for hot reds, yellows and oranges, planting a red-stemmed Cornus alba ‘Westonbirt’ to make a fiery contrast with the golden conifer.
On the other side of the garden, I began a scheme with cool colours, planting a cream variegated version of Portuguese laurel.
Fragrant corner
That took care of the main outline planting, but at the shady end of the garden I started a fragrant corner with Daphne odora , the deliciously scented, white-flowered Osmanthus delavayi and that trusty bloomer Mahonia japonica .
I love the smell of those yellow winter blooms — just like lily of the valley.
Not all outline plants are huge.
One side of the garden at Barnsdale has a narrow border running down its length.
Here I put dwarf plants to echo the barrier effect of the plants in the main border: heathers for winter colour, and small hebes.
A dwarf mock orange,Philadelphus ‘Manteau d'Hermine’, will provide scent in early summer and, to  complete the outline, I chose a compact version of the Scots pine,Pinus sylvestris ‘Watereri’.
Understorey planting
In the wild, understorey planting fills woodland floors and lines streams or roadsides.
In nature, it's a mix of grasses and wildflowers, but in the garden we want a gently changing mantle with a succession of changes in colour and character through the year.
Foliage will be as important as flower, and we'll need to think about texture — rough leaves versus smooth; tall spiky plants to set against rounded shapes and so on.
In my ‘cool’ area blue columbines give early flower, followed by a succession of perennials until autumn monkshood heralds the late show.
To set off the blues, I used white Shasta daisies, white bergenias and the silver foliage of pearly everlasting,Anaphalis cinnamomea .
In the ‘hot’ area, I set Geum ‘Rubin’and its cousin,Potentilla ‘Gibson's Scarlet’, in front of the golden conifer.
To provide swathes of massed colour in the foreground, I went for Coreopsis verticillata , goldleaf dead nettle and yellow achilleas.
These have the added advantage of silver filigree foliage, which looks bright in front of the dark green holly.
Woodland effect
In the shady corner, I wanted to create more of a woodsy atmosphere and probably went a bit over the top with primulas — not just wild primroses and oxlips but some of their prettier hybrids, like the dark-leaved, mauve-pink flowered ‘Garryarde Guinevere’ and the enchanting little double lilac primroses ‘Quakers' Bonnets’.
To these I added the delicious fragrance of sweet violets; Solomon's seal for late spring flowers, and the robust ‘Erythronium ‘Pagoda’.
Nearby, to make a link between this wild woodland corner and the rest of the garden, I have  planted hostas and dicentras to create a broad spread of really sumptuous foliage.
The star performers
Every garden need a little high drama.
In spring it might be a cluster of brilliant tulips; later on, splashes of annuals, or perhaps the fleeting but spectacular display of a tree in full blossom.
All do so much to lift the spirits.
Summer star performers are easy to organise because the absence of frost enables you to widen your horizons, selecting brilliant bedding plants or some of the more exciting tender perennials such as blue Mexican salvias or summer chrysanthemums.
I've planted a selection round one the little paved areas.
Foliage can also be dramatic.
Imagine an outsize rhubarb, or mullein whose leaf rosettes stretch almost 4ft across.
There wasn't room for more than one such space hogger at Barnsdale; after much agonised indecision I finally couldn't resist the bronze-leaved Rodgersia pinnata .
Vertical gardening
The fence on the Barnsdale plot provides, roughly, 360sq ft of vertical planning opportunity.
That's nearly half the ground area!
Since I'd rather look at vegetation than at larch lap panels, I decided to try to cover the whole fence with a rich variety of climbers and wall plants.
I planned for year-round interest and used such plants as climbing roses, clematis, jasmines, honeysuckle and Japanese quince.
With climbers, I've always believed in the more the merrier, but it's important to team up your plants so that one does not swamp and ruin another.
If you grow clematis on roses, choose varieties like C. viticella which can be cut back so that they do not inhabit rose pruning.
If you enjoy honeysuckle (and who doesn't?) go for a mix, so that you have blooms early and late:Lonicera periclymenum ‘Early Dutch’ for spring,L. Japonica ‘Halliana’for autumn fragrance.
A formal interlude
In one creative planting episode on Gardeners' World I want to savour a taste of Victoriana with some formal bedding.
Nineteenth century gardeners loved the smell of heliotrope and this, backed with gold gazanias and lacy foliage, will make the basis of the tiny, old-style flowerbed.
When you think how many wonderful colours, shapes and sizes of bedding plants there are, isn't it surprising that so many colour schemes are unoriginal?
If allowed to continue with this little plot next year, I'll try something really zany in the formal bed.
How about a black and red theme combining black violas,Ophiopogon ‘Nigrescens’ and the darkly glowing red tulip ‘Couleur Cardinal’?
The continuing story
The planting by now is well under way.
For the rest of the season it's a question of fine-tuning and correcting any minor mistakes.
Next, I want to set up a couple of special features which will probably be planted in containers.
There are lots of planting opportunities left for the season: I would like to try a little herbary, for example, and go for a bigger emphasis on autumn colour.
I'll be working on these during August and September.
In addition, there are also certain to be one or two early mistakes which will need rectifying, and plans to be mulled over for next spring's display.
Meanwhile, ideas for new contrasts and effects keep popping into my head and I can hardly wait to put them into practice.
To see whether they turn out to be brilliantly inventive, usefully practical or just plain daft, you'll have to keep watching, not this space but that little square in your living room.
See you there!
Viewers of the current series have watched Nigel transform his plot
Outline planting created the garden's skeleton structure of trees and shrubs
Blues columbines, such as Aquilegia ‘Dwarf Fairyland’, suit the ‘cool’ area
Philadelphus ‘Manteau d'Hermine’ will scent the air in early summer
To complete the picture, Nigel installs his ‘understorey’ plants in a mixed border
Summer chrysanthemums provide a cheerful border for the paved area
The exuberant foliage of Rodgersia pinnata creates a dramatic effect
Potentilla ‘Gibson's Scarlet’ will set off the golden conifer
Trained against the fence, Japanese quince will bring early spring flowers
Kitchen
The kitchen garden
Joy Larkcom dallies with dill, passes on a trap tip, saves space by sowing salads and encourages runner beans to set in the kitchen garden this month
A herb for all seasons
Dill is one of those herbs which can be sown outdoors at almost any time during the growing season, from spring until August.
Following that, a late sowing can be made in a frame or unheated greenhouse in September.
A slow spreader
It is surprisingly hardy, and a late sowing grown under cover will remain green most winters.
Mine have survived in six degrees of frost.
Dill has been slow to win its place in the English kitchen.
It is Eastern European in origin, and when I was in Hungary it seemed that every back garden was devoted to growing a mixture of dill and poppies.
The long winter evenings, I was told, were spent extracting the seed from the heads.
From Eastern Europe the herb spread to Scandinavia, and it was probably Scandinavian immigrants who introduced it to the USA.
They also brought with them their beloved dill pickles.
While it is the fairly sharply flavoured seed heads which are used to flavour the gherkins, the delicate, aniseed-flavoured dill leaf is used as a herb for seasoning fish dishes, lamb or new potatoes and peas.
It is also used in curing fresh salmon to make gravad lax (pronounced gravlax), a real treat.
Dill should be added at the end of cooking, or its flavour is destroyed.
The right dill for the job
Some varieties of dill, ‘Mammoth’ for example, run quickly to seed and have very skimpy leaves.
These varieties are good if seed is what you are after.
If you want dill leaf, however, choose one of the varieties developed for this purpose, such as‘Dukat’.
Second helpings
It is best to scatter the seed evenly across 3–4in-wide bands made with the blade of an onion hoe.
In summer they will germinate with a fortnight, and be ready to cut within 6–8 weeks.
You can pull it up by its roots, but if cut an inch or so above ground level it usually resprouts to give a second crop.
I have never found it dries satisfactorily, but whole sprigs keep their flavour very well if deep-frozen soon after picking.
There's no need to thaw them — simply crumble the frozen sprigs over a dish when required.
Getting ahead
If you want to grow dill for its decorative seed-heads (see left), sow from spring to early summer, either broadcast or in drills, thinning out the young plants to about 3in apart.
It grows best in reasonably fertile soil which does not dry out too readily.
Dill as a decorative
Dill can usefully be grown as an ornamental in flower beds or vegetable potagers, for it is a pretty plant at every stage.
The young feathery, blue/green foliage glistens after rain and when covered with morning dew.
But plants left to seed have their own beauty, the seed-heads turning gradually from green to orange to rusty brown, sometimes reaching a height of 5ft, tracing delicate patterns against the sky.
If left they sow themselves, reappearing as uninvited but welcome guests the following year.
Dill seed-heads as also wonderful material for flower arranging.
Topical tip
Research in Taiwan showed that dill was one of a number of plants which, when intercropped with cabbage, reduced infestation by diamond back moth.
It may deter other caterpillars too!
The intense colour of dill when first in flower changes slowly to a rusty brown
Intercropping the heavy brigade
I always think of the winter brassicas — sprouting broccoli, sprouts, winter savoys, spring-heading cauliflower and kale — as the ‘heavy brigade’.
They develop into large bulky plants, so should be planted by the middle or end of July so they can get their roots down and put on weight before autumn.
But they are greedy plants where space is concerned, and it grates a bit to see all that wasted ground around them when they are first planted out.
The solution is to intercrop.
There are two approaches.
One is sow or plant a quick catch crop between the rows of your newly-planted brassicas.
This will mature and be cut before the brassicas reach their full size.
Catch a quick crop
Small, quick-maturing lettuces like ‘Tom Thumb’ or ‘Little Gem’are suitable for catch cropping as are radishes.
Or sow drills of loose-leaved cutting lettuce, which are harvested at 2–3in high.
Red-tinged ‘Lollo Rossa’ and ‘Salad Bowl’types fall into this category.
Garden cress, curly endive, salad rocket and salad rape are other salads which can be harvested as seedlings within a few weeks, before they interfere with the maturing brassicas.
It is fun to create a pretty effect by sowing them in a narrow band, weaving between the brassicas like ribbon.
Sometimes I encircle a Brussels sprout with a ring of radish, or link adjoining plants in a diamond with a line of lettuce seedlings.
Fills spaces with spinach
Alternatively, sow or plant the sort of winter salad plants which will continue growing happily beneath a canopy of brassica leaves.
Ideas for hardy salad plants are corn salad (lamb's lettuce), land cress, Italian chicory and claytonia (winter purslane).
All are small, undemanding plants which can be sown between brassicas in late July and early August.
Another suggestion is perpetual spinach.
It remains green throughout most winters, and can be cut very young, when it tastes delicious in salads.
A helping of humus restores reluctant runners
I'm guessing, as I write, that in the south and east at least the summer will be as hot and dry as in the last few years, and that once again, people will have trouble getting runner beans to set.
Flowers simply shrivel up, the combined effect of dryness at the roots and attacks by tiny, shiny black pollen beetles, escapees from oil seed rape fields.
Make sure runners are planted in moisture-retentive soil, with plenty of humus worked in.
There's a lot to be said for making the trench in autumn, chucking in household waste all winter and replacing the soil in spring.
Mulch for moisture Runners should be heavily mulched once they are through, to conserve moisture.
The key time for watering is when flowering has started and pods are forming.
In the absence of rain, try to water at the rate of 1–2 gallons per sq yd, twice a week.
There is now evidence that misting the flowers with water, formerly thought to help setting, can in fact be counter-productive.
If plagued by pollen beetle, try planting the edible-leaved Chrysanthemum coronarium ,(chop suey greens or shungiku).
It may act as a decoy, its bright yellow flowers attracting the beetle away from your beans.
Green plastic trap
Now that the hazards as well as the pleasures of summer are with us, I can recommend this simply wasp trap.
Cut a plastic bottle in half, and put a mixture of jam and water into the bottom half.
Then insert the top, neck downwards, into the bottom.
I say these traps in use last year hanging in cordon pears in the lovely potager at St Jean de Beauregard in France.
Earlier in the season so many wasps (or guêpes , as they call them) were being caught that the gardener was having to empty the traps twice a day.
Corn salad is the ideal hardy salad to grow between brassicas
Too much sun mean no setting for runner bean ‘Sunset’
A fine crop of ‘Best of All’, one of the best of all summer signs
The bottle trap, simple yet fiendishly clever
kitchen garden
60 minute vegetable plot
Roy Lacey reflects on the value of intercropping and catch cropping in his small, low maintenance plot
Back in April I tossed up between courgettes and bush marrow plants, and the courgettes won.
Today, I'm sorry it turned out that way.
Two ‘Green Bush’ bush marrow plants would have provided enough decent-sized marrows for our needs, while it looks as if my two courgette plants probably won't give enough fruit to justify their considerable demand on space in the plot.
The courgettes are ‘Supremo’, a new virus-resistant variety with handsome glossy dark green fruit that is cut when about 6in long.
I set the plants in shallow hollows to facilitate watering.
Without adequate water, the baby fruits fall off.
Now the plants are in the lee of the ‘Kelvedon Wonder’ peas along the south border of the plot.
They don't mind being shaded for part of the day.
However, the Brussels sprouts are not so happy in the shadow of the pea plants.
Of the 12 ‘Peer Gynt’ sprout plants, those overshadowed by the 18in tall pea plants are rather more leggy than the others.
But the problem will soon resolve itself, when the pea vines are cut down.
The plant matter, or haulm, will be cut off at ground level and put in the compost bin, and the nitrogen-rich root system left in the soil.
Intercropping in action
Friends who have seen our 60-minute plot in action are amazed that it really is working.
So much good, fresh food can be had from a small space, at very modest cost and just an hour's work a week.
Careful planning is essential, and remember that production from a small plot can be more than doubled by intercropping and catch cropping.
All you have to do is to understand the right habit or growing style of the crops and time your sowings and plantings with that in mind, ensuring that soil fertility levels are kept high enough to support the extra output.
Slowcoaches and sprinters
Parsnips, leeks, broccoli and Brussels sprouts are all slow growers, and may be in the ground for ten months to a year.
Salad crops, however, are quick off the mark.
Radishes sprint to maturity in three to four weeks after sowing; lettuces such as‘Little Gem’ mature from six to 13 weeks while spring onions and baby beetroot can be ready for the salad bowl in as little as eight.
This means that salad crops are excellent subjects for catch cropping in space that will later be taken up as the autumn and winter crops grow to their mature sizes.
Lettuce is particularly good for intercropping among young Brussels sprout and broccoli plants.
The ‘Snowball turnips that I used as a catch crop wherever a patch fell vacant were deliciously tender and sweet; so too were the young ‘Early Nantes’ carrots I cropped among the ‘Topper’shallots.
Young runners in training
My runner beans were sown in a single 10ft row along the north edge of the plot, leaving a 4ft gap at the western end for four ‘Gardener's Delight’ tomato plants.
To improve pollination I planted a few sweet pea plants in among the runners.
But that's not the only helping hand they've needed.
I never used to have any trouble getting the bean vines to cling to the old, 8 or 9ft beanpoles.
With bamboo canes I find the young plants need to be trained to climb, and I had to spend a precious 20 minutes carefully tying in the leader of each plant with raffia.
Dressed for success
In March I gave the whole of the plot a dressing of blood, fish and bone fertiliser.
There was enough left over in the 5lb bag to give most of the plot another top dressing last month.
It was lightly teased into the top few inches of soil, after rain, to top up the fertility and to ensure that there are banked reserves to see crops through their long winter haul.
Your 60-minute action checklist
Continue feeding the tomato plants and courgettes with a liquid fertiliser such as Maxicrop.
When the tomato plants have set four trusses of fruit, pinch out the growing tips.
When the tops of the shallots are straw-coloured and dry, ease the clumps from the soil with a garden fork.
After the roots have dried off the shallots can be stored, hanging in nets or tied in strings, in a cool, dry place.
Pick French and runner beans regularly while still young.
The longer seed is allowed to form in the pods, the shorter the productive life of the plants will be.
When the bean vine reaches the top of the cane, pinch out the growing point.
This will encourage the development of fruiting laterals.
When transplanting leeks, water the soil thoroughly if it is dry then dibble a hole for each plant about 4–6in deep.
Drop a leek into the hole and fill with water.
Slip a collar round the stem of newly transplanted brassicas.
This will prevent any cabbage root flies still around from laying eggs.
Vegetable grow guide 6  Spring cabbage
Varieties to choose
A wide range of varieties is available.
The first five listed are sold by most seed companies.
Durham Early, Spring Hero, Offenham 2 — Flower of Spring, Wheeler's Imperial, Pixie, Harbinger, April and Dorado.
Choose ‘Pixie’ for a compact and early maturing spring cabbage
Sowing and growing
Sow  plant out  harvest
Do not buy in plants.
Raise from seed sown outside in a seed bed area in July/August.
Transplant young plants to their final rows in Sep/Oct, when plants are at the four leaf stage.
Plant in the bottom of a V-shaped trench.
Earth up as plants grow.
This helps prevent wind rock.
Space plants about 12in apart within the rows leaving 15in between each row.
Prepare a seed bed area to raise cabbages to plant out
Site & soil
Choose an open, sunny site where brassicas haven't been grown for a few years.
Dig in plenty of rotted manure, but ensure the ground has settled firmly before planting.
Lime acid soil to achieve a pH of 6.5–7.
Harvest tip
Instead of harvesting the whole cabbage, cut the head leaving a short stump.
Make a X-cut in the top of the stump with a knife, and within a couple of months a series of small cabbages will develop from the cuts.
Aftercare
Spring cabbage can be thinned out at the end of winter to their final spacings.
Use thinnings as spring greens.
Plant ‘Pixie’ 6in apart, and thin out to leave every other one.
Crops grow quickly once the weather improves.
Be ready to harvest crops from April.
Boost growth with a balanced liquid feed.
Protect crops from pigeons and other birds with netting.
Take steps to protect from pests.
Grow guide by Adam Pasco 
Make the most of the space, intercropping quick growing salad crops between leeks and tomatoes.
Catch a crop of carrots among the shallots and turnips wherever a parch becomes vacant.
The Victorian kitchen garden
Jennifer Davies finds the Victorian fruit house at Chilton still proving its worth
Harry Dodson's head gardener's office is built on to the back wall of the kitchen garden at Chilton.
It is in the middle of a row of other useful buildings, including the potting sheds and forcing houses.
As this wall faces north the sun seldom shines on any of these, a dismal fact for gardeners working in them but usual for old kitchen gardens where every inch of warm south-facing ground was wanted for crops.
Set back into a thick hazelnut hedge across a stony roadway, facing these buildings, is a structure which, again, the sun never blesses: the garden's fruit house.
Its sunless position is intentional, for in the summer months its purpose is to remain cool and in the winter it is kept warm by its thick coat of thatch.
Harry thinks that this fruit house is almost unique; that is, he knows of one other which started off the same but has since been altered.
The head gardener at Chilton at the turn of the century, Charles Beckett, had a brother, Edwin, also a head gardener, and both men built exactly the same design of fruit house in their respective gardens.
Edwin Beckett was employed by the  Honourable Vicary Gibbs at Aldenham House near Elstree.
Harry has heard that today Aldenham is a school and, although Edwin's fruit house still stands, its inner furnishings have been cleared out and the place is now used as a boat store.
No change at Chilton
The Chilton fruit house, however, remains unchanged.
It looks like a small cottage whose thatch has forgotten to stop, running down all four walls to ground level.
Even its two windows appear thatched, for they are fitted with wads of straw.
Beneath the thatch is a cavity, then a lining of matchboard, making a formidable insulating combination.
In summer, the scrubbed slatted shelves inside the fruit house are used as a temporary store for soft fruits.
They really came into their own in the days when Harry had to accumulate sufficient stocks for weekend house parties.
Wednesday night's picking would keep as fresh as berries picked on Friday, even in the hottest weather.
During late August and early September early dessert apples such as‘St Edmund's Pippin’, ‘Irish Peach’ and ‘Beauty of Bath’occupy shelves near the door.
It's sensible, Harry says, not to put them too deep inside since their shelf life is only a couple of weeks.
The garden's main crops of apples and pears are gathered in late September and through to the first weeks of October.
This is when Harry starts to prepare the house for its winter storage role.
The big chill
The straw wadding is taken out of the windows exposing a covering of wire, necessary to keep out vermin, and the heavy front of the house is propped open.
An inner door remains shut but air filters through it via two mesh panels.
Both door and windows are kept open for three weeks.
During this time the coolness of the nights drives the temperature inside the fruit house down to 40° (4°C), an ideal figure, Harry says, for storage purposes.
At this point the straw bolsters go back into the windows and the outer door is shut and locked.
If the door remains closed and visits to the fruit house are kept strictly to a minimum the temperature can be maintained throughout the winter months.
In late October and November Harry goes over the shelves and selects the choicest dessert apples and wraps each in waxed paper.
Treated this way they keep at least a month longer than unwrapped ones.
He also starts to look for blemished fruit.
It's more difficult to find takers for it now, says Harry.
Gone are the days when dessert fruit which wasn't fit for the mansion dining room was doled out by the head gardener to his hard-working bothy boys.
Treasure buried underground
Beside the fruit house is another store, invisible to passers-by because it is not only comparatively tiny but also underground.
It's another relic, still in use, from the head gardener Charles Beckett's days.
It is a hole dug out to a sufficient size to accommodate a sea kale forcing pot.
Each autumn the hazelnuts ripen on the bushes nearby, are gathered in dry weather and shaken to expel earwigs lurking in their casing.
The nuts are dropped in the pot, and a slate placed over its opening, camouflaged with earth or leaves.
The pot, vandal and squirrel-proof and kept cool by the earth, preserves them perfectly.
The fruit house is around a century old
Harry has the space to store a whole season's crop with ease
Earwigs must be flushed out first
The crop is well hidden
Into the future
Gardening in tomorrows world
A glimpse of the future from Dr Phil Gates, lecturer in botany at Durham University
Even commoner cabbage whites
A survey on the like effects of global warming on Britain's butterflies suggests that most species will benefit from the milder winters and drier summers which are predicted.
While this news will delight everyone who loves these colourful insects, gardeners will be less happy to hear that the cabbage white is likely to be the greatest beneficiary.
A guaranteed food supply will combine with a warner climate to boost their numbers.
Healing touch
You've heard of talking to plants to boost their growth, but what about stroking them to keep pests away?
Scientists at Reading University have made a plant-stroking machine which brushes polythene strips over test plant leaves for an hour a day.
After just a week of stroking, Brussels sprouts infested with aphids showed an ability to reduce the pests' multiplication rate.
The most likely explanation seems to be that stroking makes leaf tissues tougher.
Aphid eaters
Research on methods for controlling pests without chemicals is going on all over the world and the latest greenfly predator to come under scientific scrutiny is the lacewing.
This elegant insect is a formidable greenfly guzzler and its larvae are particularly good at exterminating these ubiquitous pests.
Canadian scientists introduced large numbers of lacewing eggs into orchards and had some success in controlling apple aphids.
Definitely an insect to encourage in your garden.
Stop the rot
Scientists based at the West of Scotland Agricultural College at Auchincruive have discovered that oil distilled from marjoram, the popular garden herb, will inhibit the growth of several problem bacteria, including erwinia, the organism which causes soft rots in stored vegetables and potato black leg disease.
An-atom-ical
Nuclear energy has become an important tool for plant breeders and Russian horticultural researchers have been putting it to good use in their iris-breeding programmes.
They treated the seeds of hybrids and pollen of bearded irises with gamma rays and produced a series of new varieties with better winter hardiness and disease resistance.
Organic solutions
Turkish researchers have discovered that the juice extracted from radishes has a powerful inhibitory effect on the germination of weed seeds.
They also found that weed growth could be substantially decreased if radishes were grown and then cultivated into the soil.
Heard on the grapevine
Micropropagation, the technique used to multiply plants in vast numbers from tiny pieces of tissue, can produce more vigorous strawberry plants giving higher yields than conventional propagating techniques, according to American researchers.
Research in Germany on the cold hardiness of Primula acaulis shows that the red-flowered cultivars are more frost-sensitive than the white or blue equivalents.
Worth bearing in mind if you plan to transfer these colourful pot plants into the garden after flowering.
In Belgium botanists are culturing cells of the ground cover plant Ajuga reptans as a potential source of food colourant.
Many garden varieties, like A. ‘Atropurpurea’, are full of purple pigment.
Also in Belgium several ecologically-sound growth media are under test for glasshouse crops.
These include recycled polyurethane foam, fibreboard and the expanded perlite used as a filter by brewers.
Dutch growers are experimenting with the use of lightweight acrylic fleece mulches to advance the flowering times of cut flowers.
Chinese growers have selected what may the world's longest and fastest growing luffa.
In tests, some Luffa aegyptica fruits grew to over 3ft long in only 20 days.
Competition
Get snapping and win a weekend away
Your colourful container pictures could win you a break in the Lakes, courtesy of the Buxton Mineral Water Company
Window boxes, tubs and hanging baskets come to life in summer, bringing rich colour to buildings and gardens throughout the country.
These vivid, compact displays require as much creativity and care, and can give as much pleasure as a formal garden.
Indeed, the planning, planting and growing of a window box or tub is a real challenge, calling for a mixture of inspiration and skill.
Now the search is on for the best container display in Britain.
In an exciting competition,BBC Gardeners' World Magazine , in conjunction with the Buxton Mineral Water Company, is looking for the most imaginative and colourful window boxes, tubs and hanging baskets.
How to enter
To enter, just take a colour photo of the container display you feel shows the most creative inspiration and skill.
It could be your own or a neighbour's, or it might belong to a local business, station or pub.
The photograph should be accompanied by a brief description of the window box and how it improves its surroundings.
Each entry will be judged by our panel of expert gardeners, including Nigel Colborn, author of Container Gardening , and BBC Gardeners' World Magazine editor Adam Pasco.
Entries should be sent to BBC Gardeners' World Magazine/ Buxton Competition, PO Box 55, Wetherby, West Yorkshire LS23 7ET.
The four best entries will each win a fabulous weekend for two at Rusland Hall.
The first prize
Situated in the unspoilt part of the Lake District, Rusland Hall will delight those who appreciate the luxuries of life and the  traditions of an English country house.
Set in beautiful parkland landscaped by Capability Brown, the house is a superb example of Georgian architecture.
The prize includes first class rail fares to Rusland Hall and two nights' accommodation with breakfast and evening meal.
The runners-up will each receive a copy of Nigel Colborn's latest book The Container Garden , published by Conran Octopus.
This glossy hardback, packed with ideas and illustrations, costs £16.99 in bookshops.
Expert inspiration
Nigel shows how a little thought and planning can create superb, colourful interest throughout the year whether using terracotta pots, tubs, hanging baskets, troughs or window boxes.
With over 180 colour photographs the cook should inspire you to really make the most of containers.
Buxton Water: the source of purity
The beautiful and historic town of Buxton, in the Peak District of Derbyshire, is source of one of the purest natural mineral waters in the world.
Buxton Natural Mineral Water, still or sparkling, is now the most popular British water sold.
Buxton Springs were discovered by the Romans in 79AD, and they believed that the water had special health-giving properties.
People from all over the world have visited Buxton to take the waters, including such celebrities as Noel Coward and Douglas Fairbanks, Jnr.
The Buxton Springs are surrounded by 550 square miles of spectacular natural landscape.
Water takes thousands of years to filter through the ancient limestone of the Peak District, acquiring a natural balance of minerals, and emerges crystal clear and totally pure.
Subtle shades in an informal grouping look well against warm terracotta
Rusland Hall in the Lake District hosts our luxurious prize weekend
Foliar colour and shape combine here beautifully with shades of pink
A light touch leavens the proverbial ‘riot of colour’ with lots of fresh greens
Rusty-pink skimmia buds and creamy narcissi give a sophisticated town look
A classic summer basket, densely planted with colourful favourites
Health-seekers have been taking the Buxton waters since Roman times
Wildlife garden
Pastures new
Geoffrey Smith
Creating a mini-meadow in your own garden means striking a balance between the natural and the contrived
One can still find, though with increasing difficulty, those ancient meadows where, as in my childhood, buttercups form a glittering carpet of gold-enamelled flowers, bluebells, spotted orchids and Billy-buttons have their place in shady corners and butter-blobs and milkmaids pattern the ditch bank.
Near the gate, where grass is kept short by trampling feet, grows germander speedwell, its blue flowers more vivid than the clearest summer sky.
As it grows, the grass is scattered with the dusky blue and magenta petals of meadow cranesbill and, as the hay ripens, seeding heads of sorrel colour its sunset-gold with red.
it is then that the honeysuckle and dog rose, twining through the hawthorn hedge, add their quota of blossom to prove that here, at least, the seasonal model is as it has always been.
The hedge-surrounded, flower-filled field supports a host of living creatures, making a meadow an attractive proposition to the wildlife gardener.
But can it be possible, or even desirable, to recreate such an environment, artless and uncontrolled, in the garden?
In the majority of gardens there is insufficient space for even a small-scale meadow.
Nor is it possible, practical or necessary to recreate precisely those conditions which were only achieved after decades, in the old land meadows, of a specialist system of grazing and mowing supported only by an annual dressing of fold-yard manure.
Mowing was often delayed until most of the plants formed ripe seed.
This was shaken out as the hay was made, helping to maintain the rich variety of flowers and herbs.
Natural wilderness
Imagine, then, such a meadow (in miniature) as the centrepiece of your garden.
Instead of a lawn there would be a tangle of vegetation spreading seeds not just over the mini-meadow but on the cultivated soil of beds, borders, and vegetable plot.
Even the neighbours' gardens either side will receive a share.
For several weeks after the ‘hay’ has been gathered there will be, not a green sward, but something which resembles in colour and texture a badly-worn rush mat or blow-dried ferret.
Nowhere is the balance between the natural and the contrived so hard to attain as in the making of a ‘domesticated’ meadow.
I have tried every variation on the lawn-meadow theme without finding the ideal compromise.
Lawnmakers of the green baize persuasion often make rude remarks about my weed infested grass, yet compared to a true meadow, mine is a tidy, close-cropped carpet of grass, speedwell, white clover, dandelion and plantain — to name the dominant species.
Preparing the ground
In a garden large enough to include a wild herbage meadow, or where an established orchard can be converted for the purpose, soil preparation must aim to reduce, not increase, fertility.
A rich soil soon becomes home to rampant  weeds which smother less competitive, more attractive plants.
A programme to clear the ground of weeds and leave the soil fit to rake down into a seed bed is simple to devise.
Rather than mix grass and flower seed before sowing, I raise seedlings of the flowering plants in trays.
Raising and introducing plants
Meadow plants are best home-raised in trays.
Milkmaids (the Yorkshire name for lady's smock), knapweed, sheep's sorrell (I still chew the leaves for their acrid flavour), cowslip, harebell and meadow cranesbill are beautiful, useful and welcome natives.
Only the seed of corncockle, poppy and those others which are weeds of arable land can safely by sown mixed with grass seed.
After two years they die out, unable to complete with the grass and your nursery-raised seedlings, which are plug-planted into the award after the second mowing.
To do this, your pre-raised seedlings must be pricked out into 3in pots, roughly the shape and size of a bulb planter.
Removing a plug of turf with the planter and replacing it with a pot-grown cowslip takes seconds.
Meadow maintenance
Where the spring-blooming species predominate, delay mowing until mid-June in the south, or until July elsewhere, to allow enough time for seed to ripen.
This would not suit meadow cranesbill and red campion.
In my last garden I grazed the herbage with geese until mid-May, then left it uncut well into October for the goldfinches to take a part share of the seeds.
In best ‘old land’ tradition, the meadow needs a dressing or organic matter each year in late winter.
Compost, farm manure, dried seaweed and pulverised bark maintain soil texture and fertility.
Though all this may sound complicated, after the first year's practice it becomes merely routine.
Plant choice
Among the gentler meadow plants, you must avoid the more invasive, weed-like pasture flowers, despite their potential for attracting wildlife.
Creeping thistle, haunt of the charming meadow brown butterfly, can become a real pest if it gets a foothold.
In a rough lawn there is no place for meadow cranesbill, pig nuts, lady's smock and others of similar character which need a longer growing season.
These are installed in borders on the lawn outskirts.
Remarkably, cowslips spread seedlings into the mown area, which indicates their preferred habitat.
Corn poppy, cornflower and corncockle, mixed with toadflax  and various mulleins, are insect-busy places during summer.
Colonies were introduced by sowing pinches of seed around the borders in late April.
They now self-perpetuate.
My meadow, which I may well be contemplating with pleasure even as you read this, is a delight.
As the summer reaches its peak, there will be a population explosion of butterflies.
I make a note of each new species so comparisons can be made each year.
Persistent moles
Year-round, it supports a vigorous populace of soil flora and fauna of which birds, shrews and, to my regret, moles are quick to take advantage.
Next year I shall plant crown imperials,Fritillaria imperialis , round the garden as I am told this will deter even the most persistent mole.
A healthy worm population is evident, as I often see a thrush, starling or jackdaw feeding.
A large leatherjacket community also exists, for the starlings which mine the area are well-fed, as are the wagtails which chase the crane flies.
The insects lay eggs in July and August, providing the starlings with their leatherjacket dinners.
One surprised me by mimicking the bubbling call of a curlew.
A diet of leather jackets has some peculiar side-effects.
Wildflower profile
Meadow cranesbill
Meadow cranesbill, the crowfoot cranesbill and gratia dei are all common names for Geranium pratense , a familiar native of grass verges and fields.
In country districts flowers are given variously poetic or prosaic names which are derived from some obvious characteristic of the plant itself.
They will often change from district to district, and much would be lost from our language if they fell into disuse.
As children we called the bright blue, slightly violet-tinged flowers which patterned the grassy lane banks by the inventive name of dove's foot, after the shape of the deeply-lobed and cut leaves.
Limestone lover
Geranium pratense is a perennial, growing 12–24in high, which flowers from June onwards.
The blooms are carried on long stalks and are over an inch across.
Under natural conditions it grows most abundantly on limestone soils.
Seed offers a simple means of raising a healthy stock of plants to dot about the garden, or plug-plant into the mini-meadow.
Keep an eye on self-seeded plants as they can show interesting colour variations.
Last year I found a pure white form with black veins.
Wild and tame names
Billy-button
Geum rivale
Bluebell
Hyacinthoides non-scripta
Butter-blob
Caltha palustris
Buttercup
Ranunculus acris
Corncockle
Agrostemma githago
Cornflower
Centaurea cyanus
Corn poppy
Papaver rhoeas
Cow parsley
Anthticus sylvestris
Cowslip
Primula veris
Flax
Linum usitatissimum
Germander speedwell
Veronica chamaedrys
Harebell
Campanula rotundifolia
Knapweed
Centaurea scabiosa/nigra
Lady's smock
Cardamine pratensis
Meadow cranesbill
Geranium pratense
Meadowsweet
Filipendula ulmaria
Mullein
Verbascum
Oxlip
Primula eliator
Ragged robin
Lychnis floscuculi
Red campion
Silene dioica
Sheep's sorrel
Rumex acetosella
Spotted orchid
Dactylorrhiza fuchsii
Toadflax
Linaria vulgaris
White clover
Trifolium repens
Bluebells form a bright carpet of colour under a canopy of deciduous trees
Female of the meadow brown butterfly
Corn marigolds mingle with poppies and corncockles
Primula veris the cowslip
Papaver rhoaes,the wild poppy, creates a startling scarlet panorama
Toadflax brings brilliant yellow cheer from July until autumn
Ox-eye or moon daisies establish themselves quickly in the wildflower meadow
A sea of wild cornflowers such as this is a rare sight in the countryside these days
Colour creations
Some like it hot
Anticipate the hose-pipe bans and make the most of a sunny border, says Nigel Colborn, by filling it with the kind of plants that thrive on heat and dust
How lucky we are, in this funny old climate of ours, to be able to grow such an amazing range of plants.
In the same garden (occasionally even in the same border) sub-Arctic species geared to withstand deep-freeze temperatures will rub shoulders quite happily with exotics which, in their native habitats, roast through the summer and seldom get rained on.
Conditions for success
If you have a sunny corner or a south-facing bank you could, with a little planning and the right conditions, create a micro-Mexico or a mini-Costa del Sol.
Mediterranean-style plants are happiest in full sun and growing in soil which tends to dry out as the ground bakes during summer.
Some species, especially bulbs and the drought-loving irises, actually need a long, hot burn-up to ripen their roots or rhizomes, so that they flower next season.
Others, for example most silver-foliaged plants, have developed special characteristics such as furry leaves or thick, waxy-cuticled foliage, so that they can tolerate summer extremes.
Cold, as a rule, doesn't bother them but they will not tolerate prolonged wetness, particularly during the winter.
The planting plan
There are several ways of dealing with a hot, dry site.
You have the choice of either trying to minimise the effect or going with it and rejoicing in the exotic feel of a semi-desert in your back yard.
You could, for instance, practise a little low cunning by selecting a range of plants which, though happy in harsh conditions, have a luxuriant look.
The giant New Zealand flaxes (phormiums) produce a dense mass of foliage when mature, and bergenias, euphorbias and colchicums when in leaf, not flower, provide a boost of freshness.
With thick mulches you could even try one or two speciea from less arid territory.
Viola cornuta is surprisingly tolerant of heat, as are bright summer annuals like Shirley poppies, or their transatlantic relatives the eschscholzias.
Alternatively, you could step up the exotic look and imitate the  Maquis.
This area of toughened vegetation and rocks lines the shores of the Mediterranean, off and on, from Israel to Gibraltar and back again on the other side.
Alternatively, you could select spiky, upright plants like agaves or yuccas to transport you across the world, figuratively speaking, to the great deserts of North America.
But if your garden plans are anything like mine, you'll want to create all these moods and more together!
Getting down to details
One of the most interesting developments in dry gardening in recent years has been an increase in the use of gravel.
Gritty mulches help to keep the necks of plants dry during winter, improving survival rates, and encourage many plants, particularly helianthemums, pinks of all kinds and most annuals, to seed freely.
The dividing line between border and pathway melts as plants spill over from one to the other.
This softens the edges and enhances the informal look.
Mat-forming plants like pinks seem to develop more freely than in conventional borders and, since there is gravel between them, you can walk among your treasures without having to tread on bare soil.
Annuals, such as cornflowers, larkspurs or marigolds, can be allowed to seed around at will, creating self-perpetuating colonies.
Euphorbias are a huge asset to the hot, dry garden.
The flower  for months on end, often when there is little else in bloom, and larger species such E. caracias can be positively architectural.
The smaller E. seguieriana (sometimes called E. niciciana ) has a non-spreading habit and fluorescent lime-green flowers which look beautiful from March to late summer and make a startling contrast with anything red, especially poppies.
Grown near soft-coloured rock roses, such as Helianthemum ‘Salmon Queen’, the contrast is more subtle but no less effective, especially if you plant the prostrate, greeny-grey-leaved E. myrsinites so that it scrambles among them.
An extra dimension
Summer bulbs add a special dimension to the dry border.
The garlic tribe is particularly useful and Allium siculum (now infuriatingly re-named Nectaroscordum siculum is one of the most elegant, with greenish-pink flowers whose pedicels (little stems) start life drooping but become erect as the seed capsules mature.
Allium aflatunense sports rich purple globes in early summer.
There are so many more, from the outlandish yellow A. flavum to the round-headed leek (which isn't round-headed at all) whose conical purple-red blooms appear in June.
Continuity
Although there is an inevitable summer climax, a hot, dry border is much easier to plant for year-round interest than most other parts of the garden.
Many of the Maquis plants, for example Jerusalem sage and the various lavenders, are evergreen and have good winter character.
Winter bulbs such as Iris reticulata and its cultivars love dry conditions.
Good winter crocuses include the gorgeous beige and blue Crocus imperatii and the many forms of C. chrysanthus .
Most snowdrops prefer moisture but the autumn-flowering Galanthus corcyrensis performs best if it bakes in summer and, as a bonus will amaze visitors when it comes into flower, minus its leaves, in October.
Contain your enthusiasm
There are autumn and winter bulbs which, having flowered, disappear, creating spaces for plants in containers.
Drought-lovers are natural container plants and will not bear a grudge if you forget to water them.
Agaves, if you enjoy their spike foliage, come in several interesting shapes with green and variegated kinds.
Echeverias are softer in form, many having good flowers and subtle leaf coloration.
E. subalpina has suffusions of pink and grey in its glaucous foliage.
Aeonium arboreum grows huge, succulent rosettes in various shades: ‘Schwarzkopf’, for instance, has deeply bronzed, almost black leaves.
Cultural notes
Most dry, hot plants are tough.
Cold bothers some, such as the silver-leaf shrub Convolvulus cneorum , but winter wetness is a far more fearsome enemy than frost.
Nevertheless, a winter mulch of bulky material or a thick layer of pea shingle will protect plants from the worst ravages of winter.
Many of the Maquis plants grow more leggy in our softer conditions and hard pruning, preferably in early spring, is almost always beneficial.
It is never a bad plan, particularly with such plants as artemisias, penstemons or santolinas, to take cuttings at least every second year, thus ensuring that you have plenty of replacement stock on the way.
It pays to have youth on your side!
More dry goods
Instant fillers
To quickly fill a gap in a hot, dry situation, try petunias or Portulaca grandiflora for colour,Senecio leuchostachys for silver foliage, heliotrope for scent or exotic Calceolaria arachnoides .
Arid architecture
Onopordum arabicum (giant thistle);Verbascum bombyciferum, Verbena boniarense,scented-leaved Cistus ladanifer and the spiky domes of Genista hispanica .
Specialised scorchers
Arid plants for the connoisseur:Tropaeolum polyphyllum, Iris confusa, Tulbaghia violacea, Asphodeline liburnica and Commeline coelestis .
Euphorbia myrsinites keeps its cool in the heat
Ground-hugging plants bask in the Beth Chatto Gardens
A border receiving full sun will suit a multitude of species
This Sussex cottage garden is awash with hot colour yet remarkably fresh-looking in summer
The flaming yellow-orange of Eschscholzia californicum ‘Mission Bells’, flowering from summer to autumn
Baking on a rocky outcrop, these tough, spiky-leaved plants form a striking tableau
Darkly fascinating,Aeonium arboreum ‘Schwarzkopf’
A spread of drought-defying lush greens in Beth Chatto's Mediterranean garden
The European fan palm Chaemerops humilis has a bold, tropical air and makes an effective specimen plant
Gardeners' Manual
The essential reference book
Start collecting our superb free Gardeners' Manual and month by month it will build into a reference book you will want to return to time and time again.
Compiled exclusively for BBC Gardeners' World Magazine by Andi Clevely, the Gardeners' Manual provides detailed advice, explains techniques and give practical information on choosing and using plants.
Packed with gardening know-how, its structured style and easy-to-follow, well-illustrated format will appeal to every gardener, from novice to enthusiast.
The Gardeners' Manual has bee designed to pull out and collect, so you can always keep it close at hand with your other gardening reference books.
Coming next month in part 7
Practical guide to the construction and use of hedges, windbreaks and screens
Your own handy hedge variety selector table
Pest prevention and control guide, including cultural, chemical and organic advice
A year-round garden colour composition plan
Harvesting and storing
Choosing the best plants for those shady corners
Gardeners' Manual
The rose garden
Follow our inspirational tips for growing, training and underplanting beautiful roses so you can add a glorious touch of summer colour and fragrance to your garden.
Rose care calendar
Concise, month-by-month advice on planting, pruning, spraying, feeding and all your rose-care problems.
Rose variety guide
Whether you're looking for a fragrant floribunda, the most patio-friendly variety or simply your favourite hue, our information will point you in the right direction.
Practical propagation
An illustrated guide to the range of propagation techniques, from cutting and layering to grafting and budding.
Roots to healthy plants
We explain what a root system is and how keep it healthy, adding some tips on growing root vegetables.
Top fruit to suit
Make the right choice for your garden with our top fruit guide, plus a section on rootstocks — what they are, and which ones will suit you best.
A rose by any other name: variety guide starts on p86
Planting plans to show roses at their best, p82
Year-round rose care calendar, p85
Root crops that are hard to ‘beet’, p92
Choose the right top fruit, p94
Rose Gardens
Roses can be grown almost anywhere, so few gardens should be without these beautiful and flexible plants
With over 2,500 cultivars and species generally available from nurseries, the rose's popularity is undeniable.
There are few gardens in which suitable roses cannot be encouraged to grow, for the assumption that they only flourish on heavy clay is a misconception.
Soils can be improved by digging and adding manure or compost to give plants the lavish, freely drained, yet moisture-retentive conditions many relish, although there are many roses (notably rugosas, species and old-fashioned kinds) that will succeed on poor ground.
Special qualities
Supplying the best environment is often less of a problem than deciding how to make effective use of their special qualities within the existing garden.
Beds devoted solely to roses are traditional but demand a lot of space and offer only limited interest.
With simple outlines and geometrical spacing, they are essentially formal and best planted with a single type of rose, normally hybrid teas or floribundas, while in smaller gardens patio or miniature varieties make equally effective bedding roses.
Compatible ground cover and edging plants add colour out of season, while planting a few taller roses or standards in the centre can avoid too much uniformity.
Borders offer more scope for imagination.
Any type of rose can be used as a specimen shrub (hybrid teas are best planted in small groups), providing its height and appearance blends with neighbouring plants.
Combine roses with earlier or later flowering plants, and with evergreens to distract attention from their leafless stems in winter.
Decorative
Grow taller shrub roses at the back of the border, floribundas in the centre and miniature roses or hybrid teas near the front.
Factors other than flower quality become important when treating roses as border shrubs: some produce coloured stems or spines, others have decorative or scented foliage, and many bear hips that persist well into winter.
Roses have structural as well as ornamental value in the garden.
Bushy varieties like ‘Canary Bird’, ‘Penelope’, ‘Felicia’ and most rugosas form large attractive hedges up to 8–9ft high, while smaller floribundas (‘Iceberg’, ‘Masquerade’, ‘Southampton’) can be used in smaller spaces.
A rose hedge can become a useful, impenetrable barrier if clipped regularly.
This will prevent flower buds from developing; if flowering is important, allow the hedge to grow less formally, pruning it annually in spring or after flowering according to variety.
Climbing and rambler roses make excellent screens if trained on wires or trellis, and are a popular choice for covering fences and walls.
Many can also be grown as tall specimens, winding stems around a stout pole or tripod to create a pillar of blossom.
Ramblers were often trained as weeping standards, with their stems tied to a vertical pole and then fanned out over a series of hoops to cascade down to the ground.
If arranged along a low wire or rail like a single espalier, they can be trained as long dwarf hedges around borders and vegetable beds.
Ideal for containers
Miniature, patio and standard roses are ideal for growing in pots and other containers 10–15in in diameter, while floribundas and less vigorous shrub roses will thrive in larger tubs of soil-based compost enriched with a little rotted manure.
Other plants can be grown around them, including restrained prostrate roses such as‘Nozomi’, ‘Pink Bells’ or ‘Bonica’to trail informally down the sides of the container.
Stand the containers in a sunny position, feed and water regularly, and top dress annually with fresh compost.
Companions for roses
The traditional rose bed, strictly excluding all other plants, may seem extravagant where space is limited.
One solution is to integrate roses in mixed borders where their bare appearance in winter and early spring is disguised by adjacent shrubs.
Alternatively there are many herbaceous plants you can use to underplant or edge beds without competing with the roses.
Short, early flowering bulbs are an ideal choice, starting with winter aconites and snowdrops, followed by crocuses, dwarf tulips and miniature daffodils.
Keep these in distinct formal groups, preferably amongst other plants that will disguise their dying foliage.
Mats of prostrate herbs, like variegated thymes and marjorams, can be used to break up expanses of soil, or you could plant an overall ground cover of bugle, saxifrage, heather or ivy, provided room is left around the roses for annual mulches and access for pruning or cutting.
Edge beds with aubretia, primroses, chives, parsley or pinks, or plant low hedges of helianthemums, catmint, dwarf lavender and herbaceous geraniums.
Many cottage garden plants are useful: dog violets, hearts-ease, forget-me-nots, Welsh poppies, honesty and primroses will seed themselves and soften the formality of the roses.
Strategic groups of foxgloves, delphiniums and tall campanulas will relieve the consistent height.
Rose types
Hybrid teas (large-flowered bushes).
Classic specimen roses, with long stems and perfect conical blooms, based on tea-scented China roses crossed with hybrid perpetuals.
Grown as bushes and standards, flowering in flushes.
Floribundas (cluster-flowered bushes).
Derived from a hybrid tea crossed with a polyantha rose.
Colourful, free-flowering bushes, bearing large sprays of continuous small blooms, less well formed that those of HTs.
Grown as standards and bushes of various sizes, the smallest known as miniatures and patio roses.
Climbing roses.
Divided into two groups: climbers, with stiff permanent stems bearing large flowers, singly or in small clusters, often repeat-flowering; and ramblers producing a single display with small flowers bunches on long stems, renewed yearly.
Ramblers can be grown as ground cover, weeping standards or decorative espaliers.
Shrub roses.
A cosmopolitan group, derived mainly from crosses between bush roses and wild species, many noted for their vigour, scent and exuberant flowering.
Includes modern shrub roses and old-fashioned types like damasks, gallicas, rugosas and moss roses.
Species roses.
Sometimes listed under shrub roses (although many are vigorous climbers) these are natural wild roses, together with their variants and hybrids.
Most have single flowers blooming in one concentrated flush, but also bear attractive foliage, stems or spines, and coloured hips in autumn.
Many and varied uses for shrub roses
Although most shrub roses make strong self-supporting growth, a few are so lax and flexible that mature specimens have far greater width than height.
With their dense sprawling foliage they can make ideal ground cover plants for larger areas, and can also be allowed to hang in swags over banks and terraces.
A few varieties of supple-stemmed rambler are just as suitable for this purpose, covering many square yards once they become established.
Fragrant roses
Many varieties, especially those bred from China roses, have little or no scent, whereas others are renowned for their fragrance.
The nature of this will vary greatly depending on a rose's ancestry, while its appreciation is a very personal matter.
Catalogue comparisons with the fragrance of tea, lemon, spices, wine, apples or more exotic fruits can be misleading, and it is important to assess scent for yourself.
Strong perfume is not confined to old-fashioned roses or particular colours, nor is it consistent: warmth and the age of the bloom both affect its strength.
Groups most noted for fragrance are albas, bourbons, centifolias, damasks, gallicas, hybrid musks and the modern English roses produced by David Austin's nursery at Wolverhampton.
These new strains have been bred to combine the varied colours, forms and scents of old roses with a much longer season of flowers.
Roses can make excellent container plants
The short mid-green foliage of nasturtiums sets of these scarlet roses
A graceful wigwam of rustic poles supports the display
Ideal support is provided by an arch
More conventional, but no less striking mixture of reds and whites
An unusual mixture of apricot orange with blues and purples
Rose care calendar
Our easy to follow, month-by-month guide to rose care will help you ensure healthy and spectacular blooms each and every year.
Roses are naturally at their most beautiful in summer, but it takes year-long care to ensure they maintain their glory.
Just a little work each month will prove rewarding.
January
Bring bush roses in pots into the greenhouse, heated to 50°F (10°C); shorted last year's shoots to one or two buds from the main stems, and keep in a light position.
Firm newly planted roses loosened after frost.
Plant if both the soil and the weather are favourable.
February
Finish planting new roses by the end of the month.
Spray roses in pots with water daily to keep humidity up; watch out for greenfly and other pests.
March
Rose seeds stratified in November may be sown outdoors.
Towards the end of the month start pruning standard (except weeping standards), bush and climbing roses.
On bushes and standards, prune strong new stems to 4–6in, shorten weaker growths and remove very spindly tips on climbers; shorten weak growth by half and stronger stems by a third or more according to desired height.
Weed and hoe rose beds.
Give potted roses a dilute feed at every watering.
April
Finish pruning early in the month.
Rake or hoe in a top dressing of rose fertiliser.
Continue feeding roses in pots, but keep humidity down in the greenhouse, lightly shading the glass and ventilating freely in sunny weather.
May
Thin overcrowded new shoots and any that are growing into the centre of plants.
Hoe and then mulch beds, either covering the entire surface or in a radius of 2ft around plants if material is scarce.
Be prepared to spray for pests and diseases from now onwards.
Move exhausted pot roses outdoors, hardening them off first in cold seasons, and plunge the pots in the ground.
June
Disbud hybrid tea roses for the best blooms and give them a foliar feed if it is necessary.
Carry out deadheading often, combining with light pruning where appropriate by cutting back to a strong bud well down the stem.
Start budding rootstocks towards the end of the month, taking buds from firm young shoots.
July
Lightly prune to two levels new stems on bushes and standards once flowering ends, top dress with fertiliser and how.
Continue budding rootstocks.
Remove suckers at their base as they appear, also any sideshoots from standard stems.
Layer flexible stems of ramblers and shrub roses.
August
Finish budding roses, check the ties on those done earlier.
Keep deadheading.
Prune ramblers when flowering ends; cut out old wood to the ground or back to young stems, and tie in new growth.
Prune weeping standards similarly.
Order new roses for autumn delivery.
September
Take cuttings from strong young shoots and root outdoors as for soft fruit.
Prepare ground for planting; dig; manure or compost; check drainage.
October
Tide and lightly fork over beds; gather leaves and burn them if blackspot and other diseases have been a problem.
Finish preparing new rose beds.
Pot up roses from open ground, repot those already in containers and leave plunged outdoors.
November
Plant new roses as they arrive or heel in until the ground is suitable; plant firmly and stake if necessary.
Tie in or shorten long stems; mound strawy manure or soil around stems in cold areas.
Gather rose hips for seed, layer them with sand in seedboxes and leave outdoors until spring.
December
Complete planting early in the month.
Finish tidying beds.
Make room in the greenhouse for first batches of potted roses.
The rose garden will respond beautifully to your attention
Keep pests and diseases at bay by regular spraying
June: Disbudding your hybrid tea roses will enable the best blooms to develop
Tie in climbing roses to give them the support they need to thrive
Ensure holes are deep and wide enough to take the roots easily
Rose selection
There is a bewildering variety of roses to choose from; the range described in our selector table includes old favourites and modern classics to suit every taste, purpose, setting and colour scheme   
The noisette ‘Mme Alfred Carriere’
‘Etoile d'Hollande’ is superb as a climber
‘Golden Wings’, a modern classic
‘Alec's Red’ is outstanding for cutting
Rosa moyesii ‘Geranium’ has dazzling flowers and fine red hips
Clear pink ‘Frau Dagmar Hartopp’
‘Roseraie de l'Hay’, splendidly vigorous and richly scented
The tall floribunda ‘Southampton’ makes a show massed together
‘Buff Beauty’ has the classic tea rose scent
‘Grouse’ scrambles daintily over the ground
Practical propagation
Any number of plants can be had for free by mastering the techniques described on these pages
In nature and gardens alike, the commonest method of increasing plants is by sowing seed.
There are certain limitations and disadvantages with this method, however.
Some seeds are difficult or very slow to germinate, and grow only slowly into full-size plants.
The high probability of cross-fertilisation, although a natural device that ensures vigour and diversity, means seedlings may not resemble their parents, a particular risk with fruit pips and stones.
F1 hybrids and many highly cultivars.
A further complication is that some plants, especially foliage houseplants, seldom flower in this country, or only do so when many years old.
Make more of plants
Gardeners get round these problems by using alternative means of propagation, all of them known as vegetative methods because of they involve taking some living fragment of a plant and inducing it to develop roots, so producing a new plant identical to the patent or part from which it was taken.
It will also inherit any disease or deformity affecting the donor (whereas few problems are transmitted by seed), so it is important to take material from the best healthy plants.
Stem cuttings
Propagation by stem cuttings of various kinds is the most familiar vegetative method, used for most herbaceous perennials, climbers, shrubs and pot plants.
In all cases cuttings must be prepared with a razor blade or very sharp knife, and are rooted in a cuttings compost or a home-made mixture of equal parts peat and sharp sand.
A few easy species (ivy, hydrangea, impatiens) will root in water.
If you use hormone rooting powder, keep the container in a fridge and replace every few months because of its short effective life.
Tip a little powder into the lid and dip cuttings into this; tap surplus powder from the cuttings and throw away any left in the lid after use.
Softwood cuttings
These are taken from the ends of shoots of current year's growth while still soft and green, during spring to mid-summer for outdoor  plants, almost any time under glass.
Choose healthy shoots, typical in colour and form (select the best colouring from variegated plants).
Work quickly or keep the cutting material in a plastic bag blown up like a balloon and sealed.
Make each cutting 3–4in long and trim to just below a node (leaf joint).
Strip the leaves from the lower half, and remove any flower buds or spines.
Dip the cut end in rooting powder and insert in a hole made with a dibber in pots or trays of rooting compost.
Make sure it reaches the bottom of the hole; firm and water in.
These cuttings need heat and humidity: arrange containers in a greenhouse propagating case or on the staging, covering them with a box whose bottom is replaced with clear plastic.
Individual pots can be sealed in a plastic bag held clear of the foliage by wire hoops.
Open every 2–3 days for a short while to avoid a stagnant atmosphere.
Soft cuttings may root after only a few weeks, so pot individual cuttings as soon as you see new young leaves or white roots at the base of containers.
Semi-ripe cuttings
Semi-ripe (semi-hardwood or half-ripe) cuttings are taken from current year's shoots of shrubs when woody at the base but still soft at the tips, in mid-summer to mid-autumn.
They are taken and inserted (‘struck’) in the same way as softwood cuttings, although many gardeners remove whole sideshoots, pulling them off the main stem with a short portion of bard (a ‘heel’) to aid rooting; neatly trim any ragged edges on the heel, and pinch out the tips of naturally bushy subjects.
Heat is seldom essential, and cuttings can be struck in a cold frame or outdoors under cloches, but may take all winter to root.
Striking them in pots in a greenhouse dramatically reduces the time taken.
Hardwood cuttings
Hardwood cuttings are taken after leaves have fallen, usually from current year's stems of soft fruit and some shrubs.
In most cases cuttings are struck in a sheltered place outdoors, using pieces of ripe stem about 9in long.
Do not remove lower buds except for plants such as gooseberries normally grown on a ‘leg’.
Bury cuttings to half their depth, either by pushing them into the soil or by lining them along the side of a slit cut in the soil with a spade (in heavy soil, sprinkle a layer of sand at the base of the slit).
Leave cuttings until the following autumn before potting up or transplanting.
Pipings
Pipings are a special kind of semiripe cutting taken to propagate pinks and border carnations in July and August.
The piping is prepared from the end of a sturdy young shoot; simply pull it from the plant, retaining 4–5 pairs of leaves, and snap or cut off the bottom pair.
Insert several of these cuttings to the base of their lowest leaves in a pot of rooting compost, water in and place in a cold frame for about 6 weeks, when they will be sufficiently well-rooted for potting up.
Leaf cuttings
Whereas stem cuttings depend on buds and the surrounding areas of tissue to produce roots, some species (chiefly houseplants and succulents) are multiplied from leaves that have not bud attached.
Inserted in cutting compost, or in some cases plain water, the leaves first develop roots and then one or more young plants which are later separated and potted up.
Again, always use a very sharp blade to make any cuts.
Most leaf cuttings need warmth and humidity to strike quickly; keep covered as for softwood cuttings until well rooted.
Whole leaf with stalk (African violet, peperomia): cut a leaf near the base of its stalk, dip the end in hormone rooting powder and insert in compost up to the leaf base.
Firm and water in.
Many cuttings of this kind will root spontaneously if stood to the base of their leaves in a jar of water.
Whole leaf without stalk (eg begonias): rooting occurs from severed leaf veins.
On the underside of the leaf, cut the main veins in several places and then lay the leaf, cut side downwards, on the surface of moist compost.
Ensure good contact by pegging in place with wire hoops or weighting it down with a few pebbles.
Plants such as bryophyllum and tolmeia that normally produce tiny plantlets on their leaves are propagated in the same way, but do not need their veins cut.
Left sections (streptocarpus, sansevieria): leaves too large to lay on the surface are divided laterally into sections, inserting the lower cut edge (nearest the leaf base) into the compost, with or without the use of rooting powder.
Plantlets develop at soil level from the severed veins.
Leaf-bud cuttings: these combine stem and leaf cutting techniques, and can be used with various refinements for subjects such as ficus (rubber plant), camellia, clematis and briar fruits.
The basic cutting is a whole  leaf, together with the short section of stem to which it is attached and the bud at its base.
Dipped in hormone powder, the stem section is then buried in the compost, leaving the bud and leaf exposed.
Large leaves may need support from a cane or, in the case of ficus, can be gently rolled up with an elastic band.
Subsequent treatment is the same as for softwood cuttings.
Root cuttings
This a less familiar technique, used for a number of plants and usually very successful (the persistence of couch grass and convolvulus from root fragments depends on the same principle).
Hollyhocks, sumach, oriental poppies, seakale, horseradish and other plants with thick, fleshy roots are most commonly propagated in this way, although some finer-rooted subjects such as phlox and gaillardia are also suitable.
Root cuttings are best taken in winter when plants are dormant.
Scrape the soil away from the plant to expose some of its larger roots and cut off a few of these with a sharp knife.
Trim thin roots into 2–3in long pieces and arrange them on their sides on the surface of a boxful of cutting compost.
Cover with a thin layer of compost, and water.
Trim thick roots into sections, cutting the upper end horizontally and the lower end at an angle for identification.
Push the upright cuttings, oblique end downwards, into deep boxes of compost, cover their flat tops with a layer of compost and water.
Stand boxes of cuttings in a cold frame or under greenhouse staging and keep slightly moist.
Pot up cuttings individually as soon as fine white roots and young top growth are visible.
Layering
A virtually foolproof method, since one roots potential cuttings while still attached to the parent plant.
Many plants spread naturally in this way, their flexible stems arching down and rooting where they rest on the ground, and gardeners have adopted this method for woody subjects otherwise difficult to propagate.
For simple layering, candidates must have one or more young branches that can be bend down and secured just below ground level 12–15in from their tips.
During the active growing season, prepare the rooting area as if for a seedbed and scope out a gentle dip in which the branch will lie comfortably.
Strip any leaves from the portion to be buried, and then expose some of the inner tissues near a node by scraping bark from the underside, twisting the stem to break some of the fibres, or by making a long sloping cut into the centre of the stem to form a ‘tongue’, held open with a matchstick.
Bury the wounded section in the depression and firm the soil.
Hold in place with pegs or a large stone, and tie the branch tip to an upright cane.
Keep the area moist in dry weather.
The layer should be sufficiently well rooted to move or pot up 12–24 months later.
Serpentine layering
Climbers such as clematis, jasmine, wisteria and honeysuckle root wherever their long pliable stems touch the soil.
Several young plants can be formed from a single stem by making a series of wounds at a convenient distance apart and burying each in a prepared hollow in the ground.
Tip layering
Blackberries and hybrid berries often form roots and new plants at the tips of their long shoots.
The simplest way to encourage this is to  push a bamboo cane into the ground to leave a sloping hole 5–6in deep, inserting the tip of the shoot into this and treading firm.
If layered in August, the new plant should be ready to move by late autumn or the following spring.
Grafting
Two closely related plants can be joined by grafting part of one (the scion) on top of another (stock or rootstock) to produce an artificial plant with the virtues of both.
Stocks can restrict or boost vigour and confer disease or frost resistance.
Scions provide the chosen fruit or flower, and may be used to change a fruit tree from one variety to another.
All grafting techniques depend on preparing matching surfaces at the ends of stock and scion so that they quickly fuse.
Whip and tongue grafting
Used for fruit and ornamental trees, usually carried out late winter/early spring.
Cut the rootstock back to a few inches high.
Prepare a scion from a one-year-old shoot, similar in diameter to the rootstock.
Trim the scion to 4–5 buds in length, cutting the base just below, and the top immediately above, a healthy bud.
The lower cut must be perfectly flat and angled to match the oblique cut on the rootstock.
Cut a tongue in each of the faces to be joined so that they interlock neatly, bind the joint with raffia and cover with grafting wax or bituminous tree paint.
Carefully cut the raffia free once new top growth indicates a successful graft.
Cleft grafting
Used to change the variety of old fruit trees.
Cut all main branches back to a few inches long and for each prepare 2–3 scions of the new variety as for whip and tongue grafting, but trim their bases to a long wedge shape.
Cut notches for the scions around the edge of the severed branches and insert a scion into each so that the green layer of tissue just beneath the bark (cambium layer) of both scion and stock meet each other.
Bind in place and way the end of the branch.
Approach grafting
Often called inarching, and used to unite pot-grown plants and for grafting tomatoes on to rootstocks.
Arrange the plants side by side and cut a thin sliver from each stem so that the two wounds exactly match when brought together.
Bind with raffia and wax in the usual way.
Continue to water and feed both plants until the union has healed, when the upper part of the stock and the lower portion of the scion are cut away.
Budding
An alternative form of grafting that unites one or more buds, rather than piece of stem, to the stock.
Budding is most commonly used to propagate roses (but is equally successful with other plants) and is normally carried out in summer.
For each bud make a shallow T-shaped cut in the stock so that the bark can be turned back.
Cut a length of one-year-old stem (‘the budstick’) from the scion variety and cut out the buds, each in the centre of a thin, inch-long shield of bark.
Lift the bark on both sides of the T-cut and slide the bud beneath it.
Tie in place with raffia, leaving the bud exposed.
Bud roses just above the ground (standards at any preferred height) and other woody plants 6in above soil level.
Prune the root-stock above the scion buds early the following spring, and tie the scion shoot to a cane if vertical growth is required.
Mound layering
Quantities of rooted layers can be produced using this technique, a useful one for replacing ageing heather and lavender.
In spring, either dig up the shrub and replant at a deeper level, or mound soil round its base so that only the upper half of stems is exposed.
Lift again the following autumn or spring and many of the stems will have rooted; these can be detached for potting up.
The patent plant is discarded or replanted if still sound.
A single fruit rootstock or soft fruit bush can similarly be induced to form several rooted layers each season, year after year.
When established, cut its stems to ground level in winter.
As they regrow, cover them with a 12in mound of soil.
Unearth them the following winter, remove all the rooted stems for transplanting and cut off any that have failed to root.
Air (aerial) layering
Used for trees and shrubs with rigid stems, and overgrown houseplants such as ficus and croton.
It is done in spring or early summer on outdoor plants, and rooting may take up to a year; pot plants are layered any time and should root in a few weeks.
Wound the stem 12–15in from its tip by making a long cut to form a tongue.
Dress with hormone powder and wedge open with a pad of damp sphagnum moss.
Wrap with moss held in place with clear polythene tied either side with raffia or tape.
When roots show through, sever the stem below the rootball, remove the polythene and pot up without disturbing the moss ball.
Leaf-bud cuttings: a good way to increase stocks of camellias
A polythene cover prevents moisture loss from cuttings
Propagating streptocarpus: ensure leaf sections are the right way up
Trim off the lower leaves when taking stem-tip cuttings of heliotrope.
Dip the cut ends into hormone rooting powder before planting.
Line up the cuttings in rows in seed trays of suitable compost
Hardwood cutting are usually taken in winter
Semi-ripe cuttings of azalea hybrids
Layering rhododendron: use a knife to wound underside of stem to be rooted in the ground.
Adding some hormone rooting powder to the wound can help the plant establish new roots.
Keep the tip of the branch upright by tying it securely to a firmly positioned cane.
Use pegs or a large stone to pin the layered branch to the ground while roots are growing
Budding roses: with a sharp knife cut out buds from the scion stock.
Make a T-shaped wound in the rootstock and insert the cut bud.
The bud should fit neatly into the wound made on the rootstock.
Tape or tie in the bud securely, leaving the bud itself exposed
Scion and rootstock must make a perfect fit
 Roots to healthy plants
Roots may be out of sight but their welfare should always be kept in mind, for strong anchors ensure thriving top growth and healthy, abundant crops
The shoot system of stems, leaves, flowers and seeds comprises the visible part of a plant's anatomy.
Below ground level, out of sight and sometimes out of mind, is the root system, whose functions are to anchor the plant in the soil and to supply it with water and soluble nutrients.
A thriving plants depends as much on root vitality as on the good health of its top growth.
Some plants have a prominent main or tap root, from which rows of fine lateral roots grow.
Damaging this tap rood can seriously check growth.
For this reason lupins, poppies, carrots and parsnips are notoriously difficult to transplant successfully.
Transplant successes
Other plants produce a number of thinner roots, all of similar size, instead of a distinct tap root.
Such fibrous-rooted subjects as bedding plants, lettuces and most herbaceous perennials will tolerate being transplanted.
Specialised roots are often encountered in the garden.
Vegetable root crops all have well-developed tap roots that act as food storage organs, often to help the plant survive the winter.
Bulbs that are too near the surface can make thick temporary roots (contractile roots or ‘droppers’) which pull the bulb deeper into the soil.
Adventitious roots grow from the upper parts of a plant, as often seen on the houseplant monstera, or on trailing stems of ivy and marrows.
Extra roots can give support, as with the stem roots of tall lilies.
Roots burrow extensively, their armour-plated tips following worm tunnels and structural cracks or simply boring for many yards through the soil in search of water and food, which they absorb through their fine lateral roots.
In the process they open up the soil, often extracting mineral salts from great depths.
Dead or exhausted roots decompose, leaving moisture-retentive fibre and stored nutrients to be recycled for other plants.
Leguminous plants, with their nitrogen-rich root modules, are especially useful, while decaying turf contributes fibre (turf loam) for  potting composts.
Healthy root development is reflected in robust top growth and an ability to withstand drought, pest and disease problems.
Airless or waterlogged clay and compacted (‘slumped’) light ground are both inhospitable to roots and can invite fungal diseases, whereas a friable structure, the result of thorough cultivation and the regular addition of compost or manure, aids their deep vigorous growth.
They are then more likely to withstand drought, especially if fed and watered properly.
Shallow roots dry out quickly even when plants are watered frequently.
Subversive activity
Sometimes roots get out of hand.
The toots of trees planted too close to buildings may penetrate foundations and damage water mains.
Some hedging species produce wide-ranging roots that deprive neighbouring plants of food and water.
It is often possible to restrict these by cutting into the ground with a spade along the face of the hedge, doing one side at a time in alternate years.
Barren but otherwise vigorous fruit trees can be root-pruned to revive production by digging a trench round the tree, 5–6ft from the trunk, and sawing sections from thicker roots.
Success with root crops
In addition to free drainage and an open structure, root vegetables need fairly high fertility.
Gardeners are often advised not to sow roots on ground that has recently been manured, as this will produce distorted shapes.
On the other hand, it is a mistake to assume they will grow to any size on indifferent soil.
In an efficient rotation, they follow a crop for which the soil was well manured so that the roots benefit from the earlier cultivation and nutrient residues in the ground.
Since swedes, turnips and radishes are brassicas, appreciative of lime and firm ground, they can be grown with cabbages and other members of this family if the ground was manured the previous autumn.
The other roots prefer slightly acid conditions; their place in the rotation system is in soil due to be limed the following year.
With the exception of round carrots, which may be sown in first in pots, and kohl rabi, which is not a true root, all root crops are sown directly into the ground because their tap roots will be misshapen if transplanted.
Groundwork
Prepare a really fine seedbed and sow the seeds thinly to avoid unnecessary thinning.
Soak drills beforehand and cover the seeds with moist peat or old potting compost in dry weather.
Keeping down weeds can be a problem.
Either remove them by hand or grow roots after potatoes, marrows or sweet corn since these are easy to weed and leave relatively clean soil.
Tips for growing root crops
Beetroot: grow varieties resistant to bolting on dry soils.
‘Seeds’, unless monogerm varieties, are actually capsules, each containing several seeds — be prepared to thin seedlings.
For small early beets, sow small pots with 2–3 capsules and plant out seedling clusters unthinned.
Carrots use cloches for the earliest varieties; sow the same variety every 2–3 weeks through the season.
These take 10–12 weeks, whereas large maincrop carrots need deep soil and 5–6 months to mature.
In August, sow early carrots in a cold frame or greenhouse and keep covered during winter for pulling as needed.
Surround carrot patch with a 15–18in high polythene fence to deter root fly.
On stony or shallow soils, grow round varieties.
Parsnips: Sow a canker-resistant variety if necessary.
Sow seeds in groups 6–8in apart; sow radishes in between to mark the rows for weeding (parsnips are slow to germinate) these will be ready when the parsnips need thinning.
Radishes: best sown little and often as a catch crop among other vegetables.
Sow in a moist, shady spot in summer to avoid early bolting.
Salsify, scorzonera: grow as parsnips.
Transplant unused roots to borders the following spring, as both have attractive flowers.
Swedes: grow in rich firm ground and water regularly as for turnips.
They are susceptible to clubroot, so choose a resistant variety.
Turnips: keep moist throughout growth, otherwise roots may be hot and pithy.
always use an early or forcing variety, ready in 8–10 weeks, as maincrop turnips are very slow to mature.
Flea beetle riddles leaves with tiny holes; treat with derris only if damage is serious.
A food store for the plant, but also a tasty crop for the gardener
Potbound roots are clearly visible when the pot is removed
Incomplete root removal explains many weeds' tenacity
Choose fruit bushes with a vigorous root system
The roots of legumes such as peas bear beneficial nitrifying nodules
Maincrop carrots after 6 months' root growth
Top fruit to suit
Defined as those which grow naturally as trees, top fruits will reward you well, given the right care and attention
All fruits that naturally grow as trees, even if trained by gardeners into ornamental shapes, are normally grouped together as top or tree fruits.
This classification is only for convenience: top fruits, such a figs, mulberries, quinces and hazel nuts, frequently produce several main stems and therefore resemble shrubs, while apples, pears, plums and peaches are often grown in short-stemmed forms known as bushes (not to be confused with bush fruit, an alternative term for some soft fruits).
If they are left to grow naturally, most top fruits can become large trees, eventually outgrowing most gardens.
By choosing varieties which are grafted on dwarfing rootstocks where these are available (cherries, apricots, plums, peaches, pears, apples), together with less vigorous varieties of others, trees can be kept to a more manageable size, some small enough even to grow in large pots or in a greenhouse.
Planting and routine care of top fruit is the same as for ornamental garden trees.
Most like slightly acid soil, although stone fruits (plums, peaches, apricots, cherries) prefer neutral or slightly alkaline conditions because they need lime for their fruit to develop fully, and blueberries need very acid soil.
The deeper the soil, the better: few kinds thrive on shallow soils, and drought can be a problem on light sandy ground unless you dig in a lot of organic material.
Training
Always select a warm, sunny position, sheltered from cold winds and frost-free at blossom time.
Where room is limited, many top fruits can be trained as cordons, espaliers or fans against walls and fences, and occupy very little ground area.
Figs, gages and pears will grow best against the warmest walls: those facing south, west or south-west.
However, acid (cooking) cherries, such as‘Morello’, will fruit successfully facing north.
Pruning (discussed elsewhere) is simple but essential for the best crops, especially from trained trees.
Pollination
Some fruit trees produce crops on their own, but many varieties of apples, pears, plums and cherries will not fruit in isolation, no matter how well grown.
The flowers of these cannot be fertilised with their own pollen and are known as self-incompatible or self-sterile, whereas self-fertile (self-compatible) varieties set fruit without needing pollen from another tree.
A self-sterile tree, therefore, must be grown near another variety that blooms at the same time and will cross-pollinate its flowers.
Not all varieties pollinate each other effectively, however.
Some produce little useful pollen of their own, even though they set well if fertilised by another tree.
‘Triploid’ varieties of apples and pears are poor suppliers of pollen and, because of a genetic peculiarity, also require two other normal varieties to pollinate their own flowers.
A few apple, pear and plum varieties are cross-sterile and cannot pollinate each other, while some apples and pears are biennial bearers and thus will not supply pollen each year.
For these reasons it is necessary for you to check catalogues carefully to make sure the trees you order are compatible, or you could  grow self-fertile varieties that do not need cross-pollination.
Most apples crop on their own, although all will do better with another variety nearby.
‘Conference’ pears are partly self-fertile, but all other varieties need a pollinator.
A number of plums, including the varieties ‘Czar’, ‘Victoria’ and most gages and damsons, will set on their own, as do most acid cherries, but ‘Stella’and ‘Cherokee’are the only self-fertile sweet cherries at the moment.
Top fruit varieties
A fruit tree is a long-term investment and you should always consult a comprehensive catalogue or fruit guide carefully before buying.
Most kinds of top fruit are available in a large range of varieties.
Your choice will be influenced by a number of factors, including soil, site and aspect, space available, time of flowering and fruiting, yield and health status, and not least your own personal taste.
If you have a small garden, for example, you will find that the most suitable apples include ‘Discovery’, ‘James Grieve’, ‘Sunset’ and ‘Winston’of the dessert types, and ‘Grenadier’, ‘Rev W Wilks’and ‘Lane's Prince Albert’for cooking.
Similarly, some varieties will cope better with cold aspects.
When choosing several varieties, remember that cross-pollination may be important and that some fruits store for longer than others.
Early maturing varieties are usually used straight away.
Recommended varieties
Apples
Blenheim Orange
Dessert and culinary, Nov-Jan
Bramley's Seedling Culinary
Nov-March
Discovery Dessert
August onwards
Egremont Russet Dessert
Oct-Dec
Grenadier Culinary
Aug-Sept
James Grieve Dessert
Sept-Nov
Lanes's Prince Albert Culinary
Dec-March
Merton Charm Dessert
Sept-Oct
Rev W Wilks Culinary
Sept-Nov
Ribston Pippin Dessert
Nov-Jan
St Edmund's Pippin Dessert
Sept-Oct
Sunset Dessert
Nov-Dec
Suntan Dessert
Dec-Feb
Winston Dessert
Mar-May
Dessert Pears
Beurre Superfin
Oct
Conference
Oct-Nov
Gorham
Sept
Louise Bonne de Jersey
Oct
Packham's Triumph
Nov-Dec
Winter Nelis
Nov-Jan
Plums
Coe's Golden Drop Dessert
Sept, speckled yellow
Czar Culinary
Aug, purple, self-fertile
Early Rivers Culinary
July/Aug, blue
Early Transparent Gage Dessert
Aug, yellow with red spots, self-fertile
Marjorie's Seedling Culinary
Sept/Oct, purple, self-fertile
Victoria Dessert
Aug/Sept, red, self-fertile
Cherries
Early Rivers Dessert
Jun, black
Cherokee Dessert
July, red, self-fertile
Morello Culinary
Aug/Sept, red, self-fertile
Stella Dessert
July, self-fertile
Peaches, nectarines and apricots
Early Moorpark Apricot
July, large fruits, rich flavour
Early Rivers Nectarine
July, reliable, fine flavour
Lord Napier Nectarine
Aug, heavy crops
Moorpark Apricot
Aug/Sept, large quality fruit
Peregrine Peach
Aug, best flavour
Rochester Peach
Aug/Sept, very hardy
Plums are the easiest stone fruit to grow.
‘Victoria’ is a reliable variety which is large, self-fertile and can be enjoyed either fresh or or cooked
There are hundreds of apple varieties, so make sure you choose well
Firm, fruity and self-fertile, ‘Conference’ remains the number choice for many pear growers
Grown for generations, the ‘Egremont Russet’ apple is unmistakeable for its golden colour and sweet flavour
Pale blossoms and leathery green leaves give the quince tree an eastern look
‘Morello’ is one of the most popular varieties of culinary cherry
Taking stock
When choosing a fruit tree, make sure you get the rootstock that is right for your garden
When planting a fruit tree, it is important to be able to predict its eventual size, yield and performance, factors which are influenced by the type of rootstock on which most are grafted.
Vigorous rootstocks produce large trees that will give high yields even on poorer soils, provide shade and wildlife habitats, and are magnificent specimens when mature.
On the other hand, they can take many years to achieve full bearing, occupy a lot of space and often have to be picked or tended from a ladder.
Dwarfing rootstocks restrict the size and vigour of a tree, so that is fills less space, crops while still young, and can usually be managed from the ground.
However, yields are proportionally low (though often of higher quality), careful pruning is sometimes necessary and, with their smaller root system, trees may need good soil and permanent support stakes.
Rootstock varieties
Apple, pear, plum, peach and cherry trees for gardens are grown on a variety of rootstocks, and familiarity with these will help you to choose the most appropriate tree for your site.
Bear in mind that in any directory of rootstock eventual size and yield as given will be approximate, since these are also affected by soil, aspect and the shape of the tree.
Use the table below for guidance, but don't be afraid to ask your stockist.
Rootstock ready-reckoner
Apples
MM111
Very vigorous, but good for poor soils.
Can be used for standards and half-standards, espaliers and fans.
Height and spread is 20ft, yield from 4–5cwt, crops 5–6 years after planting.
MM106
Semi-dwarfing, for half-standards, large bushes, fans and espaliers.
Height and spread is 15ft, yield around 1cwt, crops after 3–5 yrs.
M26
Dwarfing, for bushes, cordons and small espaliers.
Height and spread is 12ft, yield around 75lbs, crops after 3 yrs.
M9
Very dwarfing rootstock, for bushes and cordons.
Needs good soil and permanent staking.
Height and spread is 10ft, yield around 40lbs, crops after 2–3 yrs.
M27
Extremely dwarfing, for cordons and growing in containers.
Needs careful watering and feeding and some permanent support.
Height and spread is 6ft, yield around 20lbs, crops after 2 years.
Pears and some medlars
Quince A
Fairly vigorous, common stock for all garden forms.
Height and spread 15ft, yield 100lbs, crops after 4yrs.
Quince C
Semi-dwarfing, used for strong-growing types, needs fertile soil.
Height and spread 12ft, yield 75lbs, crops after 3yrs.
Plums, peaches, nectarines
St Julian
A Fairly vigorous, best for large gardens or poor soils.
Height and spread 15ft, yield 50lbs, crops after 4yrs.
Pixy
Dwarf, good for heavy soils.
Height and spread 8ft, yield 20lbs, crops after 2yrs.
Cherries
Colt
Semi-dwarfing, for most soils.
Height and spread 15ft, yield 20lbs, crops after 3yrs.
Inmil
Dwarf, needs good soil and permanent stakes.
Height and spread 12ft, yield 15lbs, crops after 3yrs.
The sweet, self-fertile cherry ‘Stella’, fantrained on a fence
The hardy apple tree variety ‘Ellison's Orange’, grown as an espalier
Apples trees are grown on a range of rootstocks, so choose carefully
Gardens by design
Perfect pergolas
David Stevens peruses pergola designs in search of those ideal structures which, blending perfectly with house, garden and planting choices, charm the eye but never intrude
Rustic timbers are often used for construction but remember that they have a comparatively short life.
The prime task of a pergola is to provide support for climbers and these should be trained to soften hard outlines.
Roses are often the ideal choice.
Here the eye is naturally drawn down to the urn at the end of the vista.
In such a distinctly chic composition this hybrid between trelliswork and pergola helps contain the garden at ground level rather than allowing the view to be dominated by the high surrounding urban walls.
The white painted boundary also serves the same purpose, and the passion flower should quickly temper the somewhat stark lines of the woodwork.
This adventurous and stylish design uses classical columns as supports with hooped timber arches to provide a real felling of movement as it sweeps away in a gentle curve.
Such a feature should always have somewhere positive to go and here the path leads one on with a genuine air of anticipation.
The ultimate outside room, with not only floor and walls but a stout canopy forming the ceiling.
The timbers are of sufficient size to make both a positive statement and to last indefinitely.
Strong foliage echoes the pattern at ground level; a better choice of vine would be the superb Vitis coignetiae .
Timber has been well used here in a number of different ways.
Solid baulks pegged into equally stout legs form the seat and the no-nonsense trellis is the perfect host for climbers that form a frame for the composition.
At ground level geraniums and hostas provide a contrasting foliar foil to neat gravel.
Oh dear, this is really what a pergola is not about.
The timbers are badly shaped and put together; such a structure can only be a vehicle for plants and the sooner they cover it the better.
At ground level, the planting is mish-mash — the choice of delphiniums only highlights the dubious structure above.
These solid stone piers and hefty timber beams are the stuff that lovely English gardens are made of.
The delicacy of hardy perennials is the ideal contrast to such strength; roses are the perfect climbing choice and the huge terracotta pot is an inspired full stop at the end of the vista.
Good design brings house and garden together as a single entity.
This contemporary building uses overhead beams to link crisp architectural lines into the surrounding landscaping.
Slats close to the building will cast dappled shade, while the tree is drawn into the composition by the well-detailed pergola.
This is a perfect study in controlled design, the bold log steps lending stability to the awkward change of ground level.
Green gardening
Organic Advice
From Pauline Pears and Sue Stickland of the National Centre for Organic Gardening
Miss the mildew
The common Michaelmas daisies (Aster novi-belgii and Aster novae-angliae ) are invaluable for their late flowers.
They not only brighten up a faded border, but provide essential nectar and pollen for beneficial insects going into hibernation.
However, they have one disadvantage.
At the end of the season their leaves are frequently dulled and disfigured by powdery mildew.
Our solution is to plant other asters which are mildew-resistant.
Varieties of Aster amellus and Aster frikartii have similar daisy-like flowers in late summer, and are generally trouble-free.
Take care and beat the apple scab blues
By this time in the season your apples are likely to be showing advanced signs of scab (Venturia inaequalis ).
The olive-green blotches which appear on the leaves, often very early in a damp, cool season, turn black and spread to the fruit, causing ugly discolouration and sometimes cracking.
If there is little sign of this on your trees you may well have had the luck to inherit or wisdom to plant one of the less scab-prone varieties, of which there are a surprising number.
A good selection to span the season might be: ‘Discovery’, ‘Red Ellison’, ‘Sunset’, ‘Egremont Russet’ and ‘Winston’, accompanied by a good cooker, perhaps ‘King Edward VII’.
Blackberries on stream at home
How many of you remember blackberrying with stained lips and fingers along the wild hedgerows of late summer?
Many of those hedgerows have gone but those forgotten flavours can be recaptured in your own garden.
With the range of cultivated varieties now available you could be picking blackberries from August to November.
One of the first on stream is ‘Ashton Cross’, a sweet bramble with a vigorous habit; last is ‘Oregon Thornless’, which is not the best in flavour but gives fruit for cooking and preserving until the hard frosts strike.
Cultivated blackberries are not far removed from their wild parents and do not need much fussy soil preparation.
However, they do need strong wire supports and careful training.
The best variety for small gardens is probably ‘Merton Thornless’.
Grow your own tomato seed
It's easy to obtain organic tomato seed of excellent quality by growing your own and ensuring you do not take it from diseased plants.
From the healthiest plant you have that is not adjacent to a tomato of a different variety, leave two or three fruits on the second or third truss until very ripe.
Pick, squeeze seeds and pulp into a container and leave, adding water if it looks like drying out.
After a week, top up with water.
Good seed should sink and the pulp float.
Pour off the pulp, strain the seeds and spread them on absorbent paper to dry; then store in a cool, dry place.
Relive your salad days this winter
It is said that commercially-grown winter lettuce is sprayed More times than a Rolls Royce, which seems an excellent reason for growing your own organic winter salads.
Lettuce can be temperamental in winter, but there are many other salad plants which are interesting, tasty and easy to grow.
Cultivated outdoors, they can supply fresh green leaves throughout autumn and, with some cloche protection, carry on through winter.
Lambs' lettuce (corn salad) is very hardy, providing juicy leaves with a bland flavour.
Sow outdoors in Aug/Sep.
‘Green in the snow’ is a hot, hardy mustard, sown outdoors at the same time.
Land cress, a dry-land watercress, should be sown in August outdoors, or in modules for transplanting later.
Chervil's feathery, aniseed-flavoured leaves stay green all winter.
Sow in Aug/Sep.
Mizuna, or ‘Japanese greens’, is a cut-leaved brassica with a mild, crisp, mustardy flavour.
Sow in Aug/Sep.
Cloche protection may be needed.
The leaves of red or green chicories add colour and bite to a salad.
Sow in August outdoors or in modules for transplanting later.
These salads come into production faster than traditional lettuces as there is no need to wait for the plants to mature.
Fair trial for fibre
Geoff Hamilton continues to champion effective alternatives to peat, sounding a warning to suppliers of substandard ‘green’ materials and misleading information
I've been getting several complaints from readers and viewers about the quality of one type of coconut fibre currently on sale.
Indeed, some of the samples I've been sent have been nothing short of rubbish.
I'm none too pleased, I can tell you.
I've been championing the suppliers' cause for some time now and I really feel let down.
Superb results
While I am pleased to report that this particular source has not been replaced with high-quality material, suppliers of this and other ‘green’ materials should be warned that I am quite prepared to give them the widest publicity they've ever had if they try fobbing gardeners off with sub-standard goods.
I've used nothing but coconut fibre composts in my greenhouse this season and my results, with one notable exception, have been superb.
Gloxinias don't seem to like it at all, but that's been my only failure.
So I was disturbed to see the Gardening from Which?exhibit at Chelsea demonstrating some very poor results with it.
They had grown tomatoes in peat compost  alongside plants grown in coir compost (coconut fibre) and the latter were very unsatisfactory.
Apparently both the tomatoes in the peat and those in the coir had been grown under exactly the same conditions.
Dubious methods
Ever since the Which?team carried out what I considered to be some very unscientific trials comparing blood, fish and bone fertiliser with Growmore a while ago, I have been suspicious of their methods.
When I enquired about this test, my worst fears were confirmed.
Obviously, in order that the trial should be of any value at all, both materials should be used in the way that will produce the best results.
If, for example, you compared real, unground coffee beans with instant coffee by simply pouring boiling water over both, of course the instant would win hands down.
In just the same way, you simply can't use coir in exactly the same way as you would use peat.
It just won't work.
Coir must be watered differently and it must be fed after three to four weeks instead of the six to eight weeks recommended for peat.
If you use it wrongly, which is what happened at Which?, you'll get bad results.
Naturally.
I'm afraid that a lot of gardeners will have been put off coir by these spurious trials, and I really think Gardening from Which?should publish a withdrawal.
No problems with coir
I was pleased to see that, after its own trials, Bridgemere Nurseries in Cheshire, one of the biggest and best garden centres for plants in the country, has grown a quarter of a million herbaceous plants in coir compost.
The nursery tells it has experienced no problems at all, except that the composts are a bit more expensive.
Well, that's certainly true, but Bridgemere is absorbing the extra cost itself so you'll be paying the same for the nursery's coir-grown plants as you would for peat-raised plants.
I award Bridgemere my Gold Medal for environmental responsibility and I just hope other growers and private gardeners follow its lead.
Tender but tough
The number one rule of organic pests and disease control is to grow strong, healthy plants that generally won't get attacked.
When they do, they're tough enough to shrug it off.
So, when I wanted to grow slightly tender plants in my none-too-mild Midlands garden, I decided to bring them up to be as tough as possible.
Perfect drainage
Of course, I gave them the warmest spot in the garden, against my only south-facing wall.
Then I provided what I hoped to be the optimum conditions for healthy growth — perfect drainage.
I did this by raising the borders as high as possible and mixing large quantities of coarse grit into the soil to make the drainage really sharp.
The results in my Mediterranean garden have been more successful than I'd dared to hope.
I'm convinced this is the answer for growing tender plants in Spartan conditions.
If you live north of Watford, give it a try.
Potting up petunias in coco fibre — only gloxinia failed to thrive in coir compost
Raising plants to be hardy in the Midlands Mediterranean garden
Shelling out
If the ‘green’ movement is ever going to have any real impact, it is essential that its supporters should tell the truth, however uncomfortable that may be.
I'm disturbed that one or two suppliers of environmentally-friendly products seem to be adopting conventionally unscrupulous tactics in order to sell their goods.
I sympathise with the temptation, but it must be resisted at all costs.
I had first-hand experience of this trend recently.
I telephoned a man who sells cocoa shell mulch to enquire about the material's acidity.
I find the dried cocoa bean husks useful as a mulch since they tend to bind together when wet, producing a surface mat that inhibits weed growth and evaporation while still allowing water and air to reach the soil.
I wanted to know whether it would affect the pH of my soil.
He assured me it would have very little, if any, effect.
If you don't know — say so
When I remarked that this was a pity, since I was looking for a peat replacement to acidify limey soil, my man began detectably to back-pedal.
I'm certain that he didn't set out to mislead.
Frankly, my impression was that he didn't really know.
In which case, he should have said so.
And since I really did want to know, the only way was to test it myself.
I mixed 10 parts of very limey soil (pH 8.5) with 1 part of cocoa shell.
The Ph dropped to 7.8.
And I felt sure that, since the shells are quite hard and dry, a period of time would produce further acidification.
This is what happened.
After three weeks the Ph had dropped to 6.2, ideal for my purposes.
Acid soil bed
I wanted to make a raised bed to grown acid-loving plants in my limey soil.
It's no good just digging a big hole and filling it with acid soil; the surrounding limey water soon seeps in.
However, if the bed is raised, the limey water can't get in.
I mixed the cocoa shell with the soil, filled and planted the bed and then mulched over the top with more cocoa shell.
So far, my plants seem to be loving it.
Wildflower garden
One thing I was pleased to see at Chelsea (apart from our Gold Medal-winning garden of course), was the wildflower garden from seedsman John Chambers.
Designed by Julie Toll, it looked a real picture.
But the amazing thing was that, just after we'd recorded our bit for the Gardeners' World programmed, I spotted a couple of butterflies fluttering around the garden.
This was on the Monday before the show opened, and the garden had been completed only two hours earlier.
It was in the middle of the busiest city in Europe, with noise, exhaust fumes and literally thousands of bodies all within yards.
Where did those insects come from?
I had just asked butterfly ecologist Marney Hall whether, since butterflies are getting scarce in this country, a garden like this would really work.
Of course I believed her when she said it would, but I wish you could have seen those first two lepidopteral visitors.
They made my day.
Mixing cocoa shell with limey soil produces a drop in the soil's Ph
Mulching with cocoa shell inhibits weeds and acidifies limey soil
Pretty as a picture — John Chamber's Chelsea wildflowers
Specialist spotlight
The key to success
Graham Rice meets Hazel Key, whose Fibrex Nurseries house the national collection of pelargoniums
Should we name them pelargoniums or geraniums?
Gardeners have been arguing about this for years, so I hope we can clear the matter up now once and for all.
Last month's issue featured my visit to East Lambrook Manor to look at true geraniums, or cranesbills.
This month I talked to Hazel Key of Fibrex Nurseries about pelargoniums.
A quick comparison of last month's pages with these will tell you that pelargoniums are colourful but tender plants for conservatories, containers and summer bedding, while geraniums are bone hardy and among the best of all border perennials.
Calling a pelargonium a geranium is quite simply wrong; they're completely different.
Hazel's collection of more than 2,000 pelargoniums, designated a national collection by the National Council for the Conservation of Plants and Gardens, is endlessly fascinating.
The pelargoniums we grow are derived from wild species native to South Africa, and it's interesting to see some of these plants in Hazel's collection.
However, the majority are named varieties, singles and doubles, in every shade of red, purple, pink and even black.
All Hazel's named varieties are raised from cuttings.
She maintains that growing the F1 hybrid varieties sold by the seed companies is an unnecessarily expensive way of raising plants.
Zonal pelargoniums
This is the most familiar group, so called because many have a dark ring or zone on the foliage.
Most gardeners prefer the semi-doubles rather than the singles or full doubles.
They last longer and look more substantial than the singles yet are not prone, as the doubles are, to brown rot in wet summers.
But I was especially taken with the single ‘White Bird's Egg’, a pure white with faint pink spots.
Dwarfs and miniatures are becoming increasingly popular as you can grow a large, varied collection in quite a small space.
Hazel especially likes ‘Red Black Vesuvius’ with its black leaves and scarlet flowers.
The Irenes are a group of semi-double-flowered zonals, ideal plants for beginners and equally at home in a pot and a border.
They propagate easily, stand the winter well and are good and sturdy — as Hazel says, almost bomb-proof.
They also do better than most in soilless composts.
‘Dark Red Irene’ is a wonderful rich colour and ‘Modesty’is a prolific white.
Regal pelargoniums
These are Hazel's favourites.
They make good pot plants and the flowers have particularly attractive markings.
She especially likes ‘Ann Hoysted’, whose flowers have deep red lower petals and almost black upper ones.
Hazel herself has raised ‘Ann Redington’, with purple upper and white lower petals, and ‘Ashley Stephenson’, an unusually free-flowering creamy pink.
Among variegated regals, the gold-edged ‘Golden Princess’ and silver-edged ‘Love Song’are both striking.
Equally lovely, and good for summer bedding (as can be seen at Sissinghurst), is the purplish-black ‘Lord Bute’.
I love the very dark flowered ‘Black Magic’, which did well for me last summer in a tub placed outside in a sunny, sheltered spot.
Ivy-leaved varieties
The trailing ivy-leaved varieties are among the best of all plants for baskets and window boxes.
For Hazel ‘Jacky Gauld’, with fully double rosebud flowers in a lovely lilac-pink shade, is as near perfection as it's possible to get.
Many people like the bicoloured ivy-leaved varieties; I confess to being quite charmed by the bushy ‘Pink Gay Baby’, with its bright pink double flowers each lined in dark magenta.
Coloured leaf varieties
Coloured leaf varieties can be a little more difficult to grow well.
They don't like it too hot in summer  and they react badly to over-watering.
In winter good light is vital and they're best kept a bit warmer than other types.
Somewhere between 50° and 60°F (10° — 16°C) will suit them.
The bushy, white-edged ‘Madame Salleron’ is a fine edger for summer beds and is unusual in that it never flowers.
I also like ‘Distinction’, a variety over 100 years old with red flowers and a narrow black edge to the bright green leaves.
‘Mrs Henry Cox’ is one of the best known, though it's not always easy to grow well.
But its gold-edged leaves, each zoned in deep red and black, are well worth the effort, though not everyone likes its pale pink flowers with such bright foliage.
Pelargoniums in pots
Most of us would probably start off growing pelargoniums in a soilless compost but Hazel reports that they're actually much easier to grow well in a loam-based compost.
She recommends John Innes No 1 for potting up cuttings and the richer John Innes No 2 when potting on.
Using rain water isn't recommended.
It's too soft for pelargoniums, whose leaves can develop a peculiar greyish look.
Loam-based composts are more limey, so if you use rainwater or live in a soft water area, using John Innes compost is especially important.
Pelargoniums for bedding
Many types of pelargoniums make splendid plants for summer bedding and patio planting, in particular the Irenes, many of the coloured leaved and other zonals, ivy-leaved and scented varieties plus even a few of the regals.
They are best grown from cuttings taken in summer, potted up in early spring and hardened off carefully before planting out in late May.
They all like a dryish soil in full sun; in rich conditions or in shady spots they tend to grow too lush and produce too few flowers.
Visiting the collection
Hazel Key's national pelargonium collection at Fibrex Nurseries is open every day except Monday during June and July, and Monday to Friday in August.
The opening hours are 12 noon to 5pm and admission is free.
Plants are for sale.
For a copy of the Fibrex Nurseries pelargonium catalogue (with its invaluable location map) send two second class stamps to Fibrex Nurseries, Honeybourne Road, Pebworth, Stratford-on-Avon CV37 8XT.
Scented leaf varieties
These are closest to the wild species and are becoming increasingly popular.
They may give out scents of citrus, mint, pine or rose, and most make wonderful patio plants.
Although they don't have showy flowers many are prettily variegated.
‘Lady Plymouth’, with citrus-scented, deeply cut foliage, is justifiably well-known.
I also like ‘Chocolate Peppermint’; its large, downy mint-scented leaves are each marked with a dark brown blotch.
Its spreading habit is useful too.
Hazel Key in the greenhouses of Fibrex Nurseries
The crinkle-cut leaves of ‘Lady Plymouth’, fragrant and decorative
Plain and variegated ivy-leaved varieties on show at Fibrex Nurseries
Plain green leaves are the perfect foil to the aristocratic blooms of ‘Lord Bute’
The pretty foliage of Madame Salleron’ makes it popular as an edging plant
‘Mrs Henry Cox’, too busy for some but a favourite with many for over a century
Portrait gallery
Handle with care
Roy Lancaster picks echinops, eryngiums and other prickly customers guaranteed to add spiky style to bed and border
When I first moved into my present garden nine years ago I madly planted all those trees, shrubs and climbers that my previous garden, being rather small, would not allow.
In went berberis and firethorns and roses, as well as colletias, zanthoxylums and a weird assortment of horse briars.
Things were fine for a year or two, until I found I was becoming rather reluctant to weed.
My babies had become thorny bully boys, and I found that my garden was not so large after all.
I have nothing against thorns and prickles so long as you can admire them from a safe distance.
When it gets to the point that to reach your greenhouse you have to run the gauntlet of a thousand bristling spines, it is time to make a major decision.
The net result is that my life is now no longer threatened by these often beautiful but decidedly hostile shrubs, and I have invested instead in a selection of prickly perennials which I can appreciate without risking injury every time I broach the border.
They include several relatives of our native sea holly,Eryngium maritimum , all of which are among the drought-tolerant of all plants and are attractive in foliage and flower as well.
I am also growing morina, berkheya, echinops, acanthus and cirsium.
Spikes for summer
Spiky annuals and biennials abound, chief among which in my eyes is Our Lady's thistle Silybum marianum , a biennial whose leafy green rosette bears in its first year a striking network of milky-white veins.
Prickly members of the daisy and dandelion family are not high on everyone's list of garden priorities but Berkheya macrocephala , that bold perennial from Natal in South Africa, is well worth considering if you have a sunny border in one of the warmer counties — especially in rich and well-drained soil.
In time it forms a substantial clump of green leaves above which, in summer, are carried  rich yellow daisy heads on branching stems.
Both leaves and flower-heads are prickly, the latter surrounded with protective spiny bracts guaranteed to teach the hungriest goat a painful lesson.
It can be increased by seed or by careful division.
Red thistle from Russia
Cirsium rivulare is a thistle from central and Eastern Europe and neighbouring Russia, where it grows in wet, especially peaty soils.
It is a far-creeping perennial which, when happy, forms extensive patches of weakly spine-toothed leaves which are deeply cleft and lobed, clasping the stems at their base.
These stems can be anything from 3 to 4ft tall and support, during summer, dense heads of crimson-purple flowers.
The colour is at its richest and deepest in the altogether superior form C. rivulare atropurpureum .
Hard and easy to grow, cirsiums are best suited to larger or wild gardens, where their spread can be comfortably accommodated.
A rich, moist soil adds further to its comfort though it should not be planted with less virile subject.
It can be increased by seed or more quickly by division.
I first encountered Morina longifolia in the mountains of east Nepal on a ridge within sight of Kanchenjunga.
It was from such lofty horizons that it was first introduced in 1839 and it has been in and out of gardens ever since.
I have grown it myself for the last twelve years, in a small colony in a north-facing border which maintains itself by self-sown seedlings.
Suspiciously snag-toothed
In my experience, individual plants are not all that long-lived, though some develop into sizeable clumps within two or three years.
M. longifolia's leaves are long and narrow, prickly teeth giving them a suspiciously thistle-like appearance until acanthus-like flower spikes appear in June.
These can reach 3ft under optimum conditions but are commonly a foot less and very attractive, with their close-packed whorls of spiny bracts from which slender-tubed flowers appear.
If these flowers were white, strawberry pink or crimson in colour they would be pleasing enough but good heavens, they are all three!
As the flowers mature they pass from one to another.
It is a gorgeous plant, well worth taking some trouble over.
It prefers a rich, moist but well drained soil and dreads a dry windy site.
As with the previous two it can be raised from seed.
No selection of prickly perennials would be complete without Acanthus spinosus .
Although common in gardens and freely available from nurseries and garden centres it is so classy-looking as to be favoured by plantsmen with the most esoteric tastes.
I have seen huge clumps of it on roadside bands in Greece, the deeply divided, dark green leaves bristling with formidable spines, a most  fearsome spectacle, and easily recreated in a warm, sunny, well-drained spot in the garden.
There, it will reward you with a sheaf of spikes 3–5ft tall, their upper parts densely crowded with pale mauve flowers bursting from green spiny bracts.
Naturally, given its native climate, it performs best in the warmer, sunnier parts of Britain but is surprisingly hardy and, once established, not easily, deterred.
Eryngium alpinum I have saved almost to the last, not because it is common, which it is, but rather that to my mind it is the loveliest representative of the Umbelliferae family (which includes, strange though it may seem, the carrot).
Aptly named the Queen of the Alps, this stout-stemmed perennial bears some of the largest flowerheads of all.
Bold blue cones surmount an extravagant collar of prickly blue bracts with filigree appendages.
No Elizabethan dandy ever sported a finer ruff.
Even more impressive are the blue and silver ruffs of ‘Jewel’ and ‘Violetta’, both of which are hybrids.
The stem, 2–2½ft tall, is also fused with blue while the long-stalked, heart-shaped basal leaves are, by contrast, plant green.
The flowers, appearing in late summer, are long lasting and may be dried for indoor display.
Most frequently found on limestone in the wild, it is adaptable to most soils in the garden though it prefers rich and well-drained sites.
Eryngium tripartitum is a useful plant because of the massed effect of its myriad tiny blue flower-heads and darker blue spiny collars.
A tough perennial, it forms a 2½ft mound of wiry stems rising from a basal rosette of green, long-stalked leaves.
Full sun and a well-drained soil suit it best, although you will find it adaptable to most conditions except shade and wet soils.
Green and graceful
Eryngium eburneum is the most frequently seen of several similar eryngiums, all of which boast bold clumps of long, narrow evergreen leaves.
It is worth growing for the effect of its foliage alone, but doubles its value as a garden plant in late summer with graceful pale green stems that grow some 5ft tall.
These branch in their upper parts, and each division bears a small, round green flower head with white stamens.
To those brought up on E. alpinum , the viciously prickly glaucous sea holly,E. eburneum is novel if not a revelation and surprisingly easy to grow given a deep well-drained soil in sun.
It is native to the mountains of Argentina and Columbia from whence come other specials — but that's another story.
Gallery guide
Berkheya macrocephala
Bold clump of green leaves with rich yellow heads.
Prefers sun and rich, well-drained soil.
Cirsium rivulare
Demands space, 4ft stems, deeply-cleft leaves and purple heads.
Likes rich, moist soil.
Morina longifolia
Attractive flowers pass from white to crimson.
Prefers rich, moist but well-drained soil.
Acanthus spinosus
Spiny leaves and a mass of pale mauve flowers.
Grows up to 5ft tall, prefers sunnier spots.
Erygium alpinum
Stately stout-stemmed, with impressively large flower-heads.
Adaptable to most soils.
Eryngium eburneum
Easy to grow, unusual green flower-heads.
Can reach 5ft.
Topical tip
The eryngiums, echinops and Acanthus spinosus all make striking dried flowers.
Air drying gives best results: hand them upside down somewhere warm, dry and not too well lit to avoid fading.
Morina longifolia bears whorls of hooded flowers
The rich crimson heads of Cirsium rivulare , a native of the eastern bloc
Eryngium tripartitum provides welcome and striking colour in early autumn
Softly spiny lavender-blue bracts crown the sea holly Eryngium alpinum 
Once established, deep-rooted Acanthus spinosus is not easy to move
The echinops tribe thrives in full sun and poor soil
Berkheya macrocephala
Practical project
Stock up on begonias
Take leaf cuttings from your favourite begonias, says Adam Pasco
Foliage begonias, with their colourful and attractively patterned leaves, make most rewarding houseplants.
Most of them produce an annual flush of bloom, but this is unlikely to impress as much as the beautiful leaves themselves.
Probably the most popular and variable group is Begonia rex , with large pointed leaved varieties in single or banded colours from silver, green and white to deep maroon.
Many excellent named varieties are now on offer.
Other species often found are the eyelash begonia (B. boweri ), the iron cross begonia (B. masoniana ), and hybrids like B. ‘Tiger’ and B. ‘Cleopatra’.
Frequent feeding
These are not demanding plants, preferring a light position out of scorching sunlight.
Leaves do orientate themselves toward the light, so turn the pots regularly.
During the main growing season from April to September, frequent watering is required, adding a liquid houseplant feed each week.
The bright colours of the new leaves in spring can make the old ones look rather untidy, so neatly cut these off at their base.
New leaves will soon grow to fill the space.
However well you treat them, after two to three years these foliage begonias lose their compact appearance and look straggly.
For this reason consider them temporary houseplants and propagate new stock each year.
When you have a colourful leaved strain you want to keep, leaf cuttings will ensure identical progeny form from a parent leaf.
Two methods can be used, both requiring a healthy and fully grown leaf from your selected plant.
Simple method
The whole leaf method is simple.
Turn the leaf over and use a sharp knife to cut each of the main veins on the leaf.
Make a total of about ten cuts in all.
Then lay the leaf on a tray of moist compost, holding it in place and pressing it onto the compost by placing several pebbles on top.
Slip the whole tray into a clear polythene bag, and put in a warm and light position.
New plants will form from the cut veins in about four to six months.
Once well formed, remove the polythene bag and allow to grow on for a few weeks before potting on each plant singly.
Stamp-sized sections
The second method involves cutting the leaf into stamp-sized pieces, each with a main vein running through it.
The base of each piece is pushed into moist compost.
Again cover with a polythene bag.
Each leaf section will produce a small plant, which should be potted up initially into a 2–3in pot, and potted on as growth dictates.
Don't over-pot or over-water.
Taking begonia leaf cuttings
1
Healthy new leaves make ideal material for leaf cuttings.
Remove leaves that won't spoil the shape of the plant.
2
Using a sharp knife and board, cut the whole leaf into pieces, each with a main vein running through them.
3
Fill a small pot with moist compost made from 50:50 seed compost and perlite.
Push the leaf sections just into it.
4
Cover with a clear polythene bag.
Place in a warm and light position.
Once young plants form remove bag.
Choose fancy foliage begonias to brighten up any room in the house
New plant developing from a tiger begonia leaf section
Leave whole leaves flat on compost to root
Under glass
Living with houseplants
Cultivate sculptural houseplants or make a feature of ferns, says Carol Kurrein, to produce your own home-grown works of art
Six for indoor sculpture
A single large houseplant, given pride of place against a plain background, can be a dramatic focal point.
With a natural, sculptural quality, it can outshine any number or works of art or ornaments and, what's more, at a fraction of the price if you buy and nurture a smaller plant rather than shelling out on a large, expensive specimen a nursery has grown on for you.
Here be dragons
Dracaena marginata (the Madagascar dragon tree) has a pale, slender stem, often branched, supporting spiky leaves tinged a delicate pink at the margins.
One of the most graceful false palms, it is undemanding and will take some neglect uncomplainingly.
Grevillea robusta (silk oak) has fern-like, arching foliage, tinged copper-red.
Easy to please, it will quickly grow to 6ft or more.
Howea forsteriana (kentia palm) is large and bold, with a striking spreading habit, the Palm Court palm is happy almost anywhere, including partial shade.
But it needs space!
Monstera deliciosa (the Swiss cheese plant) is so common that it is all too often neglected, but given enough space and care its deeply divided leaves make a real show right up to the ceiling.
It makes a spectacular cornerpiece.
Philodendron selloum (lacy tree philodendron) is the most magnificent of the philodendrons, with strong branching stems supporting deeply cut, wavy-edged leaves 12in or more across.
Growing a pukka yucca
Fast-growing Yucca elephantipes (spineless yucca) is another all-too-often neglected houseplant.
I've rescued and transformed so many, for it really responds to a little pampering.
Give it a good-sized pot, regular watering and feeding and the occasional leaf shine and you can't go wrong.
Visit van Hage
With school holidays in mind consider a visit to Van Hage's garden centre at Great Amwell, near Ware in Hertfordshire, where the rest of the family can enjoy a great day out while you quietly lose yourself in one of the most impressive houseplant departments in the country.
The centre, twice winner of awards from the Garden Centre Association, is packed with hundreds of different species — old and new, large and small.
While most are displayed on benches, you're just as likely to turn the corner on, say, a group of bathroom plants complete with bath, or shade-lovers in their very own north-facing living room.
Houseplant health centre
For those who happen to have a problem plant at home, or need some technical tips, there's always advice on hand, plus a clinic on Saturday mornings.
The family, meanwhile can be kept amused with the miniature railway, mini-farm and various family events, and if you meet at the coffee shop at the end of the day, you may even be treated to a little live music.
The centre is open on weekdays from 9am to 8pm, and 9am-6pm at weekends.
For further details, telephone 0920–870811.
Grevillea marginata will grow swiftly and gracefully to 6ft plus
Yucca elephantipes stands out from the common herd with care
Philodendron selloum needs plenty of space to spread.
Frond thoughts
Ferns seem either to like you or hate you.
They're certainly not over-fond of me, probably because my central heating is always on full blast in winter.
The poor things shrivel up in protest.
If you want those fresh green fronds to stay that way, high humidity is a must.
Make a fern commitment
My success is marginally better with those larger ferns that have rather more robust foliage, such as the Nephrolepis exaltata varieties, which include the graceful Boston fern and feathery lace fern, both of which are widely available.
I've finally learnt to resist the smaller, more delicate-leaved types, like the various adiantums (maidenhair ferns).
Although they always look so tempting on the garden centre shelf, they are known to be very hard to please.
My most successful Boston fern looks a picture on the corner of the bath, where it enjoys good, indirect light and a humid atmosphere.
Since I repotted it this spring into a generous-sized pot, it has not only burgeoned but I've also found it much easier to keep the compost just nicely moist.
Show them off with sunshine
Ferns look wonderful with diffused sunlight shining through their foliage.
I'll never forget seeing a giant handing basket in a west-facing window, groaning under the weight of a huge Tsusing holly fern, its frothy fronds lit up by evening sun.
A triumph worth any amount of failures!
A helping hand for humidity-lovers
Since few living rooms have a naturally humid atmosphere, unless you happen to have a humidifier installed for your own comfort, it's necessary to create localised humidity for those plants that need plenty of moisture in the air.
There are three basic methods.
Misting plants with a hand-held sprayer is highly effective, although it has to be done regularly, preferably early in the day when the sun isn't shining on the leaves to avoid scorch.
Don't mist furry-leaved plants such as African violets and calatheas, or the really paper-thin-leaved ones such as maidenhair ferns.
Standing pots on a tray of pebbles or gravel, which you simply keep topped up with water, will raise humidity without too much day-to-day attention and also makes watering easy.
Don't let the bases of the pots sit constantly in the water, though.
Several plants grouped together will create their own humid micro-climate, though overcrowding may make the combined effect too much.
Plant up a cache crop
Individual pots can be stood in a good-sized outer container, or cache-pot, with damp peat packed between the two.
This is a particularly convenient method for large houseplants, or a group of small specimens, providing ample humidity as long as the peat is kept constantly moist.
Top tips for ferns
Average room temperature, 60°–70°F (16–22°C), is fine but keep ferns away from radiators.
Ferns like a bright position out of strong direct sunlight.
Keep compost just nicely moist.
Watering from below, by standing the pot in a few inches of water in the sink until the surface compost is damp, is generally the easiest method.
Ease off watering slightly in winter.
Repot regularly, preferably every spring.
Endeavour to maintain a humid atmosphere.
Nephrolepis exaltata ‘Bostoniensis’, the Boston fern
An indoor basket will show off trailing Asparagus sprengeri 
Bathing addicts can create a suitably steamy atmosphere
Flower garden
Cut & Dried
Perennials are the obvious choice, says Anne Swithinbank, to provide a wealth of cut flowers for indoor arrangements
I have to admit to being a bit of a philistine where flower arranging is concerned.
I pick flowers so that they look pretty in a bunch and just jam them into a vase.
Nevertheless I like to have a constant supply of fresh flowers in the house.
Herbaceous perennials suit my purposes admirably.
They are economical, since once bought or raised from seed, plants will spring into life and flower year after year.
They also make excellent cut flowers.
One doesn't miss the odd stem in a large clump, and you can also divide old clumps in spring or autumn, planting the surplus into rows in the vegetable garden or allotment purely to cut for the house.
Welcome colour
Having spent the last two years renovating our previously neglected garden, we have needed lots of plants.
Groups of helenium, phlox and perennial gypsophila sown last year are now providing welcome colour and are my favourites for the house.
To find out more about the best sorts of plants to choose for cutting, I asked Daphne Love who, with her husband Sid, has written the Wisley Handbook Flower Arranging from the Garden .
From border to boudoir
Daphne's first suggestion was Alchemilla mollis , or lady's mantle, a plant I already grow but had never thought of cutting.
A good plant for shade, it makes an attractive edging to the border under our pergola.
Pretty, soft, grey-green leaves can be picked throughout summer, while a froth of tiny lime-green flowers are useful earlier on.
Both preserve well if glycerined (see panel).
Stachys macrantha , closely related to betony, is another flower with multiple benefits whether fresh or preserved.
Reaching about a foot in height, whorls of rose-purple flowers the same  shape as dead nettles are produced in May.
Its foliage is pleasing and the seed pods are marvellous.
Flourishing in sun or light shade, this stachys makes good ground cover under roses.
Stopping the rot
From the pea family come two particularly good subjects.
I grow Thermopsis montana in my own garden and would not have thought it would last well in water.
However, Daphne told me that the tall spikes of flowers, resembling yellow lupins, last better if stem-rotting bacteria can be kept at bay.
A teaspoon of domestic antiseptic, like Savlon, in their water will give them a much longer life.
This antiseptic treatment can be used for all but flowers.
Baptisia australis has indigo-blue flowers and superbly soft, bluish-grey foliage which is wonderful to use fresh.
Striking black seed pods will remain closed if glycerined.
These plants share an enjoyment of light, well-nourished soil and a sunny position.
I have long coveted dictamnus in both white and pink forms.
It is not called burning bush for nothing: I am tempted by the reputation its seed pods have for giving off a halo of oil vapour on still summer's evenings.
Light a match, they say, and flames flicker over it like brandy on a Christmas pudding.
As well as appealing to pyromaniacs, dictamnus apparently keeps well in water and has pretty, star-shaped seed pods.
Leaves have a citrus fragrance and glycerine beautifully, turning the colour of chamois leather.
Like the tall, autumn-flowering  Anemone x hybrida , roots are deep and resent disturbance.
A sunny position and well-drained soil ensure success.
Hostas are marvellous for both flowers and leaves, but look out for two lesser known veratrums.
Shady characters
Particularly prized for the sculptural, pleated leaves are V. album (false hellebore), with its heads of creamy white flowers up to 4ft high, and V. nigrum , with long spikes of chocolate-coloured flowers.
Both need a shady, sheltered, moist spot in the garden.
Larger leaves like these are best left completely submerged in cold water for a good six hours before being used in arrangements.
Variety show
The large Compositae family yields stunning cut flowers which will often dry well.
Achilleas (the yarrows) come in a range of sizes from diminutive alpines to 3ft tall stems crowned by the flat yellow heads of A .
‘Coronation Gold’.
Somewhere in between are good plants for small gardens, only reaching about 2ft with a far daintier habit.
Easily raised from seed are A. millefolium ‘Cerise Queen’ and A. m.
‘Summer Pastels’, in soft, jewel-like colours.
Don't neglect their humbler kin, says Daphne.
Even solidago (goldenrod), which in London used to colonise old bomb sites, has its place in larger arrangements.
Daphne recommends mustard-yellow S ‘Crown of Rays’, shorter and less rampant than the weed-like S. canadensis , for house and garden.
Keeping in shape
Lady's mantle is an excellent candidate for drying and preserving.
Stand stems at least 2in deep in a solution of 1 part glycerine dissolved in 2 parts boiling water.
When the flowers or leaves change colour to a pale olive green, drain on newspaper for a week until dry, the box up, wrapped in tissue paper, until needed.
Flowers, when air dried, will retain their colour.
Pick when approaching maturity on a dry, warm day.
Strip off leaves, then hang upside down in bunches somewhere cool, dry, well-ventilated and out of full light.
Budding candidates
Two flowers which do not readily spring to mind as candidates for cutting, but which make excellent displays, are Sisyrinchium striatum and paeonies.
Sisyrinchium can last up to six weeks when cut, although you must keep removing dead flowers as they die so that the buds at the top will carry on opening.
If you allow some flower spikes to set seed, you can glycerine them to use dry in winter arrangements.
I had never tried cutting paeonies, thinking they would not last very long, but Daphne tells me they will survive for a week or more with proper conditioning.
She particularly likes the lovely colour of their spring and autumn foliage and their seed-heads.
The leaves glycerine well, too.
Cut them when they are about half open, but not right down to the ground; be sure to leave at least two sets of leaves on the stem.
Stem care
Instead of arranging flowers immediately after cutting, help them last longer by conditioning them first.
Cut stems on the slant to increase water absorption, making an upward cut one inch into the stems of hardier material (bashing if frowned upon).
Stand the stems in a bucket of deep, cold water in a cool, dark place for at least six hours, preferably overnight.
Surprisingly, Daphne has found out that the best time of day for picking is midday.
As the plants are flagging slightly, they take water up much faster, preventing airlocks.
For plants with awkward, twisty stems, very prone to airlocks, use a solution of a tablespoon of cold water starch in a pint of water.
Thermopsis montana lasts well in water with a dash of antiseptic to beat the rot
With its indigo-blue flowers,Baptisia australis is beautiful used fresh
Like all achilleas,A. filipenduline ‘Gold Plate’ cuts and dries well
Lady's mantle, good for drying
Mixed ‘Galaxy hybrids’ offer a superb blend of colourful achilleas
Dictamnus, the burning bush, is not put out by standing in water
Veratrum nigrum , prized for its sculptured, pleated leaves
Sisyrinchium striatum , an unexpected but delightful choice
Popular plants for centuries, paeonies will brighten any room
Stachys macrantha looks good in and out of doors
BBC Scotland
The Beechgrove garden
Winter closes in fast north of the border, and already Sid, Carole and Bill are turning their thoughts to autumn sowing and planting for winter interest
August could be said to mark the start of the great divide between gardening in Scotland and the rest of the UK.
While people down south are still lying out in the sun and enjoying their holidays, up here we have to start planning well ahead for the long winter to come.
It's a good idea, for example, to plant strawberry runners this month, although it's not always easy to find runners with good strong roots.
Sow now for overwintering
Because our winter closes in so sharply, whatever we sow for overwintering must go in earlier, and that means August.
In many areas, it may cause problems; putting in vegetables like Japanese onions or ‘Imperial Winter’ lettuces so early means they have to survive in the ground for weeks longer than they do elsewhere.
In places like Fort William where the rainfall is so high, or on high exposed ground, some vegetables may not make it.
Vegetable venture
Bill is about to make his first attempt at growing vegetables, and he's keen to have lettuce and young onions next May.
His garden is well-sheltered, being at sea-level and screened by trees, and has well-drained subsoil, so autumn sowing is a good idea.
He'll only have to worry about keeping those hungry rabbits and pigeons away.
At Beechgrove we rarely do any autumn sowing, even with flowering annuals.
I have overwintered larkspur seedlings, but always choose a dwarf variety like ‘Dwarf Hyacinth Flowered Mixed’, which is only 12in high.
Cornflower ‘Polka Dot’ does quite well on a well-drained soil, only reaching 18in maximum height.
Meanwhile, our imaginary owner Mr Moneybags is turning his thoughts to winter interest in his suburban garden.
Carole and I have planted various carpeting plants to complement the winter interest shrubs.
Vinca ‘Multiplex’ had ruby-mauve starry flowers, and sometimes sports golden foliage to contrast with the red stems of ‘Westonbirt’dogwood.
At patch of Ajuga reptans ‘Burgundy Glow’ provides a fantastic foil for our yellow-stemmed dogwood (Cornus stolonifera ‘Flaviramea’), and the ever-reliable Juniperus squamata ‘Blue Carpet’hugs the ground nearby.
Back at the corner plot, the imaginary Seniors are delighted that Carole has had the gigantic poplar at the back removed.
The 54-year-old monster, which towered over the garden, was cut down on television by professional contractors, who safely lowered its limbs one be one.
Phone for action
Need advice?
Call us on Monday afternoon on 0224–625900.
Competition winners
You will remember that the brief for our competition was to design one of our next two gardens for another pair of fictional Beechgrove characters.
Now we can announce the winning entrants.
Garden Number One belongs to ‘Mr Winner’, a showgrower of flowers and vegetables.
The winning design came from Anthony Risby of Bishopbriggs, Glasgow, with a formal and practical scheme which will suit Mr Winner and his family well.
Garden Number Two is owned by ‘Miss Green’, a retired teacher with a love for nature who wanted a low-maintenance informal design.
In this category the winning plan came from Sandy and Kit McLeod of East Linton in Lothian.
Well done to both our winners!
Juniperus squamata provides an excellent background for winter interest shrubs
Winter colour, courtesy of Ajuga reptans ‘Burgundy glow’
Help at hand
Away with Vine weevil
Pippa Greenwood advises a mix of chemicals and cunning to defeat the evil weevil, peskiest of pot plant pests
It seems as if nearly all of us have crossed swords with the dreaded vine weevil, and I'm afraid I'm one of the many who never quite manage to get rid of them.
Pot and container-grown plants are the most at risk; if you grow begonias, cyclamen, coleus, primulas or fuchsias and have managed to escape this horrible little pest, you're either extremely fortunate or a great deal craftier than I am.
It is the grubs of the weevil which cause the most destruction as they feed voraciously on roots and tubers.
All you are likely to notice at first is a general deterioration of the leaves, perhaps wilting, discoloration and poor growth, followed by death.
Infested plants may appear loose in their pots because their root systems are so badly damaged.
It is only when you turn out the plant that you will find the culprits.
Each fat little grub is a creamy colour with a brown ‘head’ and, when nearly mature, is about a centimetre long and curled in a ‘C’-shape.
It is amazing what damage a few of these can do to your plants.
The ghastly grubs grow up
You're most likely to see the adults in springtime, though I met one in my bathroom, of all places, last autumn.
Matt black with tiny fawn flecks, they are just under a centimetre long.
They walk at a leisurely pace and if prodded, often ‘play dead’.
Don't be fooled — when you turn your back it'll be off!
Shrubs under siege
Adult weevils particularly like camellias and rhododendrons, nibbling notches around the edges of leaves.
Shrubs which have been badly attacked can look ragged, but the damage is usually only cosmetic, and it should not unduly weaken the plant.
However, it does warn you that vine weevils are about, and that you should take a close look at potted plants.
Coming in through the door
I'm a great believer in putting house plants out in the garden for a ‘summer holiday’ but this does provide something of an open invitation to the vine weevils to lay their eggs in the pots.
In the garden most egg laying takes place in June and July.
But the adults seem to be able to seek out their favourite plants even when they're kept in the greenhouse (or in my bathroom).
The stroll in through open ventilators, and doors, or hitch a lift when you move plants from the garden into the greenhouse.
Taking aims
So, how can you deal with them?
Insecticides such as Sybol, Picket and Sprayday can be used as a drench either when an infestation is suspected or, preferably, as a preventative measure in July.
The difficulty is in ensuring that the drench actually reaches all the young grubs.
Even when it does get to them, they seem fairly insecticide-tolerant.
It is worth removing mildly infested plants from their pots and washing off all the compost (together with the grubs and any remaining eggs), then repotting in fresh compost drenched with insecticide.
Low cunning with moats
Adult weevils are difficult to eradicate.
The leaves and soil around plants outside can be treated with one of the above chemicals or with Gamma BHC Dust.
Or, you can set traps for them to prevent then from reaching the pots to lay their eggs.
Try standing the legs of greenhouse benches or staging in trays or saucers of water to make an impassable barrier.
Make sure there are no other ways for the weevils to climb up to the pots.
Stick 'em up
A sticky and impassable barrier can be made using the Trappit Glue Tube.
This non-drying adhesive stays very sticky for months and can be squeezed out onto a strip of tape around benches, staging, individual pots, or even across doorways to prevent them walking in the first place.
More successful than any of these methods, however, looks to be a new biological weapon, a nematode.
At the moment it is only available commercially, so until the happy day when we can all buy it, I suppose I'll have to continue meeting resident weevils in my bathroom.
The tubers of container-grown cyclamen are a gift to the greedy grubs
Adult weevils confine themselves to leaf-nibbling and egg-laying
Only soil inspection reveals the horrid truth about your ailing pot plant
Fuchsias are fair game to the grub; ‘Doreen Redfern’ needs defending
Question Time
Looking for an antique garden ornament?
Plagued by sooty mould?
Agitated by ants' nests?
Our BBC experts can help you out
Making a bid for that old birdbath
Q
I have been looking for ages for a Victorian birdbath, without much success.
Do you know where I might find one, or do you know of anyone who makes good reproductions?
A
You can occasionally pick up such things at local auctions, but it is largely a matter of searching until you find the right one at the right price.
Alternatively, there are several firms that make such ornaments from reconstituted stone.
Haddonstone Ltd, at The Forge House, East Haddon, Northampton NN6 8DB (Tel: 0604–770711) makes a reproduction Victorian bird bath in reconstituted stone.
Their catalogue of garden ornaments costs £3.
Rusty bean leaves
Q
My broad bean plants are covered in little brown spots on the leaves.
Do you know what they might be?
A
They have rust fungus, which attacks leaves and can reduce yields.
Early on, spray thoroughly with Bordeaux mixture.
Destroy heavily infested plants, and don't compost them.
Sweeping away the sooty mould
Q
Do you know what could be wrong with my tomato plants?
They look rather sickly and there is rather a lot of black dust on the leaves and fruits.
A
The black growth on fruits and leaves is sooty mould which develops on honey dew falling from aphid pests such as whitefly, greenfly or blackfly on the leaves above them.
Get rid of the pests and you'll end the sooty mould problem too.
Use a soap-based insecticide, such as the Pest Pistol from Phostrogen, or an insecticide based on permethrin, such as Bio Sprayday from pbi.
Both products work on contact, and while they will kill adult aphids they do not harm their eggs.
You will need to spray at three day intervals at least three or four times, but preferably over a period of several weeks to control any new pests as soon as they hatch, before they can reproduce.
We noticed your fruits are also splitting.
Prevent this by keeping the plants regularly well watered.
Bottomless bucket to hold mint at bay
Q
I have seen some very attractively variegated mint which I would like to grow in the flower border, but my mother says it will take over the whole garden.
What would be the best way to grow it?
A
Mint, in its variegated varieties, makes a colourful addition to flower borders as well as herb gardens.
What it does require, however, is a moist soil rather than one that is very dry.
Two of the nicest varieties are pineapple mint (Mentha suaveolens ‘Variegata’), and ginger mint (M. x gentilis ‘Variegata’) but there are also some others to choose from.
Mint is extremely invasive, sending out new shoots everywhere from its creeping rhizomes (underground stems), but these can be contained.
The simplest way to do this is to plant it in a dark-coloured, bottomless bucket sunk into the ground.
Leave the dim of the bucket about 1–2in above soil level.
The mint will fill this area, but won't spread.
Antique bird baths can be hard to find, but copies of early types are available
Sooty mould is caused by aphids, while split fruits are due to irregular watering
Broad bean plants badly attacked by rust must be destroyed, not composted
Mint grown in the border must have its roots restricted in a buried container
Borax solution to corky tip trauma
Q
My apple trees are nor looking very healthy, and every year there are scabby, open wounds in the fruits which look very unsightly.
I though it was scab, and followed a spraying treatment for that, but it doesn't seem to have solved the problem yet.
An I doing something wrong, or have I mistaken the cause of this?
A
An attack of scab can lead to fruits becoming covered with a cracked, corky layer, accompanied by lesions in the leaves.
A preventive fungicide spray routine will help, starting before the flower buds open.
Another possible cause is a condition called corky pit which results from boron deficiency in the soil.
It is often accompanied by die-back of shoot tips early in the year.
If this is the cause try spraying the trees at petal fall with borax solution.
Dilute 2½ oz of borax in 5gals of water, using the solution to spray the foliage.
Repeat each year.
Just so there will be more astilbe
Q
I have some dark red astilbes which lots of my friends have admired.
Could you give me some guidelines on propagating them, so I have plants to give away?
A Astilbes are hardy herbaceous perennials which prefer a deep, moist, loamy soil.
Many of them are particularly useful for brightening up shady positions.
A
Dig out the clumps of roots and divide them into smaller portions to replant or pot-up.
This is traditionally done in early spring, although you can do it any time between autumn and late spring.
Keep on chucking out the chickweed
Q
I have what I believe is called chickweed all over my garden.
Although I keep pulling it up and throwing it in the dustbin, it keeps coming back.
I don't know what to use to get rid of it, as it is growing among flowers and shrubs.
A
Chickweed (Stellaria media ) is known as an ephemeral weed, meaning it grows and sets seed rapidly, producing several generations in one season.
Persistence is needed here.
As it is among your flowers, the best thing is to keep pulling it out (this is easy as the roots are very shallow) and hoe between plants weekly to remove new seedlings.
Stop whitefly sprouting on my Brussels
Q
All my Brussels sprouts seem to have become infested with whitefly this year.
What is the best way to treat it?
A
Whitefly make their home on the underside of leaves, where the adults feed and lay their eggs.
The can quickly build up unsightly colonies, also excreting honeydew which encourages sooty mould fungus.
Regular weekly spraying with a soap-based insecticide will help to control adults.
Spray early in the day, using a pressure sprayer directed under the foliage.
Otherwise, use a permethrin or pyrethrum-based insecticide, such as Py spray insect killer (Vitax), or Nature's Answer insect spray (Fisons), spraying during the evening.
Propagating pineapples
Q
A gardening friend tells me that it is possible to grow pineapples from their tops, but I have no idea how to do it.
Can you describe the best technique to use?
A
Providing the pineapple top is green and healthy you should be able to root it.
Remove the top by twisting rather than cutting, pulling off any brown or damaged leaves.
Place the top over a jam jar of water, with the base resting just under the water.
Roots will grow from around the edges of the base, but can take several months to develop.
Change the water regularly.
When roots are about ½in long plant in a small pot.
Keep in a warm and well lit position.
Ant colony antics no laughing matter
Q
Every year I have several large ants' nests under the paving and in my flower borders.
How damaging are ants to plants?
Should I be doing anything to control them?
A
Ant nests are commonly found among paving, lawns and in flowerbeds.
Nests tunnelled under plants can seriously interfere with the root system, causing plants to wilt and die, while nests on lawns create little heaps of soil, making mowing difficult.
Ants often farm colonies of aphids on garden plants, feeding off their honeydew, while protecting the aphids from predators.
Products such as Nippon (Vitax), Kybosh (pbi) and others will destroy nests.
Reader's questions
We are unable to provide a personal query answering service to readers by post.
However, a selection of your questions will be answered on these pages each month.
Tune in to your BBC local radio gardening experts for advice.
Details are in our Television and Radio Guide, see p93, including their phone-in numbers for personal advice.
Pitted, corky lesions on apples are sometimes caused by boron deficiency
The red-flowered Astilbe ‘Montgomery’ contrasts well with variegated hostas
A set of garden tools tailor-made for junior gardeners is a good idea
New pineapple plants can be grown from the leafy top, with a little patience
control whitefly on Brussels sprouts by spraying with soap-based insecticide
Tips and ideas
Readers' original gardening tips
Share your gardening tips with other readers and win a 50 cash prize.
There's the holiday of a lifetime for the best tip of the year
British gardeners have sent us hundreds of their most original gardening tips, and this month's 50 cash prize winners describe cool ways to water baskets and a tidy way to store canes.
Send us your gardening tips and ideas today.
Drinks on ice
To water hanging baskets and containers with the drips and spills, try freezing plastic bottles filled with water first.
Take the frozen water bottle, remove the lid, invert and rest on the compost towards the centre of the plants.
As the ice slowly melts the plants are watered over a long period.
This is particularly useful if done before leaving for work on hot days.
Larger containers may need two water bottles.
 Mrs D. Jonas, Doncaster 
Garden kneeler
Make gardening more comfortable by making yourself a garden kneeler.
Put an old cushion inside a strong plastic bag, sealing it tightly with sticky tape.
Mine has served me well for many years.
 Mrs A M Fisher, Burnley 
Keep canes tidy
To keep canes tidy and always ready to hand use lengths of plastic piping, such as down pipe, to store them in.
Brackets can fix the pipes to a fence or wall, or store under cover in a shed or garage.
Different lengths of pipe can be chosen to suit varying lengths of cane.
 Mrs N J Dean, Cheshire 
Easy access trellis
When fixing trellis panels to a shed fence, or the side of the house I always use hooks and eyes.
Screw the hooks into the trellis, attaching the eyes to the wall or fence.
To gain access for repairing the brickwork, treating timber or painting, simple unhook the trellis, gently bending the plants back until they lie on the ground.
When the work is done, and the paint dry, just hook it back up again.
 Mr & Mrs Cuthbert, Reigate 
Paving the way
We only had a few paving slabs but a large area to cover, so decided to lay the slabs in islands.
The whole area had been covered with black polythene sheeting to keep down weeds, with a few slits cut in it for drainage.
A 2in layer of gravel was laid over the polythene to make an attractive finish, and beach pebbles have added extra interest.
Retaining edges were made with preserved timber.
Then we added colourful pots for a decorative display.
 Bee Milbourn, S Glamorgan 
Win a holiday to exotic Thailand
At the end of a year our judges will choose the best tip of all, and the winner will receive a holiday for two in Thailand, plus £500 spending money.
All thanks to BBC Gardeners' World Magazine and Guinness Original.
How to enter
Just jot down your tips and ideas, including drawings if appropriate, and send them to us.
Photos would also be useful.
The open a chilled bottle of Guinness Original and pour it slowly into a glass.
Study the rich oatmeal head and the dark velvet body.
Then enjoy its distinctive bitter taste as you slowly drink it.
What better way to reward yourself for your original gardening idea.
Send your entries (being sure to include your name and address) to Readers' Original Gardening Tips,BBC Gardeners' World Magazine , 20–26 Brunswick Place, London N1 6JD.
All entrants will receive a 50p voucher redeemable against any future purchase of Guinness Original, so everyone can enjoy the distinctive and satisfying taste of this special beer.
Competition rules
Entrants to the competition agree to abide by the rules which appeared in our March issue and are available on request, if you enclose a stamped addressed environment.
What's on
Television & Radio Guide
Tune in to your favourite gardening experts with our comprehensive, easy to use timetable to this month's broadcasting
Television
BBC2
Gardeners' World every Friday, 8.30pm.
The Gardeners' World team presents a lively half-hour of practical advice and horticultural inspiration.
July 5
Nigel Colborn continues his creative planting plan (you can see it in detail on p26 of this magazine) and Dr Stefan Buczacki visits Hestercombe, near Taunton;
July 12
Gardeners' World visits 1991s Hampton Court Flower Show, incorporating the British Rose Festival;
July 19
No broadcast, as Gardeners' World makes way for this year's Proms;
July 26
Geoff Hamilton brings you more gardening diary entries, Dr Stefan Buczacky visits Paeony Valley in Langport, Somerset, David Stevens returns with his second feature on front garden design and Anne Swithinbank goes into the greenhouse;
August 2
Geoff Hamilton travels south-west, to Bosvigo Plants in Truro, Cornwall, Nigel Colborn proves you can garden with gravel and Anne Swithinbank fills the air with the smell of sweet peas;
August 9
Pippa Greenwood begins a four-part practical guide to creating an attractive garden on a steep slope and Dr Stefan Buczacki talks railway station gardens with renowned comedy actor Bill Pertwee;
August 16
Nigel Colborn visits the garden of Mr and Mrs Diment at Manton;
August 23
Geoff Hamilton takes a close-up look at some mini-vegetables that are currently being developed by Horticulture Research International, whilst Pippa Greenwood continues her plans for planting a sloping garden;
August 30
Geoff Hamilton opens up his diary and Nigel Colborn continues his colourful creative planting plans.
The ornamental kitchen garden Mondays, 1.50pm.
Starting from July 8, a repeat showing for the series of six half-hour programmes in which Geoff Hamilton shows how growing fruits and vegetables can give you an attractive as well as productive garden.
In the garden Sunday July 7 at 10.30am; and Tuesday July 30 at 1pm.
The monthly series from BBC Plymouth continues
July 7
Dennis Cornish looks at ways of making gardening accessible for elderly and disabled people;
July 30
Dennis discoverers how water can add a new dimension to your garden.
BBC 1 Scotland
The Beechgrove garden Mondays, 10.10pm.
Join in the separate 45-minute phone-in programme on Monday afternoons at 2.15pm.
Aberdeen-based series for Scottish viewers, with presenters Carole Baxter and Bill Torrance, and expert guidance from Sid Robertson, Walter Gilmore and others.
Features include ‘Through the Garden Gate’, a visit to a private garden, and ‘Horticultural Highlight’, focusing on a topical theme.
Call the separate live phone-in programme on 0224–625900.
BBC 2 Wales
Gardening Together Thursdays at 7.30pm
English-language programme for Welsh viewers, which is transmitted from the National Folk Museum's garden at St Fagan's in Cardiff, and presented by David Jones, superintendent of parks and gardens in the City of London, with assistance from Jackie Emlyn and Ivor Mace.
Note that there will be no transmission on August 8.
SC4
Palu 'Mlaen Tuesdays at 7.30pm
Welsh-language advice show, presented by Medwin Williams and Dafydd Fryer.
They pass on basic gardening skills to Ray Gravel, the ex-Rugby Union international and keen amateur gardener.
The programme is filmed at the National Folk Museum in Cardiff.
There will be no Palu ‘Mlaen on August 8.
BBC Northern Ireland
Greenfingers Thursdays, 9.30pm (time subject to change); RTE 7.30pm
New topical gardening series, produced by the BBC in conjunction with Eire's RTE.
Traversing the length and breadth of Ireland, the programme will focus on a wide variety of gardens, both large and small, urban and rural.
Programme presented by Gerry Daly and John Cushnie.
BBC East
Look East Monday to Friday, BBC1 6.30pm.
The eastern regional news programme includes a series of short features screened on the last Wednesday of each month.
Peter Seabrook visits some of the many wonderful NT gardens in this beautiful part of the country.
July 31
Peckover House at Wisbech in Cambridgeshire;
August 28
Blicking Hall, Norfolk
Independent TV
Gardening Time Central, Mondays at 5.10pm, repeated Sundays at 12.30pm; Tyne Tees, Thursdays at 1.50pm; Border and Ulster, Sundays at 12.30pm; HTV and Grampian, Fridays at 1.50pm.
Long-running weekly advice programme shown on various parts of the ITV network, and presented throughout the year by experts Howard Drury, Arthur Billitt, Jock Davidson and Geoff Amos
Channel 4
Flowering Passions Thursdays at 8.30pm, repeated the following Monday at noon.
Anna Pavord guide viewers through the ins and outs of choosing and growing garden flowers.
Expert contributions come from Christopher Lloyd, Elizabeth Bullivant, Jimmy Hancock and Roger Green.
This month:
July 11
A variety of lovely summer ideas from the traditional English cottage garden;
July 18
How you can make the most of those risky but rewarding exotic blooms;
July 25
Everyone's guide to tulips, daffodils and lilies; August 1 Focusing on the splendour of camellias, rhododendrons and magnolias;
August 8
A look at the ever-adaptable rose;
August 15
Creating colourful combinations in your garden.
Garden Club Fridays for six weeks from August 23.
Possibly 9.30pm, but please check press for transmission time.
A new series of the practical ideas and advice show, as Rebecca Pow, Roy Lancaster and newcomer Matthew Biggs take to the road, visiting private gardens and allotments.
Pippa Greenwood proves gardening is possible at an angle
Gardening Time's Arthur Billitt
Spotlight on…
BBC Radio Suffolk
With little over a year at the helm of BBC Radio Suffolk's Gardening Club, Ric Staines has nevertheless slipped naturally into the role of host.
His easy in the stressful world of live radio he puts down to over 20 years horticultural experience and his current position as tutor for commercial organic production at Otley College of Agriculture in Suffolk.
After an HND in commercial horticulture at Chelmsford, Ric spent two years with the Great Gardens of England production nursery at Blenheim Palace, four years as grounds supervisor at an agriculture college in Brecon, and seven years running his own market garden.
Ric is now in his fourth year at Otley College.
‘As a young child I pinched some prunings from my dad's forsythia and planted them,’ explains Ric of his beginnings.
‘They grew — that's where my interest began!’
With different guests every week and a wide selection of subject matter, Ric aims to please as many listeners as possible.
‘I try and blend good basic information for the novice with some advanced and scientific gardening for the more experienced,’ he says.
Ric himself likes to grow some of the more unusual varieties, such as the Chinese leaf vegetables or mange-tout peas.
‘As for ornamental plants, I tend to prefer the more traditional style or garden,’ he ponders.
‘Overall I suppose you could say I specialise in general gardening!’
Gardening Club is on BBC Radio Suffolk every Saturday at 8am.
In your September issue
on sale August 13th
Win a great new patio
Brighten up your autumn borders
Clay soil?
Nigel Colborn's planting ideas
Plus Gardeners' Manual Question Time; Kitchen Garden; Organic Advice
Geoff Hamilton's Organic plans for the perfect plot
Dwarf bulbs Ann Swithinbank's selection
Hyacinth blooms for Christmas Day