

THE FOUNT OF HONOUR
Our far-flung Empire imposed new rules
And lasted a century or so
Until, engrossed with our football pools
We shrugged our shoulders and let it go.
But old traditions are hard to kill
However knocked about they've been.
And it's still, for some, an authentic thrill
To go to London to see the Queen…
— Not Yet the Dodo Noël Coward
It is best hat time in the ballroom of Buckingham Palace.
Seated in straight lines on the purple benches and gilt chairs, from above the guests look like a field of giant multicoloured mushrooms.
In the minstrels' gallery, a string orchestra in red tunics from the Welsh Guards plays themes from film soundtracks.
Gentlemen ushers in knee-length black tunics fuss about, directing last-minute guests to their seats, although most have been waiting for the best part of an hour, making stilted smalltalk to conceal their pride.
They have come up to London to see the Queen because a relative is to receive an honour.
On the stroke of eleven, she bustles into the room, accompanied by the grey-haired and angular figure of the Lord Chancellor, lugubrious as an upmarket undertaker in black tailcoat.
Her outfit is aquamarine.
‘I'm sure I've seen that dress before,’ whispers a disappointed woman in front, but you could scarcely expect the Queen to wear a new suit for each of the fourteen investitures each year as well as all her other official functions.
Two clipped young Gurkhas peel off to the side as the Queen stands before the two great thrones, flanked by a clutch of Yeomen of the Guard, pikes resting on their shoulders.
And the long roll call begins.
As each name is recited by the Lord Chancellor, the recipient steps forward, bows slightly, and kneels or inclines his head to receive the award.
A tap on each shoulder, the laying on of a sash, a perfunctory smile, a few words, and it is over.
Mechanical, perhaps, and, as the band plays airs from ‘Raindrops Keep Falling on My Head’, ordinary and faintly bathetic.
Yet somehow, the whole ceremony retains an aura of mystery, the fruit of some collective dream.
Soon the great awards of knighthoods give way to the decorations reserved for the civil and military services, and the shuffle of office workers is broken only by the occasional clink of a cavalryman's spur.
Then come a clutch of stout ladies in flat shoes to collect their OBEs for services to different government bureaucracies, and pallid men honoured for ‘services to ice skating’, ‘to the South Eastern Electricity Board’, ‘to London Regional Transport’.
This last recipient had obviously not used London Transport to get to the Palace or he'd have missed the ceremony ‘due to mechanical failure on the Circle Line’.
One hundred and thirty men and women are honoured, the majority of them late middle aged, middle class and obviously very proud.
In this convocation of the worthy there is only one black face, a tall, handsome young man, Victor John-Charles, given an OBE for services to karate.
There is something curious, too, about the gradation of honours, so that a Ministry of Agriculture clerk is called before the young sergeant from the Royal Ulster Constabulary who chanced his life in some undisclosed anti-terrorist operation.
And then it is over, the royal entourage sweeps out, the orchestra strikes up a medley from The Mikado , and beneath the six great chandeliers the room starts to buzz with congratulations.
The British royal family remains the one truly regal family in Europe.
Where other kings and queens have adjusted to the spirit of the age, installed in some suburban villa, pedalling a bicycle around town, the House of Windsor retains palaces, massive estates and considerable influence.
Most importantly, it retains mystery.
The machine helps.
The Queen will arrive at 11.33, and at 11.33 she is there.
She will meet Mrs Jones who has spent twenty years running a shelter for battered cats, and Mrs Jones is there.
She will lunch with selected guests in the new council offices, and an hour beforehand they are all turned out in their best suits and dresses fidgeting in anticipation.
While the younger members of the family are treated by the British press and public as stock characters in some soap opera, when one of them speaks, on architecture, AIDS or literacy, the news media none the less report their comments seriously.
This ambivalence is the consequence of the techniques adopted by the court to ‘sell’ the royal family, and the product of two distinct styles of royal behaviour.
The Queen remains a remote figure, glacial and impenetrable except when caught by the press cameras watching one of her horses winning at the races.
Prince Charles, on the other hand, has developed an apparently informal style, easy, genuinely popular, with a nice line in self-deprecating jokes.
Between them, they have solved the problem of finding a role for an institution which a few decades ago looked to be under siege.
In the autumn of 1955, while the pages of the Spectator continued to be filled with angry reaction to Henry Fairlie's remarks about the Establishment, its radical counterpart, the New Statesman tackled the family which lay at the Establishment's heart.
Malcolm Muggeridge asked whether it wasn't time for the monarchy to engage professional public relations consultants, ‘in place of the rather ludicrous courtiers who now function as such.’
The royal family had to make a decision:
do they want to be part of the mystique of the century of the common man or to be an institutional monarchy; to ride, as it were, in a glass coach or on bicycles; to provide the tabloids with a running serial or to live simply and unaffectedly among their subjects like the Dutch and Scandinavian royal families.
What they cannot do is to have it both ways.
Much of this could be as plausibly argued today as thirty or more years ago: the extraordinary achievement of the public relations advisers who replaced the ‘ludicrous courtiers’ has been to ensure that the royal family do still have it both ways.
Muggeridge had been percipient in recognizing that the monarchy would increasingly have to live in a goldfish bowl and that would provide a new challenge for the image-makers.
The underlying problem was, perhaps, that too much had been expected of the Queen.
She came to the throne after a decade of war and rationing.
The new Elizabethan age was to drive out the age of austerity.
It was a great deal to hope of anyone, particularly since the political and intellectual principles of the Welfare State were so utterly at odds with the privileged hierarchical structure which had the monarchy at its head.
John Osborne turned his invective on the Palace in 1957 in an article in Encounter :
My objection to the royal symbol is that it is dead; it is the gold filling in a mouthful of decay.
While the cross symbol represented values , the crown simply represents a substitute for values.
When the Roman crowds gather outside St Peter's, they are taking part in a moral system , however detestable it may be.
When the mobs rush forward in the Mall they are taking part in the last circus of a civilization that has lost faith in itself, and sold itself for a splendid triviality.
This was the wholesome outrage you might expect from any conscientiously angry young man, and could be safely ignored as the sort of bubbling over occasionally to be expected in intellectual cauldrons like Encounter .
But the comments which most hit home were those of the young Lord Altrincham, in his English and National Review , a magazine of scarcely greater significance, but which had the good fortune to publish its August 1957 edition on a newsless Bank Holiday.
It was a godsend to news editors.
His target was the Court rather than the Queen herself: ‘the Queen's entourage,’ he wrote, ‘are almost without exception the ‘tweedy’sort.’
They had failed to change with the times, so the speeches they wrote for the Queen did her no favours.
‘The personality conveyed by the utterances which are put into her mouth is that of a priggish schoolgirl, captain of the hockey team, a prefect and a recent candidate for confirmation.’
Altrincham was writing not so much out of malice as out of a wish to save the monarchy if not from itself, then from the court.
He had acutely put his finger upon the fact that the new tools of mass culture, television and radio, exposed the old ways of the royal household to a merciless stare from which they did not emerge well.
The article unleashed a storm about his head, the more so because of his peerage, which he renounced six years later.
‘Lord Altrincham is a bounder,’ thundered the Earl of Strathmore, ‘he should be shot.’
Two thousand letters arrived on Altrincham's doormat, many of them venting the British class obsession.
‘What right have you, you pompous pimp of a Peer, to criticize Her Majesty?’ asked one.
‘I am a commoner, and know it; you are damnably common and do not know it,’ wrote another.
‘They say you are a known homosexual; we believe it,’ added a third.
Shortly after appearing on an independent television programme to discuss his views (no BBC programme invited him on), Altrincham was hit in the face by a furious official of the League of Empire Loyalists.
Apart from demonstrating one of the unwavering laws of British journalism, that nothing sells newspapers like royalty, and nothing makes a better editorial column than declamations of simple patriotism, the curious thing about these assaults is how much they belong to a period.
The position of the royal family is simply no longer part of political debate.
Three or four pamphlets and books have attacked ‘the pernicious myth of monarchy’, but serious discussion of the usefulness or otherwise of the royal family has been driven out by simpering nonsense from a pack of tabloid reporters who devote their not inconsiderable imaginations to dreaming up new twists to a comic-strip family drama with a cast-list now augmented by half-a-dozen non-royal spouses and their families.
The main criticisms levelled by the 1950s critics — the inadequacy of their public relations and the remoteness of the court — have been tackled, more effectively than anyone could have predicted.
The links between most of the aristocracy and the Crown have grown ever weaker, as the royal family progressively became the only special family in Britain.
The court circular announced within three months of the Altrincham criticisms that the business of debutantes' presentation at court would be ended.
The whole process had become discredited once various members of the indigent upper classes had taken to hiring themselves out as proxy mothers to daughters of self-made industrialists, in order that they might contract a marriage with a desperate aristo.
(The Countess of Clancarty, rumoured to have been the Earl's cook once upon a time, charged £2,000 for the service, and Lady St John of Bletso, whose provincial protégées were known as ‘the Blets’, the same amount.)
A new style of official entertaining came in at the Palace and still survives.
Invitations to royal garden parties are despatched each year to worthies across the land who have spent their lives raising money for charity or supervising the work of the council sewers and drains committee.
Attendance at these affairs, which involves queueing for the sandwiches, queueing for a glimpse of the Queen, queueing for the lavatories, queueing to leave, is potent evidence of the continuing talismanic influence of the monarchy.
So wide does the Palace cast its net when it comes to official entertaining that some of the invitees can find their fellow-guests a real let-down.
One recent visitor told me:
I was invited to lunch one day.
I was thrilled.
Can you imagine my disappointment when I saw the sort of riff-raff that had also been invited — a distinctly dubious businessman, a scruffy rabbi who I think makes his living as a stand-up comic, a second-rate academic?
Frankly, a lot of them I wouldn't have allowed in my own home, let alone the Palace.
But by appearing to separate the royal family from most of the rest of the aristocracy, the Queen's advisers have ensured the Windsors' survival in a mature democratic society.
It is, however, more a matter of style than substance.
The idea has been carefully propagated that they lead a ‘middle-class’ way of life.
It is nothing of the sort: however often houseguests at Balmoral may find themselves entrapped into games of charades after dinner, they retire to bed secure in the knowledge that a staff of 120 is plenty large enough to provide each couple with their personal footman and maid.
The friends of the Queen belong to a small coterie of aristocrats, the children are educated exclusively (one of the reasons Gordonstoun seemed a good bet was because, unlike metropolitan Eton, it was miles away in rural Scotland), and all are limited to a narrow circle of suitable acquaintances.
It hardly amounts to ordinariness.
If ‘the Court’ is an expression scarcely ever heard in everyday conversation, it is not because it has ceased to exist but because it no longer wields overt influence.
Despite her love of the Commonwealth, and Prince Charles' concern for the inner cities, there is not a single black or Asian face to be seen in the inner circle, and scarcely any white ones drawn from outside a very small pool.
Leaving aside positions like the Earl Marshal, which is largely concerned with organizing coronations and state funerals, and has been in the Duke of Norfolk's family since 1672, the court is knitted together by blood and marriage.
The Lord Chamberlain, who acts as head of the royal household, is the Earl of Airlie, an Old Etonian banker whose wife, Virginia, is a longstanding Lady of the Bedchamber and whose younger brother, the Hon.
Angus Ogilvy, is married to the Queen's cousin, Princess Alexandra.
His father, the twelfth Earl, spent almost three decades as Lord Chamberlain to the mother of the present Queen.
His grandmother, the Countess of Airlie, was such a close friend of the Queen's grandmother, Queen Mary, that she spent fifty years as a lady-in-waiting.
The Lord Steward, Viscount Ridley, another Etonian, is married to the daughter of the Earl of Scarborough, who served as the young Queen's first Lord Chamberlain.
His sister-in-law, Lady Grimthorpe, is Lady of the Bedchamber to the Queen Mother.
The present Lord Scarborough is married to the daughter of the Earl of Dalhousie, the Queen Mother's Lord Chamberlain.
The tightness of the circle extends to professional staff at the Palace too, all of whom are appointed on personal recommendation.
Inevitably, the process produces an unimaginative, safe shortlist, made up of products of established court families.
At times, it looks like little more than nepotism: The Prince of Wales' last private secretary, Edward Adeane had been a page-of-honour to the Queen in his teens; his father, Lord Adeane, had been the Queen's private secretary for nearly twenty years, and his great-grandfather, Lord Stamfordham had been private secretary to George V. George VI's private secretary, Sir Alan Lascelles, was a cousin of the sixth Lord Harewood, husband of Princess Mary.
Sir Martin (later Lord) Charteris, who became the Queen's private secretary in the seventies, had gone to work for the then Princess Elizabeth because his family were friends of the Lascelles.
The man appointed the Queen's private secretary in the autumn of 1990, Sir Robert Fellowes, is married to the sister of the Princess of Wales.
His father was the royal agent at Sandringham.
His predecessor, Sir William Heseltine, had at least been fresh blood.
Stung by the Altrincham criticisms, instead of plunging into the British middle classes, the royal household turned to dependable outsiders in the white Commonwealth.
A Canadian was appointed to the Press Office, followed in 1960 by Heseltine, a career civil servant from Western Australia, who had spent the previous four years as private secretary to Robert Menzies.
Heseltine, a stocky man who has lost his Australian accent but retained an attractive Australian directness, is one of the principal architects of the new style of monarchy.
His passport carries the word ‘courtier’ in the space set aside for occupation — a joke he came to regret when arriving at Darwin airport to be faced by a massive, bronzed Australian immigration official who looked down and told him ‘that's not the way you spell courier, mate.’
Heseltine has the status of a permanent secretary in one of the big departments of state.
What his office lacks in staff by comparison — he has a mere twenty or so — it makes up for in influence.
He is the doorway to the Queen, deciding who will or will not be granted access.
He is her link not only with the British government, but with all monarchical Commonwealth governments.
He is the Queen's impresario, influencing where she goes and what she does.
The Queen's press secretary works under him.
He sees the Queen every day.
When the prime minister arrives at the Palace for the weekly audience, the private secretary acts as host and spends a few minutes beforehand in conversation.
Afterwards, he will offer less bustling prime ministers a whisky-and-soda.
He speaks to his counterparts in the offices of the Prime Minister, the Foreign Secretary, the Cabinet Office, Home Office and Privy Council office several times every week, often every day.
He does so not only on the Queen's express instructions, he knows the Queen's mind.
It has been Bill Heseltine more than anyone else who brought the royal family into the age of the photo-opportunity.
Little could be done to counteract the John Osborne criticisms, for they abominated the very idea of monarchy.
But the style of the court could be changed, and the public relations could be sorted out.
In the event, some of the consequences of the solution have proved as irksome as the problem, but they have done the trick.
The decisions made in 1968 and 1969 by Heseltine, then just appointed press secretary, and the equerry to Prince Charles, Squadron Leader David Checketts, opened a door which could not afterwards be closed.
In collaboration with Nigel Neilson, a colourful former SAS officer who had set up his own public relations company, they decided to ‘sell’ the royal family.
The investiture of Prince Charles as Prince of Wales could be turned into a perfect television event, and they recommended in addition that he be made available for radio and television interviews.
The documentary director, Richard Cawston, was invited behind the gates of the royal palaces, to film the royals at home.
The resulting film,Royal Family (or ‘Corgi and Beth’ as it was nicknamed), in which, among other things, the Queen was shown cooking the steaks at a barbecue, was revolutionary in its revelations, and considered inside the Palace to have been a public relations triumph.
‘Richard Cawston's film could not have had a better critical reception if it had been the combined work of Eisenstein, Hitchcock and Fellini,’ wrote the critic in the Evening Standard .
In one of his celebrated aphorisms about the monarchy, Bagehot remarked that ‘Its mystery is its life.
We must not let in daylight upon magic.’
True, there was something unbearably starchy about much of the supposed ‘informality’ in the film, but it appeared to have cast a full tungsten glare over a few of the secrets of the magicians.
They could never again claim the right to be above the scrutiny of the media.
And the mundane could not be reconstituted as the unknown.
Having opened the door to invite public inspection, the Palace found it impossible to close again.
All manner of gatecrashers followed for the next twenty years.
Once the royal family had been shown as human beings it was impossible to stop the media treating them as such.
The process of demystifying the monarchy, necessary if it was to survive the second half of the twentieth century, turned it instead into a grand soap-opera, in which some minor members of the family seemed only too happy to play a demeaning part, one of the more absurd examples occurring when several of the Queen's children took part in the television party-game show It's A Knockout!
Royalty dressed as stage-royalty.
One of the difficulties is the sheer size of the family.
Attempts to refloat the monarchy after the 1936 abdication of Edward VIII were made easier by the fact that the royal family included a king with a stammer and two princesses.
By the 1990s the royal family spanned four generations, and the two princesses had acquired a husband each (one marriage ended in divorce), six children, three children-in-law and half-a-dozen grandchildren.
As the cast list expanded through royal marriages and the creation of a brood of ‘nearly royals’— frivolous young men and women staking a claim to attention in the gossip columns simply because another member of the family had a genuine connection with the Windsors — the roles could be constantly juggled to satisfy an appetite which had been primed by the Palace itself.
The change from mythic beings to human beings, while it demeaned individual younger members of the royal family (‘How big is Fergie's bottom?’), did make their personal lives easier in one respect.
In 1953, Princess Margaret had been obliged to call off her relationship with the divorced Group Captain Peter Townsend on the advice of the prime minister and the Queen's private secretary.
When, in 1989, Princess Anne and her husband, Mark Phillips, separated, they did so with scarcely a murmur, two people whose marital problems were half understood by millions.
It is a mark of the success of the policy that although they are often regarded as real people, they are rarely treated as such.
Public relations is the most vital business of the royal household, the expression of an instinct for self-preservation which has grown steadily more sophisticated as the years have rolled by and the appetite of the media has grown more voracious.
It is a task which some of the more well-bred staff in the royal household find frankly distasteful — the private secretary to the Prince of Wales, Sir John Riddell, reputedly once told a producer from Thames Television, working on a fortieth birthday tribute to the Prince, that ‘dealing with you people is like having one's private parts slowly nibbled by rats’— but they go along with it because the deferential attitude of most of the media is the means of engaging popular support for the ins of monarchy.
It has proved remarkably effective.
Republicanism has failed to become a serious issue in twentieth-century politics.
The sort of outright hostility which was felt towards the dissolute Hanoverians is unheard of and the inheritors of the nineteenth-century radicals are a disconsolate bunch of Sunday afternoon ranters at Speaker's Corner.
The Labour party has consistently taken the view that the monarchy is simply an irrelevance.
‘The king fraud will disappear when the exploiting of the people draws to a close,’ claimed Keir Hardie, and even those on the radical wing of the party usually decide the game is scarcely worth the candle.
Consider the change in Neil Kinnock.
During the February 1975 House of Commons debate on plans by the Wilson Government to increase the civil list allowances to the royal family, Kinnock, then an MP of five years standing, launched into a characteristically blustering attack on ‘the senior executives of what I may call ‘the Crown Limited’, who were ‘outrageously overpaid’.
‘I seriously consider it is time we undertook a job inspection of Her Majesty as an employer,’ he added.
By the time that Kinnock was party leader such rhetoric had become an embarrassing youthful memory.
The royal family, he told a television interviewer eight years later, was safe with him.
There are no votes in plans to pension off the Queen, and the House of Windsor has achieved a stability which would have surprised some previous royal households.
Edward VII thought it possible that his son might be the last British king, and during the reign of George V, Harold Nicolson reckoned that five emperors, eight kings and eighteen minor dynasties had come to an end.
In Britain, by contrast, affection for the monarchy appears undiminished, most devotional when directed towards those, like the Queen Mother, who have least apparent power or influence.
The notion that the price they have paid for their popularity is to live their lives under an insufferable glare of publicity is one of the great fictions of the middle class.
‘Poor things, no life of their own,’ they say, simultaneously thrilled and appalled as they pore over the latest ‘revelations’in the Mail or Express .
But the information the public is tossed about royalty are crumbs from the table.
Today the Court has acquired a spectral sort of quality, as if the 447 appointments divided among the offices of the Lord Chamberlain (sixty-seven), the Queen's household (fifty-two), the Privy Purse and Treasurer's office (twenty-eight), the Ecclesiastical household (fifty-six), the Medical household (fifteen), the household in Scotland (forty-eight), the Central Chancery of the Orders of Knighthood (forty-six), the Royal Company of Archers (thirty-two), the households of Prince Philip (ten), of the Queen Mother (twenty-five), of the Prince and Princess of Wales (sixteen), and all the households of other members of the family (a further fifty-two) did not exist.
The life of the royal family is divided into statutory relationships with deserving institutions like the Queen's position as Colonel-in-Chief to a regiment, slightly more informal but none the less prescribed relations with deserving causes as in the patronage of charities, and informal relations between the royals and their friends (in the case of some of the younger royals, a decidedly untweedy group of property developers, showbiz celebrities, and Gstaad nightclubbers).
The formal powers of the royal family have diminished as the yardage about them in the newspapers has grown.
The Queen's speech at the opening of parliament is of course written for her by the government of the day.
Theoretically, she can dissolve Parliament without advice, but the right has been in abeyance for years.
Technically she might also refuse a request for a dissolution, although it is hard to imagine her ever doing so.
She retains the power to appoint the prime minister, although this is usually pretty straightforward, involving an invitation to the leader of the largest party.
(But in 1923, George V chose Stanley Baldwin to become prime minister over the more experienced Lord Curzon, and in 1957 the Queen passed over R.A. Butler to succeed Harold Macmillan.)
The last occasion on which the monarch was required to make a real choice occurred when the Queen was obliged to dance attendance on a sick Harold Macmillan in October 1963.
Since then, the Conservatives' system for electing a leader has effectively removed this power from the monarch, and providing each election produces an outright winning party, her actions are pretty well preordained.
If no single party were to win an overall majority, then the Queen might have real power to choose a government.
It has not happened since the end of the Second World War, but before the 1987 election, when some commentators were predicting a hung parliament, much thought was given to what the Queen would do about forming a government if they turned out to be right.
Meetings between the Queen's private secretary, the cabinet secretary and the prime minister's private secretary concluded that it was unlikely the party leaders would be unable to come to an agreement among themselves.
If they failed to reach agreement, the Queen would summon them and simply say that it was their business to ensure that the Queen's government was carried on.
In the event, the formula was never put to the test, but it provides an idea of the way the Palace would expect to pass the buck.
The remainder of the formal powers of the monarchy are strictly limited.
The royal prerogative was surrendered at the Glorious Revolution and gives governments the power to make war, treaties and appointments without consulting parliament.
Amid all the excitement and turbulence of the days after an election, newly appointed cabinet ministers must find a moment to learn how to kneel and kiss the hand of the Queen, in order that they may become members of the Queen's Privy Council, together with opposition leaders, selected Commonwealth statesmen, churchmen like the Archbishop of Canterbury and senior civil servants.
The Council's thirteenth-century oath, ‘You will in all things to be moved, treated and debated in Council, faithfully declare your Mind and Opinion, according to your Heart and Conscience; and will keep secret all Matters committed and revealed unto you,’ lies at the heart of the British culture of official secrecy, and the enigma of monarchy remains the secret from which all other secrets flow.
So, while formal powers are limited, the influence of the royal family is still considerable.
There is not a good cause in the land which does not seek the imprimatur of royal patronage, and the number of official engagements carried out by members of the family doubled during the eighties.
During 1989, both the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh carried out over 550 official engagements, the Prince of Wales over 450.
Most industrious of all was the Princess Royal, who appeared at 737 functions on official business.
Two hundred letters a day arrive at Buckingham Palace addressed to the Queen.
The speeches of Prince Philip on the preservation of wildlife, of Prince Charles on modern architecture or inner city deprivation, gain entry to the newspapers and television news bulletins automatically, although the sentiments they express are unexceptional, the ideas unoriginal and their delivery undramatic.
Although they usually no more than reflect back ideas which are already common currency, they get immediate attention because they are delivered by royalty.
A mere list of statutory rights and public duties ignores the question of experience.
Simply, the Queen has spent far more of her life at the heart of politics than any of the party leaders.
Twice a day for the best part of four decades a box has been arriving at the Palace containing the reports from British ambassadors overseas.
Every week the memoranda which have been written by ministers for discussion in cabinet are delivered to the Palace, followed by the minutes of the ensuing cabinet meeting.
The weekly reports by the joint Intelligence Committee, seen by only the five senior politicians in the land are delivered to Buckingham Palace unexpurgated.
The Queen has been talking to prime ministers every week since the early fifties: when it comes to practical experience, she is better placed to give advice than her own advisers.
Once Queen Victoria had been established on the throne for a few decades, she acquired a natural authority when dealing with her prime ministers.
Queen Elizabeth is already the longest-serving monarch of the twentieth century, and may possibly be on the throne even longer than Victoria.
The perspective is bound to encourage a consensus attitude.
‘I cannot forget that I was crowned head of the United Kingdom’, said the Queen in her Silver Jubilee speech in May 1977.
It was seen as an unveiled hint of royal displeasure at Scots separatists (the elaborate investiture of Prince Charles as Prince of Wales, at a time when Welsh nationalism was acquiring an increasingly strident tone, had been intended to have a similar impact) but it might also serve as a text for all the concerns of the monarchy.
The royal family persistently talks in the ‘common good’ language of the fifties so unfashionable among those who held power throughout the eighties.
Certain themes run through pronouncements by all members of the family — interest in national unity; worries about the environment, from Prince Charles's confrontations with modern architects to Prince Philip's affection for the giant panda; concern about family life, at home in the Inner Cities or overseas through the Save the Children Fund.
The visit had been known about for weeks.
A grey, litter-strewn north London wilderness, high in unemployment, crime, drug abuse, homelessness and all the other signs of high-rise putrefaction.
A meeting had been called at one of the local schools, another in a series of as yet fruitless attempts to persuade businesses not to abandon the area to inner-city rot.
Prince Charles, in his capacity as president of the charity Business in the Community, was to be the guest speaker.
But the moment he got to his feet to begin his speech, the windows began to rattle with the din from outside.
Conch-shells, drums and trumpets almost drowned the sound of his voice.
He persevered to the end, inaudible at times, incomprehensible at others.
Finally one of his hosts explained the source of the racket, a hut in the yard outside.
The moment he left the hall, the Prince strode away from his escort, opened the door of the hut, and stepped inside.
He was faced by about forty young black people, several very aggressive.
Many had clearly spent the afternoon smoking ganga.
‘He just stood there in a cloud of smoke,’ recalls one of the people first through the door after him, ‘while they effed and blinded at him and told him what they thought of what had been going on in the hall.
He just stood there and listened.
‘Then, to my amazement, he said, ‘You know, I think I agree with you.
Let's see what we can do.’
The incident is a more extreme example of a common enough practice in the development of a new popular style for royalty.
Where Elizabeth failed to find a way of reinventing the monarchy, Charles, a child of the television age, succeeded.
The most remarkable thing is the way in which someone from the most privileged home in the land should strike a chord with those from the most deprived backgrounds.
But watch the Prince working a crowd and compare him with a politician in the same situation.
Where one comes to talk to people, the other comes to listen.
And there is something more profound.
It is more than mere style, something beyond the old ‘something must be done’ concern.
Stephen O'Brien, Director of Business in the Community, who has accompanied the Prince on numerous visits to inner city slums, has seen what happens when he arrives:
He seems to be above, or able to cut through, all the normal suspicions that alienated young people have of the ‘Establishment’ in a quite remarkable way.
They want to talk to him.
Not just because of who he is, but because they think that he understands and cares, and may be able to intercede.
The genuine popularity of the Prince, his self-evident concern and compassion, and events like his fortieth birthday party (held in a Birmingham tram shed) are drawing on new sources of support for the institution of monarchy beyond the recesses of middle-class dreaming.
A somewhat lonely figure, often mocked for his retreats to the Kalahari or the Hebrides, he has managed to tap popular concern about the environment, education, and racial disadvantage.
His interest in, and knowledge of, inner-city problems is more profound and personally felt than that of most government ministers and civil servants, according to those who have spent time with him.
‘I think he'd take the view that the government needs to be educated,’ says one.
‘He believes intensely in localness and smallness instead of centralness and bureaucracy.’
‘Something as curious as the monarchy won't survive unless you take account of people's attitudes,’ the Prince told an interviewer in 1982, in a remark which gives some clue to the task he set himself.
‘I think it can be made a kind of elective institution.
After all, if people don't want it, they won't have it.’
His popularity, and the seriousness with which his views are treated is a measure of his achievement.
Not all the causes he took up were quite the product of personal initiative that they later came to seem.
Casting around for a task for the Crown Prince, Palace advisers had considered putting him to work leading a development campaign within the Commonwealth, before the inner-city initiative seized his imagination.
The skill with which the royal family have identified not merely the good causes which will garner public sympathy, but some of the issues which tap the popular pulse has enabled them to weather any potential challenge from republicans.
It is their good fortune to have the luxury of comment without the responsibility of action that enables them to appear more in tune with public feeling than the ideologists of either side of the political spectrum.
The House of Windsor has become highly adept at the business of its own survival.
That there is no popular opposition is testimony not only to how successful they have been, but also to the fact that there appears to be simply no desirable alternative: the British just do not like their politicians enough to want them made head of state.
Relations between the Queen and Mrs Thatcher are, by all accounts, cool to the point of frosty formality, although probably not as uncomfortable as dealings between Queen Victoria and Gladstone at their worst.
What takes place at their weekly meetings is unknown.
The prime minister is met at the door of the Palace at 6.30 on Tuesday evenings by the Queen's private secretary, and ushered into the royal drawing room by a footman.
On the words, ‘The Prime Minister, Your Majesty,’ the Queen invites the prime minister to sit down, and the two are, left alone.
No minutes are taken of their conservation, no record of any kind exists, beyond what either may record in their diary, although the private secretaries, who hold a parallel meeting below stairs, have some idea of the topics under discussion.
James Callaghan, when prime minister, would have the subjects he planned to raise on a piece of card, but often didn't bother to raise them, as they gossiped about politics or took a stroll around the gardens on summer evenings.
In the last few minutes he would fumble in a inside pocket, and the Queen in her handbag, and they would quickly run through the formal subjects for discussion.
The relationship with Callaghan, who freely confesses he found the Queen's advice highly supportive, was easier not only because his policies were less socially divisive, but also because, taken to its philosophical conclusion, the Thatcherite dream of a dynamic, enterprise-based meritocracy had no place for a family which reigned simply by blood-right.
The monarchy is the keystone which holds the arching class system in place.
It promotes the idea that advancement is by acceptance rather than enterprise or originality.
If Britain's performance since the war has been worse than that of many of her competitors, then the Crown must take part of the blame.
Yet patriotism is the easiest of declamatory prejudices.
Since the monarchy is in so many respects the visible representation of the nation, the merest whiff of criticism draws the fire of every tub-thumping little Englander with access to a microphone.
George Bernard Shaw claimed that ‘Kings are not born, they are made by universal hallucination’.
The common assumption is that the survival of the monarchy is proof of the enduring British attachment to its hallucination.
But it is also the consequence of effective management and skilful public relations by a unique family and their advisers.
Neither Socialist nor right-wing governments have come remotely close to threatening the monarchy, demonstrating the relative institutional strengths of the political world and the privileged, quasi-magical world of the Court.
The benefits of this curious survival — stability, ‘one nation’ -ism and the rest, are well enough chronicled.
But we should recognize the disadvantages too.
Should a nuclear bomb ever fall on Norfolk, the handful of bureaucrats, policemen and soldiers scrambling into the underground bunker will be joined by a mustard manufacturer.
Timothy James Colman, a director of Reckitt and Colman, is married to a lady-in-waiting to Princess Alexandra.
He has been Lord Lieutenant of Norfolk since 1978, and lord lieutenants are guaranteed a seat in the emergency underground seats of government.
Precisely what they would do to justify their share of the precious filtered air in the bunker is unclear, although only marginally less so than the process by which they were chosen for the job in the first place.
They represent one of the last truly feudal institutions in Britain.
Although procedurally they are selected by the appointments secretary at Downing Street, in practice the Queen is asked for her informal approval before a nomination is made: the prime minister's private secretary writes to the Queen's private secretary saying ‘the
Prime Minister has it in mind to recommend to Your Majesty the appointment of Fotherington-Smythe to be Lord Lieutenant of Borsetshire.’
As the lord lieutenant acts as the monarch's personal representative in the county in question, whom the Queen selects for the post gives an interesting insight into the sort of people with whom the royal family identifies.
No formal list of qualifications for the job exists.
The little blue handbook given to newly-appointed lieutenants explains that their prime responsibility is to ‘uphold the dignity of the Crown’.
They are further charged with promoting the industrial and social life of the county and encouraging good works.
Ordinary people who have been awarded ‘less important’ decorations like the British Empire Medal may well find it pinned on their chest not by the Queen but a lord lieutenant in the form of a retired colonel or minor baronet.
At the Annual General Meeting of the Lord Lieutenants' Association — surely Britain's most exclusive trade union — there is much discussion of such knotty questions as whether the pushy chairman of the local district council has, as he insists he has, the right to be presented to the Queen before the laid-back leader of the county council.
These may seem somewhat recondite fripperies, but the activities of the lord lieutenants ensure that the fine gradations of class distinction filter out from the Court across the land.
And contact with royalty gives the lord lieutenants real influence.
Because everyone knows they have a direct channel of communication to the Palace, their ear is sought.
They can recommend individuals for honours or awards — often the district postmistress who has spent fifty years behind the counter and then receives an unexpected OBE will have been suggested by the local lord lieutenant.
The socially ambitious know it is the lord lieutenant who arranges who gets to meet the Queen, so the embossed invitations to his receptions are rarely refused.
His phone calls do not go unanswered, and because few councillors or officials will decline to speak to him he has a disproportionately influential voice on questions like the route of a planned by-pass.
More than one lord lieutenant told me almost apologetically of the number of supplicants who sought his intervention with the democratically-chosen authorities.
The lord lieutenancy was originally devised by the Tudors as a means of internal security.
The first true holder of the post, Lord Russell, had been ordered by the privy council to raise his troops to put down a West Country revolt against the prayer book.
Under Mary, the Crown set up a sliding scale of military liability, so that poorer members of the community were obliged to supply a suit of armour, spear and bow and arrow, while those worth a thousand pounds or more were expected to provide sixteen horses, sixty suits of armour, fifty helmets, forty pikes, thirty long-bows, twenty bills, and twenty arquebuses.
At the peak of this hierarchy, Elizabeth I set a personal commander in each county, who was to have charge of the local militia; the lord lieutenant thus became the monarch's personal representative.
The responsibilities of the lord lieutenant for raising the militia only disappeared in 1921.
The other duty of the lord lieutenant under Elizabeth was the appointment of justices of the peace.
He was thus at the head of the rule of the squires.
They still often continue, in the capacity of Custos Rotulorum , to be the senior magistrate in the county and usually sit as chairman of the committee which recommends the names of new justices of the peace to the Lord Chancellor, a partial explanation for the dull, middle-class nature of the magistracy.
The justification for reserving this not uninfluential role to a small number of wealthy, landed families was that since they had to act as the Queen's hosts when she visited the county, they needed a house big enough to accommodate her and her entourage.
Nowadays, if staying overnight far away from any of the royal residences, she tends to use the royal train, but lord lieutenants continue to be drawn from the same big houses.
In practice, most of them have previously been deputy lieutenants.
As deputy lieutenants are chosen not by the Queen or the Downing Street appointments secretary, but by the existing lord lieutenant, ‘subject to the non-disapproval of the Queen’, most of the lieutenancy is a self-electing little clique.
They are a distinguished-looking bunch, particularly when arrayed in all their blue, gold and scarlet finery for some official function.
Not surprisingly, a significant number have a military background.
They are almost all rich old men, since most are appointed when in their fifties and don't retire until they reach seventy-five: Lord Leverhulme was appointed Lord Lieutenant of Cheshire in 1949 and served for forty years.
In 1990 there were two women among them, Mrs Susan Williams, a keen race-goer who represents the Queen in South Glamorgan, and Lavinia, Duchess of Norfolk, in West Sussex.
The rest viscounts, earls, baronets and scions of ‘county’ families with names Ike Bowes-Lyon, Ponsonby and Smith-Ryland.
Many had fathers who were lord lieutenants before them.
In Scotland they are particularly weighted towards ancient titles and service ranks — only two unadorned names jostle among the thirty-one earls, baronets and colonels.
They also tend to be substantial landowners.
The Earl of Yarborough, a mere deputy Lord Lieutenant in Lincolnshire, has twenty-eight thousand acres, over which the family's pack, the Brockleby Hounds range freely.
Robin Leigh-Pemberton, who has a full-time job as Governor of the Bank of England in addition to being Lord Lieutenant of Kent, sits on an estate of 2,400 acres.
Lord Leverhulme has eight thousand acres in Lancashire and another twenty-seven thousand acres in Sutherland.
There are a number of counties — Berkshire, Norfolk, Aberdeenshire, and now Gloucestershire — in which, because they contain royal residences, the Queen takes a particularly close personal interest.
It is revealing, therefore, to see what sort of people are thought to fit the bill in these places.
In Berkshire she chose Colonel Gordon Palmer, an Old Etonian heir to the biscuit empire of Huntley and Palmer.
In Norfolk she picked Timothy Colman; in Aberdeenshire, Captain Colin Farquharson, formerly of the Brigade of Guards and subsequently a land agent; and in Gloucestershire, Colonel Martin Gibbs, another military Old Etonian.
All told, of the forty-six male English lord lieutenants in 1990, no less than thirty had been at Eton.
There are occasional signs of attempts by Downing Street to infiltrate a new type of person into the ranks of the lieutenancy.
When the need arose to find a new lord lieutenant for East Sussex in succession to the Queen's horseracing chum, the Marquess of Abergavenny, the name which emerged from Downing Street was not that of another grand county family but Admiral Sir Lindsay Bryson, a retired naval engineering officer whose address, 74, Dyke Road, Brighton, hardly hinted at rolling acres.
Admiral Bryson, an expert on guided weapons, was not of conventional lord lieutenant stock.
Apart from anything else, his family came from Glasgow (unlike twenty-five of the thirty-one Scottish lord lieutenants, Admiral Bryson had also been educated in Scotland), as several of the big Sussex landowners who had been hoping for the job quickly pointed out.
The Queen had taken little or no interest in the appointment when the informal suggestion of Admiral Bryson came from Downing Street in 1989.
When she heard the grumbles of the county landowners after the announcement, she may have wished she had done.
Their apparent wealth notwithstanding, there are rumblings of unease within parts of the lieutenancy about the cost of it all.
Except for an entitlement to a police car and driver when attending official functions, they receive no formal allowances.
Most expect to meet the out-of-pocket expenses of the job themselves, but some feel the whole business is getting too costly.
To begin with, there is the expense of the uniform, which London military tailors run up for about £2,000.
Most lord lieutenants are scarcely in jobs where they have employers breathing down their necks about time off, but there can be substantial day-to-day expenses.
In corners of rural Scotland the lord lieutenant may only be required to turn out four or five times a year, but in densely populated industrial areas like the West Midlands, Charles Ian Finch-Knightley, the eleventh Earl of Aylesford, may be performing several times a month.
In Kent, the rate runs at an average of one official engagement a week.
The lord lieutenants have used their association to act like any trade union, and lobbied for a government grant.
They were more successful than most trade unions confronting the government in the 1980s: a hugely discreet slush fund now exists under which their lordships can be reimbursed by the taxpayer.
Payments are made through the Home Office in England, and the Welsh, Scottish and Northern Ireland Offices elsewhere.
In the year 1990
91, £250,000 was made available by the Home Office to the lord lieutenants.
Precisely what the taxpayer got in return is less easily quantified.
There are few more impressively glittering sights in Britain than the summer afternoon at the start of Ascot week when the members of perhaps the most prestigious order of chivalry in Christendom process through the grounds of Windsor Castle.
Preceded by the quaintly named Fitzalan Pursuivant Extraordinary, Rouge Croix Pursuivant, portcullis Pursuivant and the ten other equally lexicographically obscure officers of the College of Arms, each in crested and quartered gold tunics, the two dozen knights of the Order of the Garter shuffle slowly into St George's Chapel beneath a cloudless sky.
They walk ponderously in their crimson velvet hoods and black caps, ostrich plumes nodding on their old men's heads.
Two or three look so pale and frail, you wonder whether the heat and the heavy robes will all be too much.
What is the protocol for removing a collapsed Knight of the Garter?
Inside the chapel the Honourable Company of Gentlemen at Arms, swords drawn and helmets catching the rays of sun through the windows, guard the Quire.
A fanfare sounds.
There are perhaps two or three hundred uniforms on display, scarlet, blue, gold and white.
It all appears perfectly timeless but, like so much British pageantry, it is a relatively modern creation.
The honour itself, however, dark velvet and buckled just below the knee on the left leg, is genuinely ancient, for the Garter is the second oldest decoration, founded by Edward III in about 1348.
Apart from its royal members, the number of Knights of the Garter is limited to twenty-four, and this restriction, coupled with the fact that since 1946 it has been once more in the personal gift of the monarch, makes its membership peculiarly exclusive.
They are all old men she has chosen, men in the cloudy twilight of past glories.
For generations it was customary that the heads of certain households became members, so that‘Garter families’ developed: at least twenty-five out of thirty-eight Beauforts, Marlboroughs, Northumberlands and Salisburys have been admitted as members.
But as they processed into the Quire of the royal chapel in June 1988 the ancient families were in a minority.
Taking their seats beneath their personal banners were the former socialist prime ministers Lords Callaghan and Wilson, the past Conservative cabinet ministers Lords Carrington and Hailsham, two departed governors of the Bank of England, a representative from the retired top brass of each of the services, two White Commonwealth knights, the explorers Lords Hunt and Shackleton.
The Dukes of Norfolk, Northumberland and Grafton were there, Lords Leverhulme and Waldegrave and Sir Cennydd Traherne to represent county life.
Viscount De L'Isle VC and Lord Longford were rewarded for military and moral valour.
Of the twenty non-royal knights who processed into the chapel, all except for the two former Labour prime ministers had been at public schools.
Three had taken military training, and the remaining fifteen had attended either Oxford or Cambridge.
From the terrace beside the chapel you look down on the playing fields of Eton.
I wondered how many of them glanced down as they processed in their finery into the castle for tea with the Queen.
Their lives had been a circular journey: no less than nine of them had spent their schooldays there.
The frequently mistranslated motto of the Garter,Honi soit qui mal y pense , derives from an incident at the ball to celebrate the capture of Calais when the Countess of Salisbury, either accidentally or otherwise, dropped a garter.
King Edward bent to pick it up amid suggestive laughter, declaring ‘shame on him who thinks evil of it’, and prophesying that he would make it the most sought-after badge of honour in Britain.
They are not words which spring immediately to mind when considering the honours system in general.
Apart from the Garter, the Order of the Thistle, the Order of Merit, and the Royal Victorian Order, other decorations come not from the fount of honour but from the desk of a Whitehall functionary or the nudge of a political friend.
Many of the most apparently distinguished honours are a reward for little more than longevity or political servitude.
The class hierarchy is alive and well in the gradations through the 250 different decorations which the Crown awards.
The system ensures that those who might seem most deserving receive perhaps an Order of the British Empire (OBE)— or a British Empire Medal (BEM) for those ‘who do not qualify by rank for the higher awards’— while a bureaucrat who has successfully worked his way to the top of the civil service without putting a foot wrong will get a knighthood in the Order of the Bath.
The civil division of the Order of the Bath is the jealously guarded preserve of the home civil service, so that every six months a new crop of bureaucrats begin making their way from Companion of the Bath to Knight Commander or Dame Commander to Knight Grand Cross.
The principle is the good old British device of Buggins' Turn.
The ambitious soldier can expect a similar progression, from Commander of the Bath when he becomes brigadier, to KCB when he reaches lieutenant-general and GCB when he eventually storms the summit of military life.
Foreign Office worthies look forward to a parallel rise through the ranks of the Order of St Michael and St George, from CMG (Call Me God), to KCMG (Kindly Call Me God) to GCMG (God Calls Me God), on the theory that gullible foreigners will be more impressed by the ambassador of a second-division power if he's called Sir Cuthbert Smith instead of plain Mr Smith.
Melbourne remarked of the Order of the Garter that ‘there's no damned merit in it’.
The same could be said of most of these awards, which are simply a perk of the post, along with the £60,000 or £70,000 salary, retirement at sixty, and an index-linked pension thereafter.
The fiction is maintained that these lists of the worthy, the deserving and the hitherto unrecognized are supervised, if not by the Queen herself, then at least by her staff.
In reality, the list has taken shape in the Cabinet Office.
Senior civil servants somehow find time from the burdens of office to sit around deliberating over who really deserves what.
Not only do they agonize over which of their colleagues deserve which piece of ribbon, they are unafraid to set themselves in judgement upon those whose candidacy for an honour is based upon genuine distinction, perhaps in the arts or by voluntary work.
The moment one list has been published, the various subcommittees begin drawing up the next.
Only about one fifth of names submitted make it through to the final roll-call of the main Honours Committee.
There are exquisite gradations of worth to be decided upon: what does Colonel Bristlebrow deserve for his services to Scouting, an MBE or an OBE?
Doubtless their minds are uncluttered by the thought that in the fullness of time they themselves will appear on the list.
But they are not renowned for their adventurousness and the final product has an arbitrary dullness about it that suggests the product of a predictable corporate culture.
It is the cast of mind which decrees that Henry Cotton, the most successful British golfer of the last fifty years should get an MBE rather than a knighthood, the same level of honour as a shorthand note-taker in the House of Commons or the draftsman of regulations governing haddock quotas.
The intellectual life of Britain is, not surprisingly, under-represented.
One honour, the Order of Merit, restricted to a couple of dozen members, is designed to reflect intellectual eminence, and is in the personal gift of the Queen.
Cultural standards in the court have risen since George III remarked to Edward Gibbon, when the latter had just finished his Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire , ‘Another big fat book!
Scribble, scribble, scribble, eh, Mr Gibbon?’ and this century the Order has been awarded to Thomas Hardy, Ralph Vaughan Williams and Bertrand Russell.
Their successors include Graham Greene, Sir Yehudi Menuhin, Lord Zuckerman, Dame Veronica Wedgwood, Sir Sidney Nolan, Sir Isaiah Berlin and professor Dorothy Hodgkin.
A perk of the office is to be invited to lunch with the Queen every few years.
Some of them are also Companions of Honour, an order additional used as a way of rewarding prime ministers' political friends, so ‘that Norman Tebbitt and Lord Whitelaw, neither known as retiring aesthetes, rub shoulders with Anthony Powell, Lucien Freud and Dame Ninette de Valois.
The honours system provides governments with a means of distributing favours at no cost.
Macmillan showered political honours on his backbenchers like confetti, and during the thirteen years of Conservative government which ended in 1964 over two hundred MPs, one third of all those who sat on the Tory benches, were rewarded with some sort of gong.
In the next Conservative government, Edward Heath was so lukewarm about the idea that between 1970 and 1973 only nine political knighthoods were awarded, provoking complaints of knight starvation.
From Julian Critchley, destined for a lifetime on the backbenches, came the anguished question:
Is then an MP, who must keep the hours of a street-walker; who is understood to be — if the public is to be believed — either impotent or corrupt; who spends the best years of his life listening to Ministers, speeches, and to the complaints of his constituents; is he to receive as his only reward after twenty years of service a signed photograph of Jim Prior?
Surely not.
Mrs Thatcher was cute enough to see the need to cultivate the backbenchers who made up her lobby fodder and the knighthood became once again the reward for wrecked marriages and broken health caused by sitting up all night to vote as the whips instructed.
Her first honours list contained fifty awards for Conservative party politicians and supporters.
By the end of the decade, 100 MPs had become knights or lords.
Not all of the recipients of honours were backbenchers, and over the following years journalists, industrialists and bankers sympathetic to the cause were handed decorations of one kind or another.
Businessmen who served as political advisers, like Jeffrey Sterling, Derek Rayner and John Hoskyns were given knighthoods.
Political friends like the former Labour MP Woodrow Wyatt were rewarded with peerages, and other loyal supporters in the press also benefited.
Sir Larry Lamb of the Sun , Sir John Junor of the Sunday Express , Sir David English of the Daily Mail , Lord Matthews of Express Newspapers and Lord Stevens of United Newspapers, all owe their handles to political loyalty.
Although nothing like as corrupt as the practices of Lloyd George and his broker Maundy Gregory, when a visitor to his office at 38 Parliament Street could buy a knighthood, baronetcy or peerage, depending upon whether he wished to spend £10,000 or £100,000, there are plenty of signs of a correspondence between political donations and the receipt of honours.
In the first six years of the Thatcher premiership eleven private sector industrialists were given peerages.
Subsequent analysis by the Labour Research Department revealed that they all directed companies which had given donations totalling £1.9 million to Conservative party funds.
Sir Nicholas Cayzer, whose baronetcy had been given to his father by Lloyd George, was raised to the peerage by Margaret Thatcher in 1982.
That year his company had given £95,810 to party funds.
Sir James Hanson's Hanson Trust gave £82,000 to the cause the year he became a Lord.
Alistair McAlpine became Lord McAlpine of West Green in the year that his firm donated £43,000.
Lords Forte, Taylor (of the construction giant Taylor Woodrow), Weinstock, King, Edwin McAlpine, Matthews, Vinson and Sieff had also coincidentally been associated with companies which had given money to the Conservative cause.
There is no suggestion that these honours were ‘bought’, nor that the recipients were anything other than entirely worthy and deserving.
But it is quite a coincidence.
Political honours have to pass the scrutiny of a committee made up of Lords Shackleton, Pym and Grimond, a team scrupulously chosen to represent the three main strands of opinion in parliament, and each of them himself the recipient of a life peerage at an earlier date.
Harold Wilson's resignation honours list was the one which has caused the committee most anxiety in recent years.
Its honours for impresarios and maverick businessmen — what The Times called examples of ‘unrepentant Darwinism, of the business survival of the fittest and of nature red in tooth and claw’— so appalled them and the Palace that it took several weeks for approval to be obtained.
Two of the recipients, Joseph Kagan, a mackintosh manufacturer subsequently convicted of theft, and the property developer Eric Miller, who shot himself during a fraud investigation some eighteen months later, proved the justice of the concern.
It subsequently emerged that part of the list had been drawn up by Wilson's private secretary, Lady Falkender (plain Marcia Williams until ennobled in another honours spree), on a sheet of lavender writing paper.
When the list reached Buckingham Palace the Queen found herself almost as impotent as George V fifty years earlier.
The name of a sports promoter disappeared from the list, and another candidate was downgraded from a peerage to a knighthood.
For the rest, the Queen's private secretary merely asked whether Sir Harold was serious.
He was.
The Queen acceded.
George V had found Lloyd George's scattering of honours ‘disagreeable and distasteful’, according to his private secretary, Lord Stamfordham, and while no subsequent prime minister has abused the system to anything like the same degree, they cannot kick the habit.
The Crown, in whose name the whole thing is being enacted, can only accept a fait accompli .
The honours system developed in medieval Britain as a means of maintaining the strict hierarchy necessary for monarchical rule: a place for everyone and everyone in their place.
It is too strong to say that it has been corrupted — after all, James I dished out so many knighthoods (2,600) that the Venetian ambassador to London thought the knights ‘no longer distinguishable from common people’— but at best it is dull.
The majority of higher honours are dished out to people who have done nothing more than their job, for which they are already well rewarded.
The civil and foreign services treat the whole thing as if a gong is just another perk of the job.
Those who are nominated from outside the government service are a predictable mixture of retired headmistresses, regional general managers and council clerks.
Political honours are either an almost contemptuous gesture towards those who have kept silent when their consciences might have told them to vote against a government bill, or a reward for money or advice.
And there is something bizarre and distasteful about the juxtapositions the system can create.
In the same list of honours in which one of the firemen who broke his ribs fighting the disastrous fire at Bradford football stadium received the lowly BEM, Gordon Reece, an advertising executive who helped run Margaret Thatcher's election campaign, was given a knighthood.
The essence of royalty is its exclusivity.
Bagehot's magic depends upon the fact that the common man or woman remains just that; he or she cannot, except by the most exceptional marriage, become part of the royal family.
Yet the purpose of the honours system is to confer a form of proxy, subsidiary, membership of this family.
It is a contradiction which thousands happily go along with because they are keen to advance up the social ladder.
The British — even those who claim to be attached to the virtues of the enterprise culture — are too addicted to the class system and the honours baubles to give them up.
Of all the letters sent out each year inquiring, disingenuously, whether ‘this mark of the Queen's favour’ would be acceptable; only about a dozen get a negative reaction.
If we are to keep the whole pantomime, the grounds for the awarding of honours need re-examining, and some thought given to how to make the business more representative of a broader spectrum of achievement.
And the time is long past when the question of who deserves what was taken out of the hands of politicians and time-serving bureaucrats and given to a genuinely independent and truly meritorious body which might set about trying to put honour back into the honours system.
Etonians and Estonians
Here richly, with ridiculous display,
The Politician's corpse was laid away.
While all of his acquaintance sneered and slanged
I wept: for I had longed to see him hanged.
—‘Epitaph on the Politician Himself’ HILAIRE BELLOC
‘IT USED TO BE an honour to have the local MP to dine,’ a big Yorkshire landowner told me.
‘Now you count the spoons after they've gone.
This handing over of the Conservative party, in Denis Healey's phrase, ‘from the estate owners to the estate agents’, has been a process upper class Tories have watched with distaste.
Like a vile-tasting patent medicine, they appreciate the need for treatment, but find it hard to swallow.
They distrust the people who have replaced them.
The caricature Tory MP of thirty years ago was a knight of the shires; his contemporary counterpart might more accurately be called Morden Man.
His most striking characteristic is his suburbanity’.
The knights of the shires have disappeared as the shires themselves have succumbed to an urban sprawl in which the Sunday place of worship is no longer the village church but the DIY superstore.
(So much so that when, at the 1989 party conference, a delegate got up to speak in defence of Sunday as a day of worship, he was met with a chorus of boos from shopkeepers on the floor.)
The dominant interest represented on the Conservative backbenches is that of the dormitory town and the metropolitan county.
Even Sir John Stokes, the bristle-brushed old gent for whom ‘the twentieth century has been a mistake’, sat in the Commons representing the Birmingham dormitories of Halesowen and Stourbridge, where the closest most of his supporters had come to a foxhunt was a roadside cocktail lounge called the Whip and Saddle.
The parliamentary party has taken on a new style, in which the old alliance of interests to which Henry Fairlie alluded has fractured.
Mention the Archbishop of Canterbury or the Director-General of the BBC to many of the new Tories, and there is an instantaneous, Pavlovian, hostility.
Although prepared to get into the occasional lather over the destruction of ‘heritage’, many have little time for old money, and profess their heroes to be self-made men who have succeeded by their own efforts.
Where the old Tory MP had joined the party to keep the country the way it was, the present Conservative joined to change it.
It was all so different in 1959, when Julian Critchley, the party's resident music-hall artiste, rumbled into Westminster in his Ford Popular as a new MP:
You could tell a Tory just by looking at him.
He was well suited.
The party still retained something of its pre-war sleekness; elderly gentlemen in Trumper's haircuts, wearing cream silk shirts and Brigade or Old Etonian ties.
Everyone seemed related to everyone else.
I was forever being accosted, when sitting quietly in the Smoking Room (the far corner of which was occasionally occupied by the grander Labour MP such as Hugh Gaitskell or Richard Crossman), by nice old buffers who claimed to have known my father.
Many had had a ‘good war’, and one cure for contempt was to discover, while sitting in the Library during all night sittings, a slim volume such as How I Rowed Across The North Sea Singlehanded , by Sir Hugh Munro Lucas-Tooth.
Within my first week or so in the House, I was sitting in the Smoking Room reading a book.
Charles Hill, who had spoken for me at Chatham Town Hall during the election, came up to me.
‘Young man, it does not do to appear clever: advancement in the party is due entirely to alcoholic stupidity.’
I have taken care never to open a book since…
I sat uneasily in this assembly of bumblebees.
Shrewsbury, the Sorbonne and Pembroke College, Oxford, enabled me, or so I thought, to pass for white, although of my grandfathers one had been a railwayman on the London and Northwestern and the other a clerk in Bristol Gas Works.
I gave up the stiff white collars that I had worn at the advertising agency and was careful to wear plain ties; but my suits were Burton's at £10 a time.
One evening I was in the ‘No’ lobby waiting to file past the clerks to record my vote on a three-line whip.
Out of a crowd of more than three hundred I noticed Sir Jocelyn Lucas, with whom I had never exchanged a word, making his way determinedly in my direction, and I watched him breast the wave like Captain Webb, twisting and turning.
Could he be about to invite me to dinner?
Or to congratulate me on my maiden speech?
He took my elbow in the palm of his hand.
‘You're wearin' suede shoes,’ he said, and promptly vanished.
Today we are all wearing suede shoes.
Critchley's party-piece has the rounded phrasing, the well-turned punchline of frequent rehearsal (it's claimed that some of his fans can recite it back to him), but it captures the tone of the Tories in those days perfectly.
The party of that generation was dominated by amateurs.
They went into politics because it was one of the things that a certain type of person in a certain station did.
It has been romanticized as a tradition of public service when much of it was about the protection of vested interests.
But in the end, politics for many of them was a sideline, a diversion, a supplement.
Something happened to political life in Britain when it became the preserve of professionals.
It was not a sudden transformation, but by the late eighties there were precious few figures prominent in political life who were anything other than careerists.
‘Career politicians are almost the only politicians left in the upper echelons of British politics and government,’ observed Professor Anthony King, the loquacious professor of government at Essex University in the early eighties.
The breed of Tories who passed through the Commons, on their way from the Brigade of Guards to the House of Lords’, is no more.
After the 1987 election, the parliamentary party had only eleven MPs who had served in the Guards, and a further eight who had been cavalry officers.
Most new MPs enter the Commons in their thirties and forties; there are fewer very young politicians, and — despite all the blather about the ‘party of enterprise’— fewer going into politics in their fifties, after a successful career elsewhere.
The party expects its young hopefuls to fight at least one unwinnable seat in a rotting inner city or municipal wilderness before letting them have a crack at a seat in the safe suburbs.
So, they spend more and more time in the business of politics and less and less in the business of business.
And the proposition that the Conservative benches are now occupied by men and women whose ambitions have been forged in industry is greatly exaggerated.
The proportion of Tory MPs in the 1951 parliament with a background in business was thirty-five per cent.
By the 1987 parliament it had risen only to thirty-seven per cent.
This is not a party dominated by technocrats who have fearlessly built great industries, but ‘Increasingly politicians without a great deal of first-hand experience of the world outside politics are running the country, including the economy, in conjunction with civil servants who similarly lack first-hand experience of the world outside politics,’ Anthony King noted as long ago as 1981.
The new Conservatives not only wear off-the-peg suits, they adopt off-the-peg philosophies: they have something their predecessors would have sneered at.
They have ideologies.
Lord Home, the last Etonian prime minister, disliked politics because it interfered with his sport.
He kept a set of bags packed inside the door of Downing Street, so he could escape at the earliest opportunity to the grouse moors or trout streams.
By contrast, the 1987 intake included a mere nineteen MPs who were farmers or landowners, and only twenty-four who listed any kind of field sports as a recreation, a far cry from the party of thirty years earlier.
As political life became dominated by people who were in it as a career, the shires felt betrayed.
The Field complained:
We are represented by men hungry for high political office who will therefore not rock the party boat; men whose loyalty is to their political careers, not necessarily their constituents; men who know nothing of rural life, for why should they, nurtured as they were in towns or suburbs?
What do such men or women know (or care) about agriculture, forestry, field sports, immigration (for they are immigrants themselves)?
Many of the new breed were people for whom, in Andrew Roth's words ‘capitalism doesn't have an unacceptable face’.
It was most noticeable at the annual conferences, held in windswept seaside resorts in early October.
Old-fashioned MPs, unlike the new generation who happily turn up at the annual conference, went out of their way to dream up family illnesses, unavoidable business meetings or urgent missions to Kurdistan to avoid these gatherings.
The annual demands to bring back the rope, the murmurings about repatriating immigrants, the calls to purge the nation of social welfare scroungers, were for them a sojourn in purgatory.
Those who could not escape put in a token appearance, showing themselves before the delegates from their local constituency association and then scuttling off on the first train back to civilization.
There was more than a touch of class disdain in their attitude, but it also signified a political distance, an understanding that the parliamentary representatives had softer views and a broader idea of their responsibilities than the mere enactment of their supporters' prejudices.
There aren't many nobs left in the Commons.
The last representative of the four-hundred-year-old Cecil family political tradition left at the 1987 election.
Lord Cranborne, son of the sixth Marquess of Salisbury, had sat for the family constituency of south Dorset for eight years: his grandfather, ‘Bobbety’ the fifth Marquess, had served eleven and a half years as an MP before joining the peerage and becoming one of the most influential party men in the fifties.
The grandest MP to remain in the Commons today is Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, brother of the Duke of Hamilton, a former Oxford boxer and author.
One other MP sitting on the government benches under an apparently plebeian name, Richard Needham, is in reality the sixth Earl of Kilmorey, an Irish title.
The chain-smoking Nicholas Ridley is the younger son of the third Viscount Ridley, and has had ancestors on the Tory benches for two hundred years.
William Waldegrave's father, the twelfth Earl Waldegrave, was a junior agriculture minister under Macmillan, and his sister, Lady Susan Katherine, is a lady-in-waiting to the Queen.
Archie Hamilton, son of the third Baron Hamilton, who served as Parliamentary private secretary to Margaret Thatcher, is another example of the old tradition accommodating itself to the new spirit in the party.
There are a handful of representatives of well-known political families, like Nicholas Soames and the present Winston of the Churchills, the Douglases Hogg and Hurd, who are both the sons and grandsons of MPs, while the father of Sir Charles and Peter Morrison (‘Pinky and Perky’) was Lord Margadale, who had been chairman of the backbench 1922 Committee in the fifties and sixties.
The journalist Hugh Montgomery-Massingberd, continuing his indefatigable quest for the ancien régime , identified a clutch of MPs who owned country houses, including Paul Channon and Mark Lennox-Boyd of the Guinness dynasty (the story goes that when Channon was selected for his seat in Southend, which had been represented by the family since 1912, local advertising hoardings were proclaiming ‘Have Another Guinness!’).
Alan Clark, son of the distinguished art historian, lives at Saltwood Castle, and William Benyon, the MP for Milton Keynes, owns the Englefield estate, fourteen thousand acres of agricultural land in the home counties.
The 1990s are likely to see the last days of the political baronets.
Sir Anthony Meyer's self-destructive challenge to the leadership of Margaret Thatcher cost him the support of his constituency party early in 1990, but, like Sir Ian Gilmour, he was merely symptomatic of a cast of mind common to many of the baronetcy.
They are a declining band.
‘That is not to say that the squirearchy is extinct, rather that the squires that survive would not touch politics with a pitchfork.’
‘Oh my Bromley-Davenport and Anstruther-Gray of long ago,’ lamented Montgomery-Massingberd.
‘The inevitable conclusion is that the Tory party in the Thatcher age has become irredeemably middle-class.’
Or so goes the conventional wisdom.
It is instructive to see what has become of the role in the party of Britain's most exclusive school.
All but one of the seventeen MPs mentioned in the preceding three paragraphs had attended Eton, but the proportion of Etonians on the Conservative benches has been dropping steadily ever since the end of the Second World War.
After the 1945 election more than a quarter of the Conservative parliamentary party had been at Eton.
By 1959, the proportion had dropped to one fifth.
After the 1987 election, scarcely more than a tenth (eleven per cent) of MPs had been at the school.
This is still a remarkable proportion for one school to produce, but it is a shadow of Eton's former prominence.
‘The Tory party is run by about five people,’ Oliver Poole had said in 1961, ‘who all treat their followers with disdain.
They're mostly Etonians, and Eton is good for disdain.’
Iain Macleod, the former Chairman of the Party, thought the group slightly bigger, a ‘magic circle’, in which ‘eight out of the nine mentioned…went to Eton.’
The occasion of Macleod's fury was the process by which Lord Home had come to be chosen as Leader of the party and thereby Prime Minister in succession to Harold Macmillan.
The party's idea of internal democracy was, to say the least, idiosyncratic.
When Anthony Eden resigned the premiership in broken health in January 1957, the two obvious contenders had been R.A. Butler and Harold Macmillan.
Before going to the Palace to advise the Queen on whom she should summon, ‘Bobbety’ Salisbury called the Cabinet to his office, and simply asked, in his thin, piercing voice, ‘Well, which is it to be, Wab or Hawold?’
In choosing Macmillan over Butler they were choosing Eton over Marlborough.
Although hailed by Randolph Churchill as being ‘Tory democracy in action’, the 1963 process was no more open.
‘The customary processes of consultation’ would be gone through, Macmillan had written to the Conservative party conference in Blackpool from his hospital bed in London, racked with the pain of an inflamed prostate gland.
He instructed the Chief Whip to sound out MPs and the Lord Chancellor to gauge the mood in the Cabinet.
But in private he had already told Lord Home that he should prepare to succeed him, and the ‘customary processes’ duly resulted in Home being chosen.
The fourteenth Earl of Home had been marked for prominence since childhood.
Cyril Connolly had been a contemporary at Eton, and painted the most celebrated pen-portrait of the Prime Minister-to-be in 1938.
He recalled that Home had been
the kind of graceful, tolerant, sleepy boy who is showered with favours and crowned with all the laurels, who is liked by the masters and admired by the boys without any apparent exertion on his part, without experiencing the ill-effects of success himself or arousing the pangs of envy in others.
In the eighteenth century he would have become prime minister before he was thirty; as it was he appeared honourably ineligible for the struggle of life.
Connolly's observation is often taken to confirm him as a better judge of literature than of politics, but in many ways he was remarkably prescient: Home was indeed ‘honourably ineligible’ for the new age which was dawning in the Tory party.
His selection, the last spasm of the grouse-moor class, provoked feelings of extraordinary vehemence both among the growing band of young meritocrats within the party and many outside, among them Sammy Finer, then a professor of politics at Keele University.
‘How could they choose this nothing man simply by a bit of finagling and jiggery-pokery behind the scenes.
I said to myself I will not vote for the Conservative party again.
Once exposed, the Magic Circle succumbed to the relentless advance of the new middle-class Conservatives like Macleod, Reginald Maudling, Enoch Powell and Edward Heath.
When Sir Alec lost the 1964 election their hour arrived, and all but Macleod stood for the leadership under a new system of open elections within the party.
With the choice of Heath, the era of the bright grammar-school boys had arrived.
‘We've failed a number of Etonians recently,’ Tom Arnold, the party vice-chairman in charge of candidates in 1990, told me.
‘They were the sort of people who twenty-five years ago would have been deferred to because they were gents.
It won't wash any longer.’
Arnold, the genial, unassuming son of an impresario (and godson of Ivor Novello), cheerfully admits that the people likeliest to succeed in getting adopted as Tory candidates are those with the strongest suburban credentials.
So it is the middle class and upper middle class to whom the parliamentary party now belongs.
Between 1945 and 1974, according to research analysing the backgrounds of Tory MPs, the back benches remained dominated by the public schools and Oxford and Cambridge.
Since then, however, the complexion has begun to alter significantly.
The much publicized working-class Conservative has yet to take command of the green leather benches.
True, increasing numbers are past pupils of day schools, notably the former ‘direct grant’ schools.
To take two able junior ministers at random, no-one could claim that Peter Lilley, the son of a personnel officer, or John Redwood, whose father was an accounts clerk, belonged in the patrician old Tory party.
By the 1990s the change to the meritocrats had begun to affect the highest levels of the party.
Apart from herself and John Biffen, all nineteen members of Mrs Thatcher's first cabinet were public school men.
Sixteen had been at Oxford or Cambridge, as had the Prime Minister.
Three others had gone straight from public school into the services.
Five had served in the Guards, two in the Cavalry.
Six were Etonians, three were peers, and another three were knights or baronets.
By 1990, only Sir Geoffrey Howe survived from the first cabinet.
The number of Etonians had been cut by half (Douglas Hurd, Lord Belstead and Nicholas Ridley were the alumni remaining), and the great majority (sixteen of twenty-two) were still graduates of Oxford or Cambridge.
Some of the new generation of cabinet ministers were products of city grammar schools like Nottingham (Kenneth Clarke), Lancaster (Cecil Parkinson) or Llanelli (Michael Howard).
But in the main the Cabinet was the preserve of the second division public schools like Charterhouse (John Wakeham), Rugby (Tom King), or Sedbergh (David Waddington).
The figures are inevitably distorted by the fact that several of the great old grammar schools opted to join the private sector after the Labour governments' reform of secondary education in the 1970s, but of the twenty-two schools attended by Cabinet ministers, eighteen belonged to the 1990 Headmasters' Conference.
Not quite the supremacy of the self-made man that the party liked to pretend, but a distinct shift none the less.
The great change has been the disappearance of the landowners from the Tory benches.
The distinctive tone of the old Conservative party was set by the land: even those who did not belong to great landed families still believed in some romantic notion of the spiritual strength of England's green and pleasant land.
The creed had such a powerful hold upon the party that even Quintin Hogg, who later chose the life-peerage title Lord Hailsham of St Marylebone — you can hardly get more urban than that — was opining in 1947 that ‘the Conservative believes that farming is more than a business; it is a way of life, essential to the community in war and peace.’
The following year, R. A. Butler told the party conference:
In saving agriculture, we are saving more than our own economy.
We are saving a way of life in which the features are kindliness, freedom and above all, wisdom.
These are the qualities of the countryman and the countrywoman.
They are instinctive with Conservative policy, they are vital to our existence.
This rosy view of rural life — no mention of manual toil, poor housing, low wages — was easily developed into an outright contempt for business and industry.
‘We are not the party of unbridled, brutal capitalism,’ Eden confidently declaimed at the 1947 conference, adding and never have been.’
The old-fashioned shire Tories had instincts where others might have policies, and there was an inevitable tension within the party between paternalism and the spirit of free enterprise.
The achievement of Macmillan (who before the war once declared that ‘Toryism has always been a form of paternal socialism’) was to adopt the more liberal ideas of men like Butler to render the rest of the meal palatable.
Edward Heath's attempts to commit the party to something more dynamic, outward-looking and enterprise-based, after the meeting at Selsdon Park in 1970, collapsed in the face of a corporate culture which had become used to having things its own way under a succession of both Conservative and Labour governments.
In the end, the radical change of direction which the country took under Mrs Thatcher was the result not merely of the party donning a new suit of clothes but of the electorate despairing at the failure of thirty years of consensus politics to do anything to arrest the inexorable process of national decline.
Old-fashioned Tories were an inevitable focus for animosity.
One of her wealthy former Cabinet ministers told me:
Margaret looks down on people like me.
Because she and the others like her rose by their own merits, they dislike those born above them.
But they also dislike those who were born into the same station in life, or further down, and who haven't risen as far as they have.
It doesn't leave many people to like.
She thinks that we have absolutely no understanding of anybody because we were born with a silver spoon in our mouths.
I know she's wrong.
I spent the war years living alongside these chaps, living, eating and sleeping with them a lot of the time.
She got out of her background — which incidentally was comfortable and middle class.
I spent the war with chaps who'd come into the army straight from the dole queues.
The importance of the Second World War to this generation cannot be overstated.
In the first place the experience knitted these men together, both to one another and to others who subsequently made up ‘the Establishment’.
William Whitelaw's brother officers in the Scots Guards included, for example, a future Archbishop of Canterbury, a future Lord Chamberlain, the man who would become Moderator of the Church of Scotland, the future chairman of United Biscuits and five lord lieutenants as well as the Home Secretary: not bad for a single officers' mess.
Not only did these men share the hardships of combat, their very survival imbued many with a pre-disposition to paternalism.
Still deeply marked by the folk-memory of the Depression, they looked kindly upon Keynesianism and would do almost anything to avoid the dangers of mass unemployment.
The horrors of war made them want to prevent conflict.
And the paternalistic traditions of the great landowners could be married relatively easily to the responsibilities of a Welfare State, because in many ways they were not really that different.
When Margaret Thatcher became leader the party was still dominated by these men who had been through the war together.
Her campaign for the leadership was run by Airey Neave, a war hero who had escaped from Colditz and prosecuted Nazi war criminals after the war was over.
She had been only nineteen when the Second World War ended, and by the start of the nineties was the elder statesman in a cabinet which included several who had still been in nappies in 1945.
In the 1990 House of Commons there were only twenty-three Conservative MPs who had fought in the army during the war.
It cannot be mere coincidence that the abandonment of paternalism came about when the party was on the cusp of a new generation of leaders.
The 1922 Committee of backbench MPs is led by Cranley Onslow, stocky, ginger-haired and looking unaccountably like a surveyor who has just arrived to advise on suspected dry rot in the roof.
He belongs to the slightly grand sector of the party, related to the Earls of Onslow and married to the daughter of a fourteenth Earl.
He rejects the suggestion that they are no longer united by a common experience.
‘We may not all have been through the war together,’ he told me, ‘but we're all Conservative MPs and want to stay that way.’
It is a revealing remark.
Unity of ambition is a poor substitute for unity of vision.
It had all begun to unravel with Sir Keith Joseph's Damascus Road conversion in September 1974, announced during his seminal speech in Preston.
It was the most important disavowal consensus politics in recent history.
Sir Keith had been a member of the Heath cabinet throughout the disastrous Tory administration of the early seventies.
Now he proclaimed that inflation was a much more serious threat to national wellbeing than unemployment, which anyway was a greatly overestimated danger, and that what was needed was a much tighter control of the money supply and the budget deficit.
By implication, the whole thrust of post-war economic policy had been misguided, dominated by a totally unrealistic fear of a return to the 1930s.
‘We talked ourselves into believing that those gaunt, tight-lipped men in caps and mufflers were round the corner and tailored our policy to match these imaginary conditions.’
He had dared to slaughter a sacred cow.
The Centre for Policy Studies was only one of a series of institutions which now began to churn out papers, briefings, and a stream of serious young advisers in dark suits who saw it as their role to steer the party away from the errors of its past ways.
Unlike the Labour party, where policy is made after debate at the annual conference, power over Conservative policy rests entirely with the headquarters in Central Office, the Cabinet or Shadow Cabinet, subject to the influence of MPs.
The think tanks therefore had a much greater influence than they might have achieved with any other party.
With the arrival of Mrs Thatcher in Downing Street, the new Toryism, something which was quite distinct from traditional Conservative policy, gained the upper hand.
Some of the advisers brought into government by Mrs Thatcher disliked the old-style Conservatism almost as much as they detested socialism.
John Hoskyns, who was later knighted by a grateful Prime Minister for his work in running her Policy Unit, talked of the Churchill/Eden/Macmillan/Home period as ‘the thirteen wasted years’, a phrase borrowed from a Labour campaign slogan.
In a fit of gloom at the failure of consensus, Hoskyns had sold his company in the seventies.
Deciding to become involved in politics, he first sought out Lord Plowden, one of the grandest figures of the Great and Good, who had spent the thirty years since the war as one of Whitehall's most distinguished gofers.
Hoskyns called on the great man in his chairman's office at Tube Investments.
‘We began to talk,’ Hoskyns recalled, ‘and suddenly he stopped everything, and just asked ‘Who are you?’
What he really meant was ‘I've looked you up in Who's Who and you're not there.
And I don't know who you are.’
The meeting broke up a short time after, a bewildered Hoskyns leaving more convinced than ever that change would have to be wholesale.
He detested the old-style Conservatives.
‘The whole squirearchy, old school tie, old boy network was a recipe for disaster.
A narrow social grouping just doesn't produce a rich enough mixture of ability and talent to regenerate a country.
Even geneticists would agree with that.’
‘Out go the Etonians.
In come the Estonians,’ Harold Macmillan is said to have remarked after one of Margaret Thatcher's early cabinet reshuffles, and the men to whom the Prime Minister turned were certainly outside this small genetic pool.
She owed a notable debt to Jews.
It was Sir Keith Joseph who opened her eyes to what was subsequently dubbed ‘Thatcherism’.
He came from a comparatively well established family — the baronetcy he had inherited after Harrow and Oxford had been created in 1943.
Others she favoured included Nigel Lawson, her Chancellor of the Exchequer, the grandson of a refugee from Latvia, and David Young, to whom she gave a peerage and a seat in the cabinet — his father had come from Lithuania.
Leon Brittan, Trade Secretary until the Westland scandal, and Malcolm Rifkind, her Scottish Secretary, were also Jewish.
Other kindred spirits were self-made gentiles, like Norman Tebbit, Cecil Parkinson or John Major, whose capacity to drag themselves up by their bootstraps appealed to her Methodist conscience.
The Whips' office is as good a place as any to examine the new complexion of the party.
Since its task is to hold the vote together, by threat, bribe or flattery it is purposely chosen to give a political, social and geographical spread.
Despite official denials that a blackball system exists, it has all the characteristics of a club, or as one member boasted, ‘the Mafia’.
At their regular dinners together, a former whip recalls, ‘the atmosphere is very much like that at a second-rate public school or a duff regiment.’
For a party supposedly in the hands of a new breed of Tories, the Commons whips were, in 1990, a pretty predictable bunch.
For a start, there were no women.
The fourteen men included two Etonians, and those who might be described as having a business background were outnumbered by bankers and professionals.
No less than eleven of them were the products of public schools.
The fabled working-class Tory MPs, such as they are, appear to continue sitting on the back benches, awaiting the orders of the officer-class.
Where once Tory MPs were made at Eton, now they are graduates of home counties motels.
One sunny weekend at the end of April 1990, there are forty-six would-be members of Parliament milling around in the lobby of a formless overnight stopover near Heathrow Airport.
It is not an immediately obvious choice for a dirty weekend, but the only other guests are those taking advantage of ‘celebrate romance’ special deals to keep the place ticking over while the weekday corporate businessmen are away.
‘We will cosset you with fluffy towelling bathrobes, fresh flowers, a glossy magazine and a chilled bottle of champagne with breakfast,’ promises the brochure.
In the old days, would-be MPs were spared all this embarrassment.
You could pick up a seat by knowing the right people, having gone to the right school or being thought to be worth a few thousand — almost the first question put to the prospective MP for Richmond, Sir George Harvie-Watt, when he went up before the local selection committee in 1937 was whether he would subscribe £700 to the local association.
Sir Neill Cooper-Key, Lord Rothermere's son-in-law, procured the safe Conservative seat of Hastings because, as a young army officer in 1945 he happened to be drinking in the bar of the Berkeley Hotel.
The chairman of the Hastings Conservative association, a stolid chap with a serious need to find an MP fast, was staying at the hotel while he visited Central Office to collect a list of suitable candidates.
None of them he knew personally, and most were completing their war service.
Seeing a young officer in the bar, the chairman bought Cooper-Key a drink and asked him to give the list a quick once-over.
Was he familiar with any of the names?
‘Yes, I know him,’ Cooper-Key would say, ‘first-class chap.
Pity about that business with the little boys in Cairo.’
Or, ‘should be recovered enough from the shell-shock by polling day.’
Or, ‘think he's fine now he's dried out.’
Aghast at the roll-call of drunks, adulterers and pederasts that Central Office had fobbed off upon him, the baffled chairman turned to Cooper-Key and asked ‘I don't suppose by any change you'd consider it yourself would you?’
‘Well,’ Cooper-Key paused for a judicious few seconds, ‘if you insist.’
And so began a happy parliamentary career lasting until 1970.
It is a system which not merely connived at nepotism, it depended upon it.
Those who got selected either for constituencies, or for the Central Office list when it was established in the 1950s, tended to be those whom old buffers in the party already had a pretty good idea about, because they knew their fathers, their regiments or their schools.
It was the main reason the party stayed so long the creature of the Magic Circle and the explanation for the exclusion, time and again, of otherwise talented party-members who didn't happen to have the right pedigree.
The selection procedure the forty-six weekenders were undergoing was devised in 1980 to recognize talent, wherever it came from.
It may prove to be Margaret Thatcher's most lasting contribution to her party, for it is changing it irrevocably.
The system was invented by Brigadier Sir Nicholas Somerville, a former director of army recruiting, to a brief set by Sir Anthony Royle, then the party vice-chairman in charge of candidates.
Somerville's procedure subjects would-be MPs to argument, interview, drafting tests and debate, and has some similarities with the selection tests for the Foreign Office or civil service: where the Foreign Office once had a country house, the Conservative party has a motel.
The other difference is that the vast majority of successful candidates would undoubtedly fail the exams for entry to the higher levels of the bureaucracy.
The Conservative selection board was designed to bring the candidates' list into the latter half of the twentieth century by including more industrialists, more women, more representatives of ethnic minorities, and reducing the number of barristers looking for a congenial second career.
Among the aspirant politicians milling around in the lobby are fourteen people from the world of business, a handful of barristers, a couple of teachers, two farmers, two academics, a journalist or two, a couple of housewives and a taxi-driver.
Less than ten are women and only one — a fifty-eight-year-old Indian doctor making his fourth attempt — is from an ethnic minority.
Divided into groups of eight, each watched over by a party official, an MP and an industrialist, they begin with a series of discussions about current affairs.
Most have spent all their sentient life as paid-up devotees, and the glib phrases soon roll off the tongue.
In one room, a discussion about law and order soon gives a Yorkshire solicitor the chance to ask rhetorically, ‘And do you know the age of the average criminal?’
They all do, of course, since law and order is the one subject on which every single one has instinctive, visceral, views.
He plunges on, before anyone can interject ‘Yes, fifteen!’
Next door, the same discussion draws forth from a youth who looks about fifteen himself, ‘We teach them the three Rs.
Well let's add two more — right and wrong.’
The slogan is so grey-haired that even at party conferences it wouldn't get a ripple of applause.
He looks around for a moment, pleased as punch, then realizes that his fellow group members have all heard it a dozen times before.
‘We are the party that has put the police back on the beat,’ says the Indian doctor.
‘The streets are safe.
It is a real pleasure to see these young lady constables and to pass the time of day with them.’
Other members of the group shift awkwardly at this picture of Arcadia in Southall, until an economist announces coldly that ‘it is axiomatic that anything the state does it does worse than the private sector.’
There is a code to all of this.
‘Professors’ are ivory tower wastrels.
‘Teachers’ are marxist theologians.
‘Councillor’— when applied to the opposition — means prodigal hooligan.
Most appear economically illiterate.
With opinion polls showing support for the party at its lowest mid-term level for decades, the common belief is not that the Government is out-of-touch or seen as tired and uncaring, but that it hasn't gone far enough.
Those who have spent time on the big metropolitan councils seem to feel it most acutely.
The bitterness of repeated daily confrontation with left-wing majorities has given them a steeliness entirely absent from the old-fashioned candidates.
It is most apparent in people like the councillor from Middlesbrough, a big, feisty woman with close-cropped red hair and a voice like a Teeside fishwife.
In the second exercise, in which groups are required to come up with ideas about how to improve education, force of personality ensures that she is elected as chairman, in which capacity she proposes new local authorities to supervise the schools, ‘from which councillors would be banned.’
This idiosyncratic view of local democracy does not prevent her finishing the board with a pass, and the recommendation to Central Office that she ‘would make the perfect candidate for a safe Labour seat in the Northeast.’
By now, the candidates are being called out individually for interviews with the backbench MPs.
Do they want to become MPs for the money (some, it seems hard to credit, apparently are dim enough to think so), for the glamour (one glance at the crumpled dandruff-laden figure putting the question should disabuse them of that idea), for the influence?
Then, as the planes roar down the flightpath to Heathrow, the one designed to prevent the ultimate nightmare of exposure in a Sunday tabloid.
‘Is there, ahem, anything in your personal life which would embarrass the party if it became public?’
Most who would fail on this count have already been weeded out in preliminary interviews with the party vice-chairman and local area officials, but it can still stop a potential career in its tracks.
Drinks before dinner are spent in bizarre oscillation between an Essex taxi-driver advancing his theories on the need for a return of the ‘glasshouse’ for young offenders, and a syrupy smooth young Etonian on the Turnbull and Asser wing of the party who in previous times might have glided effortlessly into a constituency.
(He failed on this occasion.)
By the following morning's exercises — discussion of how to set about winning a Labour seat when the other candidate won't share a public platform with you, a mock television interview and a debate, several of the candidates who appeared strongest — including a chairman of the party's Bow Group — seem to have given up the fight.
The television performances range from the tedious (insuring antiques) to the hilarious (a Colonel defending foxhunting to an urban Tory.
‘How many people hunt in your county?
And who are they?’)
The debate has the style of a Westminster confrontation, and you get the strong impression that even the complete no-hopers must sneak off at home to lie in the bath to practise cries of ‘shame’, ‘hear, hear’ and other parliamentary harrumphing.
By lunchtime on the second day, they are finished.
The officials, the MPs and the industrialists get together over sandwiches to mark each candidate for their intellectual capacity, the ability to speak, write and organize, and personal qualities like their influence on others, their sense of responsibility or determination.
It turns out to be a surprisingly exact science, in which ten or fifteen minutes are spent deliberating over whether someone deserves to be graded ‘adequate’ or ‘limited’for their motivation or their ability to organize.
It struck me as an intelligent and fair system which had the merit of being open and above-board and easily comprehensible.
Only the most objectionable individual could manage simultaneously to antagonize all three assessors.
About three quarters of the contestants at each board are graded as suitable for the candidates' list, some of them with recommended restrictions (the Indian doctor was reckoned ‘suitable for consideration for an ethnic seat’).
Others, like the councillor from Diss who are rejected, are given warm words about their unsung voluntary work for the party, and invited to continue (‘Bliss in Diss,’ said the chairman).
In the group to which I paid closest attention my surprise was more at the unremarkable calibre of several who did get through than at any apparently unfairly rejected.
Can it really be that five ‘O’ levels, no original ideas and a pretty indifferent speaking ability is ‘adequate’for an MP?
The assessors explain that they are not looking for the best; ‘that'd be hopeless.
We'd end up with 350 MPs who all wanted to be prime minister.
So we're looking for the good, the average, and the unexceptional as well.’
Those who passed out successfully had as broad a range of social backgrounds as the original list of applicants — certainly more broadly based than the parliamentary party.
Both the taxi driver and the privatizer of the police force failed to get a place on the candidates' list, and the small number of women did proportionately better than the men.
‘No constituency will select her, of course,’ one of the MPs remarked after a female candidate had been passed for the list, reflecting a certain realism about the whole process.
Despite often being dominated by women, the local associations, to whom those on the list must make application if the sitting MP falls under a bus, are frequently biased against them.
They usually resent any guidance from Central Office, and sometimes deliberately pick as their candidate someone reckoned by headquarters to be a dead loss.
So most of the 750 or so who have emerged victorious from their motel weekend over the last decade are condemned, like the Ancient Mariner, to spend their lives trailing around the country, telling their tale to uninterested local Conservative worthies in the hope they'll be offered the honour of fighting the seat.
For most, just getting on to the list will be the end of the road.
Because of the kudos it can bring at the golf club, once there they are hard to dislodge.
(One even refused to stand down although he would have been seventy-six at the time of the next election.)
The motel weekends are slowly changing the basic bloodstock of the parliamentary party.
Those who succeed are much more in the image of representatives at the party conference than members of the old ‘Establishment’.
The gulf between the party organization and the MPs is narrowing all the time.
The suburban southern venue for the selection board is more than just convenient (a sortie into Lancashire was abandoned after the second session), it is a metaphor for the new style of the party.
Almost the first MP to pass through the selection process and win a seat in the Commons was Nicholas Soames.
As Mr Soames was the grandson of Winston Churchill, it might look as though the end-products were much the same as before.
They are not.
Although broader in the range of their social backgrounds, they are somehow homogenized to a degree previously unthinkable.
The selection process is not unlike that for a giant multinational corporation, and those who win through have some similarities to corporate executives.
They are people to whom the Conservative party is meat and drink and there are few enough eccentrics among them.
With parliamentary life now dominated by machines rather than individuals, the back benches are packed with men and women whose only hope is to be offered a job in the Whips' Office or a junior ministerial brief.
Even those who have long since abandoned hope of winning Downing Street's favour have increasingly won their places after passing through a selection process which prevents the eccentric and the too-individualistic getting a look-in.
Small wonder the back benches look so dull.
Because MPs enjoy such low status, because the work is so poorly paid, because the upper classes have largely abandoned ideas of ‘service’, and because the selection process has killed off the old boy network, there is less and less interest in politics in the Conservatives' traditional reservoir of support.
But, despite the much-publicized flirtations of a few aristocrats with the centre parties, the Tories are still the natural home for the landed gentry.
It is impossible to imagine their ever retaking control, but at a philosophical level the estrangement of the party from some of the old landed values still seems more a separation than a divorce.
And the House of Lords provides them with the only forum in the western world in which an accident of birth assures them legislative power.
Take the case of the thirteenth Earl Ferrers, a man to whom all drinking folk have reason to be grateful.
Six foot five, bright-eyed, unmistakably English with his clipped grey military moustache, pepper and salt tie and well-cut black pinstripe, Lord Ferrers singlehandedly changed the licensing laws of England.
In English pubs the time between two and three on a Sunday afternoon should perhaps be named ‘The Ferrers Hour’.
‘I altered the law of the country,’ he says brightly.
‘One man did it, on his own.’
Then he pauses, before adding, ‘By mistake.’
In early 1988 the government had decided to liberalize the antiquated English licensing laws, to enable pubs to stay open longer on weekdays.
But, in deference to religious pressure groups, the Sunday hours were to remain unchanged.
The Earl, summoned from his Suffolk estates to become deputy leader of the solid phalanx of Conservative peers in the House of Lords, was in charge of steering the bill to a successful conclusion.
To his mild surprise he found himself confronted by rows of peers determined to fight on behalf of the brewing industry, a fearsomely effective lobby.
They tried to force an amendment, to extend the Sunday closing time from two to three p.m.
A similar amendment had been introduced in the Commons and quickly voted down by the government.
Earl Ferrers, whose closest friends would not call him an intellectual, was unfamiliar with the arcane procedure of the House.
When the question was put, the Earl shouted ‘not content’, and lay back on the buttonback red benches to await the division.
But, because his was the only voice to shout ‘not content’, the amendment was put again.
This time, he was silent.
To his amazement, he suddenly heard the words ‘the contents have it’.
The government was defeated.
‘I looked up, the thing had gone.
There was the most fearful flapdoodle afterwards.
I'd bogged it.’
The following morning a photograph of a dejected-looking Lord Ferrers appeared in The Times , brows furrowed, mouth glum as a basset hound.
Three days later, he received a letter.
‘Don't be depressed,’ wrote a reader of The Times , ‘every Sunday at two o'clock, people in pubs across the land will raise their glasses and toast your health.
You'll be remembered long after the occupants of Number 10 have come and gone.’
The Ferrers family pedigree is woven into a silk pennant thirty feet long, a complicated lineage because the first Earl had twenty-seven legitimate children and a reputed thirty bastards.
It is not a particularly political family, although the fourth Earl did attend the House of Lords in 1760 to be tried for shooting his steward.
He attempted to plead insanity, but did it so effectively that they concluded he must be sane.
Sentenced to be hung by the peer's privilege of a silken rope, for his transportation to Tyburn he dressed in his wedding suit, on the grounds that his marriage was the only occasion in his life to have caused him as much distress as his execution.
Although the family seat was sold off in the fifties, the thirteenth Earl finds himself in a very similar sort of house, and the comparison is instructive.
Ditchingham Hall, sitting on two thousand acres landscaped by Capability Brown, previously belonged to Lord Ferrers's father-in-law, a retired brigadier.
The brigadier ran from room to room swathed in overcoats: now the house is centrally heated by a straw-burning boiler.
The Earl has benefited from government grants, by the boom in agriculture and, more profoundly, by a change in public attitude.
I asked whether he thought he had the same difficulties as his father:
My problems are precisely the same as my father's, but the climate's different now: in those days, people who had large houses were thought to be plutocrats who ran society, the Establishment if you like.
And people thought that it all had to be changed.
So many houses went then, that nowadays people say, ‘Good heavens, look at this marvellous heritage!
We must preserve it.’
It's totally different now.
The revival has given aristocrats like Lord Ferrers the opportunity to play an active role in politics again.
He gives a passable imitation of a man at the wrong end of a coconut shy.
‘It's hellish hard work.
You're confined to this place,’ he waves his gangly arm around his tiny office in the Lords one Wednesday afternoon, ‘stuff flies at you from left, right and centre,’he snorts, as his forehead furrows.
‘You just have to try to keep your head above water.
And as for those bloody red boxes,’ he says pointing to the battered containers which deliver official papers to Ditchingham Hall every weekend, ‘hate 'em.’
Lord Ferrers and his like continue to provide the Conservatives with a steady supply of workhorses because, whatever its move away from traditional Toryism in the eighties, the party remains the only natural home of the aristocracy.
Apologists for the House of Lords argue that it ceased to be the exclusive preserve of the upper classes with the creation of Life Peerages in 1958.
But the hereditary peers provide a ballast which distorts any pretence at representativeness.
Over three quarters of the House of Lords attended fee-paying schools of one sort or another.
Of the 766 hereditary peers listed in Dod's Parliamentary Companion in 1987, almost all had been educated at public school, no less than 371 of them — almost half — at Eton.
Adding life peers to the calculation inevitably reduces the Etonian proportion, but Eton still accounted for four hundred out of a total 1,156, over one quarter of the entire chamber.
And a sort of title inflation continues.
In the time of Henry VIII there were reckoned to be fifteen lords for each million of the population.
By 1990, the figure was one peer for every 48,000 people.
The granting of peerages to former politicians, chiefs of the defence staff and so on has the effect of enhancing the status of those whose only achievement in life is having been engendered by a privileged set of loins.
Furthermore, the institution is inherently politically biased.
Not only do the hereditary peers entitled to sit in the House of Lords outnumber life peers by over two to one, but the hereditary principle ensures a constant supply of new blood, while during the eighties the Labour benches became thinner and thinner, as their life peers grew older and more infirm.
The independence of the cross-benchers provided little balance: calculations in 1988 showed that they voted two-one in favour of the government.
It is tempting to ask whether this unrepresentativeness really matters.
During the seventies, Lord Hailsham dismissed the place as ‘arguably less persuasive than a powerful leading article in The Times , or even a good edition of Panorama .’
During the eighties, however, the Lords recovered their self-confidence.
Faced with a massive majority in the House of Commons and racked by their own internal problems, for much of the decade the opposition parties had a distinctly toothless appearance.
The House of Lords, however, inflicted a series of amendments on government legislation.
Articles with titles like ‘The New Opposition’ and ‘Power Returns to the Lords’began appearing in the newspapers.
They seemed a force for change.
So swollen did the self-confidence of the House of Lords become that in June 1990 it rejected a measure (the War Crimes Bill) already decisively passed by the House of Commons on a free vote, the first such confrontation since 1949.
But the independence of the Lords was of a studiously limited kind.
Lord ‘Bertie’ Denham, the bluff and genial Chief Whip who floated between the Lords, White's and Pratt's proffering a glass of whisky to any peer tempted to vote against a government bill, likes to maintain that there is no inbuilt Conservative majority in the Lords, and during the first two Thatcher terms the government did indeed lose 111 votes.
But this was really the freedom of a lord of misrule, and generally any serious damage was undone back in the Commons.
On important matters, Lord Denham still had a vast hereditary army of Etonians to call upon, Chesterton's ‘great democratic protest against the eternal insolence of the aristocracy of talents.’
One of the most dramatic demonstrations of the continued existence and potential power of the Lords occurred in May 1988.
The Duke of Westminster, the richest man in Britain, was typical of several aristocrats with a residual sense of paternalistic decency who found government proposals to reform local government finance by replacing a graduated rating system with a flat-rate ‘community charge’ or poll tax deeply offensive.
Calling it ‘one of the worst taxes ever created in the history of man’, the Duke appeared to speak for the old Conservative tradition.
‘It is thoroughly and unutterably embarrassing that a stalker, a ghillie or a farmworker should be paying the same tax as me.
It's just unfair.’
Other peers in the paternalist tradition, led by the former knight of the shires, Lord Chelwood (the much-parodied Sir Tufton Beamish), planned an amendment which would have required the tax to be related to ability to pay.
The poll tax proposal had already been passed by the government's overwhelming majority in the Commons.
Bertie Denham went to work to turn out the vote.
Lord Denham is a cunning man.
What was said in the phone calls to ivy-clad stately homes across the land is unknown.
Certainly to some he made the point that a government defeat would raise potential constitutional problems — the Lords could not lightly defy the will of a democratically elected House of Commons.
But there were other considerations, too, of which self-interest was only one.
He produced the second highest attendance in 150 years.
Across the nation aristocratic backwoodsmen, a tribe previously thought to be on the verge of extinction, tottered off to the nearest railway station to obey the summons.
Five hundred peers turned up to vote, giving the government a majority of 317 votes to 183.
The total number attending was only nine less than on the question of membership of the European Community seventeen years earlier, and forty more than had voted on the Government of Ireland bill in 1893.
As they poured into Westminster from remote corners of the Scottish highlands and seats in the English shires (fifty-nine of the government supporters had attended less than one tenth of the sittings of the house in that session), it was clear that those who had championed the House of Lords as a place where party discipline took second place to wisdom had an altogether too rosy view of things.
Among the peers identified by the parliamentary writer Andrew Roth as voting in favour of a measure which would oblige a labourer to pay the same amount of tax as a millionaire were the Duke of Buccleuch, the biggest landowner in Europe, the beef magnate Lord Vestey, another of the richest men in Britain, and the eighty-three-year-old Marquis of Bath, of the Longleat Estate.
The men who obey their party's call in the House of Lords do so for the highest of motives.
Expressions like ‘don't want to let the side down’, and ‘it's better to be a giver than a taker’, fall unselfconsciously from the lips of men like Lord Ferrers.
The Viscount Massereene and Ferrard wrote in 1973:
At a time when the clarion call is for intensified training, higher education and greater specialization, it is a contradiction in terms to attempt to eradicate one of the best educated specialized sectors of the community, a sector that has taken hundreds of years to be created and which has the rare advantage of combining its specialized knowledge with a practical technique inherited over centuries.
The author of these words, John Clotworthy Talbot Foster Whyte-Melville Skeffington, the thirteenth Viscount Massereene and sixth Viscount Ferrard, became one of the great institutions of the House of Lords, an inveterate campaigner for field sports.
He introduced the Deer Act and spoke seventy-seven times during the Wildlife and Countryside Bill (‘I cannot understand why anyone should want to shoot a curlew.
They are filthy to eat…’).
He once began a memorable contribution to a debate on the 1981 riots in Brixton with the words, ‘My Lords, I think I am the only member who has spoken today who has had agricultural estates in Jamaica.’
Even hereditary peers who have served with distinction in the House of Lords, like Lord Carrington, are inclined to wonder about the legitimacy of the place when they hear speeches like that.
His personal preference is for an elected second chamber.
In the seventies a report from Lord Home recommended replacing the House of Lords with a new body, two thirds of whose members would be elected.
But when the Conservatives gained power they did nothing to implement the scheme.
In the eighties, a secret cabinet committee under William Whitelaw considered further ideas for reform, including joint Lords/Commons committees, and dividing the Lords into voting and non-voting peers, but again they ducked out of taking any action.
The Labour party first committed itself to abolition of the House of Lords in 1910, yet it has done less to diminish the power of hereditary peers than either the Liberals or Conservatives.
In 1968 the Wilson government's attempts to reform the House of Lords, taking voting rights away from hereditary peers and creating a nominated group of voting life-peers, fell victim to sabotage from both Left and Right.
Enoch Powell derided the bill as an absurdity: you couldn't just invent a second chamber.
‘You don't ask what an oak tree is for, it's a silly question,’ he once said.
‘There are oak trees, they came that way.
And you don't ask that question about institutions of society.’
From the other flank, Michael Foot thought plans for reform gave too great a power of patronage to the prime minister and mocked the very idea of a representative democracy.
The two filibustered spectacularly.
On one day in March 1969, four and a half hours were spent on points of order and discussing the confidentiality of attendance records.
Ten days were needed on the first few clauses alone.
In April Harold Wilson admitted what everyone else already knew: the Bill was a dead duck.
Twenty years later, after including a pledge to abolish the Lords in the 1983 manifesto and dropping it from the 1987 manifesto, the Labour party again committed itself to reform of the Lords: now they planned to replace it with an elected chamber designed more to reflect the diversity of the nation and the regions, but with less legislative power.
It will be a brave prime minister who decides that the game is worth the candle.
The House of Lords' survival hangs upon its very idiosyncrasy.
No-one would have planned a system like it, but, the argument goes, its powers to examine and revise legislation are scarcely great enough to make it worth the bother of finding something to replace it.
If it were less an absurdity, the House of Commons would have to take it seriously.
The House of Lords would certainly not have survived had it not been reformed by Harold Macmillan's Life Peerages Act of 1958.
Lord Carrington had entered the House thirteen years earlier and recalls a relaxed, convivial place with an overwhelming political bias:
It was totally unbalanced — there were ten or so Labour people, and about four hundred Conservatives — it sat for about three hours every day, and there were a great number like Halifax, Salisbury, Beaverbrook who had been prominent in political life.
Then there were what you might call the ‘county magnates’, who were important in their counties.
They had a common feeling: not that they were necessarily agreeing with one another, because often they weren't.
It was more that it was genuinely in those days a club.
This common feeling, shared by the knights from the shires scattered along the Conservative back benches in the Commons, was more than mere aristocratic disdain, although if you were already seated in a large country estate it cast a different light upon the tiresome business of dealing with the Whitehall bureaucracy.
Carrington describes the prevailing a prevailing outlook as
a more detached view of what was the right thing or the wrong thing to do, a tradition of what national life was like, and what it ought to continue to be like.
That there were certain standards of conduct by which public life was conducted.
This cast of mind is easily recognizable as the outlook of the traditional ruling class.
They did not give up their privileges easily.
The second Lord Redesdale once stood up in the House of Lords to argue that ‘denial of the hereditary principle is a direct blow at the Crown.
Such a denial is, indeed, a blow at the very foundation of the Christian faith.’
He explained this extraordinary assertion to his family by saying that the aristocratic rule of primogeniture was the same as that by which Jesus Christ had inherited the kingdom of heaven (at which his daughter, Nancy, remarked, ‘Oh, I thought you meant it would be a blow at the faith because the Lord's son would lose the right to choose the clergyman.’).
When the proposal to create life peers — and peeresses — came before the full House of Lords, it was Lord Glasgow who formulated the classic argument.
It would put intolerable pressure on the limited number of parliamentary lavatories.
On a winter's day the Lords has the dozy ambience of a modernized and centrally-heated Victorian stately home.
An electric imitation coal fire glows in the fireplace, the walls are dark panelled, the wallpaper plush, the ceilings arched and gothic.
There is only the occasional indication of the dangerous realities of life outside: behind the wooden revolving door from the peers' car-park (the best free car-park in London) is a rolled-up stretcher and a notice warning of bomb alerts.
Old men shuffle across the tiles to be greeted with ‘Good afternoon, milord’, by tailcoated attendants.
In the tea room, beneath the yellow fleur-de-lys wallpaper, several dozen elderly men munch their way through buttered toast and crumpets.
Many of the faces are vaguely familiar from faded newspaper photographs of dark suits coming and going in Downing Street.
There is a genteel buzz in the room, like four o'clock in a spa-town hotel.
Suddenly, the division bells ring and the room empties, milords making their way to vote in a debate of which they may have heard not a word.
They move towards the sound of gunfire, a slow wave of grey flannel, chattering amiably among themselves, with no urgency, no uncertainty on this or many other matters, old folk in the kindest of retirement homes.
Although it is the hereditary peers who give the House of Lords its raison d'être , it is the life peers who give the place its intellectual distinction and who produce the most impressive arguments in examining the details of legislation.
Although their creation had the disadvantage of prolonging the existence of the House of Lords long beyond its natural term, it has had one beneficial effect in broadening the representation of women in parliament.
In this most male of chambers, by 1989 there were sixty-six women members.
Surprisingly, perhaps, it is pretty free of sexual discrimination.
Baroness Seear, a leader of the Liberal peers for several years, remarks that ‘I can honestly say that I have never been in a place that treats you better on male-female equality.
And that includes the London School of Economics, where I've lectured for years.’
Despite the fact that it can seem at times as if half the figures on the red benches are comatose — a chastened Lady (Barbara) Wootton concluded after eight years in the place that at any one time about ten per cent of the participants in a debate were fast asleep — the quality of argument can be incomparably higher than in the House of Commons, and the pool of expertise available from the ennobled professors, judges, generals and bureaucrats makes for more informed contributions.
Undoubtedly the House of Lords performs a useful role in revising legislation and moderating extremes.
But its independence is exaggerated.
Under a Conservative government it has the licence of the troublesome relative, indulged because in the end they're family.
But nothing gainsays the basic objection to the Lords, that there is no inherent justice in it.
No plausible argument can be advanced to defend the place.
Certainly, no-one devising a system of government for a late twentieth-century industrial democracy would give the right to alter legislation to a group of people whose only qualification is the fact that at some time in the dim and distant past a grateful monarch rewarded the loyalty, bravery, intrigue, obsequiousness or blackmail of an ancestor with the grant of a title and the profits of plunder.
The only excuse for the House of Lords is that it exists.
It has survived so long because abolishing it would have been more trouble than it was worth, but that does not make it any better in itself.
What would you replace it with? the argument goes.
One wonders how much longer this reasoning will hold water, as a steadily growing proportion of British legislation begins life in Brussels or Strasbourg.
The House of Lords can only look more and more an anachronism.
If every other advanced democratic country can cope with the challenge of fully democratically elected parliaments, it is hard to see why it should present insuperable problems in Britain.
Let us now Praise Famous Men
And apologetic statesmen of a compromising kind,
such as— What d'ye call him — Thing'em-bob, and likewise — Never-mind,
And ‘St-'st-'st — and What's-his-name, and also You-know-who —
The task of filling up the blanks I'd rather leave to you.
But it really doesn't matter Whom you put upon the list,
For they'd none of 'em be missed — they'd none of 'em be missed!
—The Mikado W.S. GILBERT
If you spotted P. D. James, the crime novelist, in a street anywhere from Canton to Buenos Aires, you could guess her nationality at once.
From her sensible shoes to her practical haircut, her appearance proclaims her membership of that generation of British women who survived the privations of wartime and went on to spend their lives in ungrumbling toil creating the now tarnished Jerusalem of the Welfare State.
After thirty years as an administrator in the National Health Service and an adviser on policing, Miss James was enlisted for service in the corps of commissionaires of British public life.
Her distinctive combination of qualities — literary talent and experience of public service — combined with the fact that she was a woman, made her a natural.
By the time of her seventieth birthday she had served on the Board of Governors of the BBC, the Corporation's General Advisory Council, the Arts Council and the British Council and their respective literary committees, to say nothing of her work with such organizations as the Royal Society of Literature.
Such was the number of committees that writing itself had to be suspended.
When she returned from one of the innumerable meetings and one of her daughters asked who had been present, her usual reply would be, ‘Oh, the Great and the Good.
And me.’
It is characteristic that the more modest member of these august committees fail to recognize themselves as belonging to the Great and Good, a tribe which lives in the great terra incognita of Quangoland.
Most of them are well-meaning, public-spirited souls with little desire for glory, committee people prepared to serve their lives huddled over blotters in council chambers from the broadcasting authorities to the Sea Fish Authority, successor to the legendary White Fish Authority.
As you might expect, the great are much outnumbered by the good.
The list from which they are selected is held on a small computer on the second floor of the drab grey Cabinet Office building in Whitehall.
The names on its files provide a gazetteer to the map of much of this Unknown Land.
The list itself is secret, although it is a fair bet that it contains only a few genuinely brilliant minds, and fewer still who are likely to rock the boat.
Although broader than the days when Lord Rothschild described it as populated entirely by men who ‘are aged fifty-three, live in the South East, have the right accent and belong to the Reform Club’, it is hardly representative of the population as a whole.
For the twenty-three years after 1950, the list was run by Miss Mary Bruce, a caricature white-haired Whitehall spinster more interested in horses than in people and who scared the pants off all who worked with her.
Miss Bruce's distaste for innovation made itself manifest in the dreary proposals served up to the Conservative and Labour governments in the seventies — whenever a request for names for public duties arrived in her in-tray, the same roll-call of has-beens fell out of her out-tray.
The new Public Appointments Unit set up in 1975 to revivify the List was run by Jonathan Charkham, a well-heeled nomad who had begun his career as a barrister, went into industry, and by the late eighties was working for the Bank of England.
Charkham enjoyed his job, coining the phrase that ‘patronage is second only to the act of love in conferring pleasure on all parties concerned.’
In an attempt to get away from Lord Rothschild's stereotype, he trawled the country for new names, although it was not until 1980 that people were able to write in to nominate themselves.
Under the present director, Geoffrey Morgan, a soft-spoken Welshman whose main outside interest is silkworms, the list of names has moved away from the Reform Club and further out into Middle England, although it is still a very long way short of representing a cross-section of the population.
In January 1990 it included 5,953 names, of whom 4,141 were men.
The thirty per cent who were women represented a doubling within a decade, but the great majority were still well into middle age — only 344 (eighty-five men and 259 women) were aged forty or less.
Half lived in the South East of England.
This is still only about one eighth of the number of people required to fill public appointments of one kind or another.
The plum tasks for which the Great and Good might be chosen are Royal Commissions or Committees of Inquiry, the device by which governments buy the days when faced with demands for change, political embarrassment, or questions too deep for quick political answers.
Because of the sensitivity of the subjects under consideration, the highest recommendation in considering who might be suitable to sit on these investigations is the fact that they have a safe pair of hands.
Mavericks need not apply.
The impulse to put safety first is understandable enough, but it is hardly a formula either for dynamism or for originality.
Once someone has established themselves as being the right sort of chap, then their name crops up time and again.
In a career which lasted over sixty years Lord Benson, Britain's most distinguished accountant, served on over twenty different governmental or quasi-governmental committees or inquiries.
In 1943 he was seconded from the army to advise on how to reorganize the munitions factories.
Exactly forty years later, at the age of seventy-four, he was still in post as adviser to the governor of the Bank of England.
He attributes his succession of government jobs to ‘a sort of grapevine’.
‘If you do one job adequately, then your name gets passed on.
And then, of course, you can become fashionable, like doctors or dentists.’
Lord Shawcross, who at one time or another was chairman of the Bar Council, the Press Council, the Medical Research Council, the Takeover Panel, and assorted royal commissions and tribunals of inquiry, claimed when questioned that the consideration uppermost in the minds of such figures was ‘the national interest’.
It was, he admitted, hard to define precisely what this was:
It's a matter of background and philosophy, which one can't really explain or analyse.
But a person going about it seriously has to discount his own personal opinion, which may be that all coloured people should — um — be expelled from the country, and decide what is in the best interests of the country as a whole, given that there is a large — er — ethnic problem.
And to do that he has to draw on whatever sources of knowledge he has, and try to arrive at an honest, unbiased conclusion.
It depends upon his personal honesty and intellectual competence.
In the case of immigration, a rare insight into the selection of the Great and Good occurred in January 1986, when, under the thirty year rule, government documents of the mid-fifties were declassified.
Alarmed by inner-city tensions in reaction to mass immigration from the Commonwealth, in June 1955 the Home Secretary asked Sir Anthony Eden to set up a committee of inquiry, to drum up support for immigration controls.
He listed the composition of such a body.
Ideally, it would be chaired by the law lord, Lord Radcliffe.
There would be an MP from each of the three parties, a token Welsh and Scottish member, an employers' representative and one from the trade unions, an economist, a social worker (‘preferably a woman’), a local authority representative and two members nominated by the Commonwealth and colonial secretaries.
It is hardly an inspired cast-list — it is characteristic that it includes no representatives from the community under investigation — but in its apparent breadth it is typical of an attitude of mind.
Members of the Great and Good appointed to these bodies not only had similar backgrounds and education, but acceptance of the job, with its admission to a distinguished club, involved adopting if not identical views, at least a similar perspective.
Lord Shawcross thought that
they of course tended to believe in the country.
They wanted to see it happy and successful and as far as possible united.
They did not want to provoke conflict between different sections of society.
They wanted to give everyone an equal opportunity at the beginning of their lives, in health and in education.
It was Butskellite, I suppose.
Here is a key to the post-war Establishment so distrusted by Henry Fairlie and the others.
They were consensus men.
The idea proved remarkably durable.
Professor Sir Richard Southwood, who became vice-chancellor of Oxford in the autumn of 1989, entered the world of the Great and Good thirty years after Lord Shawcross and found things largely unchanged.
A down-to-earth ecologist with a taste for mutton-chop side boards and a cloth cap, Southwood was part of a stream of distinguished biologists in post-war public life, including Lords Rothschild, Zuckerman, and Swann.
By the early eighties he had held half-a-dozen public appointments, including the chairmanships of the Royal Commission on Pollution and of the Trustees of the Natural History Museum:
There were all sorts of different views of the future, but everyone had the same ideas about what was worth preserving.
The principle that education was to be open to all, irrespective of means; public galleries and museums should be open to all, the National Health Service likewise.
There was also a view that there was an unacceptable face of capitalism.
We were drawn from both sides of the political fence, but the key idea was consensus.
Even if you had different views, you felt you should not impose those views on a significant minority.
We always strove to get a solution that was acceptable all round.
In the context of the times, this approach had practical as well as philosophical attractions.
In the twenty years between 1960 and 1980, the tenancy of Downing Street changed between Labour and Conservative four times, an average occupancy of only five years: the Great and Good were trying to produce policies which would be durable enough to survive the swings.
Their loyalty was therefore to some profounder vision of Britain than that expressed in mere party politics.
And there were inevitable structural constraints built in.
Lord Annan, who led the Committee on the Future of Broadcasting in the 1970s, noticed them:
Firstly, the idea of balance is written into the very idea of a Royal Commission.
Then you take evidence from everyone who might have anything to say on the subject.
And then the next question is, what you do with all this mass of material you've collected?’
Established to tackle thorny problems, it was hardly surprising that, in the words of Lord Shawcross, ‘if you couldn't find a solution which commanded general support, then at least you'd find a way which would enable the whole matter to be put on the back shelf.’
There is more than a grain of truth in the observation by A. P. Herbert that royal commissions were usually appointed ‘not so much for digging up the truth, as for digging it in.’
Herbert also penned the verses which have come to sum up the general fate of such investigations:
I saw an old man in the Park;
I asked the old man why
He watched the couples after dark;
He made this strange reply:
I am the Royal Commission on Kissing
Appointed by Gladstone in '74;
The rest of my colleagues are buried or missing;
Our minutes were lost in the last Great War.
But I'm still a Royal Commission.
My task I intend to see through,
Though I know, as an old politician,
Not a thing will be done if I do.
A capacity for burying problems made royal commissions and the like instantly attractive to politicians besieged by one knotty issue or another.
In the four decades after the war, there were 589 such inquiries, an average of almost fifteen each year.
Only thirty-seven were full-scale royal commissions, although Harold Wilson splashed out on them so liberally that even the Great and Good began to complain that the currency had been devalued.
Many of the post-war inquiries were into big, difficult subjects, like the investigation carried out by Sir Edmund Compton into allegations of security force brutality in Northern Ireland, or the inquiry by Sir John Wolfenden into homosexual offences and prostitution, which led to changes in the law.
But at other times they seem like sledgehammers to crack nuts.
Were Sir Charles Wilson's frequent trips to inquire into the future of the Dundee Institute of Art and Technology really necessary?
And what was the Duke of Northumberland doing for two years investigating recruitment into the veterinary profession?
Or the eminent Welsh barrister, Roderic Bowen QC, wrestling with the problems of bilingual roadsigns?
Since the war, the three most distinguished figures in this band of auxiliaries — the greatest of the Great and Good — in the opinion of the percipient Whitehall commentator, Peter Hennessy, were Lords Waverley, Radcliffe and Franks.
Lord Waverley (John Anderson) occupied the post of grandest grandee until 1952.
Lord (Cyril) Radcliffe, a brilliant barrister who had come to attention by his achievements in the wartime civil service, succeeded Waverley that year, and lasted until 1977.
On his death, the mantle fell upon Lord (Oliver) Franks, who, on returning to Britain in 1952 after serving as ambassador in Washington, turned down the editorship of The Times , the director-generalship of the BBC and the eventual headship of the civil service.
Margaret Thatcher's distaste for royal commissions is well known, but when her government faced the most serious foreign policy misjudgement of recent years — the failure to predict and forestall the Argentine invasion of the Falkland Islands — it was time to send for Oliver Franks again.
The five privy counsellors chosen to assist — the former Conservative Chancellor of the Exchequer, Lord (Anthony) Barber; the one-time Labour Cabinet minister, Lord (Harold) Lever; Sir Patrick Nairne, the delightful former permanent secretary and master of St Catherine's Oxford; James Callaghan's home secretary, Merlyn Rees; and the industrialist and Conservative politician, Lord (Harold) Watkinson were unlikely to come to radical conclusions.
But that is one of the points of such enquiries.
None the less, their investigation appears to have been scrupulously thorough, painting what Callaghan called ‘a splendid picture’, and pointing out political, diplomatic and military deficiencies by the British government.
But then, in the last paragraph, they concluded that ‘we would not be justified in attaching any criticism or blame to the present Government for the Argentine Junta's decision to commit its act of unprovoked aggression in the invasion of the Falkland Islands.’
It was as if , said Callaghan, they had got bored with the subject, and suddenly ‘chucked a bucket of whitewash over it.’
The Great and Good still had their uses.
There will always be subjects which can only be handled by referring them to apparently independent adjudicators outside government.
The Thatcher administration felt the behaviour of the tabloid press in invading people's privacy was one such matter — although their behaviour outraged all civilized standards, the worst offending newspapers were owned by political sympathizers like Rupert Murdoch.
In the spring of 1989 David Calcutt, Master of Magdalene College, Cambridge, was asked to lead an inquiry, and, sure enough, fifteen months later came up with proposals which appeared to satisfy both government and proprietors, even if it left victims distinctly underwhelmed.
Calcutt, the son of a Home Counties chemist who won a Cambridge scholarship after a minor public school scholarship and then held down a successful practice at the Bar, has a common Great and Good pedigree.
In being trusted with one delicate mission after another (the Diplomatic Service Appeals Board, compensation for the wrongfully imprisoned Guildford Four, the grievances of the former M.I.5 officer, Colin Wallace) Calcutt was bidding fair to become the chief of this tribe in the nineties.
What lay behind the beliefs of the Great and Good was a sense of custodianship.
It was rooted in a cast of mind raised to an ethic in the professions.
In an age when politicians, journalists, estate agents and even advertising executives claim to be ‘professionals’, it is easy to forget that the description once carried with it a certain cachet.
The reforms of the late nineteenth century had taken hold, it would be the self-governing professions, an aristocracy of merit, that would take over much of the social responsibilities of the hereditary peerage.
Even Adam Smith acknowledged their special status:
We trust our health to the physicians, our fortune and sometimes our life and reputation to the lawyer and attorney.
Such confidence cannot safely be reposed in people of very mean or low condition.
Their reward must be such as may give them that rank in society which so important a trust requires.
George Bernard Shaw was altogether more worldly-wise, observing that ‘all professions are conspiracies against the laity,’ and while they affected contempt for the medieval craft guilds, with their closed shops, the professions were in reality based upon very similar principles.
Lawyers and doctors had their own institutions dating back to Tudor times, but the great expansion of the professions occurred in the Victorian age.
A vast new respectable society arose round the professions, dignified by the belief that what they were doing (although it might be exorbitantly expensive) was in pursuit of some higher calling.
‘Medicine is a profession, dentistry is largely a business’, sniffed the British Medical Journal in 1878, but the professional tag was so sought after that the rush to respectabilize was unstoppable.
By the end of the century, architects, accountants and engineers had all created their own professional institutions.
By the 1920s, in the twilight of the aristocracy, instead of respect switching to industrialists, deference was accorded to the professions.
They appeared to attach chivalric values to the business of private gain.
‘The meaning of a profession’, wrote that great Christian socialist R. H. Tawney, ‘is that it makes the traitors the exception, not, as they tend to be in industry, the rule.’
The dignifying characteristic of the professions was that they had their own codes of ethics.
Because of the professional's specialized area of knowledge, the layman was unlikely to know what was best for himself.
He depended on the integrity of the professional.
Codes of practice were supposed to protect the customer, by dangling the threat of expulsion and consequent loss of income over the practitioners.
The professions therefore became mid-wife to the ‘we know best’ philosophy on which later the Establishment was to rest.
By the 1930s not only had admission to a profession become the goal of every middle-class family in the land, but they had come to seem bulwarks of society.
In a positively eulogistic survey in 1933, one author proclaimed them as a saving glory of European society as against newer cultures like the United States where ‘crude forces’ threatened the social structure.
In Britain, by contrast, ‘the family, the church, the universities, certain associations of intellectuals, and above all the great professions, stand like rocks against which the waves raised by these forces beat in vain.’
Which goes some way towards explaining the relative stagnation of the British economy.
While it was not axiomatic that the professional institutions were politically conservative, they were almost always culturally so.
The Royal Academy of Arts, for example, maintained a slavish loyalty to portraiture, landscapes and the inspiration of literature, while just across the English Channel the art world was alive with one ‘ism’ after another — Impressionism, Fauvism, Cubism, Surrealism.
‘You did not speak about the Royal Academy if you pretended to be interested in modern art,’ said one young critic.
Confined to the fine arts, this clinging to the safe and known was just a brake upon innovation and exuberance.
But in professions concerned with providing a service, where resistance to new ideas was allied to undisguised self-interest, it was a big obstacle to entrepreneurial dynamism.
Aneurin Bevan was only able to defeat the opposition of doctors to the National Health Service in 1944 by buckling together a compromise with Lord Moran, president of the Royal College of Physicians, ‘stuffing their mouths with silver’, and promising to respect their independent practice.
Similarly, the 1989 plans to loosen barristers' stranglehold on appearance in court ran into such heavy opposition even from radicals — or what passes for radicalism in such a deeply orthodox business — that the plans of an elected government were tempered by vested interest.
In the legal world, the most archaic of the lay professions, the idea of status was closely linked to the notion of the grandeur of the law itself: if the population had no respect for judges and barristers, they would soon have no respect for the law of the land.
The importance attached to ‘character’ was, therefore, considerable and even after the introduction of competitive examinations in the 1870s, the social composition of the bar scarcely changed.
A century later, the Royal Commission on Legal Services discovered that the profession of barrister was still largely the preserve of the upper and middle classes.
Not only did the cost of supporting themselves during their training and pupillage deter would-be barristers from poorer back-grounds, but the anachronistic requirement that they then find a place in ‘chambers’ from which existing advocates were working inevitably favoured those with the right contacts or family connections.
In the 1990s the Bar likes to proclaim that all that has changed, that it is no longer dominated by men who have been to public schools followed by Oxford or Cambridge.
Certainly there are many more women barristers to be seen around beneath the horsehair wigs, and the occasional black or Asian face.
But it is a deeply conservative trade which has resolutely resisted most attempts to bring it into the twentieth century, to make it more efficient, or to make access to the law more available to the ordinary citizen.
And while the spread of backgrounds may be wider now than it was, it scarcely shows in the appearance and mannerisms of the lawyers.
The aloofly anachronistic style of the bar, the stentorian joshing, the minor public-school humour remain the common coin, and even those who started life as the children of railway porters soon assume the mannerisms of the people whose bags their fathers carried.
The curious nature of the Bar would matter less were it not for the fact that it supplies the vast majority of judges.
In continental European countries, where lawyers can choose to become judges soon after qualifying, the judiciary looks very different to Britain, with, for example, near parity in numbers between men and women in countries like France and the Netherlands.
In Britain, it is almost entirely made up of upper-middle class, late-middle aged, white men.
In early 1990 there were no female law lords, only one woman (the redoubtable Dame Elizabeth Butler-Sloss) among the thirty lord justices of appeal, one female judge out of eighty in the High Court, and only eighteen women among the 422 circuit judges in England and Wales.
Black and Asian people were even more notable by their absence; there was one black judge among the circuit judges and, at the lower level of the judiciary, five among the 703 recorders.
This is not the multi-racial, equal opportunity society in which the rest of Britain is living.
Successive Lord Chancellors have gone on record stating their keenness to create a judiciary more representative of the population as a whole.
The fact that it has not happened says a great deal both about the appointments process and the legal profession.
Unlike civil servants, who win their jobs by competitive examination, judges depend upon a process of consultation and soundings which reproduces the judiciary in its own image.
Twenty years ago, officials admit, it was an amateurish, informal process.
Now, aspiring judges are called to a room at the western end of the Palace of Westminster overlooking the Thames, and, seated on chairs stamped with the gilt portcullis, interviewed about their suitability for the job.
After this interview, their success or failure depends upon their winning the good opinion of existing judges whose views are canvassed informally by civil servants in the Lord Chancellor's office.
Once appointed, circuit judges can be sacked only for incapacity or misbehaviour (one lost his job in 1984 after involvement in a smuggling racket), while to get rid of High Court judges or their seniors demands a joint address of both Houses of Parliament to the Queen.
The last time that happened was with an Irish judge in the 1830s.
It makes those who appoint judges understandably cautious.
The Lord Chancellor's civil servants can, they say, only recruit judges from among advocates who have already distinguished themselves by their performance in court.
Up to six or seven senior judicial figures are appointed each year, from a short list which numbers no more than a dozen.
The short list is drawn up on the advice of existing judges, seeking to establish whether the candidates combine the qualities of legal skills, status within the profession and ‘respectability’.
Since the top judges only retire at seventy-five, the highest levels of the profession are something of a gerontocracy.
One lord justice of appeal appointed in 1984, Sir David Croom-Johnson, was seventy when he took up his post, the age at which mere mortals are deemed too doddery to be trusted on jury service.
The core of the problem is simply that the judiciary is the creature of the legal profession.
The translation from an ordinary barrister to the prestigious — and much more lucrative — title of Queen's Counsel, ‘taking silk’, is, for no good reason also administered by the Lord Chancellor's department, rather than by the profession itself, which further consolidates the relationship.
The standard answer to suggestions that the judiciary is less than a representative cross-section of society is that the Lord Chancellor can only fashion judges from the timber he finds on the list of QCs.
As it is a list of his own making, it is not much of an excuse.
It is instructive to look at where recent silks have come from.
Close examination of the QCs appointed during the 1980s, from whom most of the judiciary will be drawn in the nineties and beyond, reveals that the old pattern has scarcely changed.
Of the 450 practising QCs appointed, 406 give biographical details in Who's Who and other standard reference works.
Of this number 262, almost two thirds, were educated at public schools, 215 of them subsequently going on to Oxford or Cambridge.
Another fifty-four who had been at state schools were also Oxbridge graduates.
Of the 450, a mere twenty-three, five per cent, were women.
The male, public school judiciary will be with us for years to come.
Significantly, it was a Scottish Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay of Clashfern, the son of a Highland railwayman, who was given charge of reforming the legal profession in England and Wales.
The Bar was the sort of impenetrable club with its own set of values that the Thatcher administration instinctively distrusted.
But when the Central Policy Review Staff (the ‘Think Tank’) had suggested in the early eighties that they mount a full-scale investigation into the practices and abuses of the professions, they discovered that the influence of the lawyers upon Number 10 was so strong that the proposal was sat upon and then returned, with a suggestion they confine themselves to teachers and social workers.
At the heart of Lord Mackay's proposals years later was a suggestion that solicitors be given the right to speak, and to become judges, in any court.
In the course of time, the two branches of the legal profession might be merged.
The plans would seem to have the merit both of broadening the spectrum of judges and giving the consumer greater choice.
Almost to a man, barristers fought the scheme.
Some of their arguments, such as that their professional standards were higher than could be maintained by law — as envisaged in the legislation — had a ring of truth to them.
But there was an unmistakable whiff of vested interest about the howls of outrage.
They had a considerable army of former lawyers to call upon in parliament, and the comments of the former lord chancellor, Lord Hailsham, that the Government was ‘thinking with its bottom and sitting on its head’ caused a flurry or two.
In the end, the hapless Lord Mackay's proposals were considerably watered down.
And so strong is the legal culture that radical change, to make the bar and judiciary more accessible or representative, looks unlikely.
The judiciary looks set to remain the preserve of elderly, slightly unworldly men whose cast of mind is rooted in the aspirations about which Tawney had been so glowing.
In The Acquisitive Society he wrote:
The difference between industry as it exists today and a profession is then, simple and unmistakable.
The former is organized for the protection of rights, mainly rights to pecuniary gain.
The latter is organized, imperfectly indeed, but nonetheless genuinely, for the performance of duties.
How he could have concluded that there was anything better designed to protect ‘rights to pecuniary gain’ than barristers' exclusive right of audience in court is a passing curiosity.
But the depiction of the motivation of the professions as being ‘the performance of duties’, goes to the heart of the motivation of that distinctive élite in British public life, the Great and Good.
For them, ‘the performance of duties’ is their overriding duty.
Like the guardians in Plato's Republic , few achieve the ranks of the Great and Good before the age of fifty.
They do not do anything that they are not entitled to do, and they usually do it reasonably conscientiously.
They are put in place to represent the public, but their background, education and occupation are rarely ordinary.
The ‘we know best’ philosophy of the professions informs their every activity.
Since populism is the antithesis of everything they stand for, it is instructive to see how they have handled that most demotic of forces, television.
The birth of commercial television in the early fifties was a victory for money over breeding, of corporate power over paternalism.
Among the Great and Good, scarcely a voice could be heard supporting a proposal which the BBC's founding father, Lord Reith, had said would prove as beneficial as dog-racing, smallpox or the bubonic plague.
The Tory party leadership, including Churchill (who thought commercial television ‘a tuppenny Punch and Judy show’), Lord Salisbury, Sir Anthony Eden and R. A. Butler, were unenthusiastic.
The leaders of the Trades Union Congress, governors of the BBC, the Archbishops of York and Canterbury, to say nothing of grand figures like the former foreign secretary, Lord Halifax, the former chancellor and home secretary who gave his name to the wartime Anderson shelter, Lord Waverley, and the sainted Lady Violet Bonham Carter were all against.
Henry Fairlie observed:
The debate on commercial television remains one of the clearest examples of the Establishment in action in defence of one of its dearest illusions, namely, that it knows best what is good for other people.
Yet they lost.
The political allies of the Popular Television Association were initially limited to a handful of young Conservative backbenchers like John Profumo and Selwyn Lloyd, but they ran a public-relations campaign on a scale, and of a sophistication, which had not been seen before in Britain.
The election of October 1951 had brought 100 new Conservative MPs into parliament all of whom received the undivided attention of the lobbyists.
Many of them also nurtured hopes that a new commercial sector would offset what their flights of fancy saw as the ‘bolshie’ bias of the BBC.
The new Tories talked of being ‘on the side of the people’ and when, in March 1954 the Television Bill came up for its second reading, they won the day.
‘Giving the people what they want’ had proved a more potent slogan than traditional Conservative paternalism.
A Princeton professor who investigated the campaigns a few years later put it more bitterly: ‘Cynical pseudo-egalitarianism replaced an older commitment to the maintenance of national standards.’
But now the old paternalism began to reassert itself, determined that whatever shackles had been placed around the BBC should also tie down the commercial companies.
An Independent Television Authority would regulate them, run by a group of people pulled out of the old drawer marked ‘gentlemen amateurs’.
The Postmaster General, the Earl de la Warr (Eton and Oxford), didn't think an interest in or knowledge of communications part of the job requirements.
‘The qualities required in the Chairman and members were tact and sound judgement rather than energy and administrative ability,’ he told the Cabinet.
How much of this delightfully frank list of requirements the Earl passed on to the man he approached for the job of chairman, the art historian Sir Kenneth Clark (Winchester and Oxford), is not recorded.
Like most of his friends, Clark believed that independent television ‘would produce a cloaca maxima of rubbish’.
Later he wondered:
Why did Buck de la Warr invite me?
I can only suppose that my name had respectable associations, and he thought it might allay criticism in what might be called Athenaeum circles.
In this he was mistaken.
Their odium was not allayed, but was focused on me, and when, soon after my appointment was announced, I entered the dining room of the Athenaeum (as a guest) I was booed.
Whitehall had no idea where to find the professionals who would stave off the imminent cultural vandalism of television.
When Clark had to hire someone to become chief executive of the new regulatory authority, the Treasury gave him a list of nine admirals, seventeen generals and six air marshals and told him they'd be disappointed if he didn't find the right chap among them.
Clark preferred the old boy network, and settled on an old pal from the Ministry of Information, Robert Fraser.
Clark and Fraser were trying to control a new set of television nabobs with priorities quite unlike those of the forty-year-old BBC, whose task was to ‘inform, educate and entertain’, in that order.
‘I don't want to change people or lead them.
I want to give the public what they want,’ said Lew Grade.
‘I know what the public wants because I am one of them.’
This was an entirely novel perspective: although chosen to represent the public, few of the Great and Good would have declared themselves spiritually one of them.
Those members of the Independent Television Authority and its successor, the Independent Broadcasting Authority, who have been most interventionist have devoted their energies to trying to make commercial television more like the non-commercial BBC.
Lew Grade and his successors put up with them, because the regulators did not prevent the companies making a profit.
Time and again the IBA proved itself a sucker to serious-sounding prospectuses, awarding franchise to London Weekend Television and the new breakfast television service, TVAM, only for them to turn out complete flops which later recouped their investment by lowering standards.
It is in the field of editorial content that the Great and Good of independent television have exercised their most direct influence.
Companies bidding for franchises must satisfy them that they will broadcast a sufficient proportion of ‘quality’ programming, a fair enough requirement perhaps, given the limitless temptations to pander to the lowest common denominator.
When the Authority intervened in the decisions of individual companies, it was almost always to insist on certain BBC-type standards, whether it was the retention of University Challenge or the compulsory broadcasting of the Queen's Speech on Christmas Day.
Twenty years later Channel Four, originally conceived as a publishing house for independent producers, succumbed to the same institutional pressures.
The IBA was of course on the liberal wing of the Establishment, but it knew where to draw the line.
The consequence is that Britain has never had truly free broadcasting.
When it comes to the most sensitive and important areas of journalism, like Northern Ireland or official secrecy, British broadcasters are less free to report than a camera team arriving from Perugia or Poughkeepsie.
Britain has been denied this freedom because it has never had a truly commercial broadcasting environment.
There has tended to be agreement on the central question; what is broadcasting for?
In other countries it was a vehicle for selling processed peas or indoctrinating the masses.
But in Britain, television, like the cod-liver oil forced down the gagging throats of Welfare-State children, was supposed to be good for you.
The tone had been set from the earliest days of the BBC.
‘It is occasionally indicated to us that we are apparently setting out to give the public what we think they need and not what they want — but few know what they want, and very few what they need,’ Reith had pronounced.
This cast of mind survived for decades.
In February 1965, the new Labour Postmaster General, Tony Benn, asked the chairman of the BBC, Lord Normanbrook (‘a stupid man…at the very centre of the Establishment’ Benn thought), and the Director-General, Sir Hugh Greene, why the BBC would not provide a radio service to satisfy the demand being fed by dilapidated old rust-buckets moored in the North Sea blasting rock music to the mainland day and night.
‘If you had continuous music, it would be like keeping the pubs open all day,’ he was told, which Benn summarized as ‘a real BBC view that it is bad to give the people what they want.’
As Benn's frustration indicates, the ‘public good’ which the BBC considered itself to be serving was not necessarily the same as that defined by government.
The BBC's loyalty was to some profounder purpose.
There was more than a touch of arrogance to the assumption, and clashes with governments, who could at least point to the fact that they had been elected, were inevitable.
In the 1926 General Strike Winston Churchill had proposed that the BBC be commandeered.
During the Suez fiasco in 1956 Eden considered an identical idea, and there were even a few voices suggesting something similar during the Falklands War in 1982.
These incidents are rare not only because national emergencies are mercifully infrequent, but because for much of the time there is an instinctive understanding between the governors of the broadcasting organization and the government of the nation, as the corporation's behaviour on issues like appeasement demonstrates; Reith succumbed to the same collective delusion that had seized Chamberlain, his foreign secretary, Halifax, and most of the population.
‘Of all the voices of the Establishment,’ wrote Henry Fairlie in 1959, ‘the British Broadcasting Corporation's is the most powerful.’
Not only did the BBC believe that it alone knew what was good for the audience, its pretence of impartiality was bogus and it absorbed and suffocated with banalities all differences of opinion:
It fears, and when it does not fear, it despises, non-conformity; and if non-conformity must be allowed its say, it will gently rob it of all anger and all laughter, of all passion and all heartache, until it lacks both pith and point…
Where the boundaries of accepted thought are being crossed, there you will not find the BBC; where there is dissidence or protest, there you will not find the BBC; where there is irreverence or resistance to cant, there you will not find the BBC.
The comment belongs very much to an era.
A decade later, after the satire boom and a score of grim socially realistic documentaries, the BBC had become the bête-noire of a thousand Conservative social clubs.
When he arrived at the BBC as deputy Director-General in 1987, John Birt even told the Financial Times that he found the place ‘crudely, thoughtlessly anti-Establishment.’
This too was an exaggeration, confusing cultural licence with editorial prejudice.
The BBC is rather like a cross between the Church of England and the Post Office.
On the one hand there is the lofty principle, spelled out in the inscription carved into the walls of Broadcasting House, ‘that the people, inclining their ear to whatsoever things are lovely and honest, whatsoever things are of good report, may tread the path of virtue and of wisdom.’
For the rest, there is the drab functionality of the place, the bureaucracy, the tatty carpets, a vast, amorphous organization given form by regulations which even prescribe the amount of money which may be claimed for riding a bicycle on official duty.
Its internal organization, hierarchies, and values struck Melvyn Bragg, who joined the Corporation from Oxford in 1961, as being modelled on the public school system:
I think the BBC has a system of promotion which is rather like the way in which people are made prefects at school.
The reasons for their success are not necessarily to do with their acuteness, not necessarily to do with their originality, but everything to do with sustaining the status-quo of the institution at that time.
People are seen as going up a ladder: they are trainees, they become accepted when they get to know the school rules — the ambience is that once you've survived the initiation, you're part of this club, this closed society.
The club becomes the most important thing in their lives.
When you talk about politics to BBC people, they immediately assume you mean BBC politics, not relations between the parties or the superpowers, but who's going to be the next DG.
This distinctive corporate culture flourishes in an environment in which independence is more a matter of convention than anything else.
It has no guarantee in law and the Corporation has no weapon to wield against political interference beyond an appeal to public opinion and the threat of resignations.
Technically, the governors are the BBC.
The first governors were a worthy lot.
The chairman, Lord Clarendon, had been parliamentary under-secretary for the dominions; presumably running the BBC was a similar sort of task.
Reith thought him ‘weak and stupid’.
The others were a liberal coal-owner, an ex-comptroller of the Bank of England, and the former headmaster of Winchester (the postmaster general, who made the appointments, was a Wykehamist).
The one woman, Ethel Snowden, wife of the former Chancellor of the Exchequer (‘ignorant, stupid and horrid’, according to Reith), was a double token, chosen to represent the interests of both the Labour party and women.
In the fifty years following there were eighty-five governors.
When the historian Asa Briggs examined their backgrounds he found that fifty-six of them had been university educated, forty at Oxford or Cambridge.
The three schools of Eton, Harrow and Winchester accounted for twenty governors.
Among the thirty-eight who had been politically active, there were more than twice as many Conservatives as anything else — nineteen were Tories, seven Liberal and eight Labour.
Their average age on taking up their post was fifty-four.
Although appointed to represent a cross-section of British life — one each from Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland; at least one academic; one trade unionist (almost always from the right-wing of the movement); one with an interest in the arts; usually a scientist; a retired diplomat to represent the Foreign Office; and in recent years one representative from the ethnic minorities — they have their amateurism in common.
Sir Alexander Cadogan, made chairman in 1952, had never seen a BBC television programme, and the ones he had seen, in the United States, he didn't much care for.
Lord Tedder, vice-chairman in the early fifties, admitted that ‘I know nothing at all about broadcasting, but I can learn.
Specialization is one of the most dangerous tendencies.
It has given us experts, not wise men.’
By the time that Edward Heath had to appoint a chairman twenty years later, he chose Professor Michael (later Lord) Swann, Vice-Chancellor of Edinburgh University, on the grounds that running the BBC was rather like running a university, with a ferment of ideas, plenty of eccentricity and troublesome students.
Which is how the Great and Good have always seen their role.
One of the little pleasures of life in Downing Street is the opportunity it affords to dish out baubles of one kind or another.
The twice yearly honours lists are the ones which attract most attention, but there is another raft of honours in the gift of Downing Street, some of which reflect professional excellence and others which confer real power and influence: jobs.
For reasons best known to themselves.
Downing Street declines either to list or number the posts directly in the gift of the prime minister.
But they include various agreeable academic posts such as the mastership of Trinity College, Cambridge, regius professorships, the boards of most of the great museums and galleries, and the deans of cathedrals (when it comes to bishops, changes introduced during the Callaghan premiership restrict the prime minister's choice to two names, submitted by a Church of England committee).
The posts may not necessarily be particularly lucrative (regius professorships are worth £100 a year, religiously paid in quarterly £25 cheques), but they are at some of the pinnacles of national life, they open doors and they command respect.
Unlike other university appointments, which are made by faculty boards or governing bodies on the basis of academic achievement, there is no formal selection process, and no open competition for regius professorships.
Those who wish to be appointed must somehow solicit the good opinion of the prime minister's appointments secretary.
For most of the eighties this post was held by Robin Catford — of whom more later — who had the privilege of having the tenancy of the best room in Number 10.
Even then, they can lose the post for the most bizarre reasons; Downing Street myth has it that Richard Cobb failed on his first attempt to get the Oxford Chair of Modern History because he wore bicycle clips throughout his interview.
Anthony Honoré, retiring Oxford Regius Professor of Civil Law, had just been canvassed by the appointments secretary when I visited him in his panelled rooms at All Souls.
The search was under way for his successor, although Catford's trawl was conducted in a distinctly courtly style:
He was both listening to suggestions and putting forward names that other people had suggested.
He was interested in who the local people wanted, whether they considered that a chap would fit in with the university or college, whether he'd be acceptable to his colleagues.
How particularly English that question of whether a chap will ‘fit in’.
This is the dry sherry end of the appointments business.
Many other jobs get handed out simply because a minister happens to know someone who might fit the bill.
Sir Ian Trethowan slid comfortably out of the director-generalship of the BBC to become chairman of the Horserace Betting Levy Board because the Home Secretary, William Whitelaw, happened to know he was interested in racing.
Others rise because they are politically congenial.
Still others — few enough in number — advance relentlessly for reasons even they find hard to fathom.
William Rees-Mogg was the great panjandrum of the eighties.
All black suede shoes and double-breasted pinstripe, he seemed central casting's idea of the ideal Establishment man.
He is a genuine hate-figure for the libertarian left, who are capable of splendid outrage at the mention of his name.
Anyone who takes on public duties sets himself up for attack, and in Rees-Mogg's case, the succession of posts was dizzying.
Where others might have been satisfied just to become editor of The Times , he took on one public job after another.
Some, like becoming High Sheriff of Somerset, were trouble-free baubles.
But others — the chairmanship of the Arts Council, deputy chairmanship of the BBC, or leadership of the Broadcasting Standards Council — involved real work and real responsibilities.
Why did the ministerial hand hover above the name of Rees-Mogg when presented with a list of candidates for these public positions?
The Broadcasting Standards Council job, as a sort of public smut-detector, demanded some acquaintance with popular taste and culture.
Yet, by his own admission, ‘I tuned out of pop music with Elvis Presley.’
He served as editor of The Times while unable to type, as chairman of the Arts Council while unable to drive, and was appointed to the Broadcasting Standards Council unaware that one of Britain's most popular television shows was named Jim'll Fix It (‘Who's Jim?’ he once asked).
Part of the answer lies in the unexciting fact that he is prepared to take on the jobs.
He has that ingrained self-confidence most commonly attributed to the grandest old Etonians, although he failed to win a scholarship there and ended up at Charterhouse.
At Oxford (at that most political of colleges, Balliol, inevitably) he ran both the Conservative Club and the Union.
Even in such a nursery of ambition Rees-Mogg stood out.
College contemporaries composed a new version of the song Lloyd George knew My Father:
Rees-Mogg knows the Master.
The Master knows the Queen.
Rees-Mogg talks to no-one
Lower than the Dean.
His is the sort of pedigree which has produced figures who have risen to the top of public life for generations.
The combination of self-assurance, ambition and an etiolated compassion is the hallmark of the great English Pooh-Bah.
(Who else could write of his ‘impotent guilt, on the walk from the Royal Opera House to the Savoy Hotel for supper,’ on observing the homeless sleeping in doorways?)
Rees-Mogg's answer to the question of why his name had such appeal for Downing Street during the eighties has an undramatic plausibility about it.
As he lies back in his armchair, grey hair falling across his brow and his fingertips steepled on his chest, he gives a rehearsed explanation.
It's a question of contacts:
Inevitably as a journalist you get to know a large number of people, and it's people who make appointments.
If they feel reasonably safe about appointing you, you're more likely to get the job than somebody they don't know.
Appointment secretaries and ministers are much more concerned with not having a disaster than with anything particular which may or may not happen.
And I've never done anything really badly.
It is a humdrum enough explanation which goes some way to explaining why most public appointments are so dull.
It is also further evidence of the extraordinarily shallow pool from which the Great and Good are drawn.
Rees-Mogg went about his business conscientiously and with a good degree of enthusiasm, and while it is hard to think of him as a representative of the common man, sheer assiduousness probably bridged the gulf between the housing estates of suburbia and the Old Rectory, Hinton Blewitt.
But the sharpest criticism of him is that while appearing to be a chip off the old block, he was in fact something else, representative of the politicization of public appointments.
Certainly he never made any secret of his Conservative past, having twice stood unsuccessfully for parliament among the miners of County Durham, where his air of a slightly lost rural dean can hardly have been an asset.
During his time at the BBC, when the Home Secretary, Leon Brittan, asked the Corporation not to show a documentary in the Real Lives series dealing with extremist politicians in Northern Ireland, it was Rees-Mogg who led the governors' demand that the management acquiesce.
At the Arts Council, he accepted government wisdom about the need for alternatives to public funding.
He supported attempts to suppress the Spycatcher memoirs of former M.I.5 man Peter Wright.
Rees-Mogg's predecessor as vice-chairman of the BBC, Lord Bonham-Carter, son of Lady Violet and grandson of Asquith, was another member of the Great and Good with a political background, having briefly been a Liberal MP.
Indeed, his record was intrinsic to his being offered the job, since at the time (1975), the BBC was short of governors with political experience.
I suggested to Lord Bonham-Carter that his pedigree inevitably made him a political appointee himself:
Of course, I was a political person.
But in those days things were different: appointments had to be consensual.
There was balanced politicization.
Now, it's an unbalanced politicization.
What was unique about the BBC governors in the eighties was that you had Rees-Mogg as vice-chairman and Stuart Young as chairman — two open, committed supporters of the present Government.
That had never, ever happened in the whole history of the Corporation.
They had simply abandoned balance.
This is a familiar refrain.
Alasdair Milne, the BBC director-general sacked in 1987, also believed that the Thatcher government abandoned any attempt at bipartisan appointments, in favour of packing the BBC governors with people who would be politically sympathetic.
But it is a complaint that has been made before.
When Harold Wilson put in Lord Hill of Luton to act as chairman of the BBC (a Conservative who, as head of the Independent Television Authority had ‘made sure that their treatment of news and current affairs does not offend the Establishment’, in the view of Richard Crossman), he remarked, ‘Charlie Hill has already cleaned up ITV and he'll do the same to the BBC now I'm appointing him chairman.’
There is nothing novel in the direct involvement of the prime minister in public appointments.
Under the secret rules of Cabinet procedure, the prime minister has the right to be consulted about all chairmanships and deputy chairmanships of public boards and commissions of inquiry.
Some politicians freely confess that they have packed supposedly ‘independent’ inquiries, in the hope they will produce a congenial result.
In her diaries, Barbara Castle admits that when secretary for social services in 1975, she and her health minister, David Owen, deliberately appointed Alec Merrison, Vice Chancellor of Bristol University, to chair a Royal Commission on the Health Service, on the grounds that ‘he was a dedicated supporter of the NHS and would have no truck with private financing and all that nonsense.’
What happened in the 1980s was, say opponents, of a different order altogether.
To begin with, Margaret Thatcher dispensed with royal commissions.
For a government committed to radical change, they had a number of disadvantages.
Firstly, as their participants confessed, they were supposed to be balanced in composition, and were inevitably predisposed towards consensus.
Once established, a royal commission was out of political control.
And when it had finished its inquiry, not a word of its report could be changed by government, which was also obliged to publish its findings.
The Thatcher approach was to employ small teams to tackle specific problems or to issue a set of proposals, and then wait for the howls of
This was not the style of the Great and Good.
Figures like Lord Bonham-Carter, appointed to his most public post, as chairman of the Race Relations Board, by the Labour Home Secretary, Roy Jenkins, and reappointed by both his Conservative successors, Robert Carr and Reginald Maudling, was committed to a more sedate, centrist approach.
Like most of his ilk, he believed in the three great pillars of domestic policy: the Welfare State, full employment, and the nationalized industries.
Generally, with the exception of Suez and the Common Market, there was also agreement on foreign policy.
He belonged to that alliance of the professions, the remnants of old money and a smattering of intellectuals which had a romantic view of the working man and found a sympathetic ear in the leadership of more conservative trade unions.
It would be hard to overstate the contempt with which the lower-middle class were viewed.
Peter Jay, who was plucked from the economic editorship of The Times by his father-in-law, Labour Prime Minister James Callaghan, to be made ambassador to Washington, recalls the feelings clearly:
We felt nothing but hostility for them.
We thought they were silly and selfish, with narrow, primitive, semi-educated attitudes.
We grew up viewing them with contempt, and saw them as preoccupied with money so they could ‘better themselves’.
They made themselves ridiculous.
They were contemptible, and therefore it was easy for governments to squeeze them.
And squeezed they were.
The petit-bourgeoisie was an easy target for governments keen to raise a little more in taxes.
Their common-sense ideas about life, good housekeeping and the rest were ignored by government after government, who regarded them as an over-productive milch-cow.
There was a cultural bias against them too: much of British theatre and cinema in the fifties and sixties was peopled by heroes and anti-heroes wrestling with the small-mindedness of the lower-middle class.
It was predictable, if not predicted, that one day the worm would turn.
Mrs Thatcher was a natural to lead the revolt of the petite-bourgeoisie.
She was an outsider to her bones: a woman, a scientist and a non-conformist in a male, humanities and soft Anglican world.
The old Establishment was masculine — the public schools, the male Oxbridge colleges, the  gentlemens' clubs of St James's.
Attitudes were formed as much in shared leisure as by individual endeavour.
She, by contrast, seemed only happy at work.
The abiding impression of eighties government is of a woman going briskly about her business, handbag over one arm, bustling off from one meeting to another, impatient at others' need for rest or reflection.
She distrusted the institutions through which they exercised influence from the moment that supreme power seemed within her grasp.
Her former Special Adviser, Patrick Cosgrave, recounts how there were only two areas for which she had any respect:
‘Do you,’ a friend asked her in 1980, ‘hate all institutions?’
She frowned and replied, ‘Not at all.
I have great respect for the Monarchy and Parliament.’
But for the City, the trade unions, the civil service and the Church of England she has a dislike that some would call hatred and certainly veers regularly over into contempt.
Given this cast of mind, it was not surprising that during Mrs Thatcher's occupancy the Great and Good found the doors of 10 Downing Street more closed than at any time since the war.
To ward off the smothering tendencies of the bishops, permanent secretaries and dons, the Prime Minister had a shifting circle of advisers to protect her, and another group who would replenish the fund of radical ideas.
All prime ministers develop a small coterie of kindred spirits, but Mrs Thatcher tended to listen to individuals on individual issues, while the number of people who enjoyed sustained, continuing influence was tiny.
Industrialists, who have acquired power and influence without passing through the mollifying tunnel of public school, Oxbridge and the professions, have always represented a potential challenge to the old order.
They therefore proved natural allies in her assault upon the seat of consensus in Whitehall.
Some, like David Young, who had abandoned the law for a career as a property developer, she put in charge of great statutory bodies, in his case eventually raising him to the Cabinet as Lord Young of Graffham.
Though much resented by MPs who had had to go through the tiresome business of getting people to vote for them, he proved a determined and effective minister, until he decided he'd had enough of the political rough-and-tumble which went with the job.
At a second level were industrialists like Jeffrey Sterling, the chairman of the P&O shipping company, for whom she arranged a knighthood.
Sterling was given an office at the Department of Trade and Industry, where he advised on industrial policy, and had a big say in plans for the future of broadcasting.
Sir Roy Griffiths, Managing Director of the Sainsbury grocery chain, was put in charge of an inquiry into the National Health Service.
Sir Derek Rayner was borrowed from Marks and Spencer to tackle waste in government.
Sir Robin Ibbs was loaned from ICI and asked to sort out the civil service.
A small group of civil servants stayed loyal throughout the eighties, of whom the most formidable was the Prime Minister's press secretary, Bernard Ingham, the short-tempered son of a Yorkshire weaver.
His bluff style, orchestration of a pliant group of lobby correspondents and capacity to communicate with the Prime Minister almost telepathically, justified the tag ‘the deputy Prime Minister’.
Robert Armstrong, the Cabinet Secretary, developed a genuine affection for Mrs Thatcher, which was obviously reciprocated during his term in office.
Another highly influential bureaucrat, Charles Powell, was a fast-rising Foreign Office man who came to Margaret Thatcher's notice when part of the team negotiating independence for Zimbabwe.
Seconded from the Foreign Office as her deputy private secretary, Powell was soon reckoned by his former colleagues to have ‘gone native’, and was widely resented for his continued and easy access to the Prime Minister's ear, into which he appeared to be whispering something which was definitely not the authorized FO version.
All worked prodigious hours (‘Charles, eez's nairver at 'ome’ was the frequent complaint of Powell's sprightly Italian wife), which reinforced their remoteness from the rest of the world.
Then there were the courtiers, the greatest of whom was her husband, Denis.
Others included Cecil Parkinson, whose devotion ensured his survival even after an undistinguished ministerial career and despite his former mistress presenting their illegitimate child to the press.
There were also her public relations men.
Tim Bell, usually described in the newspapers as ‘Mrs Thatcher's favourite adman’, claims the distinguishing characteristic of this group was that ‘we spent time being nice to her.
There's something about her which stopped other people saying ‘what a nice dress’, or ‘you did well on television yesterday’.
They seemed to feel it was a threat to their virility.’
Bell is happy to cultivate the impression that he was the Svengali who transformed Thatcher's harsh, strident public persona into something softer and more voter-friendly.
In fact, much of it was the work of Gordon Reece, another of her image-makers.
But the acceptance of responsibility is typical of these men: modesty is not the word which springs to mind.
The office of prime minister is a lonely and uniquely stressful one, and most develop their own small circle of confidants.
The Thatcher group had several characteristics which made them differ from their predecessors.
Apart from the fact that most of them were self-made, the other thing they had in common is that they were all essentially ‘doers’, unencumbered by second thoughts.
‘They are characterized by low boredom thresholds and an inability to work for other people,’ thought Sir John Hoskyns.
‘They're probably impossible, unattractive people.
The basic premise is that they think they know better than anyone else.
They aren't team players.’
The most zealous guardians of the flame were the converts.
They included the former Communist, Alfred Sherman (whom she later recommended for a knighthood); Paul Johnson, one-time editor of the New Statesman ; and her close friend the former Labour MP and News of the World columnist, Woodrow Wyatt.
Nothing is more politically reassuring than the fact that people have abandoned their former friends to join you.
Others might be suspicious of their capacity for the volte-face, but in the Thatcher Downing Street, seeing the light was the key to their fortune.
Among her policy advisers, the best-known was Sir Alan Walters, whose wraith-like presence as her adviser on the economy proved so vexatious to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Nigel Lawson, that he resigned.
Although he later affected contempt for the poor, Walters had grown up the son of a working-class Leicestershire Communist.
He had been recruited by Alfred Sherman specifically to provide a counterblast to the Treasury advisers, because Whitehall was deemed to be the source of the advice which had let the country down in the past.
Other recent prime ministers had been aware of the shortcomings of policy advice from Whitehall, but none had acquired the almost visceral distrust which characterized some of the early Thatcher advisers.
The Central Policy Review Staff, or ‘Think Tank’, which had been run by the polymath Lord Rothschild to supply Edward Heath with independent ideas and inject new life into strategic thought, was an early casualty.
Rothschild and his successors tried to take a fresh look at issues too remote, politically inconvenient or otherwise ignored, and come up with clear, concise proposals for action, if possible on a single sheet of paper.
They had been on to the energy crisis, for example, years before it hit politics.
Mrs Thatcher was instinctively distrustful of the group.
Early on, she demanded from each member a list of the people they had consulted during the previous three months.
Deciding they hadn't spent enough time talking to industrialists (Marks and Spencer was the favoured analogy), she killed it off in 1983.
The first some of the Tank members knew of their fate was when they read it in The Times .
In place of the Think Tank the Prime Minister had the Policy Unit.
The difference was vast.
Members of the Policy Unit were drawn from a much broader pool and were dominated by businessmen and academics.
Lest they be contaminated by too frequent contact with the fudge and mudge of Whitehall, they were entertained to frequent lunches by right-wing organizations like Aims of Industry and the Institute of Directors.
Also present at these meetings in various London clubs and restaurants were representatives from employers' organizations, who recognized that to influence the Policy Unit was to influence the Prime Minister: if a minister proved unavailable, unsympathetic or intractable, they could outmanoeuvre him by enlisting Policy Unit support.
Where the Think Tank tended to challenge Downing Street, the Policy Unit strengthened it.
The beliefs of this group centred on Downing Street were completely at odds with the ideas of most of the Great and Good whom, indeed, they regarded as a symptom of the problem.
Tim Bell considered that Mrs Thatcher thought ‘all the problems of Britain were the direct consequence of two things.
One was socialism.
The other was the Tory Grandees.’
She was fortunate in that those who had passed through their political puberty in the fifties and sixties had grown up with a hazy notion of the Establishment.
Many had begun by raging against it as angry young men or women and felt terribly let down by the failure of the Wilson government to make much of a dent in it.
Others, demoralized apostles of free enterprise, were appalled at the way in which the old boy network laid its palsied hand upon the business of wealth creation.
By the late seventies a succession of writers, of whom Correlli Barnett and Martin Wiener were the best-known, had given this idea intellectual respectability.
By the time that Mrs Thatcher entered Downing Street — after a Winter of Discontent in which rubbish was piled high in the streets and the dead lay unburied — the two ideas had been elided.
The most consistently outspoken broadsides against the old Establishment came from the Institute of Directors, a once moribund association of small businessmen and oddball intellectuals, which revived itself by taking up Thatcherism almost before the term had been coined.
Even after a decade in which they had more-or-less everything their own way, they were still railing against the old enemy.
Using their favoured analogy in which the complexities of a nation-state were reduced to the simplicities of a corner shop balance sheet, the newly appointed boss of the Institute took up the cudgels again in February 1990.
‘It is obvious that responsibility for 100 years of decline of UK plc must be laid at the door of the Establishment which purported to guide the affairs of the nation,’ Peter Morgan told them in a speech which commanded wide attention.
To him, the Establishment was a liberal conspiracy.
Listing the institutions which had contributed to the lamentable performance of ‘UK plc’, Morgan went on to lambast Oxford University (‘dons caught in a timewarp’), the Church of England (‘the enterprise culture is an alien concept to the established Church’), and Whitehall (‘our vast body of state employees who do not have to worry where the next pay cheque is coming from’).
All this went down well enough with the members of the Institute, although it conveniently ignored both the fact that large numbers of those he excoriated had been encouraged into the professions by business parents and that for an entire decade ‘the Establishment’ had been elbowed aside by the Thatcher appointments policy.
Margaret Thatcher understood the power of patronage early in her premiership.
He use of it was scarcely unprecedented: ‘jobs for the boys’, Tory MPs had cried as Harold Wilson infiltrated another trades union general secretary or a congenial academic on to the board of one or another of the great national institutions in his gift.
In Whitehall, three words came to sum up the appointments policy.
The director of one of the national galleries whose trustees were appointed by Downing Street ran into them in the very early 1980s.
Previously, he had merely submitted the name of the person chosen by his committee to Downing Street, where it was rubber-stamped.
Now, for the first time, he was subjected to close questioning, which went beyond the usual itemizing of previous posts.
‘Of course,’ said the civil servant, ‘the question I shall be asked when I put this name to the PM is ‘Is he one of us ?’
‘One of Us’ soon became the catchphrase of the Thatcher era.
It did not imply membership of a social circle but an attitude of mind.
The inclination was, where possible, to appoint new people, often with no experience of similar work, to jobs in Downing Street's gift.
At its most blatant, posts which had once been the preserve of dons from Oxford or Cambridge were now given to businessmen.
They were furious.
In Oxford, the voice of the gnomic Professor Sammy Finer, a declared political agnostic, rose a full octave when I asked him about it: ‘It simply isn't true any longer that merit will out.
Merit plus party will out, but not merit on its own.
You're just ignored.
You might as well never have existed.’
Mrs Thatcher took a much closer interest in a broader range of appointments than any other post-war prime minister.
Now, when a short list of names went to Number 10, there were questions about why other names had been omitted.
As often as not, they were the names of her favourite businessmen of the moment.
There was nothing new in the involvement of businessmen on the boards of the great public institutions alongside the retired civil servants and august academics.
But the balance began to change.
The distinguished nuclear physicist Lord Flowers, a veteran of a dozen such committees, told me:
Management is what they're good at: the old buffers are scholars.
Where you want scholarship is on the inside, not on the boards.
But one of the pities is that the distinguished old buffers steeped in scholarship who are a little unworldly are being eased out of things.
The inevitable consequence, if that policy is practised too energetically, will be that we won't have any erudition left.
However uncongenial for the old professors, the obsession with appointing businessmen to the boards of such things as the great museums and galleries undoubtedly had positive benefits in terms of efficiency and fund-raising for example.
But it failed to recognize that the challenge of running an individual company was very different to that posed by a large public organization with a multiplicity of purposes whose owners weren't shareholders but taxpayers who felt entitled to demand access to those things the nation already owned.
Besides which, the list of figures qualified for the job was very short.
It was almost as small as the circle of names and acquaintances of the average senior civil servant, and was reduced further by the fact that once they had got on to a board, many businessmen rapidly came to resent the amount of time the job demanded.
Some of the details of this appointments policy are explored in later chapters, but it is worth noting here the way in which the philosophy of much of this new breed flew in the face of cardinal articles of faith of the Great and Good.
It surfaced, for example, in the suggestion that museums and art galleries, which had previously been open to the public free of charge, should begin to charge for admission.
It was not merely that such a proposition cut across yet another area of previous consensus.
It was also that free admission was part of the great Victorian philanthropic tradition, part of the vision of Britain which the Establishment felt they were called to safeguard.
Many of the new style trustees put in by Downing Street saw nothing wrong with the idea.
But the belief that as every post fell vacant, in marched another businessman briefed to implement the free-market orders of Downing Street soon became another myth.
The Great and Good have proved more resilient than might have been expected.
The new group —‘the Disestablishment’ as they were christened in a series of articles in the Financial Times — was highly fluid.
Businessmen, politicians and academics came and went from it.
Life was faster, demands changed more quickly, and people were included because they met a particular need at a particular time.
Entry to the old Establishment was hard to achieve for outsiders, but once they were in, the successful ones, the safe pairs of hands, tended to stay in.
The new group accepted and rejected with startling speed.
Its central belief, in the wisdom of the marketplace, was less than immediately applicable to the running of Kew Gardens or the British Museum.
Besides which, there was a severe lack of available talent.
In an attempt to find new blood to lead the science research councils, the then education secretary, Sir Keith Joseph, a great proselytizer for the new approach, hired a firm of headhunters.
Unfortunately their first action was to ask those already within the system of whom they should make enquiries.
Lord Dainton, one of Britain's most distinguished scientists, observed the process at first-hand:
The really dangerous thing is the exclusivity of the ideas under discussion.
It's always the same group of people.
And when it comes to appointments, they just get on the blower to somebody and say ‘give me your views’, and it's the same circle of people they know and trust.
It's not necessarily done with bad intentions, but unless there's much greater flow in and out, then I fear we're on a downward path.
This is not the sort of complaint one would expect after years in which Downing Street was running riot by appointing one maverick after another.
In fact, the Great and Good are not nearly as changed as popular myth would have it.
The spectacularly political appointments of the Thatcher years, like sending the right-wing journalist Lord Chalfont to be deputy chairman of the Independent Broadcasting Authority, are outnumbered by the nomination of much more traditional figures.
Between 1970 and 1989, for example, four fifths of BBC governors were men, half had been privately educated and half were products of Oxford or Cambridge.
There was a steady increase in the proportion of businessmen appointed, from two out of twenty in the 1970s to six out of nineteen in the 1980s, but they were still outnumbered by representatives of the professions.
The man appointed chairman of the BBC by Mrs Thatcher in 1986, Marmaduke Hussey, was a businessman, it was true, but of the most patrician style, and his wife, Lady Susan, as mentioned before, was a lady-in-waiting to the Queen.
For all their talk about the wisdom of the marketplace, the Thatcher government could not give up the paternalistic idea that they had to regulate the independent television companies, with the continuation of the Independent Broadcasting Authority in the guise of an Independent Television Commission.
A Broadcasting Standards Council, to determine what the British people may or may not watch, will be run, under Lord Rees-Mogg, by a bishop, a headmaster, a psychologist, an educationalist, a retired Labour MP and a former television newsreader.
None of the figures on any of the regulatory bodies was exactly a spring chicken, and none could be called a radical.
Everywhere in public life, old families, old money and titles have been in decline, while business has advanced.
But still, the great majority of posts are held by the sort of steady chaps who have always made up the Great and Good.