

SPECIAL EVENTS
THE GRAND DESIGN
Nothing great was ever achieved without enthusiasm.
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Those old Andy Hardy movies always seemed to have a scene where a bunch of American teenagers would be sitting around in an old barn or something wondering where to stage their amateur dramatics.
Suddenly one would leap onto a bale of hay and exclaim, ‘I know, kids, why don't we do the show right here…?’
There would be a couple of quick scenes of frenzied activity and then they would cut to a grand finale of Mickey Rooney & Co singing and dancing their way across a barn miraculously transformed into a splendid stage.
This is the kind of dreamy Hollywood fantasy I like to float in when I'm lying flat on my back under some dirty platform desperately trying to tack a loose wire or stubborn piece of baize into position — or standing in a wet field trying to work out exactly how the VIPs will swim through the mud from the helicopter to the marquee.
No event just ‘happens’; it's got to be created.
Whether it is a school fête or a huge rally, a successful event is the result of clear objectives, imagination, planning, an overall view and attention to countless details.
This part of the book will give you an expert — and simple — guide to planning and staging such events.
It's based on my experience of presenting thousands of them in close to a hundred countries around the world, under a wide variety of conditions.
I shall be talking mainly about conferences, because they are the most common.
There are more than 200,000 a year in the United Kingdom alone.
You can go into any reasonable size hotel some days and find two or three events on simultaneously.
It is increasingly likely that anyone who takes an active role in any organisation will at some point find themselves involved in setting up a ‘special event’.
Most of the principles and practicalities we shall be discussing for conferences apply to other events too, but where there are special considerations and differences for, say, rallies or exhibitions, I will mention them.
The key elements are: imagination, planning, foresight, thoroughness and a never-ending willingness to go that ‘extra mile’ in dealing with people and details.
These are as essential when you're planning a company training seminar with twenty-five people as they are when you're organising an 8,000 delegate, fifty-nation, ten-day congress.
Setting the objectives
First of all you must have clear goals, a picture in your mind of how you see the end result and a plan to monitor your progress and results.
It's no good going to work on the details unless you have this ‘vision’.
It would be like taking London's M25 or Washington's beltway, in the hope of getting somewhere; all you would do is go round and round in circles.
You have to know where you're going if you are to plan the best way of getting there!
Before you start, ask yourself: what are our objectives, what message are we trying to get across, which people do we want to reach, what emotions should they feel, what responses are we looking for, what do we want them to take from this event — in person or through the media and press?
A conference may, for instance, be held to communicate policy as the Conservative Party's is, or to decide policy as in Labour's case.
You may wish to inform a specialist group of people, or give them a reward or an incentive.
An exhibition may be aimed at creating new marketing ideas or providing an arena for marketing.
A rally may be aimed at exciting, motivating or converting people, and so on.
Only when you know what you want to achieve can you plan how you are going to achieve it.
The goal dictates the form.
The goal dictates the form.
It was frustrating at the Brighton Conservative Party Conference in 1988 to find ‘entrepreneurs’ selling Union Jacks on the afternoon of Mrs Thatcher's address.
It was the wrong occasion: the amateur just ‘likes flags and razzamatazz’ but the professional creates the atmosphere to suit the occasion.
This was a mid-term party conference, not a general election rally!
In America they ask: ‘What do we want to achieve?’ and then: ‘How do we achieve it?’
In England we say: ‘What shall we do?’ and then: ‘I wonder if it will achieve anything?’
No wonder we win so few gold medals or cups.
In America the political conventions are designed to enthuse the participants and television viewers to go out and campaign for their candidates for the Presidency and Vice-Presidency.
Because that is the aim, razzamatazz, music, flags, balloons, streamers and placards are appropriate means to help achieve it.
I remember during the Republican National Convention in Dallas in 1984 walking through the floor as the renomination of President Reagan was being acclaimed.
Thousands of flags were waving, helium balloons were going up and air balloons were coming down, two separate bands at both ends of the huge auditorium were playing different songs and everyone was cheering and screaming their heads off.
I was walking quietly by one group of people when a delightful black girl saw me passing and, in the nicest way possible, flung her arms around my neck and said, ‘Isn't America wonderful?’
The magic had certainly worked for her.
In 1985 there was a double objective for a rally I did with Ernie Guy for the American Bar Association in the Royal Albert Hall.
Although it was a major political speech by the Prime Minister, it was quite appropriate to have a military band and flags and a bit of excitement.
The Americans expected it and so it prepared them to sit down quietly and listen to speech.
On the other hand, most of the political and commercial conferences that I do are either for presentation on television of important policies or for discussion and debate on serious issues.
In such cases too many frills and too much frivolity would be all wrong.
The professional plans the presentation to suit the message and achieve the objective — not to ‘put on a good show’.
Paying for it
Once you have a clear idea of what you have to do, the next thing is to work out how you pay for it.
There's something of the chicken and egg situation in this.
It's hard to decide what you can do if you don't know how much money you can get, and it's hard to decide what something will cost if you haven't a clear idea of what you want to do.
Sort this out at your first planning meeting and much will depend on the particular circumstances of your organisation.
It may have unlimited funds or it may have very tight ones; most fall somewhere in between so you have to think creatively about raising the additional finance to do the job properly.
There are several things to remember about finance.
One is that the bigger the event (up to about 3,000 people) the more it costs proportionally .
It is not simply a question of multiplying numbers.
For instance, you may find that a conference for seventy people in a smallish London hotel will work out at £30 a head per day.
But if you're doing something for 7,000, the costs will be more per person per day.
That's because large events involve extra considerations you never dreamed of when doing a small conference.
If you're hiring Earls Court, for example, most people in the audience probably would not even be able to see the speakers, let alone hear them.
So you're talking about setting up giant screens and elaborate video and sound systems.
Another important point is that the less time you have in which to do something, the more it costs because you start to run into things like overtime and special delivery payments, rush jobs and so on.
In 1979 we held the United Kingdom's first showbiz-style election rally for Mrs Thatcher, and it was a great success.
A few days later Lord Thorneycroft, the Party Chairman, and Alastair (now Lord) McAlpine came to me and asked if we could stage another for the European Elections — three weeks later.
We had spent nine months working on the first one!
When I had got my breath back, I said, ‘Yes, we can, but it will cost three times as much and the Party will have to be responsible for getting people to come to it.’
(The most difficult part of any conference is getting the right number of the right people to attend.)
We set to work and produced the rally and it was terrific.
It showed you can achieve something at short notice, provided you're prepared to drop everything and cover the cost.
Petula Clark sang, and political agents wept — with emotion!
Such occasions, however, have to be very special.
No-one can operate like that consistently, nor should it be necessary.
For any event involving more than two hundred people, a year's planning is just about enough; for any event involving fewer people six months is the absolute minimum.
Work out your initial budget for every possible item of expenditure and then pad it .
Be as precise and as far-seeing as possible.
Many people spend money chronologically rather than strategically, with the result that they run out before they've done everything.
A little foresight might have shown them that spending less on early hospitality and a bit more on the venue would have saved them time, money and trouble overall.
Similarly, it's no good discovering that you are going to need an autocue and a slide projector when there's no money left to buy or hire them, or that your guest speaker will only fly first class when you've allocated £200 in your budget for his travel costs because someone vaguely remembered that £200 was the ‘Apex fare’.
When you're inviting speakers, discover what their real needs are going to be.
It's not unknown for an American to want to show a dozen video tapes, each of which may cost £50 to transfer to the British system.
Plan your expenditure for each stage.
For instance, site recces.
I make it a rule to go at least three times.
Allow for such visits and the travel and accommodation costs they entail.
If you're borrowing money for the event, be it £200 or £20,000, include the interest payments as part of your expenditure budget.
Insure against everything from salmonella poisoning to a speaker's non-appearance, and keep finances for a particular event separate from the company or organisation's general finances.
Once you've drawn up this highly detailed (and incredibly efficient) list, pad it.
Pad every section by ten per cent at least.
The smaller the overall budget, the more you pad to give yourself room for manoeuvre.
I'd recommend padding a budget of under £1,000 by at least fifty per cent.
And after you've done all the item padding, allow another fifteen per cent for contingencies.
The odds are that you will have to dip into it, but if you don't, and you come in under budget, everyone else will be enormously impressed by your professionalism.
Many events will in fact generate an income to offset some of the expense — perhaps a registration fee, a commercial exhibition or sales of souvenirs.
The point is to be specific about income and to plan it to meet your maximum budget.
It always strikes me as odd that we are incredibly specific in our lives about the small things, ordering a sandwich for instance: we order type of bread, filling, relish, seasonings and extras.
But when it comes to big things like religion, politics and money, we all too often just vaguely hope that we'll get by.
Don't ‘muddle through’ when you're planning an event.
Don't say, ‘Oh, if we have a wine and cheese party, it'll bring something in’, when you need to be sure of raising £300.
Nor is it any good hoping you'll raise all the money at the conference itself if three-quarters of the bills have to be paid beforehand.
You have to make things happen, not let them get mentioned, discussed and then forgotten.
Who does what
Who actually does what will depend on the nature of your organisation, whether, for instance, it is part of a professional set-up drawing on different departments, resources and personnel within a company, or whether it is purely voluntary — or a mixture of both.
In any conference or special event there are certain essentials.
You must have a co-ordinator who liaises between the different people, takes the overall view, is good at detail and is ultimately the person with whom ‘the buck stops’.
Find a secretary and some key workers, depending on your needs.
You should also have a treasurer or accountant to supervise the spending of the money and a finance chairman to raise it.
(These two functions ought to be separate.
The accountant cannot be worrying about money coming in.
He needs to have time and freedom to concentrate on proper spending!)
For bigger events you may also need someone to look after travel and accommodation, the programme, publicity and, most important, a person responsible for getting the right people to enrol, always the most difficult single task.
These are a few suggestions.
Your event will have its own needs and the composition of the committee may be suggested accordingly.
Oh good — a committee
Committee?
Now there's a word to chill the blood!
If Moses had been a committee, the Children of Israel would still be in Egypt.
But you need a body that can get together at various stages to liaise and swap ideas but whose members can function in their independent tasks.
I have included here a planning chart for small conferences which has served as a basis for hundreds of other charts I've used over the years.
You can adapt it for your own taste but keep the pointers in mind.
Once you've had your initial meeting, drawn up your central strategy and agreed your budget, individuals should be allowed to get on with their jobs with a reasonable amount of flexibility.
Don't put yourself in a situation where the treasurer has to come back to the committee to argue over every last penny.
To take a simple illustration.
If it's been agreed that the treasurer spends £300 on publicity with £100 each for posters, leaflets and newspaper advertisements, he should be allowed the latitude to spend £150 on newspaper ads and £150 on leaflets if the publicity chairman thinks it necessary, and perhaps nothing on posters.
Don't schedule too many meetings.
The trouble is, organisers love 'em!
One of my bigger irritations is when I have an enormously tight schedule taking me all over the country and I get calls — sometimes on my mobile phone when I'm stuck in the middle of a field somewhere — insisting that it's vitally important I attend a meeting that has just been scheduled for three o'clock that afternoon in London, which could easily have been planned at least two weeks earlier.
When you're drawing up the timetable right at the beginning there is no reason why you cannot fix your planning meeting dates, and stick pretty closely to them.
There are rare occasions when emergency meetings are necessary but such crises are nearly always avoidable if people are working well and the schedule has been properly organised.
I had to hold some emergency meetings once, during the preparations for Billy Graham's Euro 70 Crusade at Dortmund in 1970.
Billy was suddenly taken quite ill and all our closed circuit television centres around Europe had to be briefed quickly — and in person.
I scheduled airport meetings in fourteen of the thirty-six centres and travelled to seven on each of two days.
The first day it was Kristiansand, Oslo, Copenhagen, Hamburg, Amsterdam, London and Brussels.
Late at night I drove to Germany and the next day met committees in Frankfurt, Paris, Geneva, Zegreb, Graz, Munich and Vienna.
Most of the trip was on scheduled flights — all exactly on time!
Of course, you do need to monitor people once they have been given their tasks.
You can't just go away and hope everything will fall into place.
I was once involved in setting up ten Crusades simultaneously in Australia and New Zealand for Billy Graham.
They were about 3,500 miles apart and I was visiting each one at least once a month for a year.
That meant I was travelling a route that stretched from Darwin in northern Australia to Invercargill in southern New Zealand.
At one team meeting Billy asked me if all the travelling, and the time and money it took, were really necessary.
I told him it was and he said fine.
Nearly two years later he told me that in each of those ten Crusades, people on the committees had said that, although everyone had agreed on certain tasks to be done, they only actually got cracking on them a couple of days before I was due back!
That kind of effort is worthwhile, because it motivates and energises workers.
There is no substitute for personal contact in this work.
If you are an event co-ordinator giving your personal direction, passing on your commitment and gut-level conviction is vital.
If an organiser does not co-ordinate and monitor and know exactly what's going on at each stage, then ultimately he has only himself to blame if something goes wrong.
You can never plan too much, never work out too many details or anticipate too many ‘worst cases’.
It helps you understand other people's tasks, avoid problems and keep in mind that crucial overview I spoke of earlier.
Your event has a personality!
Perhaps this is the point at which to mention an event's atmosphere, its charisma, its personality, if you like.
It's a hard thing to talk about and difficult to define, but it is that essence that makes an event special, different from the rest, even from similar occasions in other years.
Sometimes it happens spontaneously.
At other times you have to create it, perhaps by one imaginative stroke, perhaps by hundreds of tiny details: programme decoration, colour scheme, logos, motifs, slogans, guests, music, menus and so on.
FIRST NIGHT Planning the huge Billy Graham Crusades of the sixties and seventies meant starting from scratch and moving into a city or country six to eighteen months ahead.
The ‘first night’ was always a little tense and emotional as we saw hundreds come forward at the end of the service to commit their lives to Christ.
I would usually be at the foot of the platform stairs as Billy went on at the start.
Behind him was the vice-president of the organisation, Walter Smyth.
All of us in the team knew that we were totally dependent on the Lord for any ‘success’— but it was still reassuring at each crusade when Walter would murmur to me as he surveyed the huge first night crowds —‘Well, Harvey, that's your job safe till the next one.
At the Conservative Party Conference in Brighton in 1988 we had a little fun on the last day, just before the Prime Minister's speech.
The audience was sitting waiting, about forty-five minutes before the start.
I asked our organist, Douglas Reeves, to switch to the rhythmic, sing-along songs.
People began to clap and wave flags.
I turned our closed circuit cameras onto the flag-wavers and they appeared on the huge screens above the stage.
As the audience saw themselves on screen they began to ‘perform’ for the cameras and within minutes the whole audience was cheering, singing and even dancing in the aisles.
In two minutes we had created the excitement, fun and audience involvement that set the atmosphere for the afternoon.
When the Prime Minister came to speak we had quietened it down so that they were ready to listen.
Object achieved!
If you agree on the details and choose a theme you can then weave them into your planning at every stage.
Working backwards
When you are compiling a flow-chart, work backwards!
For example: you want to produce some leaflets about an event that is happening on July 21.
You need time for the leaflets to be effective — maybe three weeks.
You allow a week to ten days to distribute them, so they have to be ready on June 15.
Allowing for running and folding time, proof correction, author's corrections, design and scripting, it soon becomes clear that by early-May you must be sitting down to plan the details of those leaflets — no later.
It would be useless to start compiling the leaflets at the beginning of July, but that's what often happens.
This is just one example.
Apply the same countdown procedure to other elements, and over-estimate how long things will take rather than under-estimate.
That way you can only be pleasantly surprised — occasionally.
A flow chart, compared with a calendar, will also tell you if your event clashes with a race meeting in the area on that day or another big event that might clog the roads, take the public attention and jeopardise the success of yours.
As new ideas come up during preparations the chart will help you assess their potential within the overall strategy.
You should also work into it check lists for each month with every detail you can think of, and have an arrangement for assessing the event after it has happened.
This is important if you are to learn whether you have achieved your objectives and what should have been handled differently.
The Billy Graham Crusades, for example, include planning for the following-up of converts through local churches as part of their very early advance meetings.
The flow chart is not supposed to be rigid or to be adhered to at all costs; more a source of guidance and reference and a way of keeping check on the different activities that go on simultaneously as you move towards that special day.
People are always niggling me and teasing me for doing too much work, going into too many details for even the smallest conference.
But these same people always say, ‘That ran like clockwork, Harvey’ or ‘What a great ‘do’that was, it looked terrific’and so on.
They just don't make the connection!
Some people say you get tired and jaded with something if you plan too much or for too long.
Wrong!
Not with good strategic planning.
Good planning gives you thinking time, the chance to anticipate problems and find ways of avoiding those stresses and crises that arise because you haven't enough time to deal with the unexpected.
Give it time
There are very few problems that cannot be overcome.
The main reason they are not overcome is lack of time to discover the mistake and put it right.
It's a principle that applies to even the most straightforward things, like travel.
It takes me half an hour to get from my home in North London to Heathrow Airport via the M25.
That's on a good day.
On a day of heavy traffic it could take an hour.
I always leave a minimum of one and a half hours so that if I have a blow-out or breakdown or some other unforeseen emergency, I still have time to take care of it and catch the plane.
The result of this strategy is that I've never missed a plane in twenty-eight years of international travel — except once.
That was in Frankfurt when a meeting over which I had no control went on just too long and I had no chance of making my flight.
I caught the next one and as we arrived at Geneva we were told the flight before — the one I should have been on — had been blown up by a terrorist bomb.
It was one of the first attacks and everyone on board had been killed.
Advancing
Much of the travelling I have done has been ‘advancing’,the vital part of effective event planning.
It can be a long and weary job — especially if you've got more than one location — but there is no way to plan a conference, exhibition, rally or any other special event without proper advancing.
Colleagues in politics and commerce still belittle my commitment to advance work.
‘Surely you don't have to go there again ’, they say, or ‘Do you really need to take your assistant there before the start?’
Yes, yes and yes again.
There is simply no substitute for knowing your venue (and how to get there) thoroughly.
There is no other way of anticipating the potential and the problems or getting to know the local people you will need to solve them.
At one venue we were having two conferences three months apart.
Because the first one was quite small I did not give it the full ‘advance’ treatment that I usually do.
I lived to regret it.
We had crowd-flow blockages, insufficient refreshment facilities, no VIP entrance, no security check until people were in the main auditorium, and no way to get backstage except by walking right through the main meeting, up the stairs onto the stage and out through the back — with everybody watching!
It caused us a lot of extra work, major changes and more travel to get it right for the second larger meeting.
FROM THE LONGMAN REGISTER OF NEW WORDS :advance man noun someone who makes arrangements for visits and appearances by an eminent person, and goes in advance to ensure that they proceed smoothly.
Officially Mr Thomas is director of presentations for the Conservative party: unofficially he is the Prime Minister's personal advance man, as the current phrase goes.
This is the year of the advance man.
And when people say advance man, they usually mean Harvey Thomas .
Daily Telegraph 4 June 1987 * A word of US origin.
Thorough advancing is the heartfelt belief of a man who has worked in ninety-seven different countries.
And travelled all the way round the world thirteen times.
The military rightly say, ‘Time spent on reconnaissance is never wasted’.
On my first visit to a venue I take photographs, get hold of the plans, make extensive notes — and there will still be a hundred things I'll miss.
Like the fact that the plugs are the wrong size, or the electrical system is completely inadequate or, in the case of the Brighton Centre in 1988, that there are many different ceiling heights in the exhibition area!
If you don't see and feel each event venue for yourself, you will not get the maximum potential out of it.
I would like to see the ‘advance’ man (or woman) used to much greater effect in this country.
The Americans do it better.
He should be brought in at the earliest stages to advise on venues — which would save time, money and frustration.
He should be the link between the professionals at head office and the local knowledge of the on-the-spot workers.
He should have a say in how the guest speakers use their time at the event: should they meet the press or the mayor, where can they go for a bit of peace and quiet, even reassurance, and so on.
The advance man will even be the person best qualified — from having sussed the location — to advise on menus, rehearsals and many other crucial details.
In so many areas the advance man (who may or may not be the same as the event organiser) has the on-the-spot knowledge which headquarters staff or the committee can never have — and it's a mistake not to get the maximum use from it.
The advance man knows the way to get VIPs in and out of the hall and how to manage their entrances and exits to the best effect.
He also knows if a particular route will need clearing of cables, furniture and other obstacles.
Ignorance of and unwillingness to accept the need for a good advance man causes more problems in event presentation than anything else.
Another of his tasks might be the gathering of voluntarily offered resources at the venue, whether it's free baize for the tables at a church fête, free mineral water or food from a local business, or the offer of cars to transport guests.
The good advance man develops through experience the wisdom of knowing when to try something and when not.
He has a sixth sense to recognise the genuine from the phoney.
I was the advance man for Mrs Thatcher in the 1987 General Election.
When I arrived ten minutes before her at one stop (advance means a few minutes ahead as well as two months) I found that two ladies in wheelchairs had positioned themselves at the foot of the stairs and were pleading with everyone to let them stay and shake hands with Mrs Thatcher.
Officials were trying to move them but after a word with our security people, we allowed them to stay.
It was a photo-opportunity for everyone but only because they genuinely wanted to be there, and to have their picture taken.
That is the kind of occasion on which the advance man has to think fast, make a decision and ‘manage’ it through.
Something that he has to accept, however, is that there will be many, too many, occasions when great chunks of research or preparation are never used.
You can spend an enormous amount of time checking out the possibilities for a particular audio-visual presentation only to find the organiser or speaker changes his mind.
It's an occupational hazard.
In the Billy Graham team we had a saying ‘But that was yesterday’.
In the political world it's often ‘But that was an hour ago’.
CHECK LIST
If your conference has a significant attendance, it may be worth your while to stage an exhibition and sell stands to related groups.
Here are some other staging considerations for you to think about.
space
facilities
square metres available
union position
open design — pillars?
porters
refreshment area
power supply
ceiling height(s)
water
lorry access
drainage
parking
lighting
height and width of doors
heating/cooling
storage space
storage
floor weight limits
decorating services
set-up time available
cleaning arrangements
relation to conference rooms
catering offered
cost
security.
CHOOSING THE RIGHT PLACE
I appreciate your welcome.
As the cow said to the Maine farmer, ‘Thank you for a warm hand on a cold morning.’
John F. Kennedy (Speech in Los Angeles, 1960)
Is that all of it?
The overview of the situation comes first.
When I was working in Australia I went swimming with some missionary friends near Darwin.
We drove for miles through dense jungle and eventually came to a big pool which was maybe 150 metres square and 30 metres deep.
I was a bit dubious at first, but I was hot and sticky and the water looked tempting.
My friends and their little daughter went splashing blithely in so I threw caution to the winds and followed.
We had a nice swim for half an hour or so.
As I climbed out I felt something tickling my toes.
I looked down and saw a giant freshwater prawn almost a foot long.
For someone used to the tiny creatures we get in England it was something of a shock, and I said as much as I leapt into the air.
‘Oh, that's nothing,’ they said.
‘This pool is filled with freshwater crocodiles and water pythons but they don't bother us so we didn't tell you.’
I said, ‘If you'd told me that while I was in the pool, you'd have seen another miracle walking on the water!’
When you understand the whole picture your attitude towards it changes radically.
I hadn't come to any grief by not having a comprehensive view of that crocodile pool, ignorance really was bliss that day; but when it comes to organizing a major event, failure to see the overall picture from the start can blight the whole business.
It is certainly crucial when it comes to choosing your venue.
We'll be talking about the important practical details you have to grapple with when making your selection, but the first and last point is always the overall view of the project and objectives.
Why are we doing all this?
What do we want to achieve?
If you lose sight of that , all the attention to detail in the world is not a great deal of use.
Enjoy it
In Chapter Four I set Out some of the reasons why conferences and other big events are held.
I want to mention one here.
It's often Overlooked but it is probably the single most beneficial part — having a good time.
Now I'm not talking about a loud, wild time or a side-splitting, back-slapping drunken knees-up.
I mean what the Bible calls ‘the fellowshipping of yourselves together’.
People want to enjoy the company of like-minded fellows.
They like to renew old acquaintances, make new friends, see an interesting place in good company, recharge their batteries.
They want to be interested and happy .
But conference organisers and participants often feel guilty about this aspect.
They are nagged by the feeling that it's wrong to mix pleasure with business.
Business should be pleasure and politics should be fun!
That's realistic not frivolous.
Nothing makes an impact in communication like enthusiastic personal contact.
That's why we have conferences and rallies and congresses and debates and shows and exhibitions.
Because they bring people together .
Otherwise, we might as well all stay at home and stare at computer terminals.
Mark you, if the atmosphere at the venue is good, you can expand the outreach of your message a thousand times by television broadcast or closed circuit television relays to other venues.
Look at the Last Night of the Proms from the Albert Hall; the whole country joins in.
And the Wimbledon Final too.
And if the nation is in need of a quiet sleep, we can all tune into cricket.
Venue personality
So, when you're picking the venue, remember that atmosphere will play a big part in your success.
It will influence the reaction to the presentation and memories of it.
Some halls not only have no ‘personality’, but no potential for creating any.
You learn to recognise them through experience; it's often an indefinable something that's lacking.
More specifically, it may be the acoustics or the positioning of the seats or the stage, or it may be the ‘coldness’ of cement walls or the seediness of crumbling old ones.
The Bournemouth International Centre is an example of a place that lacks personality.
The staff are great but, like many venues around the world, it was built for the architect's vision, not for practical multi-purpose use into the twenty-first century.
The stage is tucked away like a box in the wall.
There's no space over the top of it to ‘fly’ anything.
An audience can only sit at the front of the stage and the hall stretches back for miles.
There's nothing around the sides of the stage except cold brick walls and if you put anything there you cut down the already poor sight lines even more.
If they had accepted good professional presentation advice, they could have saved thousands, had a marvellous multi-purpose centre, proper crowd flow and huge potential for the next decade.
I wonder why the right people are so rarely asked to help until it's too late?
Having said all that, there is usually something you can do to redeem a place.
The Bournemouth International Centre is not really extensive or flexible enough for a modern Conservative Party Conference.
However, because the management were helpful and co-operative we were able to make a few adjustments.
We drained the swimming pool and turned the surrounds into a huge, light, warm, press area.
We converted the kitchen into a production centre and extended the stage by three metres to make the sight lines passable and give us reasonable presentational potential.
DISTRACTED Avoid venues with distracting views outside the windows — or pull the curtains.
I once had a half-day seminar in a conference room on the top floor of Chicago's O'Hare Hilton overlooking the O'Hare Airport runways, which crossed each other.
By the end of the afternoon I was a nervous wreck.
Chicago had the busiest airport in the world.
Every few seconds a plane would take off as another approached the cross runway, with a third coming in behind the take-off plane to land.
How they made it safely I will never know.
I never did find out what the seminar was about!
Bend it to what you want
It is always easier to create in a cavern than concoct in a corner.
If you have height and space you can do anything.
Mrs Thatcher held her first rally for the European Elections at the National Exhibition Centre in Birmingham — Hall 6.
It is a great barn of a place which seats 5,000 but which that day was due to hold 2,500.
So we had to shrink the hall.
We put up 6m muffle boards two-thirds of the way back, erected a four-row tiered seating block in front of them and built a 24m by 11m stage at the front.
We ‘flew’ huge flags and posters one metre in from the side walls, reaching to some two metres above the ground.
A big backdrop to the stage with light concentrated on it did the rest.
We even had space for a refreshment area behind the muffle boards at the back of the hall.
A powerful organ added the final touches with lively and popular ‘European’ music.
The fact that Hall 6 is a bare cavern with iron girders didn't matter at all by the time we had finished.
We had created a colourful, well-lit, attractive, atmospheric setting out of virtually nothing.
For a bigger event, it is always better to go for an empty room that allows you scope to do your own thing rather than a place which has limiting fixed features.
That's why, for instance, it's easier to produce a big conference at the Brighton Conference Centre where there is almost austere simplicity than it is in Blackpool's charming but inflexible Winter Gardens.
The atmosphere we create is different but not better or worse in either Brighton or Blackpool.
One of the best major centres I have worked or seen is the International Congress Centre in Berlin, which has two auditoria with a stage in the middle.
This arrangement is so flexible it can be used for anything from tennis to Holiday on Ice to huge international congresses and exhibitions.
Your venue provides the actual meeting room or hall and all your ancillary needs, food, exhibitions, office space etc.
Let me, for a moment, concentrate on the meeting room alone.
The main auditorium
Although you can shrink a hall by various techniques, it is not ideal.
What you want is a location that is always comfortably filled.
This is the rule for bigger conferences — two hundred people or more — because these are more the ‘show’ conferences.
If you are going to reach people through the media,never have many empty seats.
It looks bad.
Have the place filled and a few people standing.
This needs careful organising!
On the last afternoon — are many people leaving?
Then move some chairs out and spread the others.
Before you confirm a venue, plan your strategy for seat occupation in the main hall.
At the CBI Initiative 1992 Press Launch in October 1988, we used the Methven Room at Centre Point in London.
There were 220 chairs.
The CBI team estimated a total attendance of 120 (they were exactly right).
A hundred chairs ‘disappeared’, the rows became a little more spacious, aisles were one seat wider, space was left for photographers — and the press conference was packed, creating the vital ‘success’ atmosphere to set the tone to launch an important strategic project.
When you choose your meeting room, the size has to be such that there always appears to be more interest in the event than the organisers anticipated.
This generates atmosphere and publicity if you are looking for it.
I learned this principle in the first big event I was involved in: Billy Graham's Crusade at Maine Road Stadium in Manchester in 1961.
For nearly thirty years that crusade has been regarded as one of his least successful, whereas a later British Crusade at Earls Court in London in 1966 has always been seen as a triumph.
An average of 35,000 people a night attended Maine Road; only 22,000 a night attended Earls Court — a third less.
But Earls Court only holds 20,000 and Maine Road football stadium had a capacity of 50,000, so people looking at the crowds at Manchester always saw one empty or thinly populated stand.
Earls Court, on the other hand, was so packed we had to use overflow rooms.
(Moral: perceived success is what goes into the history books, not actual success.)
The size of the venue, therefore, is one of your first considerations and it might be helpful here to divide conferences into two types: Open and Closed.
These divisions influence all considerations in choosing your venue: accessibility, flexibility and presentational potential, facilities, crowd flow and that indefinable something —‘charisma’.
A closed conference is for purely private discussion which neither wants nor needs publicity.
The other kind, the open conference or public event, does.
You want the world to see what's going on and must therefore attract the press and even radio and television.
Getting the right size of meeting place is always a priority.
You have to ensure that everyone is comfortable, that there is space between rows, at the front and down the aisles.
Over-crowding distracts as much as empty seats.
Plan room to ‘breathe’ and have space you can move into — even if it's only a corridor where you have coffee — that gives your audience and the room a break.
Can we help you?
There are far too many places advertising ‘conference facilities’ that offer nothing more than rooms of different sizes.
Stay away from them.
However small your event is, don't hold it in a hotel or other venue that does not provide good crowd flow, catering service, easy-to-reach toilets and any other facilities you need.
There are enough good venues around — starve the poor ones of your business.
It is achieving your objective that matters, not ‘We always go to the Knot and Muddle.’
Flexibility and presentational potential are important too.
Is the management of your venue adaptable enough to cope with changes in your programme or its timing?
This might be the tiniest thing but if it is wrongly handled, it will inconvenience everyone and leave an uneasy or even bad memory.
Suppose you've scheduled your meetings till 12.30 but you get through the morning's business more quickly than you expected.
Are the hotel or centre staff going to throw up their arms in horror if you want an earlier lunch so that you can press on with the afternoon session?
Before you commit to a venue go there yourself and find out what exactly it will provide and what the extras will be.
Can they offer you any exclusive services or facilities?
For instance: are the soft drinks in the conference sessions free; do you pay for meals actually eaten or expected numbers; are the hotel's public address system and audio-visual facilities adequate and available without charge; do they provide electricity and power for extra lighting free?
Most conference venues fall down on the little matters of personal caring.
There aren't enough biscuits; you can have tea and coffee in the morning but only tea in the afternoon; no-one knows where the switches are or how the equipment works; and so on.
The impression you get is that no individual is taking care of your particular conference.
This attitude reflects badly on the conference service industry and demonstrates that it has still not fully come to terms with the need for quality and a caring approach in its business.
The head of a training department for a big bank in the City of London recently asked me if I could help find him suitable conference locations.
We checked out hundreds of hotels but only found thirty-five or forty that met the basic-facilities criteria.
He wanted to set up seventy-five gatherings a year!
The CBI Initiative 1992 held ten seminars for 150 people each, in thirteen centres all over the country.
The venues were hard to find.
The Americans plan things better.
European conference venues suffer from chronic diseases: small doors, narrow stairs, no lifts at all or tiny lifts added to the building as an afterthought, poor electrics, low ceilings, ‘miles away’ kitchens, staff curfews, meaningless rules and no ramps.
Avoid Mr Jobsworth!
The man who says when you need a door opened to save a long walk —‘It's more than my jobsworth, mate’.
FIRST-CLASS HOTELS For a really good example of a venue I must point to Washington DC and either the Sheraton/Shoreham hotels (individually or as a combination) or the Washington Hilton.
The Hilton's ballroom is a classic model of flexible facilities.
It holds between 3,000 and 4,000 altogether, but it can also be divided up by electronically controlled, walls to give one area of half its size and two quarter areas.
The soundproofing between its three sections is excellent and helped enormously by the fact that the PA system drops sound down from the ceiling rather than pushing it out from the front.
You can have three choirs singing their heads off in the separate sections without any of them disturbing the other.
The Sheraton and Omni Shoreham hotels can cope with 5,000 delegates comfortably.
Forty ‘syndicate’ rooms with full technical and catering services can accommodate forty to 200 people at a banquet, and more if theatre-style seating is used.
Crowd flow in these three locations is so good that non-conference guests can stay there during even the largest event without inconvenience.
Hotels that do offer good professional facilities with personal service and attention to detail are sadly still few and far between.
There is huge unexplored potential in this field.
Conferences and other such events are not going to go away.
‘May I present…’
The presentational aspect involves all kinds of different considerations which I shall come to presently, but what they boil down to is this: what can you do to make it easier for the communicator to communicate and the audience to receive the required message — with minimum distraction?
‘No distraction’ is always the priority, but more so at a large event.
At small conferences people tend to be in the mood to concentrate.
At larger ones, you have to work harder to grab and hold their attention.
On the other hand, some problems show up more markedly at smaller gatherings.
For example, if you have sudden feedback with a microphone which produces a dreadful screech, 5,000 people will just laugh.
It's more likely to throw everyone off course if it happens in a little room with a small audience.
With bigger groups the atmosphere takes over and helps combat the hitches.
Smaller gatherings are more personal and the mess-ups actually stand out more, and are more likely to happen.
Similarly in smaller conferences, shabbiness and tattiness of surroundings stick out more; everyone is closer to them.
Perhaps the most noticeable factors here are cleanliness and light.
You don't want grotty curtains, draughts, windows that won't close or open properly, obvious holes in the carpet or old air-conditioning that is too noisy.
Check out the seating arrangements, platform or stage (if there is one) and its relation to the main entrance.
Speakers are handicapped when the main entrance doors are behind them and every time they open, the audience's eyes swivel in that direction and attention is gone.
Also check audio-visual aids, the PA system, ceiling heights, flooring, size of access doors and sight lines.
Unless you have a very small conference of less than a hundred people avoid low ceilings; it's like being in a crowded rail commuter carriage and everyone feels oppressed and claustrophobic.
I've worked in a number of centres where the fire alarm has been set off by the heat from our lights.
In one place a television ‘red head’(800 watt) light set off the sprinkler system with hysterical results.
You'd better know the theory and the practice of the venue's fire regulations.
(Some centres require all seats to be linked together; in others you have more layout leeway.)
‘Make room there…’
A good venue should have high and wide goods access doors — at least 3.5m high.
Sets for exhibitions and conferences these days can be large, complicated and costly.
It's no use having a fantastic set if you can't get it into the building.
Attempts to squeeze in through too small openings inevitably result in Laurel and Hardy-style disasters — try taking a 3m panel into the Barbican in London!
For any serious exhibition or conference you need commercial goods lifts.
‘Flow’ for the building materials should have no sharp corners, narrow passages or stairs.
Look for ramps, wide passages and large loading doors.
If you can drive an articulated truck to the main floor from the street outside, you know you're in business.
(That's a good point at the Bournemouth International Centre!)
Be specific in checking out a venue's own audio-visual equipment.
If you know your speaker wants an overhead projector, make sure they've got one that works.
If you're going to use slides, see that the room can be darkened easily — and check your sightlines.
Visibility is a key factor in any event whether it's seeing who's opening the church fête or watching a celebrity sing.
Look at how the stage is positioned and its depth, or whether there are pillars or any other view-blockers.
Sightlines can be a good reason for choosing a clear open hall where you can build your own platform or stage.
The principle applies even with very small conferences.
A constant bane of the conference organiser is arriving at a venue to load and unload a dozen mini computers, audio-visual equipment, tape recorders, packets of paper and the like, six or eight times onto trolleys, carrying them up or down steps, grazing elbows squeezing into lifts or staggering miles under their weight — all before arriving at the place where they have to be set up.
Not to mention the bumps and bruises on the centre's staff going the opposite way in a hurry.
Make life as easy as possible for yourself by picking a venue with good access for sets and materials.
Floors
When it comes to flooring, I never fail to be amazed at the lack of consultation with the professionals when a new centre is being planned.
One of the many frequent hazards in this business, be it syndicate rooms or stadia, is the floor surface.
The Germans do this better than most: Frankfurt airport has a synthetic studded floor which is now widely imitated.
It's quiet, safe and looks good.
The Americans go for the ‘slippery when wet’ floors and it's amazing how often floors can get wet!
If you're faced with a slippery floor problem, it is inexpensive these days to get exhibition contractors to supply some cheap carpeting and you may want to investigate this option.
It can be money well spent making the place smarter and safer.
‘Can you see?’
A good presenter can create an atmosphere in an empty room or hall.
The problems usually lie not with emptiness, which can be filled, but with the fixed building created by a designer who thought he was being terribly clever but whose design has hindered events ever since.
If you find yourself offered a standard layout of chairs, don't be afraid to try something different.
Changing things gives you the initiative.
At one TV training session I swapped the whole room around, putting the audience on the stage and doing the presentation from the floor!
They saw better and I had more space to work in; but no-one had thought of it before.
Good sight lines are more important than evenness of chair layout.
Most organisers set them rigidly in straight rows without checking whether some other design might give everyone a better view and provide more working and movement space.
Moving the people
Now then — crowd flow!
Movement of people.
It's important in small conferences where there are limited numbers moving slowly, but for bigger events it's absolutely crucial.
The answer is to make the crowd flow through , not in and back out again.
When people are moving in all directions, meeting dead ends and trying to push back to the start, it's not only chaotic, it's downright dangerous.
It can also be a security headache.
Think of a conference as an aircraft: it needs air flowing over its wings to give it lift.
So you need more than ‘just enough’ space — in corridors, past exhibition stands, into and out of the main forum, to the toilets and refreshment facilities; more than theory or the fire inspector demands.
Think in terms of ease more than possibility of movement for the number of people you anticipate.
When in doubt, leave more space rather than less.
In conferences our movement problems have, for the most part, been caused by a ‘political’ insistence on cramming more chairs, more people into inadequate space, including the stage.
For some reason my clients nearly always ask: ‘Where can we put more people?’
Rarely: ‘What is the right way of achieving our objectives?
What would the best venue be?’
Work out ways of splitting the incoming crowd and directing them where you want them to go.
That alone would have avoided the Hillsborough football crowd disaster in 1989.
Make plenty of clear, highly visible signs, maps even if the venue is large enough to warrant it.
Put firm barriers where you don't want people to go and have enough stewards and security men to help.
Find people who will do the job well — don't pick them just because they are there.
If you do muddle up the crowd-flow arrangements, Over-stretch the facilities or pick an unsuitable venue in the first place, you cause enormous distractions from the event and the message .
The participants feel flustered, uncomfortable, annoyed and unlikely to want to come again next time.
There are certainly no more rats in the Isle of Man than anywhere else.
It seems though that they handle them better.
On a recent visit we learned of a ‘rat run’ from nests down to the stream — through hedges, across the road, all well established.
A new building project however wrecked a portion Of the ‘run’.
The rats, in a panic on the first night, hit the barricade and swarmed everywhere, including some spots where they were definitely not welcome.
Any similarity to people is entirely co-incidental!
‘How do I get there?’
I've left the question of accessibility of the venue until last, not because it's less important but because it's one of the most important considerations and impinges on one of the most difficult tasks any event organiser has to face: getting the right number of the right people to come to it.
‘Bottoms on seats.’
Effective marketing, the programme offered, the speakers appearing, the styles of presentation — all these elements contribute to pulling in the public and the theme of ‘bottoms on seats’ will appear again as I deal with them.
But it's something you must think about right from the start when you're choosing your venue.
Unless you want to hire coaches and bus people in (not unknown) you must pick a place people will be able to get to fairly easily.
Accessibility is not so important with the small, closed conferences because the participants are usually either highly motivated in the first place (because of specialist interest or commitment) or their employers require them to go or at least agree that they should.
So they can come with time off work and probably on an expense account, even to a far-flung location.
With the larger events, however, the net has to be cast wider and an individual's decision on whether to attend will undoubtedly be influenced by the convenience factor.
Amateur organisers inevitably pick a venue for the wrong reasons.
It's the ‘turn’ of a particular hotel or city, or they choose it because they have a vague idea that it might be rather nice to go to Torquay next year, or even — worst of all — because ‘We've always had it there'!
When the motives are wrong the venue is nearly always far less than the best.
A good organiser is totally objective, even downright hard-hearted in choosing venue, style, speakers and programme.
Look at the people you're trying to reach.
What money will they have to spend on a trip?
How far will they have to travel?
Will the event be worth it to them?
You can hardly expect people to make a journey of six hours round trip for an afternoon's event unless it is very special.
How near is your proposed venue to airports (if it involves international visitors), and the road and rail links.
It might be great to have something in Torquay if you're hoping to draw visitors from the southwest, but not if you're trying to pull a big public audience from Tyneside.
Don't eliminate somewhere because it sounds ridiculous or out of the question.
In these days of competitive air fares many overseas locations can be as cost effective as being in the UK.
In setting up big rallies in Berlin's Olympic Stadium in 1981, we had two committee members in London (my wife Marlies and me), two in Berlin and two in the United States (living in Virginia Beach and Los Angeles).
We found that it was cheaper for the four Europeans to travel to America than for the two Americans to come to London or Berlin.
So once each month from June 1980 until June 1981, Marlies and I rushed out to Heathrow Airport early Friday afternoon, flew to North America (Toronto, Washington DC, Los Angeles, Virginia Beach, etc) and worked in committee through Saturday.
Sunday morning we preached at different churches and flew back to London over Sunday night, to bounce cheerily into the office on Monday morning.
Amazingly we saved thousands of pounds that way!
Also remember that accessibility considerations apply to the media if you want to attract them.
They not only have to be able to get there but they have to be able to get their words and pictures out .
This does not mean ‘just-enough’ telecommunications on site; it may also mean the nearness to a micro-wave or satellite TV link or surface links to a major town.
For quiet study conferences, remote old-fashioned, ill-equipped venues in places like Scarborough and Buxton might be great.
But, please,not for twentieth century media conferences.
Finally, go to the place yourself .
I know this sounds obvious but it's surprising how many organisers depend on brochures, models and plans (it's fine to have those as well, of course ) or even their recollections of a place five years ago (when it and your needs were different).
Strike up some personal rapport with the person in charge Of the centre so that he or she is more likely to go that extra mile for you.
Make sure they know what's really going on in your mind, and what your objectives are.
PET ‘HOTEL HATES’(THE FREQUENT ONES) * narrow stairs and no lifts * low shower pressure * telephone kiosks built for left-handed midgets * only one plug, down on the floor under the bed and 5AMP * hairdryers on 1m fixed lead from the floor socket 3m away from wall mirror facing opposite direction * just two 40 watt lamps to read and work by * toilet rolls positioned for contortionists only * room service that brings each course separately throughout Dallas * radiators that haven't been on for years * radiators that won't go off * basins that take half an hour to empty after you've cleaned your teeth and you want to shave * stoppers that hang under the cold water tap but don't reach the drain * stoppers that have no chain so you wallow in the dirty water to find them * toilets where you can sit down or close the door but not both
The venue staff should be able to demonstrate all their equipment and facilities, and understand your technical requests.
Watch out for the ‘Oh the electrician will be here on the day — I'm sure’ syndrome.
He won't!
And beware of those who want to take over the organiser's job.
Frequently venue staff try to set everything up before you arrive, on the basis that it worked for the people before you and it's less effort for them.
No two conferences are ever the same.
You and the venue manager need to make the arrangements together.
Put them in writing and be sure you know and he understands what you want to achieve.
WHAT'S ON?
It is far more difficult to be simple than to be complicated.
John Ruskin
Does it contribute?
When you've set your objectives, sorted out the budget, chosen the venue and fixed the date, the next step is to plan the programme.
Again, it's of paramount importance to keep an overview so that you can gear each aspect towards achieving the objective.
If you don't know what you want to do, you can never judge whether you've done it.
Remember: to achieve your objective you need to interest inform and involve.
You get the interest by inviting good speakers to talk on the right subjects and by your format variety and, wherever possible, the right kind of sparkle.
You inform by making sure that the programme is not just froth and bubble, that it has genuine body.
And you involve by making sure you draw the required visible response from the audience.
So the question is not ‘What (who) shall we have in the programme?’
— but ‘What programme must I have to achieve my objectives?’
Too often people throw up ideas —‘Let's have so-and-so as a speaker on Tuesday and a dance on the Wednesday and a banquet on Thursday’— without ever stopping to think how any of these will help reach goals or fit into the overall time.
They make these suggestions because, ‘Well, that's what people do at conferences, isn't it?’
The ideas might be splendid in themselves but you must consider how they will contribute to the strategy.
Do you, for instance, want a disco because it will bring a welcome break to an otherwise (necessarily) heavy and demanding programme, or could it prove too sharp a contrast and interrupt the concentration you're trying to establish?
Is a banquet going to make everyone feel pleasantly pampered or is it going to cause hangovers and indigestion the next morning when you've got some crucial business to get through?
I can't decide for you, but don't ignore the questions; consider the pros and cons and then decide.
A programme is not just what happens in the conference hall.
It covers every aspect of the entire time that participants are present in the city or town where it's being held.
Start with the free time
When you plan your programme, start with the social and personal free time for shopping or relaxation that the participants ought to have to encourage their brains to work during the meaty sessions.
Don't compromise that free time.
If you do, the participants will play truant anyway — probably at the wrong times!
This goes back to what I was saying about the ‘fellowship’ of conferences and similar events and how important it is for people to enjoy themselves and make contacts.
They ought to get to know each other, see a little of the place they are in, have time to shop for family souvenirs and sample the local food and culture.
If you try to squeeze these requirements in around the mainstream business, you will be left with scrappy little bits of free time that are useless, and your visitors will feel cheated.
So you start by saying (and these are purely arbitrary divisions, you can work out your own): ‘We're here for three nights and four days, let's have one evening completely free, two or three meals in different, interesting locations (include transport time) and perhaps half a day free for shopping.
Mark that time on the schedule and regard it as sacrosanct.
What you're left with then is the time for the ‘meat’ of the programme.
That way, you will ensure that people will be pleased — they all want free time — and the programme doesn't suffer.
Stagger the time
A programme does not have to be conventionally ‘nine to five, structured but participants are more likely to accommodate themselves to unusual arrangements if you've given them time for themselves.
So if you would usually start the programme with the address from the mayor at 9.30am, consider having the mayor speak at a breakfast at 8am and then give everyone a two-hour break from 11am to have a sight-seeing walk or shopping session before returning for lunch.
Alternatively, have a lengthy ‘heavy’ morning session and a free afternoon, perhaps with optional social events for those who want them.
You might then have a working dinner with a business speaker.
It's the basic principle of presentation: almost anything works well as long as you do it deliberately and explain it clearly and pleasantly, and make it interesting.
GOOD PROGRAMMING The 1989 National Religious Broadcasters Convention in Washington was a first rate example of balanced and varied programming.
It lasted three days and during that time the 4,000 delegates had a choice of plenary sessions with top speakers, technical study groups, workshops, banquets, free time and even great music.
The theme of the convention was carried through by every speaker and in every session.
Since attendance at everything was voluntary there was plenty of time to view the high-tech exhibition and to mingle and chat in any of the dozens of coffee shops on the site.
Video and audio cassettes of each session were available at the bookshop within twenty minutes of the finish, which is the time when people want to buy them.
Another good feature was the sponsored breakfasts each morning at 7am: they saved delegates expense and guaranteed a good turn out.
Setting the tone
Every element contributes to the whole.
Of course, you will be enthusiastic when you're planning a programme.
The trouble starts when people get carried away.
They say, ‘Why don't we show this great movie one evening?’ without considering how this ‘great movie’contributes.
One man's job was to select films for airlines and cruise ships.
He lasted a week until he supplied Flight 219 Mayday to an airline and The Poseidon Adventure to a liner.
When you select an item for a programme, consider how it will contribute to your goal and how it could affect mood and outlook.
Be sure of the strategy before you embark on the mechanics.
Maximum ‘razzamatazz’ is not always right and sometimes it can be counter-productive.
Suppose you are having a conference for your sales people to tell them about a new product.
You will find that a good audio-visual presentation and some agreeable refreshments afterwards are all you need for them to welcome the information and instruction.
If you want to motivate them to go out and sell that product, you've got to make them feel it is important to them.
You want them to exert their self-discipline and use their talents in your favour.
So you really don't want a situation where they go out and get drunk every night.
Catch their interest and spark their enthusiasm so that they begin to see the product's potential.
How something that is good for the company will be good for them.
How it will earn them more money.
The ‘programme’ for your event covers the whole period the participants are present in the city.
It includes handling their reception at the station, airport or parking lot.
First impressions last.
Each detail must be designed to help create the right response, the desired mood — to bring you another step nearer towards achieving your goals.
If you are running a rally aimed at inspiring and motivating people, don't start by having them arrive in a strange city to find the car park full, the nearest suitable alternative two miles away and no taxis available because it's Sunday evening and pouring with rain.
You probably can't do much about the rain, but you can work out contingency plans such as having helpers to park participants' cars or arranging minibuses to shuttle between the centre and the car park.
Sometimes you can turn what at first seems a mess into a triumph, with a little imagination.
For instance, at the Conservative Party Conference in Brighton in 1988, we had to turn the building ‘back to front’ for security reasons and have the main entrance at the rear.
People arriving at the car park or taxi set-down point had a four or five minute walk to the main entrance, which was through the ground floor of a multi-storey car park.
We appointed some friendly stewards whose sole job was to encourage people from their point of arrival to their destination.
They gave information and made conversation.
We couldn't shorten the walk, but we made people feel better about it.
When the participants finally reached the multi-storey car park, they found a pleasant white-walled entrance hall with a blue muslin ceiling, nicely decorated with flags and Party symbols and brightly lit.
You see, it's not up to the participants to come in the right mood.
It is up to you to put them in the mood you want.
Make them feel looked after.
When they get to the hotel have someone to greet them, someone who knows names, and can help with transport, luggage, the pre-registration formalities.
Provide a (decent-looking) security pass and all the necessary care and attention to make the participants feel welcome, comfortable and enthusiastic about what is going to happen next.
That way, the conference gets off to a good start because people are raring to go and in the right frame of mind.
And if conference participants see that your organisation is well-run and thoughtful, they are more likely to respond as you want them to.
This same feeling should be carried into the first welcome meeting which should set the tone in the way that gospel singer George Beverly Shea did for Billy Graham.
It was Petula Clark who set the feeling at the first rally for Mrs Thatcher after she became Prime Minister.
Her version (slightly rewritten for the occasion) of ‘This is My Song’ brought the house down and everyone was ready to listen to the main speech.
Your guests, your audience, your congregation need to feel part of what's happening.
They need to know where you're taking them.
Give them that outline, the feeling of involvement and purpose, at the opening session.
The delegate arriving to an indifferent reception or lack of clear information, even a misspelt name, soon starts to believe that he's dealing with incompetents.
He wishes he were back home.
He may feel he's in a British Rail nightmare: he will get to his destination some time or other but he's deeply unhappy about his discomfort while travelling.
I'm reminded of the story about the time when a British Rail advertising contract was up for grabs.
It was a huge budget and the top agencies were eager to get their hands on it.
It was prestigious, lucrative and a creative challenge.
The agencies laid on the works: marvellous hospitality, slick presentation, sophisticated arguments.
All except one.
That one invited the railway VIPs to their office to see and hear their sales pitch as the others had done.
When the big wigs arrived, however, they were barely acknowledged by a dour receptionist, told to sit in a grubby waiting area strewn with cigarette ends and empty coffee cups, and kept waiting for half an hour without either apology or explanation.
Just as they were about to explode with rage the head of the agency appeared.
‘Gentlemen,’ he said.
‘Now you know how the average rail customer feels.’
He got the contract.
One embarrassing experience involved Jan Leeming, the television personality, who was taking part in a film I was producing.
Unfortunately no-one had been able to see her accommodation beforehand and we found that the hotel she had been booked into was a nightmare — tatty rooms with cigarette burns, door handles which fell off, threadbare carpets.
A colleague made cheerful conversation with Jan while another of the team hurriedly arranged a better room.
Actually, Jan is a very sweet lady and a good professional and she would happily have stayed in that room — but it would have been wrong.
Apply the principles: check it out ahead of time and put yourself in the other person's place.
There is an old Sioux saying: ‘You cannot understand a man until you have walked two weeks in his moccasins.’
Strictly speaking these things fall outside what most people think of as ‘the programme’.
They are just as important though as what goes on in the main body of the conference centre.
It's your attitude to people which wins them over.
The programme jigsaw
A conference is a bit like a jigsaw, the participants, debates, guest appearances, audio-visual presentations, workshops, free and social time — they all have to click together to provide the complete picture.
When you come to detailed programme planning, you need variety and balance and, if you have a great deal to get through and a concentrated message to communicate, you still have to break it up and give people a chance to relax their brains as well as their bodies.
Every programme needs highlights.
There's only one FA Cup Final, one Wimbledon, one Royal Ascot every season, even though there's plenty of football, tennis and racing at other times.
If you provide memorable highlights, people will go away feeling the whole event was good; they will gradually forget the weak parts of the event (though I hope you won't).
People today are used to getting their information in small doses: a newspaper paragraph, a news item on television.
They have short attention spans so don't expect them to sit for hours on end without fidgeting, yawning or falling asleep.
As I said in an earlier chapter, the principle of speaking is not to go on for more than a few minutes without getting your audience to do something — applaud or laugh or raise their hands.
The same principle applies with conference programmes.
To get maximum impact, break up the messages and the format.
Skilful, experienced speakers will do this themselves.
If you have inexperienced speakers, curtail their time.
Vary the programme with humour, audio-visual devices, music, movement, colour, question and answer sessions, guest appearances.
You want your audience to be active, not passive.
You want them to respond, rather like the vicar who ‘wired-up’ his pews.
It was a novel method of fund-raising.
‘Who'll give £25?’ he asked and pressed a button.
Several leapt to their feet.
‘Alleluia,’ he replied.
‘And who'll give me £50?’
Another button — dozens more responded.
‘Praise the Lord’, said the vicar.
‘And now £100?’
Another button and up stood the rest.
‘How did your appeal go?’ a colleague asked later.
‘Great,’ came the reply, ‘except for one Scotsman who was electrocuted.’
Perhaps a little too active but he did achieve his goal!
Food at last Mealtimes provide natural variation in a programme and what you are going to offer will depend on the programme, the venue's facilities, the season, the numbers and your budget.
My advice here is to avoid a lot of fancy twiddly bits — unless you're running a conference for French gourmets.
Most people prefer something simple and easy to eat.
They will be talking as they eat and it's distracting and embarrassing to have to juggle something fussy and awkward while you're trying to make new friends and business contacts.
Bangers and mash is better than pretentious nouvelle cuisine , though you can probably be a little more original!
The food in the hospitality rooms at the Republican Party's National Convention in Dallas in 1984 was particularly good.
They had huge piles of chilled fresh pineapple and other fresh fruits and cheeses all beautifully arranged and cut up into bite-sized pieces.
The quality was superb.
No-one had to worry about plates and forks.
We all went home having had little but fruit, cheese and Texas-size shrimps for three days, but it was delicious, convenient and appealing, and there was plenty of it.
Drawing the people
Last but certainly not least, when you're planning your programme, remember the hardest single task in a conference is getting people to come to it.
In-house or company conferences have a ready-made audience and your main consideration is getting the right mix of personnel, senior management, middle management and so forth.
But for larger events you have to ‘sell’ them — metaphorically if not literally.
Decide who you want to attend, where they are, how they will get to you and what will appeal to them.
There are heavy demands on people's time these days and a lot of rival attractions.
Sometimes, particularly where you have a specific audience, the task may be primarily a logistical one — moving them from A to B — and you can solve this by bussing them in.
When your potential catchment is broader based you have to find additional ways of drawing them in.
An obvious method is to advertise but be careful that you aim the right kind Of advertising in the right direction, otherwise it is money badly spent.
The Billy Graham organisation used to estimate that only ten per cent of their crowds came as a direct result of advertising and, generally speaking, I find that by itself it is the least cost-effective way of marketing events; the most effective being personal invitation.
Most significant things, from marriages to murders, happen between people who know each other well, so the best way to reach people is by word of mouth in the right places.
Start with the stalwarts of the organisation and let the message fan out from there, snowballing as it goes along.
All the advertising in the world will not draw people to your event if they believe they're going to be there alone.
Let them know it's going to have a fabulous programme and be full of people they know or others of a like mind.
That's when they get interested.
When we were setting up Eurofest ‘75 — an evangelistic congress for 8,000 young people in Brussels in 1975 — a number of advertising agents came to ‘sell’ me on their company.
Forty-seven countries were involved, so they had dreams of a big account.
One girl was a hard, chain-smoking sales machine letting me know I could not set up a multi-national congress without multi-national advertising.
I asked if she had ever been to hear Billy Graham; a bit unlikely I thought.
‘Oh yes,’ she said, ‘I heard him once.’
‘What On earth got you to go?’
I asked.
‘Oh,’ she said, ‘a friend came round and asked me to go with her…
Ah, I see what you mean.’
We got 2,000 reps in forty-seven countries who averaged four recruits each!
And if you want 70,000 people at a birthday tribute concert for Nelson Mandela, you push the information through to organisations like CND, The World Council of Churches, and you'll have a full house!
In an emergency you can, of course, also try straightforward ‘bribery’, depending on how much you want to spend: free meals, free accommodation, free transport etc.
On the other hand, you might appeal to their finer feelings, their sense of duty and responsibility.
With a political party, for example, this might mean conveying the idea that the Foreign Secretary is making an important speech in their locality and they owe it to him to show their support.
But professionally, you can do much of it with your programme.
You create an interest by having appealing people to speak, by arranging debates that will be gripping, even controversial, by having one or more celebrities present, by asking a well-known band to perform, by offering special food, by spectacle, by drama, by electronic presentations.
The list is long and varied and what you choose or the combinations you try will depend on what you want your event to achieve.
The bigger the event, the harder you will have to work at crowd-pulling and the earlier you will have to start to build up the interest.
NATIONAL PRAYER BREAKFAST The National Prayer Breakfast in the United States is an annual gathering of political and religious leaders and other key national figures who meet to pray for the nation.
This was the programme for the 1989 meeting.
Pre-breakfast prayer : The Honourable Charles Grassley, US Senator, Iowa Opening song : US Naval Academy Chapel Choir (in uniform)Presiding : The Honourable Bob Stump, US Representative, Arizona Opening prayer : General Larry D. Welch, Chief of Staff, US Air Force Breakfast : chilled fresh orange juice, Cheddar omelette, O'Brien potatoes, chutney-filled peach, croissants and apple spice muffins, butter and fruit preserves, tea, coffee and brewed decaffeinated coffee.
Message from the United States Senate : The Honourable Paul Simon, US Senator, Illinois Old Testament reading : The Honourable John Buchanan, Premier of Nova Scotia, Canada New Testament reading : Art Monk, all-pro wide receiver, Washington Redskins.
Solo : Sandi Patti Message from United States Congress : The Honourable Ike Skelton, US Representative, Missouri Reading : Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, US Supreme Court Prayer for national leaders : Dr. Billy Graham Message : The Honourable Alan Simpson, US Senator, Wyoming The President of the United States Closing song : Sandi Patti Closing prayer : Mrs Susan Baker.
Now that's what I call a programme.
It lasted only one and a half hours but it satisfied body and soul.
HAVE STAPLE GUN — WILL TRAVEL
If you can keep your head when all about you
Are losing theirs and blaming it on you
Rudyard Kipling
Right, you've worked out your budget, you've chosen your venue and you've planned the most marvellous programme that will pack 'em in.
Now, you've got to get down to the real nitty gritty: how will the stage look, what about the sound system, who presses what buttons for the audio-visuals and when…?
This chapter is about details but, as usual, the same principles still apply: have your overall picture and your ultimate objective in mind and aim to make it easy for the presenter to present and audience to receive.
Sticky tape and live wires
When people walk into an auditorium, one thing ought to happen and another ought not: their attention should be grabbed and held but at the same time they shouldn't fall flat on their faces because you've failed to gaffer down a loose wire.
This is hands-on conference presentation, a case of ‘have staple gun, will travel’.
You might not exactly be able to pack up all your troubles in an old kit bag, but if your rally bag isn't packed you will have trouble.
Gaffer tape, for instance— an all-purpose cloth tape that sticks to any surface but is easy to remove.
It is strong and not damaging and is probably the one absolutely essential piece of equipment you need above all others.
Don't, as they say, leave home without it.
Most people in this business opt for two-inch wide tape but I prefer three-inch black for securing every line of wire in the hall, plus some two-inch white or silver to mark the edge of steps and other things you need to make noticeable.
Three-inch gaffer is not common, but you can get it if you hunt around.
(Bitter experience has taught me to remove the gaffer at the end of the event only by holding the wire down on the floor as you pull the tape up.
If you don't hold the wire on the floor, the tape will wrap itself round it and you'll have a terrible time trying to disentangle the resulting blob of sticky goo.)
You also need lots of electrical extension leads and bars of four 13 amp sockets.
Fuses blow from the amount of power used, not the number of sockets.
Light and heat use power.
Virtually nothing else uses very much.
Thus you can run thirty electric typewriters off one 13 amp socket but only three 800 watt lamps.
A simple formula to calculate the amps is to divide the watts (usually marked on the bottom of the appliance) by the volts: the result is amps.
You can pull around 3,000 watts off one 13 amp socket.
So with videos, word processors and so on, life is easy.
Bring in a few television lamps though and watch your amps.
Are there electricians on site?
— preferably not the night porter who says he ‘knows how it works’.
The first rule of safety is never to have electrical wires off the ground , and gaffer everything on the ground.
The second is never to leave on the floor a closed loop of wire or string.
A closed loop that someone can catch their foot in and trip is one of the most frequent causes of industrial accidents.
In Covent Garden Market every band from every box of fruit, vegetables and flowers is cut.
The third rule is to wear hard-soled and protective shoes whenever you are setting up.
At an election rally in the Wembley Conference Centre in 1983, I stood on a nail in my training shoes and it went nearly four centimetres into my foot.
Apart from not actually having members of your audience fall headlong, the other main consideration when getting them into and out of their seats is ease of movement.
Organisers are frequently met with what  appears to be rigid rules —‘We always have a five foot aisle, sir, it's all we need’— when in fact the reality should be far more flexible, better suited to your particular needs and safer too.
Focusing on the platform
The main focus of your audience's attention will be the backdrop and the stage, and, on or near it, the audio-visual point and the speaking lectern.
First though, one of my bugbears: people on the platform.
In theory, the platform is for those actually taking part in the programme.
In practice, the platform becomes a place for people who want to be seen, those who believe that their own importance is such that the presentation of the programme is secondary to their right to be seen beside the programme participants.
This leads to a definite conflict of interests — yours and theirs!
In principle, platform numbers should be kept to an absolute minimum.
You're trying to focus attention on the presenter, the person giving the speech or answering the questions and it is a dreadful distraction to have beside and behind him or her numbers of men and women who invariably want to whisper, gesticulate, stare in the wrong direction, scratch their heads, pick their noses or make their exits at completely the wrong moment.
Who is essential is for the organisers to decide, but the ‘non-essentials’ who sit on platforms are basically either ignorant of the art of presentation or disdainful of it — if they weren't they wouldn't be there.
Generally there are too many bodies on stage and it may be your job to thin them out.
I've fought this problem for years at political conferences and gradually we've been able to improve the situation.
If you compare the platform parties of the middle and late eighties with those of 1979, the effect is quite noticeable.
We've not managed to clear the speaker's part of the platform as entirely as the Americans do, but at least we've managed to create a decent space around the speaker.
We set the tone at the Tory Conferences and the other parties have followed suit.
A thirty second commercial on ITV can cost £60,000 or more.
If a member of the Government gets ninety seconds of news time, that's worth a lot of money.
In that ninety seconds I want every one of the 13 million viewers to concentrate on the speaker —not on someone else scratching their nose in the background.
The only exception I would make to this rule is if there are special guests who actually should be ‘on-show’ because they enhance the programme, for whatever reason.
Here, too, you have to be careful and weigh the advantages of their appearance against the disadvantages of their potential to distract from the message.
If you are not in a position to be ruthless about getting rid of people on the platform, school them in the proper way to behave — sitting still, looking towards the speaker and not thumping the table in their enthusiasm.
It jolts your carefully prepared and placed microphone out of position and may wobble the lectern as well.
Lectern
Lecterns are a whole subject in themselves but one that frequently gets overlooked.
For a start, a lectern ought to be the right height for each speaker.
I know that sounds obvious but even nine years after I designed it, I still have one of the very few adjustable-height lecterns in the UK.
More often than not no-one bothers about the height factor, with the result that the speaker may have to peer at his notes or stand awkwardly or otherwise find it impossible to combine proper use of the mike with proper use of the lectern.
The speaker should feel comfortable with the lectern's height and it must be positioned so that he can see his notes.
It should be sturdy enough to lean on if necessary.
And if you've got more than one speaker it must be adjustable with minimum fuss.
We were late in introducing this concept: it took me three years of persuasion for politicians to accept the idea.
Billy Graham was using an adjustable lectern twenty-five years ago;(he needed to, since he is six feet four and some of his colleagues are a foot shorter.)
In 1979 I had built a small wind-up lectern for table-top use and followed that a couple of years later with a full-size floor-standing lectern that operates hydraulically.
The top half of it slides down over the bottom half so that it can be lowered right down to table-top level when a debate is going on and a speaker is sitting down.
At that point he needs to have an uninterrupted view of the audience and they need a clear view of him.
Importantly, the lectern is never operated by the speaker who needs full concentration on the speech and presentation.
It is operated by a colleague who assesses the right height for each speaker.
The levels are marked so that they are visible some feet away; you don't want undignified scrabbling around under a speaker's feet.
This prototype lectern is made of wood with a separate hydraulic unit.
It is operated simply by pressing a button.
It cost around £2,000 to make in 1982 and the man who built it for me said then that it would ‘lift one ton, let alone Willie Whitelaw’.
A lectern should have a minimum depth of 38cm and a minimum width of 5Ocm — space to hold two A4 sheets alongside each other— and a ‘lip’ of at least 1.5cm to stop papers sliding off onto the floor.
The lectern at the Guildhall is a classic example of one that looks beautiful but is too small and fragile to use.
It's a beautiful creation designed without thought for its function.
When Mrs Thatcher speaks at the traditional Lord Mayor's banquet there, we substitute our own humbler but more practical table-top lectern.
Good lecterns today also have space for microphone wiring built into them so that you don't have wire trailing around the place and looking unsightly, or a big boom mike stand in front.
(If you are using a table top, cut holes in the baize covering the table to feed the wires through and keep them tidy.)
I like the height of the lectern to be adjustable, but the Americans like to adjust the floor .
This is more expensive but it has a particular advantage in television coverage.
It means the cameras can focus on the lectern knowing that the speaker will always be placed in exactly the same position relevant to it.
If there are between fifty and two hundred different cameras, as there sometimes are in America, it's a major consideration.
In Europe we have to strike a balance between the needs of the audience in the hall and the requirement to communicate effectively to a far larger audience through television.
Autocue
A useful advance in the technology of presentation in the eighties was the advent of the autocue.
Ever since I started consultancy work in politics, I'd been pushing for the use of this simple invention — a British one — but it wasn't until after President Reagan used it in his address to the Houses of Parliament that our politicians felt it was worthy of notice.
It is a simple closed circuit television system, a video camera photographing a speech being rolled beneath it.
The video monitors are on the floor facing upwards in front of the speaker and there are two pieces of glass above so that the speech is reflected at the speaker's eye-level, directing his main focus at the appropriate part of the audience.
In other words, the speaker can read his speech and look out into the audience at the same time.
They have a clear view of him and he can hold the important eye contact.
The line being spoken is always in the same spot, so that if he turns his head from a familiar sentence he can be confident that he will be able to pick up again where he left off.
When you're reading a speech ordinarily you have either to keep your finger on the spot or find it again.
With the autocue, your hands and head are free to communicate body language more powerfully.
The reflector glass can be positioned directly in front of the speaker but I prefer to use wing glasses on either side because it lessens the barrier with the audience and leaves more room for photography.
I also surround the monitors discreetly with flowers to avoid distracting the audience.
Use of the autocue is another reason in favour of a variable floor, by the way.
When Mrs Thatcher and President Reagan both spoke at the United Nations' 4Oth Anniversary in 1985 they used the same autocue, which remained in a fixed position.
While the President walked off after delivering his speech someone was able to slip in a pre-built ten-centimetre platform for Mrs Thatcher and Rajiv Gandhi, which was a lot less fuss than having to fiddle around re-adjusting the autocue height.
In the UK I commissioned some electrically adjusted autocue screens.
Even so, the same rule applies as it does to the lectern: never let the speaker adjust the screens to fit his height.
Someone else must do it.
The autocue operator will be back-stage cueing the speed to suit the speaker's delivery.
It requires concentration by the operator but, again, I would not let the speaker do it himself.
There is now also a ‘computer’ autocue — direct projection to the screens by a word processor.
It does not have the flexibility of the paper roll and President Reagan, amongst others, always preferred the safety of the mechanical ‘roll’ with its additional emphasis markings.
It is possible to lose the entire speech off a computer disk.
You can only lose power with the roll system — and that's much less likely.
It happened however to Ronald Reagan in France once.
A power surge blew the fuse on the White House autocue and the President dried-up for a moment and then ad-libbed.
I rarely take equipment from one country to another, and never if there is a voltage difference as with the United States (110 volts) and Europe (240 volts).
If I need the autocue in America, I have one there and avoid unnecessary problems.
You need to check lighting arrangements with the autocue.
If they're wrongly placed they can blank out the screens and make them impossible to read.
Lighting
Lighting is one of the most effective ways of creating a good atmosphere.
You can create quite a memorable set out of little more than good lighting.
Find out what your venue has to offer and whether you will need to supplement it.
Most hotels and similar venues have tracking spotlights and if you have plenty of set-up time, you should be able to cheer up the most basic hotel meeting room.
If television is going to be with you, you will need to arrange stronger lights on the key focal points — you would do well to get a set of four ‘redheads’(800 watt TV lights).
Incidentally, direct a little light down behind the speaker: it fills the space behind him and makes him more three-dimensional.
Find out early on how dark you can make the hall.
Dimming the lights is necessary for even the simplest pieces of audio-visual equipment.
Audio-visual equipment
The overhead projector, which shows 11in by 8in (28cm x 20cm) transparencies, can be useful, as can the slide projector.
The most consistent mistake with both these pieces of equipment — possibly because they are so simple — is, once again, to have them operated by the speaker.
Don't fall into that trap.
We've all suffered the ‘amateur night’ feeling that occurs when the poor speaker gets it wrong: the upside down slide, the image on the ceiling, the missing bulb and the inevitable stifled titters from the audience.
The only exception is the small ‘teaching’ meeting, when the speaker actually draws diagrams on the transparency while talking.
Make sure the equipment is planned, checked and operated by someone who knows what they're doing, and who will rehearse with the speakers.
There have been impressive developments of audio-visual aids recently and you might consider some of them if you're staging an ambitious project.
Remarkable things can be done linking projectors and computers so that you get composite or varied images on a wall of screens.
But there comes a point at which audio-visual presentations take over from being an aid to the speaker and become an end in themselves.
If this looks likely, you have to be absolutely certain they're going to achieve your objectives better than a human being!
Generally though, use special effects cautiously and for a specific purpose.
It's easy to get carried away by the many tools at your disposal so beware of using them just because they're there.
Once in a while an ‘audio extra’ creates itself.
I was once speaking to some 2,000 people in the Tent Hall in Glasgow when I noticed my audience's attention drifting — something I'm not used to!
When I investigated, I found that the long microphone lines across the stage were picking up BBC Radio 2.
Since I was behind the public address speakers, I could not hear it.
But the audience could.
I was being accompanied by an orchestra!
Long mike leads need to be properly wired to prevent them from becoming an aerial.
Lasers, helium balloons, streamers, flags, dry ice, disco lights, computer graphics are great at election rallies or festivals but inappropriate at most serious commercial conferences.
Sometimes in the art of presentation, ‘less is more’.
The backdrop
Take something as simple as a backdrop.
It should be interesting but not too interesting, fit in thematically and colour-wise but give a ‘clean’ backdrop to speakers.
It has to be designed or thought out carefully so that conscious decisions can be made about it.
You may decide to put a table and a lectern in front of a blank wall.
That's fine as long as you do it deliberately and not by default.
At the other extreme you could set up giant screens to show large images of the speaker as we do in larger conferences such as the Institute of Directors at the Royal Albert Hall.
The backdrop should reinforce the message of your conference either overtly — with the slogan or motif emblazoned on it — or subliminally by its design emphasis.
If, for instance, your conference is concentrating on leadership and moving into the future, you might design something with a slightly futuristic appearance that left the thought in the minds of the audience without being too obvious about it.
A boon to the organiser who needs a simple mobile improvement for small venues are the ‘Supalite’ panels, made of coloured foam with metal or plastic edges.
They are light, easy to set up and transport and they can cover a multitude of grotty walls.
WINNIN' When the Royal Sussex hospital called my wife Marlies after the bomb during the 1984 Tory Conference, they told her there had been a ‘little accident’ but that I was OK.
Marlies thought I had fallen off a ladder fixing a letter G from the conference slogan of that year, ‘Britain Winning Through’.
The slogan was spelled out in three-foot-high polystyrene lettering and glued onto a soft canvas backdrop.
Unfortunately the powerful television lights kept melting the glue, and in spite of extra large dollops of the stuff, the G from ‘Winning’ fell off every night and I had to be up a ladder fixing it back again at six the next morning.
It was too thick to nail and, anyway, the backdrop was too soft.
Now I always glue, nail and use a solid backdrop whenever I can, I think of that episode as my ‘belt and braces’ lesson.
Sounds right
However your event looks, you still have to be sure that it's going to sound good as well.
The old adage that a picture is worth a thousand words is small consolation to an audience which can't hear any of them.
If you've got forty or more people, use sound amplification — not necessarily for volume but for presence .
Like lighting, sound creates atmosphere and lends authority to the proceedings.
Some people are daunted by the technology of sound, but it's basically just like water: you can send it out in a jet or you can spray it gently over everyone.
Spraying gives the most even coverage and is mostly best for speech.
Achieve the effect by having a number of loudspeakers at lowish level, preferably facing in the same direction.
There is no problem with amplifying a speaker's voice because in a room of any size you do not hear the individual's voice as such and the electronic sound reaches everywhere at the same time.
Music is more complicated because electronic sound travels faster than natural sound, so people hear the ‘real’ band a fraction of a second after they've heard its electronic reproduction.
Music, therefore, should always come from a single source, not a single loudspeaker but a group of speakers close enough together for the natural sound to leave the platform at the same time as the electronic sound.
Think of rock concerts where they have those banks of giant speakers grouped together on the stage.
Electronic equipment is also built to varying degrees of power.
To continue the water analogy, it's like a fire hose and a garden hose.
You can turn down a fire hose to water a garden, but you cannot turn up a garden hose sufficiently to tackle a fire.
Powerful amplifiers can be turned down for a small hall, but a weak amplifier has no potential for increased volume before it starts distorting the sound.
To get good quality sound in a meeting, therefore, have fifty per cent more power than the sound man says you need.
A rough guide, until you work out your own preferences, is to look for amplifiers of 100 watts for meetings up to 150 people; 200 watts up to 500 people; 500 watts up to 1,000 people and 1,000–1,500 watts up to 3,000 people.
For larger groups you will need supplementary power and sound sources.
The acoustics (the factor that determines how sound behaves) are different at every venue.
Outdoors, sound will ‘evaporate’, so you need to compensate with more power.
With good acoustics a hall will distribute sound evenly.
People soak up sound.
You need more volume for a full hall than an empty one, so allow for that when you're testing — which will probably be in an empty hall.
Watch out for metal roofs and high ceilings: they'll make the sound bounce around like water off a tin roof.
The Royal Albert Hall has acoustic panels in the roof to absorb bouncing sound.
In Earls Court in 1966, before the days of good acoustic panels, we draped silk parachutes from the roof in an attempt to cut down the echo; nowadays technology helps!
There was a strange side effect to the cleaning of the Winter Gardens Empress Ballroom in Blackpool, which was cleaned and restored to its original Victorian splendour in 1984.
The ballroom looked beautiful but when Sir Basil Feldman stood up to give the opening address at the Conservative Conference, though his projection was fine and his microphone working, half his audience had difficulty hearing, and a third were hearing twice.
You see, when they took a century's dust and dirt off those walls, they completely changed the acoustics, swapping grubby absorbency for beautiful, bright marble which bounced the sound all over the place.
Beware of feedback, the dreadful shriek or whistle when a microphone is in front of a loudspeaker (the inanimate, not the human kind).
What happens is that the mike hears the sound going into it, being amplified by the system and then coming out louder behind it again.
This noise then ‘feeds back’ into the microphone again, causing that awful sound and complete confusion.
If you get a little‘ringing’ in the microphone sound, try a little less ‘treble’on the tone controls.
You can change the tone of treble or base.
A balance is possible for both music and speech and the right adjustment will make a noticeable difference.
Each individual sound source, microphone, tape recorder etc, will have its own level control into the amplifier or mixer.
When you are testing, balance the volumes of the different sources.
You will then find a master volume control on the amplifier that raises the whole (balanced) mix to the right level for that audience without affecting the balance of the individual sources.
Test your mikes for sensitivity, tone, pick-up range, best position and so on before the proper ‘balance’ check.
Play with them without an audience, but remember to make adjustments when the audience is present.
Ability with sound systems only comes with practice and the more you learn about sound, the more respect you have for it.
It is seldom simple and even the more experienced operators make mistakes, often because they do not understand the difference between source — what the original sound is like — and acoustics — what happens to it when it leaves the loudspeakers.
At Billy Graham's 1961 Maine Road Stadium Crusade, low-level, multi-speaker systems meant that music from choir and instruments was travelling around the stadium electronically and then being ‘chased’ by the real sound, with the result that everyone heard everything at least twice.
We had to build sound ‘towers’ by the stage to get the music amplification right.
With Billy Graham again at the Lausanne Olympic Stadium in 1974, we had made no allowance for the effect of the wind on sound — it blows it around like rain.
Some of the time the Germans at one end of the stadium were hearing the French translation, while their own language was floating with the wind over the top of the stadium and down to Lake Geneva.
QUESTION OF INTERPRETATION In the Euro 70 television crusade from Dortmund in Germany, we reached thirty-six cities in twelve countries through live closed circuit television on big screens: 100,000 people a night watched around Europe.
The speech was translated phrase by phrase into six languages.
Billy Graham would say, ‘Good evening, ladies and gentlemen’ and six translators would repeat the phrase in their own languages, their mikes feeding the appropriate centres.
Each pair of interpreters was in a small booth by the Dortmund platform with one microphone, a cut-off button and a television showing the broadcast picture.
There was discussion after the first night between the Welsh interpreters, Rheinallt Williams and David Sheppard.
Wouldn't it be better not to translate Billy's invitation to come forward, as the people at the Welsh meeting understood English and it allowed a quiet moment between Billy's phrases?
‘Well, last night,’ said Rheinallt, ‘I kept right on interpreting Billy through the invitation.’
‘Oh no you didn't, Rheinallt,’ said David.
‘I had my finger on the button.’
Rehearse
Rehearsal pays — and steers you around disasters.
That means rehearsing everything .
If necessary climb the scaffolding yourself to get the lights right.
Don't take it for granted that they'll be OK.
Try out the PA system on site; don't take the management's word that they'll do it for you.
You'll arrive to find they've stuck the mikes just where you don't want them.
Work out and run through your lighting and music cues.
Music that is to be played as part of a programme must be chosen with care.
‘Don't Cry For Me Argentina’ isn't quite right for a Falklands Veterans' meeting.
I have some fun sometimes though.
We played ‘Who Wants To Be A Millionaire’ during the collection at one big conference.
National Anthems — never assume your venue will have one on tape.
At one meeting a chairman blithely told me as he went on to the platform that they would have the National Anthem at the end, changing his mind without consulting me first.
I didn't have a recording of it with me, Mrs Thatcher was already on her feet and there was no way I could interrupt to reverse the decision.
I managed to get a police car to rush me through security to the shopping precinct.
I dashed into a record shop, begged a loan of the album, transferred it onto cassette in Dixon's next door, sped back to the hall and managed to shove it into the system just as the chairman announced it and the audience was standing.
I now carry one with me everywhere.
But if you're thinking of doing the same, make sure you get a recording that can be sung-along with and not one of those dragged out funereal dirge versions.
Everything needs rehearsal and not just in the venue.
If you are on a site-recce and you hit on an idea or a way of solving your problem, do a dry run.
Someone will say they've got a machine that prints names on badges.
The machine can completely fail to work because no-one has bothered to test it before the day.
In 1988, I was producing a major women's conference at the Barbican and we needed a big bank of flowers.
Twenty-odd years earlier, I'd picked up an idea from the marvellously creative Bill Brown who was Director of Billy Graham's Crusades in 1966–7.
I was his assistant and when he wanted flowers he would send me to the Old Covent Garden at 4.30am to buy hundreds of pots of chrysanthemums which would then be sold off at the end of the day, thus serving a dual purpose as decoration and a means of recouping some of our costs.
I realised things might not be the same nowadays so, ten days before the conference, my assistant Joanne and I went down to Covent Garden (which is now at Nine Elms) and had a trial run.
We discovered that you now need £2 to get in and give a week's notice for 300 pots.
If we'd left it to the day we'd have been sunk!
Co-ordination
One person has to be responsible for co-ordinating all these different elements and the need for an integrated approach, with one person carrying the overview, was brought home sharply to me during a Youth Conference in Eastbourne in 1983.
My wife and I were actually in Hawaii at the time (combining business and pleasure) secure, or so I thought, in the knowledge that everything was running smoothly.
In fact just about everything that could go wrong went wrong.
The television lighting shone right into the autocue, dazzling the speakers and making the apparatus unusable.
Staff got frazzled, speakers got angry and there was almost a fist fight between some of my colleagues and the lighting technicians.
Someone had brought the adjustable lectern and set it up perfectly but not bothered to find out the heights of the speakers.
And so it went on.
The problem was not that people had not done their jobs: they had.
But they had only done their own jobs.
What was lacking was the professional overview.
The resulting chaos was so memorable that I've never dared take a holiday during a conference again!
Get there early
If you have the co-ordinating role, an important priority is to be everywhere early.
If a conference is due to start at 9.30am, be there at 6.30am.
That way you have time to find problems — and put them right.
You have time to digest the unexpected worm, as they say about early birds!
Most ‘organisers’ swan in at eight-thirty looking important, only to discover there's a big hitch and they have no time to put it right.
And the craziest things can happen at the last minute.
There was a youth dance during one conference I staged and at six the next morning I did an automatic check on the adjustable lectern, Only to find graffiti-covered papers stuck all over the front.
They didn't show when the lectern was down, but imagine the audience's laughter if they had popped up with the lectern and the speaker.
It took us One and a half hours to clean up, but my early start gave us plenty of time.
No audience wants to start off with blunders.
You have a long way to go to win them back.
In Southport recently we had planned a 3Oft (9m) Portakabin to serve as part of a wall around a car park.
Someone somewhere, however, changed the order for the Portakabin and we ended up with a 15ft (4.5m) one.
We then didn't have enough materials for the wall so we had to shorten its length, which in turn meant there was not enough room for media vehicles and not enough space for VIPs to manoeuvre their cars in, and that meant altering security arrangements.
All these complications arose simply because someone thought a smaller cabin would be big enough but had not bothered to consult the professionals.
Once in Porthcawl in South Wales I was trying out my hydraulic lectern and discovered it had developed a horrible squeak.
Again I had time to find a garage that had opened early and had a welder.
We got him to come and fix it before the first session.
At a Local Government conference, someone at the venue had put up the mikes but had not checked to make sure they were fixed properly, so they were slowly drooping!
Mikes always need careful adjusting to catch the speaker's voice — but not, hopefully, his eye!
At yet another conference, police dogs searching the hall before the opening session broke the teleprompter!
Your excessively early arrival means that you can check the aforesaid dogs are not using your beautiful flower arrangements as their loo, and also run through a technical check and the autocue before anyone else gets there.
(That's how you discover the odd rude word that's been written on the script by some joker, before the VIP inadvertently reads it out.)
Be nice to staff and volunteers, as much as possible!
One well-known television personality is said to be rather hard on the teleprompter operators.
At a live broadcast he started to read his autocue lines —‘Hello and good evening.
You're on your own now — we've gone home!’
COST FACTOR Staging needs an imaginative mind!
And occasionally you have to balance results and cost.
A director filming on location in a stadium was spending £20,000 per hour.
His assistant should have directed a scene after lunch but the director returned to find things at a stand-still.
‘Why no filming?’ he asked.
‘We can't find the caretaker to open the locker-room door,’ replied the assistant.
‘Kick the thing down,’ said the director.
‘The delay has cost £20,000 and we can buy a gold door to replace it for less than that.’
CAMPAIGN TRAIL
PROJECTING THE IMAGE
A man, Sir, should keep his friendship in constant repair.
Samuel Johnson
The most exciting and terrifying thing about political campaigning is that it is a tangible measure of your communication skills.
In the other fields I've discussed earlier — public speaking appearing on television, staging a special event, holding a conference, you can (but you shouldn't) kid yourself that they went better than they really did.
But in an election the facts speak for themselves; if you do not get the right message across to the right people, you lose.
This applies whether you are trying to get yourself elected as a parent governor, a church committee member, or a party leader.
Now, let's get something clear at the beginning.
As with other effort to make an impact, if you want to be success you must have substance in your message.
A quality product — fillet steak not offal!
But, once you have the steak, it is the sizzle, the tantalising, mouth-watering aroma, the surrounding cleanliness and the personal credibility of the butcher and the chef that persuades the customer to choose it.
Political campaigning goes on all the time of course, not just in the run-up to a major election.
That is just the intensification, the high point of an ongoing process.
In the UK the political parties maintain a permanent grass roots organisation for this reason.
In America the organisational style is geared to mobilize people only for specific projects.
By instinct, the Americans are geared to winning, the British to playing the game.
The Americans recognise that professionals can achieve more; the British resent the professionals interfering in what is ‘always done’.
Fortunately, in the eighties we have begun to recognise that modern communication skills go far beyond the concept of advertising.
Even so, when we gathered together a superb voluntary team of some of the UK's top communicators for both the 1983 and 1987 General Elections, the Conservative Party could not find any strategic use for them.
The groups contained some of the most talented, creative, experienced and successful people in UK marketing and public relations.
In effect the equivalent of a million pounds-worth of fees went unused.
The Americans have learned to bring in their big guns whenever they need them.
The Republicans and Democrats tick over with a skeleton staff and then hire specialist consultants for each campaign.
The directors of the 1988 Republican National Convention, for example, were political campaign experts seconded from their companies in Washington to the New Orleans event for six months.
In theory, our system ought to work better.
If we had a well-oiled party machine, we should be able to move into a higher gear every now and again to win elections.
In practice it doesn't.
It makes people stale and dull.
We need a radical reassessment of what our organisational goals are and how we will achieve them.
Getting your supporters enthusiastic at the right time requires strategy and planning and that is a political weakness in the UK.
I've been advised to stay away from political jokes (they too often get elected) but in the UK, party workers say: ‘If you put a monkey up for Parliament here and stuck a red (or blue) rosette on him, he'd get in.’
The point they are making is that, for the most part, people still vote more for political parties in Britain than for the individual candidate.
In America it's the Opposite, especially in presidential elections.
There, voters opt for the individual and a big chunk of campaign money is spent on what we call ‘name identification — getting voters to know your candidate's name.
Political agents in the UK often refer to their candidate as ‘an unfortunate necessity’.
He (or she) could get in the way of the running of the party machine.
But, thank goodness, that is changing.
The human side of politics is getting stronger.
It's never been clear though, if you have a Conservative seat, say, in the West Midlands, whether people vote because they think Mrs Thatcher is doing a good job, or because they are worried about a local problem, or because Mrs McJones next door was helped by the sitting candidate over her rates problem!
People are influenced not just by political parties or candidates but also by national, regional and local considerations.
In some seats there will be a substantial personal vote for a long-serving, well-liked MP.
When such MPs die or step down the resulting by-election often provides big shock waves.
Crosby in 1981 was a classic example: the voters lost a man they had known for thirty years and they didn't know who to vote for instead.
There was virtually no constituency organisation to cope with a major campaign — it had not been needed for three decades!
Shirley Williams stumbled on to the scene and a 19,000 Conservative majority turned into a 5,000 SDP (1981 version) one.
By the time the General Election arrived eighteen months later, there was a good candidate (Malcolm Thornton, now MP), a renewed constituency organisation and time for the people of Crosby to realise that they'd done in that panicky moment when they were looking for a familiar face as their Member of Parliament.
Some trends happen without anyone being quite sure why.
For instance, if a party does well in local government elections in May, it is likely to do well in another election a month later despite the fact that the local authority is quite separate from the Westminster or European Parliaments.
But it would be a mistake to conclude that the results must be similar.
Separate strategic planning and professional campaigning could produce substantially different results in two such campaigns.
Voting patterns are a complex business and my colleague, Keith Britto, who is an expert in these things, tells me that no research has been able to disentangle all the strands of voting motivation, a crucial point to remember in planning a campaign!
Atmosphere and environment: national and local
There are two elements in an election at every level from parish council to national government — environment and organisation.
By environment I mean the mood, the atmosphere of the campaign, its tone and the preoccupations Of the voters.
These determine the priorities of the campaign and the emphasis on projecting the image of the party and its people.
The organisation, local and national, has to build on this environment and use it as powerfully as possible.
National activity highlights the parties, the leaders and most of the issues.
If the national mood is wrong, even the very best organisation is unlikely to win a local election.
The local emphasis more often needs to be on the candidate, getting his name, face, personality and position known in the community and introducing him to key groups of people.
As I said earlier, name identification campaigns are routine in the United States but not so common in Europe, although there have been cases where a candidate has been so successfully promoted that he has won, despite his local party's unpopularity at the time.
As a military analogy, with the (political) campaign as your battleground, the generals at headquarters would gather intelligence, study the enemy, develop overall strategy, and provide hardware and ammunition.
It is the troops on the ground who do most of the fighting.
The troops must be enthusiastic, well briefed, well equipped —and in touch with headquarters!
It's always said that Oppositions rarely win elections, Governments lose them.
It was Jim Callaghan's dithering in 1978 and failure to anticipate the horrors and effect of the ‘winter of discontent’ that contributed substantially to Labour's defeat in the General Election the following year.
By then they were running round frantically trying to excuse everything that had happened.
They broke the basic rule of presentation which applies in politics as much as it does in other fields.
Whatever you do, do it deliberately: be seen to be in control Of the situation.
Just saying, ‘Crisis, what crisis? is not the way to do it.
In 1979 Labour was obviously in a panic — that set the mood.
The Tory party used that atmosphere to its advantage and combined it with its Organisational skills to produce a Conservative victory.
Just the facts, m'am — just the facts!
Before you start thinking about mood and atmosphere, or revving up the party machine, what you must have are the facts.
What are the voters in your electoral area thinking and feeling?
The foundation of all political campaigning has to be opinion research.
In national terms this must be done professionally.
Locally it needs to be done to as near a professional standard as possible.
What will not do — though you'd be surprised how often this happens anyway — is a group of political activists getting together and saying, ‘Auntie Flo thinks that…’ or, I think a good slogan would be…’
You need qualitative and quantitative research.
First, a small representative group discussing subjects in depth with a trained observer leading and reporting conclusions.
Then quantitative research, testing those themes, reactions and conclusions on a larger sample of people.
If your research is good, it gives you the base from which to start.
You take the nasty results with the nice, examine them thoroughly and dispassionately and ask these questions:What are people really concerned about?
What do they think of us and our opponents at this moment?
What would change their thinking?
What do they want from us?
Before you take off on your campaign, be sure you know whether you can genuinely meet the voters' needs, without compromising your convictions and standards.
When you can, your campaigning will reflect it.
When you can't, you have to explain why you can't and try to convert the voters.
Just proving that you are right and they are wrong will lose the election for you.
You must win the hearts as well as the minds.
The fact that you're dealing with abstracts makes it hard.
If voters say they want politicians to care, how do you show it — you can't suddenly burst into tears.
The Conservatives have always had to tackle this particular problem by tying care in with action and results.
Not only did we care, we did something about it.
Not only did we want to improve something but we have created the wealth to make more resources and improvements available for social needs.
What you say during a political campaign is the concrete foundation of it.
It is however at most only ten per cent of the impact of the communication.
The rest is presentation.
THE ‘X’ FACTOR Here are two examples of involuntary agenda emphasis, the situation where the agenda is set by events beyond the control of politicians.
In the 1988 General Election in Sweden the Social Democrats had a huge sympathy vote lingering on after the murder of Olaf Palme while he had been Prime Minister some years before.
So despite a good campaign by the Moderate Party and some dissatisfaction with the Social Democrats, the emotional factor still returned the Social Democrats to power.
In Denmark the same year Prime Minister Schluter went to the polls after a social democrat coalition defeated him in Parliament and ruled that NATO ships coming to Denmark must be nuclear weapon free.
It was doubtful whether Schluter could remain in control but two emotional anniversaries during the campaign helped to keep defence as the issue: April 9 was the anniversary of the German invasion and occupation of Denmark in the Second World War, and May 9 the anniversary of the Liberation.
Schluter won.
The image
An ‘image’ is projected not created.
If you do not have the substance you will fail, even with the help of ‘media coaches’ and ‘image creators’.
If they were that good they would have told you to forget it until you had a good message or product to project!
As that great veteran of many political campaigns, Lord
Thorneycroft, said in 1978: ‘In the end, Harvey, image is what you are.’
You cannot project a phoney.
That is why
Labour's campaign failed in 1987.
Glitz, glamour and gloss cannot replace substance, they can only enhance it.
The word ‘image’ conjures up something insubstantial, an illusion, a gimmick.
In fact it's just the opposite.
When you project an image, you project an intensified version of the original.
A clarified version of a reality.
The man or woman in the street cannot know their leaders personally.
But they can ‘know’ them, in the sense of getting a feel for the sort of person they are, a closeness with them, even an affection.
That's what image means and it's what we try to do in political campaigns.
We project the politicians beyond their immediate circle of personal contacts out to the people who matter.
What we project is the essence of our politicians, the nature of their convictions.
It's making the most of what you've got.
Projecting the image
The first and most powerful image projector today is television.
Everybody has access to it and politicians ignore it only if they are thick or arrogant.
It is tempting to fantasise that leaders and parties make their reputations through finely tuned arguments in the House of Commons or speeches in far-flung halls.
The truth is that political leaders project their image nowadays in ninety-second ‘sound bites’ on radio and television.
Advertising is a one-way hard-sell in a political campaign and can be a good motivator as long as it doesn't try to sell the voter something his guts tell him isn't true.
It can also help to set the debate agenda if it is strategically planned.
It is, however, a reinforcer and emphasiser, not a converter.
A girl sits down with a man and he says, ‘I'm very romantic’— that's advertising.
A girl sits down with a man and he says, ‘What you need is a good romance and it so happens I'm very romantic’— that's marketing.
A girl sits down with a man and she says, ‘I hear you're very romantic, please take me to dinner’— that's Public Relations!
Newspapers do develop the discussion in much more detail, but people are more likely to be turned off by newspapers than
On, so their effect is negative rather than positive.
The written press provides back-up, analysis and in-depth knowledge but rarely encourages or inspires people.
That comes from television.
To put it another way: people get their minds going from newspapers and their hearts moving from TV.
And we win the heart first,then the mind.
How individuals come across on television usually depends on how much understanding, effort and practice they are prepared to give to it.
I've discussed this in the chapter on radio and television.
In a political campaign, television exposure is magnified many times, so the projection of the image has to be co-ordinated, consistent and continuous.
Though you project, not create, an image, with a proper understanding Of broadcasting you can create Opportunities for politicians to project themselves.
If the public is to get the message, it must be presented to them many times.
We therefore combine television and newspaper coverage.
The viewers get a glimpse of an event or person on the early evening news, another taste at nine or ten in the evening and (hopefully) a bit more detail and not too much distraction in the following morning's papers, radio and TV.
Media images
I sat in a thirteenth-century hall in Bruges in September 1988 and listened to Mrs Thatcher's speech on the future of Europe.
It was one of the most powerful, positive and visionary speeches I have heard her give in eleven years.
I got up feeling encouraged and thoroughly supporting her strong positive vision of Europe's future.
The next morning the newspapers headlined what I thought was a completely different ‘anti-Europe’ speech.
I even wondered just for a moment if she had, unknown to me, made another, negative, speech later in the day.
It was only weeks after the speech that I began to read in the press that actually her theme had been positive and she had presented a positive forward view.
The media had ‘created’ a false ‘image’of an anti-Europe Mrs Thatcher, but because it was ‘created’, without substance, from a small out-of-context part of her argument, it didn't last long.
In 1980 I was at the Cleveland debate between Ronald Reagan and Jimmy Carter.
On television and in person, it was vividly clear that Reagan won at least 9 to 1.
In the Bush-Dukakis debate in 1988, Bush won at least 7 to 3.
On both occasions the press reported a draw or a very close thing because they were concerned only with the mind, the argument.
Television projected to the hearts of the people and we know the results.
The Telly
Some people purport to be experts in political campaigning but still refuse to accept television as a major medium.
They think that gearing a campaign towards maximum effective coverage is demeaning.
They are either blind or foolish.
After personal contact, television is the fastest and most powerful way of winning people.
We who have been classed as ‘image-makers’ in Europe and the United States are proud of the job we do.
I have worked with and studied strategical political campaigning in many countries, among them France, Germany,
Malta, Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States.
In every case television in its full variety of formats has been the primary influence in projecting the parties' images.
In Malta in 1981 we faced a socialist black-out of the Centre Nationalist Party from any access to Maltese television.
The Nationalists set up their own TV station in Sicily and beamed into Malta.
An estimated fifty per cent of the Maltese population watched those broadcasts and the Nationalists won 50.7 per cent of the votes.
Elections can be and are won or lost on television.
An image can change on that screen suddenly and dramatically.
When George Bush addressed the Republican National Convention in New Orleans in 1988, he was still seen as a wimp.
He was still behind in the polls.
His fortune changed suddenly and dramatically when all America watched his acceptance speech on TV.
I had got myself down on the floor of the Superdome Convention Hall to make a video.
He began his speech in fairly predictable, George Bush style, slow and a bit boring.
Then he said dryly: ‘We're not going to be too hard on our Democrat opponents.
I'm going to work at keeping my charisma in check.’
Suddenly, I felt the atmosphere change.
People were no longer thinking, ‘He's all we've got — we'll probably be OK’, instead it was ‘This guy is big enough to laugh at himself.
He's going to be President, and a good one.’
It sunk into 30,000 delegates and millions watching at home that this man knew he was not a charismatic orator but he knew , too, that he was going to be President and he could handle it.
He showed us George Bush, the man, as well as the politician.
It goes back to my point that genuineness is the key.
If you've got it, flaut it.
In his thirty-first year in show business, Cliff Richard was the top of the UK pops for Christmas 1988.
His No 1 was ‘Mistletoe and Wine’— a song of his Christian testimony.
The pop world expected ‘Silent Night’ by the group Bros to oust Cliff.
With exaggerated hype, ‘Silent Night’ climbed to second place, but at Christmas it was Cliff No 1 and Bros behind him.
Two Christmas songs.
The difference?
Cliff's conviction showed.
People respond to gut genuineness in a way that they cannot respond to phoney image.
The televised debate in October 1988 between Bush and Dukakis was virtually a repeat, in terms of people-winning, of Reagan/Carter in 1980.
Television showed Reagan and Carter as they were.
Reagan genuine, confident, warm and human.
Carter cold, stiff, impersonal and lacking confidence.
People liked what they saw in Reagan and the campaign was won in that debate.
Dukakis had similar flaws to Carter: lack of political substance and lack of belief in what he himself had to say.
He said ‘I think I'm fairly lovable’— with a face as cold and unlovable as if he were dissecting a fish rather than trying to reach his fellow human beings.
Later in the campaign his media advisers tried desperately to ‘create’ a new Dukakis by injecting comments such as‘I am a liberal, I am against capital punishment but I would feel like killing the person who harmed my wife and children.’
Of course it didn't work!
Bush's belief in what he was saying was obvious.
Dukakis seemed to be reciting words merely to try to manipulate voters.
If your body language, eyes, mouth, expression and voice contradict the words you are saying, the words will be meaningless and even counter-productive.
If you have nothing to say, don't open your mouth and prove it.
Dukakis's television performance and interviews gave it all away, as did those of his supporters.
They knew they were going to lose.
The newspapers in Europe were seriously claiming the battle was close and that Dukakis could even win enough States to pull it off.
But he knew he couldn't and his supporters knew it.
They used phrases like ‘We're going to surprise them’, ‘It's going to be real competitive.’
They were going through the motions on television but their voices, face and body language were vividly clear — they knew they would lose and they were putting on a brave front.
What they may not have realised is that that message conveyed itself to the American public!
Television is the most personal and intimate communication medium there is.
When you're on it make sure you believe what you're saying!
DEBATING POINT Good presentation points to and highlights the message at the heart.
When Jimmy Carter suggested that the world would be a dangerous place if Ronald Reagan became President (at their televised debate in Cleveland in 1980), Reagan replied: ‘There you go again, Jimmy,’ and smilingly put Carter right on some facts.
What that sentence really said to the audience and viewers was: ‘It's people who matter to me and I'm going to take care of my fellow Americans real well.’
When Carter a few minutes later in the debate said, ‘I asked my (eight-year-old) daughter Amy last night what she thought…’, what the audience heard was: ‘I'd better try to find a warm human illustration before it's too late.’
He was too late!
Co-ordination
Projecting an image, particularly in Europe, is not just maximising the television potential of particular people.
It is also about carrying that image into every other aspect of the political campaign, so that the whole really is greater than the sum of the parts.
The image has to be both of the politician and of the party.
Professionally the two should go together.
A local candidate at variance with the national campaign may please the press but it rarely wins the people.
In developing an image, you and your workers, professional or voluntary, have to swallow your pride, smile at yourselves and put yourselves in second place to getting the message across — not easy, not often said, but true!
So face it.
All too often in politics we are handicapped by the fact that Mrs Jones has done something a certain way for twenty-seven years and therefore must be allowed to do it again this time.
The real world has long left behind the age when old so-and-so could decide ‘I rather like this slogan’ or ‘My constituents think we ought to do such and such’without that ‘feeling’being backed up by professional research and experience.
In the Church and in politics we are cursed by a number of opposite extremes.
‘If it was good enough for the Apostle Paul/Disraeli it's good enough for me’ at one end.
Or, ‘We've got to be high-tech, use computers’ at the other.
‘All this American razzamatazz, we don't want it here’— or, ‘Let's have balloons and bands for everything.’
It's not ‘playing the game’ that is most important; it's winning, and a professional assessment of which methods will achieve that.
And just in case it is suggested that I'm saying the end justifies the means, let me confirm that I'm not.
You can assume that I mean legitimate, ethical and otherwise proper methods.
Now I would not ignore hunches, insight or occasional flashes of brilliance that can come from anybody, as long as they do not become a substitute for objectivity and professionalism.
Today's political campaigning requires trained and experienced communicators familiar with modern practices in opinion research, public relations and marketing.
That means understanding the principles of communication and custom applying them to a campaign, not just throwing hardware at people and showing them the switches.
So if you are serious about winning, put your prejudices away and start again.
(People often believe they are thinking when they are merely rearranging their prejudices.)
Technology is not just about making clever films for party political broadcasts or staging breathtaking rallies, but more about helping weld your communications strategy into a coherent whole.
For years we have had the technology for every constituency headquarters to be linked to a central databank of key information.
Every candidate can have instant access to the national leaders' comments.
The candidate can call up the data and be briefed throughout the day about new statistics, party policy developments and relevant events.
Sadly, because our party political management systems have had to centre on ‘now’, these strategic concepts are slow in coming into use.
Such technology, properly used, would more than pay its way, coming into its own during the intensity of an election but maintaining its worth all year round in enabling swift and efficient communication between headquarters and members.
I'm not referring to top secret information; if the other parties are interested enough to hack their way into the system, they might be converted!
While I'm on the subject of secrecy, it is true to say that many politicians, sometimes justifiably, are paranoid about the subject.
Fair enough at senior government level when there are so many ‘leaks’ in the system.
Nonetheless, it is impossible to carry out a strategy if those who are meant to implement it don't know what it is!
The image you are projecting for your campaign will not be confined to people.
It must be echoed in slogans, posters, the visual design of venues for meetings, speeches, interviews, rallies and press releases.
There must be a unity of concept and content in everything from your banners to the banner headlines.
It is known commercially as a ‘corporate identity’.
An image, after all, is the way people see you.
If you are not prepared to project it properly, it is most likely that people will only see the wrong parts!
A campaign strategy needs to have an in-built system of self-criticism and self-assessment.
How are the plans being carried out?
How effective are they being in achieving your objective?
What can be done to make them more successful?
You need flexibility to change tack if you are not getting it right.
Be aware of the time limit: no election campaign goes on for more than three or four weeks in the United Kingdom — be glad about that!
People have a limited capacity to sustain interest in politics.
It's one reason why there is so much apathy in America where campaigns seem never-ending.
Don't let time overtake you.
This was a major mistake in the Dukakis camp.
The Democrats clearly felt guilty about their ‘liberal’ politics and thus uneasy when Bush attacked them.
Their initial response was denial.
Then, far too late anyway, the Dukakis advisors decided to change tack and try to make ‘liberalism’ sound decent by linking it to names from the past like Kennedy and Truman.
It was so obviously a panic reaction that it fooled nobody.
Not only had they failed to think it through under the ‘what if strategic planning heading, but they had also failed to consider how they were going to project the change or how the people were going to react.
They had made the more usually British mistake of asking ‘What shall we do?’ rather than the standard American approach of ‘What has to be done to achieve our objectives?’
On the whole, especially at local level, the Left in Britain has been more goal orientated than the Right.
When the Left want to take control of a particular constituency, they look at its controlling group and note that over a six-month period the maximum number of people attending the decision-making meetings is never more than (say) twenty-seven.
Question: ‘What is our aim?’
Answer: ‘Control.’
Question: ‘How do we get it?’
Answer: ‘Get fourteen people to vote for us.’
Then they select fourteen people and go after them one by one.
It is no good complaining about militants running everything if we have not spotted what is happening because we're so busy doing it the way ‘we always do’.
In America, campaign leaders ask: ‘How much money do we need to do the job properly?’
They then look at that figure, break it down into separate realistic amounts achievable in various ways and set up the systems that are going to raise that cash.
In the UK we say: ‘How much money have we got?
Oh dear, we'll have to run the project On that budget.’
A winning strategy
A winning campaign strategy comes from answers to the questions:
What must we do to get our supporters to turn out on the day?
What must we do to firm up the opinion of those who almost support us?
How many people do we need to convert?
And what must we do to neutralise the opposition?
I believe that campaigns should be at least 70 per cent positive for your side and no more than 30 per cent knocking your opponents.
Ideally I like to see a ratio of 85 per cent positive,
15 per cent negative.
I don't like heavy knocking campaigns which at best seem sour and at worst backfire.
In Opposition, of course, you have to criticise harder but that criticism has to be seen to be reasonable if you are to succeed.
Dukakis on defence and crime and Kinnock on defence and the economy were perceived to be weak.
They failed to pick their own high ground or to control the political agenda.
We cannot lose touch with political reality.
What do we do, them or try to discourage their supporters from voting?
There are elections at all levels where it can be better for a party to have a low turn-out overall because those who do vote will tend to be your people.
Everyone is free to vote, but your objective is to win — not to guarantee a high turn-out!
If you run a high-profile, fancy campaign it will alert everyone to the fact that they should be voting and the proportion in your favour could shrink rapidly, It may be better to run a low key affair targeted directly at your own supporters.
Perhaps I should point out here that there's a distinction between the before and the after of an election.
Once someone is elected they serve every member of that constituency, antis as well as pros.
While campaigning you owe it to your convictions to do the best you can to win .
I've watched a lot of American campaigning at close quarters including the primaries and presidential election of 1980, the Republican Convention in 1984 (when I also spent a week travelling with Ronald Reagan) and the most recent Republican
Convention in New Orleans in 1988.
There is a lot we can learn from them without having to copy slavishly.
The Conservative Party in this country has been hindered by the concept that winning the argument automatically means winning the people.
The Socialists have historically been better at going for the gut-level reaction.
It's only really in the last two general elections that we have begun to bring fun and excitement into campaigns, to raise people's enthusiasm to the point where they can let down their reserve a little bit.
The other parties have followed the Conservative lead and we have completely changed the face of political presentation since the early 1980s.
We're no less serious of purpose today but we may now seem a little less po-faced.
In that way the electorate see us as people first, Conservatives second and politicians third.
And that's the way it should be!
STRANGE SEAT MATES On one of my planning visits to Washington I sat next to a pleasant young lady on the plane out.
We chatted a little after the movie and well out over the Atlantic at 37,000ft I commented that a lot of my consultancy work was with the British Conservative Party.
‘What funny seat mates,’ she said, ‘I'm with the IRA.’
And she was.
I checked her out with the FBI and she raised funds for the IRA in the United States — not illegal at that time — and carried the money across to her IRA contacts every month.
I told her that I had been involved in one of the IRA attacks when I had been blown up in the Brighton Bomb, and that I had friends and colleagues who had been badly hurt or killed.
‘I have nothing against you personally,’ she told me quietly, ‘but that was one of the happiest days in my life — we almost brought the Thatcher Government down.’
Sad — she was bright, educated and charming; but with such a bitter heart.
In the end, image is what you are!
NURTURING THE GRASS ROOTS
The humblest citizen of all the land, when clad in the armour of a righteous cause, is stronger than all the hosts of Error.
William Jennings Bryan
People power
Technology is a wonderful thing and I'm one of its greatest fans.
I use it throughout my work because, used skilfully and imaginatively, it can make any sort of communication more powerful, more exciting and frequently a lot more fun.
But if you want your message to have impact you need people-power first and foremost.
This is especially true in political campaigning.
You can have first-rate candidates, experienced political and communications professionals and all the sophisticated equipment money can buy, but if you don't have the grass roots organisation as back up you will probably fail.
The professionals motivate, guide, provide resources and strategy, but at the heart of a political campaign are its voluntary workers.
No politician or party can function without such an army.
They decide whether you win or lose.
If you have a strong enough army of voluntary workers you can conquer the world, or even turn the People's Republic of Islington blue!
America and Germany are countries which are particularly good at recruiting and keeping in regular contact with their supporters, which makes it far easier to galvanise them when you need them most in the run-up to an election.
We for the most part are bad at this.
We approach it in a hit-and-miss sort of way instead of through a systematic communication programme.
Direct Mail
One of the most effective ways to recruit and encourage members and supporters is by direct mail.
You can target particular groups you think are likely supporters, draw a response and then keep in touch.
The Christian Democrats in Germany have a tradition of good quality newspapers.
They are well-produced, have interesting human and political content and are mailed (not hopefully dumped in offices for volunteers to deliver) to 600,000 party members every month.
Members are kept in touch with party people and activities, political news and views and social events.
They stay interested and involved.
The Americans specialise in the personal touch with individualised laser-printed letters.
They are also skilful in their deployment of famous names.
It's a rare person who can ignore a letter sent personally to him over the signature of Clint Eastwood or Charlton Heston, saying ‘I need your help’.
I've been involved in direct mail ever since my first days with the Billy Graham Organisation in the early sixties.
We pioneered the technique well before it became used on so large a scale by giants like American Express and Reader's Digest.
As with any technique, direct mail has basic principles which must be obeyed if the programme is to communicate and raise money over a long period: * It must be regular (a minimum of eight times a year) * It must be personal, relevant and informal * It must be good quality * It must ask for and offer something * It must appeal to emotion first and reason second
As we enter the nineties we are progressing slowly with direct mail in UK politics, but national attempts by the different parties have failed for one reason or another.
Mostly they're haphazard so that you don't hear anything for months at a stretch, or they're impersonal, or the responses are not followed-up and developed, or they are stupefyingly dull.
That's probably the worst sin.
Who wants to be involved with a boring organisation?
There are regulations governing how much can be spent during election campaigns.
These vary from country to country and obviously you have to be aware of them and comply with them.
Outside the campaign itself, however, you can spend whatever you can raise.
Money is well spent in setting up and maintaining a properly serviced grass roots party organisation.
A good direct mail programme will hold them together and bring their response.
Everyone likes to feel wanted and appreciated and such a group of people will give or raise whatever amount of money is needed.
We raised £2 million in eighteen months for Luis Palau's Mission to London in 1984, most of it through direct mail.
In 1979 we began pioneering the direct mail concept at constituency level with my wife Marlies at first typing and then working the word processor and computer.
A constituency operation in south-east London was begun at about the same time.
The prevailing idea then among Conservatives was that computers were ‘hi-falutin’ and ‘impersonal’.
I never could understand why a letter typed with a word processor was any less personal than one produced with a typewriter.
Fortunately the rumour began to circulate that Disraeli had used a WP and suddenly computers were ‘in’.
There's still a long way to go, but for both the major parties in the UK, computer campaigning in the constituencies is now widespread.
With good software programmes and consistent input, a constituency can identify most of its own voters and potential switchers.
Incidentally, much of the success of direct mail lies in the fact that, apart from bills, most of the population get no mail at all and people are delighted to get a letter that expresses interest in them, concern about them and opens the door for further contact and involvement.
It is not enough to notify the regional chairman or committee members of what's going on and hope that they will pass on the message to the members and supporters.
(Remember the party game Chinese Whispers?
The message comes out completely different at the other end.)
The greater number of people who are well-briefed, the wider the cascade effect.
Enthusiasm and commitment radiates outwards until it touches those on the edge of the circle and draws them in.
This is the way forward.
A central core of keen and well-informed supporters whose enthusiasm, knowledge and confidence will draw new members like a magnet.
Anything else is false economy.
Telephone campaigning
Telephone campaigning is an expanding field and one that can be very effective, but it is open to misuse; you can say almost anything on the telephone and campaigners have to be trained in the right technique.
It should go without saying that an approach should be unfailingly courteous.
Never preach, hector or bully.
The wrong word can do your cause more harm than good.
The telephone can be rather cold as a method of first contact, but very useful if it is used in conjunction with a letter or a visit.
In fact, the strongest impact is always made with three hits.
So, for example, a letter and a phone call are good but a letter, a phone call and a visit even better.
This ‘three hits’ principle applies across the board in communication, but it takes effort.
Say, for instance, you're holding a press conference and you want to ensure maximum attendance.
Send out an initial press notice.
Find the name of the news editor or the particular specialist reporter and announce that you will be holding the conference to make a ‘significant announcement’.
Follow this ‘teaser’ with a second release giving full details of who, when and where, and follow it up again by a phone call checking that the right person has got the material.
The local scene
Local elections, however insignificant they might seem sometimes, are actually very important.
They affect quite radically the life of a community and they have repercussions that reach up to national level.
Local authorities can spoil or block what a government is trying to do, or they can steal its credit.
Political units overlap and influence each other.
For example, if a local authority is apathetic about the European Community and the single market of 1992, they can effectively stifle interest and ensure a low turn-Out for a European election.
Equally, an authority that encourages exchange visits by schools, business and industry contacts, twinning with continental towns and so on, can easily raise the level of voter involvement.
In the United Kingdom there is no breathing space, no fallow time when a local party can sit back and not worry about politics.
Elections of one kind or another are taking place three years out of four: parish, borough, county, European.
Contact does not have to be political ; in fact it can be more effective when it isn't.
A visit when someone is sick or an invitation to coffee is far more appreciated — and remembered — than a call to discuss committee problems.
It's always the same principle: hearts first, then minds!
Setting goals
A local political organisation needs specific goals and a strategy.
You need a measurable target.
If you are having a recruitment drive, decide what it is you want: 500 members in two years, 2,000 in five or whatever.
I remember Billy Graham saying at Earls Court back in 1966 that the Christian Church in England should organise itself like the Communist Party: by forming active and multiplying cells, fixing a timetable, planning a strategy and working it through.
I keep hammering away at this point but it applies to so many areas and it's so rarely done.
Good organisation is specific and detailed not bland and vague.
Your supporters
There are two types of supporter in politics.
Those who want to be paid-up, signed-up members and those who for one reason or another do not actually want to become a member but are keen to be kept informed, involved and used as the occasion demands.
SO don't feel you've failed if people won't sign on the dotted line.
They may turn out to be Of equal value to those who do.
Some of the most effective recruitment campaigns I have worked with have been for limited commitment.
Many people want to help but just don't want to be bogged down with wasteful committee meetings every week for years.
To involve people in Billy Graham Crusades we asked for a specific and limited commitment, something that people understood and could accept: a prayer meeting in their home once a week,for five weeks only ; giving a monthly gift to the Crusade,for six months only .
A finite contribution.
In local political organisation the technique is just as effective.
By using it in Ealing in West London in 1979, we recruited enough help to win the borough council election and to take the parliamentary seat from Labour.
Three hundred extra helpers were recruited to give eight hours help in the three months before the election, or two Saturday mornings, or four evenings in the final two months.
The local constituency officers got new people and could plan how and when to use them — and later many of them decided they'd like to go on working with their new friends.
People and the community
Supporters of whatever political hue are people first and political creatures second.
So if you approach a sympathetic, but so far neutral, person and start telling him that he ought to give his support because of x, y and z policies he is likely to be bored and irritated.
But if you ask him to spare a couple of hours to help out at a St John Ambulance fund-raising activity or a garden fête for the church roof repair fund, he might find that a worthwhile thing to do.
When he gets to the event and discovers that the people there are friendly, interesting and pleasant company — and most belong to the same political party — he will begin to think.
You've caught his interest and got him involved by deeds more than words.
In grass roots politics interest grows mostly through non-party political activities.
The Labour Party knows this and so do the Liberals (now Democrats) with their emphasis on community politics.
It might seem little enough to get an extra bus stop or pedestrian crossing, but those are real concerns for local people and such matters affect the way they regard you politically.
Lord Cockfield, a European Commissioner from 1983 to 1988, discussed European publicity with me early in his term.
He said: ‘The most effective publicity we've ever had for the Community is the European Ryder Cup Golf Team.
It means something for people to see the top golfers of the different nations playing together.
It says more about the concept of the European Community than any amount of leaflets and party political broadcasts can.’
I'd like to see Euro MPs introducing their singers in the Eurovision Song Contest!
Millions of people watch it, it involves and amuses them and it's the perfect forum for effective communication — not party political, just an idea of Europe.
But the best communication is always person to person.
Let me give you an example.
You know someone who you believe is a supporter and in conversation it's mentioned that he regularly gives to charities.
You, if you are well informed, can then point out that there's a way in which he can get tax relief on his donations.
Take the person the appropriate leaflet and explain the system.
(You can see the need for good information to local constituency offices.
If you are sent incomprehensible bumf, find someone locally who can translate it into readable English.)
Your potential supporter is both helped and encouraged to look on your organisation more favourably because someone took time and trouble over him.
Once you have got a favourable response, you follow through with an invitation to a social event.
Perhaps a letter from the local party chairman saying, ‘I'm interested to learn you are a supporter of ours and I'd like the opportunity to get to know you.
We're having a short breakfast-time get-together at 8:30 Saturday.
We'll be serving scrambled eggs, toast and coffee — free of course— and we'll have the chance to chat.
We'll be through by 10:00 and you may find it interesting and useful.
Do come along.’
The local media
You will not need telling that good relationships with your local press, radio and television are essential — but how do you do it?
First of all get to know them.
Keep a complete list of all the reporting and editing staff on all the outlets in your area.
Try to meet them in non-political situations and when you do not want anything from them.
Take a school class or a group from your voluntary organisation to see how the local media work.
Meet them with a local businessman or at other functions.
When they know you, in a personal capacity, you have credibility when you contact them in a political role.
Second, never abuse that credibility.
Make sure that the story you have for them is interesting and if it is merely constituency information, explain that you are providing it for background briefing and that you are not expecting them to publish it.
Many times over the years, I have contacted radio or television stations all over the world to propose a client to appear on a show.
I have never suggested to the media that anybody goes on a programme, unless I know that it will be good radio or good television .
My own professional credibility would be lost in an instant if I proposed a boring twit.
On the other hand, if the media ask for someone to take part, try to make him or her as interesting as possible — for the programme not to themselves!
Third, make situations interesting.
If your candidate is going to research the level of pollution in a local river, he doesn't stand on the bridge and look; he either wades in to feel for junk or he goes in with a professional diver to find it.
In both cases it's a good story and photo; but in both cases make sure your candidate is properly equipped and safely escorted.
‘Candidate disappears under junk in local river’ is a bigger news story, but you lose the photo!
Fourth, don't always do a news release on all the grass roots activities.
Sometimes, if you plan it, it's worth not reporting a newsworthy event — but make sure the local press finds out casually after it's over.
Then they come to you (the third person principle) and ask you to make sure they are told of everything in future.
Fifth, be available.
Make sure that all the local news people have the appropriate office and home phone numbers.
And finally, organise the volunteers to take part in phone-in radio programmes and write letters to both press and radio.
Do not wait for political discussions.
Get them to take part in all the community topics, but — and it's a big but — their opinions must be genuine.
Don't plan twenty similar letters on one subject; your people lose credibility again.
It is wise, however, to teach them the basics of radio and how to construct an interesting letter!
Advertising, publicity and public relations
Advertising, publicity and public relations all play a part in effective communication by local party organisations.
Advertising is buying space in whatever medium and designing the selling device — poster, commercial, etc.
Publicity is the exposure you get by providing the resources yourself — leaflets, posters, press releases and newsworthy events — but the space is free.
The leaflet and letter is posted through the door, the poster stuck up in the window, the story featured in the press.
Public relations or PR is slightly less visible.
It is establishing and keeping up mutual understanding between an organisation and the people it wants to reach.
It's the ‘third person factor’.
‘Marketing’ incorporates all three.
It means recognising or creating a need, pointing it out and offering to meet the need with your product or message.
What other people say about you — and your party — has far more impact than what you say about yourself.
We're getting better at using this third person factor in political campaigning, but it's still not used fully.
The reason why party political broadcasts, however clever and imaginative, rarely have a great impact is because they are still essentially advertising, and people know it.
But when you get a senior foreign statesman commenting abroad how much the world respects Mrs Thatcher — that's a real PR coup.
EARLY CALL Arrivals and departures can often be dramatic.
I was travelling with President Carter's press corps in 1980.
We had finished a big dinner in Chicago around midnight.
Back at the O'Hare Airport Hilton we were told, ‘The President's gone to bed.
Nothing now until 0800.’
I fell into bed only to be woken by the telephone an hour later at 1.30am.
‘Airforce One and Two will leave for Washington in one hour — please be downstairs in twenty minutes, packed.’
The President had seen the polls forecasting heavy defeat and had decided on a high-profile last-ditch effort to free the Iranian hostages.
It didn't work but we all — or rather most of us — lost our sleep to fly in Airforce Two.
The following morning six of the travelling journalists showed up innocently for breakfast in Chicago wanting to know where everyone had gone.
They had not been reachable when they were phoned in the night!
Governor Dukakis tried a similar dramatic stunt in 1988, holding midnight and early hour rallies for supporters between California and Boston on the last night of the campaign.
That didn't work either, but it was imaginative and made the supporters feel better.
In a very close race it just might have helped.
The same principles work through the grass roots of a party.
If you want to attract people to an event you will get a certain response by direct invitation, but a much greater rate of success when your members are saying: ‘I'm going to a terrific do.
So-and-so will be there, this-and-that will be happening — why don't you come with me?’
Meeting people
Once you've recruited your members and other helpers, you must use them and their talents.
One of the most important factors in any election campaign is finding out who is likely to vote for you — canvassing.
It is a key task for your troops.
They must find the information for you to base your strategy on.
And gathering that information means knocking on doors and asking people questions.
That awful script: ‘Good morning/afternoon/evening.
Have you decided which party you will vote for?’
Canvassing is usually done with a rather hit and miss approach.
It is left to the individual's instinct and good sense, which are not always entirely sound.
A Conservative candidate knocked at the door of a run-down council flat one evening at 7pm.
The door was eventually opened by a scowling man, cigarette hanging from the corner of his mouth, towel around his waist, shaving soap on his face and a razor in his hand, getting ready for his night shift.
The caller stepped back aghast and stuttered, ‘I'm so sorry to disturb you — I see you're changing for dinner.’
There is an art to canvassing.
Watch for tell-tale body language and gestures and give-away phrases in someone's response.
If they know which party you are from and say, ‘Oh I expect I'll vote for you’, they probably mean ‘I won't, but I want to get rid of you quickly because Dallas is just beginning’, or, I've no idea and I'm really not interested — politicians are all the same.’
Rather than marking the person down as a supporter, try a follow-up saying: ‘Thanks, I'll get a colleague to call round.’
If the response is, ‘Oh, no it's alright, don't bother’— it's fair to assume you can't count on his vote.
Try to read the feedback and get as definite a picture as you can.
You don't want to under- or over-estimate your strength.
Canvassing is still done without uniformity of approach or agreed method and its results are often badly inaccurate.
Canvassers should have training, which could in itself be fun for them.
Get some volunteers to come and ‘be canvassed’ at a buffet supper.
You might even win some supporters.
For some of us, meeting people is difficult but you do not have to be an outgoing, free and easy character in order to learn to meet and get on with new people.
If you are involved with local politics, meeting people is going to be part of your task — unless you are ready to spend the whole time in a backroom stuffing envelopes.
Individually we are very much the same, but the circumstances that govern our lives might be quite different.
Politics is about communicating with and winning a person , not winning an argument or battering home a policy line.
When you first meet someone, assume you will meet them again.
Take time to become acquainted.
It will take more than one meeting and not all people are equally responsive.
Try to be natural and Objective.
You will find it easier to talk to people if you don't take all their ideas personally.
They have a right to think the way they do.
When you know them better, by all means invite them to a party meeting but don't let your attitude to them be dependent on their political philosophy.
As the initiator of the contact, the tone of the encounter, the degree of relaxation, ease and good humour, depends On you.
If you handle it right your next contact will be easier.
All this is, I know, easier to say than to do and there are times when everyone feels shy.
If you are nervous about meeting new people, take a friend with you on your first efforts.
I am considered to be fairly outgoing but as a teenager I was painfully shy.
I had to train myself to deal with people and situations and it's quite possible — once you make your mind up.
Meetings
Involvement with a political party will at some stage inevitably involve meetings.
Like most other projects, meetings are not difficult to organise if you know the principles.
I discussed them in some detail in the chapter on event planning.
There are four main points to remember: a clear objective, an overall picture of the event, meticulous preparation and the willingness to go an ‘extra mile’.
Small meetings, regular get-togethers of people who mostly know each other, are not so much my concern here, because they will probably run to an agreed format and be fairly self-contained.
But anything of a bigger scale that involves attracting the public or rallying the faithful or listening to a guest speaker does need forethought and care if it is not to be a shambles.
If possible, visit your location weeks ahead, arrive hours before the meeting so that you can test your equipment and check through everything well before the doors open.
Draw up a checklist to include: platform design and decoration, technical equipment, sound and lighting, stewards, signs, first aid arrangements, wheelchair space, press area, guest seating and parking.
Don't be afraid to add your own items to the check-list; every meeting is different.
Always have a rehearsal and go through, on your own, every step.
Check that you have the right information and equipment.
Rehearsals save you being embarrassed in the meeting by broken light bulbs, out of focus films, a speaker half an hour late because he couldn't find anywhere to park, and shrieks and howls as the public address system does its best to drown the speaker.
Timing is critical: many meetings are marred by going on and on.
Your audience must know that you finished on time, without knowing how you did it.
Plan the schedule as a whole, and in detail, and write down exact timings.
Always finish on time, unless there is a very good reason to overrun.
Be flexible with the details so that if you are getting behind you can trim the programme.
Brief your participants that you will be conducting the meeting this way and expect their co-operation.
Leave them wanting more is a good piece of showbusiness advice.
If people leave feeling it was good but rather long, you have failed.
If they leave wishing it had gone on longer, you've succeeded.
If you are actually conducting a meeting, do it with sensitivity, objectivity, a cool head and an informal personal touch.
Sometimes you can let the meeting carry on by itself — you don't have to bob up between every item on the programme.
One person leading into another can make for a smoother flow and a more efficient use of time.
You're presenting a message, not hogging the limelight!
ON THE ROAD
You should never put on your best trousers when you go out to fight for freedom and truth.
Henrik Ibsen
On the wall of our dining room is one of my favourite pictures — a composite photograph of all of the ‘Roadies’ team for Mrs Thatcher's 1987 election tour.
It's a favourite because it reminds me of the most exciting part of political campaigning: the roadshow.
That's where the politicians meet the people and the adrenalin really flows in those exhilarating, nervewracking , exhausting three to four weeks before polling day.
You've got your candidate, you've got a date, you've got your strategy and organization and now you've got to put theory into practice.
The roadshow team has to put it all together — and win.
In spite of all the technological developments land sophistication and speed of modern communication, the point of a campaign roadshow is the same as it was in the days of the whistle-stop tour when politicians addressed voters from the backs of trains: to communicate with the maximum number of people in the short time available.
Being on the road is the lifeblood of politics and that's something that these days television enhances, because whatever the potential of studio interviews or recorded broadcasts, some of the most effective television comes from live campaigning ‘out there’.
An imaginative on-the-road campaign involves all kinds of activity: walkabouts, whistle-stop tours, visits to places of interest, speeches delivered in market places, shops, factories, farms and building sites.
It can cover anything from giving a church sermon to holding a mass rally.
What unites all these disparate activities is that they all help to maximise the impact and outreach of your message, to present the person or the party in the most effective way to enthuse and woo the voters.
Interest — inform — involve.
These are the aims.
The message comes first
Presentation is a growing profession and business, as we come to the nineties.
It is interesting and perhaps unusual that it developed first in politics but now is used more and more in commerce and industry.
The explosion of television outlets has been a key factor in this trend.
Isaiah wrote that whenever the Bible, as the Word of God, was proclaimed it would ‘never return void’.
In other words the message itself would always have an effect.
Even so, it is clear that the most effective proclaimers of the Gospel are those who have learned how to speak and present their message professionally.
I would not presume to add anything to the Word of God but I have a sneaking suspicion that if Isaiah had been writing in the 1990s he might have added a phrase.
He might have said for example: ‘The Word shall never return void but its impact will be a whole lot greater if it's presented well.’
Of course, before you start reaching out to others you have to get your own act together.
Mid-term between the 1983 and 1987 General Elections I had lunch with a friend; the film producer David Wickes.
At the time the Conservatives were low in the polls and within the Party the various political and organisational groups were not yet pulling hard together towards the election.
I mentioned some of the problems we were facing and David asked, ‘Harvey, do your people actually want to win the next election?’
As I thought about that perceptive question I realised its implications.
Was the message or the product important enough to present properly?
Did the result matter to those of us who were involved?
And if it was important, to us and the country, why in the world weren't we snuffing out all those niggling grievances and getting on with the job of winning?
It's only when you've put yourself second and the message first that you can get on with the business of communication.
On-the-road campaigning allows the repetition of a simple theme to different live audiences.
This theme, illustrated in all kinds Of ways, is then thrust home to millions more by television.
The roadshow's organiser must always keep this larger audience in mind.
Those who are not on the spot will get their impressions firstly through television and radio coverage and then through newspapers.
So you must not get bogged down in detail.
Remember the importance of the visual image and try to keep your theme unified and simple.
Avoid the detail that could divide, and hammer home the principles that unite.
There has been a lot of debate in political circles as to whether on-the-road campaigning should tackle political issues or concentrate on displaying the personality of the candidates.
Obviously I'm not saying that political issues should not be debated.
Indeed the political theme for the day should be set at the morning's press conferences, and local candidates and VIPs fully briefed and able to talk about or answer questions on that topic wherever they may be.
What such issues must not do is clog up the wheels: travelling communications must have clarity and cohesion.
Above all they must have punch.
And beware of flogging an issue too hard.
Sometimes it sounds like a good idea to tackle, say, health or education all through one day on the road, in a particular area.
In practice it's often very hard to sustain.
There is, after all, a limit to the number of schools or hospitals in a town that you can go to without everyone getting bored or the whole business seeming increasingly contrived.
At the end of the day it is the person that makes the impact.
The right place, the right time
A lot of the work in this field is logistical: getting the right people to the right place at the right time with the right equipment.
Because time is short you will want to fit in as much as possible without over-reaching yourself.
In other words aim for targets that are possible but only just.
Don't try to cover Berlin, Hamburg and Munich or Paris, Strasbourg and Marseilles or London, Plymouth and Glasgow in one day, however good you are with plane schedules and grass landing strips.
On the last day of the 1988 American presidential election Dukakis went on a whirlwind tour that must have been dreamed up by a desperate team.
He crossed the country from California to Massachusetts — with rallies en route— in twelve hours.
There should be no need for that!
Use a logical progression or a system radiating out from a central base.
It is less demanding on the people involved and offers less chance of something going drastically wrong.
Sometimes there is no special political reason for going to a place.
It's simply that people need to see their leaders and would feel hurt if they believed themselves forgotten.
Of course one must put a lot of effort into marginal seats, but in the long term you must not forget the safe ones too.
Besides, you need to motivate workers in safe seats to go and help in the others.
You must also be sensitive to the special needs and preoccupations of a particular area and its people.
Britain is a richly varied country and the politician you are presenting must be well briefed about these local concerns before he or she arrives.
On the other hand you don't want to get too embroiled in parochial issues if you are hoping to attract national coverage.
It's a question of getting the balance right and doing your homework.
Keeping the media happy
Sometimes the needs of local and national media conflict.
The first needs a strong local angle of interest to its community, the other something that can hold its own against all the other stories of the day.
It takes skill and judgement and sometimes a compromise is not possible — you may have to choose one over the other.
I had a difficult time at one airport on a visit during the 1987 election.
The national press and media were travelling on the plane with Mrs Thatcher, but the local photographers and journalists were going directly to the airport ahead of time.
Once they got there, however, they found the police would not allow them onto the tarmac with the welcoming VIPs and it looked at one point as though they were not going to get any pictures.
A bit of discreet negotiating sorted it out and the area chairman led Mrs Thatcher over to have a word with the local press on her way to the Battlebus, as we called the campaign coach.
But if we had not been advancing properly — being there just ahead of the main party to iron out any difficulties — the result could have been a very serious error in terms of local coverage, with potentially unhappy consequences.
When you are planning a schedule you should also bear in mind the location of speeches and statements.
Geography is usually irrelevant, but not always.
For instance, if you are going to be discussing inner city problems, speaking about them from a beautiful stately home deep in the heart of the countryside lessens the impact somewhat!
Don't lose sight of the candidate
Whatever your programme, certain basic rules must be obeyed.
They are so basic they seem obvious, yet it's amazing how often they are broken or ignored.
First and foremost everyone present at an event must be able to see and hear, and the press must be able to see and hear slightly better than the rest without getting in the way of the guests.
(Incidentally never forget to plan for the practical needs of the press when you're drawing up your arrangements.
We always provide telephone or fax facilities and try to schedule events to fit deadlines.)
I'd even go a step further than the physical necessities of being able to see and hear properly and say that the audience must be in the right mood, too, to receive the message.
The candidate must not be hidden in or by the crowd; at the same time he must not appear too remote.
If you put someone on a second floor balcony, for instance, to deliver an address, it looks as if he is simply haranguing his listeners.
In the Portuguese elections of 1984, where I was an adviser, it was quite a problem — it had always been done from the second floor — so I suggested the flatbed truck concept that had been so successful in Malta.
I campaigned there in 1981 for Eddie Fenech-Adami.
He is now Prime Minister but was then Leader of the Opposition.
The rallies were wonderful affairs.
For most of them the ‘arena, was formed just by swinging a huge articulated truck across one end of the street.
The street then became the stadium and the custom-built truck opened out into a full stage with a public address system, railings, lights, flags, party backdrop and seating all built in.
Although it looked completely different, it was this truck that gave me the concept for ‘MiniMag’, the 27ft (8m) articulated truck that we used for Mrs Thatcher's open-air meetings in the 1987 election.
We used to drive it into fields or parking lots and open it up to reveal a complete Conservative campaign stage.
It had everything we could think of — lights, PA system, lectern and its own generator.
The slogan at the back of the stage could be changed so that the appropriate place name could be inserted according to where we were.
It meant we could have a sophisticated presentation platform literally in the middle of nowhere and people came from miles around for these outdoor meetings.
There were occasions when we couldn't use it: instead we had to rely on our improvisation skills.
Once we did not know where the Battlebus was going to stop during a tour of Suffolk until minutes before it arrived.
In that short interval we managed to grab a couple of milk crates and a door that we found at the edge of a building site.
We stapled a piece of blue baize around the door and, hey presto, there was a neat little portable platform which we could produce when the time came, looking incredibly efficient.
Another day we had an open-air meeting in a field by a river near Southampton Airport.
My helpers borrowed an old flatbed truck from a farmer, along with two dozen squared bales of hay which they arranged as steps leading up to the truck.
They then commandeered a battery operated amplifier and two loudspeakers from the local constituency association, and via the roof of one of their cars set up an excellent PA system.
By the time the guest arrived in the field there was a platform made of wooden beams and corrugated iron, a vantage point for the press and the necessary amplification.
Everyone enjoyed the pleasant outdoor atmosphere and setting without having to forfeit convenience.
I think they thought those structures had been there forever.
LATE ARRIVAL You must always be ready to think on your feet.
In Eddie Fenech-Adami's final rally in Malta in 1981 we had the old stadium in  Valetta .
A capacity crowd of 40,000 turned up.
We expected sabotage from the Labour extremists and hired two 100,000 watt generators in case the electrical sub-station was cut off.
As it turned out the problem came not from the Opposition but from our own side.
After a one-and-a-half-hour pop concert the political programme began.
We had all the leading Maltese Nationalists to speak, not to mention two former Italian prime ministers.
All we lacked was Eddie Fenech-Adami.
We tried frantically to reach him with our walkie-talkies, but he was somewhere en route from the island of Gozo.
In desperation I said to Noel Buttigieg-Scicluna, Secretary of the Maltese Nationalist Party, ‘Noel, please go up and make a speech until we can find Eddie.’
Noel ran onto the platform and said: ‘The last ex-Italian prime minister's speech was so good I'm going to repeat it in Maltese to make sure you don't miss any of it.’
And he did.
He finished just as Eddie arrived.
We swung into the Brotherhood of Man's special theme tune and turned all the spots on the stadium entrance.
We just saw Eddie's tiny figure coming through the entrance in an open Land Rover before we collapsed in hysterical relief.
Incidentally, the Maltese have a delightful habit of carrying their political leaders by hand over the heads of the crowd.
I once saw Eddie travel nearly half a mile like that.
It's not quite as effective as walking on water, but it comes close.
You cannot see the bearers until they are right by you so the effect is of the person floating on air as he passes along the heads of the crowd and leans over to shake hands.
It's not, however, very practical for most countries — or most politicians!
Plan A and Plan B
I mentioned the vital importance of site visits in the conference section, but it applies equally in roadshow campaigning.
You must visit every spot ahead of time to plan what you are actually going to do on the day with your candidate or leader.
Of course, having worked out this wonderful plan, you will probably have to create another one on that day because of some unforeseen circumstance.
I was recently involved with a stone-laying ceremony for a new school.
We checked out the site a week beforehand.
The field lay alongside a road in a London suburb and we thought that people could stand on the road and look across six metres into the field to the platform where the ceremony would take place.
On the day, however, we discovered that the level of the field had dropped by two metres.
Thousands of tons of earth had been moved as part of the site development.
There was absolutely no point in having two hundred people perched up on the road looking down on the top of a marquee.
In three hours we managed to get the contractors to build an earth ramp, roll it flat, cover it with gravel and put a handrail alongside so that people could walk down from the road to a flat area beside the ceremony site.
A colleague said, ‘Now I know what it means to move mountains.’
At times like that you do your initial planning only to find that everything has changed and you have to fly by the seat of your pants.
Nonetheless, start out with a master plan and wherever possible, use it.
Because you need to get maximum use of your time in an on-the-road campaign a last minute change, even a small one, can have immense repercussions.
It can even jeopardise the whole operation.
During the 1987 election we set a carefully timed an organised arrival at a particular airport.
The seventy strong press and media corps were in the rear of the Prime Minister's plane and we had arranged a special area and platform for them in the terminal.
That way they would get excellent pictures of Mrs Thatcher as she moved through the crowd.
For this to work though, it was absolutely essential to get them to their spot a minute or two ahead of her, and to achieve that we had arranged for Mrs Thatcher to pause for a cup of coffee with the VIPs in a small room just outside the terminal door.
The object was not to provide refreshment but to hold up the party for two or three minutes in order to get the press into position.
Unfortunately for our timing one of the hosts suddenly said, ‘I'm sure you don't want any coffee, Prime Minister, you've just come off the plane.
Let's go straight through.’
And with that took Mrs Thatcher's arm and led her off.
The result was chaos.
There was no way the press could catch up, let alone get in position ahead.
The airport became a free-for-all with the journalists charging after Mrs Thatcher, battling to get a good shot and knocking people in the crowd over in the process.
That mix-up caused us serious problems for the rest of the campaign because we had to be constantly reassuring the media that we would get them good positions.
Because they had been confused and upset early on in the campaign they found it hard to relax and trust us.
Opportunity knocks
When I talk about positions and opportunities for pictures I don't suggest that you can plan them all.
Part of the presenter's role is to watch for good photo opportunities as they arise spontaneously in the course of events.
Obviously situations like the airport arrival can be worked out ahead of time and you can plan how best to accommodate the media for such moments, but it's equally important to spot new potential and make the most of it.
Don't try and set up something that is quite patently false.
Everyone will be embarrassed and it rarely helps.
At the same time, on-the-road campaigning will produce its own moments so you have to know your candidate and know your location.
You cannot, for instance, turn someone into a surfing champion just because he's at the seaside, but if it turns out that he has a genuine interest in fishing and some skills as a fisherman you can centre pictures and film on that.
Because it's genuine, it looks good.
When you are looking for such opportunities, however, beware of allowing visual images to blind you to potential problems.
For instance, we were making a film about how well a particular local authority was doing and we were planning to shoot the thundering morning turn-out of dozens of heavy cleaning trucks at five o'clock in the morning.
It turned out that all the big trucks were Volvos, so in order to keep things British we had to confine our film to little electric dustcarts.
Not nearly so visually impressive but essential content-wise.
By the way, always make sure you've cleared all on-the-road activities with the necessary authorities.
You don't want your brilliant impromptu inspiration to get you into trouble.
Sound, as well as visual image, plays a big part in successful campaigning: applause, off-the-cuff conversations, speeches, music and cheering.
And spontaneous ad-libs are great — as long as they're properly rehearsed.
Remember, people are interested in people not politics and the best campaign moments are those with a human touch.
At the same time allow for human frailties.
The person you depend on can lose his or her nerve about something which seems straightforward, like presenting a bunch of flowers or offering a cup of tea.
All can seem well till the last moment.
Then they see the size of the crowd or the famous VIP arriving and they are overwhelmed with terror.
I remember going to a fruit and flower market in Leeds very early one morning during a tour and one of the staff was going to bring a cup of tea and a bacon buttie to Mrs Thatcher.
In the end the man became so nervous that I had to hold his arm and literally steer him through the crowd to the right spot.
Because of the mystique — and maybe the image — celebrities and VIPs are quite daunting to those who usually only see them from a distance.
I'm not quite sure why.
How often I have heard the amazement in someone's voice: ‘You know, he actually wanted the loo!’
Human after all!
Security
Security is a major headache these days.
It means, for instance, that you cannot announce the whereabouts of major political figures in advance which makes your presentation via the media even more crucial: sometimes they are the only people you can take into a particular venue.
Even where you have more flexibility, such as constituency campaigning by local candidates, you may still need to choose your audiences and visitors carefully.
And you have to be careful that there are not so many policemen round your VIPs that the real people — the public — don't get to see them.
There is no national police authority in the United Kingdom as there is with the FBI in America, for example.
Each of our forces is autonomous and has a different approach to security.
You have to liaise with them on policy and practicalities.
ECHO FROM THE PAST In 1980 Marlies and I spent three days travelling with Senator Edward Kennedy in his motorcade during the presidential primary campaign.
We were with his secretary in the car immediately behind the gun car, a huge open station wagon with six secret service men wearing bullet-proof jackets and with the most vicious looking automatic rifles at the ready.
All the motorways were cleared and our sixteen car motorcade cruised down the centre of the freeway at 6Omph.
The next day Kennedy was addressing a meeting in a black church in Los Angeles.
As he began to speak a young boy ran straight through a plate glass window behind us at the back of the church.
The glass exploded with a loud shot-like crack.
It was seventeen years after President Kennedy's assassination, twelve years since Bobby's, but the idea was so powerful nobody turned to look at the shattered window or the stunned lad.
Every eye was on Edward Kennedy.
Had he been shot?
There was no need for anyone to say the words.
The pastor spoke first: ‘It's all right.
The Senator is not hurt.’
Only then did everyone turn and pay attention to the boy and the window behind them.
In 1985 in Washington DC I was responsible for the security co-ordination of eleven prime ministers and twenty other Conservative party leaders from around the world who were there for the International Democrat Union Party Leaders' meeting.
I worked with the FBI, the US Secret Service, the thirty-one diplomatic groups and the individual protection teams.
There were fascinating differences of approach from the White House to Paris, from Oslo to Bonn, from Tokyo to Canberra.
At first I had visions of an OK Corral shoot-out at High Noon between dozens of different security forces who didn't know each other, but in fact we worked it out and there were no serious problems.
One of the effects of this increased need for security has been to strengthen the importance of the big set-piece occasions like rallies where access can be controlled and crowds organised.
French farce
An election rally must inspire, enthuse and excite, and radiate these qualities out through the media.
The atmosphere must be right in the arena and the whole event must be properly produced and co-ordinated.
Individuals doing their own thing does not work, as Jacques Chirac found out at a 1988 Paris rally.
There was lots of very French glitz and glamour and an apparently unlimited budget, much of which had been spent on giant television screens and clever use of lights; but it was all quite impractical and unco-ordinated.
Nobody seemed to have a clear objective in mind and the speakers had obviously not been briefed on what to expect.
Some basic rules were broken.
Most of the 25,000 audience in the Palais Bercy could not see the platform because of the enormous scaffold bridge built across it for the cameras.
‘The bridge was too high for a good angle anyway and the fact that it blocked the view of so many meant that the atmosphere never developed properly, so that the cameras had nothing convey.
It was a vicious circle.
Politics were allowed to intrude too much: in fact they spoiled the rally.
Chirac had to be seen to be making concessions to his defeated rival Le Barre in order to get Le Barre's support for the run-off against  Mitterand .
So both men were given almost equal prominence and Le Barre virtually killed off any audience interest with a heavy speech.
Chirac didn't even know where to go while Le Barre was speaking on an empty white platform with no chairs, and when it was his turn to speak he had no chance of a good clean start because he had to shake hands with Le Barre as they passed on the stairs.
It was a study in how not to do something and it cost Chirac dear.
Gofers
However, back to roadshow campaigning and an important innovation: Gofers.
I introduced the concept to this country during the 1987 General Election in an attempt to overcome one of the major difficulties facing campaign organisers: getting consistent standards of presentation.
Up until then it had been virtually impossible.
Local staff or voluntary workers cannot be expected to have the resources, time or experience to ensure that telecommunications, backdrop, crowd flow, music, lighting and camera positions are available at the right time and in the right way.
Travelling teams of Gofers can.
A ‘Gofer’ is not the little squirrel-like animal of the American Midwest, although there is a certain behavioural resemblance, but an abbreviation of ‘Go-for a coffee’, ‘Go-for a piece of string’etc.
(Actually I originally decided to call the teams Oyus as in ‘Oi you, go for some coffee’.)
We recruited a team of twenty-five young executives whose firms or colleagues gave them three weeks paid leave for the election campaign.
It's a concept I adapted from the American presidential campaigns.
We'd had a huge rally of 10,000 people for Ronald Reagan at the Southern Methodist University in Dallas and I was flying on to Los Angeles with one of the co-ordinators the next morning.
I asked him how long he had been with the Republicans and he said, ‘Three weeks — I'm a sales manager and I've been given leave of absence by my company just to produce last night's rally.’
Our 1987 Gofers were terrific.
They were invaluable to our road campaign and it was a great and new experience for them.
We had barristers and solicitors, merchant bankers, sales and advertising executives, a restaurant manager, researchers, a public relations officer, a textile broker and farmers among the team.
Their average age was about twenty-five.
They had to be ready — and able — to do absolutely anything from greeting a minister off a plane to cleaning drains, from handling the press to guiding the helicopter down to its landing site with hand signals.
Because they were already in successful careers they were able to learn fast and by the second week our Gofer teams were veteran roadies.
We needed a Gofer to drive ‘MiniMag’ around the country and I asked if anyone could drive articulated lorries.
One girl volunteered with confidence and handled the vehicle without trouble during the campaign.
I was a little concerned though when the makers of ‘MiniMag’ asked what experience she'd had of articulated vehicles and she replied, ‘I've spent my life driving Daddy's horse-boxes.’
On another occasion we were meeting the Prime Minister's plane at Cardiff Airport, with only two Gofers in the team that day.
We had lost the press buses and one of the Gofers, a merchant banker, came up to me on the tarmac to ask if I knew where they were.
The man standing by my side said that he had seen them behind the terminal.
Our Gofer (a young woman) grabbed his hand before I could say anything and said, ‘Great, show me will you?’ and dashed off with him in tow, coats flying.
We would have actually liked to have told her that the man was the Secretary of State for Wales and a member of the Cabinet!
Still they returned safely with the press buses.
Four minutes later I had another nervous moment.
I asked her to meet the press off the back of the BAC One-Eleven as it came to a stop in front of us.
She shot off looking up at the plane, underneath the tail and far wing and back again.
As a successful merchant banker there was no reason for her to know where the back door was in a BAC One-Eleven, and that the tail opened downwards with the stairs!
By the last of the three weeks the Gofer teams were performing brilliantly.
They had learned the principles and techniques necessary to focus all the attention onto the VIPs, and to make it easy for presenters, audiences and the news media.
The use of Gofers in 1987 was a successful pioneer effort.
They were the right sort of people — talented and with some experience, and willing to get their hands dirty.
Efficient management of the political parties in the nineties cannot carry permanent numbers of young professionals whose talents are so necessary in major campaigns.
The Gofer concept provides good mobile flexible staff help, just for the times it is needed.
It gives valuable experience to the Gofers, which is usually translated into a more effective contribution to their own work when they return to it.
And it allows companies both to contribute to and benefit from election campaigns.
I want to take the Gofer idea a little further here based on a primary principle of presentation.
A ‘sales pitch’, a campaign of any kind, an annual general meeting, must never be ‘produced’ by the VIPs, the candidate or the sales team themselves.
They must be presented, minded and mollycoddled if necessary so that they concentrate totally on their own performance.
Unfortunately senior executives often either consider that no-one less senior than themselves can be trusted with knowledge of a meeting, or that the meeting is so important that they alone are significant enough to occupy the chair.
This is merely routine arrogance, but it obscures from them the fact that they could impress everyone a lot more if they could do a better job — and with a bit of help they could.
If you are pitching for an account, appearing on television or radio, making a significant speech, always have a company Gofer with you.
This is never extravagant.
It is just an extension of on-the-road campaigning.
Consider this scenario which I see consistently two or three times a year.
You and your colleagues arrive to present a pitch for an advertising account.
You are going to use a video and some slides on a little portable projector.
You are following two other companies and the last one is moving their equipment Out as you come into the room.
CAR PHONES Mobile phones have changed on-the-road campaigning dramatically, and for the better.
I wonder how on earth we worked the 1979 and 1983 elections without them.
At one point in 1987 I was bowling up the M6 talking to a colleague in London on my ‘hands-off’ Cellnet phone — it had a microphone in front of me on the visor.
My assistant Joanne Barker was talking on her phone and two more colleagues were in the back seat on their phones.
When my own hand mobile rang Joanne answered: ‘I'm sorry, Harvey's on his other line and our three phones are all occupied.
Could he call you back?
He should be free by Wigan.’
All at 69mph on the motorway.
I hope the caller was impressed.
I certainly was!
Another time in the 1987 election we were driving along a dual carriageway in Norfolk heading for an airport to meet Mrs Thatcher's plane and join up with the Battlebus.
We thought all was well until the Battlebus passed us at full speed in the opposite direction.
Since both of us were going to meet the same plane, one of us was definitely going the wrong way.
We telephoned from our mobile to theirs — probably at a combined speed of 100mph going away from each other— and it was indeed us who were hotfooting it away from the airport.
We made it on time — just — thanks to our car phones.
A final story about these phones.
Joanne had handled the set-up of the press conference in Glasgow and I had gone on to Newcastle Airport to meet the plane there.
Early fog had cleared and the airport manager and I were standing on the tarmac lining up the motorcade when my car phone rang.
It was Joanne on Mrs Thatcher's plane at Glasgow Airport.
‘The pilot has just said we're diverting to Teeside because of the fog at Newcastle — we're taxiing out now,’ she said.
I relayed the message to the airport manager who rushed to the control tower just in time to contact the pilot and air traffic control to say that Newcastle Airport was open and all was OK.
That's good on-the-road (or on-the-tarmac) thinking.
Confidently you open your portable projector and put it on the table.
Then it hits you — your power line isn't long enough and you haven't checked the video and TV (if they are there at all).
The table is a five-metre boardroom piece.
You can't move it.
You ask for an extension lead.
There isn't One.
You ask for a chair and four telephone directories and rig up an impromptu table near the only plug — and ask all your prospective clients to turn their heads around.
Someone gets strangled in the wire and pulls out the plug.
Your concentration and your confidence has been lost.
You are sweating and grubby.
Your chance of the contract has gone — along with the picture from your video cassette.
What you needed was a Gofer: someone who had nothing else to do but look after you and your team.
He would have checked your equipment in advance, brought extension lead and table, checked the video on that particular TV and set it all up while you were shaking hands and making conversation rather than getting flustered.
When you came to make your presentation he would even have put a glass of water within reach in case you needed it —and operated the equipment for you.
That's what I mean by attention to detail.
Good Gofers can save face, time and trouble and allow you to make an impact.
Above all, campaigning must be fun for watchers and participants.
It should be different, out of the ordinary, exciting.
I suppose that the common denominator in on-the-road campaigning is the commitment it requires, especially from the volunteer workers in the constituencies who make the biggest sacrifice.
They have to keep the rest of their work and life going as well as helping the Party.
Their reward is often in the hands of those of us who are campaigning professionals.
In this instance the objective is not just a winning result; it is also to leave the volunteer workers with an awareness not only of their importance, but of the value of the contribution they have made and how much they are appreciated by the ‘roadies’ and the candidates passing through.
A pig and a chicken were walking together and they saw a huge sign advertising scrambled eggs and bacon.
‘Awful isn't it?’ said the chicken.
‘Listen,’ said the pig, ‘for you it's just an offering — for me it's a real sacrifice’.
LAST WORDS
Advice is seldom welcome, and those who want it the most, always like it the least.
4th Earl of Chesterfield
In 1980 I set out to change the face of political presentation in the UK and to use some of these new concepts and techniques in business and industry as well.
With a lot of help from other people I believe we've done just that.
Much of the time the principal performers were not even aware of what we were doing for them.
But today, a decade later, the art and profession of presentation is recognised as an essential strategic ingredient for making an impact in communications.
Success in this field is going to become even more important as we move into the 1990s and beyond and I hope that in this book I've been able to give you the benefit of my experience, to pass on the kind of backstage know-how that can make that vital difference between winning and losing.
But I also hope I've done something else.
I hope I've given you the motivation — and confidence — to go out and develop your own personal communication style to its full potential.
I leave you with my ten basic ‘commandments of presentation’.
As Sherlock Holmes said to Dr Watson, ‘You know my methods: apply them.’
TEN COMMANDMENTS 1.
See yourself as you really are 2.
Know your objective 3.
Have an overall picture in mind before you start on all the details 4.
Work out your route plan 5.
Rehearse 6.
Take your audience by the hand and lead them along with you.
7.
Win hearts — then minds 8.
Keep it simple 9.
Be enthusiastic 10.
Be yourself