

Westward to Galway
Once again I sat down to breakfast surrounded by sporting trophies and medals, many of them won by the young man of the house during his schooldays.
As I sipped my coffee, I reflected once more  than the Midland Irish were very like the English of the 1950s.
They were friendly, but with a suburban reserve; they were mad on sport and thought everybody knew all about it; and they were gaining a glittering net-curtain prosperity against a background of ruined buildings that in England had been bombed in the war (and in Ireland had fallen down).
Men smoked pipes, wore roll-neck jerseys and had a stolidly dependable air about them.
Imagination was in short supply, and the poverty of yesterday had been banished from their memories, the happy-go-luckiness along with the hardships.
I remember, at the close of the fifties, going to a hairdresser and praying that he wouldn't talk.
Unfortunately he did.
‘How are we doing, do you know?’ he asked.
‘What do you mean?’
I asked, mystified.
I was eighteen years old.
‘Eh?
The cricket, of course!’
I stammered something about not understanding cricket, totally incredulous that anyone should suppose I did understand it, or that I should regard the English side as ‘we’.
The barber in his turn was equally taken aback — we were all English, weren't we, and wanted to know how England was doing?
Rock and roll, which arrived for me in 1958, had completely severed the younger generation from its elders.
The elders grew older, and the old Englishness and innocence were lost.
In Ireland I was recognized as English as soon as I appeared on anybody's horizon, and no one in the Midlands asked me how ‘we’ were doing at Gaelic football, golf, bicycle racing or hurling.
This time with a light plastic bag containing nothing more than a sketchpad and a book (Sleeman's Rambles and Recollections of an Indian Official)I set out to have a look at Roscommon Town.
As I neared the roundabout outside the old town, I glanced across the fields and noticed an eerie grey ruined abbey standing on its own in flat farmland.
Reserving it for later, I plodded on into town.
As at Killorglin, a street of dark stone houses climbed a hill.
A gaunt building, Roscommon's former prison formed a wall that seemed to seal off the end of the town.
Part of the ground floor had become a dress shop.
Later on, I learned that ‘Lady Betty’, the last woman hangman in Ireland, had her base at Roscommon Jail.
Apparently a hooded stranger with a bag of gold had asked if he could stay at her house one night.
Overcome by greed, she murdered him while he slept, only to discover he was her own son, who had made his fortune and wanted to surprise her.
As a penance, she became a hangman, although I would have thought she would more likely have become a candidate for hanging.
The writer of the old guide book whence I gleaned this misinformation had unknowingly quoted a fragment of folklore older than Roscommon Town and its jail.
Before becoming a dress shop, the jail had been a lunatic asylum, of the Hogarthian deep-straw-and-goggling-visitors variety.
Round the corner from the old jail, the Royal Hotel boasted a well inside the bar, the top covered by glass and the stone walls curving down into darkness and revealing a tiny gleam of water.
Beyond the hotel, the town straggled to an end, and the fields began.
In one of them, I could see the broken towers of a Norman castle.
Returning to the main street, I browsed among the many little shops I found there.
Despite the grey sky and gloomy weather, the people were unusually friendly, greeting one another and saying ‘hello’ to me.
In one little shop, the lady behind the counter shouted aloud with excitement and joy as soon as she caught sight of my plastic bag.
The bag bore the name of my off-the-peg tailor, ‘Marcus Menswear, Craven Park, Harlesden’.
‘Marcus!
Why, that's my wee laddy's name!
Marcus!
He's five years old!
Wait till I tell him his name's on a bag!’
It began to rain, so I dodged into the Roman Catholic Church of the Sacred Heart.
There were three altars, one a submarine green.
A mosaic of a tree stretched along the whole centre aisle, the branches spreading out before the altars, the birds and beasts of Ireland standing between the leaves.
Rampant stags looked odd balanced on twigs among foliage, and so did exquisitely made seabirds, puffins and razorbills.
In one of the pews, a woman was fingering her beads, eyes shut, muttering.
When the rain was over, I emerged and strolled back into town along the wide church forecourt, past a heart-shaped flower bed and two Virgins in substantial grottos.
Then I hurried down to look at the ruins I had seen earlier, before the next onslaught of rough weather could begin.
The path to the abbey ruins was under water, but I managed to keep dry by sidling along the edge, holding on to a fence.
Pavements and drains came late to Ireland, and in some cases have stayed away altogether.
A notice declared the ruins to be a Dominican Priory.
According to a picture I had seen on the wall of the Royal Hotel, this Priory had been founded by King Felin O'Connor of Connaught, whose burial place it became.
Now roofless, the Priory had been tidied up slightly, but with no explanatory labels.
This made my delight at finding King Felin's tomb all the more great.
There he lay, in knightly stone effigy, with a row of eight knights in stone cartoon-strip below him.
These knights were Gallowglasses, twelfth-century mercenaries from Scotland, each in chain mail with a pointy helmet.
Each knight was in the act of drawing his sword, the swords a little further from the hilts in each panel, as if the knights were drawings in a moving-picture flick-page book.
Having admired the kingly tomb and added the name ‘O'Connor’ to my list of families who might accept the Irish throne, I wandered off to the Abbey Hotel.
A marvellous eighteenth-century folly, this manorlet represented the builder's idea of the Priory gatehouse in all its medieval splendour.
Now the sky grew nearly as black as night, and I galloped into the hotel just as the most torrential downpour I have seen in my life cascaded from the sky as the waters of the Red Sea might have descended on Pharaoh.
‘May I stay here for a pot of tea?’
I asked the girl at Reception.
‘Sure, if you went out you'd be drinched entirely,’ she sympathized.
As I drank my tea, I heard her answer the phone: ‘Terrible morning, can I help you?’
Well, it made more sense than ‘good morning’.
With judicious use of hot water, I enjoyed four cups of tea, and then found that the rain had stopped.
I edged around the puddles in the garden, where belated rain fell from the yew trees, and returned to my Bed and Breakfast house for a soothing sleep.
In the afternoon, I strolled back into town beneath a blue sky.
Boys of thirteen and fourteen were stampeding out of school, roaring, jeering and swearing.
Ignoring them, I made my way to the Norman castle.
A stile over a stone wall led into a field whose furthest wall consisted of the grey squat towers of the castle.
The long grass was so wet that I decided to admire the castle from afar.
I walked round the walled field and found myself at the edge of a tinkers' camp.
Beyond the seven or eight tents and caravans, the camp ponies grazed, all piebald or skewbald with vivid white patches.
Among them, a black and white jackdaw hopped, a magic sign of great portent and possibly the reason why the camp had been pitched there in the first place.
Looking hard at the castle, sketchbook in hand, I allowed the corner of my eye to rove the tinker camp.
There were no horse-drawn wagons, but one of the trailers looked very old-fashioned and may have been home-made.
It was brown and box-shaped, like a flat-roofed shed on wheels, and had a stove-pipe chimney poking crookedly through the top.
A large curved home-made tent, with tarpaulins in different colours draped over it, seemed to be supported by bendy willow staffs.
Clinking washing-up sounds came from the shed-like caravan, and the dogs were friendly.
All in all, this camp had a peaceful atmosphere.
‘Do you want to see the castle?’ a plainly dressed girl of fifteen asked me, looking up from her job of sweeping her trailer entrance with a broom.
‘Look, there are stone steps into the wall over there.’
When I asked if I might walk through the camp and look at the castle from the other side, Cinderella looked distressed, so I said ‘never mind’ and made my way back to the stone stile.
I had drawn a fairly creditable sketch of the castle when, as I hoped, I heard voices behind me.
Two snub-nosed bristle-headed boys were looking over my shoulder in bright-eyed interest.
Looking very solemn and Royal Academyish, I suddenly drew a fiendishly grinning devil playing a fiddle in the castle forecourt.
Both boys drew in their breaths, then began a torrent of pleas.
‘Can we have it, mister?
Can we have it?’
This was most gratifying.
For the next twenty minutes I drew picture after picture of devils playing and donkeys dancing.
I even drew a donkey playing and a devil dancing.
It was hard for the donkey to hold a fiddlestick in one hoof, but he managed.
Now I had a new mission in life — to ensure that every tinker caravan in Ireland contained a picture of a donkey dancing while a devil played the fiddle.
When I had run out of paper, I bowed to the boys and departed.
On my way out, I encountered a dignified, round-faced tinker grandmother, a big lady in a shawl and long dress that swept the ground.
She returned my greeting politely.
It was suppertime, so I made my way to the Roscommon chip shop.
I found the Italian-Irish proprietor poring over an encyclopaedia of Black Magic while his female relatives served a crowd of hungry teenage boys.
‘You see, that's a circle of protection,’ he told me seriously, pointing at a drawing.
‘You be careful, or the devil will appear one day and ask you to sell your soul,’ I warned.
‘I wish he would, if I'd get a good price for it,’ the man joked.
All the youths seemed interested, so I told them stories of Black Magic in Sussex, a county particularly afflicted by Satan because of all the artistic people who live there, running craft shops or theatrical costumiers.
‘On Midsummer's Eve, I walked up to Highdown Hill at midnight, below a full moon.
When I saw a fire and capering figures, I ran down again.
The grass all around my feet was alive with black toads.’
‘Do Black Magic people in England attack you?’ a Roscommon chip shop boy asked me in awe.
‘No, they just ask you to go with them.
In Brighton, the worst place for magic, my sister went to a theatrical costumier.
He was dressed as a wizard and the whole place was full of drawings of human sacrifices and magic designs.
She was terrified, but he didn't hurt her.’
Back in 1959, I had been sitting one day in a Brighton coffee bar aptly named the Thieves' Kitchen.
An upper-class homosexual-looking man with white hair and glittering eyes came up to me and asked if I wanted to go to a Black Mass.
‘No fear!’
I gulped.
‘Ah, I see you're conservative in your ways,’ he sneered, expecting that this would goad me into Satanism.
‘Is that what you call it?’
I replied, and ever after voted Conservative.
However, as a compensation, I tend to draw comic devils playing fiddles.
Back in the chip shop, I warned the Roscommon boys against trifling with the Black Art.
‘One day you'll come in here and there'll just be a burnt patch on the ground and a wisp of smoke where the chip shop man used to be,’ I said.
‘The devil will take him away in a sack.’
At breakfast, my 1950s landlord told me that Ballinasloe Fair, County Galway, was being held that week.
David Thomson and the Kirkwood family from Woodbrook bought and sold horses at Ballinasloe, I remembered.
Moreover, an emissary from Ballinasloe had attended the Puck Fair at Killorglin.
The landlord showed me the way to the railway station and off I went.
According to him, it was possible to go to the fair and be back in Roscommon before dark.
For a change, the sun was shining.
The train journey southward to Athlone took me through wild flat bogland scenery.
Some were heather bogs, some bracken bogs and others were boggy floodlands of marsh grass.
Most bogs are full of tree stumps and used to be oak forests, like the Scottish moors.
Some of the bogs I saw from the train window had been ‘harvested’, and rows of beehive-shaped ‘peat cocks’ stood like haycocks, awaiting collection.
These are also seen in Scotland, where they are known as ‘peat hags’.
At Athlone I waited in a large modern station for another train to take me to Ballinasloe.
The approach to Athlone station was very fine, along a wide bridge over the Shannon.
Finally I arrived at Ballinasloe, to find the station a long way from the town.
It was a well-manned Victorian station, with dark waiting rooms, a parcels office and a quaint Neo-Gothic shelter with an ecclesiastical window at each end.
Outside, in a field, a lively group of boys and girls were piling branches in a heap for their Halloween bonfire.
‘Taxi?’ said a voice in my ear.
The taxi driver was a sharp-looking middle-aged man who told me that he was the landlord of the Dove bar in town.
‘I've come to see the Fair,’ I said conversationally.
‘The Fair!
There's no fair today!
Yes, it's Fair Week all right, but the fair is only celebrated at the weekends now, when they sell the horses.
Since they've had the marts, they don't be keeping the pig days and sheep days no more.
Ah, it was grand in the old days…‘
Thinking quickly, I asked the driver to take me to Clonmacnoise instead, a famous holy city that stood in ruins scattered over a sloping river bank.
I had been to see it years before in a taxi from Roscrea, and had been greatly impressed by the poignant air of haunted melancholy that hung over the ruins.
My decision pleased the present-day driver, as the fare would be expensive.
We crossed the River Shannon once more, travelling eastward through open country.
A disused stone toll house stood at one side of the river, a ruined mill on the other.
Finally we drove up to the Clonmacnoise ruins.
They were spread over a wide expanse of riverbank, back at the twisting curling Shannon river once more.
Here the Shannon resembled a long lake, pale grey in the sunlight.
Near the Clonmacnoise entrance, the river had overflowed into the fields, beside a misshapen castle tower that perched on a hummock, balanced at an angle and looking as if it were about to fall over.
A broken-off piece of castle lay in the grass nearby.
Throughout the centuries, the monks of Clonmacnoise had suffered from raiders sailing up the Shannon to plunder the monastic city.
In the thirteenth century, a bishop had ordered the castle to be built and manned as a protection.
However, it had been demolished, some say by Cromwell.
To my dismay, the whole entrance to Clonmacnoise had been concreted over in a multi-lane car park that was almost totally empty.
As far as I could see, a holy well pointed out to me by my 1973 taxi driver had also been concreted.
A young, innocent man, very knowledgeable about ferrets, the driver had led me across a scrubby field that led to the riverbank and had then triumphantly pointed to a weathered stone below a thorn bush.
Water trickled from the brown earth near the roots of the bush and traced a dark line through the tall grass.
Strips of cloth had been tied to the thorn, as on trees dedicated to strange gods in West Africa, the Near East and India, each strip a supplication.
‘Sometimes the priest holds services here — I think on the Feast of St Finian,’ the driver had told me.
Clonmacnoise had now become scientific, with a large brick Interpretive Centre where once a motherly woman had sold entrance tickets in a shed.
The ticket woman and I had got on famously.
Her hair was rather wild, her tongue eloquent.
Mrs Kelly, for that was her name, had unintentionally paid me an enormous compliment.
‘What part of Ireland are you from?’ she had asked, at length.
‘Ireland?
I'm English — can't you tell by my accent?’
She seemed flabbergasted, but rallied and asked me if I would look in at the Gray Mare in Kilburn and say ‘hello’ to her son Joe Kelly who worked there.
I agreed, but never seemed to notice a Gray Mare on any of my trips to Kilburn.
Years later I found it, a tiny pub tucked into a cobbled alley beside a large inn.
To my surprise, some of the customers greeted the barman in Gaelic.
‘Joe Kelly?
He's only just left this pub, and moved to Wembley, but I don't know whereabouts,’ the bilingual landlord had told me.
So I gave up my quest.
To my chagrin, I found, back in present-day Clonmacnoise, that most of the stone slabs with strange carvings of Celtic saints, reminiscent of Celtic gods, had been taken indoors and put in glass cases under bright lights in the accursed Centre.
One of the glories of Old Clonmacnoise was the possibility of seeing a strange stone face staring from a broken column in a randomly-chosen clump of grass.
Half the magic of Clonmacnoise was gone, but there was still some mystery left.
There was still the same mournful view across the flooded Shannon from the ruin-studded slopes, with the same toppled tower, arrested in motion, ever-ready to fall.
On the inland side of the broken city stood a humpy line of green mounds, perhaps with old treasures or masonry in their innards.
In the mid sixth century, St Ciaran with seven followers had arrived at Clonmacnoise by water and built a wattle church and beehive huts, the foundation of the holy city.
St Kevin from Glendalough, and St Columcille-Columba from just about everywhere, were frequent guests.
Scholars, disciples, stone-carvers and holy artistic men of every kind taught or studied at Clonmacnoise over the centuries.
Until recent times, there was great water traffic on the Shannon and a busy landing-stage at Clonmacnoise.
In spite of raiding Vikings, the great days of the city of churches and colleges coincided with the English Dark Ages.
The protection of the local kings, the O'Connors, was not strong enough for Clonmacnoise to withstand disastrous raids by the Norman English in the Middle Ages.
A great storm in 1547 destroyed the cathedral.
Before it could be repaired, Protestant English troops from Athlone rushed in and looted the place.
Bishop and priests left, and Clonmacnoise became a ruin, used only as a burial ground for those who held the site forever sacred.
Just as I had done before, I stumped around Clonmacnoise, surveying each ruined building or ancient cross as I came to it.
Stone ruins were dotted about the site, several yards apart, like an abandoned village whose streets had turned to pastureland.
Here there was a tall Round Tower standing sentinel over the river, there was a large grey church standing roofless on a rise, its tall end gables resembling towers.
The Pope of the day had visited Clonmacnoise in 1979, and a dismal pavilion with throne had been made in his honour.
However, it was not too obtrusive.
Modern graves with bright plastic flowers sought to take advantage of the saintly dust.
A small cemetery plot had been added since my last visit.
I threaded my way between the various broken churches, towers and columns to the entrance-exhibition where posters announced that fibreglass imitations of the stone carvings were soon to be set up outside.
There I enquired after Mrs Kelly, only to be told that she was dead!
I was very taken aback, as she had not been old, and asked where she might be buried.
‘Right here in Clonmacnoise,’ the blonde ticket girl replied, and sent for a tall young man who worked in the grounds to show me her grave.
The grave was in the new cemetery plot, with a figure of Jesus crowned in gold on the headstone.
With head hung low, the young man looked awkwardly respectful.
‘I'm not a Catholic, so could you say a prayer for her?’
I asked him.
‘In your head!’
I added quickly, as the appalled expression of a visitor singled out by a pastor in an evangelical church for ‘spontaneous prayer’ flashed over his face.
Greatly relieved, he muttered under his breath and crossed himself several times.
Now relaxed and talkative, he saw me back to the waiting taxi and told me of his ambitions as a Gaelic football player.
‘I went to school with the son Joe,’ he added.
‘Now he's got a pub of his own at Hitchin, Essex.’
Soon I was being whisked back to Ballinasloe, the driver singing ‘Red River Valley’ for most of the way.
He told me that he had once worked for Lipton's Stores in London, very near my old school, Holloway Comprehensive.
Finally he dropped me off outside his pub, the Dove, in a street hung with bunting for the Fair.
‘Today would have been sheep day in the old days,’ the driver explained, as he hurried in to take over from his wife at the bar.
‘I must be careful to lock the car, as youths often steal cars to get home at Fair time.’
Despite the absence of sheep, there was a faint holiday atmosphere at Ballinasloe.
A stout middle-aged man sat at a corner playing a red squeeze box and working a pedal with one foot which made a row of wooden puppets dance.
Most of the puppets looked rough-hewn and primitive, but two were utterly grotesque, as plastic dolls heads, complete with eyelashes and floppy yellow curls, had been fixed on to their stick-like bodies.
In between tunes, friendly loafing policemen (or Garda) chatted amiably with the puppet-master.
When the man's shift was over, he was replaced by a shabby flute player.
There were plenty of Garda around, and there ought to have been plenty more, as I saw a group of wild children steal chocolates from a shop and then run off down the road.
No one had seen them steal except myself, but they went on running nonetheless.
Unpleasant tinker men with fierce expressions roughly begged from passers-by in the streets.
Some of them may have been the fathers of the running children.
They too seemed to work in shifts.
The off-shift sat scowling on a wall, counting their money.
My train would not leave for over two hours, so I strolled desultorily around the town.
Where the fields began, a stream led into the River Suck, and here I found a row of tinker caravans.
Children played uproariously with supermarket trolleys, pushing one another around.
A surly man stepped from a trailer doorway and asked me for money.
‘Certainly not,’ I replied primly.
‘Jew!
You must be a Jew!’ he shouted, and turned away.
There is some Jewish blood on my maternal grandfather's side, so this only goes to show the uncanny power of the tinkering race.
Having admired the Roman Catholic church, I retraced my steps to town to see the Church of Ireland, set on a hill.
Unfortunately for me, but fortunately for the reader (who may have had enough of churches), it was closed.
Suddenly I stared in amazement, for below me, sloping down from the church, was the Fair field, a broad sweep of land entirely covered with tinkers, caravans, and horses.
In the distance, ponies in long-shafted light chariots trotted at a spanking pace, the wheels spinning around.
One corner of the field housed a closed funfair, the various attractions packed tightly together.
Over the whole plain, the temporary tinker village seethed with life.
Grass had everywhere been trampled into mud, well-strewn with waste paper.
Dark brown horses roamed freely, nosing round the caravans and grazing midst the rubbish, like black bears scavenging around National Park campsites in America.
Among the great variety of trailers, an enclave of horse-drawn barrel-top wagons formed a circle, like covered wagons on the prairie awaiting Indian attack.
Their round roofs were green, the steps, shafts and other woodwork dark red.
Old fair hands could doubtless see order in the chaos, the separate camps of the different families within the larger camp.
Crooked stove-pipe chimneys sprouted from a hundred roofs, and families could be seen talking animatedly in rows of caravan windows.
Children and colts, two of a kind, rushed round and round the field in exhilaration.
Bareback riders tore up and down the slopes, racing one another.
I was reminded of Appleby Horse Fair, a gypsy occasion in Westmorland, but the Irish travellers seemed far less fond of pets and livestock.
There were fewer dogs than would be found at a Romany camp, and no poultry at all.
Since horse-drawn wagons went out of fashion, both gypsies and tinkers lead a curious, inverted life, buying and selling horses among themselves for sheer pleasure.
I suppose stamp collectors and some antique dealers lead similar lives, where dealers deal with dealers, and the public have no place.
Within minutes I was inside the camp, where I hoped to meet the tinkers who had tried to rob me at Killorglin.
It's always nice to see a friendly familiar face.
An avenue of fortune-tellers' trailers led into the funfair, displaying yellow or red cards in their windows.
One woman advertised herself as Madam Homa, an imaginative name.
Although most of the ‘Lees’ were probably Flanellys or Murphies, there may have been some Romanies present.
A scrawny little old lady poked her head from the doorway of a miniature trailer and fervently watched me advancing slowly towards her, moon-faced, a red neon light about my head flashing the word ‘Sucker’ on and off.
Overcome with necromancy, greed and competitiveness, she rushed out and began stroking my jacket in an ingratiating manner.
‘Come in and see the crystal ball,’ she crooned appealingly.
‘No, I'm really looking for the people who told my fortune at the Puck Fair,’ I said.
‘That was me!
That was me!’
‘No it wasn't.
All right, what happened to me there?’
‘You was breathing fire and brimstone!’ she guessed, well knowing the effect a Puck Fair fortune-telling might have on a customer.
‘No, I wasn't.
'Bye!’
Ruefully she watched me go.
Back in the main street of Ballinasloe, I had to act fast, or I would miss my train.
Quickly I bought three chocolate liqueur bottles and a small plastic figure of a stag.
These I put inside a paper bag, along with a pound note and a hastily drawn picture of a devil and a donkey.
Then I returned to the tinker camp and sought out the same woman.
‘All right!’
I challenged her.
‘Let's see if you can really tell fortunes.
If you can tell me the initials of my name, you can have what's in this bag.’
Momentarily staggered, she rose to the challenge, and I could feel her mind racing feverishly.
‘You have a nickname and a short name,’ she said cautiously.
‘Never mind that,’ I said, disappointed that she hadn't said ‘Rumpelstiltskin’.
‘What are the initials?’
The poor woman swayed, appeared to commend her soul to God, and said faintly, ‘There's an ‘M’ and a ‘B’in it.’
‘How did you know?’
I cried, jumping up in the air in amazement.
I had temporarily changed my name to Marvin Brainboxbatterer.
‘That's absolutely right!
How did you do it?
It's amazing!’
The lady looked modest, but said nothing, and I handed her the bag.
‘God bless you!’ she said with feeling, and shook me by the hand.
I was moved to see that she had absolute faith in my goodwill, for she took the bag without glancing at the contents.
With that, I galloped off for the train, and even had time for a drink before it left.
A tinker accosted me in the bar, asking for a glass of brandy, but I gave him short shrift.
It was a long haul with my heavy bag to the bus stop at the top of town next day, but I made it and set out on a bus journey westward from Roscommon to Galway.
There had been heavy rain in the night, and some of the fields were flooded.
Sprays of drizzle flecked the bus window, but I could still see out.
As we drove westward, the bogs vanished and we were among pastureland enclosed by dry stone walls, augmented with barbed wire.
Soon cob and thatch cottages began to appear.
Long white cabins with bright thatched roofs are typical of the Province of Connaught, and are known as ‘bothies’.
They are more often to be seen on Irish calendars than in real life (except as ruins), but many survive as comfortable homes.
I wondered if I would ever be able to peep inside one.
Whether the thatch on these bothies was old or new, it was always a deep orange colour.
Even the haystacks were thatched.
Posters advertising ‘Sixties Discos’ were stuck to telegraph poles.
One pole wore a similar notice which read ‘I'm Sick of Sixties Disco Posters.’
We passed two ruined abbeys, one with a tower and one without, and then stopped at a four-house township.
A rough-looking man with dark slicked-back hair and heavy eyebrows popped his head into the bus and shouted jubilantly to a friend, ‘Come in, there's a funeral wi' free whiskey!’
This man, who was soon joined by three friends, reminded me of the woozily friendly Galway people I had known in Brighton in the late sixties and early seventies.
These wild Gaelic-speaking men may have once lived in bothies, but when in Brighton they regarded themselves as raiders in a strange and hostile land.
Most of them worked intermittently as hotel kitchen porters, and they slept where they fell.
Feeling very daring, I would sit in a circle with them on the grass in Powis Square, and pretend to drink deeply as the cider or barley wine bottle passed around.
Sometimes one of them would leap to his feet and dance a jig before falling over.
One of these men had a wife and family, and only joined the Powis Square circle when he was on a spree.
Normally he was a model husband and father, kind-hearted and always laughing.
When he drank, he grew miserable and would throw every living creature out of the house, wife, children, dog and pigeons, and then rush out himself to Powis Square.
Luckily his pigeons were homers and flew back when he was sober.
Most of the Powis Square mob frequented a particular betting shop where their noisy ways were tolerated.
They knew very well that the manager kept several pounds of their winnings, but couldn't object, as every other betting shop had barred them.
One of these men, named Pat, was going out with my godson's grandmother.
He stole a chicken from work, and I watched as he stuffed it and sewed it up with needle and thread in his girlfriend's flat, frowning with ponderous alcoholic severity.
He was arrested for theft on the same day as my godson, each in a different part of Brighton.
My Bible instruction to the lad had been of no avail.
With these memories, I expected Galway City, my destination, to be a hopeless, broken-down kind of place.
As the bus pulled into the depot, just in time before all the busmen went on strike, I looked around in surprise.
This seemed a very sophisticated city.
With a final burst of furious rain, the sky cleared and I dragged my bag along the road in blinding sunshine.
Near the bus and railway station stood a Great Southern Hotel, not too different from the luxurious mansion I had known in Killarney.
My purse had grown thin since then, so I struggled on.
In the lobby of that hotel, on the following evening, I was to meet a Mrs Knelle, the friend of an English friend, and she was going to put me up at her house in the country.
She was an English woman, now widowed, whose husband had come from County Galway.
(Irish counties, provinces and county towns can be a bit confusing, so I'll spell it out carefully — I was now in Galway City, county town of County Galway.
County Galway itself is part of the Province of Connaught, which contains five counties.)
The front door of the hotel looked out on John F. Kennedy Square, a wide-open space of seats and gardens named after the American President who had visited Galway in 1963.
Its real name is Eyre Square.
Wearily and painfully, I lugged my bag along the perimeter of the square, past rows of little shops.
Before long, I found a Bed and Breakfast, a squalid musty place of peeling lino, connected to a sweet shop.
A thin disdainful blonde girl led me up narrow stairs to a room filled completely by a single bed.
At the foot of the bed, a window looked out on dip-backed slate roofs.
Exhausted, I fell asleep.
I awoke some hours later and, feeling refreshed, went out to explore Galway.
Eyre Square, though marred by a mad iron statue put up in honour of Kennedy, was still a fine place, used as a promenade by the young people of Galway.
Prosperity seemed everywhere, and I learned that Galway was a university town.
A medieval merchant city, unlike any other in Ireland, it had been founded in 1232 by a Norman knight, Richard de Burgo, at the mouth of the River Corrib, facing the Atlantic Ocean.
Rich merchants from Spain had traded there, and the young Christopher Columbus is said to have worshipped in the Church of St Nicholas.
There was still a Mediterranean atmosphere, as I could see as I walked beneath the Spanish arch along the cobbled quayside towards the harbour.
Writers, artists and Bohemians now lived in some of the tiny terraced cottages facing the quay.
One of these houses, with books in the bottle-glass window, advertised Bed and Breakfast.
I wished I had stayed there instead of at the sweetshop.
A plaque reading ‘Michael Walsh was shot by Black and Tans near this spot, 1920’, was a reminder of grimmer times.
From the harbour, I could see oil installations in the distance, another source of Galwegian prosperity.
Just as Glasgow-ites are Glaswegians, Galway dwellers are Galwegians.)
Large red and white boats packed the harbour, and I thought at first that they must be private yachts.
When I looked more closely, the ropes, winches and heaps of nylon netting showed me that they were superior fishing vessels.
One of them was named Galway Bay , but of the bay itself, famous in song, I could see no sign.
Near here, trips to the Aran Islands were advertised.
One of the Kirkwoods from Woodbrook had told me about these wondrous isles, where fiddlers played Gaelic melodies to fisherfolk who danced on the quayside.
At least they did so until the local priest warned them that if they did not stop, he'd say a prayer that would make the dead rise from their graves and walk the length and breadth of the islands.
Fishermen went out in curraghs, long Irish coracles, and turf boats named hookers flew in and out of the harbour on wind-filled sails.
It was as well that I was unable to visit the Aran Isles, for if they had changed since the 1930s my disappointment might have been too great to bear.
Apparently the Galway and Aran fishermen of those days had the usual fishermen's superstitions.
Christianity conquered the land but could never quite conquer the sea.
Fishermen would never go out in a boat if anyone who could swim was on board, since the Fates might decide to give the man a chance to do so.
A man once fell off the dock, with only one hand reaching above the surface.
Nobody would pull him out of the sea.
Finally an Englishman did so, to be told by scowling fishermen that ‘a drowning man's hand turns against you’.
Sure enough, the rescued man later tried to murder somebody with that very hand.
I retraced my steps to the square where Kennedy had been given the Freedom of the City (an empty honour), and explored a network of narrow shopping streets.
These were the glittering and opulent reminders of the medieval city.
Stone carvings and whimsies had been plastered over in the nineteenth century, but some had now been uncovered.
The old grey Allied Bank was decorated with sixteenth-century gargoyles and sculptured animals, some devouring one another.
Sophisticated young women, with toned-down Irish accents, tripped in and out of expensive perfume and handbag shops.
One or two ruined houses could be seen, but the dreariness of much of Cork and Dublin was absent, as were high-rise office blocks.
If you enjoy city life, I recommend Galway.
Kenny's Bookshop, near Buttermilk Lane, seemed to be the centre of civilization in Galway.
I just had time for a quick glance into its shelf-ridden depths before it closed, and I saw room after room, opening vistas of eternal reading to my gaze.
When it closed, a statuesque elderly lady in curly grey hair, several laps of necklaces and a sweeping gown that may have been bombazine (a word I have often pondered over) showed clearly by her bold carriage that she was a power behind the Kenny throne.
I had to restrain myself from running after her and asking who she was — heir to the Austro-Hungarian Empire perhaps?
Emerging from the delightful maze of shops, bars, churches and cafés, I crossed a bridge over the River Corrib.
Perhaps swollen by rain, the river rushed into the sea in a torrent of white foam and spray.
I found myself in a grey council estate that faced the river.
Seeing a Catholic church, I went in, but a huddled family inside looked so shocked at the sight of a stranger that I hurried out again, suspecting a funeral.
Cars crawled by, chased by stray dogs.
At one time a fisherman's village had stood not far from here, the Claddagh.
It had been a village of thatched cabins, with virtually no other buildings at all, and had been the original Galway town before De Burgo came.
The songs, stories and customs of the Claddagh dwellers had set them apart from other Galwegians, and the well-known Claddagh rings originated there.
Sad to say, the neighbourhood had been pulled down as ‘a slum’ in 1927, a council action that had staggered the rest of Galway.
There is now not a thatched roof in the city.
I followed a long harbour-wall pathway, then took a gate into a park.
All at once I could see Galway Bay.
Tall, dim mountains on a curve of horizon, a winking lighthouse and the open sea.
There was no prom, and neatly cut grass grew down to the black shiny shore.
Seaweed glistened on the rocks, waders large and small ran up and down, and gulls and cormorants bobbed on the waves.
A round black head appeared and disappeared — a common seal.
The sky was as orange as Galway thatch, overlaid by dark clouds, and the sea also glowed a dull orange.
Dusk was falling as I eventually made my way back into town.
I had been right about one thing — an enormous procession of funeral guests was making its steady way into the riverside church.
Pensively I roamed through a housing estate, stopped by a bearded man who asked me if I knew where Number Fifty was.
When he found I was a stranger, he explained that the houses were numbered at random‘in the old-fashioned way’.
In Nigeria, so I had heard, people gave their houses numbers for aesthetic reasons, because a certain number might have a distinguished ring to it.
I'd hate to be a Galway postman.
Soon I came to a strange place where the river divided, one part of it compressed as a hurling white torrent between steep artificial banks, the other part let into a tranquil canal that entered Galway from the countryside.
A narrow path led between the two waters, the wild and the domesticated.
Feeling as if I were under an enchantment, I walked the narrow way, between vivid white handrails that shone in the half-light.
At one time, this may have been a mill chase with a waterwheel turning.
Looming over all was the great green dome of the Roman Catholic cathedral.
Beyond yet another bridge, for Victorian ingenuity had been hard at work here, I came across a torrential waterfall labelled ‘salmon weir,.
Here it was, I believe, that my hero Frank Buckland, the writer, naturalist and Mayhew-like chronicler of London life, had jumped into the water in order to imagine himself a salmon.
Queen Victoria appointed him Inspector of Fisheries, and he took his job seriously, persuading millers to install salmon ladders over their weirs.
Floundering excitedly among the real salmon, he had not noticed the water bailiff, who observed, ‘Bedad, your honour, you're the finest fish I ever see in this ladder this long time.’
Walking by the riverbank, I came across a W.W. Jacobean neighbourhood of mellow terraced shops, pubs and houses.
Seaman-like men in bobble hats or ship caps roamed cheerily around, and the bars advertised ‘Music’.
Dim lights shone in brown parlour windows and there was a trail of yellow in the purpling sky behind the chimneys.
Without knowing how, I found myself in the smart medieval quarter again.
Galway was the strangest town I had ever visited, and I felt as if I were in a dream.
Strange towns, reached by complicated journeys, are part of my dream repertoire.
In the morning, I paid my disdainful landlady for the use of my room for the rest of the day.
Mrs Knelle would not be meeting me until half past ten that night, after the theatre.
I was looking forward to being a guest in Ireland for the first time, instead of merely a paying guest.
All Irish landladies, however pleasant, seemed to breathe a sigh of relief when a visitor left, and they were able to get on with the intense business of family life without interruption.
Bag-dragging had exhausted me so much that I went back to bed and slept until afternoon.
After a second teatime breakfast in a café, I set off without delay for Kenny's Bookshop.
What a place!
Painted green outside, the inside contained the largest collection of secondhand books about Ireland in the world (I should imagine), going back to the days of Swift and beyond.
Framed colour photographs of visiting Irish authors hung between the shelves.
I had read none of them, and had only vaguely heard of one, Edna O'Brien.
Seeking to remedy this sad state of affairs, I browsed my way around the bookshop from floor to floor, upstairs and down and in and out of little book-filled rooms that the owners themselves may have forgotten about.
My instant history of Galway comes to you by courtesy of Kenny's Bookshop.
The shop stocked un-Irish books also, and even the smallest volume was treated and presented with greater care than has ever been known in the bookworm paradises of Charing Cross Road or Hay-on-Wye.
A leaflet near the front door told the history of Kenny's, opened in a former ‘crubeen shop’ by Desmond and Maureen Kenny.
The pair had once been students at the University College of Galway.
Not wishing to leave the city when their studies were over, they asked all their friends for unwanted books and opened the shop in November 1940.
I realized that the cheerfully forceful woman I had seen the day before must have been Mrs Maureen Kenny herself.
As well as running an art gallery in the shop, the Kennys also had a bookbinding business whose services included ‘Edges gilt; white handsewn headbands; handmarbled endpapers; full oasis goatskin in differing colours; gold blocked on vellum, oasis circular piece superimposed with antique compass…‘
Such bookbindery had a Biblical ring to it, particularly with all those oases and goats of many colours, and recalled the building of Solomon's temple.
Americans frequently sent books to and from Galway to be bound.
Tom Kenny, bearded, bespectacled son of the founders, told me that the shop stocked one hundred thousand books about Ireland, or by Irish authors.
As in George Borrow's day, the booksellers were also publishers, and printed their own catalogue.
They were the Irish suppliers to the Washington Library of Congress.
Everyone who worked there seemed to be a Kenny.
‘Is your father still alive?’
I asked.
‘Yes, that's him at the back there.
Why don't you come back tonight, as it's the opening launch of an art exhibition here?’ and he gave me a pamphlet.
With that he dashed off on business, so I turned to his mother, who was seated at a table serving customers, a delicate loop of chain attached to her spectacles.
‘What does it mean here, where it says that this used to be a ‘crubeen shop’?’
I asked her.
‘I don't think they have ‘crubeens’ in England.’
‘Of course they do — it means pigs’ feet,’she replied decisively.
‘You're right, they must do,’ I agreed, on thinking it over.
‘Otherwise the pigs in England wouldn't be able to walk.’
After another soothing dusk spent gazing at weirs and waterfalls, I presented myself at the Kenny Gallery, behind the bookshop.
‘Paintings by Jim Teck’, my prospectus read.
‘Which one's Jim?’
I asked Tom Kenny, edging my way uneasily round all the fashionable people in the brightly lit room.
‘It's a misprint for Jill Teck,’ he admitted.
‘That's her over there.’
Jill Teck was a curly-haired lady with a silvery laugh, and her pictures were bright, swirly and only semi-abstract.
Many of them were labelled ‘Moondreams’.
I introduced myself and chatted to her husband, a sandy-haired man in a huge jersey, who looked like a folksinger specializing in sea shanties.
He was in the shellfish business.
Both of them were English, I believe.
‘Your pictures would make excellent greeting cards!’
I complimented Jill Teck.
She seemed affronted, but it was the truth.
Escaping from the awkward embarrassment of arty people, in whose company I can never say the right thing, I went for a Chinese meal.
Then I collected my bag from the Bed and Breakfast.
To my surprise, instead of the scornful narrow-eyed blonde, I found two frail but good-hearted old ladies in charge, plaid shawls about their shoulders.
I spoke to them in the doorway of an old stone-flagged kitchen full of saintly pictures.
Both wished me ‘Godspeed’.
Probably the whole house had been cosy and well-run when these ladies had been in their prime.
Then came a long anxious wait in the foyer oft he Great Southern Hotel.
Finally my hostess, Mrs Knelle, and a theatre-going friend, Mrs Molloy, approached me with friendly smiles.
Before long we were speeding through the night towards Joyce's Country, County Galway.
The ‘merry Joyces’ had been one of the fourteen Merchant Tribes of Galway, prominent families who had succeeded to the De Burgos in controlling the city and fighting off the ‘wild Irish’.
Other Tribes included the ‘bloody Bodkins’, ‘brave Brownes’, ‘prating Frenches’, ‘proud Lynches’ and the ‘litigious Martins’.
As for the wild Irish, they had every reason to be wild, for most of them were O'Connors and the site of Galway had belonged to them before De Burgo came.
Many of the Merchant Tribes came originally from Bristol.
Mrs Mary Knelle, whose car it was, drove through inky blackness, the headlights sometimes picking out signs stuck to telegraph poles.
Instead of advertising Sixties Discos, these were Signs of Unrest.
‘No to Licences’, ‘Save Our Lake’ and ‘No Fish Farm’, I read.
Others had rhymed messages, lines of verse which could not be read from a moving car.
‘There is a fishing war going on here,’ Mrs Knelle explained.
She was a calm, pleasant-faced lady with glasses, perhaps in her fifties, with a musical upper-class accent and an air of quiet confidence.
‘You see, the people here, around Lough Corrib, have always fished without rod licences, as an ancient right.
Then one day, the TDs stayed late at the Dáil — in England you would say ‘MPs stayed late at Parliament’— and sneaked in a bill about angling licences on the Lough.
This came together with the permit for fish farmers to enclose part of the waters.
All the local people were furious!
They are still refusing to pay for licences, or to pay fines, and they seem quite prepared to go to Mountjoy Jail in a spirit of martyrdom.
Their fines were paid by someone unknown.
People here say that fish farms will pollute the lake.’
‘Farmed fish often get fungus and other diseases,’ I said, remembering the trout at Roscrea.
Although I could not see it, we were travelling beside the lake where all these controversies were raging.
Mrs Molloy said goodnight at her garden gate, and we rushed onward into the night.
Finally we dived into a driveway and continued uphill to the verandah of a large white house.
‘This used to be a lord's fishing lodge,’ Mrs Knelle told me, with a slight laugh.
She seemed to regard the Ascendancy with humour as imperial relics.
The late Colonel Knelle had been both Anglo-Irish and Anglo-Indian.
Like Major Kirkwood of Woodbrook, he had served in the Indian Army.
A fervent supporter of Home Rule, he had converted to the Roman Catholic faith.
The Knelles had raised their children to feel proud of Ireland.
Kodiak, Mrs Knelle's huge shaggy Alsatian, barked at me excitedly but was soon soothed by his mistress.
Scenes of India and Tibet hung on the walls, and I enjoyed a late-night coffee among wicker chairs, potted plants and handwoven Oriental rugs.
Clutching a hot water bottle prepared by Mrs Knelle, I finally and thankfully snuggled into bed.
The Shores of Lough Corrib
Birds sang outside my window, and when I pulled the curtains back I was astonished to see a vast grey placid lake outside, with no beginning or end; an inland sea.
Mrs Knelle's garden — or perhaps I should say ‘grounds’— meandered gently down to the narrow lakeside road.
Tall beech trees shed leaves over a disused tennis court, near well-kept lawns and bright hydrangeas.
I drew the bathroom curtains next, and had another surprise.
Wild brown hills of heather and bracken rose up steeply behind the house, just beyond a red-jewelled fuchsia hedge and a grove of mysterious scrub oaks.
Feeling deliciously convalescent, I pottered about in pyjamas, weak yet fortified by the knowledge that I was in a sympathetic house where I could be waited on, and had no appointments of any kind.
Kodiak the Alsatian barked at me for a few minutes, and gave up in resignation.
Mrs Knelle soon appeared in a dressing gown, and we sat down to a soothing breakfast of toast.
What bliss not to have to eat a huge fried breakfast to please a bacon-happy landlady!
I explained about my ‘baggitis’, caused by over-indulgence in books and souvenirs, and Mrs Knelle looked concerned.
To my relief, she was not shocked when I asked if I could spend most of my stay at Lough Corrib asleep in bed.
As it happened, a few sweet dozes over the next couple of days was enough to restore my vitality.
Meanwhile, over breakfast, we chatted of this and that.
Mrs Knelle asked if the huge pair of antlers on the verandah were those of an Irish elk, and I said no, a Canadian moose.
She was very keen that I should portray Ireland in a sympathetic light.
‘Do write something nice about us!
You're not going to the North, are you?’
‘No, I've been all over the North, so I'm leaving it this time.’
‘Perhaps it's as well.
Those Protestants —ugh !
The Presbyterians, I mean, not the Anglicans, of course.’
‘Well, when I was there, I found middle-class Presbyterians who were not very different from Anglicans.
They shied away from Orange parades and Paisley rallies.’
‘That Ian Paisley — ugh!’ she said with feeling.
She had a very nice line in ‘ughs’.
I found that Mrs Knelle regarded the Ascendancy as comic dodos, and took for granted that they were all opposed to Home Rule.
‘If it hadn't been for Home Rule in the South, would Ulster have been ruled by Presbyterians in Belfast?’
I asked.
‘Wouldn't the capital have still been Dublin, where most Protestants are Anglicans?’
‘I'll have to look that up,’ she said dubiously, unwilling to concede any ill effects to Home Rule.
For the rest of the time, we talked only of natural history and local gossip, and got on very well.
It turned out that her son was a great friend of the paraquat-wielding monk I had seen at the monastery farm near Roscrea.
Mrs Knelle's boy had attended a similar boarding school to the Cistercian college, and had then gone to Maynooth, a prestigious Dublin seminary for priests.
From there he had got into Trinity College, and now hoped for a career in the Civil Service.
‘Do you mean the Irish Civil Service?’
‘Good heavens no, the English Civil Service, of course.
When my boys first started school, we were aghast at the anti-English propaganda in the history books.
But in the last ten years, school history here has grown far more balanced.
It was quite an adventure for me to come to Ireland, you know.
I met my future husband when he was a colonel in the Indian Army.
But I hope I'm not a typical colonel's lady!
‘When I was a young girl, I was an army secretary in India.
We had to leave the staff headquarters in a hurry at Partition in 1947.
Our regiment had a very fine cellar, laid down in Victorian days, and it had to be abandoned.
People drank all they could, and I washed my hair in pink champagne.
Everybody thought our train would be ambushed, but in the event we got out safely.
Perhaps our wine fell into the hands of looters, though we were on the Pakistani side and Muslims aren't supposed to touch alcohol.’
I described the crowning of the goat I had seen at Killorglin.
‘Here we have Wren Boys who dress up and go from door to door asking for money, every St Stephen's Day,’ she said.
‘That's Boxing Day in England.
In the old days, they would have a real wren with them, alive or dead, but now I suppose you have to pretend a wren is there.
On St John's Day — that's midsummer —— people light bonfires.’
Despite the saints involved, both customs derive from Celtic paganism, and are none the worse for that.
Later, when exploring the grounds, I met several wrens, as well as titmice, blackbirds and chaffinches.
In the words of the Irish ballad, the birds they were singing from tree to tree.
‘We used to have strawberry fields, but they were too much work,’ Mrs Knelle told me.
‘So they turned into jungle.
My husband and the boys cleared a path through the undergrowth when we first came here, and they called it the Burma Road.’
She showed me the way to the Burma Road, and I set off up the wooded slope behind the house.
Mossy boulders, strangely twisting tree roots and little streams splashing over stones are my delight.
I was reminded of North Wales.
Here and there, a miniature Halfpenny Bridge of stone curved over the winding brook.
Strange moss-covered devices were relics of the house's first electricity system, run by water.
Finally I descended the ash and beech slopes to the house once more.
Later that same day, I awoke from a restoring sleep to find rain pouring down outside, the lake nearly invisible.
At the back window, the oaks and the steep brown hill looked wonderfully romantic in the deluge.
However, I didn't envy the line of white sheep hurrying down the mountain to seek shelter against Mrs Knelle's stone wall.
That afternoon we watched television, which was full of the anglers’ strike at Lough Corrib.
‘The government has denied that there will be fish-farm cages on Lough Corrib,’ said the announcer.
‘However, they have not ruled out the possibility of fish farms on streams that drain into the lake, which could be harmful if their waste enters the lough waters.
These lakes have never been landlord lakes — the fishing has always been free for the people.
The government denies any intention of become a ‘lakelord’ and controlling the waters.’
Mrs Knelle's sympathies seemed anti-government in this case.
‘Last week a woman who lives near here was arrested for not paying her fine, and she was actually put in a police wagon headed for Mountjoy Jail in Dublin,’ Mrs Knelle told me.
‘She had a helpless husband at home in a wheelchair, dependent on her, but the Garda took no notice.
When they had gone some way from here, the Garda received a radio message, stopped and turned around.
‘Someone's paid your fine, so we're taking you home,’ they said.
‘No one here believes her fine was really paid.
They think it was a trick by the Garda or the judges to frighten people and teach them a lesson.
But still people won't give in.
They say the government insist on fish farms near here, and some hint that there's a ‘backhander’ involved.
Now the strike has spread to boatmen, and no local people will take visitors out on the lake.
Some fear reprisals if they did so, although tourists have been coming here for years to fish for trout and salmon.’
Mrs Knelle kept in touch with the Irish Catholic grapevine through her friendship with ‘Sheilagh, up the mountain in bandit country’.
Sheilagh, a farmer's wife, had been widowed at the same time as had Mrs Knelle, and a bond had formed between them.
For the most part, Mrs Knelle's world seemed a cosmopolitan one, for well-to-do foreigners from Europe and America were buying houses and bungalows all around Lough Corrib.
With the high civilization of Galway City so close, such newcomers had the best of both worlds — wild mountainous scenery with friendly bothy-dwellers and fine restaurants, shops and theatres.
With the huge shaggy Kodiak bounding around me, I plodded down the path next morning in Mrs Knelle's son's wading boots.
Telegraph poles along the lakeside road bore warning notices: ‘Lakelords Out’ and ‘No Boatmen’.
Sky and water blazed blue beneath a fickle Irish sun.
Willows and other small trees grew thickly on the banks of Lough Corrib, fenced off from the road.
Mrs Knelle, however, had a key to her own private gate at the water's edge.
I don't know if this made her a lakelady or Lady of the Lake or not.
At any rate, in we went, and soon I was happily splashing around the creeks while Kodiak plunged after sticks thrown by his mistress.
More than ever he resembled his namesake, the giant Alaskan brown bear, a beast that also rollocks cheerfully through northern waters, sending spray flying with enormous paws.
As the bears go after salmon, not sticks, one might make a powerful ally in the Fishermen's War.
Bending and brushing away overhanging thorn branches, I sidled through the water in vain hopes of seeing one of the otters that lived here, according to Mrs Knelle.
At length, shielding my eyes against the dazzling ripples, I returned to land.
Later that day, Mrs Knelle declared that she'd take me for a drive, to see Ashford Castle, a local stately home that was now an hotel.
Poor Kodiak whined and scratched at the verandah door as we drove off.
First of all, we stopped at Cong, a small town of white houses.
There I was introduced to a friendly couple from the North of England, Jack Farrer and his wife Joan.
Jack was an artist, and the Farrers had a studio and gallery in a little shop.
I admired bearded Jack's oil paintings of local scenes, and thought him a far better artist than Jim Teck.
His work reminded me of that of Kyffin Williams, the Artist of Anglesey.
My only complaint was that, in common with the entire Irish tourist trade, he had presented Flann O'Brien's verse ‘A Pint of Plain is Your Only Man’ in a decorative border as a serious poem.
In fact this banal verse, which forms a part of the novel At Swim-Two-Birds , is a satire on the cult of imbecile proletarian writers that began in the thirties and later reached its apotheosis under Joan Littlewood.
Over coffee in the studio, amid paints and palettes, we all discussed the Fishermen's War, a war that still drags on as I write.
‘People are afraid that the lake will be parcelled out into cages for fish farming,’ Mrs Farrer said.
‘The locals are very determined, aren't they?’
‘Yes, but now some of them are regretting it,’ Mrs Knelle put in, scattering fruit from her grapevine.
‘There's a new fear, that criminal records will be stamped on their pass fishermen and their families won't be able to emigrate or visit relatives overseas.’
Waving goodbye to the Farrers, we sped on to Ashford Castle.
‘You see that hideous concrete Roman Catholic church?’
Mrs Knelle pointed.
‘Well, in order to build that, they knocked down the prettiest little Catholic church you ever saw.
It was tiny , with lovely windows, like a doll's church.
A ruined monastery reared grey gable ends near the concrete church.
‘You see that place, the House of Music?’ my guide continued.
‘A very forceful woman runs that place.
There's no real music there, it's a late-night disco and very noisy, too!
Well, a few years back someone else not far away opened a late-night disco and also called it the House of Music!
So the woman from the first House went out at night and burnt the rival House to the ground.
No one was hurt, but she went to prison, of course.
After a while she emerged, quite unchastened, and went on running her House of Music more successfully than ever.
Her rival never rebuilt and had to give up.’
Ring fences and tall two-hundred-year-old trees showed that we were approaching a stately home.
When the castle came into view, I was stunned at its beauty.
Those towers, those gatehouses, the bridges over clear water, the tree-lined avenues, the fountain playing in the forecourt…it was perfection.
as if in a dream, I allowed Mrs Knelle to lead me to the front door.
As I stumbled along, she told me that the present appearance of the castle was in part the creation of the hotel people, who had joined two separate buildings together.
Originally there had stood a medieval castle alone, then it had been Neo-Gothicized and French Châteaued a bit in the nineteenth century.
The Guinness family, the last owners of the estate, had also built a fanciful fishing lodge beside the castle.
This had now been soldered to the main building so well that you couldn't see the join.
‘As we're not guests, we're not really supposed to go inside, but let's!’
Mrs Knelle suggested mischievously.
We tiptoed inside, but no one seemed to mind.
No duke or Guinness heir could ever have lived in such opulence.
If Versailles is ever to be refurnished in Sun King style, it will have to become an hotel.
Only hotels can command fleets of servants now, not so much because their owners are rich, but because there is no stigma of ‘domestic service’ attached to hotel work.
No matter how much of a slavey she might really be, a chambermaid never thinks of herself as a maid.
Polished and carved wood of every kind, fitted or furnished, greeted our eyes.
Carved faces grinned at us, reflecting the fires that burned in every grate.
We floated around gazing at leather chairs, chandeliers like frozen inverted fountains and embroidered tapestries based on Gould's paintings of Australian parakeets.
Finally we floated out on to the porch to admire the lawns and burnished trees, before driving back to relieve pent-up Kodiak of his anxiety.
If the Ashford Castle Hotel now wish to give me a free suite in return for this publicity, I shall not demur.
As I slept off the last of my baggitis, sweet visions of castles, fountains and autumn leaves drifted through my dreams.
Later, over dinner, Mrs Knelle spiritedly told me of the sensation around Lough Corrib when President Reagan had stayed at Ashford Castle.
As Irish people are given naturally to speculating over ‘CIA plots’, their excitement when real CIA security men arrived to safeguard the President can be imagined.
‘The countryside round here was simply crawling with CIA men!’
Mrs Knelle exclaimed.
‘One was found on top of a neighbouring castle tower surveying the landscape.
The local Garda had been sent to Ashford Castle to protect Reagan, and they didn't get on with the CIA at all.
Standing outside the castle, on the edge of the lake, the Garda were dreadfully bitten by midges.
So they lit a fire to smoke them away.
A CIA man rushed out and roared at them angrily, and they had to put the fire out.
The hotel staff felt sorry for the Garda and asked them round to the back door, where they handed out tots of whiskey.
Luckily, the CIA didn't know about that.
‘One of the CIA men had to phone a message through to Reagan.
Whatever he might do, he couldn't get past the postmistress at Cong, who acts as operator, and runs the whole village.
Reagan's suite had been given a special phone number for the occasion, but the postmistress didn't believe in such nonsense.
‘Again and again she kept repeating, in a stern, calm voice, ‘The number of the castle is Cong 3.
There is no such number as the one you mentioned, and I will not connect you.
The number of the castle is Cong 3.’’
‘When she had repeated herself five or six times, the CIA man slammed the phone down in a rage, and Reagan never learned what he had to say.’
On my last full day in her house, Mrs Knelle declared that she would drive me through the mountains of Joyce's Country to the edge of Connemara.
‘That should give you some idea of the beauties of County Galway,’ she added.
‘I have some friends along the way who should be pleased to meet you.’
So off we went.
The sky was blue, and the lake and mountains seemed to smile at us.
Large houses faced the lake at intervals of miles.
Each house stood high on the hillside that sloped down to the lakeside road, with curling or zig-zagging driveways and thick modern stone walls.
‘That's a Dutch couple who live there…those people are Germans…that's a nice American who lives there,’ Mrs Knelle's commentary ran.
One house was so unusual that we stopped and walked around it.
It was a small Norman castle keep, with three towers, two with turrets and the middle one with a pointed roof.
‘That's Murphy's Castle,’ Mrs Knelle told me.
‘It's a real medieval castle, that had been a ruin for years, and has now been modernized into a house.
Some people complained when the owners painted it white, but it was proved from an old book that Normans often painted their castles.’
Maybe so, but the old castle looked to me like a Victorian Gothic lighthouse, looking over the lake.
Now Mrs Knelle drove away from the lake, along a narrow road between green hills where sheep grazed.
To my delight, we stopped at a bothy, a long white cabin with a small door in the middle, deep-set windows and a roof of orange thatch.
A maze of low stone walls bounded the twisting paths of the front lawn, and one wall of a former next-door cottage had been left standing as an ornament, with glassless windows.
A large annexe at the back detracted from the symmetry of the old bothy.
‘An unusual couple live here,’ Mrs Knelle forewarned me.
‘June comes from a well-to-do English family and Pat, her husband, is the son of a poor Galway farmer.
The bothy was in Pat's family, and they've made it into a lovely home.
June's parents weren't too pleased at the marriage at first, but they accept it now, as the couple seem so suited.’
June, a robust pony girl in short hair and trousers, and Pat, a good-natured sandy-haired young man, made us very welcome.
While tea was being prepared, I looked around their bothy home.
A turf fire burned merrily in the end fireplace, and roughly-cut brown chunks of turf (or peat) lay in a box nearby.
The heat from this fire warmed the whole length and breadth of the bothy, a stone longhouse of one single room.
The original bothy had now become a long low front room, with settees and coffee tables, and the beds had been put in the annexe.
Although well furnished, the annexe rooms, which led off from the rear of the bothy, lacked cosiness because they were so cold.
‘There's nothing like an old bothy for warmth.’
Pat told us, as June poured the tea.
‘When our two wee ones came along, we had to have the ixtra room, but I prefer the old part of the house.
A bothy will keep you warm in winter and cool in summer.’
Mrs Knelle and June discussed turf, which they both used for fuel.
Apparently turf was a great talking point in this country, where people greeted one another with ‘Have you got your turf in?’ instead of commenting on the weather.
Most local people cut their own turf from family sites on the hillsides.
‘My father used a special spade for digging turf.’
Pat put in.
‘He called it a ‘slane’.’
‘Turf is cut all summer, in dry weather, to prepare for winter,’ Mrs Knelle explained to me.
‘My friend Sheilagh up on the mountain is very nervy and distraught until she has her turf in.
Then she relaxes.
When we first moved here, we were very keen to be Irish and we cut our own turf.
It was terribly hard work, even with the boys helping.
Now I just buy mine from Tommy the Turfman.’
Pat pointed out a castle tower visible from the window, with two ruined churches nearby.
‘You see where there's bog — there used to be water there,’ he told me.
‘The owner of the castle would put his family into a boat and row them across the lake to church every Sunday.
But one day his wee son fell out of the boat and drowned.
So, in his grief, he had the other church built near the castle itself, so no one need cross the water any more.
Now the castle and the churches both are ruins.
See where the cintre of the church has fallen in, leaving the two ends, like?’
For Pat, every ‘them’ was a ‘thim’and every ‘centre’a ‘cintre’, pronounced very clearly.
‘Simmetry’ would be a place for dead people, lending new meaning to Blake's poem about the tiger.
Finally Mary Knelle and I were on our way once more, driving past hillsides where neat black cut-away shapes showed that turf had been extracted.
Turf (or peat) is the remains of the ancient Irish forest not yet old enough to be coal.
‘Those are turf strips,’ my guide informed me in her calm, assured voice that I found so soothing.
‘After cutting, the turf is stacked by the roadside until Tommy comes along with his turf cart.
For some reason, they always leave three ‘steps’ of turf on the hill, after cutting.
Tommy's cart is a trailer on a van now, of course.
He simply hurls the turf into the trailer.
Someone usually gets in while this is going on, and puts the turf into neat heaps.
Then your own turf is delivered to your house.
Tommy is a strange man.
He walks about at night, and people say he can see in the dark.’
On we drove, and I noticed stacked turf everywhere, in wooden shelters and under tarpaulins, usually by the side of a house.
Old style ‘African hut’ haystacks stood here and there, some with cloth covers on top, others with a single pole poking up through each ‘roof’.
Small patches of forestry plantation darkened the slopes of some hills.
‘Farmers don't care for those plantations,’ Mrs Knelle went on.
‘They sometimes set them on fire, and you can see hillsides of charred stumps in some places.’
So saying, she pulled up at the gateway of a two-storey farmhouse used as the holiday and weekend home of her friends Mr and Mrs Clay.
Sean Clay was a Dublin solicitor with knowing pale grey eyes.
He shook my hand heartily, and left us sitting in the front room while he went in search of‘something special’.
‘You might have heard of this — potheen!’ he said with a smile on his return.
A transparent liquid, pronounced ‘pocheen’, the moonshine, bootleg or Real Old Mountain Dew still-born whiskey swirled around in a lemonade bottle.
I backed away in alarm and refused to touch it, so Sean made up for my abstinence.
‘Who makes that stuff?’
I asked.
‘I cannot say,’ he smirked.
‘How did you get it?’
‘I have it.’
‘So I see,’ I said nervously, watching as he smacked his lips for fire to stream from his mouth, the top of his head to fly upwards on a jet of steam or his eyes to turn into Catherine wheels.
None of these things happened.
‘If I ever go to a funeral in an out-of-the-way place, I always get pushed a discoloured glass of potheen.
So I've acquired a taste for it,’ he explained modestly.
‘Wakes round here are not what they were.
Once they lasted three days, now it's only one.’
I had heard Hindus in London say exactly the same thing about weddings.
Celts and Negroes love funerals, Orientals of every kind love weddings, while for inward-looking Saxons the big days are family holidays.
‘You see those broken clay pipes on the mantelpiece?’ asked Mr Clay.
‘We found them behind the house when we moved in.
There was a custom here until the fifties of giving people new clay pipes at a funeral.
When the guests had gone, all the pipes would be broken at once, and then thrown away.’
‘There was a custom here until the fifties.’
How often is that sad refrain heard all over the English-speaking world!
In the fifties television came along, the destroyer of tradition.
Enter the Demon King.
‘What killed the old Ireland was not only television, but the motor car,’ Sean proceeded, as if reading my mind.
‘In the old days of walking and bicycles, you would walk down from your house to the village and stop at every house on the way for talk.
Now you just drive straight there and back, with no time for stories.’
However, Mrs Knelle seemed to be driving from house to house to exchange news, and I thought the old Ireland persisted around Lough Corrib as well as might be expected, or better.
Some might call Connaught the Real Ireland, but I don't see why turf-cutters are any more or less real than Midland golfers who cut a different kind of turf when they swing their clubs.
The Midlander has the better claim for the title of Typical Irishman.
Mr Clay went on to tell of his visits to a bone-setter, who successfully healed him after an accident.
Bone-setters were regarded as witch doctors by orthodox Irish medical men, but were never without a clientele, human or animal.
‘The man I went to cured my hip just by stroking it,’ Sean said.
‘Farmers brought animals along to the same waiting room as human patients.
There were rows of cars outside when I went, and you had to take a ticket with a number when you sat down.
‘There's two sheep ahead of you,’ I was told.
‘When I went in, the man was very gentle.
He could tell what was wrong by magic, without needing to ask.
Nearly everyone who saw him was cured.
Gaelic footballers were his best customers, as the sport's so rough.
The bone-setting power is often handed down from father to son.
In this case, the man's grandfather had been a well-known bone-setter for his gentle touch, but the father had been a bone-cracking bone-setter.
He could heal, but with sharp movements and loud cracking sounds that frightened people away.
But his own son, the man I saw, had the gentle gift once more.’
Major Kirkwood of Woodbrook, according to a member of the family, always sent for the bone-healer and the vet whenever a horse became lame.
He would see that the two rival practitioners never met.
Apparently the healer would tie a black thread round the horse's ankle, and it usually worked.
Or so the people on the estate said, for it was the Major's aim to please them and keep things running smoothly.
After a little more gossip, we said goodbye to the friendly Clays, and set off on our tour of the countryside.
As we left, a herd of cows wandered into the solicitor's garden through the open gate and were shooed out again with loud cries.
My magical ride took me from lake to lake, from Lough Corrib to Lough Mask and then to a third lake that seemed smaller than the last two inland seas set among high mountains.
But this ‘lough’ turned out be an arm of the sea itself, an Irish fjord at Leenane.
Soft lights glowed on the mountains as if reflected from stained glass.
Bog grass on lower ground shone orange, emerald green or gold.
Cumulus clouds rolled majestically through the blue sky, casting shadows or releasing light as they did so.
Some mountainsides were chequered with tall stone walls that cast slanting shadows over the fields they enclosed.
The hill country had once been far more populous.
Ireland's Highland Clearances had been made not by Man but by Famine.
Mary Knelle pointed out to me the green ridges on almost perpendicular fields that showed where potatoes had been grown before 1847.
Here and there were strange unexplained heaps of stones on high places.
My theory was that these were ‘deer roasts’ left by hunters in historic times, when the game would be cut up and cooked on the hill where it was slain.
Stones would enclose the fire, and the meat might also be cached under stones.
On the verge of Connemara, we passed through a steep valley of rocks poised as if to roll down upon us.
High on a mountain we paused and I looked down on Lough Nafooey, a lake lying far below us.
From a cloud that hovered over the lake, a rainbow emerged, arching down to the water, suffusing it with fairy gold and mauve.
The other end of the rainbow was presumably curled up inside the cloud.
Mary Knelle knew every road between the mountains.
I saw a ‘table mountain’ and rugged peaks of every kind, although with no snow on the tops as yet.
Bracken and heather made rufous brown the most typical colour.
High over Lough Corrib once more, she pointed out a ‘ruined castle’ on a wooded island.
From that distance it did not look ruined at all.
Grace O'Malley, the Pirate Queen of Connaught, might still have been living there.
Like Shane O'Neill, another robber monarch, she had made her way to Queen Elizabeth's court in England.
There she bargained with the Queen, and in return for not harrying the English ships that were pursuing the Spanish Armada, O'Malley was allowed a free hand in Connaught.
As Mrs Knelle descended from the mountains, she told me stories attached to various landmarks.
‘That's the ‘witch's house’’.
Until she died a few years ago, a wise woman lived there, a strange being who wore outlandish brightly-coloured clothes and had feathers in her hair.
She could cure sheep of all ills, and if anyone cut themselves, she would bind cobwebs into the hurt.
‘Over there is where they killed Lord —, nearly a hundred years ago.
There had been an unpopular decision made at the Lords in London, so gunmen here decided to shoot a lord, to set an example.
Lord — was a harmless man, with hardly any land, so they decided it would have to be him.
One day, when the lord was stepping down from his carriage, which he drove himself, he was shot dead outside his gate.
The murderer thought nobody else was there.
But unknown to the gunman, a little boy had been stealing a ride on the bar under the carriage, and he saw it all.
He ran home and told his mother, and soon the whole district knew.
‘I know both families — the little boy's family and the murderer's family.
They both still live round here.
Officially the case has never been cleared up, as not a soul reported the man to the authorities.
He was never brought to justice, and since he has long since died himself, we shall leave the matter there.
If a more powerful lord had been shot, with a vast estate, many men might have been thrown out of work and so have borne a grudge against the gunman.
‘Strange things happen round here.
Lately the government has taken to giving grants to Swedes to create industry.
Two Swedes came to a town near here with a grant, and started a factory that made micro-electric parts or something — anyway, it would supposedly employ hundreds of local people.
‘Now the Swedes were of two sizes.
One was a little short jolly man of five foot, called Sven Svennsen.
The other was a tall man, seven foot high, called Yon Yonson.
Well, Yon Yonson took to drink and stayed in the pub until he'd drunk up most of his grant.
So regretfully Sven Svennsen had to go back to Sweden.
‘After a while, Yon Yonson grew lonely.
He shocked the postmistress in town by asking ‘Can you get me a woman?’’
Eventually he met a rather feckless man who had seven children.
The two went into a long drinking session, and the end of it was that he bought the man's seventeen-year-old daughter outright, with the last of his grant.
‘He took the girl home, and they lived by selling off all the furniture in the factory, bit by bit.
By that time the girl was pregnant.
Yon Yonson married her in an evident attempt to qualify for the Irish dole.
This didn't work, so he took the girl back to Sweden and nothing has been heard of them since.’
Zimbabwe and other African countries are now making the same mistake, and inviting Swedes to come over and do progressive things to their economies.
So if Robert Mugabe, Prime Minister of Zimbabwe, is reading this: beware of Yon Yonson.
Mind you, I'm not saying a word against Sven Svennsen.
As we drove up to Mrs Knelle's house, we passed a man in dark clothes, with tousled grey air, walking unsteadily beside the lake.
‘That's Tommy the Turfman,’ Mrs Knelle told me.
‘He lived in a bothy until the roof fell in.
His parents kept it spick and span, but when they died, he lived there alone until it went to rack and ruin.
He's the one I told you about, who can see in the dark.
Sometimes when I take Kodiak out at night, I see Tommy staring at the house.’
Mrs Knelle gave a shudder, and in that moment she reminded me of a Karen Blixen figure in Kenya, who has stayed on after Mau Mau to make the best of life in a new Republic.
The Woodcarver of Sligo
Despite all Mrs Knelle's entreaties that I go westward into the wilder parts of her beloved Galway, I stuck to my original plan.
‘Could you please drive me to Tuam?’
I asked.
‘From there I can get a bus to Sligo Town, in County Sligo, up in the north of the province of Connaught.’
‘Tuam!
Whatever is there to see at Tuam?’ she complained mildly, as we set off:.
Kodiak barked a farewell, the moose antlers seemed to wave and the ripples on Lough Corrib frowned at me reproachfully.
One day I hope to return and spend several weeks exploring County Galway.
We drove through placid scenery, past a ruined castle and so into Tuam.
Once a holy city and (from 1049) the seat of the O'Connor Kings of Connaught, Tuam now resembled a relaxed, fairly prosperous market town in Sussex.
Mary Knelle looked around approvingly.
‘It's just like an English town of the 1950s, with hardly any traffic,’ she said.
With time to spare, we looked at the two cathedrals of Tuam, Roman Catholic and Church of Ireland.
The former, a dignified nineteenth-century building, reminded me of St Peter's at Brighton.
Most of the Church of Ireland cathedral was nineteenth century also, including the tall spire.
However, in the twelfth century corner, I found a place where I could look through four archways at once, a soothing occupation.
Part of the cathedral had been roped off as a theatre, a very Sussex touch.
A little later, I stood nervously beside my bag, hoping that I was at the right bus stop for Sligo.
Patient as ever, and too kind just to leave me, Mrs Knelle stood by my side, allaying my fears.
Suddenly a small single-decker bus appeared at a corner not far away.
Within minutes I was safely on board with my bag, leaving Mrs Knelle waving and asking me to give her good wishes to her friend in England.
Outside my window, the sun slowly set behind mournful evening scenery, fields and bogs, with cows everywhere, sometimes on the road itself.
Rivers flashed by, and mountains appeared on the horizon.
We were crossing the Plains of Mayo, in the county of that name.
Big men with big grins slumped half-sideways on their seats, shouting remarks to their neighbours.
I was suddenly startled to see that we were entering the town of Knock.
All over Ireland, posters advertise pilgrim coach tours to Knock, a town famous for apparitions of the Virgin Mary.
Our Lady first appeared in Father Cavanagh's chapel in the summer of 1879.
Opening my bag, I managed to unearth a pink magazine I had bought,The Curate's Diary .
‘Knock Apparition Saved Father Cavanagh from Having Ears Cut Off’, the sensationalist headline proclaimed.
Inside, the story told how the people of Knock, unable to pay their rent, faced hunger and eviction.
Once more the potato crop had failed.
Secret societies sprang up, some with the enmity towards the Roman church noticeable in IRA writings today.
One such society, the Ribbonmen, decided that Father Cavanagh must be punished for preaching non-violence, and swore a solemn oath to cut off the priest's ears.
Few of them were old enough to remember the first Great Famine of the 1840s, when Father Cavanagh had worked tirelessly to help the starving.
A day or two before the crime was to take place, the Apparition of Our Lady shone forth, changing bitterness to religious awe and causing the Ribbonmen publicly to repent.
Prosperity came to Knock, as pilgrims came from far and wide; and Father Cavanagh kept his ears.
Concluding the entry on Knock, the Curate next confided to his diary the tale of Father Vianney, a priest persecuted by the devil, who kept banging on the walls and throwing furniture around.
Often Satan, entering Father Vianney's bedroom, would actually cry aloud.
‘Vianney, Vianney, thou eater of potatoes, we shall have thee yet!
We shall have thee yet!
We have thee!
We have thee!’
…
Continued in next month's issue of The Curate's Diary .
Poor Father Vianney must have thought his sacrifices and self-denial in becoming a priest had scarcely been worthwhile if this sort of thing was going to happen.
I never learned how he escaped.
Posters advertising Knock pilgrimages that I had seen nearly always mentioned ‘matchmaking’ as part of the attractions.
In pagan days, when Celtic pilgrims journeyed not to Knock but to the Sacred Feasts of Tara, matchmaking played an important part in the celebrations.
Some things never change.
Pilgrim prosperity had brought startling modernity to Knock.
A grey, unsightly concrete church with a steeple like an upraised sword stuck through the roof stood beside a futuristic glass pavilion with rows of outdoor benches for apparition-watchers.
White statues of saints, angels and the Holy Family added a traditional, if sepulchral, touch.
Could they not have been painted?
Bed and Breakfast houses jostled one another in rows, and a huge shop advertised tawdry ‘Religious Goods’.
The bus stopped outside gaunt St Mary's Hostel and several girls got out.
‘Medieval England managed this sort of thing so much better,’ I thought smugly.
Then I remembered — the word ‘tawdry’ comes from ‘St Audrey’, whose English feast and fair was notorious for vulgar souvenir stalls in the Middle Ages.
Continuing northward, the bus arrived next at Tobbercurry.
On the village green stood black life-size silhouette figures of fiddle and accordion players, apparently cut out from thin sheets of iron.
I was reminded of the black iron horse silhouettes which decorate the Wolverhampton to Shrewsbury railway line in England.
Between Cloonacool and Coolaney, beside the River Moy, the bus passed beneath the rocky peaks of the Ox Mountains.
Then came Ballysadare, with its roadside mill and view over the bay.
Finally, in the dusk, the lights of Sligo came into view.
Overshadowing the town, a massive round-shouldered hill loomed, like Ayer's Rock, Table Mountain and the Wrekin all rolled into one.
It was Benbulbin.
Dismounting at the railway station, I cast envious looks at yet another Great Southern Hotel, and dragged my bag to a terraced street Bed and Breakfast nearby.
A cheerful, freckled young woman showed me to a small seedy room and I began to unpack.
A straw St Bridget's Cross hung over the door of the dark little room in which I was eating my breakfast next morning.
I remembered seeing similar crosses in other Irish homes I had visited, always above a door.
St Bridget is supposed to have quickly twisted some dry reeds into the form of a cross, so that a dying pagan could see the symbol of Christ and perhaps enter Heaven.
Curiously misshapen, the straw Bridget's Cross rather resembles a swastika, the ancient Hindu symbol of fortune.
St Bridget's affinity to the old goddess Bridget can be seen in the wording of long-ago prayers to the Abbess: ‘Bridget, our torch and our sun’…
‘Bridget, the sun above the stars, the Queen of the South, the Mary of the Gael.’
My meditations on St Bridget were cruelly interrupted by the radio, which bore the news of a policeman shot in Belfast.
A lively group of beefy youngsters at the next table gave a loud cheer, and a girl exclaimed ‘Great!’
‘He escaped with chest wounds and is expected to recover,’ the announcer continued.
‘O-oh!’ the youngsters groaned in disappointment, and went on discussing a blasphemous film they had seen.
I was amazed at first, for most Irish people never carry on like this, and those that do have first to be very sure of their company.
Enlightenment soon came — the youngsters proved to be Australian .
In a moment, the freckled landlady came in with the morning bacon, greeting us in the slightly questioning accent typical of Sligo.
Australians too raise their voices querulously at the end of a sentence, only in harsh tones no doubt derived from their country's past.
All that their unfortunate ancestors had to say probably came in questions: ‘When are you going to let me out of here?’ and ‘Can I go home now, please?’
The weather was dull as I stepped out into Sligo.
Grey rows of grim houses, three storeys high, led into the town centre.
Far from being a one-street town, Sligo turned out to be a city, the centre criss-crossed with bright, lively shopping streets.
I sauntered along attractively named Wine Street, then came to a bridge over the rushing River Garavogue.
From a seat on the verandah of the Silver Swan Hotel, which overlooked the river, I was able to admire the white foamy torrents hurtling over a weir and beneath the bridge, black and sleek as they sped on their way.
At first white-maned monsters, they plunged forward as dark shiny hump-backed whales, each wave a living being.
The name ‘Garavogue’ means the Rough Malignant One.
A little further on, I found a marvellous public library, with a mural that showed the Battle of the Books, the war stirred up by St Columcille (or Columba).
This had taken place at Cul Dreimne, now in County Sligo.
St Colum seems to have attracted legends around himself wherever he went, for as Columba he used to be well known to every Scottish schoolboy for converting the King of the Picts, banishing water horses and other praiseworthy acts.
While evangelizing Scotland, the saint seemed able to keep his Irish temper under control.
Around the walls of the Sligo library hung framed pages of a magazine named Broadsheet , dated 1903.
Ballads and rhymes, some by Masefield, were illustrated in black and gold by Jack Yeats.
‘He was the brother of W. B. Yeats, the great poet,’ the librarian told me.
‘Well, I think he's really good,’ I enthused.
‘I like his drawing of the Fiddler of Dooney.
That's the only poem by Yeats I can understand.’
‘W. B. Yeats never wrote the ‘Fiddler’—‘twas his father .’
‘Oh, that explains it.’
Next door, in a small art gallery and museum, I saw more drawings by Jack Yeats, all excellent.
His oil paintings, however, seemed to grow more splodgy over the years.
A few strokes of his pen brought out all the Irishness of an Irishman; proud lean faces were a speciality.
In the museum, a case was devoted to the Phibbs family, whose Sligo mansion, Seafield House, has been long demolished.
The firm of solicitors, Argue and Phibbs, still have an office in Sligo.
Retracing my steps to the town centre, I came upon a street named Harmony Hill, the title of a book of short stories by the late Richard Phibbs (Curlew Press).
I was once privileged to meet Richard, father of the Conservative journalist Harry.
Cockle Button, Cockle Ben , a children's book he wrote in the 1930s, has remarkably good illustrations.
In honour of Richard Phibbs, I walked up and down Harmony Hill, although there was nothing special to see there.
In between the bright little shops of Sligo, the dank ruinous atmosphere of Ireland's Everytown intruded.
Picturesque ‘yards’(courtyards) behind the shops all too often petered out into demolished nothingness, with scraps remaining of stone walls, closed workshops, industrial debris and boarded-up cabins.
One cabin had been made into a pottery, others had council murals daubed over them.
I should have liked to have seen Sligo at the turn of the century, or failing that, in sunny weather.
As at Tuam, Sligo boasted two cathedrals, Anglican and Roman Catholic.
Strange to say, at Sligo they stood side by side, obvious rivals.
Inside the former, I read a strange inscription beside the early-seventeenth-century tomb of Sir Roger Jones, Knight, formerly Governor of Sligo Castle: ‘This tomb has been restored by Past Masters of ‘Light of the West’ Lodge, this Year of Our Lord 1922, and of Free Masonry 5922.’
A nearby plaque stated that W. B. Yeats’ mother Susan had been ‘married here on Sept.
10th, 1863’.
In the Roman Catholic cathedral next door, I found a baffled couple from Pennsylvania, who turned out to be in the wrong cathedral.
‘Why are Catholic churches here not so good as Church of Ireland ones?’ the man asked me.
I told him about the Reformation and about nineteenth-century Catholic Emancipation.
‘You mean the Anglicans didn't give their churches back ?’ he echoed incredulously.
‘No, they held on to them, and the newly free Roman Catholics had to build new ones,’ I explained, ‘What denomination are you, by the way?’
‘We don't have one,’ the woman said.
‘You must .
This is Ireland!’
I remonstrated.
‘How were you brought up?’
‘As Roman Catholics, but we've given it up.’
‘Then you're Catholics,’ I informed them, thinking back to my days in Northern Ireland.
‘You don't have to actually believe it, just be it.’
All the same, the Catholic cathedral of the Immaculate Conception, built in the 1870s, had many good qualities that the Pennsylvanians seemed not to appreciate.
Parts of the outside walls curved in and out like waves of stone, altar and stained-glass windows were awe-inspiring in gold and blue, and the chimes from the clock could be heard all over town, even in my stationside boarding house.
There was a wonderfully prejudiced guide book, which referred to Protestant bishops as ‘pseudo-bishops’ and made no mention of the rival establishment next door.
According to this book, the new cathedral's strategic site had been hard to acquire.
A private citizen, secretly acting for the clergy, had pretended he was buying the land for non-religious purposes.
For the next few hours, I walked in and out of Sligo, beside the swollen, roaring river, its many weirs, ruined mills and unexpected bridges.
Raw council estates spilled over the fields at the edge of town, marring the views.
In other places, grey old houses stretched into the distance, merging with the grey mountains, wall-like Benbulbin and mysterious Knocknarea with its stone cairn on top.
Other walkers greeted me as we passed, saying either ‘hello’ or ‘good morning’.
‘Hello’ is a far more soothing greeting than the English ‘All right?’
In Ireland, ‘good morning’ lasts until two o'clock in the afternoon, and then becomes ‘good evening’until five, when ‘good night’starts to set in.
It was getting on for ‘good night’ time when I fell in with an old lady who complained that the naughty children of Sligo pulled her ivy down and swore at her.
‘And me all alone in the house since my son went to England.
I went to see him once, in London, but there were black men everywhere!
I was looking around, seeing where to go, when a black man took my arm.
‘Are you all right, darling?’ he asked, and led me along to my son's house!
I thought to myself, ‘If anyone sees me from Sligo, my reputation is lost.’
You can't walk with a black man here.’
Probably this was no longer true, for I had seen an African in town who seemed very much at home.
I humoured the old lady, who soon went on her way.
By a quarter past five at night, the streets of Sligo were full, with people pouring out of workplaces and standing talking on pavements everywhere.
Students from a college hurried to the roads leading out of town.
Spreading themselves out, they began to hitchhike, just as English students had done in the sixties.
One tall girl with curly hair only hitched for two minutes before a smiling family picked her up.
Soft lights glowed from the windows of the shops in Wine Street.
I stopped outside Quirke the Butcher's, and noticed with surprise that all the joints of meat were made of wood.
In fact, they were not joints of meat at all, but pagan gods and goddesses, grotesquely and beautifully carved from roughly-cut haunches of woodland trees.
Bloodlessly they rested on white slabs where mince and chops had once reposed.
Books on Celtic mythology lay among them here and there, like garnish.
Metal hooks for meat still hung in rows, some with carvings dangling from them.
Wonderingly, I walked inside.
A meat saw roared, scattering sawdust, worked by a butcher in a white tunic.
The man turned and gave me a friendly nod, before taking up a small piece of wood with pencil markings on it.
A few minutes’ whittling caused a fairy cobbler to emerge from the tree in which his spirit had evidently been imprisoned.
Pagan gods, birds and beasts sacred to the Celts of old stared at me sagely from every hand.
Branches lay across the bacon slicer, ready for lopping.
‘Excuse me, sir, but could you tell me one thing?’
I asked.
‘Are you a woodcarver or are you a butcher?’
‘I have been a butcher.
I was brought up to be a butcher,’ the man replied, looking me cordially in the eye.
With his tousled hair and humorous expression, he reminded me slightly of Michael Heseltine, the English politician.
He was a bit shorter than Heseltine, and his name was Michael Quirke.
‘Ever since I was a boy, I've been making models and carvings,’ he said.
‘I thought it was a weakness I had but it wasn't — it proved to be my strength.
Everyone said I was playing when I got out the clay or plasticine, but really I was training myself without knowing it.
I felt guilty to be so foolish when I was young, but now I'm enjoying life.
At one time, I had a few carvings in a corner, away from the meat, but no one noticed them.
Finally I did what I should have done before.
On 24 May 1988, the last bit of meat went out the door, and an hour later I felt I'd never seen a T-bone steak!’
My eyes roved around the little shop, taking in the wooden treasures brought to life by Quirke.
There was nothing arty or touristy about the old gods — a touch of pagan malevolence, perhaps — and I could see where the phrase ‘rough-hewn honesty’ had come from.
Mr Quirke could have been woodcarver to a pre-Christian Irish King.
Banishing an old life and taking on a new life and character when the time seemed ripe was a very Indian thing to do.
Chunks of oak, ash, alder, beech, sycamore and hazel lay here and there, awaiting their miracles.
Thick branches of apple, pear and ‘whitethorn’ lay stacked against the wall.
‘I use all native woods, many of them windfalls,’ Michael Quirke continued.
He was a talkative man.
‘This is the Black Boar of Benbulbin.
Here he comes, ripping out of the bushes!
In Irish legends, the boar kills the hero.
Benbulbin, that great hill, acts as a barrier between Ulster and Connaught.
There have been many wars here.
In 1798, General Humbert of France came over and won a battle near there, but he took so long that the nearby towns had time to refortify.
He was the best French leader after Napoleon.
Had he succeeded, Ireland might have been annexed to France, though, mind you, we'd have been no better off than under England.
The French were supposed to be ‘liberating'’ Ireland, that's the official story.’
The Black Boar had a great crest running from his head along his spine, like the dorsal fin of a fish, the hairstyle of a Mohawk or the rays of the sun.
‘Could you tell me what the cairn is for, on the hill outside town?’
I asked.
‘Knocknarea?
That cairn is the grave of Queen Maeve, about whom many stories are told.
Here is her likeness!
[I inspected a carving of a frightening witch queen, whirled around with strange shapes, a hare and a stag.]
Maeve, that malevolent queen and goddess!
I've shown her with a March hare, as she can make men mad.
Below her cairn on the hill is Tobernalt, a sacred well — the Well of Lunatics.
There is a road up to the well now.
Don't ask for the Well of Lunatics — that's the old name, and people will be embarrassed.
It is a good Christian well now, and the water is said to be curative.
‘Maeve is not always wicked.
She has three aspects — she can make a man into a warrior.
I'll show you how she lies in the landscape, in erotic invitation for those who enter…‘
Quickly he seized pencil and paper and drew three hills, resembling the breasts and belly of a woman lying on her back, the Maeve cairn becoming a nipple.
These are ideas familiar to Indians and West Africans.
Maeve could be Kali, or even Mammy Water the lake goddess of Nigeria's Ibo-land who makes beautiful women mad so she can possess their boyfriends.
Such a mad girl is termed ‘abanji’.
When I told Michael Quirke about Mammy Water, he came right back at me with Finiver, the local Lady of the Lake.
Sligo's lake is Lough Gill, where lies the Isle of Innisfree, named after Froech, who took the dragon-slaying sword from the hand of Finiver, his betrothed, raised above the water.
Stories, myths and history poured from the eloquent tongue of Quirke, holding me spellbound.
For every character, he had a carving.
A Celtic pantheon of gods whirled about my head, and I may have got them a bit mixed up here.
As in India, a river, a hill, mountain or lake, in Celtic legend, is personified by a god-like person.
Mortals see only a river or a hill, but somewhere on another plane, these natural objects are fierce, lusty or romantic men and women.
Sometimes, as in West Africa, a lady arises from a lake, yet she is no lady but the lake itself.
‘I've carved Maeve from hazel, as she's sometimes known as the Hazel Queen,’ Quirke continued.
‘Hazel is the wood of power.
Maeve's power drives men mad, not only with lust, but with lust's associate, battle fury, so that Maeve's men fight like demons.
Finiver makes a boy into a man, Maeve makes a man into a warrior, but Garavogue, the hag of the river, makes a warrior immortal —— that is, she kills him.
These are the Three Women of Sligo, Finiver (or Guinevere), Maeve and Garavogue.
Finiver is of the rowan, or mountain ash.
Alder is the death wood, the wood of Bran.
Bran is not a full god here — he is a type of Finn…‘
‘Can you make a living doing this?’
I interrupted, wondering if the carver was too poetic to survive.
‘Yes, I live very well,’ he said, as I could see, for at that moment a well-dressed young woman came in and bought the carving of Maeve for twenty-five pounds.
‘Now I can carve her again,’ Michael said with satisfaction, when the customer had gone.
‘I can never repeat a character who is here in the shop with me.
Now, where was I?
Oh yes, Finn MacCool, the Son of Bright Apple, for he holds the Apple of Immortality.
He is carved here with an apple and a boar, for Finn was the Boar of High Summer and his enemy Diarmaid a Wolf.
In the legend, you know, Finn has Diarmaid killed by a boar.
This log I'm about to carve is alder, a resonant wood, used when making the sound box of a harp…‘
‘Have you any lamb chops?’ a dark-haired woman enquired.
Her voice trailed away, she looked dazed and confused, and said ‘Oh no, he's closed’ to her daughter.
Both left.
‘People come in after meat all the time,’ said Quirke.
‘Yes, Garavogue, or Caravogue, the river, is the Third Woman of Sligo.
She confers immortality, as you'd find if you fell in the river, and protects the hero's soul.
She is here carved riding in a car drawn by elks.
That carving is of mad King Sweeney, a Sligo character.
You must have read about him in Flann O'Brien's book,At Swim-Two-Birds .
In Scotland, they tell of a madman of the woods who sounds like our Sweeney.
Lough Doyne is the Two-Birds of O'Brien's book.
There Sweeney fought the Hag of the Mill, she who turns a handmill.
Sweeney, who was half a bird at that time, whirled round the mountain, he and the Hag, until the Hag dived into the lake, her own navel.’
St Patrick must greatly have simplified Irish thought, a turn for the better, when he introduced Christianity.
Animism has its own heady pleasures, however, and I went on listening to Michael Quirke and admiring wooden statuette after statuette.
Most of his sculptures in Irish wood were meat size, between eight inches and two feet in length or height.
Surviving Celtic figures of pagan imagery are mostly worked in stone or metal, not in perishable wood.
Anyone who wished to hoax an archaeologist need only buy up Quirke's stock and then sink it in a bog to be rediscovered.
‘Those were the good old days, the days of heroes,’ Michael Quirke sighed, ‘when men didn't fight over politics and religion, but over sensible things like cattle and women!
Invaders swiftly became as Irish as the rest of us.
The Normans lasted no time at all!
In two hundred years, they was Irish.
Only the Elizabethan English stayed foreign, as they were absentee landlords, and ruled from over the water.’
Later, I reflected that the Tudors came to Ireland not just as rulers, but as missionaries-by-force, in Islamic style, determined to change the people's religion.
When the English upper classes grew too civilized for such ideas, Cromwellians overthrew them and carried on worse than before.
Without such a mission, the second wave of English might have become as Irish as the Normans before them.
‘We in the west of Ireland have all the old customs that survive in England here and there — the Garland Days, midsummer bonfires and decorated wells.
Our old ways have been rededicated to Christianity, the gods turned into saints,’ Quirke went on.
‘Christians don't know it all.
This little shoemaker I'm carving is a leprechaun [he pronounced it ‘leprehorn’]and the priest will say there's no such thing.
Yet an American girl came here, who'd crossed the mountains, and there she had seen a teeny bearded man wearing a black serge suit.
Take no notice, it's only the wife,’ he added, as a woman looked into the shop from a door at the back.
Evidently the Quirke family lived upstairs.
I told Michael Quirke how a heron had once nearly landed on my back in Wales, and he was mightily impressed, taking it as a good luck omen.
He called the heron a ‘crane’, for real cranes, sacred birds to the Celts, have long been extinct in Ireland.
From Quirke I learned that the Sligo hares turn red, not white, in winter, as the hills grow fiery with bracken and heather, not white with snow.
‘Do you think Ireland should have her own king?’
I asked.
‘No, that's an Anglo-Saxon idea.
We're far too tribal to think of central power.’
Falling under the spell of the story-teller, perched on a stool, I fell into a trance as the woodcarver talked and whittled, whittled and talked.
‘That figure of Bres is carved from elm, the tree of Bres.
Bres the Beautiful, who told men when to plough and reap.
Like Good King Wenceslas, Bres's feet melted the snow when he walked.
Leu of the long hand, the beams of the sun, took over from Bres, a shining youth.
Here in the west of Ireland, we call him Balor of the Heavy Blows…
Colum Cill, after causing the Battle of the Books, came back to Tara for the Convention of Drumceat at the Hill of Synod, where they discussed what to do about poets.
In those times, a poet could descend on you with all his retinue and eat you out of house and home.
If you complained, he'd put a curse on you.
The issue was finally resolved in our day, as the government have now set up a pension for poets, a license to be lazy.
I'm glad I'm a woodcarver…
This happened here at Sligo: Owen Bel died in the River Garavogue, speared by Ulstermen, in AD 500.
He cried, ‘Bury me in the womb, in the mountain, in the belly of the mountain’…
Yes, the plain between Benbulbin and the sea is the place of battles; three rivers and three battles…‘
With a struggle, I broke the spell the woodcarver had cast, and escaped into the lamplit streets, promising to return before I left Sligo.
Yet the magical city had not yet finished with me, for I somehow found myself in a dark little wood-panelled bar, with a cosy snug in the rear, and a counter near the door left over from the pub's grocery-bar days at the turn of the century.
Drawers for spices and other grocery bygones remained.
There was a cheerful, Bohemian atmosphere, the air thick with smoke and the shouts of uproarious women.
‘This place has been in the same family for over a hundred years, and it was going strong before that time.
Nothing's been changed here for ninety years,’ the barman told me.
At breakfast next morning, the son of the house dashed past the open doorway stripped to the waist, shaving cream all over his face, looking very agitated.
There was a knock at the door and a man came with a message, causing still more agitation.
Doors shut everywhere, and I heard the landlady give a loud ‘Shh!’
I picked up my plastic bag and walked noisily along the hall, banging the front door behind me.
A collective sigh of relief seemed to whistle from every pore of the house as I walked away.
It must be hard to have boarders if your family is in a constant case of crisis, as most families are.
I decided to take the bus to Strandhill, on Sligo Bay, and follow the road in a circle around Queen Maeve's hill of Knocknarea.
Although very bad at following directions, I might be able to find Tobernalt, the Well of Lunatics.
‘I like to get down to the sea and talk to the waves,’ one housewife said to another, on the bus.
‘Yes, it's good to talk to Nature.
Better than being in the house.
Nature has so much to say.’
The bus passed directly under the hill of Maeve's cairn, the sea on one side, the hill on the other.
A few white houses lined the road, and fields stretched down to the shore.
Rain spitting in my face, I plodded along the narrow coastal road, through scenery eerie and desolate, unseen spirits everywhere, conjured up by Michael Quirke.
As Strandhill is a peninsula, I could see the hills of the mainland far across the sea.
Gulls and waders dabbled at the edge of the breakers, along strands of pale sand.
Below the great hill of Knocknarea, brown stark woods, leafless and grim, glowered at me from behind a stone wall.
A padlocked iron gateway barred my entrance to the wood, a part of the former estate of the Phibbs family.
Open pastureland succeeded the neglected wood as I walked on, and soon I came to a rough circle of boulders on a mound — Lisheen, the little fort, home of fairies.
Before long, Knocknarea towered over me in escarpments of sheer rock, with grassland visible high in the sky.
I could not see the cairn from here.
A big grey house with a ‘Guests’ sign stood among trees, so I knocked at the door and asked how to find the holy well.
Spaniels frisked around me, and an aristocratic white-haired lady called her daughter Mary to guide me.
There was something bookish and appealing about the old lady, but we had no time to get acquainted, for brisk Mary pointed me on my way.
Bungalows began to appear, then a Catholic church at a crossroads.
According to Mary, I was to go straight on.All of a sudden, I came to a place of fairy rings, in fields on either side of the lane.
They were spoiled by official ‘Historic Monument’ signs waffling away about Bronze Age stone heritages.
Before I could examine them, I was buffeted by a gust of wind and rain.
A car approached, and on an impulse I thumbed a lift.
‘Do you know a holy well around these parts?’
I asked the driver.
‘Indeed I do!
Get in!’ my rescuer smiled.
Clearly he was pleased by my request, for he was a priest, a man for whom the well was a place of Christian worship.
He introduced himself as Father Liam Devine, of St Patrick's, Strandhill, and a more kindly and agreeable man I have yet to meet.
It was a good thing I did meet him, as the Well of Lunatics proved to be a long way away.
We drove up a steep gravel path, and soon beheld the well, Tobernalt.
Like most holy wells, it was a natural spring of water, not a man-made sunken well.
A park-like path had been laid out around the sacred waters, with stepping stones.
Clear fresh water bubbled up from a pebble-filled pool, overhung by rocks.
Boulders lay around the waterside, ash trees spreading finger-like leaves overhead.
If the well had been in the centre of an ash grove ever since it was discovered, it is no wonder that it was deemed sacred, for ash was holy to the ancients.
A grotto had been hollowed out of the mountainside, with a beautiful figure of Mary.
A row of candles stood by the wayside.
To my amazement, they were burning brightly as the rain fell and water dripped from the ash trees.
I was glad the well had been Christianized, as Michael Quirke himself could scarcely go on his knees and pray to the rascally old gods he so admired.
Below the well, a waterfall tumbled across an artificial rockery.
We stepped from stone to stone across the new-born stream, below the trees.
Wistfully, I looked back at the haunting beauty of the well.
Father Devine beckoned and showed me a huge slab of rock.
‘This was a Mass Stone in the Penal Times,’ he said reverently.
On we drove, towards Sligo, as I thought.
I enquired about Queen Maeve, but the priest doubted if she had ever existed.
‘I think the cairn was placed there as a landmark to guide Bronze Age pilgrims to the rings of stone,’ he said.
‘Now let me show you around County Sligo.
We don't get many English visitors these days.’
Soon Lough Gill, a vast lake, came into view.
Father Devine took a mountain road, and stopped the car.
There was a fine spray of rain, and the weather was misty, but I could still see the forested islands on the lake, and the tall mountains brooding all around.
One of those islands, half hidden in the mist, was the Lake Isle of Innisfree, of Yeats’ poem.
I have often read this poem, starting off jubilantly, but growing disappointed as I go on.
To my mind, it begins so well that it could easily be mistaken for a translation of an eighth-century hermit's verse, composed in a beehive hut by a contented holy man of Old Ireland.
Then it starts to ‘get poetic’, and I lose interest.
I blame my upbringing!
Parents, never teach your children to love folklore, for folklore and high culture can never be friends.
Indeed, total illiteracy is an asset to anyone who wishes to acquire folklore.
‘I'm in no hurry if you are not.
Why don't I show you the place where Mountbatten was killed?’
Father Devine suggested.
Delighted at the chance to see more of County Sligo, especially as the weather was now improving, I thanked the priest and settled back in my seat.
One day cars must be abolished, but not yet.
Mountbatten fell victim to a bomb placed in his yacht.
He was never a favourite character of mine, as I do not approve of the British partition and subsequent desertion of India, mismanaged by Mountbatten against a horrific background of massacres.
Mountbatten always seemed rather proud of his role in the affair.
For a truthful picture of India in 1947, you must turn to fiction.
Train to Pakistan , a novel by Khushwant Singh, has been a great inspiration for me.
Another hitchhiker, a student, raised a thumb in anticipation, and Father Devine slowed down at once.
‘People can see my collar, so I must stop,’ he told me gravely.
Apparently, in Ireland, stopping for hitchhikers is seen as Christian behaviour.
In England it is regarded as ‘encouraging wastrels’.
In my case, the student proved a welcome recruit to our company, for he too showed great interest in the local landmarks.
Both my new friends pointed out Drumcliff Church (C. of I.) as the place where W. B. Yeats was buried.
Moments later we passed the stump of a tower, and the student sang out the date it was built: 1170.
Now the sky was blue, and we were bowling along beside the edge of the cliffs, with views across the water to distant strands.
A jagged castle appeared on a headland, apparently a ruin.
By straining my eyes, I thought I might be able to see Donegal across the bay.
Beyond a forestry plantation, the castle appeared again, and closer up it seemed a marvel, with French château-like towers, and a classy name, Classybawn.
Near here the student hopped out, waved goodbye and disappeared up a side lane.
Finally the helpful priest drove up to a point overlooking a fine old stone harbour, with a few houses on the quayside.
‘Mountbatten used to drink Guinness in the bar down there, and he was well liked by the locals.
Two men worked at night, placing the charge in his boat, leaving a third man on the shore with a detonator.
When the two men drove away, the Garda stopped them on a routine check.
One of the men was nervous, so the guard asked them the number of the car they were driving.
Neither of the men knew, so they were taken to the station and charged with stealing a car.
‘It wasn't me put the charge on the boat!’ the nervous man cried out.
With that, the police gave a jump, and began grilling them,
‘What boat?’
But the men didn't talk.
Hour after hour, they were asked ‘What boat?’ until Mountbatten's boat finally blew up.
In the end, the nervous man was released for lack of proof.
All the people of Sligo feel bitterly ashamed for what happened.
Now let's go back and see Yeats’ grave.’
We pulled up outside the church.
‘Yeats was in a pauper's grave in France, cremated, but he was brought back here to be buried later,’ Father Devine explained.
‘Some say they brought back the wrong ashes, and that isn't Yeats there at all.
Yeats’ father had the living here — that white building is the rectory where he lived.’
A sad little grave stood by the side of the church, with some lines by Yeats himself as an epitaph.
Cast a Cold Eye
On Life, on Death.
Horseman, pass by!
W. B. Yeats — 1865 — 1939.
‘Why did he want people to cast a cold eye on him?’
I asked.
‘Why not a warm eye?’
‘Well, he never meant those lines for his tombstone.
Yeats was a complete atheist — he didn't believe in anything.
A lady I know who saw his mother's funeral said that Yeats wouldn't go into the church.
In fact, he pottered around in our cathedral instead!’
‘Not many horsemen will pass by nowadays,’ I commented.
‘Of course, Yeats couldn't have been expected to know that.’
As we drove back to Sligo Town, good Father Devine regaled me with stories of Ireland's literary giants.
‘Someone I knew says he saw Brendan Behan in a pub in Dublin once.
No one took any notice of Behan, so he got angry and fired a bottle of whiskey at a shelf, breaking all the glasses…‘
Note the happy use of the word ‘fired’.
The English only fire bullets, but in Irish speech any missile to hand can be fired, simply by hurling it.
‘…
And some say that Brendan Behan never wrote the song ‘Old Triangle’, but learned it off another inmate at Mountjoy and claimed it as his own.’
Father Devine went on to speak of his admiration for Shakespeare, but had no fresh gossip about the Bard.
He showed me the big green gabled home of Ireland's Minister of Finance.
Later I heard that Irishmen outside Sligo nurtured suspicions that the Minister used the Finance of All Ireland just to favour his home town with a new bridge, a new hospital and other luxuries.
Sligo deserves them all and more, as for friendliness and conversation its sons cannot be beaten.
My priestly friend set me down outside the two cathedrals and I bade him a fond farewell.
WOODBROOK
My bus next morning set out for Ballina, westward to County Mayo, to the place where General Humbert of revolutionary France had landed with his soldiers to help drive the English out of Ireland, in 1798.
David Thomson's vivid account of these goings-on, in Woodbrook , had aroused my curiosity.
The bus took the coast road, around the tall grey Ox Mountains, beside dark sea cliffs with grassy rounded undulating contours, dropping down to Sligo Bay.
On the inland side of the bus, cattle grazed on the flanks of the mountains.
Silver plumes of snow lay across the peaks.
A grim building of thick stone walls stood alone in high-walled grounds in the middle of nowhere, filling me with foreboding.
It was Dromore Workhouse, a passenger told me, built for the relief of victims of the Potato Famine.
Dirt encrusted on the bus window gave a grainy texture to the scenery.
Fiddler's Elbow, a large pub by the wayside, was advertised by a giant wooden carving of a fiddle.
At the coastal town of Easky, two life-sized statues of cloth-capped old men appeared as if turned from flesh to blue-grey stone on the spot, one wheeling a bike, the other resting on a seat.
‘God Bless You As You Leave the Town of Easky’, a sign proclaimed.
The mountains had now been left behind, and we were in flat, windswept country, the bare trees all bending one way.
Easky's spire could be seen from the back window from many miles away.
Small cabins were dotted about at the side of fields, mostly ruined or used as farm sheds, but in some cases inhabited.
Green grass sprouted from the mouldy, neglected thatched roofs.
One lived-in cabin also had a grassy roof, as if the craft of thatching had died out locally.
Men with sacks were lifting potatoes, in furrowed fields, behind the cabins.
At Inishcrone, near Ballina, I could see the coast of County Mayo across wide Killala Bay.
I was amazed to see a gigantic black statue of a pig, made of plastic and very life-like, standing in somebody's front garden.
It was an advert for a fair.
Finally we arrived at Ballina, where the rushing River Moy joined the sea.
I would have to take a taxi back to Sligo once I had seen the sights, for there was no return bus.
There was little to see, for Ballina seemed to be the usual uphill-shopping-street Irish town.
Bunting and Irish flags made a bright display, still celebrating the bicycle race of weeks earlier, the one I had seen at Mullingar.
There was a good bookshop, and a large ruined building, gaunt and flaking, the Hibernian Hall.
Not far from the river stood a statue to General Humbert, with Irish words underneath, and verses from a ballad.
Humbert had landed at Killala, just across the bay.
Wolfe Tone, the aristocratic eighteenth-century Irish nationalist, had secretly arranged the arrival of a French invasion fleet.
However, the arrival of the French did not quite coincide with the national uprising of ‘98.
For a time, Humbert controlled part of the countryside, and his soldiers armed, clothed and fed the Irish peasants who flocked to join their banner.
David Thomson in Woodbrook , quotes extensively from the diaries of an Ascendancy-class bishop whose sympathies lay with the Irish poor.
Dr Joseph Stock, Bishop of Killala, describes how men ragged and barefoot fell on French army uniforms with whoops of delight, putting the clothes on wrong, holding guns upside down and so on.
Many of the French laughed at such antics, or felt disgusted at being allied with so ‘primitive’ a people.
The Irish bishop did not laugh, but looked on the behaviour of the peasants as a tragic folly that could lead only to their doom.
How right the bishop was!
Eventually Humbert was forced to surrender, handing his sword gravely to the English commander and being treated with all the honours of war and politeness of diplomacy.
Meanwhile, the English soldiery hunted down every Irishman suspected of helping the French and put them to death in a variety of ingenious fashions.
Corpses hung from gallows, heads were spiked on railings.
More people were put to death in Ireland than died in the French revolutionary Terror of the time.
However, the aftermath of the French Revolution suggests that Ireland's fate might have been equally unpleasant had Humbert succeeded in his mission.
The Royalist Roman Catholic French would probably have made better conquerors of Ireland, if Ireland had to be reconquered once more.
By now, rain had begun to fall, and I took refuge in the Imperial Hotel.
After a leisurely tea by a coal fire, I asked the clerk to phone for a taxi.
My driver proved to be a very spirited young lady in her thirties, with blond hair and blue jeans.
Her name was Mrs Mulhooley.
‘Could you take me for a spin through the country, and then on to Sligo?’
I asked, as the rain had stopped and I wished to see more of Killala Bay.
‘I'll take you to the town of Killala and back, and me husband will take you to Sligo’, she promised.
‘Have you been to Ireland before?
Look, that's what we call a ‘goat’.’
‘We have goats in England, too,’ I explained.
Outside Killala, many fields were flooded.
A gentle sun now emerged, the sea became blue, and low dune-shaped hills appeared on the far horizon.
Near Killala harbour, where the French had landed, I saw a pointed Round Tower, obviously very old.
Mrs M. parked the car in a street of stone houses, where steps led up to the tower.
However, a locked gate barred the way.
An elderly man was kneeling on the pavement, sawing a slice from the bottom of his front door, to prevent it from jamming.
‘Is it the tower that you want?
I have the key,’ he said, producing it.
‘That tower is eleventh century.
There's one like it at Glendalough, where St Kevin used to live.
Did you ever hear about St Kevin and that Kathleen?
Chasing him everywhere, she was.
He evidently didn't like women, hee hee hee.
Now I've got a key to the Protestant Cathedral also.
Would you like to see that, too?’
Young Mrs M. looked shocked at the thought, so she waited outside, while I sprinted in for a quick glimpse at Bishop Stock's former domain.
It was an old dark church, full of leftovers from the Harvest Festival, such as cabbages, turnips, sprays of wheat and petal-shedding flowers.
An American lady from Boston also looked in.
To my surprise, she had never heard of harvest festivals.
More of interest were the many memorials to well-known Ascendancy families, the Carys, the Kirkwoods and the Shaws.
Joyce Cary, one of my favourite writers, came from an Anglo-Irish background.
In his novels, the Carys became the ‘Corners,.
I gave the old man a tip, and soon Mrs M. and I were speeding back to Ballina.
On the way, we passed a whole family, mother, father, and five children, busily digging potatoes from a field.
By and by, Mrs M. stopped the car in a lonely place, and urged me to look at St Patrick's Well.
‘This is where St Patrick preached in the olden days!’ she declared, eyes shining with enthusiasm.
‘Have you heard of the Penal Times?
That stone is where they used to say Mass in thim days.’
The well bubbled into a tributary of the Moy, but unfortunately it had been hemmed in by modern concrete and so had lost a great deal of its charm.
A former pool had silted up and was turning into a miniature reed marsh.
Mrs M. darted around the waters with great vivacity.
There are as many Patrick Wells in Ireland as there are haunts of Robin Hood and King Arthur in England.
I once knew a man who had been brought up beside a Patrick's Well in County Limerick.
He told me that the sacred water was bottled and sold to Irishmen all over the world for its healing powers.
Skirting a tinker camp, Mrs M. eventually put me down beside the fast-flowing River Moy at Ballina.
Her husband was out with a fare in another car, and she radioed him to stop and pick me up on his way.
With that, Mrs M. gave a wave and vanished.
Several misgivings later, I was relieved to see a car stop, and so made the acquaintance of Peter Mulhooley.
A good-natured sandy-haired man, he welcomed me into his car with a smile, and then went on talking to the family sitting in the back, a young couple with a baby.
The father was a wild-haired rough-looking young man, very cheerful, and with such a strong local accent that at first I thought he was speaking Gaelic.
After a while, I kept catching the word ‘lottery’.
Shouting and laughing, the family disembarked at a broken-down council estate covered in rubbish.
‘That couple are not really married,’ Peter M. told me in wondering tones.
‘A few years ago you would niver have heard of such a thing.’
‘It's the same in England,’ I said primly, trying to recall if any of my relatives there had ever bothered to get married.
‘I was in London once, with another feller, and we got lost on the Underground,’ Peter said.
‘The other man had pretended he could use it, but he could not.
My brother-in-law's English, a kinder man you never would meet.
I was ashamed when he came here and walked in a bar.
As soon as the people heard his accent, they all began speaking in Irish, so.
Near here is my farm — we have sheep and cattle.’
We were driving along the coast road to Sligo, beside flat fields.
All at once, Peter M. slowed down beside the entrance to a narrow lane, or boreen.
‘May we just have a look down here?’ he asked appealingly.
‘There was an apparition down that road two or three year's ago, and they've got a shrine there now.
Our Lady was seen by many people, and they call it the shrine of Our Lady of Carns.
My wife's very religious now, she goes there to pray a lot.’
‘Has she ever seen anything?’
I enquired, as we drove down to the shrine.
‘She thinks she saw some lights in the sky once.
I've never seen anything myself.’
Suddenly, while driving reverently along, a thought occurred to Peter M. and he threw back his head and roared with laughter.
‘I've never heard anything so funny as Paisley accusing the Pope of being the Anti-Christ,’ he gasped, shaking and holding his ribs.
‘That Paisley, he's a terror!
He was an IRA man once, and learned all their secrets.
They dasn't shoot him, or he'd be a martyr.
I don't hold with what's going on up North — if Britain ever left, there'd be another Civil War.’
Soon we reached the shrine, a car-park-like space beside the road in which stood a large glass tank containing a painted figure of Mary looking with pity on Jesus crucified.
Rows of benches with damp kneeling pads stood before the display.
While I admired the figures, Peter kneeled and prayed with his eyes shut.
Finally he drove back to the main road.
‘When Our Lady appeared, the Church at once offered to buy the field,’ Peter told me.
‘The farmer wouldn't sell, but then his cattle got ill.
Still he wouldn't sell for them to build a shrine, so the cattle began to die.
With that he gave in and sold.
At once, all the sick cattle got well.’
‘What are those black tarpaulins for, in the fields there?’
I asked, when we had returned to the main road.
Black shiny mounds of tarpaulins were weighed down near the ground by rows of large stones.
‘I call them ‘whales’, ‘cause that's what they look like.
They're to cover and protect the silage, made of spoiled hay.’
Two very smart policemen, in caps and polished buttons, stood in the middle of the main road, stopping each car and questioning the driver.
I was reminded of the priest's tale of the Mountbatten murder.
‘Everything in order? they asked.
Peter nodded, and we were waved through.
‘That's funny.
I never saw them two fellers before, they're new to me,’ Peter told me.
I never learned who they were looking for.
Peter M. began talking about farm animals.
‘It's useful to know a good bone-setter,’ he said.
‘The seventh son of a seventh son can heal both beasts and men.’
We drove into Sligo, where Peter shook my hand warmly and wished me luck.
As a parting gift, he gave me a copy of the Mayo Post and Advertiser , a sprightly, humorous and well-written paper.
I was glad I had met the Mulhooleys.
On my last full day in Sligo Town, I decided to take a taxi southeasterly into County Leitrim, and if possible see Woodbrook, the house brought to life by the able pen of David Thomson.
My driver was a cheerful young man named Adrian Scanlon, who boasted a curly moustache.
He told me of a visit he'd made to California.
While over there, he had gone into Mexico for the day.
On his way back into the USA, he found himself faced by a stern row of Immigration Officials.
‘It was so easy going out of America, I never realised it would be hard to get in!
And me with my passport in California, miles and miles away!
Luckily, the Immigration Officer who chose me turned out to be a Sligo man!
After askin’ how everything was doing back home, he waved me through with a laugh.
After that I found that if I iver was in trouble far from home there'd always be a Sligo man somewhere to help me.’
He drove along the Arigna Valley, beside the river of that name.
It was a sunny day, and the rolling hills smiled peacefully down at us, some wearing dark beards of conifer plantation.
‘My grandmother remembered when those trees were planted,’ Adrian told me.
‘She died not long ago, aged ninety-three.
When she was ninety, I gave her a surprise birthday party in a pub near here, on top of a hill.’
Adrian seemed very fond of his grandmother, and spoke of her kindly as he drove from lough to lough, through enchanted countryside.
Little Lough Shean led into middle-sized Lough Meenagh, until finally we faced an inland sea, Lough Allen, one of the bigger bulges in the River Shannon.
Where the great lake joined the river, at Drumshanbo, we headed directly southward and soon were in neat white Leitrim Village, a row of houses up and down a hillside street.
A corner shop was being repaired, the owners and workmen outside talking animatedly.
Adrian asked them the way to Woodbrook, then came back and told me that there was a ruined castle behind the shop.
I went over to see, and a girl from the shop pointed eagerly towards a stone wall and a tree in which two boys were climbing.
‘That's Rourke's Castle.
There's not much left of it, but its history is all in this magazine,’ she said.
I bought the magazine,Shannonside , and found it to be very interesting.
As I looked at the few stones that remained of the castle, I learned from the magazine that the Irish-built castle of the local kings, the O'Rourkes, had once towered over the local countryside.
Brian O'Rourke, the builder, had intended the castle as a war fortress for his use when plundering neighbouring kings and chieftains.
That was in 1540.
Thirty years later, the castle had become the O'Rourke stronghold against the encroaching English.
Other O'Rourke castles had been demolished to prevent the English taking them over, for they had stood too close to the Elizabethan English garrison at Sligo Town.
Finally, Leitrim Castle was destroyed by the English in 1603.
Part of the remaining walls became incorporated into a police barracks in the nineteenth century.
By a strange twist of fate, an O'Rourke was the leader of the local branch of the IRA in 1920.
He led an attack on what ought to have been his own castle, and blew it up with dynamite!
So much for Leitrim's Castle.
The most romantic episode in the strange history of the castle had taken place in 1588, the year of the Spanish Armada.
Storms had wrecked the Spanish fleet on the shores of West Ireland, and the refugees had been welcomed and cared for by the Irish people.
Such kindness outraged Sir Richard Bingham, nominal English governor of Connaught.
All Spaniards, and all those who sheltered them, he declared, were to be put to death.
Nevertheless, the O'Rourke of the day offered hospitality and refuge to Captain Francisco de Cuellar and his crew, survivors of the wrecked galleon San Pedro .
It must have been a strange sight in a land of Celtic war chiefs, dressed in Highland-type garb, to see the proud, aristocratic De Cuellar in fine Spanish attire, pulling a face as he sipped the O'Rourke potheen and thought of his native wine.
De Cuellar returned safely to Spain, where he wrote an account of his Irish adventure.
Like Humbert's French of later times, he regarded the Irish as well-disposed ‘primitive people’.
According to Shannonside , he described ‘Señor de Reurque’ as follows: ‘Although this man is a savage, he is a very good Christian and an enemy of heretics, always carrying on war with them.’
After some zigging and zagging, Adrian Scanlon and I reached the golf course outside Carrick-on-Shannon, said to lie on the old Woodbrook estate.
There was-no sign of a mansion, so I knocked at a cottage door and enquired.
‘Woodbrook is just at that gate with the lodge house — keep right on straight,’ the housewife pointed.
‘That was a wonderful book David Thomson wrote about it — I'm so sorry to hear he died.
He and his wife Martina came here to Woodbrook not long ago.
‘I once had a drink with David Thomson at Camden Town in London,’ I said, ‘and I know Martina slightly.’
‘Are there lots of writers in London?’ the housewife asked excitedly, then grew wistful.
‘When you go back, tell Martina that Molly Maxwell is in the nursing home now.
You remember the Maxwells from the book?
My name is Rose Mannion, but I don't think Martina would remember me.
Since that book was written, people come to see Woodbrook all the time.’
The wooden gate was broken and the hedge overgrown.
Most of the beeches that had been a feature of Woodbrook had been felled.
Half hidden by brambles and long grass, the little Gothic lodge house, almost a fairy dwelling, looked at us sadly with a black eye or poked-out ecclesiastical window.
I think this had been the former jockey's house, for the Kirkwoods of Woodbrook survived into the middle of the twentieth century by breeding racehorses.
Adrian Scanlon insisted on driving up to the front door, once I had opened the gate.
A friendly orange dog came to greet us, but no human was visible.
The present owners seemed to be living around the back of the house, beside junk-filled stables.
Part of the mansion had been demolished, but the front door still looked impressive, a large window on either side.
Now painted an off-cream colour, the house had a forlorn air of sagging decrepitude, the paint flaking.
I peeped through the two windows.
One room was furnished scantily, in suburban style.
The other was used as a store room, a pathetic fate, since the tall window and high ceiling spoke of better days.
A step-ladder, cans of paint, a sack of potatoes and assorted rubble lay where Kirkwoods once had frolicked.
I had been expecting this, for David Thomson had written of Woodbrook's fall from splendour once the Maxwell family had succeeded in buying house and grounds from the former landlords, the Kirkwoods.
Living in a stately home is an art, acquired by upbringing.
Nobody who was not born in a manor house should aspire to one, for if he gets his wish, what a mess that manor house soon will be!
According to Rose Mannion, the Maxwells had now sold the house to someone else.
A man of simplicity and goodness, as I have said earlier, David Thomson took many of the remarks made by disgruntled locals too seriously, and so was perhaps a little harsh on the Anglo-Irish, or Ascendancy.
Whatever he wrote about Kirkwoods of past ages, no one could have written a better tribute to a family than did Thomson when he described Major Kirkwood and the rest of the present-day family.
They come across as a splendid reminder of the days, only just past, when the English and Irish upper class had not become embittered and still looked on their poorer neighbours with sympathy and kindly humour.
As the Kirkwood tutor, young David seemed as anxious as his employer-friends that the estate should survive.
Major Kirkwood is depicted in the book as a nobleman and a gentleman in the best sense of both words.
It was unfortunate, perhaps, that Thomson should have written so ardently of the love he felt for Phoebe Kirkwood, his pupil, when he was eighteen years old and Phoebe only twelve.
Nothing came of this love, but it might have been more tactful, in the aftermath of Phoebe's tragic death, for Thomson to have used pseudonyms.
However, had he done so, I would not have known how to find Woodbrook.
As it was, I felt thrilled to be walking on the same ground that young Thomson had trodden long before.
‘Whenever we came back to Woodbrook after a long absence, the servants would always have a fire and a meal ready to greet us,’ Phoebe's sister Antoinette once told me.
‘When we asked how they knew we were coming, they would solemnly say that they had seen the Little People lighting candles in all the windows.
There was a ring of thorn trees that we never cut, d'ye see? for they said 'twould annoy the Little People.’
I looked back at the house as Adrian drove away.
There were no candles burning in the windows.
Today the new Little People, those who dance nightly on the television screen, have ousted the old.
We drove through Boyle, a town whose hill had proved agonizing to the bicycle-racers, and around yet another wide lake, Lough Key.
The high tops of the Curlew Mountains loomed in the distance.
Nearing Sligo, we passed Collooney, where General Humbert and his French-Irish army had defeated the British.
At Ballysadare, just outside Sligo Town, Adrian grew excited.
‘That's my father's house, the one with the black roof!’ he cried.
‘My other relatives live over there.
You see the old mill?’
Once more I glanced at the large flour mill, temporarily closed, despite the addition of a new silvery turbine engine to take the place of water power.
‘Yes, I see it.’
‘Long before my time, when my great-grandmother was a young girl, she would bring the men at the mill their dinners hot under a covered tray,’ he said earnestly.
‘One day she had brought the dinners and started home, when for some reason she looked back.
The whole mill was afire, with sheets of flames!
A man leaped down from a window five storeys high and drowned in the river.
Terrible, it was!
There was a ballad composed on the event.
My great-grandmother taught it to her daughter, my grandmother, and my grandmother taught it to me.
Shall I sing it to you?’
‘Yes, please.’
Come all ye loyal heroes
Wherever that you be,
Come and pay attention
And listen now to me.
Concerning this sad accident,
A burning now beware,
And pray for those who lost their lives
In the Mills of Ballysadare.
It was on a Thursday evening
As quick as you could hear,
After coming from their dinners
With neither dread nor fear…
‘No one knows how it happened!’
Adrian burst out in his normal voice.
‘It's still a complete mystery!
Well, I'll get on with my rhyme…‘
And eight or nine of those young men
Were burned in their prime.
There was a man on the top loft,
For mercy he did cry.
He was mangled in the river rocks
After lepping five storeys high.
To hear those weeping widows
From your heart would take a tear,
We may cry and weep in sadness
Round the Mills of Ballysadare…
‘…
that was taught me by my grandmother, Annie Scanlon.
Well, here we are at Sligo.’
‘Let me out at Wine Street,’ I asked the balladeer, as I prepared a silver handshake.
There is said to be a grandmother at Ross Carbery who can sing the whole of ‘The Battle of Ross Carbery’, another local ballad.
If more men like Adrian would listen to their grandmothers, then Irish songbooks would be a lot fatter than they are.
There was still a light in the window of Michael Quirke's shop, so I called to wish the woodcarver goodbye.
On the morrow I would be off to Donegal.
Somebody had broken the glass door of the shop, but Michael wasn't worried.
‘There's a piece of teak I've carved into a hex sign up there,’ he pointed out.
‘That means ‘Keep away from me door’.’
He had now completed the leprechaun shoemaker, whose hammer could be taken out and replaced at will.
Even as we spoke, a young lady came in and bought the little creature for fifteen pounds, hammer and all.
‘So you've been to Woodbrook?
The wife wanted David Thomson to address the Literary Society here, but the committee shot her down in flames.
Thomson's not Irish, you see.’
Just then Michael's wife and a teenage person stole quietly into the shop from the rear and began working on the lettering of a ‘Fiddler of Dooney’ carving.
‘This must be Mrs Quirke and your daughter,’ I said brightly.
‘No,son ’, I was corrected, and the poor boy blushed bright red.
‘Yes, this is my wife, Eithne.
You know, Eithne was the mother of Sigurd the Fat of Orkney…‘
The present-day Eithne laughed.
She was a good-looking dark-haired lady.
‘I suppose you know this is all heresy!’ she said, gesturing at the Irish gods, who stared back impassively.
‘We've gone back to the old gods, in defiance to the Church.’
‘Don't you go to Mass?’
I asked Quirke, who shook his head.
‘What do your parents think?’
‘My father approves of this — he never really believed all he heard from the priest.’
It seemed to me that the Quirkes gloried in the poetry of paganism, but were not true pagans, eager to propitiate feared gods with flame and sacrifice.
Nor did I see how gods worshipped in days of continual tribal war and plunder could adjust themselves to the world where Peace is an ideal — the Christian world.
Gods whose ways co-existed with farming and nature now functioned all the better in the guise of saints.
I brought the conversation back to David Thomson.
‘When I told the Society I wanted to ask David Thomson over to address one of our meetings, no one said a word,’ Eithne told me.
‘They didn't want to admit they'd never heard of him.
So I lent out some of his books, and they straight away came back and said, ‘He's not Irish, he's Scottish.’
If he'd been Irish, they would have paid his fare over.
And now he is no more.’
After murmuring words of consolation, I asked her how she'd felt when her husband gave up being a butcher and devoted his life to carving the gods.
‘I was pleased, and I still am!’ she said, beaming round at the wooden gods.
They all made a jolly family.
My bus driver, in the morning, spoke in a guttural Derry accent.
The coach was the Dublin to Derry Express.
I was glad to hear the accent, for it reminded me of my exciting days in Northern Ireland, recounted elsewhere.
Luckily I found a window seat, as passengers with bags were struggling in.
Soon we were off, heading northward, along the coastal road.
A sense of something old, strange and eerie came over me as we passed directly below Benbulbin, that strange grey-green mountain, chief link in the chain that guarded Ulster and has made it the most separate of Irish provinces from the beginning of time.
Benbulbin ought to have been called Benbulbous, for one end of the barbaric table bulged upward in a great curve, with lesser knuckle-shapes on each side.
As the coach swung around the mountain's impressive edge, directly below the vast height, I looked up and seemed to see the grimly laughing face of one of the woodcarver's gods.
On a near-perpendicular mountainy field, a flock of seagulls screeched behind a tractor, and men and women raw-handedly filled sacks with potatoes.
Then we continued northward, past Yeats' Drumcliff and Mountbatten's Classybawn Castle out on its headland.
Eventually we reached Beautiful Bundoran, a seaside resort overlooking blue Donegal Bay in the Province of Ulster.
Cream-coloured Regency guest houses reminded me of Weymouth.
Mountains could be seen across the bay.
There is a difference between Ulster and the troubled political entity of Northern Ireland.
All of Northern Ireland is in Ulster, yet not all of Ulster is in Northern Ireland.
Three counties of the Province of Ulster belong to the Irish Republic — Cavan, Monaghan and Donegal, where I now was.
So these three counties are in Limbo.
They had more Catholics than Protestants, and so voted for the Republic when Ireland was partitioned.
All the same, there are Orange Lodges in Donegal, which you wouldn't see in County Cork.
At Ballyshannon, where a bridge crossed the mouth of the River Erne, we were very close to County Fermanagh in Northern Ireland.
When the River Erne reaches Fermanagh, it broadens out into immense Lough Erne, a fragmented inland sea of a thousand islands that bisects the whole county and reaches clear to Cavan in the south.
Here, in the 1960s, Hugh Malet rediscovered fierce pagan idols glowering in the undergrowth of Boa Island on the lough.
At the wasp-waist of the lough is the town of Enniskillen, scene of tragic murders, yet in itself the most delightful of neighbourhoods.
Meanwhile we were at Ballyshannon, with its tall church spire seen from far away, its ‘Old Barracks Bar and Lounge, 1700’ and a strange bell-and-weathercock tower that now housed a jeweller's shop.
On rolled the coach, around the bar to the estuary of the River Eske, another river that become a lough inland.
Here stood Donegal Town, and here I dismounted, with my red, white and blue bag.
I found myself in a smart town square surrounded by glittering bars, hotels and souvenir shops.
Without difficulty I found a Bed and Breakfast house, equally smart and highly polished, and settled down for a pre-exploratory nap.
Ruins in Donegal
Donegal Town square, I discovered, was known as the Diamond.
I hurried across the Diamond, down to the shore, where the River Eske meets Donegal Bay.
A giant anchor, embedded in concrete, ornamented a small jetty.
There was no sandy beach, and as this part of the bay was an inlet, I felt as if I were standing beside a great lake, not the Atlantic Ocean.
Three Innisfree-like islands, beautifully wooded, lay out at sea.
On my right, across the river, steep forested banks rose up from the water.
I could see a white hound running through the trees.
A blue-grey heron glided to rest on a pebbly strand, and a cormorant flew high overhead like a goose.
To my left, steps led up to a hummocky cliff edge, on which reposed the fragmented remains of a Franciscan friary.
I roamed around archways leading nowhere and windows framed by stone walls standing in isolation.
Catholic graves, ancient and modern, occupied most of the ground.
A shower of gravel barely missed me, hurled by naughty boys who played among the ruins, ambushing one another.
They scooped gravel from the paths and carried it in apron-pouches made from their jerseys.
A green metal notice told me that the abbey had been built in 1474, by O'Donnell, Prince of Tyrconnel, and his wife Nuala.
Back at the anchor vantage point, I met a dreamy-eyed tramp-like man of about fifty.
He told me of his travels from one Bed and Breakfast to another, from Galway to Sligo to Donegal.
In fact he could have been me, except that he had had the initiative to ask the landladies if he could stay cheaper by foregoing the second ‘B’— the breakfast.
If only I had his nerve, think of the greasy eggs and tough bacon I could have been spared!
‘Do you think I could get a job in London?
I can drive a tractor,’ he said, and went on to speculate at length on the possibilities of the English dole.
In the end, I could only escape by galloping off, leaving him in full flow, and diving into a shop.
Thereafter, I browsed around the shops of the Diamond.
The shop people seemed a little sharp.
They banged my change down quickly, as if nervous of the English.
Donegal folk were dark-haired good-looking people, with a touch of Scottish gravity.
A newspaper told the sad story of a six-year-old boy with an incurable illness.
‘When we found out, we let him drink, smoke and swear,’ the boy's father told reporters.
‘We wanted him to experience everything life has to offer.
He had a beautiful death.
His mother played the recorder, while we all sang.’
A locally printed ballad book contained all-new material composed by a local accordion player.
The songs were not very good, with irregular rhymes and metres, but included oddities such as a lengthy ballad recounting the adventures of the characters of Dallas .
Another song, with no irony intended, celebrated Dole Day in the author's village, evidently the big drinking day of the week for neighbouring farmers.
One of the largest shops of the Diamond was Magee's, the tweed shop, which sold expensive clothes and souvenirs.
Later I was to see Magee's huge tweed factory, or mill, on the outskirts of town, a building that resembled a giant Gothic grammar school with stained glass office windows.
Away from the square, near my Bed and Breakfast, I discovered the Roman Catholic Church of the Four Masters, standing on a rise.
Apparently the Four Masters were seventeenth-century Franciscans from the Friary, who wrote a pro-Catholic history of Donegal.
Built of soft brown stone, the church closely adjoined a tall pointy-roofed Round Tower with a cross on top.
This tower was visible from some way away, and with its backdrop of dark conifer-forested hills, it reminded me very much of the tower at Glendalough.
I assumed that a medieval abbey had been restored, as at Holy Cross.
However, a friendly priest emerged and told me that the whole church had been built, in an old-fashioned style, in 1935.
The Round Tower was in reality the church tower.
Inside, I heard mutterings from a Confession box, but stifled my curiosity and hurried away.
Almost on the opposite corner to the chapel stood Donegal Castle, its gateway locked, for the ruins were unsafe.
The O'Donnells of Donegal had built a stone Tudor mansion on the site of a twelfth-century castle, and the walls that remained were of surprising elegance.
Probably rose gardens had flourished here at one time.
A tower loomed over the roofless mansion, and beyond it, the spire of the Church of Ireland could be seen.
During the Penal Times, Catholics must have thought spires a Protestant invention.
Few were built when the nineteenth-century wave of Roman Catholic churches and cathedrals began.
All over Ireland, a spire proclaims an Anglican church.
Steps led down to the banks of the river, and from the water's edge, the ruins of the castle dominated the skyline.
The name ‘Donegal’ means ‘Fort of the Strangers’.
Both Scots and English, acting independently, have made Ulster a province of many races.
It was the habit of the Elizabethan English, when dividing the provinces into counties, to name each new county after the town with which the namers were most familiar.
Counties Leitrim, Louth and Mayo have been named after towns which nowadays have shrunk to the size of villages.
Damp leaves, moist air and a faint atmosphere of dereliction made my riverside walk feel sadly autumnal.
Soon I reached the Diamond once more.
It was a Saturday afternoon, and the square was filling up with cars.
Young blonde tinker girls begged from passers-by, holding ‘babbies’ that were obviously not theirs, wrapped in shawls.
Posters advertised a local singer, Bluestack Bill.
I headed out of town and found the path through the woods where earlier I had seen the white hound running.
Yellow-brown leaves spun downwards from high branches, and the calm estuary waters could be seen below, from between the trees.
I could see a heron standing motionless, and a curlew dabbling by the shore.
Three pairs of young lovers walked by, hand in hand, whispering dreams of emigration.
My path ended in thick undergrowth, just where the estuary widened into the sea.
Dark pines and yellow birches lay ahead, as the shoreline curved to meet me.
Beyond these woods lay the round green hills of Donegal's farmland, not unlike England's South Downs, the fields bounded by tall hedges.
In the soft evening light, I retraced my steps back to town, soothed by the songs of blackbirds and chaffinches.
Wagtails swooped across my path, and from the mouth of the Eske, curlews called shrilly to one another like owls.
Bells rang on Sunday morning, and with some trepidation, I followed the crowds to the Roman Catholic church for Mass.
When in Rome…
The bright strip-pine interior of the church (or chapel) was absolutely packed with worshippers, like a Tube train in London's rush hour.
This was only one of several Masses that were to take place that day.
Nearly everyone in town would be attending at least one service there.
I was sandwiched between two big men who joked over my head about how squashed they all were.
One of the men fondly dandled his two-year-old son on his knee.
Teenagers with sporty slogans on the back of their jackets sat attentively amid the rest of the crowd.
After a song and a prayer, a priest in green vestments came on and preached a long sermon warning us all not to misuse authority.
Finally he asked us to pray to be forgiven for the times when we had misused our authority.
I could not remember when I last had any authority over anyone.
However, if anyone were misguided enough to give me authority, I would certainly misuse it, so I prayed along with the rest.
Every word of speech, song and prayer was in English, a great change from the services to which an Irish friend had taken me in 1960s Brighton.
There the rise and swell of incomprehensible Latin seemed to have a grandeur that aroused the spirit of poetry in the Gaels, as if they stood on a rocky shore communing with the waves.
People in Donegal listened earnestly to the priest, craning forward as if to show him that they were there, but did not seem to be taking in the words.
‘When I see the old truck you drive, I'll give it a slap,’ the little blond boy on my right said to his father, slapping him heartily in demonstration.
‘Why have you got a black eye?’ the child asked, a moment later.
Probably it was since he last had slapped the poor man.
Receiving only whispers for a reply the boy wriggled down and sat under his father's feet.
‘When can we go home?’ he suddenly enquired in piercing tones.
‘When the priest has finished,’ the boy's father muttered, looking very embarrassed.
Holy Communion was taken prior to the end of the service but to my relief not all the worshippers took part.
So although I sat tight as the communicants went forward I was not too conspicuously a Protestant.
‘Lord, our Mass is over,’ the choir sang in sweet, lilting voices as everyone walked down the hill into town once more.
Family parties chattered happily, and single people hummed the choir's song to themselves, as they walked.
During my travels round Ireland, I had been reading Sleeman's Rambles and Recollections of an Indian Magistrate .
Sleeman's Indian journeys, his great interest in local customs and religious beliefs, his explorations of temples and ruins wherever he went in pre-Mutiny India, helped me to see the Irish as an Indo-European people.
I sensed that the people of Donegal felt faintly disappointed at having such a rational church service.
The return of Latin would make them feel as if they were experiencing something mysterious and exalted, something greater than themselves.
Hindu worshippers gather round a holy man in order to absorb Goodness from his aura.
They don't expect to understand anything he says.
If he is completely silent, they are more than satisfied, if only they can see him.
Something of this attitude survives in Ireland.
I made my way to an hotel lounge in the Diamond, where I sat and read a leaflet I had picked up in the church.
It concerned the appearance of Our Lady of Fatima, in Portugal, who appeared to a group of peasant children, sitting on top of an oak tree.
The day was still dank and moist when I emerged, but I called a taxi from the rank outside, and asked to be taken to the ruins of Holford House, once the home of Mr Harvey-Beaumont.
This visit was to be my last tribute to the Ascendancy.
‘I'm thinking I know where that is,’ said the driver, an elderly man.
There was but a touch of the harsh, ironic but humorous Ulster accent that I knew, in the tones of his speech.
Soon we were driving alongside Lough Eske, the waters below me on my left, shining in the mist.
Wooded islands, in pastel shades of orange, yellow and brown, appeared and disappeared in the soft vaporous whiteness.
Bold and clear, on my right and ahead of us, stood the craggy Blue Stack Mountains, rearing their heads in strange volcanic attitudes.
Bluestack Bill, the singer, must have come from these damp Colorado badlands.
‘I'm seeing that white bothy down there,’ the driver informed me, pointing out a delightful cabin with a golden thatched roof.
‘That's a German family live there.
Ah, what fine people they are, the Germans!
They try their hardest to fit in here, and now our two countries are growing together, I'm thinking.
Irish pop groups are forever going to Germany now.’
Fortunately the driver made up for this heresy by roundly cursing the French, whom he disliked for the same reason that most Englishmen do — the way they clutter up the place, never get out of the way and can't speak English.
‘Holford House…’ the driver mused.
‘Now which one is that?
It's all ruins here.
See down by the water, that big house is empty.
It used to be a hotel.
There's a gateway over at that forestry plantation, and there was once a castle there.
The O'Donnells had a castle hereabouts, I'm thinking.
There is a bar by the roadside, further on, and I'll enquire there, as I think the landlady used to work for the Harvey-Beaumonts.
‘I'm seeing my way right now,’ the driver told me, as he came out of the bar, followed by the landlady.
The old lady ran up to me fervently, her hair wild.
‘Are you one of the young Harvey-Beaumonts, from over in England?’ she asked excitedly.
‘Good Heavens no!
I have met some of them, that's all.’
‘I was a maid there in the Big House when I was a girl,’ she continued, obviously still thinking I might be a modest Harvey-Beaumont in disguise.
‘Great landlords they were — wonderful people!
You should have seen the house in the old days!
Oh, so beautiful inside!
The Mulverins have a farm there now — they used to be the stewards when I was a girl.
Old George Mulverin has died, and it's his son you'll find there.
It's all a ruin now, the famous Bower and all.’
I promised to remember her to the Harvey-Beaumonts ‘over the water’, and we set off once more, along a road that ran beside a demesne wall.
A large iron gateway sagged permanently open, beside a lodge house and a cattle grid.
Beyond the grid, the grounds had become pastureland, the curving driveway a tractor-rutted swamp.
‘You wait here, while I pay my respects to my friend's house,’ I told the driver, and galloped in.
Nervously, I edged past the lodge house, which had been flashily restored, and was evidently lived in.
No one stopped me, so I followed the edge of the path round to the house.
A most curious maze of ruined stone walls covered in ivy emerged from a mass of brambles.
I went over to have a look, but found the jungle impenetrable.
Artificial ruins had now become real, and secular grottos and Gothic-whimsy hermitages were impossible to distinguish from caved-in summer houses and heaps of fallen masonry 'mid the briars.
This was the site of Fair Rosamund's Bower, once a rose garden, Japanese garden, maze, hermitage and Folly, a trysting place for young people who thought the days of dancing and fox-hunting would never end.
A small roofless house nearby now played host to a large tree growing out of the middle of the floor.
Another tree, recently felled, lay by its side.
I returned to the tractor-path and in a few moments saw Holford House standing before me on a rise.
Grooves in the pastureland showed where the drive had swung round to the front door.
The tractor ruts led straight on to a farm gate.
Abandoned in 1947, when barely a hundred years old, the mansion still looked imposing in its new guise of romantic ruin.
Holford House now had a knobbly look, the immense chimneys standing inside roofless walls, covered in thick blankets of ivy.
The stonework was pale orange in colour, and jutted out in ridges and patterns around the empty frames of doors and windows.
Wide-eyed in reproach, those windows must once have been the glory of Holford.
Heart filled with pathos, I slipped through one of the windows, and stepped gingerly around the saplings and splintered tiles, afraid I might crash into the cellar.
Ivy grew around the columns left between doorways and windows, and turned them into foliated columns.
These were twisting, turning ivy trees, with thick trunks.
New windows with odd shapes had been created in draping curtains and walls of ivy.
A ceiling and first floor had vanished except for lines of ledges along the wall.
Bushes grew in the arched front doorway, and a wintry wind whistled round the peaks of the Blue Stack Mountains and the chimneys of Holford House.
Stepping over a ridge along the floor, I found myself beside an immense open fireplace, all trace of grate and mantelpiece removed.
A window-hole looked out on flooded pastureland below, a ruined stable, a kitchen garden that now contained a newly built bungalow, and a working farmyard with a tractor and cows.
The former stewards, the Mulverins, were obviously in residence.
Crossing the humpy floor, I looked out of a doorless doorway and saw, half hidden in the grass, the red tiles of the porch where the young Harvey-Beaumonts had sat, celebrating St George's Day by tapping their feet to the brassy music of the band of the Black and Tans.
No wicker chairs could be seen there now, only a rusty harrow baring its teeth in the long grass like a mantrap.
Names of infant Mulverins had recently been scratched on to the wall.
To give the children a surprise on their next visit, I took a small toy lion from my plastic carrier bag and pressed it into a hole in the edge of the doorway.
Then I hurried back to the taxi.
So that was the last roar of the English lion at Holford House.
To my consternation, I found the taxi was empty.
Looking round, I found the farm entrance, where my driver and young Mulverin the farmer both greeted me cheerfully.
A jovial, curly-headed man, Mulverin was squelching around in a muddy yard outside the cowshed, mucking out with a spade.
Friesian cattle snorted and frothed behind a railing.
‘Me mother said one o’ the Harvey-Beaumonts came back not long ago, and prised the name of a horse long-dead from the top o’the stable door!’he bellowed.
‘I'm sorry the house is so spoiled!
It's the rates what did it!’
‘Yes, the rates!
More than a pity!’ my driver agreed.
A light rain began to fall, so with a wave to Mulverin, we were off.
When we neared the outskirts of Donegal Town, the driver told me that the former maid suspected young Mulverin of pillaging the Big House for building material.
‘What's more, she said it was haunted after the living members o’ the family moved out in 1947,’he added.
‘George Mulverin had to get the Jesuits in to exorcise the house.’
Musing on all I had seen, I hummed an old Eileen Donaghue song, ‘The Homes of Donegal’.
Seeing the look of pain on my driver's face, I asked him what had become of Eileen, ‘The Girl from County Donegal’, possessor of one of the purest ballad voices I know, with a hint of Irish mischief.
‘Eileen, is it?
I'm thinking she should o’ been called the Girl from County Tyrone, as that's where she's from in reality.
Her son plays football for Tyrone.
Bridie Gallagher, now she's a Donegal singer.’
‘Yes, I like her, too.
Remember ‘Home to Mayo’?
What about Bluestack Bill?’
‘Bluestack Bill!’
He began to laugh.
‘He's one o’ the singers who work for Radio Glencoe right here in town.
That's our very own pirate radio.
Do you want me to take you there?
They'll be going on the air, soon.’
‘Have they got a secret hideout?’
I asked.
‘No, they're in a room behind the cinema,’ he said, pulling up and showing me a light in a doorway, up some steps.
‘Everyone knows where they are.
If you want to know about Donegal music, they're the boys to tell you.’
Thanking the kindly driver, I knocked at the door of Radio Glencoe.
A Reception lady showed me into a tiny broadcasting room full of switched-off microphones.
There I met Peter Cannon, the youthful Pirate King.
He was a friendly, freckled young man of eighteen, with shoulder-length hair.
Peter shared the dingy three-room studio with sixteen other disc-jockeys, working in shifts.
‘The music we play is country and Irish,’ he told me.
‘We can be heard all over Donegal and Northern Ireland, and now we're getting fan letters from the west coast of Scotland.
All pirate stations, such as ours, have to close at the end of December.
After that we can apply for a licence and hope they let us ‘go legal’.’
‘Why are you called after Glencoe, a horrible place in Scotland?’
‘Well, we originally started at a place outside o’ town, called Glencogh.
It somehow got turned to Glencoe.
During the week, I work in a music shop, and my ambition is to be a professional guitarist.
We promote local artists — there are some of their pictures.’
‘Do musicians ever play here in the studio?’
I asked.
‘Yes, when we have a traditional music show, that's all-Irish, they bring the instruments in here.
That corner's reserved for accordion players.
Here's one of our most popular singers — Bluestack Bill.
He's named after the Blue Stack Mountains outside town.’
He pressed a button, and I heard B. B. singing in a voice midway between high-pitched Irish balladeering and smooth country and western crooning, able to leap in two directions.
He played sweet hillbilly guitar and sang lilting modern Irish ballads such as‘Summertime in Ireland’ and ‘At Home in Old Kilcar’.
‘Kilcar's a little town further west along the coast,’ Peter Cannon explained.
‘Last question coming up — what are your hopes for the future at Radio Glencoe?
All this is going in a book.’
‘Well, we'd like more adverts, so we can make more money and expand a bit.
Can't you think of anything else to ask me?’ he appealed.
‘No,’ I confessed, so we parted, and I wandered out into the night humming ‘Summertime in Ireland’.
Enniskillen Interlude
On Monday morning, I stood in a queue at the Diamond, and waited for the Dublin coach.
It came at last, a huge long-distance coach, with high steps in the doorway.Soon we were off, heading south on the coastal Sligo Road.
When we crossed the River Erne, at Ballyshannon, we turned inland, driving between hilly green fields and wet woodland, near the banks of the river.
There was a long halt, as a traffic jam piled up ahead.
I thought no more of it, and stared vacantly into space, wishing that the weather would improve so that I could have a better look at the scenery.
All at once, I sat up as if electrified, for we had driven into a large corrugated iron compound, and there were British soldiers everywhere!
I remembered such clearing-compounds from my 1982 trip around Northern Ireland.
We were at the Border, about to cut across County Fermanagh in British Northern Ireland, the better to get to Dublin on time.
No one else on the coach seemed surprised.
A tall muscular Lance-Corporal (I think) in a red beret and camouflage suit stepped into the doorway of the coach, gave us all a knowing look, and stepped out and nodded us through the outer gate.
How my heart leaped to see a red pillar box once more, on the other side of the compound!
I was now back in Britain, in the official as well as the geographical sense.
Donegal post office had a ‘suggestions’ service, and I had suggested that all Irish pillar boxes be repainted red once more, instead of bureaucratic green.
Doubtless the authorities would not heed my plea, but here in County Fermanagh I could feast my eyes on red pillar boxes to my heart's content.
Our whole zig-zag through Northern Ireland followed the western shores of Lough Erne, Ireland's inland sea.
There was Boa Island, of the baleful idols, for we were staying on the inward side of Ulster's wall, the Dartry Mountains and the great haunted head of Benbulbin.
The lake grew narrow and we were at Enniskillen, where once I had spent many happy days at the Railway Hotel and Irish musical nights at the Cove Bar.
How strange again to see the grey château-like castle overlooking Lough Erne, and to recall a boat ride to a ruined monastery on one of the thousand islands!
We waited a long time at Enniskillen, an RAF helicopter buzzing above the castle.
I caught a soldier's harassed glance, and suddenly remembered a modern Ulster saying: ‘There were more helicopters than at Crossmaglen.’
(Crossmaglen is a rebel-held town in County Armagh, only nominally a part of Britain.
As the entry roads to Crossmaglen are often mined, soldiers go in and out by helicopter.)
Northern Ireland is a very interesting part of the world.
Although the shops are richly stocked compared to those of the Republic, Northern Ireland may bear a slight resemblance to a Communist country.
People cannot openly speak their minds or be quite at ease, in case they are being spied on —not by the KGB or the government, but by ‘patriot’ or ‘loyalist’terrorists.
I remembered buying an ‘Orange’ Protestant newspaper in Enniskillen and reading the editor's lament that no English literary type had a good word to say about Presbyterian loyalists.
As I know that many Presbyterian loyalists are decent, courageous Christian men and women, I wrote to the editor and begged to be excused from his dictum.
Then I ran into a snag — the newspaper had no printed address.
So I took my letter, sealed in an envelope, back to the newsagent.
‘The man that makes the paper just brings it in, on foot,’ the newsagent said, beginning to sweat.
‘Well, when he comes in, could you give him this envelope?’
I asked.
To my surprise, the newsagent seemed too afraid to speak, shaking, sweating and holding his palms up in refusal of my letter.
He was a big man, twice my size.
Patiently I told him what was in the envelope, bending it to and fro to show that it wouldn't explode.
In the end he reluctantly took the letter, though I don't know what happened to it.
In my blunderings around Enniskillen, I may have inadvertently done some harm, as foreigners do in Communist lands by innocently befriending natives who are then shadowed by the secret police and later imprisoned or shot.
I had contacts in Enniskillen through Ulstermen met in England.
Following these up, I went into a chemist's shop, introduced myself to the tall lady assistant and said that I was a friend of her future husband's brother.
She, a Catholic, was about to marry a Protestant policeman, a ‘mixed marriage’.
When I congratulated the poor girl, she almost fainted.
Later I learned that the wedding had nearly been postponed, as the two families thought I might have been a terrorist uttering a veiled warning against the nuptials.
Still, I had happier memories of Enniskillen: of the Horseshoe Lounge in the Railway Hotel (now an hotel without a railway) and a group named ‘Country Comrades’, who played Irish, Scottish and hillbilly tunes fast and slow, while the crowd whooped and danced merrily; of hillside fields and haycocks; of the Bronze Age burial chamber said to be a giant's grave; and of tales of the local footpack's exploits among the Ulster foxes.
I befriended a family named Armstrong, who told me that their ancestors had been deported to Northern Ireland from the Scottish borders in 1610.
Certainly the Armstrongs had been famous Border Reivers, or cattle rustlers, in the Debatable Land of Border Ballads and Sir Walter Scott's romances.
The Fermanagh Armstrongs seemed peaceable enough.
Some Reiver families went further afield, to America's Wild West, where their cattle-rustling instincts were once more allowed full rein.
Ulster Protestants have much in common with their close relatives, American cowboys and hillbillies.
Like Southern Baptists of Tennessee, many Northern Irish Presbyterians believe that the wine enjoyed by Jesus and His disciples must have been grape juice, since Christians do not drink alcohol.
Consequently, some Northern Irish restaurants serve bottled unfermented grape juice in place of wine.
‘Orange songs’, a body of fine traditional music ignored by left-wing folklorists, usually celebrate Protestant victories of the seventeenth century.
Hotheaded youths often sing them in order to provoke Catholics and start a fight.
It is as if cowboys besieged in forts on the Western plains were to compose endless anti-Apache ballads to Irish-Scottish traditional tunes.
In England, football hooligans have learned Orange songs, and are adapting them to their own purposes.
My Enniskillen reverie came to an end as we moved out of that city at last, and continued southward beside the great lough.
Below Enniskillen, the lough kept appearing and reappearing, interrupted by birch woodlands.
A map of Lough Erne resembles a giant spoonful of quicksilver emptied over Ireland to form and re-form in myriad fluid blobs.
Near Belturbet, we reached the Border once more, and drove into a small enclave.
A tiny fair-haired boy in army uniform walked jauntily up and down the bus with an air of chirpy innocence, holding a gun nearly as big as himself.
I suppose the lad may have been fifteen, sixteen or seventeen years old.
Everyone looked surprised.
A moment later we entered the Republic and County Cavan.
Between Belturbet and Cavan Town (where I had been before), Lough Erne fragmented into a series of lakes, with strange names such as Lough Parisee.
We crossed the River Annalee at Butler's Bridge, then stopped a while at Cavan, before continuing southeast to Kells, on the River Blackwater, where monks had once preserved the sacred Book.
I chatted to a Dublin-bound nurse in the seat beside me, and looked out as lakes, rivers and deeply-furrowed potato patches flashed by.
‘Navan!’ called the driver, and I jumped up and reached for my bag.
Working in Navan
As I struggled with my heavy bag at Navan, a strong old man ran to help me.
We wobbled down the road holding a handle apiece.
A few readers may remember that I had long ago arranged to spend two days drawing cartoons for children in the Navan shopping centre.
That was the reason why I had left the Dublin coach in County Meath, before reaching the city.
Now I had to reach the shopping centre and meet Ray Coary the manager, who would find me accommodation.
‘Why are there Irish flags everywhere?’
I asked my kind helper.
‘There's been a Gaelic football game.
Now, you go through that gap an’ you'll see the centre, so.’
Navan consisted of an attractive brick-and-tile shopping street, with a four-pronged C. of I. church that nobody used and a bridge over a river.
In short, it was Every Irish Town.
However, as I could now see, a vast area behind the shops had been cleared of housing and turned into an enormous shopping centre.
Two rival supermarkets faced one another across a tarmacked acreage of car park.
Behind the furthest supermarket stood the gigantic glittering indoor shopping centre where I was about to work.
In a sense, this huge construction had made the whole of Old Navan redundant, a quaint fringe on the edge of Shopping-Centre Land.
The old man went on his way, and I put my bag on a supermarket trolley and wheeled it off to look for Mr Coary.
In the entrance of the shopping centre, I stopped to examine a taxidermist's display.
A big brown otter, cleverly mounted, looked up at me with bright eyes.
(In England, taxidermy is considered a Victorian vice.)
Tropical plants with bright leaves and flowers made a colourful display, and the whole shopping centre was luxurious in the extreme, stuffed with goods and shoppers.
I met Mr Coary and Mr Rafter of the sewing-machine shop, and once the back-slapping was over, I set off in the manager's car for my new lodgings.
We drove out of town on the Dublin road, then swung up a lane, beside a Round Tower and monastic ruin.
Soon we arrived at Tower House, a suburban-style dwelling with a large front garden.
I felt like an invited rather than a paying guest, as I shook hands with Mr and Mrs Noone.
Mrs N. was a brisk youngish lady in a green track suit, and her husband was a detective in the Garda, a big gentle friendly man.
I was shown to my room, which had a view of the back garden and the Noones' paddock, where three sheep were grazing as the sun went down.
‘We hope for more sheep before long,’ Mrs Noone said.
Once I had unpacked, I set off down the lane to have a look at the Round Tower before dark.
Glancing up, I saw a beautiful yellow bird perched on a telegraph wire, looking like a prize long-tailed canary.
It was a yellow wagtail, seen from below, where its colours are finest.
After admiring the wagtail for a while, I went on until at last I reached the Round Tower.
All that was left of the monastery founded by St Patrick was a large stone Gothic doorway standing up on its own surrounded by grass and modern graves.
Donaghmore Tower, with a dark entrance halfway up, stood undamaged, pointing silently to the Heavens whence cometh our help.
Both looked eerie in the twilight.
I rejoined the lane, and walked back a little way towards Navan.
Near a tombstone-memorial by the wayside, I gazed on a crowd of boys.
They were busily heaving full potato sacks on to the back of a lorry parked in a field of stubble, beneath a bright half-moon.
Rows of sacks stood like dark harvest sheaves.
I am no farmer, or perhaps I could understand how wheat and potatoes can be grown at the same time in Ireland.
Back at the Noones', I enjoyed a snack in the front room, in the company of the good-looking teenage Noones, curly-headed Martin (or ‘Murt’) and his pink-cheeked sister, a wholesome girl who played guitar at the Folk Mass.
‘I want to be a fighter pilot when I leave school,’ said fourteen-year-old Martin.
‘Are you going to England, then, to join the RAF?’
‘No, I doubt if I could pass the exams.’
So saying, he slotted a video into the telly and began to watch old films of air fights in the Great War.
After a while, he took out one of his father's old police notebooks and started to draw aeroplanes.
Taking this as my cue, I produced my own drawing pad and began to draw google-eyed rabbits and donkeys, with great speed.
This endeared me to the young Noones.
‘Do many cartoonists stay here?’
I asked Martin.
‘No, you're the first one.
Usually we just have salesmen.’
With a groan, he took out his homework, which consisted of French and Irish.
‘We're lucky in England, as we don't have to learn Irish,’ I said.
‘You are that, so!’ he answered with feeling.
Bright and early next morning, I set off down the lane to work, my drawing pad and pens in my jauntily swinging plastic bag.
It's not often that someone can get paid for doing what they enjoy most.
Fiery gold and orange trees shed leaves which drifted down before a bright blue sky.
At breakfast, I had been given freshly home-made bread, and I felt at peace with the world.
Soon I reached the tombstone-memorial, possibly that of a person killed on that stretch of road.
Below the name and date of demise, the following lines had been engraved.
Well, he's walking through the clouds with a circus mind that's running wild.
Butterflies and zebras and moonbeams and fairy tales.
If anyone puts a verse like that on my headstone, I'm warning them right now that I'll get up and haunt them for ever.
I mean, why zebras?
Before long, the fields ended and Navan began.
I hurried down steep Flower Hill, a flowerless road of grey terraced houses and shops that led down to the bridge and the weir.
For a time I leaned on a rail and watched the rushing waters where the rivers Boyne and Blackwater combine.
I had met both rivers previously on my travels, and felt glad to be present at their marriage.
In the shopping centre, I was gratified to see my name up on the Day's Attractions board, and I sat down at a prepared place by the side of the stage.
Goods of every kind were piled around me, waiting to be raffled — giant toy animals, television sets and a stuffed pheasant donated by the taxidermist.
Shoppers were already milling around, for the centre opened at nine in the morning and closed at nine at night, when late shoppers had to be shooed out like errant sheep.
Mr Coary gave me some enormous sheets of paper and I began to draw.
As a small boy, I devised my own set of cartoon animals, and they now stood me in good stead.
So I drew them one by one —— Skippetty Rabbit, his wife Gillian, Brownie the Bear, Prowler the Wolf, Fido the Pup, Sly Fox, Piney Cone the Pine Marten, Longtail and Short Tail the Mice, and Bill Mouse with his wife Sue.
Other characters — swordfish, manatees, king penguins and Canada geese — had no names that I could remember.
When I was twelve, a boy at school had asked me, ‘Are you one of those people who can turn scribbly lines into pictures?’
‘I don't know.
Try me,’ I said, and I found that I was.
Although my efforts would make Mr Walt Disney cringe, they were popular enough with the children of Navan, and I was soon handing out picture after picture — all free, courtesy of Navan shopping centre.
My meals came free also, at the nearby cafeteria, and I had an hour off to walk around the town.
All morning, as I drew, musicians played behind me.
‘These are all local bands,’ Mr Coary said casually.
Although the music of south-east and middle Ireland lacks the depth of music in the magic west, being somewhat derivative, it is still far better than most Irish pub music heard in England.
It was hard to concentrate on google-eyed creatures when musicians were animatedly sawing fiddles, caressing accordions, flailing guitars and blowing down flutes.
Mr Rafter looked over my shoulder while I drew a request item for a small boy — a picture of a witch jumping over a bonfire.
He returned with a Man from Mullingar, a newsagent who wanted a Halloween witch to hang up in his shop.
I obliged with iron-toothed Baba Yaga, and the newsagent asked how much he should pay me.
‘See Mr Rafter — he's my agent,’ I said loftily.
He took the witch and left.
I later learned that he hadn't seen Mr Rafter at all, but had hot-footed it back to Mullingar.
Over a hasty meal, I glanced at the Official Guide to County Meath , a gift from the manager.
A chapter on famous people, I was amused to see, devoted only a paragraph each to renowned saints, scholars and patriots, but devoted nearly a whole page to Collier the Robber (1780 — 1849), a noted highwayman.
Some of his exploits read like folk tales.
Apparently, like Robin Hood, Jesse James and legendary robbers of every land, he had met a weeping widow who faced eviction.
‘Collier gave her the necessary sum, and when she had received a receipt of payment from the agent, he duly robbed the agent of the money…
’ Michael Collier's mistake was to have survived into prosaic Victorian times, whereupon he was arrested and sent to Australia.
Closing the book, I went back to my cartooning stool, where a small circle of children awaited me.
Parents were parking children next to the cartoons and musicians, and going about their shopping.
A snag soon became apparent.
All the children wanted pictures of Mickey Mouse.
Nothing else would do, all other mice were imposters.
Now Mickey Mouse is Walt Disney's creation.
I can't draw in other people's styles, and I turned out particularly inane Mickey Mice.
He is not one of my favourite Disney characters, and I soon grew thoroughly sick of him.
I punished him in every way I could think of — I married him to Minnie, gave him children, got him bitten by a vampire so that he grew fangs and finally had him turned into a rat by a wicked witch, a great improvement.
Still the customers called for Mickey Mouse (with the blessed exception of mischievous tinker children who asked for horses and donkeys).
All that day and all the next day, I was doomed to draw Mickey Mouse again and again.
So my job did turn out to be work after all.
If only they had asked for Donald Duck, a character I hold in great respect!
Some children came back repeatedly.
My favourite of these was a boy of ten or so, called Clint, with a black greasy quiff of hair.
He had great force of character, and had become a legend in his own lifetime.
Long before he appeared I had heard children saying
‘Clint’ this, and ‘Clint’that.
‘I don't care about a queue, I just want a picture!’ he announced himself, throwing other boys out of the way impatiently.
When he received a Mickey Mouse, he swelled triumphantly, and asked for another.
I duly and mechanically began another Mickey, and Clint seemed hardly able to believe his luck.
Ages later I saw him listening to the band and clutching his fistful of Mickeys.
Needing fresh air, I strolled out into the town.
In a corner of the car park, against a wall, a foreign-looking man exhibited clumsy oil paintings on pieces of wood and played a banjo, his hat on the ground.
‘We're in the same business,’ I said, and told him about my Mickey Mouse job.
His pictures had price tags.
‘I am a Belgian,’ the shabby middle-aged man told me.
‘First I stay in hotel at Paddington, London; now I stay here at Navan.
No, I do not sing.
I let my banjo do the singing.’
I felt the pathos of this remark, as all he could do on the banjo was strum ‘plunk plunk plunk’ over and over again.
After an invigorating gaze at the rushing rivers, I returned to the Mickey Mice.
Business was brisker than ever.
During a pause between Mice, I noticed a poorly-dressed woman pick up a twenty-pound note in surprise.
Anxiously, she handed it in, her face full of pity for the loser.
As closing time drew near, the children grew less.
Lounging teenagers appeared, using the centre as a rendezvous.
They all wanted pictures of Mickey Mouse, too!
The customer is always right, so I obliged.
Eventually I was driven back to the Noones’ house by a blue-clad security man.
News travels fast in Navan, and next day there were twice as many children as before, all demanding Mickey Mouse.
As nearly all the children had freckles, I felt as if I were seeing spots before my eyes, and drew Mickey Mice in a trance, my hand and pen moving mechanically through a misty ocean of freckles, wave upon wave, every freckle asking for Mickey Mouse.
At interludes, visitors from my past came in to see me: Mr Rafter and his son Dermot, the Belgian artist, who wished me ‘Happy drawing!’, and black-quiffed Clint, who eagerly dragged his whole family along.
They didn't know what he was so excited about, and his father was disgusted to find that I couldn't draw a footballer (an unKerridgean species).
Martin, the Noone boy, also looked in.
These kind visitors received animals that were not Mickey Mouse.
Apparently, a day or so before my arrival, the children of Navan had been entertained at the centre by a man dressed-up as Mickey Mouse.
At some time during my second afternoon at the centre, a Bonny Baby competition was held, but I missed it all in a blur of Mickeys.
One event, however, made my day.
Two old countrymen, oblivious of my pack of children, began a friendly argument, raising their voices and ending each sentence with ‘Begor!’ an abbreviation of ‘By God’.
Finally one of them clearly pronounced, ‘It is that, so!
Begorrah!’
It had happened.
I had heard an Irishman say ‘Begorrah’ and now I could die happy.
In England the stage country yokel accent, as mimicked by Londoners for over two hundred years, comes from Buckinghamshire, just outside London.
So in Ireland, the stage country Irish accent, full of ‘begorrahs’, must come from County Meath just outside Dublin.
When the shopping centre was locked up that night, Ray Coary the manager praised my work, and tried to press an envelope on me.
Eventually I gave in and accepted it.
It was the kind of envelope that crackled.
Since he had paid for my food and lodgings, this was an additional kindness I had not expected.
As he lived in the city, Mr Coary drove me up to the Noones’ for my bag and then took me all the way back to O'Brien's Hotel in Dublin, where I had stayed long before.
Fireworks were going off in the city, in advance of Halloween.
There is no Guy Fawkes’ Night in the Irish Republic.
It was good to be in O'Brien's Hotel, and to meet the proprietor Maureen O'Sullivan, her tall soft-spoken brother and their Kerry Blue terrier once more.
Soon I was in my old room, with its creaky Victorian furniture, looking out of the tall window at the Dublin traffic.
I could hardly wait to explore the city once more.
In Dublin's Quare City
Glad to be in Dublin once more, I roamed around the shops, noticing that many bakers had ‘Brack Loaves’ on display, with rings placed on them.
The loaves resembled barm cakes, and the rings looked like wedding rings.
One shop advertised a gold ring inside one of each batch of Brack Loaves.
After the shop girl stopped giggling at my enquiry, she explained, handkerchief on mouth, that Brack Loaves with rings inside are a Halloween tradition.
She had not realized that everyone in the world does not celebrate an Irish Halloween.
In Perth, Scotland, I have tasted Halloween Buns, which have smiling faces, made of eating-paper, stuck to them.
Bakers in England content themselves with Hot Cross Buns at Easter.
Still reflecting on buns, my favourite food, I called a taxi and in lordly tones asked to be taken to Lansdowne Road, home of Jazz News magazine.
The editor had kindly accepted an article I had written about West Indian gospel music, so I thought I would go to the head office and introduce myself.
A sudden cloudburst set the taxi windscreen wipers to work.
Meanwhile, the driver, a great newspaper-reader, spoke to me in headlines.
‘What Are the Royals Up To Now?’ changed abruptly to ‘Will Soccer Violence Spread to Gaelic Football?’as he turned a mental page.
At Lansdowne Road, I struggled through blinding rain to the Jazz News office, the basement of a big house with a garden.
‘Pleased to meet you — we're not taking your piece after all,’ a lady sub-editor smiled, trying to put me at my ease.
‘The editor thought it was now a bit out of date.’
Stunned, I wobbled outside, where fortunately I found that the rain had stopped falling.
It was a blow, but I would survive it.
In a mood of bitter-sweet melancholy, I walked back to the centre of Dublin.
It was an interesting walk, past once-grand Victorian houses divided into flats, past ruined buildings with caved-in roofs, past grey monumental ‘British rule’ edifices now put to various purposes and past modern office blocks that had already become decrepit.
Pavements gleamed, as I walked towards the sunset, along a narrow street of dark, shabby houses.
Lights began to go on in the dark houses, and I relished my melancholy to the last drop.
I felt like Max Zillion, a cartoon strip character devised by Hunt Emerson.
Max is a jazz musician, a black cat with Negro features, who owns a talking saxophone, his Alto Ego.
Although Max is a jazz genius, fame always eludes him, he always loses his fee and ends each episode walking down a lonely street into the sunset, consoled by his friend Alto Ego who loudly plays a mournful tune.
I knew exactly how Max felt.
(There is a happy ending to this tale of woe, as shortly afterwards Jazz News accepted another article I wrote, this time about blues.)
Cheered up by a Chinese meal, I walked along Wellington Quay by the side of the River Liffey.
The Ha'penny Bridge had been illuminated, and shone green in the darkness, rocking whenever a group of people crossed over.
I was in the Bohemian quarter, where cobbled alleys full of bars and bookshops met the quayside.
Next day, I promised myself, I would come back and explore these streets by daylight.
Lights still burned in the musty old Marxist — Leninist bookshop, with its icons to Stalin on the wall.
Inside, the elderly English upper-class proprietor told me that true Communism only survives in Albania.
Who wants true Communism anyway?
Not the Albanians, I'm sure.
All of a sudden, I found myself in a festive gathering, as I had absent-mindedly gatecrashed an exhibition launch at the Gallery of Photography.
Wriggling through the crowds, I sidled around the walls, admiring black and white photographs of old men in cloth caps playing fiddles, while children looked on wonderingly.
These pictures had been reprinted as a book,A Time that Was .
Somewhere in the smoky crowd the authoress and photographer, Jill Freedman from New York, was holding court.
I didn't meet Miss Freedman, but I read a statement she had typed out.
I sing of simple pleasures: making music, dancing, friendship, work and fun.
Young and old sharing their lives the way they always had, before television shrunk the world…
It is an older, gentler Ireland I am documenting…
I want to get it down now, while there are still people who remember a time that was.
A worthy aim, well achieved by the camera.
She did not sing at all, as it happened, but there were plenty of singers there.
Intellectual Dublin seemed no longer to consist of writers, but of folk singers, bearded or otherwise.
Faces aflame with drink, grotesque moustaches, pot bellies…
I seemed to have stumbled into a painting by Hogarth.
One of the pot bellies was mine.
Liam Clancy, a fellow Hogarthian, told me that he was one of the Clancy brothers, a group which has found success in New York with its romanticized versions of Irish songs.
Liam sprang on to a table, raised a glass and began to declaim a speech.
Now was the moment for Jill Freedman to take a photograph, for he made a picturesque sight —— a tall slender man in blue denim, with a new white cap and a bright pink face.
Much later, I arrived back at O'Brien's Hotel, carefully avoiding a straggling pack of wild young boys, who seemed about to fight among themselves.
It was a grey, wet Sunday morning when next I walked through deserted streets to the River Liffey.
At Crown Alley, beneath the archway facing the Ha'penny Bridge, a tinker lady was begging as usual, her baby peeping from a plaid shawl.
In pensive mood, I explored the Liffeyside Bohemia, stepping carefully around puddles and over cobbles, past closed bookshops and open recording studios.
A corner pub, the Norseman, had been packed with arty young people on the Saturday night.
A clumsy mural of a Viking adorned one of the windows, the bright colours looking strange in the surrounding drabness.
I rambled around Temple Bar, Temple Lane, then into Eustace Street; dark, narrow thoroughfares of some antiquity.
Record studios outnumbered bookshops, and the atmosphere was Liverpudlian.
Dublin is in great danger of acquiring a world famous Beat Scene, the Liffeyside Sound.
(Let us pray that this fate may be averted.)
Temple Lane Studios, Roadshow Rentals and several other music factories seemed open for business.
I entered a studio at random, and spoke to a young man behind a battered desk.
The hallway was sleazy in the extreme, plaster falling from those portions of walls that did not have posters holding them together.
‘English groups are coming here to make records — they say the Liffeyside rocks!’ the young man told me enthusiastically.
He was of Italian stock, as was the proprietor of a blues recording studio I had met in the Deep South of America.
Blues singers do well in Ireland, as Celts have a feeling for Negro music.
Against my better judgment, I asked the record man if he were able to bring impoverished blues singers over to Ireland.
He was all for the idea, and we exchanged addresses.
Then I saw a gaggle of youths arriving with guitar cases for a recording session, and I changed my mind.
The faces grinning from the tatty punk regalia looked so depraved and hollow-eyed that I could not bear to think of my American blues friends calling them ‘sir’.
So I strewed the pieces of the Italian's card over the cobblestones.
Blues-lovers such as myself face a dilemma.
Should we help blues singers to find a wider audience, outside the coloured quarters of Southern towns, or should we leave them where they are, that the blues may thrive?
Each singer who gets rich, learns to play for white people and then settles in Paris, is a loss to the blues.
Cut off from his inspiration, he endlessly rehashes songs from his American era.
On the other hand, he at last gains well-deserved riches and a life of comfort.
Just as I was about to pick up the pieces of card once more, I stopped transfixed.
A glorious Irish voice rang out in song, a manly tenor that equalled the most impassioned of blues.
I ran across the road to the open door of another tiny studio, and saw a grizzle-bearded hobo-like man singing into a microphone, his mouth wide open and his eyes half closed.
As he sang, he strummed a guitar.
Oh, Mary of my heart's delight,
My pride and only care,
It was your cruel father
Would not let me stay here…
I sidled into the room, scarcely daring to breathe lest I harm the recording.
A shiver ran up my spine and into my scalp, as I realized he was singing ‘Mary from Dunloe’.
This old ballad contains lines that may have inspired a blue-grass ditty of the Kentucky mountains, ‘Roll in My Sweet Baby's Arms’.
To my surprise, the singer gave me a friendly nod before throwing his head back and tackling the last verses.
I wish I was in sweet Dunloe
And seated on the grass,
And by my side a bottle of wine
And on my knee a lass.
I'd call for liquor of the best
And I'd pay before I go;
I'd roll my Mary in my arms
In the town of sweet Dunloe.
‘You needn't keep so quiet, I'm only testing the microphone, not recording at all,’ the singer told me with a smile.
Watched by an Italianate studio owner, Tony Verrechia, he told me his story.
‘My name's Allan Scuffle, and I've been a full-time singer for only four years.
If you'd seen me five or six years ago, you wouldn't recognize me now.
Most of my adult life I've been a salesman over in England.
I've been a life insurance salesman and I was in the deep freeze business for ages.
In those days I wore suits, and I was very clean-cut.
‘More and more, as years went by, I began to frequent Irish singing pubs, until I was totally immersed in the music.
I gave up work so I could practise singing and playing, and went on the dole in England.
At first I played the bodhran drum [he pronounced it ‘bowran’]and then I took up the guitar.
I'm totally left-handed, but eventually I learned the bottleneck style used by blues singers.
Back in Dublin, I sang and played in pubs, living for music day and night.
At one time I was in a group called ‘Skin the Goat’.’
‘Oh, after the cab driver in Phoenix Park!’
‘You know your history!’ he complimented me.
‘It's not mine, it's yours.
Well, go on.’
‘With practice, my style developed, and there's stacks of work for me now.
I've been busking round the bars of Torremolinos in Spain, and at Tenerife, in the Canary Islands.
I spent three months in the Canaries, and since then I've been travelling between England and Ireland.
Slattery's the travel people, have given me an open ticket, so I can cross the water any day I feel like.
I've never made any records yet.’
‘I hope you'll be famous one day, as you deserve to be, with that voice,’ I said.
‘Then I can say, ‘I knew him when…‘’
Allan Scuffle (or scuffling Allan) gave me a frank grin and handshake, and I wandered back down to the Liffey.
Just like Michael Quirke, the butcher turned god-carver, he had totally changed his life from Commerce to Art, in middle age.
I was reminded of Kipling's story,The Miracle of Purun Bhagat , a tale of a Western-dressed Indian statesman who suddenly becomes a hermit and holy man, living on a mountain, at one with nature.
Dublin's brand of rock music merges at times with traditional music, and the studios are used for both styles.
So perhaps they have their uses.
At the great Adam, Eve and Immaculate Conception church near the river, I stood with others in the marble hallway and listened to beautiful female solos soaring praises up to Heaven.
A monk in brown robes sold religious Christmas cards.
Wandering on, I found myself among dreary council flats, improved by a figure of Joseph holding the Baby high on a wall.
Although the flats looked poor outside, I glimpsed some well-furnished interiors.
Masses were ending everywhere in Dublin, and I walked back to my hotel through streams of home-going worshippers.
The great bells of the Immaculate Conception chimed the hour.
Before leaving Dublin, I decided I ought to see something of County Louth.
This uneasy county lies north of Dublin and south of the Border.
Like most Border counties in the Irish Republic, it has a name for harbouring gunmen.
Louth's county town, Dundalk, is very near Belfast.
As I boarded the Belfast train, at Connolly Station, a guard stepped forward and ran a buzzing metal detector over my plastic bag.
Finding the bag innocent of any crime, he waved us both on our way.
It was a beautiful journey, northward along the coast, past Dublin's harbour.
Near Balbriggan, there was a wonderful view of sea and river.
Thereafter, the coastal scenery reminded me increasingly of lowland Scotland, fields and hedges lying close to the shore.
Dundalk station, with its lovely garden, stood at the edge of town, close to the enormous Harp Lager brewery.
I walked down to the town centre, which reminded me of an English country town, with shops of every kind.
People smiled a lot and greeted one another.
Although Dundalk is supposed to be a seaside town, I could find no trace of a harbour.
Red-brick houses, in Belfast style, vied with grey stone dwellings.
There was a large temple-like town hall, eclipsed by a gigantic white modern Tourist Information Office with a mighty fountain playing in the triumphal forecourt.
Inside, the usual bored girl presided over a collection of postcards and tea towels.
I wandered into the wholesale office of a big tobacco factory, and found myself in a dark panelled Victorian world of snuff counters, old polished scales for weighing out ounces of baccy and a snug with settle chairs.
Pictures of eminent tobacconists graced the walls.
Browsing on my way, I dipped into shop after little shop.
A record shop had a large display of ‘Rebel Song’ cassettes.
However, in a nearby café the jukebox sang a peaceful song of a neighbouring town, ‘The Village of Ardee’.
Crude murals on a hoarding illustrated the legend of the hero Cuchulain, who killed a fearsome hound and then himself became known as the Hound of Ulster.
Away from the shops, the Roman Catholic church faced a wide tree-lined eighteenth-century street.
A vast Gothic structure, with strange ornamental spirelets, the church dominated the town.
Crossing mosaic floors, and pausing to admire stained glass windows, I reached a little shrine to St Bridget.
Instead of candles, a panel of electric light bulbs awaited the saint of my choice.
I put some money in the slot, pressed a button, and lit a bulb for St Bridget.
Outside the church, I found a taxi rank, jumped in a taxi and asked to be taken to the village that gave County Louth its name.
Soon we were bowling along a narrow road, through a gentle countryside of green fields, with dim mountains in the far distance.
‘Those mountains are in Ulster,’ the driver told me.
He was a middle-aged man named Gerry Matthews.
‘The Border's only four miles away.
We go up there to get cheap cigarettes, petrol and groceries.’
Gerry told me that he had once run a showband, and played bass guitar.
‘Like all the showbands of the sixties and seventies, we had a trumpet, trombone, sax, guitar and drum line-up.
The best time I had playing was in Africa, out in Zambia.
We played for the British ambassador and some Irish teachers and workers who were out there.
It was a St Patrick's Night dance.
Would you believe it, the Africans there had formed a brass band and played all Irish tunes!
They were fantastic!
We had a really good time.
‘Before the Vatican II reforms, there would be no dancing in Ireland over Lent.
We'd go over to England then, to London and Birmingham.
I've only ever made one record, a Christmas song called ‘Tonight for Santa Claus’.
It's been out on a Christmas LP, among lots of other songs, every year for six years running.
Yet I haven't heard a word from the record company, and haven't received a penny!’
Soon we were at the village of Louth, which Gerry pronounced ‘Lowth’.
Noticing a tiny oratory-style church standing alone in a muddy field, I went over to have a look, leaving Gerry in the car.
Heifers ran out of my way, taking shelter behind a piece of wall and peering after me.
‘St Mochta's House’, a plaque on the church announced.
‘Built in one night to give shelter to the saint, who died in AD 534.
Rebuilt in twelfth century.’
Puzzled, I returned to my musical driver.
He was talking earnestly to a road-sweeper, who was at work in front of some English-style cottages with flower gardens.
A kind, gentle-looking man, the sweeper had wispy hair and soulfully expressive eyes.
‘That was a monastery, where that field is now,’ he told me.
‘That little building you saw came about like this.
One of the monks was a beer man, always on the beer, you know.
He fell asleep on the grass outside one night.
When he woke up in the morning, the building was raised over him!
So he never suffered from cold or dampness.
It was a miracle!’
The road-sweeper's eyes shone at the wonder of it all, and then he went on.
‘It was a huge monastery in them days.
You can see a piece of the walls still standing, just.
The road I'm sweeping wasn't here then — it ran right over those fields instead.
‘But if you're interested in the old days, you ought to ask the man who lives in the house over there.
He's a TD (MP) and he's writing a book about Louth.’
After a long genial conversation between Gerry Matthews and the road-sweeper, we were on our way.
Gerry offered to be my guide, and show me the sites of the county.
The sweeper's story reminded me of a tale told at Ross Carbery, County Cork.
St Fachtna, in the olden days, left his precious prayer book in the grass, where he had been sitting reading it.
When he reached his church, he missed the prayer book, and hurried back.
It began to rain, and his heart sank, for the book was a valuable one, laboriously copied out by inspired monks.
In the field he found his prayer book, protected from the pouring rain by a dove that sat upon it with wings outspread.
Back at Louth, we found the TD to be out for the day, to my secret relief.
I was afraid I might lose my train back to Dublin.
‘I'll take you to Cuchulain's castle,’ Gerry promised me.
‘Cuchulain was big round here, not just in Ulster as some think.
We all learned about him in school, how he was attacked by a savage hound and killed it by knocking a hurley ball slam into its mouth.’
Gerry pronounced the hero's name ‘Cahoolin’.
The Hound of Ulster is supposed to have lived at the beginning of the first century AD.
Whether he really existed or not, he stands as a type of the most bloodthirsty and battle-frenzied of Celtic warriors.
When the blood haze was on him, he could not stop killing and might turn on his friends once his enemies had been slaughtered.
To prevent this, his friends would soothe him with music, cool water and adoring maidens until at last he would ‘come to himself.
Stories of great battle frenzies once featured in legends told by Red Indians on the western plains.
Cuchulain legends, written down by monks in the early Middle Ages, are full of taboos broken with dire results, totem animals and other Apache touches.
Once, when a messenger brought bad news to Cuchulain, the hero let him go in peace.
Later, the hero's temper flared up, and he fired an arrow after the messenger, which killed the poor man from afar.
‘So it was not altogether true that Cuchulain did not kill messengers,’ a monk dutifully recorded.
‘Sometimes he did so.’
Leaving the car, Gerry Matthews and I walked up a steep hill, past an eerie standing stone, and eventually reached a mound at the hilltop ringed by a deep moat.
Mature beech trees were growing from the dry moat's bed.
Evidently a medieval castle had been built on the site of an Iron Age fort.
A stone tower remained, repaired by later comers, for forts can never be redundant in Ireland.
Gerry Matthews took a deep breath, obviously imagining Cuchulain himself stalking down the steps of his tower, one hand on the war axe in his belt.
We retraced our steps to the car, and Gerry next drove me to a field near Dundalk where he said he could show me an altar used in the Penal Days.
We squelched across the field, finally reaching the altar, a single slate slab mounted on stones, on the side of a bank overlooking a tangle of briars.
A modern shelter had been raised over it, and the ground about the stone had been paved.
Here the faithful had once met, safe (I hope) from prying Protestant eyes.
‘That's a pool table,’ Matthews cried.
He examined it carefully.
‘No, it's a snooker table,’ he finally pronounced.
‘Look, there's the holes where it was unscrewed before they brought it here for an altar.
They often used slate table tops for snooker in the old days.’
In the town of Dundalk itself, Matthews pointed out a strange hill enclosed in a public park.
‘That's called Ice Hill, and it's got tunnels in it,’ he said.
‘I used to play there as a boy, and people told us the tunnels went all the way to Cuchulain's castle.
We would crawl into them.
They were hollowed-out places, but always came to a dead end.’
‘You were probably crawling into prehistoric graves,’ I remarked.
‘You ought to have been frightened.
Maybe people later put ice in the tunnels, so it wouldn't melt.’
There was no more time for sight-seeing if I were to catch my train, but the helpful Matthews told me of martyr Sir Oliver Plunkett's head, preserved in a church at Drogheda.
‘It's a skull really, but the saint's skin has never rotted away,’ he informed me.
‘Outside Dundalk here, there's a shrine to St Bridget where they hold Novenas.
That's nine days of continuous Mass-going.’
‘I'll see all that next time,’ I promised, wishing him a hasty farewell and lolloping rapidly into the station.
Now it was dark, and the smell of lager hung heavily on the air.
My Belfast — Dublin train soon came in, but no passengers were allowed to board it until the customs men had searched the carriages for contraband.
Came the sad morning when I had to say goodbye to the crimson walls, white statues, giant mirrors and piped music of O'Brien's Hotel.
Dragging my red, white and blue bag, I stepped into a taxi bound for the Liverpool ferry at Dun Laoghaire (pronounced Dunleary), on the outskirts of Dublin.
We passed a pleasant seaside resort on the way to the harbour.
According to the driver, it was to be redeveloped as an industrial site, despite protests.
‘James Joyce the writer used to live here,’ he added.
‘Joyce wrote a lot about Dublin, but unfortunately never said anything nice.’
Staring straight ahead at the road before him, the driver went on talking, telling me of his boyhood ambition to be a footballer and of the Mafia-like behaviour of the modern IRA.
As he spoke, his language grew rougher and rougher, as if a Jekyll and Hyde transformation were taking effect.
When he turned towards me at Dun Laoghaire, he looked the complete tearaway.
I swear his nose hadn't been broken when I first stepped into the car!
There were not many passengers on the ferry — a handful of English and Irish, with one nun.
I stood on the deck, watching the two spires of Dun Laoghaire receding into the distance.
The Irish skyline grew thin, but the sea was lighter there.
All around me the waves looked grey, but far away at Ireland the sea glowed an ethereal soft green, for it ringed a fairy island.
Sprawled on a chair in the lounge, trying to sleep, I thought of Ireland and its vanished Sovereignty.
In the Celtic sense, Sovereignty means more than mere exercise of power.
It is a mystic quality, a marriage to the land.
There now seemed a gap, a missing dimension to Irish life.
Everywhere an unspoken question seemed to hang heavily in the air: Would we have been better off without Home Rule?
I thought of the shoppers’ day trips to Northern Ireland in search of cheap goods, and tried enumerating the benefits Ireland might receive from a Reunion with the rest of Britain.
Marks and Spencer's, Sainsbury's, W. H. Smith's, Home Improvement Grants…
Then I turned to the other side of the coin — the Civil War that might break out, even if Reunion were voted in by a majority and approved by the Dáil.
Ideals can be stronger than economic interest.
If Dublin were razed to the ground, what would it matter if some of the ashes belonged to Marks and Spencer?
From old Elizabethan days to New Elizabethan days, writing Constitutions for Ireland has been an English hobby.
Every such Constitution has been ignored or resisted by the Irish, but still the English persist.
I pondered and pondered.
After a while, I remembered an article in the Hot Press magazine.
With tongue in cheek, the writer had suggested that a deal be struck with Britain over the Six Counties in the North.
With great fanfare, Britain would hand the Counties over to the Republic, and ‘a little later, we quietly slip them Tipperary, Laois and Offaly.
Think about it.
We don't use Counties Tipperary, Laois and Offaly.
They're just there.’
Pondering on, I wondered how Ireland could be prevented from copying every harmful change in English life as soon as it occurred.
Why should the nonsensical Nationalization — Privatization ping-pong of English politics be copied in Ireland?
Why decimalization?
Could Ireland only be prevented from copying England by English rule, or could she somehow rediscover her pride, her lost Sovereignty?
My other idea for a healthy Ireland, an Irish king, had been proved yet another alien English notion, for pre-Ascendancy Ireland boasted not one but many kings.
Not one Sovereignty has been lost, but a thousand.
Yet Republics are deeply repugnant to me.
A Parliament without a monarch is like a tail without a dog.
Parliaments thrive best where they have not been created suddenly from scratch, but have evolved from a monarch's Council of Elders.
In England, Wales and Scotland, most people love Royalty but hold elected politicians in scorn.
Ireland has plenty of scorn for its leaders, but where is the love?
At this point I fell asleep.
Suddenly I awoke, inspired, and jotted down a complete Constitution for Ireland.
Here it is.
The Irish Monarchy must be restored, but on an Irish, not an English plan.
A king would not be an hereditary monarch, but would be elected from a small cohort of princely and chiefly families, in the ancient Irish manner.
(In the Kerridgean World Order, the Monarchist League, not the United Nations, would be the arbiter of world affairs.)
Ireland's traditional Provinces, Connaught, Leinster, Munster and Ulster, would rise to their ancient pre-eminence.
Each province would select a candidate for monarch, and then the four would-be monarchs would put their cases before the People of Ireland.
How would monarchs be selected?
I am not presumptuous — I would leave that to the People.
Perhaps by tests of physical skill, at hurling, football or wrestling.
In true Celtic fashion, physical strength and absence of blemish would be the qualification of a king.
When the King of Ireland reached a certain age, he would have to step down and a new king be chosen.
The King of Ireland would take over the ceremonial duties of the Irish President, who is now nominally set over the Irish Prime Minister.
The office of President would be gradually phased out.
You can imagine the intrigue, the excitement and gossip that would accompany the selection of a king!
Such selections, at provincial level, might be going on most of the time, the cause of much happiness, honest pride and scheming malice!
Ireland would be given something new to think about.
For the first time in centuries, outdoor Coronations would take place at Tara.
A Georgian mansion, as near to Tara Hill as possible, could be restored and used as the Royal palace.
As always, Ideal Constitutions for Ireland must wobble a bit when they come to Ulster.
It is imperative that Ulster be united once more, whether under an Irish Crown or the Crown of the United Kingdom.
Counties Donegal, Cavan and Monaghan (at present in Republican Limbo) must be a part of Ulster in legal fact as well as by tradition.
Now, ever since the emigrations and plantations of past ages, Ulster has been Scottish in character.
Ought Ulster not be ruled by the monarch of Scotland?
In other words, should the Republic slip Donegal, Cavan and Monaghan to the United Kingdom, whose monarch is also the monarch of Scotland?
Plenty of people in Donegal, Cavan and Monaghan would be delighted, as they would not have so far to go to buy drinks, groceries and cigarettes.
They would already be on the right side of the Border for shopping.
However, others might be furious, and my Constitution is at its weakest here.
It may be that the Protestants of Northern Ireland would acquiesce in the new kingly order.
Many of the chiefly families of the other Provinces are now Protestant, and a Protestant High King might be a possibility now and again.
If Scotland should one day become independent, with its own monarch, then union with Ulster might seem more acceptable to all.
So I'll blur over the consequences for Ulster and hurry on to my next point — the re-establishment of an Irish House of Lords, the first since 1801.
An Irish House of Lords, in my view, should not only consist of Anglo-Irish peers, but of clan chiefs and both Anglican and Roman Catholic bishops.
Of course, each King of Ireland would have the right to confer hereditary peerages on heroes and contributors to the public good.
Anglo-Irish lords might be entitled to sit both in the Irish and the United Kingdom House of Lords.
Or they might be asked to choose between one or the other.
If they chose Ireland, as I believe most of them would, then the Ascendancy could once more be drawn to the heart of Irish life and be given a high-minded function.
Roman Catholic bishops and clan chieftains would even up the balance, and Ireland might boast a Second Chamber that would be the envy of England and the world.
At any rate, it would be a lively place!
How much power the Lords should enjoy, I leave to the People of Ireland.
Refreshed, I went up on deck and looked at the waves.
Of Ireland there was no sign whatsoever.
Yet I seemed to hear the distant cheers, as each Province selected its king and the champions of Ulster, Leinster, Connaught and Munster set out for Tara and the kingship trials.
I seemed to hear trumpets and see colourful flags and standards fluttering in the sea breeze.
When the band plays Four Nations Once Again, then I shall return to Ireland.
The Adastral Hotel Westbourne Villas Hove Sussex