

PART III 1857–1861
THE HOUSE FRIGHTENED her, which, she repeatedly told herself, was foolish.
It was not even a large house, only tall, with long flights of steep stairs, and had two rooms on each of the four floors.
None of them were in a good state of decoration.
The paintwork, a dark brown, was peeling and the walls, unusually, had been hurriedly and superficially covered with an ugly beige paper which did not cling properly to the plaster.
The floors were for the most part tiled, large patterned tiles, not unattractive, but in need of thorough cleaning.
Wilson could see that when scrubbed the red and white patterns upon them might be pretty.
But not even scrubbing would alter the fact that the scullery was dark and ill-equipped and one look at the ancient stove made her glad it was still high summer and heating was not necessary.
She did not even need to cook since she lived on bread and melon and tomatoes, lacking the energy and appetite to bother with anything else and having only herself to consider.
She had engaged a young girl, only fourteen years of age, called Maria, brought to her by the caretaker of the house, and vouched for as ‘good and obedient’.
It was a strange experience, to be hiring a servant, but Wilson was in too confused a state to relish this evidence of her change in status.
It had been all she could do, as she wrote to Ellen:
— to get myself to Florence.
I lay on my bed in a cheap lodging house and cried and I tell you Ellen I wished I was with you and receiving your kindness which was great to me.
There is no one here who cares for me or will look out for me and I must shift for myself in everything which is not easy now I am big with child and not well as I was with my first-born.
It was only the thought of this poor baby in me that made me stir at all and get myself to a friend of Ferdinando's who is in the way of knowing all the business of the street being a wine-merchant and visited by all.
He knew at once of a house to let for a whole year, the owners being abroad and failing to let it before they left last month and seeing my condition he took pity and had the caretaker prevailed upon to come to me at his premises.
I had no interest in what this house should be like wishing only for a place and quickly to lay my head and could hardly rouse myself to inspect it.
It is a poor house Ellen and not clean but it is cheap and furnished after a fashion and best of all lies next to the Casa Guidi which raised my spirits.
I am now installed and with a maid-of-all-work with me named Maria.
She is near the age we were Ellen when we first went into service and has no idea how things should be done.
I set her the first day to clean the floors starting at the top and expecting her to reach the bottom at the end of the day or at least the last floor, but Ellen she had not managed more than two rooms in eight hours and those not well done.
She said carrying the water up from the well had taken a great deal of time which, when I saw her filling the bucket, I was not surprised since she lowered the rope slow enough to make me fall asleep watching.
Then she must sit in the sun before hauling it back up and altogether I was enraged and wished I was in a condition to show her how it should be done.
I am at her mercy at the moment though I keep her and pay her well and might look with justice for harder work from her, but when I am over my lying-in I will be behind her you can be sure.
She is pleasant enough but how reliable I cannot say and I am not depending on her for the birth.
A woman I know has given me the name of a midwife who will come and otherwise I shall have to engage a nurse for the shortest time possible since I cannot be without assistance when my time comes.
Ferdinando will return with the Brownings towards the end of October and I pray my delivery will not be before the middle of November.
I do little but rest and try to put this house into some sort of order but as yet there is neither pleasure nor profit in it.
By next week there will be two rooms ready for occupation but whether I will find takers I do not know or if I will be up to providing the services required.
I think of Oreste day and night and weep to think he will be two years of age when this second child is born and of those two years I have had so little.
But I feel that I am now in the way of bringing him to me since I have a house and am no longer in service and need only to arrange to have him brought over.
Tell him often Ellen that he is to go to Italy soon where his mother and father who love him greatly await him.
Tell him Ellen that he might grow accustomed to it.
But would Ellen tell him?
She wished desperately that Ellen were in London that she might send Lizzie to judge how Oreste fared and what he understood, but as it was she had no means of knowing.
Nothing could be more unsatisfactory than Ellen's barely decipherable notes which came rarely and only after money had been remitted.
On September 1st, as soon as she was back in Florence, she had sent £12, almost ten months' wages to Ellen and had stressed the importance of letting her know such a large sum of money had arrived.
A note duly came at the end of September, hurtful in its brevity, frustrating in its lack of information:— thank you for the money sister which is put to good use your son being in need of shoes and all manner of apparel since he grows apace.
We are well.
I hope you are well.
The summer has been poor.
You need have no worry your son is well cared for as I trust you believe.
Again and again Wilson read it, trying to read some comforting significance into Ellen's twice referring to Oreste as ‘your son’.
It was no more than the truth but showed, surely that her sister was not forgetting the fact.
And if Oreste was growing so fast it could only mean he was healthy.
But she thought of how, if the positions had been reversed, she would have written pages full of detail to Ellen, would have described a child in such a way as to make him spring from the writing, alive and visible.
Oreste, in Ellen's notes, remained hidden from her.
He was lost, only the memory of the baby he no longer was having any reality in her mind.
Isa Blagden found her weeping over this one afternoon and took the time to console her, pointing out that soon, in her new position, Oreste would join her and at two years of age would quickly become hers again.
Wilson nodded and dried her tears yet again and made some effort to smile.
She asked, with some apprehension, how Miss Blagden had left Ferdinando and was told he was well but anxious about her and eager to return to Florence.
She also added, without being asked, that Annunciata was not, in Pen's opinion, found to be a substitute for his Lily and that the maid had fallen ill with fever soon after Wilson left and had been useless to anyone.
But what Miss Blagden had sought her out for was not only to ask after her welfare or bring news from Lucca but to offer her two lady-boarders for three months.
The ladies, sisters, were English and looking for somewhere cheap but clean while they stayed on in Florence to attend art classes.
Wilson was immediately worried that the rooms she had ready would not be thought adequate, that indeed she did not know if she herself thought they were adequate, and that she would be unable to prepare meals in her feeble condition, but Miss Blagden laid to rest all her anxieties.
She inspected the rooms and found them perfectly tolerable and assured Wilson the ladies would require only coffee in the morning and would otherwise dine elsewhere.
If Wilson's maid could be guaranteed to clean the rooms each day and deal with washing, which could be sent out, and empty the slops and bring up hot water then that would suffice.
It was with some excitement that Wilson greeted the Misses Wynne on October 1st and she was aware that the challenge of preparing for them had in some curious way made her feel better.
They were younger than she had expected and seemed shy and reticent, emphasising frequently, all the way up the stairs, that they wanted only a bolt-hole and must not be thought of as real boarders.
When Wilson was obliged to rest on the stairs, they both begged her not to continue and when she insisted went either side of her, helping her along.
The rooms were pronounced charming, which made her smile with amusement for charming they were not.
They were bare and shabby and if it had not been for the pretty yellow cloths she had made for the tables and the yellow and orange cushions she had covered for the chairs and the blue vase full of roses she had asked Maria to place on the chest of drawers, then they would have been dismal indeed.
The Misses Wynne flew to the window and exclaimed in ecstasy over the view of roof-tops and more roof-tops, and then exclaimed again at their luck in finding somewhere so peaceful and perfect.
Wilson quickly realised how lucky she had been to have the Misses Wynne directed to her by kind Miss Blagden.
They could not have been less trouble, leaving the house at ten in the morning and not returning until nine in the evening, having already dined.
She hardly saw them, but their presence at night made her feel easier than did Maria's and she slept better.
They paid their rent every Friday (the money was put straight into a jar for Oreste's journey) and always enquired if there was any way in which they could be of use to their landlady in her circumstances.
They were polite and concerned but only once betrayed any real curiosity.
The younger of the two, Miss Violet, said one Friday, with some hesitation, ‘You were maid, I believe, to Mrs Browning?’
‘Indeed yes, miss.’
‘And before her marriage, I think?’
‘Oh, well before.
I went to her in 1844, before ever Mr Browning appeared on the scene.’
Miss Violet clasped her hands together in an anguish of delight and exclaimed, ‘How romantic!
Oh, how I should have liked to be you!’
‘To be me?’
‘To be near such poets and part of that adventure!’
Wilson was silent.
The elder Miss Wynne, Miss Millicent, frowned a little at her sister and was embarrassed.
‘Violet reads poetry,’ she offered by way of explanation, ‘especially Mrs Browning's.
She has whole passages of Aurora Leigh by heart, or so it often seems.’
‘Do you think,’ Miss Violet said, leaning forward excitedly, ‘do you think, Signora Romagnoli,do you think that one day I might meet Mrs Browning in this house?’
‘Violet!’ her sister remonstrated.
‘Mrs Browning does not like visitors,’ Wilson said, ‘and as to meeting her, I could not say.’
‘Of course you could not,’ Miss Millicent agreed, ‘and Violet is silly to expect an introduction.
Let us forget it at once.’
But Wilson did not forget it.
On the contrary, the question she saw hovering behind Miss Violet's innocent query remained at the forefront of her mind right up to the day the Brownings returned to the Casa Guidi.
The question was, on what footing would she now be with her old mistress?
The more she thought about this, the more uncertain she became.
Were they to be friends?
And if so, how was the friendship between maid and ex-mistress to be defined?
She did not know what assumptions she could make.
Would she be free to come and go in the Casa Guidi as she liked?
Would Pen be allowed to visit her as and when he liked?
And what of Ferdinando, her husband?
How would they succeed in living together?
What would be allowed?
Everywhere she looked there were areas of doubt and her apprehension grew.
In every way except one her worries proved unjustified.
Both Pen and Ferdinando rushed in immediately the carriage drew up at the door and wonderful was the reunion; then within the hour the kindest of notes came from Mrs Browning begging her to find the time and energy to visit whenever she was able.
Wilson was able straight away.
Pausing only to change her dress and smooth her hair she went into the Casa Guidi, laboriously climbed the stairs and arriving in the drawing room in some distress through lack of breath, was hastily urged to sit down and put up her feet and take a dish of tea.
It was only when the tea came that her pleasure in such a welcome, in being given such evidence of the continuing affection in which she was held, abruptly waned.
The tea was brought in by Annunciata.
Looking at her, Wilson felt an actual spasm of pain.
The girl was not only twice as pretty as she had remembered but graceful and vivacious with the most beautiful smile.
But it was not the face, or the manner which struck Wilson most so much as the lithesome body.
Perhaps because her own was at that time lumpen and awkward she seemed to feel the contrast painfully — such high, generous breasts, such a neat waist, such slender wrists and ankles!
Wilson instinctively tucked her own swollen legs more securely under her gown and covered her enormous belly protectively with her arms.
Annunciata turned to her, as she put the tea down, and respectfully enquired for her health.
The girl's skin glowed, her eyes were bright.
It was all Wilson could do to thank her for her concern.
And then to watch Annunciata trip back to the kitchen, where her own Ferdinando was preparing supper, was too much.
She had difficulty attending to Mrs Browning's questions and replied in a strained voice.
Looking up, she saw her old mistress understood perfectly her misery and confusion and was sorry for it but there was also an air of what looked remarkably like satisfaction about her.
It seemed to say that all this inconvenience had ended well and she, Mrs Browning, had after all gained more than she had lost.
Wilson could hardly bear it.
With Pen, there were no such changes in allegiance.
If he had had his way, he would have stayed in Wilson's house all day long and as it was managed to be there a good half of it.
But Wilson played fair — she did not encourage him.
Whenever Annunciata came to fetch the child she was firm: he must go at once or otherwise his mother would be displeased and might not allow him to come at all.
And this was not simply because she wished to be above reproach: it was also because, nearing her time, she found the eight-year-old boy exhausting.
He had not quietened down at all as he had grown older — far from it — and could not now be still for a single moment.
He was still pretty, still was obliged to wear his hair in long curls and was attired in the same silks and satins but underneath all this there was a tougher character emerging.
Wilson saw Henry Barrett in him and even a flash of his Grandfather Barrett.
Mentioning this once to his mother she was speedily put right: Pen was all his father, lacked entirely the characteristics of those other Barrett males.
But when he was with her alone Wilson watched him kicking a ball down her stairs and fight with Ferdinando in her kitchen and knew the time would come when his mother must face facts.
Pen wished, above all else, to see a baby born.
To Wilson's embarrassment, he would not leave the subject alone.
He cuddled her and felt the bump in a way that made her uneasy as to the propriety of it and asked constantly how this baby was to climb out.
What should she say?
The normally so frank Mrs Browning was no help when asked to suggest what should be said.
‘Birth is a natural event,’ was all she offered, ‘and I will tell Pen so.’
She may have told him but it did not stop the questions.
‘When the baby is ready,’ Wilson said, ‘it will find a way out and if you wish to know more you must ask your mother and father.’
Whether they explained further she did not know but the questions changed in direction.
‘When will it be born, Lily?’ was the next refrain and here she could be truthful.
‘Nobody knows, only God,’ she told him, only to be asked if God would divulge the information if prayed to very hard.
He wanted a promise that as soon as the baby appeared he should be sent for, ‘even in the dead of night’ so that he might be the first to kiss it.
In the event, he very nearly was.
This birth was so quick and easy, Wilson could not think it the same process as Oreste's.
One moment she was directing Maria in the making of knead cakes, the next she was taken with a sensation of wishing to bear down, no pains preceding it, and had a struggle to get herself to bed and to have Ferdinando and the midwife sent for.
Half an hour later, her second son emerged, as strong and healthy as the first, and Pen Browning arrived two hours later to go into paroxysms of delight.
Lying in bed that November day, Wilson looked at the baby cradled in her arms and felt dizzy at the sight of his uncanny resemblance to his brother.
Only the room she was in and the company she was among marked the difference.
All around her were the smiling faces so lacking at Oreste's birth, for Ellen and William could not match the pride of Ferdinando nor the ecstasy of Pen, and she felt loved and treasured not pitifully alone and bereft.
Yet the baby, in looking and seeming the same, distressed her.
Tears ran down her cheeks as she thought of her first-born, of how he ought to be here, a part of the family circle.
Writing to Ellen as soon as she could manage it, she could not help confessing:
— holding this second baby Ellen puts me in mind more and more of Oreste and I grieve to have him.
It is not right we should be parted.
In no manner does the birth of this child put the other out of my mind nor can I accept he is a substitute but rather a reminder as if God wished to show me what I have lost and reprimand me for my carelessness.
When you tell Oreste that he has been blessed with a brother I beg you to remind him that he is his mother's first-born and as such has pride of place in her heart.
We are to christen this child Pilade, being the name of Ferdinando's maternal grandfather whom he wishes to honour.
Teach Oreste how to say it.
It is pronounced ‘Pil’ as in pill ‘a’as in the exclamation ‘ah!’and ‘de’as in day.
The whole together is three syllables and pleasing I think to the tongue.
Mrs Browning at least thought so.
Wilson took the baby in to see her as soon as she was about and he was admired but, she fancied, with some sense of distancing.
Mrs Browning did not wish to hold him, saying she feared her arms were not strong enough and that her cough might disturb him.
She coughed, Wilson noticed, all the time, not the hacking, tearing deep coughs of a bad attack but persistent little coughs, as though trying and failing to clear her throat.
‘So are you well, Wilson?’ she asked, lying back on the sofa, white and drained-looking.
‘I am fair, ma'am.’
‘Better than I, at any rate.’
‘Is it the old trouble, ma'am?’
‘Oh yes, nothing more.
Except the life has gone out of me and in some curious way I hardly care.’
‘And do you write, ma'am?’
‘Write?
Good heavens, Wilson, I have nothing to write now, only lines here and there that add up to precious little.
If I could take up my pen again and find some hard, satisfying work it would be the better for me.’
‘Only there is a young lady as lodges with me, who asks me every day what Mrs Browning writes and is eager to know for she announces she lives for your poetry.’
This produced a laugh which unfortunately brought on such a fit of coughing that Wilson was obliged to put Pilade down and attend to the invalid as though she were still her maid.
Relieved, Mrs Browning did at least say, ‘You are the best of nurses, dear, and I miss your skill.’
‘It is nothing, ma'am, and I am glad to assist you.
If ever you should need me I will come, night or day, and gladly.’
Then she saw Mrs Browning's eyes fill with tears and her hand was pressed.
Annunciata, coming in singing with coffee, was reprimanded for causing a headache to begin on that instant and Wilson could not help feeling triumphant.
But she knew perfectly well it was a foolish and misplaced sense of petty triumph for the old order had changed irrevocably.
Though she might be an ever welcome visitor in the Casa Guidi, though the traffic between the two houses might be unrestricted, she saw all too clearly by the start of that New Year of 1858, that her part in the Brownings' life was peripheral.
She felt excluded from their world even though she could not have been better informed; the trouble was Ferdinando still belonged to that world.
He came to spend the night, by agreement, twice a week and she saw him every day but there was no denying that he seemed a visitor and never a member of her household.
What concerned her did not truly concern him, however much she sought to involve him.
He did not want to be bothered with the problems she encountered, with water that seemed brackish or ceilings that had cracked — they were her concerns and, as she complained in a letter to Minnie:— I am driven to distraction with those household concerns with which you will be familiar Minnie but then in your case you have but to report them for them to be seen to by the master who will instruct the butler to bring in workmen and I am obliged to go out and seek my own help which is no easy thing.
The landlord is abroad and the caretaker seems to have no power to maintain these dilapidated premises.
In other ways I suppose I could be said to prosper tolerably well.
I have this day bid farewell to the Misses Wynne, two English ladies who have been as friends to me and I am sorry to see them go, and have taken in Miss Hawarth, an old friend of Mr Browning's together with two other ladies who will stay until Easter.
I am pleased to have ladies since they are more comfortable to be with and understand better the difficulties I labour under with a young baby and poor help and no husband constantly at my elbow.
But I tell you Minnie, for all the independence,I had rather have my old job back and be in service with Mrs Browning .
I daresay you find this strange and may think I am ungrateful when after all I have been given the chance to set up for myself which is not given to many of our station but it is a surprise to me too.
I have upon my shoulders so many cares as a landlady that I feel bowed down whereas, and I do not think my memory faults me, I was freer as a maid.
It would be otherwise if I had my husband with me and my first-born but as it is I feel neither one thing or the other.
There is more to running a boarding house than ever you would think Minnie and hardest of all is the impossibility of finding reliable and trustworthy staff who are not forever thinking of themselves first in a way we would not have dared.
But bit by bit, Wilson became aware that she had some small skill in the matter of keeping a boarding house and that her future, and her family's, might indeed lie in that direction.
She seemed at any rate, to satisfy lodgers.
The Misses Wynne sent two other ladies, rather considerably older than themselves, with a heavy recommendation and they in turn sent a widow and her daughter.
Miss Hawarth likewise procured several paying guests, moving Wilson to declare she could not imagine why any lady would wish to lodge in her poorly decorated and furnished house when they might find themselves a place a good deal more attractive and comfortable.
‘Ah, Wilson,’ Miss Hawarth had said with a smile, ‘the keeper is more important than the house and then there are your connections, you know.’
‘Connections?’ she had echoed, entirely bewildered.
‘Why yes, dear, you are the good friend of the Brownings.’
And so it seemed.
Lady after lady breathed heavier when Pen dashed in and out, and on the days when Wilson was a little late with the supper — which she now undertook to provide — on account of having been delayed taking tea with Mrs Browning there was not a word of complaint but only a diffident enquiry as to how the venerable poetess had seemed.
If it had not been for the shamelessness of it, Wilson felt she might have been sorely tempted to exploit this extraordinary advantage.
As it was, she concentrated on organising her household to better effect.
Her days were very full.
She now had a girl to watch over Pilade and, as well as the still indolent Maria, another young woman, rather more energetic, who fulfilled the combined roles of house- and parlour-maid.
Wilson sent the washing out and did the cooking and marketing herself.
It gave her great satisfaction that after a couple of months she proved as expert as Ferdinando, learning rapidly how to drive a hard bargain.
Ferdinando, she came to see, had never done that, however much the Brownings were convinced he did.
Watching him in the market she saw how popular he was, and certainly he had an eye for the best produce on offer, but when it came to the exchange of cash he parted with it too readily.
She saw women, old gnarled Italian housewives, who did not care about popularity, who were quite composed in the face of sour looks, getting fruit and vegetables and even meat at a quarter the price paid by her affable husband and she resolved to become one of these women.
She let Ferdinando teach her how to judge an aubergine ripe and a chicken fresh and then she copied those older women she had seen for the rest.
She learned to keep her face absolutely still, not to smile, and to look as if , on the brink of completing a bargain, she was going to walk away in disgust.
At first, her face burned and she was often defeated in her purpose but within a few weeks she was indistinguishable from the seasoned bargainers.
Ferdinando did not like it.
The market people passed comments on his wife and, he said, threw doubt on his ability to better her.
He frowned when reporting this and said it was not good that she should be so hard.
He preferred her, he said, to be the gentle creature he had married.
Wilson, telling Mrs Browning of this, laughed.
‘Gentle, indeed!’ she said ‘And if I were as gentle in the market as I have been for him at home, how does he think I would manage?’
‘All men wish all women to be gentle,’ Mrs Browning commented, ‘just as all women wish men to be strong and to alter this we must first start with our sons and what they are brought up to.
We ought not to admire them when they put up their fists and fight nor mock them when they are afraid and tell them they must be a man.
‘Wilson looked doubtful.
It was not at all the response she wanted, but Mrs Browning was again in full flow.
‘Penini knows I think it good that he is considerate and sensitive — he has been brought up to see no merit in violence, and when he is a man he will be as his father, entirely lacking in those so-called manly virtues of domination and arrogance towards women.’
There was a pause and before Wilson could think how to reply, she added, ‘But I may never see him as a man,’ in a low voice.
‘Oh, now come, ma'am, do not speak so.
You are stronger than you were and with summer arriving you will once more pick up.
‘Pick up?
Perhaps.’
There was no confidence in her answer.
Wilson saw the doubt in her eyes and the droop of her body and felt a shiver pass through her own.
It was easy to keep promising that some sun and heat would work its usual miracle but it had been a hard, cold winter and almost everyone had suffered from influenza, Mrs Browning worst of all.
It seemed a long time since she had been out of her apartment, longer still since she had taken a walk.
Wilson knew that some visiting Americans had let it be widely known in Florence that they considered Mrs Browning little more than a ghost and though she had laughed such gossip to scorn she now saw there was perhaps real cause for alarm.
‘What you need, ma'am,’ she suddenly said, ‘is a holiday, a proper holiday.’
‘I know, and I have plans to have it, if I can but gather the energy in a month or two.
It was a while before these plans were divulged and when they were, Wilson's first reaction was one of alarm.
The Brownings, it appeared were going to France, to some seaside place, in Brittany perhaps, where they would be joined by members of both their families, somewhere new, somewhere stimulating away from the tired attractions of Lucca.
All very well, but did it mean Ferdinando would be taken with them, together with Annunciata?
It was all she wanted to know and did not dare ask directly.
What wounded her was her husband's indifference.
When she pointed out this might mean she would be on her own yet again throughout another summer he shrugged and said it could not be helped and he had no choice.
She boiled at his lack of thought for her and replied, louder than she had intended that indeed he had, that, unlike last year, there was a choice.
Then she brought him her account book, which she had kept faithfully from the first day of opening her house, and showed him the state of things.
Since the Brownings' present had paid the year's rent and since she had managed the household so economically there was an actual income, growing monthly, from the boarders, upon which they could live.
If Ferdinando left the Brownings service and came in with her, adopting his rightful position, then she could manage even better and take more boarders and they would be self-supporting besides living together always.
No one could have mistaken the hesitation in his manner.
She could see his brain struggling to find an escape route and that he should want one hurt and shocked her.
She watched him, waited scornfully and yet was taken unawares when he blurted out, ‘And Oreste?
The money we remit to England, to your sister?
It would not be possible.’
It would not indeed.
All of Ferdinando's wages went to Ellen, save for the smallest amount he kept for his personal pleasure.
Often, she had felt for him as they both stood in front of Mr Browning as the money order was made.
‘All, Ferdinando?’
Mr Browning would ask him and he would nod, but squeeze her hand and hang his head.
She had always told him how proud she was of him, that he should work so hard to support his son in a far-off country and how one day she would tell Oreste it was due to his father's efforts that he had been so well looked after.
Now, if he left service, it was true they would no longer be able to afford to remit the regular payments.
What was she asking him to do?
To throw over that stability she had insisted they must have.
It was too soon to do so.
In September, another year's rent must be paid and the money for that would not this time come from the Brownings.
Writing to Ellen, she could not help be bitter, remarking:— all life seems a trap again Ellen and I expect it has too often seemed so to you and will yet.
However hard I work and struggle for the future there are ever snares to catch me and sometimes I see no end to it and think myself doomed to pass my days in toil and nothing else.
All of which you will be tired of hearing but it has been brought about by my great fear that my husband will be taken off by the Brownings once more, this time to France and there is nothing we can do to prevent it they being the masters of our fate.
But I am resolved that if it must be so I will obtain permission from the Brownings to have my husband journey to England at the end of the holiday and bring his son back with him.
He would not need above four days' leave from them and since Oreste is now or will be by then nearly three which is the age Pen first travelled at I cannot see any reason why he need inconvenience the party.
The more I think on it the more I see that this cruel sentence may yet be turned to advantage and may be God's way of effecting what I most desire and have been unable to bring about.
I will write again as soon as Ferdinando hears he is to go and when I do you must prepare Oreste for the change Ellen so that it is not sprung on him.
But before the decision had been made Wilson was astonished to receive the speediest reply she had ever had from Ellen and quite the longest.
She wrote, with an unaccustomed fluency, which made her sister wonder if the words had been thought up by her alone, that:— it would not be good for Oreste to leave here at this moment since he has been ill and though he is making a good recovery the doctor who you can be sure I was quick to call and no expense being spared but your money put to good use has said it would injure his general well-being to travel in his weakened state.
He has said the change in diet and water would be calamitous and that he ought to rest where all is familiar for six months or more.
I tell you this sister only that you may be warned and not endanger your dear son's health or put your husband to an unnecessary and useless journey.
Wilson was certainly warned — warned instantly by the absurd nature of the letter, of Ellen's sense of panic.
It was all too obvious what her plot was and she went straight away to see Mrs Browning, resolved to ask outright if Ferdinando was to go to France and if so to plead her case.
She was at first misunderstood.
‘Why, Wilson,’ Mrs Browning said, opening her eyes wide, ‘it had not occurred to me, nor I am sure to my husband, to think Ferdinando might not go with us.
How would we manage, dear?
He is our servant, we depend upon him.’
‘Ma'am, I wish only to know.’
‘Then I think you must take it that you do know.’
To Mrs Browning's clear surprise, Wilson smiled and looked pleased.
‘Then, ma'am, I beg of you, let Ferdinando go to England and bring home our son.’
Rapidly, she outlined her plan, stressing the ease of it all and the perfect opportunity it represented to right what she must surely agree was a manifest wrong.
‘And if those four days he will need to collect Oreste were to come off Ferdinando's own holiday which he would not take again then you would lose nothing, ma'am, if you please.’
There was a dead silence.
Mrs Browning put down her teacup and cleared her throat.
Wilson waited, not sure how to interpret the sudden change of atmosphere.
Carefully, Mrs Browning dabbed at the corners of her mouth with a handkerchief.
Still she said nothing.
Desperately, Wilson burst out, ‘I hope I have not spoken out of turn, ma'am, I hope I have not given offence?’
‘I am admittedly a little taken aback, Wilson,’ Mrs Browning finally said, her eyes lowered and concentrating on the empty cup.
‘There is a great deal to take in in what you have said, too much to be done all in a moment.
I will have to speak to my husband and consider carefully with him.
Such an agreement could not be undertaken lightly.’
‘No, ma'am.
When might I look for an answer?
Only I would wish to tell my sister as soon as possible and put paid to her nonsense.
‘I really cannot say, Wilson.
All is confusion as to our precise plans as yet.
I only wish I was clear as to what we will do myself, you may be sure.’
Yet the answer came speedily, the very next day, and was a shock.
The party would leave for France at the beginning of July and Ferdinando would not be of it.
He was told this and not Wilson.
When he came to tell her, thinking she would be pleased (though, as he knew she suspected, he was not exactly pleased himself) she stared at him in disbelief and said over and over ‘Not go? not go?’ like a parrot.
He spread his hands wide in a gesture of incomprehension and invited her to make of this unexpected turn of events what she could.
To his dismay, she wept and only then did he hear of the plan with which she had gone to Mrs Browning.
Then he too was distressed, seeing how it would all have fitted in.
‘Now I must write to Ellen,’ Wilson sobbed, ‘and she will think I have bowed to her wishes and feel even more the mistress of the situation.’
Wiping her tears with the corner of her apron and clutching the baby to her she searched for the reasons for this volte-face .
What had she done?
What had she said?
Over and over she asked the questions and became so demented by them that, though she trembled with indignation, she once more went into the Casa Guidi and, controlling herself as best she could, asked to see her old mistress.
Annunciata, with evident enjoyment, said Mrs Browning had the headache and could see no one.
‘I have nursed her with the headache,’ Wilson said, ‘it is nothing to me or to her.’
Back the maid went, only to reappear shaking her head sorrowfully and saying this headache was so very bad as to quite incapacitate the invalid and render her unfit even for Wilson.
Just as she was turning to go, shaking with mortification, Mr Browning came out of his room and said, ‘Ah, Wilson,’ and she turned, her face working with the effort of trying to calm herself.
He saw her state at once and without another word took her arm and led her into the little sitting room.
‘Now come, Wilson,’ he said, ‘sit down and let us talk about this sensibly.’
They talked sensibly, for full half an hour, but at the end of it Wilson felt neither clearer nor happier, only numb.
Mr Browning had expressed himself surprised that she had failed to recognise and acknowledge the consideration for herself and her well-being which had influenced their decision about Ferdinando.
Had they not remembered her misery at being in Florence alone, without him, the previous summer?
Of course they had, and remembering had made them examine their arrangements more closely to see if they could not do without their man-servant.
They had known it was not right to separate a man from his wife for several months when she had a young baby and a business, in a manner of speaking, to care for.
And now this was the thanks they got, these tears of hers, this dismay at what they had trusted would be hailed as good news.
‘I ask you, Wilson,’ Mr Browning said, gentle but aggrieved’
‘what did you expect of us?’
She sat with bowed head for a moment then looked directly at him and replied, ‘It is only my child, sir, the wanting of my child, and suddenly seeing a way to get him, and then it being taken away.
I am confused, sir.’
Mr Browning shifted uncomfortably.
‘Certainly,’ he said, ‘it is hard to be separated from your first child.
I have often thought so.
But you could not in all honesty, Wilson, expect us to make that our first consideration.’
‘No, sir.
But it seemed, sir, when first I talked to Mrs Browning, before ever I mentioned my plan, or else I would not have mentioned it, it seemed Ferdinando was to go, that there was no choice, that he was nigh essential to your comfort, and then, having spoken out, to find he was not and therefore he would not go and my plan was to come to nothing — it is hard to understand, sir.’
‘Our plans changed, Wilson, and my wife had not kept pace with them.
We need to be as small a party as possible in order to accommodate in one house, one holiday house we shall rent, all of us and members of our respective families, do you see?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Well, then, there is no mystery after all.
And to look on the bright side, you will have your husband with you throughout the summer and I daresay you will enjoy it very much.’
She could not say, at the end of it, that she had.
She could not even say she truly felt she had had Ferdinando with her those four months.
What precisely he did with himself all day long she never could fathom, but he was not in her company above two hours or so each day.
He made great play of all the tasks in the Casa Guidi he had been left to do — furniture to repair, decorations to see to — but to Wilson's experienced eye they would not have occupied an energetic person more than a month at the most.
But then Ferdinando was no longer energetic.
The fearful heat of the city seemed to encourage him to sleep half his time away and she had never felt more English than when she observed his devotion that summer to the long siesta .
And he drank.
Living with the Brownings, his intake had been modest but living with her it rapidly increased.
She did not provide him with wine, to be sure, but he took it in the caffè he frequented, a caffè where politics were argued over far into the night and the arguers fell asleep at the table.
Often, he came home exhausted at dawn and slept the whole of the day away.
Her anger grew and with it she became shrewish.
It horrified her to hear her own voice screaming at her husband for his indolence but she could not help herself.
At least Ferdinando's reaction was to be penitent and vow he would not visit the caffè again.
Only with Pilade did he act as she would wish a husband and father to act.
With the baby, he was gentleness itself, playing with him and caring for him with true devotion.
On the evenings when the three of them went abroad together, the worst of the heat over, Wilson felt more content than at any other time, more part of a family.
Ferdinando, a clean white blouse on and freshly shaved, looked the handsome fellow who had first attracted her and the way he carried his son, with ease and pride, made her feel warm towards him.
No Englishman, she fancied, would bear his child in quite such a way.
And she knew herself to look better, clad in what passed for finery these days, than she did in the house where with so much work to do she had not a moment to spare for her appearance.
Those evenings were the good times, when she did not question so fiercely what she was making of her life.
Otherwise, day after day, a restlessness had seized her again, to be afraid.
It was harder than ever to face up to its cause.
Did she not now have a husband, a child, a home?
So why should she be plagued once more with feelings of frustration?
What did she want, apart from Oreste?
Always, she came back to that, with some relief: everything could be explained by her yearning for her other child, the root of all her discontent.
But even as she was citing this as the reason, citing it only to herself, she was wondering whether it were true.
Suppose, by some miracle, Oreste was brought to her — would she then be happy?
Was that all it would take to banish the feeling of gloom which so often half-incapacitated her?
It was no good confiding in Ferdinando who merely stared at her as though she were mad, should she even begin to confess her inner dissatisfaction.
Life to him was simple: food, wine, sleep, love, and as little work as decently possible.
Of the love, she knew he was growing tired but since her own ardour had considerably diminished after Pilade's birth she was not disposed to criticise him for this.
They were now an old married couple and it was to be expected.
But she did not like the way his eye followed a pretty girl, nor the way theirs could sometimes follow him.
His appetite for all the other necessities of life had increased and she suspected his carnal instincts were merely turned in another direction.
This seemed, more than anything, to symbolise the difference between them.
It made her grow cold to think what her marriage might become.
And then, in September, three weeks before the Brownings returned, she received a letter which changed everything.
It was black-edged and addressed in Ellen's hand, the very communication she had always dreaded and feared.
Terror gripped her so completely that she was incapable of opening it and let it fall to the floor where — she very nearly followed it in a faint.
She remembered mother's compassion in saving her from the certain shock of such evil envelopes.
But though the blood was pounding in her head and her vision was blurred she managed to take up the envelope again and lie down with it on her bed.
It was mid-morning, the sun not quite at its highest, the rooms still bearable, with every shutter and curtain now closed ready for the afternoon glare.
Pilade was asleep, Ferdinando in the Casa Guidi supervising the painting of Mr Browning's study.
She could hear Maria clattering about with her water buckets in the yard and far off church bells ringing somewhere north of the Arno.
She found herself thinking that when she had forced herself to read how and when Oreste had died she would take her sleeping baby and drown both him and herself forthwith.
She would do it at night when it would be the easiest thing in the world.
All her agitation of the summer she suddenly saw as moving towards this end — she had known, without knowing it, of this tragedy, she had been what her old mistress had called ‘pre-sentimental’.
And now she was quite prepared and calm and ready to end it all.
Opening the letter carefully her hands were quite steady and her eyes focused on Ellen's words without difficulty.
Only they were not the words she had expected: it was William who had died.
Oreste was well.
It was a sign and she accepted it as such.
She got off her bed resolute and determined.
Life, her life, the lives of Oreste and Pilade and Ferdinando, must be valued.
Oreste had been spared and it could only be for a purpose.
Swiftly, she wrote to Ellen, exclaiming at — the cruelty of this my poor sister when you have had so much to bear.
I weep to hear of this latest affliction and so unexpected with him in the prime of his life and never an illness and being a big strong man.
I do not rightly understand how the medical men could not save him after the accident since you say the cut seemed small and did not appear to trouble him but I have heard that for the blood to be poisoned it takes only a pin-prick and that a cut where there is manure about can have this effect if not noticed.
Ellen, I would that you could come to me now that you are alone and would ask you to consider it seriously.
What is there to keep you in that sorry place?
It is not your real home, you have no family together.
We are only two of us now and we ought to be closer.
Think, Ellen, what Mother would have advised.
Why not, dear, sell the house and come with Oreste to us?
It was the perfect solution.
Eagerly, Wilson waited for an answer, quite convinced of what it would be.
THE MOMENT THE Brownings returned — Mrs Browning looking, Wilson thought, rather worse than better after her French holiday — Ferdinando reformed.
It was galling to her to observe his change in demeanour.
There were no more sustained bouts of drinking, no more hanging around the caffè and he was altogether brisker and more efficient.
At least when he was not with her she now knew where he was but the comfort this brought her was not as complete as it might have been because he was also with Annunciata during those times.
The girl had changed.
Four months in France had quietened her down and at the same time given her a veneer of sophistication quite lacking before.
Wilson smiled to see it, a trifle grimly.
Hadn't it happened to her, in her own day?
Annunciata had eyes and ears and both had been busy conveying subtle messages.
Whereas before she had been a rough-and-ready Italian peasant, flashing with high spirits, now she thought a little about how she seemed to others and tempered her boisterous good humour.
She walked rather than ran, smiled rather than laughed out loud, dropped her eyes instead of staring frankly.
The effect was extraordinary.
All the natural grace in her now flowed through her body, unspoiled by her bursts of youthful energy.
She was quite beautiful.
Mrs Browning was as aware of this as Wilson and indeed appeared to find nothing hurtful in mentioning it.
Watching Annunciata remove her coffee cup she remarked to Wilson, ‘You will hardly recognise Annunciata, Wilson.
Has she not improved out of all recognition?’
‘Indeed she has.’
‘We have tamed her on our travels, I think, and yet not taken from her that which is precious.’
‘Precious?’
‘Her youth, Wilson, the most precious thing of all, you will agree.’
Wilson hesitated only a moment.
‘Why, no, ma'am, I don't know that it is the most precious thing of all, if I understand you rightly.
There are things dearer to me, at any rate, than lost youth.’
Mrs Browning was amused.
‘Are you sure, Wilson?
What can be more precious than life itself and if one is youthful there is more of it.’
‘I had rather have the certainties of middle-age, ma'am.’
‘You are not middle-aged, so how can you know this?
And it is a loathsome term, I detest it.
One is young or one is mature and that is all there is to it.’
She spoke with such vehemence Wilson thought it better not to risk a reply, though in her head she practised saying what nonsense she thought Mrs Browning spoke.
But then she had always reacted strangely to the subject of ageing, had always feared it.
as if reading her thoughts, Mrs Browning then said, ‘It is not that I am afraid of dying, you know.
I have no fear, knowing it is but a passing from one world to another.
But the mask of age is ugly to me.
I like to have young people about me.’
‘Children, ma'am?’
‘Especially children.
Your own Pilade is a pleasure to me, Wilson.
Such a fine child, so like his father.’
‘I hope he will grow to be finer than his father, may God bless him.’
‘You say that with some feeling, Wilson?
Finer than his father?
What can that mean?
I wish nothing more for Pen than that he should be as fine as his father.’
‘It is different, ma'am.’
‘In what way?’
‘You are satisfied Mr Browning is fine.
I wish I were satisfied my Ferdinando is.’
‘Wilson!
What disloyalty is this?
What cause can you have for such doubt?’
‘Oh, cause enough.’
‘But Ferdinando is the very model of a servant.’
‘He is not the very model of a husband.’
‘Ought you to be saying this, dear?
Will you not regret it?’
‘There is nothing to regret.
I have said nothing, only that my husband is lacking in perfection, I believe.’
How they had got onto this Wilson could not remember, but Mrs Browning was the more worried.
If it had not been for a visitor arriving then and her being obliged to leave instantly she had no doubt they would have waded into deeper waters and she knew she would not have been sorry.
But as it was, Mrs Eckley was announced and Wilson stood up.
She was not quick enough to be out of the room before Mrs Eckley was in it and found herself trapped by her between chair and door.
She dropped a curtsey and was waiting to be allowed through the door when Mrs Eckley said, ‘Is this not Wilson, whom I have heard so much about, Ba?’
The use of ‘Ba’ registered with Wilson more than her own name — she had not realised Mrs Eckley was on such familiar terms.
‘Why yes,’ Mrs Browning said from her sofa, ‘but surely you are acquainted?’
‘I believe not,’ Mrs Eckley said and to Wilson's surprise held out her hand.
‘How do you do, Wilson?’
‘Well, ma'am, thank you.’
Her hand was retained and to her astonishment given the slightest but most certain squeeze.
Wilson did not presume to squeeze back.
She suddenly felt in a great hurry to escape, instinctively disliking this pretty, richly-dressed young American.
But it seemed Mrs Eckley had no intention of allowing her to take her leave yet.
‘Ba,’ she said, ‘did you not say Wilson was in the way of being in touch?,
Bewildered, Wilson turned and saw Mrs Browning had coloured and seemed embarrassed.
‘We had some success, one winter, in Rome and that is all,’ she said.
‘More success than we have had?’
‘No, no.
It was not at all the same thing.
You must let Wilson go, Sophie, she has much to do.’
So that was the attraction of this unlikely friendship.
Pondering what she had just heard, Wilson went home, wondering if Mr Browning felt the same distrust of Mrs Eckley as she did.
Questioning Ferdinando when next she saw him she grew exasperated with his inability to notice anything at all.
He had no idea how often Mrs Eckley came nor how long she stayed nor what Mr Browning thought.
It was, he said, his job to cook and see to his master's clothes and open the door and go marketing, not to be a spy.
All he knew was that the Eckleys were lending the Brownings their best carriage so they might travel the more comfortably to Rome for the winter.
Wilson froze.
All speculation about Mrs Eckley disappeared from her mind.
‘Rome?’ she echoed.
Ferdinando obligingly repeated his piece of news without seeming to think it was either of interest or importance.
‘Rome,’ he said, ‘for the winter.
My master is anxious to take my mistress south as soon as possible.’
‘And you?
What of you?
Is it to be as before?
Does Annunciata go and you stay?’
He shrugged, spread his hands in the usual gesture, did not seem to care.
But Wilson knew the answer without enquiring any further.
Of course Ferdinando would be taken to Rome.
Rome was not France, he would be essential in Rome, and if-they took him with Annunciata she knew what would happen in no time at all and how it would leave her.
She had not had an answer from Ellen but she could not wait.
That very evening, leaving Pilade asleep, she went into the Casa Guidi and formally requested an interview with Mr and Mrs Browning.
Ferdinando stared at her as though she had gone mad.
‘What am I to say?’ he whispered.
‘What I have just told you,’ she answered sharply.
‘Go, ask.’
She took care to remain on the threshold while he did so.
After a moment, Mr Browning came out of the drawing room.
‘Wilson?
What is this?
You stand on such ceremony, at this hour?’
‘I wish to speak with you, sir.’
‘Then speak.
Come, come through.
My wife is already prepared for bed but then you are no stranger to that.’
She followed him through the drawing room and into the bedroom where Mrs Browning, a thick shawl round her shoulders, sat up in bed.
She was relieved to see no sign of Pen, before whom she would not have wished to speak freely.
Mr Browning drew up a chair for her, as nice as could be, and sat down himself.
He folded his arms, yawned, begged their pardon and smiled.
‘Do begin, Wilson,’ he encouraged her, as though she had promised an entertainment.
She felt awkward sitting down but, since she had been bidden to do so, could not choose to stand.
Twisting her handkerchief in her lap she began straight away by saying, ‘I believe you are to go to Rome soon, sir, ma'am?’
Mr Browning, with an expression on his face that said he guessed what this was about and it did not please him, nodded.
‘Go on, Wilson, though it may not be of any use.’
‘No, sir.
It is, sir, ma'am, that I would wish to return to your service and come with you.’
Mrs Browning gave an exclamation of astonishment — a great breathing-out and almost a groan that came with it — and Mr Browning simply stared at her in disbelief.
‘Come with us?
But your child, Wilson, and your house.
Do you hear what you are saying?
Are you thinking?
'Yes, sir, I have thought deeply and I have a plan.
My sister Ellen, sir, who has had charge of my first-born this three long years, her husband William died of blood poisoning in September and she is now alone and I have written even before I heard of the plan to go to Rome to beg her to come out here to me with Oreste and if she does, as I think she will, having no other family or ties, then she might look after my house and other child for the winter and we would all profit without further trouble.’
There was a silence so complete she could hear the slight rasp in Mrs Browning's chest, a rasp that broke into a cough she seemed to welcome.
Her husband leapt to give her a glass of water and Wilson to help her sit upright.
When the fit was over none of them knew how to act.
‘It was the shock,’ Mrs Browning murmured.
‘Such a plan, Wilson!’
Mr Browning paced about and then said, ‘You place us in a difficult position, Wilson, and one we can hardly approve.
To take you, a married woman and mother, away from your child when you have grieved so sorely for the other does not make sense.
If, as you say, your sister will come and bring Oreste then surely you have achieved your dearest wish?
How could you then leave, leave both children?’
‘Only for the winter, sir.’
‘Robert,’ Mrs Browning broke in, ‘that has little to do with it, you are forgetting Annunciata, dear.
How could we set her aside?
We are not even able to consider this extraordinary offer.’
But Mr Browning had become fascinated and ignored his wife's point.
‘Wilson,’ he said firmly, ‘what lies behind this?
Why should you choose, if you could, and I do not say that you could, to leave your children?
And why would you wish to become a maid once more when you have risen higher?
It does not seem sensible.’
‘It is not, sir,’ she said calmly, ‘but I am driven to it.
If my husband goes to Rome then it is all up with me.’
‘Up with you?
I miss your meaning entirely.’
‘He will succumb to temptation, sir.’
‘Oh, come, Wilson — think better of the man than that.
Why, Ferdinando is the most dutiful, most loyal…’
‘He is a man, sir, and Annunciata is a beautiful young woman.’
‘Take care, Wilson, these are serious accusations.’
‘I accuse no one, sir.
I only say he is a man and will act like a man, given the chance.
He is human and so is she and all the marriage certificates in the world would not keep him faithful if he were tempted in those circumstances.’
‘It is a simple case of jealousy,’ Mrs Browning said quietly, ‘and we can have nothing to do with it.
And since you push the issue, Wilson, my husband is a man too — no Robert, let me finish — he is a man too and subject to like temptation and to the charge of masculine appetites and yet I do not doubt his fidelity, wherever he goes.
Cannot you have the same faith, Wilson?
Cannot your love conquer this jealousy?
You are Ferdinando's wife, he is the father of your sons, is that not enough to make you trust in him?,
Wilson smiled, pityingly, and folded her arms.
How superior she suddenly felt to that woman in the bed, the woman whom she had so long admired, even idolised, but who knew little of human nature after all.
It hardly mattered what her own husband did or did not do when his wife languished in bed, an invalid.
Perhaps Mr Browning was entirely above reproach, though there were those who saw him constantly at Isa Blagden's and thought that friendship promised more; perhaps he was able to subdue the desires of a healthy man in his prime, but Ferdinando would not be able to if temptation was set in his way.
And consider, as Mrs Browning had never done, the close proximity in which servants lived in these rented apartments — it was very often more than flesh could stand.
So she smiled on and stood there and in exasperation Mrs Browning said, ‘I do not know that we should continue this discussion, Wilson.
I think it better if you leave us now.’
‘Then there is no hope?’
‘That is a touch melodramatic, surely.
If you mean will we consider your desire to return to our service, then I am afraid not.
It is impossible.’
‘Ferdinando could leave us,’ Mr Browning said suddenly.
‘He would have no difficulty finding another situation in Florence.’
‘Must you show such generosity, Robert?
Is there any need for self-denial of this order?’
‘He will not leave, ma'am,’ Wilson broke in, quite matter-of-fact.
‘He is devoted, as all of us are.
He must go and I must lose my husband and that is all there is to it.
That is the way of things, the way the world works.’
She saw a look of real dislike cross Mrs Browning's face, quickly followed by an expression of exasperation.
Mr Browning motioned his wife to be quiet and taking Wilson's arm conducted her to the door, saying something to the effect that she must not give way to gloomy thoughts and that doubtless she was tired with a young baby still nursing and a house to run.
She might even, he suggested, as they went to the stairs, benefit from a quiet winter with her sister to help and think what joy lay ahead with Oreste brought to her at last.
She allowed herself to be shown out, allowed herself to be talked to but said not a word.
It was her old mistress from whom she had hoped for much, woman to woman, and none of his soothing phrases meant anything to her.
As she descended the stairs, she appreciated for the first time how far she had fallen from grace.
She had suspected in Lucca, all those months ago, that Mrs Browning no longer cared for her as once she had done but she saw that it was worse than that: she was a nuisance, plain and simple.
Someone who annoyed with her need for sympathy, who irritated with her shameless display of pathos.
They wanted to be rid of her, would be glad to go to Rome and leave her miserable face behind.
And as for Ferdinando, he would do what he was told, always.
Lacking in initiative, he would be obedient and obedience to employers came before that to his wife.
Besides, Florence was dull in the winter, even for a Florentine.
Who would forgo the chance of a winter in Rome, the centre of things?
No, there was no hope of her husband exploding with rage at the thought of leaving her and swearing that he would find a way to remain.
She did not even expect it.
And then the letter came from Ellen and her world seemed to darken further.
Ellen was emphatic:— I could not take myself to a Foreign Land as you did Lily and never wanted such a thing and though you would be there that alone would in no way satisfy me and I should be afraid.
I will end my days in my own country and that is certain.
Nor could I contemplate the journey which fills me with fear near to fainting.
As for Oreste, he talks fluently now and it is of course English and there would be much confusion for him.
We are well and have no worries being happy together and not in need William leaving me better provided for than ever I had expected.
Your money is spent only on Oreste you can be assured for I have enough.
I work at the big house taking Oreste with me it is kitchen work and not difficult and gives me extra.
So do not look for us coming Lily but think rather of you coming home if you have a mind.
Wilson's disappointment was matched only by her horror at Ellen's suggestion —never would she return to East Retford.
But what alarmed and frightened her most and had her leaping for her pen was this talk of ‘us’, of Oreste and Ellen being a pair who were ‘happy together’ and would never come to Italy.
In anger she wrote:— whatever you have a mind to do Ellen it is not for you to dictate Oreste's future and I confess I was disturbed to have you write as though he were your son and not mine,which he is and you know you cannot keep him and that it would be wrong.
Next summer when Pilade is weaned which I will do long before then I am determined to come myself to England if there is no other way and bring my son back here and I have started saving towards it.
As for the English speaking, a child of far more than three has no difficulty learning Italian and is so far from being wedded to the tongue he has begun with that he forgets it within a few months so do not say to me that is an obstacle.
You will perhaps be affronted by my frankness Ellen but I am distressed and if you were to think on it you would understand.
I am besides about to be deserted by my husband, who is to go this next week to Rome to prepare the way for the Brownings.
That would be loss enough if I watched him go with only longing for him in my heart but there is instead a bitterness because he is happy to go life there being preferable to here where there is only his tired wife for company.
I do not know how I shall manage this winter and dread it not for the weather which is rarely fierce, but for the loneliness.
There will be no one to speak with except Miss Blagden for a month or two when she comes to inspect the Casa Guidi before leaving Florence herself and otherwise not a solitary congenial soul.
I have only two boarders, both of whom leave before Christmas, and I am not likely to replace them easily.
It is a struggle Ellen and no mistake and though I have been thrifty as mother brought us all up to be and the rent is paid for the next year I am hard put to pay wages and still eat and keep warm.
At least warmth was no trouble.
The moment Ferdinando left, with only the most cursory of farewells, to go by train and boat to Rome in advance of the main Party, the icy wind which had swept through the city most unexpectedly throughout October suddenly dropped and it was as if it were summer again.
On the morning of November 18th, when Wilson stood in the street to wave goodbye to the Brownings, it was hot enough for her to want to move into the shade as soon as they had gone.
And that was what it was, a move altogether into the shade.
She trailed back into her house, carrying Pilade, and felt the shadows of the entrance hall which greeted her were merciful.
She sought out the darkest room and even then closed the shutters, though it was only early morning, and lay on her bed without energy even to feed her son.
Meanwhile, in her mind, she had visions of the Brownings rattling along in high good humour with all manner of beautiful vistas to right and left as they trotted to Arezzo and she could hear the conversation and Pen's excited laughter.
In another moment she saw Ferdinando waiting in Rome, standing on the doorstep, his arms open in welcome and a welcome most of all for Annunciata.
How thrilled the girl had been to be going to the Holy City, how lovely she had looked in a jacket of scarlet silk, a birthday present given only the day before by Mrs Browning, how she had glowed and shivered with anticipation…
All that was over for her.
This was her place now, alone in a darkened room with no one to care what became of her.
What had she done to deserve such punishment?
The idea that she was being punished began to obsess her and she could think of nothing else the whole winter.
She must have done something for which she was now being made to pay.
Spending most of each day in the house, she had no one except Maria to talk to and Maria was not worth the effort.
She would rather talk to Pilade though she knew this was only a sophisticated way of talking to herself.
The child at least seemed to listen.
As she bathed him, soaping the fat little limbs with a slow, caressing movement almost hypnotic in nature, she told him how lost she felt, how she no longer knew who she was nor where she was and how all that mattered to her was him.
He was her sole reason for getting up at all, the only incentive to clothe and feed herself and drag herself from her bedroom where she would much prefer to stay.
Pilade did not even splash in reply.
He gazed up at her, huge brown eyes unblinking, and made little, soft dove, like noises she believed designed to encourage her.
When she breast-fed him, which she still did though he was now a year old, the comfort of it made her weep and in weeping she felt happier.
She would let him stay at the breast long after the milk had gone and the gentle, pulling movement as he continued to suck though he was no longer hungry were soothing.
He was a quiet baby, watchful, with a stillness about him which, if he had not been able to crawl and stand and almost walk, would have been a cause for concern.
‘He is an angel,’ people told her and that winter she began to think he really might be.
An angel.
Sent down from heaven for what purpose?
To show her the evil of her ways, the evil for which she was being punished.
Never an assiduous Bible reader, though while mother was alive she used to read a few verses for her sake, she now began to turn to it more and more in search of enlightenment but her head swam when she tried to read.
Her eyes leapt from Abraham begat Isaac and Isaac begat Jacob to Verse 25 of the Gospel According to St Matthew, to which she had turned simply because it began the New Testament and she had been unable to make anything of the Old.
‘First-born’ was the word that caught her attention, ‘And knew her not till she had brought forth her first-born son.’
She read on, about Jesus being born in Bethlehem and about King Herod and did not stop until she came to the line about Rachel weeping for her children.
She read some verses and not others, understood some lines and not others, and stopped at every mention of angels or children or weeping or suffering.
Sometimes she would hear some commandment being spoken —'Give not that which is holy unto the dogs’— and others echoed in her head until it ached.
As she read on, day after day, often by candlelight, through St Matthew and St Mark and on to St Luke and St John it seemed to her a message was reaching her and that message was that she must face her own wickedness.
She had been wicked.
She had given herself, a virgin, to Ferdinando without benefit of holy matrimony and her first-born was being withheld from her as payment for her crime.
‘Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters’ she read in Ephesians 6 — and she had not been obedient.
‘Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory’ she was told in Philippians 2 — and she had striven and been vainglorious.
James 1 terrified her most with ‘Then when lust hath conceived it bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death.’
Oreste would die, she saw that now, for what was it she had felt for Ferdinando if not lust?
Isa Blagden, arriving one day to look over the Casa Guidi, called on Wilson and found her lying in a dark room, huddled under the covers of her bed, the Bible in her hand and tears streaming down her face.
Maria, who showed her in, was frightened and stood at the door shivering.
It was all Isa could do to persuade Wilson to let some light in and dry her tears and tell her what ailed her; and when she did so, it made little sense.
Disturbed, Isa proposed Wilson and Pilade should come with her up to Bellosguardo for the afternoon and, since no protest was made, she hustled the two of them into her waiting carriage and whisked them off at once, leaving Maria with instructions to be there upon their return.
Wilson felt only dimly aware of Miss Blagden's kindness but later came to realise this sign and evidence of human concern had most probably saved her that time from real madness.
When she got home, she felt for the first time in months the need to write a letter, to commit her thoughts and feelings to paper and communicate through the medium of paper and pen with someone.
But with whom?
Her correspondence was in sad disarray.
Writing to Ellen, never her most sympathetic correspondent, was dreary work since all she could think of were frantic pleas to tell her of Oreste and she grew tired of begging long before she reached the end of the first sheet.
And Ellen never replied now, not even with a note, though money was sent to her as regularly as ever.
Minnie Robinson still sent the occasional line but now Wimpole Street had been sold and she no longer had the doings of all the Barretts to catalogue her letters were empty things and difficult to respond to.
As for Lizzie Treherne, to whom Wilson still felt drawn, she had done her best but, with four children now, she truly had no time to spare for letters, never having found them easy.
There was of course Ferdinando, but she hesitated over opening her heart to her husband, who would in any case need her letter read to him and would be unable to answer of his own accord.
She tried, but was not pleased with what came out, with the stilted words:— I have been unwell though not of anything infectious but rather a serious lowering of the spirits which I struggle to overcome.
The days are long and the nights worse.
I have presently one boarder only, a gentleman for a change, but see little of him.
Pilade goes on well.
I am attempting to wean him but it is I and not the child who is loth to finish the business.
Did she want to write such weary stuff?
Did Ferdinando wish to read it?
No.
The thought of it being read aloud was an embarrassment to her.
But still the urge to express her feelings tormented her and at last, in defiance of that dislike she had felt on their last meeting, she sat down and wrote to the person to whom she had once been most close, to Mrs Browning.
She begged pardon at once for — being so free as to presume I will be read but then, ma'am, you must blame yourself for encouraging in me that letter-writing soul.
It is a relief to me to take up this pen and sit at a table and endeavour to sort out what I feel pressing in upon me and to know that if sense can be made of it you will make it.
But I am mindful in the midst of my own troubles ma'am that you are not in good health for Miss Blagden has told me so and I am sorry to hear it and to think of you unable to leave your room and I am sorry too that the Rome winter does not prove as gentle as you had hoped.
I trust that with spring just round the corner you will feel better.
I would hope it could work some miracle for myself also but I fear the burden I feel upon my back will not be helped by fine weather.
Ma'am, I have been reading my Bible and am left in no doubt that I have sinned and am paying the just penalty for sin and I repent strongly but to no avail as yet.
Ferdinando and I being both your servants when we sinned were like unto brother and sister and broke a commandment which was made clear to me on reading the Scriptures.
Oreste was the fruit of this sin and is kept from me because of it.
Last night I opened my eyes when it was dark and feeling a sudden want of air opened the window when to my astonishment I was in time to see Oreste carried past in the arms of an angel and I wept and called out to him but there was no reply and soon they were gone up to the heavens and lost sight of.
I knelt at once to pray and prayed most dutifully till morning when I expected a letter telling me Oreste had been taken.
None has arrived but if his death took place as I saw the angel pass I would not hear from my sister Ellen for some time.
Oh ma'am if only I had shown myself strong in the face of temptation!
When the last trump sounds and I stand before the Lord our God and am judged I will be found wanting and know not what to do.
I am like unto a leper here with all faces turned against me except your kind friend Miss Blagden and now she is gone too.
The sin is recognised in me and people are afraid.
Ma'am, what would you have me do to atone for my sin?
Write and tell me and I will do as you say.
But Mrs Browning did not write.
Instead came a letter from her husband enclosed in a note from Mr Browning.
Ferdinando's was kind enough.
He bade her to rest and eat well and soon she would feel better.
He vowed that when they returned in the summer he would take her for a holiday.
He even went so far as to say he missed her and Pilade, and would be glad to be home.
Mr Browning was no less solicitous but she read exasperation in his advice to turn from the Gospels to the Psalms, ‘which may have a calming influence’.
He did not mention his wife.
She duly turned to the Psalms but found them equally disturbing.
‘O Lord my God, if I have done this, if there be iniquity in my hands, if I have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with me’ leapt out from Psalm 7 and so did ‘Let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end’.
That was a plain reference to herself.
Psalm 13 put her own question well —'How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart daily?’
— without seeking to answer it.
When she read how the Lord looked down and saw his people were ‘all together become filthy’ she trembled.
Only the sudden arrival of three new boarders saved her from succumbing to the terror which filled her.
One of the boarders was a clergyman, the Reverend Baron from Cheshire, and he, finding her at every turn with the Bible open, praised her devotion, which released from her such loud protestations of her unworthiness that he was stopped in his tracks.
But he was a kind man and took the trouble to sit with her and show her the hope in the Bible, the comfort and joy as well as the gloom.
Their Lord was a merciful Lord and if she had sinned as she believed He existed to forgive sinners.
She should come with him to the United Reform Church in Florence and hear messages not of vengeance but of forgiveness.
Wilson went and it was more the going that helped her than the services themselves.
She went with the Reverend Baron and his wife and daughter and was consoled to be among such a party of cheerful worshippers.
She was consoled, too, to have them in her house where they made an uncommon amount of noise and were certainly not easy guests but their beaming countenances and determination to look on the bright side of everything lightened the atmosphere immensely.
Because she had to provide for the Barons and for her other gentleman who was still with her she was obliged to go out daily to market and this quite ordinary transaction restored some of her spirits.
And there had been a few lines from Ellen, proving that Oreste so far from being carried to heaven by an angel was firmly rooted in East Retford and had grown another two inches.
She still woke often in the night full of strange forebodings, but with the Reverend Baron to confide in and laugh at her wilder interpretations of what she had dreamed, she survived better.
By May, when a note from Rome told her the Brownings' party was about to come back to Florence, she felt much more stable.
It was the Reverend Baron who pointed out to his landlady that her husband and his employers, about whom he had heard a great deal, would be lucky to get back to Florence ‘before war really takes hold’.
Wilson, shut up in her own world all winter, was astonished to learn what everyone else in Florence had known for many a month — French troops had poured into Piedmont and 1848 was to be repeated all over again.
Instantly, she thought of Ferdinando and whether he would go off to fight now as he had fought then.
But he was eleven years older and a father of two — surely he would not take up arms?
Her anxiety became pressing and now, every day, she had a new and urgent need to go out.
In the market, she was told that it was Mrs Browning's old hero, the French Emperor Louis Napoleon, who had landed at Genoa and pledged himself to help the Italians drive out the Austrians.
Almost at once, there seemed to be a series of victories reported with which Wilson could not keep up.
Nor could the Reverend Baron but he left immediately he heard in May that the Grand Duke of Tuscany had abdicated: that, he vowed, was the clearest possible indication of open war and he wanted to be away.
He left the day Napoleon and Victor Emmanuel entered Milan in triumph.
Wilson had no time to miss him and his family or her other gentleman, who had joined their party, before the Brownings were back, similarly propelled by the fear that they might be trapped because of war.
As soon as she saw Annunciata, Wilson felt safe.
What had happened to the girl?
It took time for her to find out, but she needed no other evidence than her eyes to tell her Ferdinando had lost interest in the pretty maid.
(It seemed Annunciata had fallen in love with one of the Papal Guard and was pining for him.)
Ferdinando came to his wife in such an open way that she was reminded of the first advances he had ever made and she was stirred in a way she believed no longer possible.
There was such relief to be found too in his physical presence — to be held by him, to feel his strength reassured her.
And he seemed more alert than when he had left, less inclined to shrug and yawn and leave everything to her.
Gradually it emerged that his concern for his country was the decisive factor in his changed attitude.
This, he told her, was Italy's great chance, far greater than in '48, to rid herself of the foreign oppressor and unite to form a great power.
If he had been young, nothing would have kept him from joining the Tuscan troops but as it was, he felt an old man and useless.
She needed to console him and assure him he was far from old and found remarkable pleasure in restoring his self-esteem.
Mrs Browning was hardly less excited than Ferdinando.
Paying her first visit to the Casa Guidi Wilson was moved to exclaim, ‘Why, ma'am, you look so well!’
Mrs Browning laughed and made a gesture of dismissal.
‘Oh, I am tired of being told so, Wilson.’
‘It is only I had heard from Miss Blagden that…’
‘Isa has not seen me since the happy news and it is that which restores me to near my old self.’
‘News, ma'am?’
‘Italy, Wilson, Italy!
You, with your husband, and you ask what news?
The news that makes every Italian heart sing, the news that liberty and freedom are abroad once more and this time we shall not fail!’
‘Oh, the war, ma'am.’
‘Yes, the war, the war of right against might.’
She found it all extraordinary.
It was as though her old mistress were drunk, or light-headed with laudanum, so intense was her delight.
The heat was fierce that June — 102 degrees in the shade at one time — but Mrs Browning went out in it and seemed to have forgotten such scorching sun had once enervated her to the point of collapse.
Pen had hung flags on the balcony of the Casa Guidi — one French, one Italian — and told her that he was paid in scudi to give to the war if he did his lessons well.
To Wilson, they all seemed to be in a fever and like any good nurse she waited anxiously for the point of crisis, more concerned about the fate of Mrs Browning than about that of Italy.
It came on July 9th.
As she went to the market with Ferdinando, each shopping for their respective households — though since hers had shrunk to nothing Wilson had no real need to make the daily pilgrimage — the excitement was unmistakable and so was its nature.
There were wailings and tears, and everywhere men sat dejected in front of their stalls while the women looked on, silent and shocked.
Bells rang as though for a funeral and the first rumour was that both Napoleon and Victor Emmanuel had been killed.
But then Ferdinando made sense of another rumour, that Napoleon had reneged, that he had made peace with the Austrians at Villafranca the day before and all was now over for Italian hopes.
All she asked when he came back to tell her was, ‘Who will tell Mrs Browning?’
It fell to her.
Ferdinando was beside himself, alternately cursing and crying with such violence he frightened Pilade.
He was in no state to break such news to a woman like Mrs Browning whose sensibilities were tender at the best of times.
So she must do it.
If she had known of how the Greeks slaughtered the bearers of bad tidings she might have taken longer to decide it was her duty, but, as it was, she saw no need to fear for herself, only for the person to whom she would relate the devastating news.
Shown in to the Casa Guidi by Annunciata, she did wonder if it might be wise to tell Mr Browning first but he was not about.
He had gone early, before it was too unbearably hot, to see if he could obtain a newspaper which might tell him what was happening.
Mrs Browning was still in bed while Pen dashed in and out when he was not feeding his rabbits on the balcony.
Wilson waited until he had gone and then spoke directly.
‘Ma'am, I have just come from the market.
There is bad news of the war.’
‘Bad news?
For us?
For our cause?’
‘Yes, ma'am.
There is talk of an armistice.’
‘Between whom?’
‘The French and the Austrians.’
Mrs Browning raised herself from her pillows and unable to speak, her hand at her throat, waited.
‘The French Emperor has signed a treaty at Villafranca and withdrawn.
It is all over for the present.’
Had she spoken with anything but sympathy?
Was she not married to an Italian, with Italian sons?
And yet Mrs Browning looked at her with hatred, her pale face growing steadily darker, and said, ‘Leave me.’
But Wilson was afraid to and advanced instead towards the bed, thinking to offer a drink or make a compress for her forehead.
Again, she was told to leave and with such venom she recoiled.
Miserably, she backed out of the room, not wanting to desert Mrs Browning and be held responsible for her collapse, if collapse there was to be.
Pen, coming once more at a run to see his mother, was stopped and held by her and persuaded to come instead and play with Pilade.
Mr Browning should be sent for and with Ferdinando still convulsed with grief and rage there was no one to send but herself or Annunciata.
Taking Pen into her own house, Wilson set off, hurrying through streets that told their own tale.
Everywhere French flags were ripped in half and trampled on and great gangs of young soldiers joined together to shout and curse the very name of France.
All the time she dashed through the streets, fighting her way through the hubbub, Wilson looked for Mr Browning, knowing he must have heard by now and would surely be rushing to his wife's side.
They met on the Ponte Trinita, she seeing and calling out to him first.
He crossed the bridge and seized her by the shoulders, shouting above the noise, ‘My wife?
Does she know?
Does she know?’
Wilson could only nod her head and turn with him to go back.
In the cool of the entrance hall of the Casa Guidi Mr Browning paused and asked, ‘How did she hear?
In what manner was the news brought to her?’
‘I told her, sir, coming as I did from the market where the news was fresh and thinking…’
‘Yes, yes, Wilson, but how did she seem?’
‘Angry, sir.’
‘Thank God for that.’
And then he was off up the stairs with Wilson, panting behind, trying to fathom the significance of his relief.
Why should he thank God for anger?
Only, she supposed, because it gave evidence of spirit and life — he had not wanted to hear his wife was prostrate with shock.
But by the time they both reached her bedroom it was clear that, whatever her first reaction, Mrs Browning was now in a world of her own.
She neither spoke nor moved.
Hovering in the doorway, Wilson heard Mr Browning plead with her to say something to him and then she listened while he tried to make out a case for the French Emperor, to argue this might not be the betrayal it seemed, and that all hope might not be lost.
His voice, low and urgent, went on and on but there was never an answer.
Slowly, Wilson returned to her own house, awed by such suffering.
It made no sense to her, but then it never had.
She remembered the bride of one year, alight with the happiness of those early celebrations when the Grand Duke had granted the first liberties, and thought how strange it was for an English woman to be so mad with joy.
Now she was mad with grief.
It was as though her father had died again, as though she had been injured to her soul.
Throughout the next three weeks Wilson was banned from the Casa Guidi.
When she might have been at her most useful, since she was so much more skilled in nursing than Annunciata, she was not allowed near Mrs Browning.
She had given the instruction herself, saying she could not bear to see the person who had been the instrument through whom she had heard such infamous news.
4 Mr Browning was apologetic.
‘You know her, Wilson,’ he said wearily, ‘she is not as other people, and you have far too much sense to take this personally.’
But Wilson found she did not have too much sense.
Far from it.
She did not feel in the least sensible but rather resentful on her own account.
Could she help the news?
Had she not thought of her mistress first?
Had not concern been her prime motive in going at once to Mrs Browning?
When she heard how a new doctor had been called in, all the familiar names having left Florence previously thinking it was to be plunged into war, she felt indignant — why was she not called in, she who knew more about Mrs Browning's illnesses than any other person?
She raged to Ferdinando about this Dr Grisanowsky, and even the assurance that he was a friend of Miss Blagden's did not make him more acceptable in her eyes.
There was talk of the doctor saying his patient might have suffered a heart attack —'Nonsense’ said Wilson — and then that her lungs were seized up —'They always have been,’fumed Wilson.
There was even mention that recovery might be impossible.
‘They do not know her, who say that,’ said Wilson.
‘They will see — in time, when she is over this, she will mend.’
Within a month Wilson saw with her own eyes that she had been right.
In a letter to Minnie, who seemed the natural recipient of the account she wished to give, she described how — when first she was taken ill Minnie, which I expect you have heard of from Miss Arabel, who I dare say was given a terrible fright as were we all, many despaired of her life but I did not and I am pleased to say my faith was justified.
We came here to Siena, where I have been before, though to a different house, to visit my husband who accompanied the Brownings last month, the doctor having ordered Mrs Browning to be taken out of this city or he would not answer for the consequences.
The villa is very beautiful and large and it has been possible for myself and my baby and my husband to stay together which is a very great privilege and one I did not look to have extended to me.
I tell you, Minnie, I have fallen from favour of late and through no fault of my own, whereas my husband and son rest high in Mrs Browning's estimation.
The truth is, she does not seem to wish to see me and will think of every excuse to keep me out of her presence.
I did not therefore expect to be invited here and was resigned to being by myself yet again and sure my spirits would once more be lowered.
This not being the case I have benefited much from the peace and quiet and from the fresh air.
But Minnie I ought to have suspected there was more to this kindness than appeared and so there is.
Are you acquainted if only by repute with a Mr Landor who is a poet?
He is an old man who Mr Browning met in the burning streets of Florence last month half out of his wits and with nowhere to go his wife having thrown him out for what reason I do not know.
Mr Browning out of the kindness of his heart and because Mr Landor I believe was once his champion when no one thought anything of him brought the old gentleman to Siena and prevailed upon Mr Story his friend to take him in.
He was afraid to keep him in his own house because the old fellow rants and raves upon occasion and might distress Mrs Browning.
But now there is the pressing problem of what to do with Mr Landor who seems incapable of acting for himself.
The Storys leave for Rome at the end of this month and cannot take him with them.
The Brownings have no room in the Casa Guidi should they ever be willing to shelter him and in any case intend to follow the Storys for another winter in Rome (entailing another in Florence alone for me).
Now they have brought forward a plan which is that they should lend me sufficient money to rent another house in which Mr Landor is to have the first floor, comprising three rooms, a book closet, and a terrace, and I am to reside on the ground floor and care for him receiving £30 a year for my trouble.
That is a great deal of money Minnie which I do not need to tell you and would without doubt enable me to bring over my first-born at long last.
The house I now rent could be let again and in all I might find myself with a handsome income.
This prospect is pleasing to me but I have seen Mr Landor and confess myself alarmed.
He is large Minnie and loud and not altogether sensible often and I would have no other man in the house to manage him if need be.
His wife who I am told still resides up at Fiesole has been heard to call her husband ‘the old Brute’ and when a wife speaks thus I am more of a mind to listen than not.
But it is hard to resist this plan put before me and indeed it ought to be tried since I have no other resource.
I have given up begging to be taken back into service since it is plain Annunciata is preferred.
She of course is in a hurry to return to Rome where she left a sweetheart and has offered to do the ironing there to save on laundry expenses so great is her anxiety to be taken.
As to my husband, he does what he is told as ever and I have faced the truth long ago that the Brownings are more important to him than I am.
But he has been very loving this summer and much cast down by the failure of the Italian cause and I will not grudge him a livelier time of it in Rome.
Next year Minnie I will be forty and hardly able to believe it but I am resolved to make great changes with the help of a hard winter's work.
I have seen at long last that I need to be free of my beloved mistress and even as I write that word it is hollow for how can I love one who no longer has the least regard for me?
Is it always thus, Minnie?
You have had a long life of service and time to look back on it and if I did not know how your arthritis troubles you and with what difficulty you pen your kind notes I would ask you to help me in this.
Is everything I did for Miss Elizabeth worthless and am I foolish to expect more of her?
It seems to me often that her husband is kinder and more thoughtful.
I have not seen her alone face to face all the time we have been here and when I do see her in company she is wont to turn from me.
Who would have thought it would come to this?
Think of me, Minnie, as I think of you.
Putting her pen down, Wilson sighed.
Thinking of Minnie was to think of days long ago when she had been at the centre of things.
Now, unless she could rescue herself, she had not even a place on the outside of Mrs Browning's life and what troubled her most was that she cared.
What she must teach herself to do was to stop caring, learn to stand up for herself.
WILSON LIKED THIS other house.
Taken by Mr Browning to view it — though since it had already been rented her approval was of no importance — she was at once charmed.
It was a small house, directly behind the church of Santa Maria del Carmine, and a good deal less gloomy than the other next to the Casa Guidi.
Though it was much less grand, it reminded her of what her mistress had called ‘the doll's house’, that little house they had rented for six months in the winter of '48 in the Piazza Pitti.
She could see its possibilities straight away, something she had never seen in those gloomy other chambers.
But that was not all: Mr Browning said Mr Landor's rooms were all to be painted, carpeted and furnished and that he thought her own quarters might at least be painted if she contributed only a little to the cost.
Wilson hesitated over how little ‘little’ would be but, when she heard the sum, could not resist agreeing since it was so very small.
The painters being on the premises, and the landlord seeing the advantage, the job was done cheaply.
(Ferdinando said he expected the profit on Mr Landor's rooms was so enormous it covered the cost of the rest more than double.)
Wilson bore the departure of the Brownings and her husband stoically this time.
She was determined to make a go of this new house, in which she felt so much more cheerful, and understood fully how much depended on Mr Landor's tractability.
She must see that he was comfortable and cared for so that with contentment would come peace.
To help her, she had a new maid, Teresa, older and more confident than Maria, who had left to be a nurse-maid.
Wilson left Teresa in no doubt as to her main function in the house: keeping the old gentleman happy.
His every whim was to be catered for, however strange, and he must be put first at all times.
This was more difficult than it sounded since he did not keep either regular or normal hours.
He was capable of wanting nothing all day, of sending every meal away and not allowing Teresa in, even to make up his fire or turn down his bed, and then, around midnight, calling for his breakfast and complaining he was cold because the fire had gone out.
It would have driven every other landlady to distraction but Wilson was determined not to be bested.
When he roared for food at midnight, she attended to him herself.
She went to him, wearing her dress over her shift, and said, ‘Now, Mr Landor, sir, what is this, at this hour, sir?’
‘This is hunger, woman, this is starvation!’ he shouted.
‘This is a disgrace and I won't have it and I will have my coffee and rolls and eggs and I will have a good fire or I leave tomorrow and to hell with you.’
‘It is midnight, sir…’
‘I don't give a damn what time it is.
My stomach says it is hungry and that's the only time I know.
You're idle, the lot of you.’
‘Idle I am not, sir, but at midnight my stomach says it is asleep and if it must be wakened it needs warning.’
‘Then warning it is given — ten minutes and no more, mind.
Quick with you, be off and see to it.’
Furious, Wilson went down into the freezing kitchen, where the well banked-up fire had not quite died down, and poked it vigorously until it began to burn up.
The kettle sang quite quickly and meanwhile the stove, never entirely allowed to go out in the winter, had coughed into life.
She warmed yesterdays bread and cooked three eggs and laid a tray and took the lot upstairs, meaning to return with coals for Mr Landor's fire as soon as he was placated with the food.
He was asleep.
She put the tray down noisily, made sure the coffee with its strong smell was under his nose, even lit a lamp, but to no avail.
He snored, deeply asleep.
Standing over him, she saw how very old he must be, with the skin of his face and neck pleated in heavy folds of wrinkles and his wild hair quite sparse and white, and only her respect for his years prevented her from shaking him.
Instead, she covered him with a blanket and put a cushion behind his head and blew out both lamp and candle.
In the morning, he was without any memory of the night before.
When she heard movement above — there was no shouting — Wilson went up and knocked on the door and was told, in the most mild of voices, to come in.
Mr Landor was standing scratching himself, and none too particular about where.
The tray remained untouched.
He seemed bewildered, shuffled about his room yawning and stretching, and only after several minutes of this focused on Wilson at all.
‘You are not my wife,’ he said, startled.
‘In the name of God you aren't.
Who the devil are you?’
‘I am Signora Romagnoli,’ Wilson said calmly, ‘and I am your landlady who you called in the middle of the night to give you food and there it is.’
‘Well, it is cold and I do not want it.
But I am very glad you are not my wife for she is a bitch.’
He rubbed his eyes hard, like some truculent baby.
‘I am tired and my throat is dry.
What time is it?’
‘Ten in the morning.’
‘What morning?’
‘January 7th, sir.’
‘What year?’
‘1860.’
‘What place?’
‘Florence.’
‘What am I doing here?’
‘Mr Browning brought you, sir.’
‘Mr Browning?
Mr Browning?
What was he doing with me?
What business do I have with him?
The world has gone ma.
Gradually, Wilson learned how to deal with the old man.
The roars in the night, it turned out, could safely be ignored.
Once this was understood, it became part of the pattern and both Wilson and Teresa and even the landlord's son, who slept in the garret, all sighed at the disturbance then turned over and went back to sleep.
A few more yells and crashings about and Mr Landor invariably wrapped himself in a quilt and fell asleep.
But no daytime cry could be left to die out — it must be investigated immediately or the rage was tremendous.
Only let there be a five-minute delay and pots would be thrown, furniture overturned and the servant arriving, whether Teresa or Wilson herself, threatened with clenched fist.
So the moment the shout was heard, one of them would rush and then try to provide what was wanted on the instant.
The real problems arose when that something was unobtainable.
It was impossible to explain that strawberries were not available and nor was a copy of The Times .
In such cases, it was best to say one would go directly and to rush out of the room and hope the substitute finally brought would convince him this was what had been asked for.
That was all that was necessary and to proffer whatever it was, saying with great emphasis ‘Here is what you asked for, sir’.
Often, he would say thank you, and take it, or look puzzled but always take it.
The fatal approach was to falter and say that whatever he had asked for could not be found — then, the violence was terrifying.
Wilson, writing to Mr Browning to report how his self-imposed charge fared, expressed the opinion that — he is not exactly mad, sir, begging your pardon, as unable to remember himself.
He is ever confused and his confusion makes him angry and I cannot see that it can be helped though it is hard to endure.
Were he among familiars it might help him but as it is he cannot place himself here and it is pitiful to see how lost he is.
He does not go abroad much which is as well since he has little sense of direction and has twice been found many miles from home wandering the streets.
I cannot prevent him going forth, but am ever relieved when he has returned.
As to the poetry, sir, I do not think there is much done in that direction though paper aplenty is screwed up and thrown on the floor.
Wilson found it hard to believe Mr Landor had ever written poetry, that he had ever been judged a great poet, but Miss Blagden, who had moved into the Casa Guidi for the winter, swore that he had been much admired and gave her a whole list of his published works.
‘He is not like a poet,’ Wilson said, sniffing, ‘and I have lived with two of them.’
‘You mean poets may not have tempers, do you not?’
Miss Blagden said with a smile.
‘Is that it?’
‘No, ma'am, though temper he has and…’
‘Oh, he is famous for it and I believe sent down from Oxford for it.
He is very old, you know, Wilson.
Eighty-five, I think.’
It is on account of his age I restrain myself, ma'am.
But it is not his temper makes him unlike any poet I have ever known so much as his, well, as his coarseness in general.
He has no love of beauty that I can see.
I cannot think what his poetry would be like.’
‘It is dramatic stuff, I believe, though I confess not to have read any.
He has had an unhappy life, when all is said and done, unhappy in the personal department.
It is fortunate for him that Mr Browning has rescued him.
Dear Robert, such affecting tenderness.’
‘He is a kind man, certainly.’
Something in the way this was said clearly caught Miss Blagden's attention.
Wilson saw she was scrutinised enquiringly and blushed.
‘A very kind man and always good to me,’ she said with more emphasis.
It would not do to have Miss Blagden imagine she bore any grudge.
Nor did she, against him.
In fact, as the winter wore on, she felt grateful rather than otherwise.
Her savings mounted and she was confident that come the summer she would be able to afford a journey to England.
This time, with some need to be cautious and not show her hand too soon, she said nothing to Ellen whom she judged would most likely have forgotten she had sworn to come and get Oreste herself.
Forgotten, or decided it had been idle talk, a vow impossible to realise.
So all winter Wilson wrote only of Pilade and of Mr Landor, innocent gossipy letters which would most likely bore Ellen but not alarm her.
Meanwhile, the moment there was a hint of spring in the air, she began to lay her plans.
Not for nothing had she made all those journeys with her employers — she now showed herself to have a familiarity with timetables quite out of the ordinary and was able to spot at once where a connection could be made.
The Brownings and Ferdinando would be back in June so it would be best to go at once, when it would be more likely that her absence would be looked on leniently.
And she would provide a substitute for the two weeks she reckoned it would take her, an English maid called Phoebe Crabbe with whom she had become friendly.
Phoebe was her own age, near forty, and had been left behind in Wilson's old house when her employers went home because she was ill with flu and unable to travel.
Wilson had nursed her and taken care of her and Phoebe was only too willing to show her gratitude.
It was all planned.
Afterwards, Wilson could not forgive herself for endangering these beautifully laid plans.
It horrified her to think how foolish she had been and she could only excuse herself on the grounds that she had suffered some kind of fit.
That was what it was, a fit, during which something in her burst and she lost control of herself — or perhaps it had had something to do with the terrible heat.
Once upon a time, she had been able to withstand Florentine summers better than any English woman she knew but of late they had begun to tire her, to make her feel that in everything she did she was pushing a large boulder up a hill.
It was her age she supposed, and nothing could be done about it.
But that late June day, soon after the Brownings and Ferdinando returned from Rome, she felt more than exhausted.
She felt as though she were suffocating in the heat, as though it were stopping her nostrils, sealing her mouth, and when she tried to breathe it forced itself down into her stomach and made her heave.
Twice that morning, before even the heat was at its worst, she had to lie down and mop her face with a cold wet cloth and when she took the cloth from her skin it seemed to steam.
She had been woken up at one in the morning by Mr Landor and again at four, and both times he had been abusive, calling her ‘a bitch as fat and stupid’ as his wife.
When his dinner arrived from the trattoria — he had told her long ago he preferred their food to hers which suited her perfectly well — it was eight minutes late.
She took it up the stairs herself, adding another two minutes to the delay because she had to pause and rest half-way up.
She was scarlet in the face and perspiring profusely by the time she entered the old gentleman's room.
The moment she did so he was on her, grabbing her by the arm, so that the tray shook violently in her slippery hands, trying to drag her to the clock as he screamed, ‘Look!
Look!
Is that the hour I ordered my dinner?
Is that how a gentleman should be treated?’
‘The trattoria sent it late, sir,’ Wilson gasped, putting the tray down as carefully as she could manage, longing to escape from the room.
‘Sent it late!’ he roared.
‘And why was it not made plain by you — by you — the consequences of such slackness, eh?
Are you the landlady?
Are you?
Is it you who collects my money week after week?
And for what?
To bring my dinner late, far past the hour, you disgusting, ugly fool?’
The snarl on his face, twisted horribly with contempt, was terrifying to behold but worse was the way he wiped the saliva away from his slobbering mouth with his sleeve and seemed to cast it towards her.
She began to back out of the room, trying to focus on a picture hanging behind the old man on the wall above the mantelpiece, a weird dark picture in which an angel of vengeance flew across a purple sky lit by flashes of lightning, sword in hand, and below a man with blood streaming from his neck prayed for mercy.
But Mr Landor advanced upon her, step by step and because she could no longer bear to look at him and because his distorted face seemed to merge with the angel's she turned to dash for the door.
A crash behind her made her turn and she saw the enraged old man had hurled his soup dish at the far wall where it hit the pretty paper and ran in thin trickles down onto the pale-grey carpet.
‘Oh, I will never get it clean!’ ran through her mind, but already there was worse to witness for a plate of spinach was already spattered on the tiles of the fireplace and a bowl of zucchini sailed out of the window.
But what brought her to the point of retaliation was the sight of his hands mauling a plate of sliced mutton, digging his fingers into the pieces of meat and snatching them up and trying to screw them up like pieces of paper and hurl them at the bookcase.
She could not stand it another minute.
Something snapped inside her and she found herself grabbing the mutton and wresting the plate, with what was left of the uncut joint still on it, and running with it from his crazed presence.
He followed her, howling and swearing, so that Teresa, who had come out of the kitchen at the tremendous noise, cowered against the door and put up her arms to protect herself from what she believed would be an attack.
Wilson pushed her back into the room, the mutton skidding from the plate as she did so, and locked it behind her, then dragged a chest in front.
Panting, she waited, but the madman never paused, seeming to hurtle out into the street still cursing and yelling.
Then there was silence and she sat down on the chest, weeping and shaking.
Of course, as she had guessed, he went into the Casa Guidi, to complain to the Brownings.
An hour later, she was sent for and went as she was, still in the apron spotted with bits of meat and potato where they had clung to her as she fought for them.
Her hair was untidy and her face still on fire and she knew she presented a distraught sight.
To her relief, Mr Landor was not present.
‘Now Wilson,’ Mr Browning began, looking grave and weary, ‘what is this we hear of you ill-treating your guest, our friend?’
‘Ill-treating?
Oh sir, do you look at me and say you see someone who has been doing the ill-treating?’
And she promptly burst into tears, throwing her soiled apron over her head to hide.
her humiliation.
She felt Mr Browning's arm round her and the gentlest of pressures as he pushed her into a seat.
He waited.
Her tears dried and she pulled her apron away, ashamed and miserable.
‘You do not know, sir, the provocation.
What I must endure from Mr Landor, night and day.
There are many can tell you what I suffer at his hands though I serve him as best I can.
Never have I been so reviled, never, and I have taken it all, knowing him to be old and alone, and I…’
‘You have done very well, Wilson, and we all know it,’ Mrs Browning said.
‘We did not pretend it would be easy,’ Mrs Browning murmured, ‘which is why you are recompensed so handsomely, Wilson.’
‘Money cannot soften some things,’ Wilson said ‘and you cannot begin to imagine the insults, the nature of the insults, as though I were a woman of the streets…
' and she began to weep again.
‘He can be violent, I admit,’ Mr Browning said, ‘but he is not himself when he launches into these diatribes and you must remember that, Wilson.’
‘Sir, even when he is not angry you do not know his habits, how filthy he can be and expect me —’
‘Wilson, I do not think you need enumerate Mr Landor's faults and I repeat, we know he is difficult, but in a man of his years, with his temperament, and cast out by his wife —’
‘She was wise, sir.’
‘That is not for you to judge, Wilson.’
‘No, sir.’
Now let us come to the point: are you willing to overlook this — this regrettable incident and try again?’
She was silent a moment, thinking of Oreste and her journey to England and the future of her family and how it rested largely at the moment on Mr Landor's £30 a year.
‘I have no choice, sir.
I am bound to keep him or be much the worse off.’
‘Then try, dear,’ Mrs Browning urged, ‘not to get in a temper to match his, rise above the poor old gentleman's tantrums and meet his ravings with dignity.’
‘I will try,’ Wilson said stiffly, barely able to get the words out.
‘He has agreed to act as though nothing had happened,’ Mr Browning said.
It angered her that he appeared to think this amounted to a great concession.
‘Oh yes,’ she said, very quietly, ‘he is expert at that, sir.
But the evidence of what did happen will be all round us, the wallpaper being ruined where the soup dripped down it and the carpet, I should think, impossible to clean.’
‘It will be paid for,’ Mr Browning said, and again she was angry.
She did not care what money was given for repairs.
Tired, she got to her feet and made to leave.
When she got to the top of the staircase and Mr Browning had gone back inside his apartment, she suddenly felt so ill she had to sit down on the stone step and compose herself before going on.
Head in her hands, she tried to pull herself together.
For the sake of Oreste, she must be cool and calm and take matters into her own hands instead of waiting so feebly for fate to help her.
She ought, there and then, while with the Brownings, to have chosen that moment to outline her plan and ask for their co-operation.
What, after all, could they do with Mr Landor should she turn him out?
She could get other boarders,he would never, with his reputation, be taken in by any other landlady in Florence no matter what was paid.
Slowly, she began to climb the stairs again, resolved to return and put her case.
Hesitantly, she pushed open the door, which stood ajar to let in what air there was, and entered the hall.
They would still be in the little sitting room.
Ferdinando was out, she knew, and so were Pen and Annunciata if the total silence was any indication.
As she lifted her hand to knock on the open door to signal her return, she heard Mrs Browning's light, high voice say, ‘I am tired of her, Robert, truly I am.
It is nothing but trouble, nothing but her problems when we have enough of our own.’
‘That is hardly fair, Ba.’
‘Of course it is not fair, but it is true.
I do not even like to see her, it makes me uncomfortable and I wish her gone, as quickly as possible.’
‘People in trouble are uncomfortable, but it is hardly their choice.’
‘She lays it at our door, I am sure, and yet it is not our fault she is in difficulties.’
‘It is partly our fault — we prevailed upon her to take Landor.’
‘I did not mean that.
It is her whole situation — she is so mournful and silently accusing and sometimes, Robert, I think her as mad as Landor with all this nonsense she makes of the Bible from time to time.
I am really very tired of her.’
‘That is a little hard…’
‘Then I am a little hard.
For example, what of Siena?
Are we to cart her with us there next month?’
‘We can hardly leave Landor here with her — think what might happen, on days like today, were we not here to be a calming influence!’
‘Both might murder the other and have done with it.’
‘Ba!
You are savage beyond reason.’
‘There is no reason in it, I am most unreasonable and know it.
‘But not proud of being so, I hope?’
‘I hear the rebuke, Robert.
No, not proud, ashamed, but unable to suppress the wicked thought.
What of Siena?’
‘We must take Landor, and if he goes, Wilson must go to look after him for we cannot and the Storys cannot be imposed upon again.
There is no other solution.’
‘Not if one is good, as you are.’
Then there was silence.
Numb, Wilson turned once more and crept out, all in a run, all the way back to her own home.
Pilade came stumbling out to greet her and she clung to him, crushing him to her and stroking his hair and crooning to him.
More than any other comfort his delighted kisses in return soothed her and eventually she was able to put him down and go into the kitchen to speak to Teresa about the day's duties.
But Teresa was not there.
The kitchen girl, standing scraping carrots at the table, looked frightened and said Teresa had gone and gone, she had said, for good.
Wilson could not believe it but it was true.
Her younger brother was sent by Teresa later in the day to say she would not be returning to a house where a dangerous lunatic lived and no one could expect her to — she would rather forfeit that week's wages than wait long enough to give notice.
And then, on top of such bad news, came another message, a letter from Phoebe saying she could not after all repay Wilson's kindness by standing in for her because she had this very day been ordered back to England and arrangements she had no part in had been made.
The world, thought Wilson that night, was crumbling around her no matter how hard she tried.
A month later, this was how Mrs Browning described her own world.
She lay in the garden of the Villa Alberti near Siena with Wilson shelling peas at her feet and Pilade picking grasses and admiring each one extravagantly.
‘The world is crumbling around me, Wilson,’ she said, the words so faint only a finely attuned ear could have heard them.
In her hand she held the letter from England that had come that morning and Wilson knew what it contained: news of Miss Henrietta, of Mrs Surtees Cook, who was mortally ill with cancer of the womb.
Her husband's letter had reached them as soon as they arrived in their summer resting place and had plunged them all into abject misery.
To Wilson, it had seemed all of a piece, all part of her own unhappiness, of that weary feeling that nothing mattered, nothing, no amount of effort could alter what was to happen.
All there was left to do was to stumble on, dutifully following the tracks on the ground as they appeared.
She had given up all hope of ever bringing Oreste over.
Day after day, she did what was expected of her and there was so little fire left in her that, when Mr Landor emptied a jug of red wine over a white damask tablecloth and kicked in her direction a cushion which split and sent feathers flying everywhere, she said not a word.
She cleaned up the room, did not even hear his curses, and thought how nothing could affect her any longer.
But Miss Henrietta's illness did.
Minnie had written to her, a short and agonising note, penned with obvious difficulty, and she had replied at length, describing her — horror, Minnie, to hear of these floodings and most of all of the terrible pain which made my own insides contract in sympathy.
I imagine it to be like the worst kind of monthly cramp and the most fierce of labour pains but perhaps it is even worse.
Her sister thinks of this pain all day and night and says it is the worst part and I think it is, worse even than how it is to end.
I must tell you Minnie that things have not been good between my old beloved mistress and me which it is not fitting that I should now go into but this blow has brought us closer together in our love and concern for Miss Henrietta.
Who would have thought it would be her, Minnie?
Always the strong one, never ailing like her sisters, and so happy with her three little children.
It does not bear thinking about and yet we think of it all day long in this pretty place, not noticing the sun and flowers.
Mrs Browning likes to have me with her now, no other person will do, and we talk of the old days and Miss Henrietta slipping off to Regent's Park to walk with Mr Surtees Cook and the squeezes she loved to hold in Wimpole Street when her father was away.
Do you remember the jellies you made for her, Minnie?
There is no one else can remember except you Wilson Mrs Browning says to me not even Robert, and it is true.
It was impossible to convey to Minnie or anyone else how this new closeness lifted her misery in a way nothing else could have done and yet Wilson herself marked how curious it was that she should feel forgiven when there was nothing to forgive.
Without her wishing it to be so, it seemed in the nature of things for her always to seek favour and her mistress to bestow it.
Always, maid or matron, she was the supplicant and her standing varied with her usefulness.
Now, she was more than useful, she was necessary and because she was necessary her faults faded into insignificance.
She was called upon, day after day, to sustain Mrs Browning in her awful anxiety and she did it willingly, dragging out from the furthermost corners of her memory evidence of Miss Henrietta s strength and fortitude together with examples of women of whom she had heard who had survived this disease.
She held out hope and it was taken eagerly and when with each letter the hope waned she was ready to support Mrs Browning's own faith that death was but an extension of life and not to be feared.
All she could not share was Mrs Browning's other intense fever, her other passion.
Here, she took a step back and called on Ferdinando to discuss Garibaldi and his Red Shirts and the promises of Cavour — they were names to her and nothing more.
She had not the least interest in the fortunes of Italy, did not care that once more liberty and unity were the watchwords, and it astonished her that Mrs Browning could seem as anxious about war as she did about her sister's health.
Listening to her and Ferdinando discussing the latest onslaught — Piedmontese troops were said to be sweeping south throughout the summer — Wilson could hardly believe the enthusiasm displayed.
What did it matter who ruled whom?
What difference did it make, if you were a woman?
She watched Pilade run around laughing and trying to catch butterflies and heard Pen shrieking in the distance as he urged his pony to a faster trot and she knew she did not care a jot for Garibaldi or Cavour or any other Italian hero.
Her concerns were here, in front of her, concerns that were domestic and intimate and not to be spoken of in the same breath as supposedly greater events.
She did not think them greater, failed entirely to see why she should.
Mrs Browning, Ferdinando swore, was more like a man than a woman and an Italian man at that.
He adored her for it and when Wilson chose to murmur against her interest, saying she could not see how it could be real, he was angry and said she was narrow and selfish, like most women.
Mrs Browning said much the same to her, observing how she did not join in when Garibaldi's victories were being discussed nor did she rejoice.
‘You have no interest in these great events, Wilson,’ she said, a statement rather than a question.
‘No, ma'am, and I do not see why I should.’
‘Well, dear, there are good reasons.
You are married to an Italian, you live in Italy, what happens here is of great importance to your future.’
‘My future, ma'am?
I cannot see how this war can affect my future.
My life is set to go on as it always has and no war can change it that I can see.’
‘Then you are a trifle short-sighted and do not see the general for the particular.
The future of your children will be very much affected by who rules their country.’
‘Of my child, ma'am.’
‘Your child?
No, your children.
Your two sons.’
‘Only one is here.
The other never will be.
I must think of him as English and belonging to my sister.’
‘Wilson!
You shock me.
You cannot abandon Oreste thus — come, it is a moment of despondency that is all, say it is.’
‘No, ma'am, it is accepting the truth.
I have tried to bring him to me and failed and now I cannot hope any longer.
He is four years old and will not remember me.’
‘Four years is very little in a lifetime, dear.’
‘Four years is very long in his, ma'am.’
‘And his father, what does Ferdinando say to this?’
‘He pays, he sends his wages, it is enough.’
Mrs Browning was quiet for the rest of that day.
Wilson saw she was being watched, closely studied, and dropped her eyes to concentrate on the jacket she was making for Pen.
He came rushing across the garden while she sewed and she called out to him to come and try the sleeves.
He could hardly stand still for the two minutes it took to slip them over his blouse and he shouted at her to be quick, that Ferdinando was waiting to take him rabbit-shooting.
When he had darted off, his mother sighed and said, ‘He grows quicker than ever.’
Wilson could not stop herself saying, ‘But you see him grow.
I try to see Oreste, or used to before I gave up the torture, but all I see is a baby, fat and dimpled…’
Mrs Browning moved restlessly, cleared her throat, said nothing in reply, but then what could be said?
Yet a week or so later she surprised Wilson by returning to this topic again, beginning, ‘Wilson, you remember the Ogilvys?’
‘But of course, ma'am, how could I forget.
And Jeannie, I remember Jeannie well and wrote to her for a while, but she was not much of a correspondent.’
‘They are at their home in Scotland, but Mrs Ogilvy writes that Gigia, their Italian maid whom they took back with them, is returning to Florence next month.’
‘Indeed, ma'am,’ said Wilson politely, not seeing this had anything to do with her.
‘I have written to Mrs Ogilvy and enquired of her if Gigia might, for a consideration, and everything being arranged for her, if she might accept a travelling companion.’
Wilson looked up, bewildered.
Mrs Browning's voice was heavy with a significance she could not rightly interpret.
‘A young travelling companion.
Do you take my meaning, dear?’
‘No, ma'am.’
‘Oreste.
Gigia is prepared to escort Oreste and even to collect him from your sister's and take him to Liverpool from where she sails for Leghorn by way of Marseilles.
What do you say, Wilson?’
She said nothing.
She sat in the garden, half-paralysed, unable to take in this information.
Her heart began to pound and Mrs Browning, smiling in front of her, seemed to swirl before her eyes.
She was speaking again, describing how Ferdinando would need to go to Leghorn to conduct Gigia and Oreste home, and how she, Wilson, must write the clearest possible instructions to her sister Ellen leaving no room for mistakes.
All this she heard, even understood, but still she was speechless.
Tears came more readily than thanks.
She stood up, holding her hands to her face, laughing and weeping at the same time, gasping for breath, feeling her heart and only finally throwing her arms up in joy.
Then she ran to find Ferdinando to tell him and they embraced and it was he who said, ‘She is an angel!’ of Mrs Browning and Wilson realised she had expressed not a word of gratitude.
Back she stumbled, Ferdinando with her, and before a smiling mistress they both fell to their knees and thanked her.
‘It is an answer to a prayer I had stopped praying,’ Wilson said, ‘and you, not God, have answered it.’
This appalled Mrs Browning, who said at once that it was God using her as an instrument and that Wilson should have had more faith.
Humbly, Wilson agreed.
She wrote straightway to Ellen, though not without considerable difficulty.
She did not trust Ellen, knew she must show some cunning and somehow invoke the name of law to frighten Ellen into co-operating.
All the emphasis, she felt, must be on this coming as an order which could not be disobeyed and yet put in such a way as not to be offensive.
So she began with praise: —the more I think on it Ellen the more beholden I am to you for how you have cared for Oreste and the more fortunate.
the child for having you.
He has known no want either materially or of a mother's love for you have supplied both abundantly and he will be reminded of this all his life you can be sure.
But now Ellen the time I have long awaited has come and I write to tell you that an Italian maidservant by name of Gigia who is travelling home to Florence having been in Scotland with a family who are friends of the Brownings is to come to you to collect Oreste and take him to Liverpool where she will be joined by Mr Ogilvy and from whence they will sail for Italy.
She will arrive on September 1st and depart on the 2nd and I trust you will make her welcome as I know all our mother's daughters would.
You need send nothing with the child Ellen as he will need quite different clothes here and when I have seen and measured him I will make them myself.
Send him only with enough for the journey and such toys he shows an exceptional fondness for you having mentioned he will not be parted from the train William carved.
And do not let him think he is to be parted from you forever Ellen for this would not be the truth.
If you will not come to us I am resolved to bring Oreste to you by and by so you may see how he progresses which I hope will be as well as when he was under your care.
Write Ellen and by express even telegram for which I will pay in order that I might have the relief of knowing you have understood and all is clear.
No relief came.
Worried, Wilson confided in Mrs Browning that she feared Ellen might not have received her letter, the posts being so very variable, and was instructed to write again and have it sent with a reply paid, a system she was assured was possible if expensive.
Still no acknowledgement was made and it grew near the time when Gigia would be setting out on her journey.
Over and over Mrs Browning emphasised what a deal of trouble the Ogilvys were being put to on her behalf, by allowing their maid to do what she was going to do, and Wilson knew it was true.
‘You have written very Plain , I hope?’
Mrs Browning asked, severely.
‘There was no room for doubt in your words, Wilson, nothing left to query?’
‘Oh no, ma'am, I could not have been plainer as to everything.’
But all the same, Mr Browning thought it wise that she should send to the Ogilvys a letter for Gigia to carry in which both she and Ferdinando formally requested the return of their young son and gave her power to remove him from the care of his aunt and conduct him to Italy.
This was even read by a legal advocate, before whom Wilson and her husband signed the letter.
It was a solemn moment.
The language of the letter itself made her shiver — the ‘we hereby, being the parents of one Oreste Romagnoli’, seemed so important and the ending, though it only gave the date of the document and names of the witnesses, truly portentous.
Then it was all done and the waiting began.
Wilson made her own little calendar on a sheet of brown wrapping paper and wrote the numbers of each day large so that Pilade might learn them.
Each evening, the child was given a piece of chalk and shown how to cross the days off which he did with great satisfaction.
On the day Oreste and Gigia were due to sail with Mr Ogilvy from Liverpool Wilson had drawn a ship which excited Pilade more than anything else.
His mother held him on her knee and explained for the hundredth time how big the ship would be and how many oceans it would cross and what his big brother would see from it.
They had one likeness of Oreste, sent at Christmas when Wilson had requested it should be taken, and this was removed from its frame and put at the end of the chart.
Nearer and nearer the squares came to the picture until there were only four left and Ferdinando made himself ready for the journey to Leghorn, where he would take over Gigia and Oreste from Mr Ogilvy, who continued to Rome, and see one to Florence and the other to Siena.
The night before her husband was to leave, Wilson could not sleep.
It was all unbelievable.
Her own intense excitement had given way to a hollow feeling in her stomach and she had been quite unable to eat for several days.
She felt frightened and strange as she thought of greeting her first-born, who would not know her and might recoil with horror and cry for Ellen.
If he had any lingering memories, which was almost impossible to credit, they would not match what he now encountered.
She had aged in four years, lost whatever attraction she had ever had, and it made her miserable to realise this son would not remember her without grey hair.
When had her hair gone grey?
She could not recall.
These days, when she occasionally took over from Annunciata and brushed Mrs Browning's hair, she marvelled that a woman so much older than herself should still have such black, black hair with only a very few silver threads in it (which she was instructed to pull out).
And if Oreste would not recognise, and might be afraid, of her, what of his father?
Ferdinando had aged, too, was no longer as vigorous nor did he walk so tall and straight.
Forgetting his father's darkness, his swarthiness, Oreste might cower and scream.
But then she scolded herself — who was better with children, even foreign children, whose language he did not speak, than Ferdinando?
Nobody.
They all turned out to watch him go, Pen clamouring to accompany him so that he might be the first to embrace and welcome Lily's baby.
‘He is no longer a baby,’ Wilson told him, holding his hand for comfort, ‘he will think himself a big boy.’
‘Bigger than me?’
‘No, for you are twice his age.’
‘Will he like me, Lily?’
‘He will like you and he will need you for you speak English and he speaks no Italian and not even his brother will be able to speak to him at first.’
‘Poor little boy.
I will love him, Lily, like this,’ and Pen gave her a strangling hug so that she gasped and laughed and begged to be released.
Ferdinando was already on his horse, which he was to ride as far as the station.
She flew to give him last words of advice, all of them unnecessary.
‘Be gentle,’ she said, ‘be patient.
He may be ill from the voyage, he may be homesick for the only home he has known, he may be…’
‘He may be happy to see his father!’
Ferdinando shouted.
‘He is my son and blood will tell.
Now let me go.’
And off he galloped, with her watching until he was a speck on the horizon.
A whole day to Leghorn and a night spent there and then the last but one square on the chart was reached.
Guiding Pilade's chubby hand, Wilson's own trembled.
Had the ship docked safely?
Had Ferdinando greeted his son?
Were they already the best of friends?
Had Oreste already learned some Italian?
At least Ferdinando now knew a great deal of English, whatever she had said to Pen to make him feel important.
Again, she did not sleep and for once was glad when Mr Landor called out, cursing the heat and wanting cold,cold water at once— even seeing to the old man's wants was preferable to lying awake worrying.
In the morning, she made up a cot for Oreste, placing on the pillow a small felt rabbit Pilade had once loved.
In a strange place, who knew how this four-year-old might suffer?
Something soft to cuddle in the night if he was bewildered might be a comfort.
She wandered around all morning, unable to sit still, wondering what Oreste might like to eat.
Fruit, surely, though there had not been much fruit on Ellen's table, and bread, all children liked bread, familiar and comforting, but then Italian bread, baked with oil, was not English bread and she began to panic at the idea of him rejecting it and going hungry.
Then cake, the soft lemony Madeira cake Pilade and Pen loved, she could bake that and sprinkle it with sugar and tempt him with that.
The day dragged on, full of such random thoughts.
By late afternoon, she thought she might be ill.
Her spine was so tense, her shoulders so rigid, that she ached all over and that empty and gnawing pain in her stomach seemed to increase in severity as dusk approached and the hour when son and husband would return grew closer.
She vomited, but had nothing except bile to bring up, a sweat thickened on her forehead which no amount of wiping away would banish.
She knew little moans of anguish were escaping her, whimperings such as a dog might give.
She walked out of the cottage where she and Pilade were lodged in charge of Mr Landor and along the road to Siena so that she might see them approach before anyone.
Pilade was asleep, leaving her arms free for the precious embrace she longed for.
On she walked, quarter of a mile, half a mile, watching the sun begin to set and knowing that when it touched the horizon she might see the horse coming and Ferdinando waving and maybe, if he was not slumped asleep in the saddle in front of his father, maybe another small hand too.
The moment that red ball began to flatten, she sat on a rock and strained to see along the flat road, along the plain leading to Siena, and sure enough she saw a black dot which grew larger and became a single horse and then she stood up and began to run towards it, waving and shouting.
A few yards on and she saw there was no answering wave and she faltered, uncertain if this was Ferdinando or some other lone horseman before whom she would make a fool of herself, but the closer he came the more sure she was that this was her husband and then she chided herself for thinking he had hands free to wave when one was needed for the reins and the other to hold the child.
She stopped, her hand to her heart and smiled and resolved to wait and be calm.
The horse was almost upon her and she shut her eyes, the better to see when it had reined to a halt.
All in a flurry of dust it came towards her and then she heard Ferdinando shout her name and the neighing of the horse as it was pulled in and she trembled as she opened her eyes and looked up.
Even before she registered that there was no child, she saw his anger.
His usually placid, cheerful features were contorted with rage and she stood dumb while he poured out a stream of abuse upon Ellen and upon her and upon the Wilson family and upon the English and upon everyone and everything he could think of.
He swung off the horse and stood in front of her, tired and dirty from travelling and all she heard was a sound like the crashing of waves on pebbles and she put her hands over her ears and swayed in pain at the roadside.
She had no idea afterwards how she got to the Villa Alberti where Ferdinando took her to break the news and tell the tale of his fruitless trip.
Did she ride?
Did she walk?
Was she carried?
All she knew was that she came to lie on a garden bench and it was dark and the stars overhead were piercingly bright.
She did not cry, or rage like Ferdinando, nor was she much interested in apportioning blame.
Oreste was not here.
Beside that, nothing mattered.
Ferdinando was still vowing to the Brownings, angry themselves, that he would not send another scudo to England and calling heaven to witness he had been cheated and betrayed, but she lay there impervious.
Everything was at an end — the hope, the joy, the new happiness that had been in her.
All life had become a series of promises unfulfilled.
She thought she would lie there forever, let others do to her what they wished.
She was finished with planning, with striving, with looking forward.
When Mrs Browning spoke to her out of the darkness, saying, ‘Come, Wilson, come, dear, you must not give way,’ she thought, why not, why not give way?
ELLEN'S LETTER ARRIVED the following week by which time life could be said, by all but the most observant, to have returned to normal.
For twenty-four hours Ferdinando's rage had continued and been listened to most sympathetically by the Brownings.
He had repeated, over and over again, what Gigia had said, of her humiliation before Ellen Wilson, of how she had not even seen Oreste.
Mrs Browning had declared it was all too bad, too dreadful an imposition to have been responsible for and that she would not be able to look the Ogilvys in the eye ever again after causing them such vexation.
She had hinted darkly that Wilson herself must be to blame, that she must have been weak, must not have written plain enough and as she had been instructed.
Then everyone had sighed and tutted and the thing began to be forgotten in the continuing concern for Henrietta.
Wilson allowed it to be forgotten.
She took no part in the exclaiming and protesting and analysing nor would she indulge in speculation as to what had really happened or as to why the letter of authority had not been used against Ellen.
Hearing her own firmness doubted, she felt the beginnings of anger but quickly suppressed it.
There was no use in being angry with Mrs Browning or Ellen or anyone else.
It was all done with and had ended how things always seemed to end for her.
She went about her normal business without speaking, unless it was impossible not to reply to some query.
She was glad Ferdinando was in the Brownings' villa and she was with Mr Landor and Pilade in another.
There was no comfort to be found in her husband's arms and in fact comfort was something he did not offer, being much too preoccupied with his own sense of injured pride.
When he said again and again no more of his wages would go to Ellen for his son's upkeep she concurred, did not challenge the underlying assumption that Oreste was no longer his responsibility.
She felt numb and tired and surprised herself by managing to sleep deeply and well.
But she knew Ellen would write and that the letter would be in the nature of both a declaration and a justification.
It would be hard to bear and she dreaded such a letter because it might disturb her wonderful composure.
Mrs Browning handed her Ellen's missive as though it were hardly fit to handle and she took it with equal reluctance.
‘Unless there is any quite remarkable news your sister has to tell,’ Mrs Browning said, ‘I would rather not hear what she has to say since I imagine it is a tissue of lies, of excuses and complaints.’
Wilson did not reply.
Why should it be imagined she would enjoy such lies?
Even to open the letter was a burden and she waited until she was alone and hidden from view to do so.
Her eyes scanned the first page quickly, taking in the expected account of how Ellen had looked after Oreste as her own, but when she came to the reasons why he had not been handed over to Gigia, Wilson slowed down and even repeated the words to herself.
There was no doubting her sister's passion as she struggled to express her resentment, writing:— on my life Lily I declare I want only what is best for the child and would not be Cruel to him nor the cause of Cruelty and what you asked was Cruel the child knowing no Italian and being Fearful of leaving me the only Mother he has known and who he loves as his own.
And the girl who came for him was Young and Insolent and spoke to me as if I were some common washerwoman who must do as she was told which is not in my nature nor never was.
If you were to come yourself Lily or the child's Father I could not stand in your way whatever my feelings which are strong, but to hand over my Precious little one to a Young and Foreign girl who spoke his only language poorly that I could not do and send him with her on a dangerous voyage most frightening to him.
You will say I ought to have informed you I would not part with the boy in such circumstances as you had taken trouble to describe but until I saw the girl I was not sure in my own mind what to do and only made it up when confronted with her and not taking to her at all.
You will be angry I know and accuse me of all manner of evil things but one thing you cannot accuse me of Lily is not caring for your son upon whose life I swear I love him truly and want only what is best for him.
I cried after the girl had gone and he seeing my distress and I explaining I feared your anger he put his arms around my neck and comforted me and said he was sure his real mother could not but love her sister and believe she had acted for the best.
Wilson smiled thinly at that bit.
She did not believe a word of it and despised Ellen for concocting such a sentimental and silly scene.
A four-year-old child say that?
Never.
The likelihood was that Oreste knew nothing about anything, and no one in Italy was ever spoken of.
Ellen was sure now that she had him for her own and most likely thought it a fair return for her investment of time and trouble.
She would not even bother to argue the rights and wrongs of what had occurred since it would be futile.
Her desire was never to see or speak to Ellen again but of course she could not allow herself such a luxurious vengeance.
It was important for Oreste's sake to keep good relations and so with a good deal of lip-biting and general effort of control she finally wrote to her sister in most moderate terms expressing surprise, confessing intense distress, but apportioning no blame.
She did not mention that no more money would be sent — let Ellen discover that when the monthly money orders did not arrive in the punctual way they always had done.
It would be in the nature of a test for her: if, as she claimed, she looked after her nephew as her own then she would not query the lack of financial support; if she asked for it then it would be easier to force her to part with the boy.
There were dangers in this silence — Wilson well understood that the steady remittance of funds for the care of Oreste constituted a claim on him over and above that of natural parentage — but she thought them worth risking.
As Oreste grew he would become more expensive to keep and Ellen might not find his maintenance so easy.
The effort of being diplomatic left her depressed once more and miserable.
It struck her how much of her life had been spent dissembling.
To her mistress it was understandable that she should never speak absolutely freely but it was intolerable that she could not do so to the last remaining member of her family, nor even to her husband.
Twice Ferdinando had come down to spend the night with her and twice she had refused him without offering any adequate reason.
He did not understand that she felt so shrivelled and drained, and all thought of sexual relations was abhorrent to her — she was not a fit partner, and shrank from his attentions with loathing.
He went off bewildered and hurt and she knew it was quite likely he would seek solace elsewhere.
Let him.
She found she hardly cared and when Mr Browning, with some evidence of concern for her, said that he feared they must take Ferdinando to Rome almost as soon as they all returned to Florence in October, she simply nodded.
‘I expected it, sir,’ she said, ‘with Mrs Browning's health as it is.’
‘Will you keep Mr Landor, Wilson?’
‘Certainly, sir.
He is quite used to me now and even accords me some respect.’
She knew everyone watched her carefully, not knowing how to interpret her steady dutifulness, not crediting that it would last.
She had never been less communicative either in speech or in manner and it was remarked on by Mrs Browning with curiosity.
‘You have done well, Wilson,’ she said on the last day in Siena.
Wilson inclined her head but did not comment though she took care not to appear sullen.
‘You have got over your distress and disappointment most admirably, dear.’
Again, Wilson merely nodded.
‘Will you manage the winter alone?’
‘Indeed, ma'am.
As I have managed others.’
‘You grow quite professional as a landlady.
I hear on all sides of the excellence of your establishment.’
Wilson knew she was being patronised if not mocked outright, but no trace of expression crossed her face and it gave her satisfaction that she knew it did not.
‘Pilade is a fine child,’ Mrs Browning said next, and her eyes filled with tears.
‘He is not in the least like any of Henrietta's children, but when I see him laugh and run he makes me think of them, being nearer the little one's age than my Penini.
Oh Wilson, what will become of them?’
‘They have a father, ma'am,’ Wilson said, gently enough but nevertheless detached from Mrs Browning's distress, ‘and each other and will not come to want.
‘But the greatest want of all is of a mother when one is a child — no other will do.’
Stoically, Wilson finished the packing she had offered to help with.
There was no point in calling Mrs Browning's attention to the deeper implications of her statement — she would only take it ill.
Her coughing had started again and soon tears mingled with wheezing and she was in a sorry state by the time her husband came back to say the carriage was ready.
‘Now Ba!
What is this!’ he exclaimed.
‘How can you travel so distraught?
We must wait until you compose yourself.
What brought this on, Wilson?’
‘Thinking of Miss Henrietta's children, sir, and them being soon perhaps in want of a true mother.’
Mr Browning sighed and put his arms round his wife's heaving shoulders and drew her to him.
Presently, as Wilson watched, quite impassive, Mrs Browning stopped weeping and her breath came easier.
In another hour she was ready to go, carried to the carriage by her husband.
Watching him with his burden, Wilson reflected it was as though he cradled a shadow in his arms.
His wife lay there so limp, so insubstantial, her black hair hanging down like the tail of a whipped animal and one white hand clutching his sleeve as though it were her only hold on life.
Tremors of feeling flickered through Wilson as she took in the scene.
All was not dead in her.
Her love for her mistress refused to die completely however hard she rejected it.
Turning to go back to her own house to oversee her own arrangements for departure, she realised how little good the summer had done Mrs Browning.
There had been no transformation, as so often there had been, but instead a marked decline in her powers.
Her husband spoke of a winter in Rome working miracles but why should it when a summer in Siena had failed?
She shivered, even though it was hot, and fancied death and disaster lurked everywhere these days.
Nothing and no one was safe, least of all Mrs Browning, and as she reflected on this a sense of futility overwhelmed her.
It remained with her throughout the month the Brownings spent in Florence, before going to Rome, and nothing seemed to lift it.
Bulletins of Miss Henrietta's condition were regular reminders that death was indeed in the midst of life but did not help to make her value her own any more.
Nothing Mr Landor could do could touch her any longer— she could endure rages, witness violence and not flicker an eyelid.
Paradoxically, as though realising his power to upset her had gone, the old gentleman became more docile.
She knew his ways and had adapted to them and this seemed to give him a satisfaction which quietened him.
Mr Browning, before he left for the south, complimented her on her handling of his friend.
‘You are as skilful as you were with my wife, Wilson,’ he remarked.
‘You would soothe a wild animal in the end.’
She showed no pleasure in the compliment, discomfiting him.
‘Not,’ he went on hastily, ‘that I liken my wife to Mr Landor nor to a wild animal, but she had similar need of kindness and nursing expertise.’
Still Wilson neither smiled nor nodded, but stood with her hands clasped in front of her, as though waiting.
‘So, Wilson,’ Mr Browning said, shifting uncomfortably, ‘you have done well and I am grateful.
I trust you find the arrangement satisfactory?
That you are agreeable it should continue?’
‘Yes, sir.’
And that was how they parted.
This time, Wilson did not go out in the street to wave goodbye nor did she weep.
Ferdinando spent the night before departure with her but he might as well not have done.
She brought Pilade into their bed and refused to send him out and the night was passed in mutual recriminations.
Ferdinando's were the stronger.
He said she had become like a stone and tempted him to treat her as one and hurl her away.
He accused her of blaming him for his failure to return with Oreste when, if anyone was to blame other than her sister Ellen, it was she herself.
Finally, he swore and said she was a bad wife and if another woman of greater warmth came his way, no one could accuse him of adultery in taking her.
Wilson let him rant and clutched Pilade to her.
Towards dawn, she said to his sleeping back that he loved his employers more than he loved her and if he had been half the man he thought himself, he would have left them rather than abandon her.
As he snored, she told him Florence was full of jobs for the likes of him and by no means all were living-in.
It was his choice, she said, to cleave to the Brownings and he was a hypocrite to say otherwise.
She said it all, knowing perfectly well none of it was heard, and then she slept a little.
When she woke, her husband had gone and outside she could hear horses in the street.
The carriage would have left by now.
She had not time to dress and make her way to the Casa Guidi.
This realisation instead of distressing her made her feel relieved.
There was no guilt in the way she snuggled down under the coverlet, only a welcome sense of freedom.
She was free of Ferdinando, towards whom her feelings had not so much changed as vanished, and of Mrs Browning who still troubled her so.
She had bid her old mistress farewell the day before.
Looking at her, swathed in shawls though the room was too warm and the day itself not cold, Wilson had once more felt those twinges of alarm which she resented.
There was such suffering in the huge dark eyes, such a tremble about the pinched mouth, that all her instincts were to rush forward and abase herself and beg to be allowed to offer comfort.
But she had not done so.
She had said she hoped Rome would prove beneficial and the journey not too arduous.
She had spoken stiffly, knowing she did, and she had seen how this wounded.
It was hard to stand her ground but she had done so, not wishing to be reclaimed by old emotions.
Only towards Pen had she let her guard slip and that was because he himself claimed her as his own, rushing into his mother's bedroom and hurling himself into Wilson's arms.
‘Oh Lily, darling,’ he cried, ‘I wish you and Pilade could come to Rome.
Won't you come, my Lily?’
He was a great lad now, though still slight and not above average height for eleven years, but he had not changed towards her in the least and his adoration of Pilade was touching.
She had no doubt of the genuine affection he had for her and knew she would be a fool not to acknowledge it.
‘I will miss you, Penini,’ she said to him, giving him a hug in return, ‘and I will kiss Pilade for you every day.’
They embraced one last time and then he was off, rushing to Ferdinando to help him carry down what he claimed were his ‘very most precious’ things.
‘He loves you dearly, Wilson,’ Mrs Browning murmured.
‘And shows it always,’ Wilson replied, ‘even though he is no longer a child.’
‘Of course he is a child!’ came the quick response, so sharp that a coughing fit inevitably followed.
‘He is as far from being a man as he is from being a baby.’
There the interview had ended, Wilson leaving with another wish for good health, a wish she could not believe would be granted.
Lying in bed, Pilade still asleep in her arms, she remembered the journeys she had made with the Brownings and the pleasure the intimacy of the carriage had given her.
Now, if she were seated in her old place, wedged between the window and Penini, with his mother opposite encircled in her husband's arms, or, if the men rode alongside or travelled on the outside of the carriage, sitting with her mistress while Pen and Flush lay on the other seat — now she would feel stifled, trapped, longing to get out.
What had brought this change about she hardly knew, but whatever the cause she did not regret the consequence.
It was a miserable business pining for those who had gone and she thought back with something close to horror of the unhappiness she had endured while wishing herself elsewhere.
Better to be in Florence, alone, independent, not subjected to sudden swings of mood than be with people whom she felt no longer valued her, whatever they said.
She had her own life and in it no one bothered her.
All Mr Landor and the other lodgers cared about was that their rooms should be kept clean and their food brought on time, and she was expert at both.
They did not want to be bothered with her joys and despairs and she did not want to be bothered with theirs.
Pilade was the only one to whom she showed her true self and at three years of age this was no burden to him.
She no longer wrote to Ferdinando nor to anyone else except Ellen and these were dutiful enquiries after Oreste's health with reports of her own and Pilade's.
The desire to draw Ellen into her own life, to involve her in her worries, had left her.
Ellen wanted none of it so let her dictate her terms.
Every day, she went to the Casa Guidi and collected any letters for the Brownings to redirect them to Rome but she no longer envied the recipients their voluminous correspondence.
But even that, she could not help noticing, had diminished — so many people were dead.
No more letters for many a year now from Miss Mitford, none from Miss Trepsack, none from Mrs Jameson, who had always been so kind to her.
All dead.
And now none from Miss Henrietta, whose untidy hand she knew so well.
Instead, Miss Arabel wrote, in her neat, tidy script, and Mr Surtees Cook.
Picking up his letters made her hesitate.
She wanted very much to know what news there was, though she feared it would be bad.
Before the Brownings left Florence she had enquired of Mr Browning how things stood and had been told very ill, but that this must be kept from his wife until she was in the warm south and better able to stand the inevitable end of it all.
Do not fail, Mr Browning had said, to send on any letters from Somerset with all speed.
So she sent them on immediately, longing to know what they contained and never finding out, but supposing that so long as they did keep coming the worst could not yet have happened.
When, in the last days of November, a telegram arrived she knew what it must contain and trembled as she held it in her hand.
It had been delivered as she paid her daily visit to the Casa Guidi or otherwise would have languished at the post office, returned as unclaimed.
It struck her as peculiar that Mr Browning should not have given Mr Surtees Cook his Rome address for this telegram could not be relayed south in under another twenty-four hours and perhaps more.
Taking it back to the post office herself and explaining the circumstances she met with every kind of difficulty about the redirection and was compelled to pay out of her own pocket to have it seen to.
She did this willingly, but wondered at Mr Browning's unusual lack of forethought.
It had all, of course, been a mistake — instructions as to the Rome address had been given to George Barrett and not properly passed on.
Mr Browning wrote to thank her for her diligence and in doing so confirmed what she had been certain of, that Miss Henrietta had died.
He said his wife was struck down, was inconsolable in the old way.
Going about her daily routine, Wilson was dry-eyed, as she knew Mrs Browning would be for a while yet.
No one was spared.
The rich, the good, the pretty, the blessed all shared the same fate as the poor, the bad, the ugly, the deprived.
Nothing anyone did could make any difference in the end.
She could see Miss Henrietta yet in her mind's eye, so young and lovely, laughing up into the face of her adoring Captain Cook.
Such gaiety she had had, such an enthusiasm for life.
And now this cruel end, just when she was happiest.
Wilson could not bear to imagine the horror of such a death.
Minnie had written to her about how terrible it had been, how Captain Cook had brought his wife up to see a specialist who had examined her and said at once there was nothing to be done, there was no operation possible, and he must take his wife home to die.
Wilson thought of that home in Somerset and thought of Henrietta walking in the lovely garden, doubled up, so Minnie wrote, with pain.
Everything had been tried but to no avail — the suffering had been agony, not even deadened with morphine.
Wilson's own insides contracted at the thought and she raged against the injustice of such a thing.
She could not remember the age of the youngest child — was he one, or two, or even three by now?
But the eldest was younger than Pen and the girl no more than five she was sure.
What kind of leave-taking had that been, such a mother dying and leaving three young children?
And Surtees Cook himself, as loving as ever Mr Browning was to her mistress.
It was monstrous, dreadful.
Resentment gathered in her in a hard knot but still the tears would not come.
Her own life had to go on.
She cooked, she cleaned, she shopped, she walked Pilade, she saw to her lodgers — day after day she did the same things at the same time, and instead of being driven half mad with boredom, insane with frustration, she found herself strangely at peace.
And her savings mounted steadily.
She spent little and even caring for her lodgers generously she did not need half the income she found she earned.
It would, she saw, be perfectly possible for her and Pilade to go to England the following year if someone could be found to run her boarding house for the time it would take.
But this realisation, which only the year before had excited her, merely pleased her.
She made no more plans.
When the time was ripe, if it was ever ripe, she would go and if not she would stay.
She had given up all idea of exercising any power over fate.
It was not just her station in life which precluded choice but life itself and she felt foolish not to have realised this long ago.
Mr Landor, for all his selfishness, for all the fact that he was old and self-absorbed, felt the change in her.
He scowled at her, as ever, but looked at her longer from under his shaggy white brows and one day soon after Christmas was moved again to comment how unlike his wife she was, the highest of compliments.
She knew better than to reply.
But in tucking a cover over the old man's knees, for there was snow on the ground outside and in spite of a roaring fire the room was not as warm as he was used to, she felt her hand patted and then he said, ‘Peace and goodwill, peace and goodwill, that is the secret after all.’
He gave a great sigh and if she had not known him better she might have thought, as he slumped forward, that he had expired on the spot.
But it was only one of those sleeps into which he was ever more likely to fall during the day and she knew he would waken, roaring, in an hour or so.
She banked up the fire and took a look round the room before she closed the door.
There were so many possessions in it, brought from his old home in Fiesole by Mr Browning to make the old gentleman feel as familiar as possible, that it was difficult to move about.
Every piece of furniture, every object had associations according to Mr Browning.
Some of them were valuable.
There were ornaments worth many guineas and pictures, however weird they seemed to her, which she had been told were of great artistic merit.
Occasionally, Mr Landor would accuse her of stealing from him when he had mislaid a silver spoon or could not find a precious paperknife, but she had always treated these accusations with the contempt they deserved.
She had none of the fears of the normal servant that her honesty might ever be in doubt and her absolute conviction of her own integrity had finally communicated itself to the old man and been conceded by him.
She wrote a short monthly letter to Rome, merely reporting on Mr Landor's condition and saying all was well in the Casa Guidi.
In reply she always received an acknowledgement but rarely more unless Penini wrote.
To her surprise, he wrote to her more that winter than at any time before and she was touched to find him attempting more than the sweet but stilted compositions he had managed previously.
They were so free in expression she wondered if they had been read at all by his parents but presumed they could hardly have escaped their eye.
She heard that:—— Papa is grown stout and has need of bigger trousers but Mama cries he is more handsome than ever and so do I. I have little time my Lily to write because I am put to Latin with the Abbe which is sore hard work and gives me the headache.
I would that you were with us to hear me play the piano which I do every day and Papa declares I make good progress.
I have begun to Fence which is a man's game and I am to have my uncle Sette's foil when next we go to England which may be in the summer.
I hope you will come with us Lily and Pilade too and we will have run.
There was as much chance of that as flying to the moon but Wilson was grateful for Pen's long memory.
He never forgot how it had once been, never seemed to regard her in any other way but as the person who had cared for him and loved him without reservation.
Every time she saw him again after an absence she stood aside humbly, expecting him at last to have reached the age when she was an embarrassment, expecting him to shuffle his feet and colour and do no more than extend a cool hand, and she would have held none of this against him.
But so far this had never happened — always, it was straight into her arms, no matter who was present, and all the hugs and kisses in the world most fervently given.
She wrote back to him careful little letters to which no one could object, fearing to display too much emotion in case it called attention to the boy's over-regard for her but she managed all the same to make her affection felt, telling him:— Pilade looks for you everywhere and will not believe I have not hidden you in a box.
He has no one to play ball with and tosses his ball against the wall in a most despondent fashion.
He thanks you for the toy soldiers you left behind for him but wishes The General was here to organise them in fighting order.
You are very kind to have thought of him and when I gave him your kiss he gave me a hundred in return to pass on to you believing I could and indeed I wish he was correct in his supposition.
That was as far as she felt she could go, though it was harmless enough.
She had seen the children in other families break away entirely from the too zealous claims of an old nurse and when the time came, as it surely must, she wished to protect herself from the pain which rejection could cause.
Of all the nurses she had known only Minnie Robinson had remained loved and revered and even now, when she was old and pensioned off, Miss Arabel visited her faithfully and turned to her in complete trust for advice and comfort.
She could not be to Pen as Minnie was to Miss Arabel since there was a mother in between but she had a great desire to see her former charge treat her as freely when he reached manhood.
Of course, being a boy made it the more difficult, it would not be as easy, but it had begun to seem to her not impossible to keep in touch with Pen wherever he was.
As for England, she heard enough to doubt that there would ever be another trip there for the Brownings, or at least for Mrs Browning.
Ferdinando surprised her by having someone write a letter for him towards the end of March which made it plain that Mrs Browning had fared no better in Rome than in Siena and was very ill.
He wrote not to tell her this nor to send her any kind of greeting but because he wanted her to do something for him.
It seemed he had left in the Casa Guidi a gun of which he was fond, taking only his hunting rifle in case he had the chance to go into the country to shoot rabbits.
Now his hunting rifle had lost a piece from its firing mechanism and he had been unable to replace it.
He requested her to parcel up most carefully in an oiled cloth his other gun and have it sent to him.
She was at first incensed at the idea — as if she had no more to do than pack up guns, as if it were an easy matter to send such an object at all, as if she existed only for his convenience — and then amused.
Rabbits, indeed.
She was not fooled for an instant nor so cut off from news that she had not heard that war was in the air again.
Ferdinando was far too old, but only mention the cause and he would be into his old daydreams, seeing himself at the head of a column moving relentlessly on the Austrians.
She wrote to him quite sharply, not caring who read her letter, that:— it is impossible for me to post a gun as you ought to know you foolish man for what would the post office officials think were I to turn up with a gun to send?
And do not think such an object can be disguised for that is manifest nonsense as you have only to try to discover.
But Miss Blagden, whom I met by chance yesterday, is going to Rome and when I told her the absurdity of your request she volunteered to carry your ridiculous weapon saying she had always had a fancy to be a gun-runner and that it would be a tale to tell her friends and astonish them.
So you will have Miss Blagden to thank and now I suppose that since I am useless to you I will not hear from you again which will not grieve me if that is all I am good for.
That was spiteful and unnecessary but she did not score it out.
Not a word had she received from Pilade's father as to his son's welfare all this long time and if she had given him cause, as he might argue, to abandon her she had given him no such leave to forget his child.
No reply came.
Miss Blagden duly took the wretched gun and it was she who was kind enough to write on delivering it:— I found your husband very well, Wilson, and as expected by you much agitated over the rumours that another concerted effort is to be made to free and unite his country which subject I may say engages the minds and hearts of his employers hardly less.
Mrs Browning, who looks weak and I believe has hardly moved from her room all winter, though she has ventured on a carriage trip or two since spring arrived, is excited by the promise Cavour has made to bring some statesmanship into this affair and hopes much from him.
Your heart would go out to her, Wilson, if you were to see how she struggles to be her old self but is exhausted after a mere ten minutes of conversation, and then she is obliged to fall back and take no more part in it though wishing to do so.
I dare not ask directly what is the precise matter but I see in Mr Browning's eyes an anxiety deeper than usual and he confessed to me the other day that he fears there may be water on the lung.
She will not hear of it and tells him the summer will restore her to her full strength, a story you have heard before and will not believe any more than I do.
She asked after you and was pleased when I told her how well your business was doing and that you seemed in good spirits since she said she had been anxious for you.
Wilson read that several times —'anxious for you’.
Why?
When?
And if so, some manifestation of this concern would have been welcome.
Anxious, more likely, that she would become a nuisance again, would let Mr Landor down or cause trouble over Ferdinando being taken away.
All that Mrs Browning required of her, surely, was that she should be docile and self-contained and grateful.
But then, as Miss Blagden said, she was ill and depressed after her sister's death.
Has all charity, all true compassion, left me, Wilson wondered?
She seemed to feel so much less, neither joy nor sorrow moving her extravagantly.
The child of one of her lodgers died in her house in April of an undiagnosed heart complaint — the tiny thing's heart simply stopped as it lay in its cot — and though she was sorry for it and sympathetic to the last degree she was aware that inside herself she shrugged and felt none of the horror and distress such an event would once have caused her.
Nor could she decide whether this was a blessing or not.
It was a relief not to weep and toss sleepless at night after such tragedies but her own indifference shocked and troubled her.
Had she become hard?
Had life buffeted her so that now she was impervious to all storms?
But then, if that were so, why did it not make her happy?
She felt, in her new severity (for want of a better word) only half alive, she knew she wanted the old enthusiasms and passions and expectations to course through her and arouse her.
To be so accepting of whatever came her way was to be comfortable but also to be dead.
It often occurred to her that she might never leave Florence again even when she had the money and means to do so.
She could not decide if this was something she cared about or not.
Once, she had thought of herself as so English that however happy she was abroad and even if married to an Italian she would always one day gravitate home.
Now, she was not sure.
She could no longer identify her own Englishness — it was lost under the thick veneer of assumed Italian ways and manners.
Mrs Browning had teased her only that summer for becoming more Italian than English and there was some truth in it.
Italy had made her lazy, and it was this indolence in herself, in her mind as well as her body, which astonished her.
She could sit for hours in the sun these days, content to watch Pilade play, doing nothing whatsoever.
She could put all but the most essential tasks off until the next day, or the next, and did it all the time.
Little by little everything that was most English about her had been eroded and all she had left of it was her honesty, her natural courtesy and a slight reserve she could not entirely eliminate.
She found it unsurprising that her lodgers, with the exception of Mr Landor, assumed she was Italian, especially if their own command of the Italian language was weak.
When she heard them talking of home in her house it was as though it were a foreign country.
Who were these actors and actresses of whom they spoke?
What had happened to Macready and Mrs Kemble?
What were these Acts of Parliament they spoke of, to do with factories and labour?
And this Women's Movement, which so many of the ladies whispered about, what did it mean?
At least the Queen was still on the throne and nothing changed there, even though she was long a widow.
She heard, too, that wages had begun to climb and that a lady's maid, such as she had been, commanded what seemed an astronomical salary — thirty guineas a year in London in some houses, twice what she had ever earned.
But prices were higher too.
Several guests had difficulty hiding the fact that they found her charges cheap (though they were not cheap by Italian standards).
One gentleman even said to her that, were she to run such a boarding house in England and charge what she charged in Florence, she would be besieged.
So she knew that in the few years since she had last been in England great changes had begun to take place from some of which she might clearly benefit.
She was the one who was standing still, frozen in every way into herself.
The arrival of the Brownings and her husband in Florence at the beginning of June was the beginning of what she felt to be a softening of her self and she was glad to find the hard crust she felt encasing her crack and dissolve.
It was the shock of seeing Mrs Browning to whom she went, a little reluctantly, on June 6th, a little after midday.
Nothing Isa Blagden had said had prepared her for the fright.
She was used to her old mistress's pallor, to the skeleton thinness, to the heavy, bruised-looking eyes but walking into her bedroom on the beautiful summer's morning and looking towards the bed she was stopped in her progress and forced to control the exclamation of horror that rose to her lips.
Here was a face, buried in its cloud of hair, which looked more like a mask than a living thing, a mask such as might be worn on All Souls' Eve to scare the children, all thickly white with painted black sockets for eyes and a mouth so crudely gashed it was but a slit.
It was dreadful to see and all the more frightening for the misery of the expression which no attempt at smiling could lift.
‘Oh, ma'am!’
Wilson said, and covered her mouth with her hand to try to hide her distress.
‘That is a fine welcome,’ Mrs Browning murmured.
‘I am a little drowsy, that is all, a little tired with the journey, though I feel better than I thought I would.
How are you, Wilson?
And Pilade?
And Mr Landor?’
‘All well, ma'am.’
‘And have you had a quiet winter?’
‘Not so quiet.
We had guests over Christmas, the house full, and three stayed until Easter which — oh, ma'am!’
She came to a full stop, quite overcome, quite unable to continue such a pedestrian account.
Her heart beat in a way she had not been conscious of it beating for many a month and she felt near to tears.
Timidly, she went close to the bed and when the invalid stretched out her hand she took it gratefully and sat beside her.
The hand was hot, the skin dry and the slender fingers lay in her palm like splinters of fine porcelain — she was afraid to squeeze them for fear they might snap.
But now Mrs Browning was cheerful, talking at once, though with long pauses for breath, of politics and how much she hoped from Cavour.
‘I learned much from Ferdinando's friends in Rome,’ she said.
‘Oh, we had a regular revolutionary den, Wilson, I assure you, our house was a hotbed of intrigue and your husband in the thick of it.’
‘I am sure.
It is all he thinks of.’
‘It is very nearly all I think of the hope in it, the glory to come…if I live to see it.’
‘Live?
Of course you will live, why when the summer…’
‘Wilson, I saw your look just now, dear.
There is no use in telling me I shall soon be running up mountains.
I know what I am become and so do you.’
‘I had not seen you for over six months, ma'am, it was merely surprise that you have lost a little colour…’
Mrs Browning began to laugh but the laugh brought on a coughing fit and, when Wilson rushed to her aid and raised her higher on the pillow, her face took on an ugly blue tinge, which she had never seen before.
Mr Browning coming in at that very moment ran to his wife's side and all but hauled her out of the bed in order to get her upright — in a moment, the convulsion was over and she sank back quite exhausted and drained.
Down from one corner of her mouth Wilson was alarmed to see a thin trickle of dark red blood.
She looked at Mr Browning, startled, and he drew a clean handkerchief from his pocket and wiped the blood away tenderly, saying, ‘She tells me it is nothing, nothing she has not had before.’
‘Never dark blood, sir,’ Wilson murmured, very low.
‘It is gone now.
It is never much.’
They both stood looking down at the poor sufferer, neither speaking.
Gradually, her expression relaxed and soon they saw she was genuinely asleep.
Together, they left the room.
Mr Browning, she saw, was as robust as his wife was pitifully weak.
He strode about the drawing room restlessly, occasionally hitting the back of a chair with his hand, and she saw how pent-up were his energies.
Finally, he came to a stop in front of the fireplace and turning to face her said, almost accusingly, ‘You know her, Wilson.
What am I to do?’
‘Well, sir, I fear there is nothing you can do except what is done already, which is to keep Mrs Browning calm and quiet and endeavour to feed her nourishing food to give her back some strength.’
‘That is the precise problem it has always been.
How can I feed her nourishing food when she will eat nothing?
I have sat with her for hours spooning broth into her and a tedious business it is to make sure any of it goes down.
You know, Wilson, you know , you cannot have forgotten how it is.
‘Certainly I cannot.
But I remember too that it was always unwise to fuss too much over what was taken for then she becomes anxious herself and her throat seizes up and nothing can go down…oh, sir, she seems very ill.’
‘It is nothing to how it has been.
I feared in Rome I detected a great change for the worse, but she has stood the journey well, better than might have been expected, and now, if all remains serene, we may see her build up again.’
But everything did not remain serene.
Unaware of the news which had spread swiftly throughout the city, Wilson returned to the Casa Guidi late in the evening, not really thinking to see Mrs Browning again but wishing to enquire after her and to take a knead cake she had made specially.
It would not be eaten — she had not the faintest illusion of that — but it would be looked on and smiled over and would bring back happy memories and it was all she could think of to signify her reborn affection.
So she hurried through the streets, hot and dusty, the still warm knead cake covered with a cloth, and she was aware of a certain agitation in the people passing her, without catching anything said.
Concentrating on keeping her gift level and unsquashed she climbed the Casa Guidi stairs carefully, glad when she reached the last bend.
But as she did so, she thought she heard a thin, piercing sound, like the wail of a child who has just wakened up and found himself alone.
She stopped, listening.
It could not be Pen, whose voice these days in all its guises was strong and most unchildlike.
Nor could it be a cat, for there had never been a cat in the Casa Guidi.
It came again, a most piteous keening sound and she hurried on, her thoughts turning to the highly-strung Annunciata who might be mourning yet another lost Roman lover.
The door was propped open, to catch what air there was, and she entered hesitantly, her gift thrust out in front of her.
There was no sign of either Ferdinando or Annunciata in the kitchen so she was bold enough to tip-toe towards the drawing room where she hesitated again and peered round the door.
The room was empty, but she could hear Mr Browning's voice from the bedroom and was now certain that was where the cry was coming from.
It could only be from Mrs Browning.
Fearing a tragedy of epic proportions — her mind leapt at once to Penini and then to Miss Arabel — she knocked on the open door and Mr Browning came through from the other room, so haggard and drawn in contrast to his morning self that once more she was convinced something dreadful had happened.
To her, it was nothing dreadful after all, but she was compelled to keep silent and pay lip-service at least to the general despair, for fear she would be outlawed otherwise.
Cavour was dead, that was all.
Cavour, only fifty years of age, the great statesman Italy had needed for so long.
This was the death that had reduced Mrs Browning to a grief more overt and terrible than she had ever shown before and all around her there were faces nearly as stricken and voices almost as crazed.
There was nothing Wilson could say or do.
It did not make sense to her.
Miss Henrietta's death had seemed so much more terrible and yet when she ventured to say this she was met with blank looks.
Putting her knead cake down in the kitchen, she went back to her own home through the streets where already black crepe banners were being hung from every window.
God knew what effect this would have on Mrs Browning, but as she went to bed that night she had no feelings of optimism left and already there yawned ahead a great void.