

AUTHOR'S NOTE
Lying Together concludes a quintet,Russian Nights .
The preceding novels are Ararat (1983), Swallow (1984), Sphinx (1986)and Summit(1987) .
Quotations from Russian poetry are in the author's translation.
The Quintet is in homage to Alexander Pushkin.
I wish to thank Andrew and Margaret Hewson, my literary agents, for their unfailing support and their honest and constructive criticisms throughout the writing of this sequence; and also Sylvia Kantaris, who read Lying Together while it was in progress and offered excellent suggestions.
I am grateful to my editors at Viking Penguin, New York, and Victor Gollancz Ltd, London, Amanda Vaill and Joanna Goldsworthy, for their patience and understanding as I kept changing my mind about whether the work was finished.
I should have realised that an author does not decide this; the work itself decides, by suddenly letting go — as it has now done.
Finally, now that glasnost has arrived, I am happy to acknowledge the collaborative assistance throughout of my Soviet friends Sergei Rozanov, Victor Surkov and Masha Barash.
I extend greetings to them and all the authors present at the 1988 Writers Internationale in London, where this novel was conceived.
DMT
1
I slipped a bookmark into Psychological Correspondences .
Paddington Station; it always creates a disturbance in me.
It's the point where home and the great world intersect.
I remember the tired yet excited feeling when, as a youth studying Russian at Cambridge during my military service, I escaped on occasional weekends, taking the train to King's Cross, and then the tube to Paddington.
The midnight train to Cornwall, silently waiting.
But on this day, an unusually cloudless Sunday late in October, I had travelled from Cornwall; the train was two hours late, and I rushed, humping my case, past the mute crowds gazing up at the information board, towards the taxi rank.
There was a long queue; before me an Asian couple stood with a trolley piled ludicrously with shabby luggage.
I lit a cigarette.
Three cigarettes later, the Asians had struggled aboard and I was directing a cabbie to the Hyde Park Regis.
I kept looking at my watch as we drew through twilit streets.
I was late for the reception.
I didn't know why I'd agreed to attend this festival.
The invitation had arrived only three weeks ago; clearly I was an afterthought.
Well, yes, I did know; it was because my Russian friends would be there.
And I had unfinished business with Masha.
I hate hotels where a uniformed porter leaps to open your door and grab your luggage.
It signals an affluence I can't live up to.
The lobby opened on to a bar area where men in dark suits and ladies in cocktail dresses sipped before-dinner drinks.
They took this luxury in their stride.
I wanted to spring an automatic rifle from my case and fire off a few shots, making them shriek and cower.
You could say it is envy, and indeed that is partly true, And I won't pretend that a factor in one's accepting such an invitation is not the thought of spending a week in a grand hotel.
On this occasion, as an added piquancy, the festival promised to have a distinctly radical flavour.
I signed in; took the lift with a bored porter to my room, which was twin-bedded, overlooking the park.
I declined to tip the porter, who left with a surly expression.
I splashed water over my face, slicked unruly grey hair into a more reasonable disorder, and headed down to the lobby again.
Following a sign saying ‘Writers Internationale, Queen Mary Suite’, I mounted broad marble stairs.
To the right, open double doors hinted at shadowy figures.
Entering, I took a glass of white wine from an offered tray, and found for myself a space near a table laden with an unappetising buffet.
My heart sank as I looked around.
It wasn't a welcoming scene.
I couldn't spot my Russian friends, nor any writer whom I recognised.
That wasn't surprising, given the denseness of the throng.
What was dismaying, however, was the sedateness of the gathering, the low voices, the dark suits and ties (I was conscious of standing out in my baggy white suit and light blue open-neck shirt), and above all the absence of women.
I could spot only four or five, grey-haired and staid-looking, dressed in muted, somewhat old-fashioned, frocks.
Surkov, I thought, would be particularly devastated by the absence of nubile young women.
This was like no gathering of writers I had ever attended.
By now, with the reception well under way , there should have been a roar of tipsy conversation and laughter.
There should be men in dinner jackets and others in stained gardening clothes; women gaudy as parakeets and others indistinguishable from the men.
I pushed into the polite ranks, with no improvement.
Okay, Bellow, I knew, was not due to arrive till the end of the week; but where the hell were Márquez, Lessing, Gordimer?
And where were my friends from Moscow?
Either their flight had been delayed, or they had taken one look at this sober crew and retired aghast.
Then I spotted Rozanov, leather-jacketed in a huddle of dark suits and tight white collars.
His appearance shocked me.
I had seen newspaper photos of him since his release from the psikhushka , but they hadn't prepared me for his gauntness, pallor, baldness.
I rushed up.
His eyes glassy with boredom, he greeted me like a drowning man clutching at a lifebelt.
He had only just arrived, hadn't even booked in.
He didn't know where Victor and Masha were; they had separated at Heathrow, some Amnesty guys had taken him off for a boozy lunch.
Our greetings over, he introduced me to the hovering writers.
‘This is Brown.
And this is Bramble —‘
‘Bromley,’ corrected the flabby-faced elderly Englishman.
‘And I'm John Davenport,’ said the third tight-white-collar, offering his hand.
‘We were just saying,’ murmured Bromley, ‘that we didn't expect any foreigners here.’
‘And I was saying,’ Rozanov growled, ‘I expected it will be truly international.’
‘Well, it's very good,’ Davenport murmured.
‘These affairs can be dull.
Useful, of course, but dull.
It will be wonderful to have some Russians.’
Brown, thirtyish yet elderly: ‘One can always learn from how it's done elsewhere.’
‘That's right,’ agreed Bromley.
‘I don't suppose the changes we hear about in your country, what's it called, this gas —.’
‘Glasnost?’
Rozanov offered.
‘Yes.
I don't suppose it's made much difference to you — in our line of business?’
His voice trembling with anger at the English writer's ignorance, Rozanov said, ‘It's making a huge difference.
At last I can work in relative freedom.’
‘Gosh!
You mean you couldn't before?
But you didn't suffer any restrictions, did you?’
‘I spent two years in a psikhushka ,’ he replied curtly.
‘A mad-house punishment block.
To stop me to work.’
‘How ghastly!’
Brown exclaimed.
I saw one of the dowdy ladies gliding up; she touched his arm, and he turned.
On close inspection her rather stern, dark-complexioned face was striking.
The patterning of fine wrinkles reminded me of an aerial photo of Easter Island.
Her black eyes, penetrating still, must once have been beautiful.
‘Aren't you Sergei Rozanov?’ she enquired in a soft, diffident voice.
‘That's right.’
‘I'm so glad to meet you!
I recognised you from your photographs.
It was terrible, what happened to you.
I'm María Sanchez, from Bolivia.’
Her eyes turned politely towards me.
‘I'm Don Thomas,’ I said.
Her handshake was warm and firm.
It was a relief to meet a genuine writer, a woman whose face was etched with a record of suffering and sensibility.
Those eyes still burned with a reflection of the fires of youth.
From Rozanov's expression it was clear he felt the same.
Brown, Bromley and Davenport introduced themselves.
‘I feel rather lost,’ she said.
‘It's my first time in England, my English is not good, and I don't know anyone.’
‘We're in the same ship,’ Rozanov said.
‘It's my first time in England also.’
‘Well!
It's certainly much more international than we expected,’ said Bromley.
‘Are you particularly interested in any of the topics?’
He glanced from Russian to Bolivian.
Rozanov said he didn't know what they were.
With a shy smile the elderly Bolivian lady, prompting him, said ‘Shamanism?’
It was well known — except apparently to Bromley, Brown and Davenport, who looked hopelessly puzzled — that Rozanov had survived his ordeal in a psikhushka partly by developing shamanistic powers.
Shamanism, he explained patiently for the three idiot Brits, was a primitive practice of self-denial so that one could travel in the land of the dead and return unscathed.
But he rather doubted, he said, glancing around mordantly, that shamanistic powers would be of any interest to such a gathering.
‘I'm sure you're wrong,’ said the elderly woman.
‘It would be fascinating,’ I said, and the others nodded.
‘Well, yes,’ the Russian murmured, ‘it certainly should be — what's the word?
— relevant.
After all, as Pasternak said, we are people who meditate upon death and thereby create new life.’
Bromley considered this, frowning, sipping orange juice.
‘I've always thought our most important job is to comfort the bereaved.’
Brown nodded.
‘The journey to the cemetery.
It can be depressing or consoling; and that's largely up to us.’
Rozanov's false teeth — he had lost his natural ones in the psikhushka — flashed in appreciation of the metaphor.
Brown continued: ‘I imagine cremation is obligatory in your country?’
Rozanov said he didn't understand.
Taken aback myself, I was about to translate for him, but Brown added in explanation: ‘The burning of corpses is — essential — in Russia.’
Rozanov's puzzlement cleared; fervently he replied, ‘Ah, yes!
You're dead right!
And there are many, many corpses to burn.’
‘There must be.
It's a vast country.’
The Bolivian poet excused herself, vanishing in the direction of the toilets.
Davenport spoke of the paper he was to read, on the New Cosmetics.
Doubtless, I thought, it would be a defence of solid workmanship in the novel rather than gimmickry and flashiness.
‘Nowadays,’ observed Bromley, ‘one can make a corpse look almost alive.’
Bromley would be one of those writers who produce corpses.
‘Realistic’ novels, full of fine and lifeless observations.
You could tell it just by looking at his flabby features.
And so would Brown who, busy demolishing a sausage roll, observed through flaky lips: ‘But it's not necessarily what the relatives want.’
Rozanov frowned again at this incomprehensible remark.
At that moment María Sanchez, her face embarrassed and alarmed, glided up to us and asked if she could have a word in private.
We excused ourselves.
I guessed what she was going to say before she opened her mouth.
We beat a retreat from the Queen Victoria Suite and climbed the stairs towards the second floor.
A comforting hum of loud conversation descended to meet us.
As we climbed, I asked after Rozanov's wife, Sonia, and Sasha his son.
They were fine.
Sasha had played a draw with Kasparov, and was centre forward for the Dynamo Komsomol team.
‘That's amazing, Sergei!’
I remembered the pale, shy little boy.
And I remembered Nina, his mother, with her long straight blonde hair.
But all things change.
We pushed into the peacock-coloured gathering, deafened by the babble in various languages.
There was Sontag, Márquez…
Everyone seemed to have found an old friend to talk to.
María Sanchez, with a nod and a pleasant smile, took her leave of us.
We accepted drinks.
I saw Masha gliding through towards us: that unmistakable froth of brown hair, the exuberant, doll-like face; and behind her, over-topping her, the bleak, dark face of Victor Surkov, his hair not grey as it had been when we last met some six years ago, but a brilliant yellow spreading down over his shoulders.
I barely had time to notice that Masha was wearing Circassian trousers before she was in my arms, kissing my cheeks; and Surkov was pumping my hand warmly.
My brain adjusted slowly to the Russian language and to Victor's hair.
‘Where have you been?’
Masha asked.
We explained about the conference of funeral directors, and Surkov, glancing around, said we might well find this crew equally tedious.
I told him I liked his hair.
He grinned.
‘It makes me look young, huh?’
‘Incredibly young.’
‘Well, I'm fifty-six next month.
No, my God!
Fifty-seven.
It's awful.’
‘And I've reached the grim forties,’ said Masha, pouting her lush red lips.
‘I can't believe it, Masha!
You never seem to look any older.
You're exactly as you were on the day we met.’
That frigid November of ‘81 — or was it ‘82?
— warmed by the smile and energy of my Intourist guide, Comrade Barash.
Who proved to be not merely a lively guide but a brilliant physicist and a secret poet.
Those nights of passionate improvisation after she'd introduced me to her two friends from Peredelkino, the writers' village.
It was almost literally true that she looked no older.
Yet straightaway I knew that something had changed, since that distant Moscow meeting and our encounter three years ago in Switzerland: for some reason I no longer felt desire stirring for her.
It could not be just the billowing Circassian trousers, though it is true I find trousers on women an anaphrodisiac.
‘You look older, my friend,’ Surkov said, fixing me with a compassionate gaze.
‘I feel older,’ I confessed.
‘Victor's had some wonderful news,’ said Masha.
‘Show them the letter!’
His face glowing with pride, Surkov extracted an already creased letter from a trouser pocket.
‘My American agent, Dave Abramsohn, dropped in.
He's in London doing some talent spotting.
He gave me this.’
Sergei and I read the letter together.
Dear Comrade Surkov, You are warmly invited to do me the honour of attending my forthcoming Inauguration in Washington DC, on 20 January 1989, as 41st President of the United States, and to read your famous poem of international accord, ‘Friendship’.
Cordially yours, Michael Dukakis.
‘That's wonderful!’ said Rozanov.
‘It is,’ I agreed.
‘The only problem is that Bush is sure to win.’
Surkov shook his head.
‘Dave has inside information.
He's on Dukakis's team, and knows the confidential polls.
Dukakis will be elected.
I shall be the first writer at an Inaugural since Frost at John Kennedy's.
It honours all Soviet writers, of course, not me personally.’
The noise was stilled as a voice came over a microphone.
It belonged to an editor from the Guardian , the main sponsors of Writers Internationale.
He welcomed all the authors, promised a splendid week.
Then he announced the winner of the Lloyd George Memorial Prize, an annual award for the best novel by a handicapped person.
For the first time, he said, the winner was a mentally handicapped person.
There was loud applause as the young man was led up to receive his prize.
Then we were requested to assemble in the lobby, ready to be taken to the Riverside Theatre for the opening public event.
We joined the surge out through the doors and down the marble stairs.
We were driven through dark and quiet Sunday streets.
Pressed against Masha's raincoated buxomness, I wondered at how unaccountably desire had all but vanished — though I had dreamed often of our reunion.
The coach drew in outside the Thamesside theatre and disgorged us.
We were late; only a few stragglers, eyeing us curiously, queued at the box office.
The auditorium was comfortably full, and predominantly female.
The chattering hushed as we filed into the front rows, which allowed easy access to the stage.
Tonight was a free for all on the topic ‘Woman and Writing’.
As it got under way it began to develop (understandably, I felt) into a tirade in favour of abortion.
Author after author denounced Bush, the likely (except to Surkov and his agent) President of the United States, who disapproved of abortion.
Stalking on to the stage with the proud air of a Red Indian chief, Surkov was the only dissenting speaker.
‘I didn't come a thousand miles,’ he muttered into the microphone, ‘to kill babies, or to support their killing.
I came to talk about literature, and to hear some good readings.
I don't like killing even a fly, so I sure as hell don't like killing babies.
It's a very difficult moral question, and it does no good to talk as if it was a simple black and white issue.’
The response was coldly polite.
Though disagreeing with the line he had taken, I patted him on the back when he sat down.
It had been courageous.
An author sitting off to our right, a man in black tie, grey suit and polished black shoes, stalked up to the microphone and said, ‘John Holcraft, Guildford.
I'm puzzled.
There are no funerals for aborted foetuses.’
He stepped down.
The laconic demolition of the Russian's argument was rapturously applauded.
A novelist from Ghana stood up and demanded to know why Surkov had used the expression ‘black and white’.
We were driven back through the nearly empty streets.
There was little conversation.
The writers ate a late dinner at three separate, long tables in the hotel dining room; the Russians and I conversed among ourselves, feeling vaguely ostracised.
It didn't surprise me that the other four male English writers who had been invited had changed their minds and stayed away.
I regretted their absence.
Not that, probably, I would have found much in common with Kington Aimes, the humorous novelist, or Douglas Parkin, the Northern poet, or the two left-wing critics, but the dearth of English tones left me feeling even more culturally isolated than usual.
Holcraft, having discovered his mistake while chatting to Sontag during the ride back to the hotel, had hurried off to find the other funeral directors.
I resolved to cling to my Soviet Friends, as if this were Moscow or Leningrad; my rusty Russian soon became relatively fluent again, helped by alcohol.
Afterwards we grabbed a few bottles and headed for my room.
With still more glasses of Beaujolais in them, my friends became animated.
We weren't going to get much literature at this festival, it seemed, so let's show the bastards.
Let's improvise something, as we'd done on those remarkable nights six years ago.
Let's celebrate our reunion appropriately.
‘Could it work again?’
I asked.
It was a long time.
I had tried since, alone and with others, and I'd been tongue-tied.
I hadn't been tongue-tied in Switzerland, with Masha, Rozanov pointed out.
I needed them; and they, me.
For some reason we sparked each other off.
‘Okay, we can see how it goes.’
‘Excellent!’
‘Shall we tell him?’
Surkov asked, glancing at his comrades.
They looked uncertain.
I said, ‘Tell me what?’
‘We've decided to reveal our part in the sequence.
There's no reason to disguise it any more, now that glasnost is upon us.
The truth can come out at last.’
He plucked some grapes from my complimentary fruit bowl.
‘We'd like our friends to know we weren't entirely inactive these past few years,’ said Masha with a smile.
‘Are you pleased?’
Actually I felt acutely alarmed.
I tried to show pleasure at their decision and at the same time annoyance that our contract simply wouldn't permit it.
I felt grateful to my publishers for their insistence that we guard against any change of mind by my secret collaborators — unlikely as that had seemed in the frigid era of Brezhnev.
‘The contract is that strict?’
Rozanov enquired.
‘I'm afraid so.’
Surkov gave a shrug.
‘Well, we tried.’
It didn't matter, Masha said.
They had done it for the joy of creating, without having to look over their shoulder at the censor.
Well, and also for a little foreign currency, which would be handy this week.
It had been very worthwhile.
Her comrades nodded agreement and my alarm subsided.
We each of us scribbled a theme on a piece of hotel notepaper.
I wrote down, rather predictably, ‘Glasnost’.
Lacking a porcelain vase — the womblike container used in Pushkin's Egyptian Nights , our major inspiration — we dropped the crunched-up papers into a glass.
Masha, shutting her eyes, drew one out and unfolded it.
‘Lying Together,’ she announced.
Then we drew lots to decide the order in which we should improvise, night by night.
Surkov was to go first.
I took my Sony from a drawer, slotted a tape in and pressed the record button.
Victor concentrated; asked for the lamp to be turned down low.
His cigarette gIowed and faded and glowed again.
He sat forward in his chair, and began to invent.
After my friends had left quietly, some two hours later, I undressed and tumbled into bed.
I fell instantly asleep.
Then I was in a tram, rushing across the snowy wilderness.
The tramcar was full of Russian authors.
Everyone was merry and laughing, drinking beer.
Lermontov left his seat to go and neck with Tsvetaeva, and Solzhenitsyn gave up his place at the front to go back and chat to Gogol and Pushkin.
I felt a trifle sad that no one wanted to talk to me.
A motorway ran alongside the tram-like-a-train; English cars sped along it.
I caught sight of Forster driving a Mini.
When I awoke, I stretched for my cigarettes and the tape recorder.
I ran the tape back, wanting to listen again to some of Surkov's improvisation; but when I pressed to start it there was only a crackling silence.
2
‘If I'd been in your shoes I'd have walked right out on him.’
‘I could hardly do that Sergei.
We were in my room.
Rozanov and I on another extraordinarily fine autumn morning, perched on stools in a grimy Soho café.
‘I was more embarrassed for Masha's sake,’ I continued.
‘She was clearly my mistress in the Swiss hotel, though he didn't name her.
Whereas in reality it was all very respectable.
We skied by day, and the rest of the time we explored our idea for Summit .’
It had been an unexpected meeting with her, brought about by the Geneva Summit of 1985.
I was to write about it for Cosmopolitan , she for Trud ; it was the first time she had been outside the Soviet bloc.
Afterwards we had spent a few stolen days at the ski resort of Grindelwald, in the shadow of the Eiger North Face.
‘Well,’ I confessed, ‘it wasn't only that.
She happened to have a period for most of that week.
It wouldn't have bothered me, but it bothered her.
I'm not saying I wouldn't have enjoyed some torrid lovemaking.’
I swallowed bitter coffee dregs and the last mouthful of chocolate cake.
‘It was superbly done, though — didn't you think?
— imagining the Eiger looking through a telescope into our bedroom.
I don't blame Victor for being angry: I simply don't know what happened to my tape recorder; I've never fouled it up before.’
‘Oh, you didn't foul it up,’ he said, mumbling through a mouthful of jammy doughnut.
‘I found it unpleasant, his needling you both like that, so I wiped the tape.’
I stared at him, bewildered.
‘How?’
He shrugged.
‘My friend, if you'd spent two years burning up with sulphur injections, or shaking from haloperidol, you too might develop certain uncanny abilities.
It was a very unfair portrayal of you.
I don't think you're in the least manipulative.’
I said I thought Surkov felt resentful because the novels hadn't made more money.
‘That's true.
And he thinks you and Masha ought to have consulted us on Summit .’
‘But we did!’
‘At a late stage, when you couldn't change very much.
Maybe he thinks we might have improved it a little, even turned it into a bestseller.
I don't agree with him; I think you did a good job.
Anyway, don't worry about it, Don.’
He patted me on the shoulder.
‘Victor's fiction has vanished.
Like the buried Armenian books.
Like Mardian's balls.
Oh, we could have consigned it to memory if we'd set our minds to it, but we didn't.
Tonight it's my turn; he'll expect me to take up the story where he left off, but I've no intention of doing that.
I shall move it in some other direction.
The devil knows where.’
I paid our bill and we went — out into the cold blue day.
Sergei, in a rumpled navy suit, attracted stares.
Bald, and with an attenuated El Greco face, he looked like a victim of chemotherapy — but also of a Transylvanian vampire, for his chin and neck were covered with what seemed to be bite marks.
He had left his electric shaver behind, he explained, and had had trouble with the disposable Gillettes he had bought at the hotel shop.
He wanted to visit Collet's, the International bookshop.
There were portraits of Gorbachev and Mandela, glinting with red, in the window.
Inside, I was gripped, as I always was, by the intense atmosphere of revolutionary zeal.
Posters commanded us to remember Chile, Nicaragua, South Africa, the nurses, CND, the NHS, the wrongs of women.
Unidentifiable Russian music was playing.
Rozanov, too, was gripped by a kind of excitement.
‘I feel it's 1917 and anything can happen.
Even justice!’
He bought a paperback Henry Miller.
As we left he said, ‘We shall know glasnost has arrived when we have a capitalistic bookshop in the middle of Moscow.’
He gazed at the slim, stilted legs of typists and shop assistants, hurrying to their low-calorie lunches.
‘London is wonderful!’
Then he took me aback by saying, ‘It's lucky to be still here.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Victor told us a grim story on the plane.
Apparently in the summer the captain of one of our nuclear submarines went crazy.
He was going to unleash a warhead on London.
One of the other subs had to wipe it out.
He and his crew, and a lot of radioactive material, are at the bottom of the Baltic.’
I swore; then asked if it was believable.
He replied that this was one anecdote of Surkov's which had seemed to carry conviction.
We strolled on.
He had a preoccupied air.
It was not, somehow, the air of a man contemplating nuclear catastrophe, but a more pleasant dream.
I suspected the image of a woman lurking behind his bloodshot eyes.
Whoever she was — if she existed at all— she went with us through the mild, cleaned-up sordor of Soho side streets.
We browsed through a desolate pornographic bookshop wearing a Monday morning hangover, then entered a crowded pub.
We managed to find a corner.
Someone had left a copy of the Sun , and Sergei grabbed it saying, ‘Ah, your free press!’
I shouldered my way to the bar.
Sipping lager, we gazed at the front-page face of a dour middle-aged nurse who had been sacked for making porno movies on hospital premises.
Rozanov lamented her undeserved misfortune — nurses needed a little recreation — but enthused over the lurid story, so much more interesting and poetic than, say, the American or Israeli elections.
This was the stuff of life.
He admired a big-breasted girl.
‘The hard feminists want it banned, the page-three nude.
There's one every day.’
‘But why?’
‘Presumably because breasts are obscene.’
‘Well, that's true.
We are pornographers in the cradle…
. It's a strange world.
Tomorrow you take us to Freud's house, h'mm?’
I promised to do that.
A juke box started up.
We stared at a girl in a too-short red T-shirt, the writhing, glistening flesh in the pit of her back exposed.
Sergei got us another drink.
He began to scribble verses on the blank inside cover of his Henry Miller.
I regarded with distaste a group of sleek young yuppies in city suits, guffawing.
How healthy, in comparison, seemed the orgiastic nurse.
I sipped my lager quietly while Sergei scribbled.
Shutting the book he said suddenly, ‘So you didn't fuck Masha because she was having a period.’
Surprised, I nodded.
‘Menstrual blood can be magical,’ he said.
‘I used to find with Nina and Sonia they would often menstruate at the same time; and various telepathic events and coincidences would occur.’
He folded his arms, leaned back in his chair, sighed, devoured with his sad, sunken eyes the writhing girl.
‘Should I buy this word processor?
What do you think?’
We had spent an hour in an office equipment shop.
I said I thought he should buy it, he wouldn't regret it.
‘But have you found there's a Muse in yours?’
‘I think so, though she's very shy.’
There had to be a Muse, he said, if he was to buy it.
But what would happen, probably, was that his spirit wife would take over the computer, just as she took over almost everything.
Her name was Avavnuk; she had been an Eskimo in her life.
She came to him maybe two or three times a week: sometimes in the form of an animal, sometimes disguised as a live, normal woman.
She was mischievous, aggressive, and totally immoral.
He wasn't enough for her; she slept with many others.
His face was completely serious, even slightly mournful.
‘Does Sonia know about her?’
‘Of course.
I explained the situation, after she found me jerking about on the bed one afternoon.
She knows I can't refuse a spirit wife, and on balance she prefers that I fuck Avavnuk rather than have affairs with ordinary women.
Well, maybe she hopes I'm just imagining it.’
Back at the hotel, the festival organiser, a wiry Scot dressed in a Superman outfit, accosted Rozanov.
He bore a message for him.
Extracting a crumpled note from a breast pocket, he gave it to Rozanov, who scanned it.
‘Ah, yes!
A couple of Russian exiles; I haven't seen them for ten years.
They want tickets for my performance next Sunday.
Is it possible, Jock?’
‘I think we can scrape up a couple.
But with you and Bellow and Finn on the programme, it's a sell-out already.
We could have sold twice as many.’
‘How are the sales going for Wednesday?’
I asked.
His face clouded.
‘They're coming along nicely.’
As Sergei went off to call his old friends, I turned into the lounge area where tea was being served, and found Surkov and Masha there.
They had accompanied María Sanchez to a mass at Westminster Cathedral; the long and, compared with an Orthodox mass, rather colourless service had drained them.
In contrast the elderly Bolivian lady had seemed energised by Christ's body.
‘She needs her fix every day,’ said Surkov.
Relaxing in the comfortable chairs, we surveyed the plushness of the chandeliered hotel and its sleek well-dressed patrons.
Again I wondered what I was doing here.
This wasn't the Dorchester or the Ritz, but it had their ineffable air of serene affluence.
These people, I remarked, could pull out of their pockets, thoughtlessly, as much money for a round of drinks as most single parents have to live on for a week; could pay as much for a few hours’ sleep as a Third World peasant and his family have to live, or die, on for a year.
Masha nodded, saying that for the first time since Geneva she could feel the attraction of Communism.
Apart from one lone Nigerian sipping tea, we saw no one else from the festival.
The Regis was so vast it absorbed the Writers Internationale just as it absorbed the British Congress of Funeral Directors.
Except in the press room and hospitality suite, on the fifteenth floor, the festival only really existed during the twice-daily theatre events and at dinner.
The hotel bookshop went on displaying Archer and Sheldon and Forsyth, happily oblivious to the world-famous authors who flitted in from time to time to paw the paperbacks.
Surkov signed the bill for our teas, and it was time to board the coach to take us to the late-afternoon theatrical performance.
We considered giving it a miss, but decided it would look rude.
With one liberal white and two coloured Africans reading, it proved to be an impassioned attack on apartheid.
‘I'm against apartheid too,’ growled Surkov, ‘but I don't want it thrust down my throat like this.’
Rozanov spent the whole performance scribbling in a notebook, and did so again at the evening performance.
He paused in his writing only to listen to a rather attractive Finnish poetess reading a sequence about her marital problems.
I recalled he had struck up an intimate conversation with her in the lobby after breakfast.
Could hers be the image he carried?
It was Hallowe'en, but the rows of surburban semis near the theatre as we drove back in the coach looked profoundly unmagical.
We watched the late-night news in Masha's bedroom.
Surkov and I sprawled on the twin beds; Rozanov sat on the floor, his back against the drawn curtains; Masha, in a comfortable chair, kicked off her high heels and drew her legs under her flower-patterned skirt.
A mother and her three babies had been killed in an attack on a bus in Israel.
Happening almost on the eve of the Israeli elections, the attack would, it was agreed, wreck Labour's chances of victory and let in the hard-line Likud.
We stared gloomily at the screen.
There would be no peace conference; the crime against the Palestinians would become even blacker.
‘It wouldn't surprise me,’ Masha said, ‘if Likud carried out the massacre.’
‘Against its own people?’
We heard a male duet of drunk voices, and a body lurched against the door in passing.
‘Why not?
What's a woman and three babies?
The ends justify the means.’
‘Now we improvise,’ said Surkov, tossing me a cigarette.
‘Fuck this crazy planet.
We should try to lay the groundwork for another novel this week — you agree?’
Sergei and Masha nodded, and glanced at me queryingly.
I shrugged.
Okay.
just make sure you press the record switch tonight,’ Surkov growled.
‘But I take it you'll have no problem remembering my fiction?’
His glance swept all three of us challengingly: as if one could possibly forget a Surkov improvisation!
‘So it's my turn,’ mused Rozanov.
‘Remind me of your last line, Victor.’
Taken aback, he stammered.
He couldn't recall it precisely.
It was something about the lovers skiing across the Alpine mountain slope, vanishing into the mist.
He glanced swiftly from Masha to me.
Masha: ‘Weren't they on a ski lift, rushing across pine trees?’
‘That was earlier,’ I objected.
‘But they weren't skiing either.’
We found ourselves lost, just as Masha and I had been when a sudden mist had descended on the lower slopes of the Wetterhorn.
Surkov growled his irritation, but Rozanov seemed to enjoy our floundering.
‘It's not meant to be,’ he said, rubbing his stubbly chin, staring into space.
‘We shouldn't fight it.
Let's imagine…
Let’ s imagine —‘
3
It was a mild night late in May.
Anna Charsky awoke in the bedroom of her pleasant flat overlooking an historic river.
She kicked away the heavy limbs of the man who was sharing her bed, at the same time dislodging a grey cat from the bed's foot.
Half asleep still, she stumbled from the room and across the hall to the bathroom.
Hoisting her nightdress she squatted.
Then she ran her hands under the tap and dried them.
She returned to bed.
The man's hairy arm had strayed across into her space, and she had to move it in order to lie down.
She turned on her side away from him and closed her eyes.
Images of her dream still flashed vaguely before her.
‘I wonder what it meant,’ she asked herself sleepily.
‘I had an English lover, we were in Switzerland, on the ski slopes…and then we were rushing across pines…‘
She felt the sudden weight on her legs which told her the cat had leapt up again.
She parted her feet to make a hollow for her.
The man's arm, in his sleep, fell around her shoulder.
Her vague thoughts drifted to him.
How strange it was, when you thought about it, that she was lying in a bed with this particular man.
It might have been anyone in Russia — or indeed, the world.
The man started to make a whistling sound through his teeth.
He wrenched his arm away and turned over, away from her.
She touched her groin, her stomach.
Perhaps her erotic dream had something to do with her condition.
Anna Charsky, native of Leningrad, relaxed her mind and was soon asleep again.
Meanwhile her husband, Dmitri, was not too far away.
He was standing on an improvised stage near the statue of the Bronze Horseman.
Late though it was, the sky was still clear.
Around the stage a large crowd, mostly of young people, sat on foldable chairs and stools; others stood in a semicircle behind.
The low, expectant chatter of the audience was muted further by the soaring granite walls of the city, the rushing Neva, and the sky which somehow seems more vast in Russia.
A performance by Charsky — a gauntly handsome man in his early thirties — was a rare event.
He had the gift of improvising verses at will to any given theme.
Since unguarded and uncensored words have usually been anathema in Russia, he mostly limited his performances to select private gatherings.
That this performance was completely open to all-comers signalled unequivocally that the Gorbachevian renaissance was a reality.
His performance was intended as a celebration of that renaissance, and also of the prospects for world peace: for in Moscow Comrade Gorbachev and President Reagan were holding a summit meeting which promised to bear fruit in disarmament.
Celebratory events were taking place all over the Soviet Union; but none was more extraordinary, in its modest way, than Charsky's promised to be.
Squatting, tossing back his black curly locks from time to time, he was chatting to his elderly accompanist: ‘I think we should have the Bach.’
‘Are you sure the Bach wouldn't be more suitable Dmitri?’ replied the cellist, who was hard of hearing.
‘Bach will be fine.’
A slim fair-haired girl in a long black dress was threading between the ranks of spectators, holding open a bag into which people dropped folded-up pieces of paper.
Having reached the most distant onlookers, a young couple pushing up-and-down a baby in a pram, the girl drew tight the neck of the bag and strolled with it to the stage.
Charsky, rising, reached down a — hand to assist her in mounting the stage.
He fumbled with the microphone while the girl sat down at the rear, the bag in her lap.
The crowd noise hushed.
The cellist took up his bow, and drew across his instrument a few subdued notes of Bach.
Charsky spoke into the microphone: ‘Well, my friends, we'll begin.
Bella?’
He glanced over his shoulder at his assistant.
She opened the bag, dipped in a hand and pulled out a slip of paper.
Unfolding it she read aloud in a clear voice, ‘The Veteran.’
Grief seized Charsky's heart.
His father, a brain-damaged veteran of the Great Patriotic War, had recently died.
Charsky gazed around the hushed audience, hoping to catch sight of a friend whose kind smile might give him strength.
But there was no one.
If only Anna had been able to attend.
She had told him she would try to come, and her non-appearance added to the depression caused by the theme.
Even the weather did not help.
Cumulus had drifted into the sky.
He stepped back from the microphone and lowered his gaze, lost in painful emotion.
It occurred to him that —
4
I had not yet escaped the strangeness of being with people who, over the years, had become largely fictional to me.
The voices of Surkov and Rozanov on tape, played over and over in my study in the first year or so after our meeting, had brought their living presence to me; but later, as those tapes were discarded in favour of over-scrawled typewritten pages, Surkov and Rozanov increasingly became characters under my control, their improvisations almost lost under the refinements of a thousand and one nights (and days) of my own labour.
Yet here they were, as large as life — Surkov with his long yellow hair and Rozanov with his attenuated face and his baldness — clearly the living people with whom I had boozed and improvised in Moscow, so long ago.
It was disconcerting.
Only gradually was I learning to adjust; learning to take some pleasure in their twofold existence —.
in their own consciousness and between the covers of novels bearing my name, somewhat inaccurately, as author.
Surkov, in a Yale T-shirt, was sitting alone at a table when I went down to a late breakfast.
He didn't know where the others were, but he could guess.
Sergei's bed hadn't been slept in, and presumably he'd been to bed with Masha.
That seemed highly unlikely, I said, taken aback.
— Also, possibly, a shade put out.
Surely she was too much in love with Liubov?
An image of Liubov Charents, that tall, leonine Georgian soprano, flashed before my eyes.
I might have added that Masha once told me she didn't know what women saw in her two ageing friends.
‘Oh, I don't think she's entirely lost to healthy sex.
But what do you think?
You ought to know.’
He leered across the table.
‘That's where you're wrong.
We've never slept together.’
His fork, dripping scrambled egg, paused in midair.
‘Really?
I'm astonished.
We all assumed you had an affair in Moscow.’
‘An affair of the heart.’
‘Good God!’
Chewing slowly, he shook his head in disbelief.
‘An affair of the heart…astonishing!’
Yet it had not been especially noble of me.
By the time I had reached Moscow I had exhausted myself physically in a purely sensual relationship with my Leningrad guide, Natasha.
For Masha I'd had nothing left but the heart.
‘But what about your Swiss encounter?
You shared a bedroom, didn't you?’
I nodded.
‘But we didn't lie together, except in the creative sense.’
‘Then my improvisation on Sunday night was pure fantasy.
I'm sorry, my friend.
I assumed too much.
But after all,’ he added, in self-excuse, ‘you fantasised quite a lot of things about Sergei and me, in the novels.’
‘They were mostly what you and he had improvised,’ I pointed out.
‘Well, okay, but you expanded a lot.
I —‘He broke off while I ordered rolls and coffee —‘I was being true to our principle, in creating a Swiss love affair for you: real people — ourselves included — but a mixture of fact and fiction.
I thought it was time you got involved in it too, my friend.
A few memories of your adolescence, in Swallow , was pretty safe territory.’
I admitted that was true.
I couldn't have exposed myself as he and Sergei had done.
‘Well, Sergei and I are kind of symbols.’
He waved his arms expressively.
‘We stand for what's good in our country, so we have to be brave and reveal ourselves.
But even Masha, who's very reticent, confessed her desire for Liubov — which was remarkable considering our country's attitude to homosexuality.
Oh, admittedly the novels aren't available there, but people got to know about it and wondered how she had the nerve to reveal it.
Because they assume you were writing from knowledge.
But you — you kept out of trouble.’
He sneered a smile over his coffee cup.
‘You were the discreet narrator.’
I accepted his just criticism in the manner of Shostakovich, and concentrated for a while on eating.
Then he launched an assault on his Moscow neighbour.
Sergei's improvisation had been crap.
The pretence that his, Surkov's, opening had been merely a dream was a pathetic cliché.
There had already been too much of it in our novels.
And poems in a novel simply didn't work; they'd been crap poems anyway.
They weren't even genuine improvisations: he'd been scribbling verses all day.
‘I thought one or two of them were good,’ I said.
‘The poem abut Charsky's dead father, for example, was terrific.’
‘I can't remember any lines from it.
It wasn't memorable.
No, my friend, it's probably a good thing the tape ran out.’
I felt myself blush.
My own stupidity, rather than Rozanov's shamanistic powers, had once again wrecked a recording.
I'd slotted in, by mistake, a tape on which I'd recorded some sixties pop music for a party, and which I'd never run back.
When we'd checked the recording we'd heard Sinatra singing ‘My Way’.
Only a fraction of Rozanov's wonderful improvisations had been captured at the end of the tape.
He had been remarkably forgiving.
It was fate, he said: the poems of Charsky on the Neva bank were not meant to survive.
Surkov offered me a Marlboro.
‘Tonight,’ he said, clicking hotel room?
Masha won't mind.
Actually I didn't say it was her.
You could invent a different woman if you like.
— Ah, here's the happy couple.’
Masha entered, holding a rolled-up magazine, followed by Rozanov, a newspaper under his arm.
They seemed faintly embarrassed.
‘We've been walking,’ said Masha, rather red in the cheeks.
With her bouffant hair, her crimson lips, her plump raincoated figure hour-glassed by a tight belt, she looked more than ever like a matryoshka , a Russian doll.
‘Neither of us could sleep,’ said her companion, falling heavily on to a seat.
‘I went to the hospitality lounge for a cup of tea at about seven, and found Masha there before me.’
She flushed a deeper red, as if the lie was too transparent.
As she slid out of her raincoat, revealing her plump, red-sweatered breasts, I had a moment of irrational jealousy of Rozanov.
‘You were fucking good last night, Sergei,’ said Surkov, putting an arm round his shoulder.
‘Who's the guy who slept with Anna?
It was a nice touch when she came running along the embankment, late, fresh from her lover's embraces.’
He chuckled.
The latecomers ordered breakfast.
Rozanov removed his parka then hid his face behind the Guardian .
I read the headlines.
‘Degree by voucher’ put on ice…
Dukakis boards the people's train’…
It all sounded terribly boring.
The sheer weight of boring events sometimes overwhelmed me.
I wondered what the Guardian headlines would be on the day of the Second Coming.
Almost certainly it would lead with welfare cuts, while the Sun — or maybe Sunday Sport if He came on the sabbath — would get the scoop.
November the first.
All Souls’.
Though I am not particularly a Christian, I thought with sadness of my beloved dead.
Masha was glancing at Newsweek .
Surkov caught sight of a smiling photo of Raisa Gorbachev with her husband.
‘Ah, our beautiful queen!’ he exclaimed.
‘She was terrific in bed!’
‘So you've told us many times,’ said Rozanov not looking up.
‘I fucked you once; perhaps I fuck you still,’ murmured Masha, misquoting Pushkin.
Rozanov and I chuckled.
‘Didn't you also fuck Thatcher, Victor, when she was in Moscow?’
‘No, but I got pretty close.’
‘Ah!’
Rozanov said.
‘I see that all men are potential child abusers.’
His eyes rapidly scanned the article.
‘Some society of angry women has been formed.
Child sexual abuse is a product of patriarchy, it will continue as long as men regard women as ultimately existing to meet male needs…
I don't see the logic of that.
Boys get abused too…
If you foster a child you must not hug her.
You must not tell her she has a nice bottom, because that's sexist.’
Surkov grabbed the paper from him.
‘Jesus Christ,’ he muttered, his glance trailing up and down the columns of print.
‘What an insult!’ said Rozanov.
‘If this is freedom of expression, I don't want it.
How can they get away with saying such things?’
Masha: ‘Maybe it's true.’
‘Oh, in a philosophical sense,’ Rozanov countered, ‘we are all capable of everything.
But most of us don't do it.
It's like saying all women are potential whores or baby-batterers.
Like, in the middle ages, they were all witches potentially.
You can imagine what an outcry there'd be from women if we made some such generalisation about them, but we men are supposed to take this shit.’
It was because we felt guilty, I suggested.
Men had screwed things up.
We were like western liberals tiptoeing round Stalin's Russia, anxious to find it good, afraid to find fault.
We were like that about women's lib.
That was a stupid analogy, Masha said, at the same time as Surkov was pointing out that Katya had always glowed when he'd praised her nice bottom and tits.
‘But sexual abuse occurs, on a wide scale,’ Masha insisted, pale, her glass of juice gripped between her hands.
‘I know that, Masha.
But it shouldn't make people scared of touching each other.
Is there really much harm in a father or stepfather fondling a girl?
I'm not talking about shoving a prick up a five-year-old, which is beastly, or years of sexual dominance, but just a little playing around?’
He rubbed her thigh affectionately under the table.
‘You bloody men, you know nothing!’ she snarled.
Tears springing to her eyes, she pushed her chair back, rose, and ran out of the dining room.
‘What have I said?’
Surkov asked.
‘Masha was abused by an uncle,’ murmured Rozanov.
‘I'd forgotten that.
She told me once.’
‘Oh, shit!’
His hand went to his eyes.
‘It obviously is damaging.
But why?
Why should eroticism be so disturbing?
Girls love their fathers, fathers love their daughters.
Caresses are expressions of love.
What is this incest taboo?
Why should a father stroking his daughter's tits create enormous problems?’
He glanced from Rozanov to me, probingly, seriously puzzled.
‘My poor old mother used to caress my little cock when bathing or undressing me.
I guess she was frustrated, living alone.
Well, I thought it was kind of nice, it didn't ruin my life.’
‘We're all fucked up,’ Rozanov said with a deep sigh, spreading strawberry jam on a croissant.
He had sensed, he said, a kind of anti-sexual hysteria in the audience at the pro-abortion meeting.
A secret, unconscious hostility to life and tenderness and the flesh.
They'd argued like Blackshirts.
Surkov: ‘Discussion with rifles, as Lenin expressed it.’
‘Oh, come on!’
I said, exasperated.
‘They were vehement, it's true; but you can understand it.
What does Bush know about having a baby?
What right have men to tell them what to do?’
Surkov stared at his plate thoughtfully, then slowly lifted his face.
‘There's a poem by the American, Simpson…‘
‘Louis Simpson?’
‘That's right.
I've heard him read it.
It's very short.
It's about a firing squad.
And it says that wherever we see a firing squad, we are always on the side of the man tied to the post.
That's how I feel about abortion.
I am on the side of the one who's going to be killed.’
‘Well, it's not so simple.’
‘Maybe not.’
‘And sexual abuse is a big problem.
In this country, anyway.
You should apologise to Masha.’
‘I'll do it right away.’
A couple of hours later Masha, placated, was standing with us in the workroom of Sigmund Freud in Hampstead.
During our journey on the Northern Line I'd sketched in the background to his coming to England in ‘38, fleeing the Nazis.
I had only visited the house — now a museum — once before.
It seemed strange, walking over brown leaves to a very English suburban house in Maresfield Gardens to visit the great mid-European.
The Sphinx of Giza gazed down at the red velvet couch.
Oedipus, in another part of the spacious room, asked his question of the Theban Sphinx.
Rank upon rank of classical, Egyptian and Oriental statuettes brooded upon the stillness.
There stood falcon-headed Horus, and bronze Osiris whom Seth brought back to life by fellation.
There stood the wise old Chinaman whom the wise old Moravian would greet every morning when he entered.
An Egyptian longboat continued to row into eternity.
The stones seemed not to weigh the room towards the earth but to be ready to lift it into the sky.
The mysteriousness of sexuality lay all around.
We gazed in silence, like the four or five other visitors.
I wondered if they too felt the presence of Freud's serene wisdom, his lucid intelligence.
I wanted to lay on him the burden of our fractured present.
Masha seemed oppressed.
She kept glancing at her watch.
It was simply tiredness, she explained, she needed a couple of hours’ sleep.
‘Yes, Freud was there,’ Sergei said when we had emerged into the unnaturally brilliant November day.
‘He was stroking that American girl's bottom,’ said Victor with a chuckle; but his weak joke fell hollowly.
I took them into the underground.
Rushed along through the dark, their faces soon settled to the same blank, tranced appearance as everyone else's.
I was almost nodding off when Victor, sitting beside me, spoke, the noise of the train turning his voice into a whisper: ‘So it's your turn tonight.’
‘Yes.
I'm dreading it.’
‘Will it be in English or Russian?’
‘I'll try it in Russian.’
‘Good!
That's brave.’
He added that I must not be intimidated by his and Rozanov's fluency; I was really quite good.
I didn't feel annoyed.
I knew I couldn't begin to match them.
‘It would be really great if we could lay the foundations for a novel.’
I nodded.
‘It's not too late, despite our problems with the machine.
I'm sure you'll get it right tonight, when it's your turn.’
I nodded again.
‘We have, I would guess, about two pages of narrative so far, and it's already Tuesday.
Still, never mind…
You were foolish, my friend, to say our work was concluded as a quartet.’
‘I know that.’
‘You remember,’ he said, ‘how we predicted, on our very first night together, that it might turn into one book, or a trio, or a quintet — but certainly not a duet or a quartet?’
‘Ah, that's right!
We did say that.
I'd forgotten.’
Memories of that particular evening, at Rozanov's dacha, came flooding back.
I'd met Masha's husband earlier in the day, and he'd improvised for me.
Shimon Barash was a fine improvisatore , though his gift has apparently faded since he defected to Australia.
I, of course, had no experience of the impromptu tradition, and the others had had little more practice.
But that night, inspired by talk of Pushkin and Akhmatova, we decided to try.
Nina Rozanov, tired, had gone off to bed.
Vera Surkov had left, to relieve their baby-sitter.
In the midnight stillness, Rozanov pointed out that we were three men and a woman — as in Pushkin's story about improvisation,Egyptian Nights .
We could either take on Masha, Surkov said drunkenly, and pay the penalty at dawn, or else improvise.
‘We'll improvise, ‘said Masha.
And so it had begun…
At the Chalk Farm stop an attractive, freckled schoolgirl, about sixteen, in a smart navy uniform and white blouse, had got on and sat a few seats away.
She had a satchel by her feet and a violin case on her lap.
She stared blankly at the adverts.
‘That bitch…’ said Surkov softly, and I knew at once he was referring to Imogen.
Hampstead had already brought her sharply into his mind — that had been obvious when the name had leapt into view on our arrival.
Imogen had lived in Hampstead, and had been just such an attractive sixth-former when he had met her on a trip to the States.
I/He had described their meeting in earlier novels.
‘She's trying to take me for everything I've got, my friend, ‘he said.
‘She ruined everything.
I had a pretty good marriage going with Vera.
We're still friends.
It's not her fault Petya won't speak to me; it's just that he turned against me when I divorced his mother.
I can't blame him.
Jesus, what gets into me?
Why this constant need to change, to try something new, to search for paradise?
It doesn't exist.
I certainly didn't find it with that fucking bitch.’
He laughed sardonically.
‘Women survive better than men.
Look at Masha.
She has a seraphic look on her face.
She's either thinking of Liubov or tonight's screw with Sergei.
Shimon is clean out of her mind, he might never have existed, he's far further away from her than Australia.’
When we arrived at the Regis, Masha rushed straight for the lifts.
I had some tea with the others, then also went to my room.
I was nervous, I wanted to prepare.
I planned roughly the direction of my ‘impromptu’.
Unlike Pushkin's improvisatore , for whom there was ‘no toil, no dearth, nor that unrest which is the prelude to inspiration’, I had to prepare the way.
I missed dinner, and the theatre readings after.
My phone rang just after eleven, so startling I broke my pencil on my notepad.
It was Masha.
‘We're going up to hospitality for a while.
We're out of drink and need to steal some.
You care to join us?’
I stowed my notes in my pocket, and headed for the lifts.
There were about a dozen writers in hospitality, most of them busy knocking back the hard stuff.
My friends were chatting to Sean Murphy, his beady eyes and Guinness-fringed lips at a level with Rozanov's chest.
A green shirt beer-bulged over a low-slung belt.
Edging in, I apologised to Murphy for missing his reading.
‘Oh, there's no need, there's no need at all.’
‘Mr Murphy read us a terrific piece about the IRA hunger strikers,’ said Surkov, gulping vodka.
‘I'm sorry I missed it.
Was there a good crowd?’
‘Sure, it was nearly a full house,’ Murphy said: turning, at that moment, to be grappled by Helmut Hauptmann, a bear of a man with thick spectacles, blond beard and broad, humped shoulders draped by an even broader mauve jacket.
Hauptmann drew the tubby red-haired Irishman away.
‘There was almost no one in the gallery,’ Surkov growled.
‘And they sold hardly any books.
You were right to give it a miss, my friend.
Before the IRA we had liberation theology and Greenpeace.’
‘Everything but literature,’ said Rozanov.
‘Murphy is obviously a political conspirator,’ Masha remarked.
‘But what about Hauptmann?’
I glanced in his direction.
‘A brigand of the wood.’
‘Correct,’ said Rozanov.
‘Sheer marauding ego.
But I don't agree with you on Murphy.
He's a charlatan trading in elixirs and arsenic.’
No one unfamiliar with Pushkin's Egyptian Nights would have understood our conversation.
In his story, a scruffy Neapolitan improvisatore breaks in on a Petersburg gentleman-poet in his study.
The Russian poet mistakes him at first for a brigand of the woods, a political conspirator, or a charlatan trading in elixirs and arsenic.
It doesn't occur to him that he is his creative spirit.
‘And what is Cita?’
I asked.
Cita Lemminkaïnen, the tall, rather attractive Finn, half-hidden by the white overalls of Judith Steinway, was sipping a juice.
She wrote poems about her husband's alcoholism.
Rozanov glanced towards her appreciatively.
‘I'm not sure.
I think she may be a genuine improvisatrice .’
‘And which are we?’ asked Masha.
Before we could consider the question we were distracted by the arrival of Geraldine Porter.
Her weird, rather witchlike appearance always drew eyes; who could ignore that bony frame in its tent of an ethnic dress, those rimless spectacles and thin bloodless lips under spikes of white hair radiating all round her head?
‘This is a true political conspirator,’ said Rozanov.
We nodded.
The New-Zealand-born playwright's attacks on Thatcher and Thatcherism at dinner were audible wherever one sat, and unmistakably virulent.
Surkov always had to hold on to his temper.
Porter was carrying a large floppy-covered book; she went straight up to an African writer, N'dosi, showed him the book, held open, and offered him a biro.
I saw the book was a popular mail-order catalogue.
I was stunned.
And the polite, formally suited African was writing something on a sheet of paper, to her instructions.
Porter was obtaining orders!
She was a mail-order agent!
It was as staggeringly out of character as the Pope reading Playboy .
And now she was heading for us, the biro between her teeth, the light of battle glinting behind her frameless glasses.
‘Hi!
I'd like you to sign our petition.’
‘What petition?’ enquired Masha.
Opening the catalogue, a gnarled and beringed hand pointed to a slim dark-skinned young woman modelling a trouser suit.
‘You may have read about her in the Guardian .
They wanted her to model dresses for next year's catalogue, and she refused.
She's a Muslim.
She doesn't want to show her legs.
So the bastards sacked her and the appeal tribunal backed them.
We think the Writers Internationale should stand up for her rights.’
The Russians courteously declined, saying they couldn't get mixed up in an issue that didn't concern them.
Porter offered me the biro.
‘I'm sorry,’ I said.
‘If she's a model she has to expect to model dresses.’
She stared at me furiously.
‘In any case, I don't see what the Writers Internationale has to do with it — as a body.’
‘Because we're writers , for Christ's sake!
We're the goddamn intelligentsia!’
I shook my head, and with a toss of her spiky white hair she veered away towards Murphy and Hauptmann.
Rozanov sighed.
‘The ego of writers!’
‘Let's get the fuck out of here,’ said Surkov.
His eyes darted around before he slipped a couple of bottles under his coat.
A few minutes later he was uncorking a fine claret in Masha's room, saying he had something to celebrate: he'd been invited to breakfast at Downing Street to help brief Maggie for her trip to Poland.
‘I guess she's missed me,’ he boasted.
I sought Masha's face; she rolled her eyes.
Glasses foamed.
Surkov said to me, ‘Now to the serious part of the evening.
Take our story on, my friend.’
The bedside lamp was dimmed, the tape recorder set going.
Quelling panic, I took out my notes and glanced through them hastily.
‘This Charsky,’ I murmured, addressing Rozanov: ‘we've met him before.
In Swallow .
You improvised a poem about him.’
Masha said, ‘Oh, that's right!
It was one of the performances at the Olympiad in Finland.’
‘That was Konstantin Charsky,’ said Rozanov.
‘This is Dmitri.
It could be a brother…‘
I felt somewhat thrown by this information, having assumed Sergei had simply made a mistake in the Christian name.
I would have to change certain things I'd planned.
As I concentrated my thoughts I saw Surkov move his hand in a downward curve.
I guessed he was trying to imitate the movements of a skier.
He was saying, in effect, get back to Eiger and the hotel room; fantasise sexually — reveal yourself!
I had no intention of doing that.
Nor did I have the urge to linger on the Neva embankment with Charsky.
There was a very simple, if rather banal, way of spinning off from Surkov's lost story and Rozanov's all-but-lost one; and I would take it.
5
Anna was bending over him, holding out a mug of coffee.
Grunting, he flopped over on to his side.
She had put the mug by his bed and gone to the window to let in the light.
Returning, she surveyed in a dispassionate way her husband of twenty years: the incipient double chin, the receded hair-line, the hairy chest — constricted by his sideways turn — pouched almost in a female way.
She wondered again, as she had in the night, why fate had sent this particular man to her.
Yet she had no doubt she was lucky; he still moved her with his intelligence, his charm, his sensitivity.
None of which was apparent in the overweight figure coming slowly alive in their bed.
Opening his eyes, he groaned, and blocked out the strong morning light with his arm.
He mumbled a thanks for the coffee.
He heard, as he lay gathering his thoughts together, a monotonous voice coming faintly from the kitchen.
Then he heard, softer, more expressive, in American English, Reagan's tones.
Charsky raised himself on an elbow and picked up the mug of coffee, while Anna slipped off her dressing gown and climbed into bed.
‘How's the summit going?’ he asked.
‘Reagan's talking quite a lot about human rights, which probably suits Gorbachev.’
‘Good.
What's the time?’
‘Eight.’
‘What time did we get to bed, do you think?’
‘Three?’
That was the only trouble with the white nights — you never wanted to go to bed.
And after last night's performance of Hamlet , some of his friends from the theatre had come back with him for an informal reading of their next play.
‘But it was enjoyable,’ he said.
‘It's a damn good play.
And you read Hedda beautifully.
I bet Lydia won't do it any better.’
Lydia was the Arts Theatre's star actress.
Currently she was Gertrude to Charsky's Claudius.
‘That's rubbish, you know it is.’
‘No, no!’ he protested.
‘I can read not badly, but I wouldn't be any good on stage.’
‘You could learn stagecraft easily.
You're a natural.
It's a crime you never took it up, darling.
This coffee is weak.
Is it Nescafé?’
‘No, we've run out.’
He grunted in disappointment.
Every time he went abroad with the company he came back loaded up with western goods.
A slim example of western luxury nestled at this moment in Anna's vagina.
She stroked his thinning dome.
‘You'll need a good wig if you're to be Hedda's long-haired poet.’
‘That's strange,’ said Charsky, sipping the coffee.
‘I dreamt I was a poet.
I was slim and young and improvising verses to an audience on the embankment.
Doing it damn well.
The trouble is, I can't remember a single line.’
He stared out at the dappled sky, trying to remember.
‘Of course we both know it's wish fulfilment.
I envy you, envy my brother.’
He pecked her a kiss.
‘Apart from the actual poems it was a very vivid dream.
Is it because — has your period started?’
She nodded.
‘It started in the night.’
‘Ah!
Splendid!
So that's the reason!
What did you dream?’
‘Nothing that I can remember.’
‘That's a shame!’
He had come to believe that a period affected dreams, and not only Anna's but his too.
And down to earth though she was, she had to admit there were often some weird parallels.
There had to be some sort of telepathy at work.
They guessed it was an emotional response to another womb death; though, heaven knew, they would hardly have wanted a child, in their mid-forties, even if Charsky's infertility could be miraculously cured.
They had long ago come to terms with that sorrow.
‘Oh, I remember now,’ she said: ‘I did have one dream, just as I was waking up.
It was about an old boyfriend — before you, my dear — when I was fat and lacking confidence.
Well, you know how I was.
This man was a real cultural snob who quite destroyed me.
He played me a record of some Stockhausen, whom I'd never heard of.’
He pressed her to remember details, and she found a few; none of them matching anything in his vivid dream, which disappointed him.
But there was still their ‘experiment’ to try.
He touched her thigh over the sheet, and gave her a smile full of meaning.
‘I should really get dressed,’ she responded.
‘The lounge is in a mess.’
‘I'll do it later.’
‘I'm hungry.
I'll make breakfast.’
‘Don't worry, I'll do it.
Scrambled eggs?’
He leapt out of bed, grabbed his bathrobe and scampered from the room.
The bathroom door slammed.
Anna put down her coffee mug, stubbed out her cigarette, lit another, then stretched to pick up a book from her bedside-table.
Straightening, she opened the book at a page marked with a tram ticket.
The book, published in France, was called Psychological interest in Freud and psychoanalysis.
It was mainly thanks to Kurminsky, director of the Hamlet production, who had suggested his actors read Freud.
A few battered English paperbacks had gone the rounds, and Anna had read them too.
Now the Charskys were scraping together, mostly from abroad, as many books on the subject as they could get.
Anna thought Freud was probably wrong a lot of the time, but he was beautifully, illuminatingly wrong.
She'd found Psychological Correspondences among her brother-in-law's books.
Konstantin Charsky was a poet like herself, but much better known, and he had been able to gather quite a few western books.
He confessed he had never read this one, given to him by a Parisian admirer.
French was tough going for Anna, but she had ploughed through the correspondence of Rilke and Lou Andreas-Salomé, and Freud and Lawrence of Arabia.
She enjoyed reading people's letters.
Now she began to tackle the section called ‘Krafft-Ebing & Sophie Arandt’.
She was still struggling with the short introduction when her husband entered, bearing a breakfast tray.
She took it from him while he climbed in.
‘It smells good.’
She saw there were some letters.
‘Any for me?’
The post was usually for him.
He received lots of fan mail.
‘Yes, there's one.’
She found it; handed the others to him.
They attacked the eggs.
When they had eaten a couple of mouthfuls they started to open their mail.
‘Sergei and Sonia send their condolences,’ he said.
‘Ah.
That's nice.’
Charsky picked less hungrily at his scrambled egg.
The sympathetic letter had reminded him he was grieving.
The worst moment, apart from his father's collapse while being helped to the toilet, had been going on stage on the night of his death, and hearing Lydia Dorinskaya say, ‘All that lives must die, /Passing through Nature to eternity.’
Anna let out a cry of disbelief and joy.
‘What is it?’
‘Novy Mir's taken two of my poems.’
‘That's wonderful, darling!
Terrific!
It's high time.
You're a marvellous poet.’
He leaned and gave her a smacking kiss on the cheek.
‘Which ones?’
‘Varvara’ and ‘Violence and Beauty’.
‘Have I read ‘Varvara’?
I don't recall it.’
‘Haven't you read it?’ she replied vaguely.
‘I really don't know.’
‘Violence and Beauty’ is one of your best.’
‘You think so?
I'm not sure.
I've written some much better poems and they threw them back.
Now, here…
And ‘Violence and Beauty’ comes out against all violence in South Africa, including black violence…
They don't mention taking any lines out.
It's amazing!’
Innocuous though most of her poems were, she had been driven by the stupidity and cowardice of the censorship to publish in samizdat.
Officially, Anna Charsky did not exist.
She had not even attracted any positive repression, nor been significant enough to affect her husband's career.
She had had fewer than a dozen poems published in magazines — usually small, regional ones — during the twenty-five years she had been writing.
No one ever invited her to read in factories or schools.
Yet now — the very best literary magazine!
‘Tonight we'll celebrate.
We'll go out for a meal after the performance,’ said her husband, slitting open the last of his letters.
The next moment he let out a cry, of disbelief and joy, similar to hers.
‘It's from Bella Kropotkin.’
It took Anna a moment to identify the name.
‘The blind film director?’
‘Yes!
She says she's to be in Leningrad for a day or two — she's on location at Lake Baikal — to meet Mrs Reagan on her flying visit to the Hermitage.
That's tomorrow.
Good God!
…
But more particularly to see me on stage — tonight.
She's got permission to film Doctor Zhivago —isn't that incredible, darling?
— and she has me in mind for the part of Komarovsky.’
Charsky's voice was on a rising graph of excitement.
‘She hopes I can meet her at her hotel after the performance, so we can talk.
She's going to ring me to confirm.’
Charsky leaned back against the pillows and raised his eyes to the ceiling as if thanking the Almighty.
Then he breathed out.
‘Phew!’
He handed her the letter.
She scanned it.
‘It's a major part, Anna.
I wonder who they'll choose for Lara.
And Zhivago.
Well, no matter.
It would be wonderful.’
His wife smiled.
‘Another adulterer!’
He was jumping out of bed, rushing towards the door.
She shouted after him: ‘Claudius, Lövborg, Komarovsky!’
He rushed back clutching a copy of Moda , an Italian magazine, leapt into bed and flicked through the pages.
Unable to read the text, he had brought the magazine home from Naples because of its glamorous artwork.
‘There she is.’
The large photo showed a handsome blonde-haired woman wearing dark glasses.
Charsky could decipher that she was filming an ecological documentary of Lake Baikal.
As always, she ‘saw’ through the eyes of her faithful assistant; but the final, unmistakable imprint of all her films was Kropotkin.
She was a remarkable genius.
Only in the Soviet Union could a blind woman have risen to her eminence in cinematography.
‘She's very attractive,’ Anna commented.
‘I guess so.
You see, we are getting some luck.
Our carezza works!’
He lifted the tray from her lap and set it down by the bed.
He took her in his arms and kissed her.
Sensing a lack of response, he said, ‘Aren't you pleased for me?’
‘Of course.
Of course!’
And she pressed her lips to his.
He untied the girdle of her dressing gown.
‘Take out your…’ he said, touching her lightly between the thighs.
They began to engage in a ritual practice of the Caucasian gypsies.
It was his mother, Yevdoxia, who without meaning to had given him the idea.
On the night of her husband's funeral she had overcome her usual reticence and talked about their married life.
In the early days, when they still slept together, he had insisted on taking her during a period: remaining perfectly motionless, in her, on her — sometimes for hours.
He had learned it from his father, a full gypsy; it was supposed to bring good fortune and happiness, something magical to do with blood.
Yevdoxia, who had grown up with the belief that sex was disgusting even at normal times, had refused to take any more of it, ever.
This is what the gaunt, red-eyed old lady had told them; and of course Charsky, needing to draw close in some way to his dead father, wanted to try it out.
This was their second experiment, the second month.
Anna didn't mind indulging him in his grief.
They didn't believe in the magic spell literally, of course, but they had had their experience of telepathic closeness at that time of the month.
The Caucasian gypsies must have known about it too.
She lay on her side, turned away from him, still.
His right thigh was between hers, and his face was buried in the pillow and strands of her hair.
The position provided a tight and comfortable union.
Even if the man drifted close to sleep, which the stillness encouraged, the union remained unbroken.
In some parts of the world, Anna had discovered, this mystical form of intercourse was known as carezza .
They were almost asleep now, bathed in warm light, half hearing Scriabin on the kitchen radio.
The shrill notes of the telephone, on Anna's bedside table, shocked them awake.
She moved her torso without breaking the union, and stretched her arm to pick up the phone.
It was Zoya, a friend from work, asking Anna if she'd managed to get soap.
Yes, said Anna, she would bring it.
And Zoya said she had got hold of the toilet rolls, and would bring them for Anna.
Zoya rattled on about the appalling queue, and some interesting gossip she'd picked up there, but Anna cut her short, saying she was busy and would see her later.
The lovers drifted again; again the phone rang, and Charsky cursed.
‘Yes, he's right here.’
She handed the phone awkwardly to Dmitri.
It was so close to her head she could hear Bella Kropotkin's husky, languid voice.
‘Yes, I've just had your letter,’ said Charsky.
‘I'm very interested…
It would certainly be possible, I'd like that…
The Leningrad, right.
Say about eleven thirty?
…
Okay, I'll see you.
Thank you for ringing.’
Anna twisted to take the phone back, and replaced it on its base.
‘Would it be possible to speak to Comrade Charsky?’ she said mockingly in Kropotkin's husky, languid, somewhat condescending tones.
Charsky stroked her shoulder, kissed her nape.
‘I think you'd better come up to my room,’ she mimicked again.
‘Don't tell me you're jealous?’
‘Of course not.
But she obviously intends to seduce you.’
‘Rubbish!’
‘Why else should she invite you to her room?
It would be easier to meet you in the bar.
She'll have to bribe the dezhurnaya to let you visit her at that time.’
He flecked her shoulder with kisses.
‘The bar would be noisy.
Besides, she's famous, and I'm not totally unknown myself.
We would attract attention.’
‘I think you're being very naïve.’
‘Well, she won't cause us any trouble.’
‘Go on!’ she exclaimed more lightly, chuckling.
‘Of course you'll sleep with her.
I know you sleep with dozens of women and I really don't mind, only I wish you'd be honest.
Have you ever had a beautiful blind woman?’
‘How can I convince you I've never slept with anyone but you?
I know that's very boring of me, but it just happens to be true, my dear.
I don't want anyone else.
I'm a very lucky man, and I'd never risk losing you.
How could anything match this?’
He ran his hand softly over her thigh; his tone became bantering.
‘I'm not so sure about you , my darling!’
‘Now you're being stupid.’
‘What about Ivan?’
‘Ivan?’
‘Sakulin.’
‘You can't seriously imagine there was anything in that.
We're friends.’
‘Why do you say ‘was anything in that’ and then ‘we're friends’?
Has your relationship changed?
Was there something?’
‘Of course not.
I only said ‘was’ because I hardly ever see him any more.
Perhaps he spends more time with his wife when he's ashore these days.’
He slid his arm around her, cupping her breast.
‘I know there's nothing between you,’ he murmured.
‘I was just trying to show you you're being silly.
Do you know, I can't tell where I end and you begin?
I feel as if my skin has dissolved down there, and it's a part of you.
Or that I've got a vagina.
I'm drifting…it's so beautiful.’
‘Yes.
Yes.’
Over his cupping hand she placed her own.
‘I shouldn't say this, with Father just gone, but I don't think I've ever felt so happy, Anna.
I don't simply love you, I'm still in love with you, after twenty years.
Isn't it amazing?
And our work is going well — it's thrilling about your poems — and we're healthy.
There's a little more freedom and decency; we don't have to talk about getting out of Russia any more.’
He sighed with happiness, burying his face in her hair.
They fell silent.
The light at the window grew stronger, but their eyes were closed.
She awoke from a light drowse to the distant strains of Tchaikovsky's Violin Concerto, the lyrical theme of the first movement.
From his inertness and his light breathing she could tell that Dmitri was asleep.
He was still inside her, but softened and withdrawn, and she could not have said honestly that the experience was an exciting one.
She picked up her cigarettes and matches.
Balancing awkwardly on her elbows, she lit up.
Then she picked up the book of ‘psychological correspondences’ again and began with difficulty to read the letters.
Frankfurt Dear Professor, I do not know if this will find you.
I just wanted to tell you that I glanced at your book while cleaning my master's study (he is a doctor) and it has had a terrible effect on me.
I can't sleep at nights from thinking of those dreadful things you describe.
I know I am just an ignorant servant girl, aged seventeen, but I do know some Latin.
The governess here, Miss Lambert, has kindly taught me a little.
Well, I am shocked that such things can be published, I do not think it is right.
I am sure you are well-meaning, but I wanted you to know how I feel.
Perhaps you can advise me how I can stop thinking about that horrible book.
Sincerely yours, Sophie Arandt
Vienna Dear Fräulein Arandt, I am very sorry to learn that my book has had such a distressing effect on you.
I can only tell you that it is intended to be read by a very limited circle of people in the medical profession.
I would be distressed to hear of any ladies reading it, let alone a girl of your tender years and experience.
I am sorry.
Your master should really have kept the book under lock and key.
Forget you ever saw it.
Sincerely yours,(Prof.) Richard von Krafft-Ebing Anna felt touched by the simple letter of a girl dead, no doubt, these fifty years.
Her thoughts drifted to when she herself had been seventeen.
So terribly serious and ignorant, and rather prudish like Sophie.
So insecure about her sexuality that she'd eaten too much and got fat.
She didn't know what Dmitri had seen in her.
The poetry reading at the institute.
Akhmatova, elderly, swollen up with thyroid, yet still majestic.
Konstantin was there, the rake of her class; with him, his younger brother.
Dmitri.
Gentler, shy too.
Relaxed her.
The first sweet, shy kisses; the first fumbling passion…
Freezing in her white dress, posing under the Bronze Horseman…
Ecstasy of the honeymoon…
But why does everything have to fade, drift away like the leaves, grow sober?…
I was interrupted by the phone's ringing.
It brought me back too precipitately into the small, dimly lit world of the hotel bedroom.
Masha reached to answer it.
We heard her say, ‘Yes?’ in English, then, in her own language: ‘Shimon?
What a nice surprise!
How did you know I was here?’
I got to my feet and stretched.
The others did the same, and yawned.
I glanced at my watch: one-thirty.
‘What time is it in Australia?
…
Is it very hot?
…
Wonderful weather: blue skies, and very mild.
Well, compared with Moscow…
No, I wasn't asleep; we're improvising.
The festival's pretty awful, so we're entertaining each other.’
I went to the bathroom.
When I came out, she was murmuring sympathetic noises down the phone.
Surkov silently offered me more claret but I indicated a bottle of Perrier.
‘Don't worry, she'll be back; she's left you before.’
Clearly her ex-husband's Australian girlfriend had decamped.
‘You shouldn't have played around.
She's not as soft as I used to be…
I wouldn't go to her straightaway, if I were you: give her space for a couple of days, then send a big bunch of roses…
‘And so on— sympathetically, yet also with the indefinable remoteness of a woman speaking to someone, once close, who has faded out of her life.
‘I'm sure it will be okay.
Goodbye, my dear.’
She put the phone down.
‘He sends his regards,’ she said.
Surkov asked how he'd known she was in London.
He'd rung Liubov, she replied.
He was very upset; and still, after five years, he turned to her for comfort and advice; still like a child,her child.
And she didn't want it.
We sipped our drinks quietly.
I felt tired.
‘Do you want to call it a night?’ asked Surkov, perhaps hopefully.
‘Soon.
But I'd like to finish it off.’
Rozanov said he must have a pee.
I reflected on the next phase, and when he returned, sitting on the floor and resting his back on Masha's bed, I plunged in again…
6
In the disputed territory, the Karelia or Sudetenland, between waking and sleeping, Charsky heard the distant screech of a violin and, close to him, a rustle of pages.
These sounds blended into one, then fell into oblivion.
A different drama was being enacted in his mind.
He was climbing.
He was climbing the Eiger North Face.
No one had ever climbed it, or even attempted it.
It was unclimbable.
Yet Charsky was not merely attempting it, but doing it solo!
It was foolhardy.
After more days and nights than he cared to remember, he was perched on a ledge, perhaps halfway up, unable to move up or down.
The first hint of dawn was touching the valley.
In the villages of Grindelwald and Kleine Scheidegg, tourists were breakfasting and getting ready to rush out and stare through telescope or binoculars at the sinister face.
Its poised, out-thrust head gave it the appearance of a cobra, a white cobra.
The weather had been kind, but now cloud was closing in.
Charsky heard a strange rustling sound beneath him.
Unknown to him, two German climbers were also attempting the face.
The lead climber, Sedlmayer, caught sight of a possible bivouac ledge, and simultaneously a man's face, looming up out of the icy fog.
The German was so startled by the sight he almost slipped and tumbled back.
The face was covered in stubble and the eyes stared in numb exhaustion.
Hands tugged at the German and helped him up on to the narrow ledge.
Then the two men hauled Mehringer up.
The Germans, panting for breath, sank back against the ice.
‘Who the hell are you?’ asked Sedlmayer at last.
‘Charsky.
I'm glad to see you.
I couldn't have gone any further.
I was waiting for death.’
The Germans introduced themselves.
Over some bread and sausage, the two Germans engaged the Russian in chat, trying to keep him awake.
This was their second night.
He could rope up with them, and they'd reach the top for sure tomorrow.
Yes, the face was tough work; but they were working men, they'd be working almost as hard if they were at home in Munich.
‘What do you think of Hitler?’ asked Charsky.
‘He's a tough guy.
He makes our trains run on time.
We need him.’
‘He'll attack us Russians.’
They cracked their frozen lips in grins.
‘Not very likely!’
‘Twenty million of us will die.
The Jews will be wiped out in gas chambers.’
Tired cackles came from Mehringer and Sedlmayer.
Exposure on the North Face had unhinged the Russian climber.
Roped perilously to the ice face, the German pair drowsed through the night.
When they awoke, the Russian was gone.
Evidently he had fallen.
Those who stared through telescopes or field glasses saw how drastically the two climbers had slowed on the third day.
Sometimes they would hang motionless for twenty minutes.
This ice field was steeper than the first, and twice as high.
Boulders constantly swept down on either side of them.
The watchers saw how hopeless it was.
That night a storm blew up.
The face was veiled in cloud; thunder and lightning raged.
No sight of the climbers as a day passed that was like night.
But towards noon of the next day the clouds parted for a moment.
Two tiny shapes climbing towards the Flatiron.
The lead climber looked strong still, but his partner often slumped in his ropes.
The storm closed in once more.
Mehringer was slumped in the rope when his partner, above, saw what seemed a huge sheet of glass cascading down.
Sedlmayer shouted a warning but his friend was too weary to move.
He was carried away down, a rope snapping.
Sedlmayer turned again to the mountain, hacking out another footstep, and another.
Then he crouched against the ice, and stayed there.
He grew one with the ice.
It looked as if he was copulating with the ice.
You couldn't distinguish German from ice.
He was groaning and clawing at the pillow.
She wondered if she should wake him, but his breathing became easier and she relaxed.
She returned to her book.
Frankfurt Dear Professor, It was kind of you to write, and unexpected.
I never dreamt of a reply from such a distinguished person.
All the same, I can't forget what I saw, what I read.
Those dreadful, ghastly images have stayed in front of my eyes every moment of the past five months.
I even see them in my nightmares, and have often woken up screaming.
Tell me there are a few men, somewhere, who do not think such dreadful thoughts, do not commit such unspeakable deeds.
Tell me that, so I may hope still to find, one day, a man of pure heart.
I have more than once thought of doing away with myself.
But no, you have spent enough time writing to a poor ignorant serving girl.
Thank you again for your kind letter.
Forget me.
Sincerely yours, Sophie Arandt
Anna liked and sympathised with the girl who had written this letter.
And yet letters are very enigmatic, she thought.
Maybe she is naturally melodramatic.
She pictured Richard von Krafft-Ebing slitting open the letter in his office.
It would be a very neat, slightly stuffy office.
Nothing would suggest the man who had collected the material for Psychopathia Sexualis .
She could imagine what kind of material was in that book, and her nape prickled.
She wanted to read it.
But even if one of her husband's western friends sent it, it would never reach them.
Vienna Dear Fräulein, On no account must you think of suicide!
I urge you to take your master into your confidence, explaining that you glanced at my book by chance while cleaning his study, and that you have been greatly disturbed by it.
As a doctor, he will understand and help you.
I ought to have explained in my letter — as is made clear in my book — that the case studies are those of pathologically disturbed men (and some women); people locked away in asylums or prisons, or who have paid for their vile perversions with their lives.
What you chanced to read has no connection with the feelings and desires of normal men: have no fear on that score.
Pure-hearted men are all around you.
You will one day find such a man and marry him, I am certain.
Yours sincerely,(Prof.) Richard von Krafft-Ebing girl is obviously fairly intelligent, and so will find it hard to find a man worthy of her among the servant classes; and how will she meet anyone else?
She probably has one half day free per week, and then she will have to visit her parents, no doubt.
In any case she'll be too exhausted to do much with her half day.
The sensation in her vulva was quite pleasurable, but not to be compared with the quiet delight of teasing people's thoughts and feelings out of an unfamiliar language.
Frankfurt Dear Professor, How very kind of you to write again.
I wish with all my heart I could believe what you say.
I continue to be very depressed, and last night I took a kitchen knife to my bedroom and drew blood from my wrist.
But I thought of you, your concern for me, and how it might trouble your conscience (not that you would ever hear of it) so I stopped.
Dreadful nightmares, when I finally got off to sleep, of men attacking me — like that man who had to cut women on their arms before he could find them desirable.
I have to look after two dear little boys, but these days I can only see them growing up to behave so cruelly towards women.
So I don't feel the same towards them any more.
I couldn't possibly tell Dr Grossman what I did.
I shouldn't have been in his study in the first place.
I was not supposed to clean there, it's just that I love reading and sometimes I feel starved.
He is very strict, and would dismiss me if he found out I'd been interfering with his books.
Can you tell me a way to get these dreadful pictures out of my head?
I see blood before my eyes, and am often dizzy.
My hand is shaking as I write.
Please excuse my handwriting.
Yours sincerely, Sophie Arandt Vienna Fräulein, Consult another doctor, who is bound to keep your confidence.
I wish you well.
Prof. von Krafft-Ebing
Anna smouldered with indignation on poor Sophie's behalf.
What possible justification could there be for such coldness?
All right, he is very busy, one could understand a degree of impatience; but this girl is in a bad way, she has taken a knife to her room, she sees blood before her eyes.
It was typical male selfishness and cruelty.
She had to light a cigarette to calm herself a little.
Angry with Dmitri, who obviously lied about his affairs with adoring women, she felt like pulling out from the carezza ; however, it might wake him, and she would be unable to continue reading the intriguing correspondence.
Frankfurt Dear Professor, Thank you for your curt note.
I could not possibly go to another doctor.
He would be a man — therefore probably a beast.
If you cannot help me, there is only one way out.
Yours sincerely, Sophie Arandt
Charsky was in trouble.
He was pressed against almost sheer ice, clinging on by his fingers.
Somewhere not too far below him were the wooden doors of the Gallery Window of the Jungfraujoch railway.
Defeated in his climb, he had been descending, heading for the window, hoping he could hammer on it and attract someone's attention, but ice and spindrift made it impossible to see where he was going; and now he was trapped.
Suddenly through the howling gale he heard a yodel from below.
Thank God!
Some railwayman must have opened the doors, perhaps sensing he was in trouble.
Charsky tried to call for help, but his voice was frail; then, to his amazement, he heard a strong voice from somewhere to his left shout: ‘We're on our way down!
We're okay!’
At that moment the mist parted, and Charsky caught sight of four dim figures, not twenty yards away from him.
He recognised Kurz and Hinterstoisser, he'd seen them at the hotel; strikingly handsome fellows, especially Kurz, an officer of the Wehrmacht, blue-eyed, blond-haired.
Kurz had been boasting that they would be the first to climb the face, thus adding to the triumph of the Berlin Olympics.
One of the other figures seemed to be injured.
His three comrades were bringing him down.
Charsky summoned all his weak strength to shout: ‘Help me!’
Hinterstoisser, startled in the act of untying his climbing rope, missed his footing and plunged.
The movement of the rope pulling the injured climber from his stance, he fell, a rope coil whipped around his neck and he strangled.
He hung some fifteen feet below Kurz, on the same rope; and their joint weight thrust their remaining comrade against a piton.
Charsky watched him freeze to death before his eyes.
The Russian wanted to say, ‘I'm sorry, it was all my fault, ‘but just then his left foot felt a ledge and he was able to take the weight off his fingers.
The ledge, he found, was quite broad, and from it there was a reasonable climb up.
But he crouched.
He would wait, he would wait to see what happened to Kurz.
The German was hanging helpless on his rope.
Half an hour passed; nightfall blanked out the mist and spindrift.
Charsky heard a voice float up: ‘Are you all right?’
‘No!’ cried Kurz in a weak voice.
‘The others are all dead.
I'm the only one alive.
Please help me!’
‘I'll be right back!’
An endless time, then a babble of voices.
They were asking Kurz if he could lower a rope so that they could attach some supplies to it.
He cried that he had no rope.
He had also lost his left mitten.
He couldn't feel his left arm.
‘We'll be back at daybreak.
Stick it out.’
‘No!
No!
I'll freeze to death here!
Don't leave me!’
‘You can do it!’
Then there was only the shrill, relentless voice of the gale.
Relatively comfortable himself, Charsky suffered every moment of the long night with Kurz.
It seemed to him that he was Kurz, in some strange way.
He was forever on the verge of falling into sweet, endless sleep, but somehow he forced himself to stay awake.
And at last he heard: ‘We're here!
Are you all right?’
Kurz uttered a weak cry, between yes and no.
‘Good man!
Now here's what you must do…
, What they were asking was impossible, but he would try.
Using his one good hand, he inched down to Angerer and with his ice axe cut him loose.
The body in its shroud of ice stayed fixed to the rock face.
Then he climbed inch by inch up to Rainer.
Anchoring himself to a piton, he cut the climbing rope and started to unravel its strands, working with the nearly frozen fingers of one hand.
Then he tied one strand to another.
It took him six hours to make a long, thin rope, but he had lost all sense of time.
He tied a stone to the makeshift rope and lowered it.
He felt a tug and drew the rope up.
Attached to its end was a climbing rope, a hammer, pitons and carabineers.
‘Wait!’ the shout came up.
‘The rope's not going to be quite long enough.
Lower your rope again and we'll tie a length on.’
Kurz did as he was asked.
Now, somehow holding a piton with his useless hand, he had to hammer it into the rock with the other.
He threaded the rope through the spike's eye.
Then he set out to rappel down the cliff, jerk after jerk as his feet hit the rock.
‘You're doing fine!’ they shouted.
‘We'll soon have you!’
Suddenly he could go no further.
‘What's wrong?’
The rescuer's voice was not far beneath him.
‘The knot!
It's jammed in the link.
The knot tying the ropes together.’
‘Force it through!
Come on, man, you can do it!’
He bent to the carabineer at his waist, and tried to chew at the knot, to make it more supple.
It was no good.
He felt something touch his boots; heard a gasp.
‘It's no good!
Bring me down.’
Kurz cried out.
‘What?’ they called back.
‘I'm finished.’
His head slumped forward as he gave up the ghost.
His body tilted to horizontal, legs and arms hanging like a spider from a strand.
Charsky came back into himself; he sobbed for the brave Bavarian.
Then, cautiously, inch by inch, he started climbing again.
Frankfurt Dear Professor, So this is how much you care about me!
I plead for help, to you who caused my suffering, and you do not even bother to reply!
I could have been dead, for all you knew or cared.
Your indifference is cruel.
Well, I will not bother you ever again.’
Sophie Arandt
Frankfurt Dear Professor, Forgive me, forgive me, for thinking you didn't care!
I didn't know you were away from home.
When my master summoned me and told me you had written to him, at first I was angry with you for betraying my and I blessed you.
There is one good man in the world.
I tried to remember that, when my master punished me.
He made me expose my bottom to him and he whipped me.
I feel horrible, degraded.
If I had anywhere else to go I would leave this house.
But please, please don't write to him again!
Sincerely yours, Sophie Arandt
Vienna Dear Fräulein, You are a contemptible girl to tell such mischievous lies about a master who has shown every care towards you.
I wash my hands of you.
Sincerely yours, R. von Krafft-Ebing
Frankfurt Dear Professor, I deserve it.
That belittling word Du, after you have addressed me as Sie so respectfully, showed me what you think of me, and affected me even more than contemptible.
I did not tell you lies but I do deserve your contempt.
I would not bother you again, only I have a last request.
You can't refuse a condemned girl her last request, can you?
It is, that you will sell me a copy of your book.
You see, I think I was in such a state after glancing at those few pages simply because I didn't read any more.
My master, Dr Grossman, says it isn't at all a dirty book if you read all of it.
When I asked him if I could borrow his copy he said I wouldn't understand it, which is true, I suppose.
I think I could understand enough, however, to be able to put my experience into perspective.
book, letting me know how much it is.
I don't go out very much to spend my money, so I have some saved up.
Please do this for me and then forget about Your humble servant, Sophie Arandt
Charsky stood on a narrow ledge above the Spider Snowfield.
Below and above him were overhangs; he had lost all his equipment; the few inches of rock beneath his feet threatened to crumble away; a blizzard tore at him constantly; his situation was entirely hopeless.
True, there was a mixed Italian and German team climbing not far away, heading for the Traverse of the Gods; he could see them but for some reason they couldn't see him.
He tried to shout for help, but was too weak to raise even the feeblest of cries.
He could see that Longhi, the lowest on the rope, was in a bad way; his hands kept slipping.
It was no surprise to the Russian when an anguished cry rang out: ‘Falling!
Hold me!’
Despite the gale, Charsky heard the whiplash of the rope snaking through the second Italian, Corti's, gloves, as he struggled to hold his partner.
He would have burn marks on his hands.
Somehow he managed to brake the fall.
Longhi was hanging in midair.
‘Lower me about six feet!’ shouted Longhi.
‘There's a ledge.’
‘Okay, Stefano!’
Charsky watched him being lowered on to a ledge, a little wider than his own.
‘Can you climb up?’
Corti shouted.
‘Impossible.
My hands are frozen stiff.
That's why I fell.’
‘We'll try to pull you up.
Hold on…
It's no good, Stefano.
We'll climb on up and get help to you.
Tomorrow we'll be back and pull you up.
Courage, old friend!’
‘Yes, pull me up,’ cried Longhi, not understanding.
‘Goodbye Stefano.Courage!’
‘Goodbye.’
The Russian's eyes followed Corti's climb, in the wake of the two Germans.
By late afternoon they were more than halfway up the Exit Cracks.
Then he saw a stone fall, glance off a crag and hit Corti on the head.
He tumbled sixty feet before he was brought up with a jolt.
He was hanging head down; blood fell into the snow.
The Germans climbed down to him, packed snow into the head wound, then dragged him to a ledge.
With cords and pitons they anchored him to the rock.
Then they set off climbing.
Night fell.
Charsky, who had no idea how many nights he had spent on the face, tried to keep himself awake by recalling all he knew of Russian history, from the founding of Kiev Rus to the death of Stalin and the suppression of Hungary.
Sometime during the next day he saw a man in a harness being lowered by cable towards Corti; heard a shout: ‘I have him!’
‘Nothdurft?
Mayer?’ the rescuer asked the injured man.
The Italian feebly shook his head.
‘Corti.
Nothdurft and Mayer went on up to get help.’
‘It seems they didn't make it.’
‘My friend, Stefano, is down there.’
Corti pointed.
‘I'll come back for him later.’
Charsky tried to shout that he too was here, but couldn't utter a sound.
He watched the harnessed pair being lifted up.
When they came into contact with the rock face, Corti tried to bite the snow, saying, ‘Hungry.’
They were lost to sight; yet Charsky heard the Italian's voice float down clearly: ‘How beautiful the sun is!’
The snowswept day was turning towards darkness.
Another man with a harness was being lowered.
Then the cable could go no further.
The man shouted, ‘Longhi!
Longhi!’
A weak cry: ‘Come!’
‘Courage!
Courage!’
Then the cable was being pulled up.
Once more, before darkness covered the grim face of the White Cobra, voices were heard distantly: ‘Longhi!
Are you there?’
‘Come!
Come!’
‘Just hold on, Stefano!
You'll be rescued in the morning without fail!’
‘Hungry!
Cold!’
Then again the mountain face belonged to the wind and the snow.
During the long night Charsky managed to find his voice; he called out, ‘Stefano!’
But Longhi did not respond, and did not speak again.
When morning came, the Russian saw he had fallen from the ledge and was hanging upside down, his ice face and the rock face united in a carezza .
7
I collapsed back into the armchair, almost as exhausted as if I'd been climbing the Eigernordwand .
Surkov lit me a cigarette and placed it between my lips.
This kindness was soon drowned in a torrent of criticism.
‘It's completely fucked up.
There's no point going on.
I know you did your best but — Jesus!
There's simply no unity, no consistency, no narrative thrust, All these pseudo-dreams and irrelevant letters!’
‘I loved the dreams,’ said Masha.
‘The Eigernordwand .
It brought it back for me.’
For a moment her eyes and her smile, turned to me, conveyed a hint of past emotions.
‘There was one sheer impossibility,’ he growled.
‘Charsky mentioned Ivan Sakulin.
We've heard of him before.
Nadia's husband in Sphinx .
But he had drowned.
Or possibly been smuggled out of Russia by the CIA.
He certainly can't be still in the Soviet Navy.
Or have you resurrected him?’ he sneered.
‘Given the Russian setting,’ said Rozanov, sprawled on a bed, his eyes closed, ‘I don't accept that it's an impossibility.
In the Soviet Union anything is possible, you know that.’
His eyes opened and he gave me a weak smile.
I nodded gratefully.
He hauled himself into a sitting position.
‘The blind film director,’ he mused, rubbing his scarred and stubbled chin.
‘A nice touch.
Did you have Olga in mind?’
‘Not consciously; but now you mention it…
’ Sergei's troubles had all begun with an adulterous rendezvous in Gorky with a blind woman called Olga.
We had made that frantic and tragic episode the central pillar of Ararat , our first volume.
I asked if he knew what had happened to her.
Pulling himself wearily to his feet, he walked to the window, drew aside the curtain and gazed out at the blackness.
‘Well, it's a very strange story.
She was married to a Jew, a history professor.
We made him blind too, if you remember, but in reality he's sighted.
Soon after the Gorky fiasco they sought permission to emigrate to Israel.
They were refused, of course, and suffered the consequences.
You know all about that, Masha.’
‘Da .’
Masha had suffered when her husband had applied for a visa.
Rozanov let the curtain drop and took a pace or two up and down.
‘She's kept in touch with us.
Last year they were given permission to go to Israel.
In the transit lounge at Vienna Airport, Professor Kubik bought a German paperback.
It was a translation of our novel Ararat : his specialism is Armenian history, you see.’
‘Shit!’
‘He started to read it as the plane took off for Haifa.
After the first few sentences he became bewildered, agitated, thunder-struck.
This was Olga — even to her skinny legs!
Thinking back, he recalled her distance, agitation and depression at that time; her deep involvement with my poetry; even a night she spent, unusually, away from home, with a ‘friend’…
Just as Olga was fumbling with her food tray, struggling to unseal the utensils, she was suddenly lashed by a storm of hysterical accusations.
She felt unable to lie.
‘The stewardess thought he was weeping for happiness at being free.
But, as Olga said in her letter to me, one weeps more often because one is not free.
He wasn't free from stupid jealousy, over a one-night fling six years before.’
He sat back down on the bed.
I felt lost for words; had difficulty breathing.
We ought at the very least to have changed her name.
It was unforgivable of us — of me in particular.
‘He divorced her.
Well, she had never been happy with him, so she was relieved.
She can now go wherever she wants, read whatever she wants…
And something quite miraculous happened: surgeons were able to restore her sight with a brilliant new surgical technique.
How clever these Jews are!
But she tells me she still does not feel free.
She tells me the only freedom is that of the imagination.
Well, I don't know.’
Surkov said, rising, ‘I must be fresh for Maggie in the morning.’
He slapped me on the shoulder.
‘I was too rough on you.
There was nothing personal about it; you gave a very smooth performance.
I just don't think we're getting anywhere.’
I woke, late, to another almost cloudless morning, and to the knowledge that it was Wednesday, half the week had gone.
Therefore I could begin to enjoy myself a little more.
There is a pattern to my occasional engagements away from home.
In distant prospect I look forward to them greatly, as a break from the monotonous, lonely routine of writing.
As they draw near, I dread them, I don't want to break the routine.
Damn it, I want to write!
When the engagements are abroad, I work feverishly in the last few days and nights to create a reasonably finished piece of work — just in case we crash.
If the engagement lasts several days, like this festival, the first half drags; I find it a strain to have to talk to people again, I'm haunted by the inevitably unfinished ‘finished’ work at home.
At the halfway stage, however, I relax, I'm a little more at ease, and I know the remaining days will pass more quickly.
Then, once I am at home, I usually think the whole of it was splendid, and hate having to settle down to the monotonous, lonely life of a writer.
While I was shaving, peacefully surveying my baggy eyes, thick lips hinting at a recent cold sore, and ever-deepening wrinkles, I saw in the mirror something monstrous appear around the side of my grey hair.
A gigantic house spider.
Shuddering, I flicked it off with my lathered razor.
It struggled for a moment on the floor then vanished into a crevice behind a tile.
Had it wandered on to me while I slept?
It didn't bear thinking of, but I thought of nothing else as I prepared to go down to breakfast.
Rozanov, hunched in his crumpled navy suit, was looking at job adverts in the Guardian .
He was thinking of settling in this land of freedom, he told me as I sat down opposite.
He might become a Temporary Water Sports Development Officer.
Or a Money Advice Support Unit Officer.
Possibly an Assistant Race Relations Adviser.
Or an Ethnic Minority Recreation Officer.
Or he quite liked the idea of being an Afro-Caribbean Woman Advice Worker.
His smile, as I recounted my terrifying encounter — I am an arachnophobe — implied that there were worse things in life than having a spider wandering over one's hair.
Ordering fresh coffee from the waitress who came to take my order, he passed me the Guardian and picked up the Sun .
The big news of the day, he said, though for some inexplicable reason the Guardian ignored it, concerned the lovers who had bonked in a British Rail platform photo booth.
‘There's a sub-heading ‘Knickers’ and it says ‘Passengers complained her green knickers were flying all over the place.’
I love that colour detail, don't you?
Is that why they were complaining?
Didn't they like green knickers?
Or because knickers shouldn't fly?
Bonking…bonking…it sounds like two pieces of wood rubbing together.
Now what's on the problem page?
I'm beginning to love Deirdre's column…
‘I left secret lover dying’.’
He scanned the column.
‘The poor middle-aged guy had a heart attack during a bonk with his teenage neighbour while his wife was out shopping.
The girl ran off and left him.
He died, and now she feels guilty.’
‘So what does Deirdre say?’
‘She mustn't blame herself.
By running off, keeping quiet, she saved his family further distress.
Even if he'd been rushed straight to hospital, they might not have been able to save him.
I like that.
I'll remember her wise words if someone ever has a heart attack while I'm around — there's no particular hurry.’
I nodded reflectively; sipped orange juice.
‘Who needs Freud when there's Deirdre?’
I saw Victor threading an uncertain path through the dining room.
So he had worn scruffy jeans and a Texas University T-shirt to his Downing Street breakfast.
He looked bleary-eyed, excited, disturbed.
He flung himself into a chair and drew out his Marlboros.
‘What an experience!’
‘Tell us.’
‘Where's Masha?’
‘She's having a lie-in,’ said Rozanov.
Then, rather guiltily, ‘Well, I guess she is.’
Over a cup of Earl Grey tea, which he had tasted and relished at Number 10, Surkov described his visit.
There had been a dozen East European ‘experts’ around the breakfast table, advising Maggie on her Polish trip.
Surkov had quoted to her a poem by Zbigniew Herbert, and she'd said this helped her to understand Poland more than anything else.
Afterwards, she had contrived a quarter of an hour alone with him in a private office.
They had kissed and caressed, but it was deeply frustrating.
Surkov's hand trembled as he lit another cigarette.
They felt very emotional about each other, he said.
She hoped to be able to see him again, more privately, before her departure.
Maybe at night.
‘It's the first time an older woman has really stirred me.’
But then, essentially she was a young girl still, the daughter of a grocer who had ruined her with discipline; a girl bursting with suppressed sexuality and fun.
Knotted up.
Fucked up.
‘She says she can be herself with me, for the first time; can let herself go.’
‘Is Victor a little crazy?’
I asked Sergei while our friend was in the gents.
‘He's been a little crazy for some time.
Maybe ever since he left Vera for Imogen — which was disastrous for him.
He's a megalomaniac.’
‘Do you think he breakfasted at Downing Street?’
‘It's highly unlikely.’
Of course, he said, an artist dwelt on the edge of madness.
I asked him about his shamanism.
Well, it had come about while he'd been receiving the wet canvas treatment.
I knew all about that.
You were rolled up tight as a mummy in canvas, then water was poured on it.
As the canvas dried, your bones cracked, you could hardly breathe.
‘And I found myself floating quite calmly above my body.
I could float around the ward, and even went outside into the snow.
I saw the sentries in their watch towers.
I came back when they were unwrapping me.’
Since then he could travel, from time to time, to the realm of the dead, and return.
You didn't have to go in for banging drums and shaking rattles to be a shaman; you had simply to have suffered tremendously, been torn apart, come close to death.
Sometimes he went into a trance.
It occasionally happened when he started an improvisation.
Last winter, in Minsk, the voice of Alexander Blok had come through — so people told him afterwards; he had no recollection.
‘Did you know,’ he asked, ‘when you were improvising last night, a cat sat on your lap for a while?’
My heart started to thump.
‘What was it like?’
‘It was small and black, with white paws and a white patch on its chest.’
‘That was Thomas!’
I exclaimed my heart beating so wildly I thought I was going to have a heart attack right there at the table.
‘She died last week.’
My eyes blurred.
I could see a cat, dying stoically.
‘I know how you feel,’ said Rozanov.
‘I howled when one of mine died.
We partly weep for ourselves; they are our vulnerable, helpless selves.’
‘And they keep to the house and garden,’ I said.
‘They never go away.
They are more faithful to the house than we are.’
‘Wives or children may depart, but they stay.’
‘And the places that knew them shall know them no more.’
He patted my shoulder.
‘Well, she's okay.
She's okay.
She came to tell you.’
I feel hesitant about including that.
It seems almost too personal.
I begin to understand why it is rare for a novelist to be his own narrator.
There is a good deal of self-censorship going on in these chapters about the festival.
For a start, I spent a lot of time on my own, or with London friends.
It doesn't seem relevant to describe those times; but also, as the named author of this book, I am aware that a certain decorum is required.
It's not that I am fearful of telling the truth, but the reader might be offended.
With a fictional character, described in the third person, there is nothing that may not be said.
With a real person, like Surkov, a shade more circumspection is necessary, but not much.
It's when one moves into the first person that problems occur.
Generally the reader wants his narrator to be upright, decent, honest, and not prone to the lusts that plague other people — never ourselves.
I might have called myself Ross Trenear:.
which would have allowed a little more scope — but not much.
Supposing, when Rozanov and I visited the porno bookshop, I said I'd bought a couple of hardcore videos, hired a video recorder at the hotel, and spent two afternoons watching porn in my room.
It would arouse uncomfortable feelings in many readers.
It would get in the way of their appreciation, if any, of the novel.
I can tell you Surkov petted with Mrs Thatcher, or at least boasted of having done so; I would not feel able to confess to it myself.
Mostly, during the day, we went our separate ways.
We did so on this day.
After visiting the Hayward Gallery I spent a half-hour just gazing along the river line, the historic buildings sharp in the clear, cold, sunny air.
The distant traffic noises did not seem to interrupt the silence; the reflective water gave to the Palace of Westminster the illusion of insubstantiality.
Clearly the scene was beautiful, even though I do not see London as my city.
This London belongs to the city gents with their regimental ties and their polished shoes; it belongs as little to a Celtic writer as it does to Surkov and Rozanov.
Its beauty was alien, yet effective.
I imagined it all dissolving in a white heat, or swept away in an enormous wind.
Surkov had repeated for my benefit his account of the submarine commander, poised to unleash destruction on London.
He claimed to have heard it from the lips of Raisa, and swore its truth.
The crazy guy, now at the bottom of the Baltic with his crew, had turned out to be a secret and tormented homosexual, a condition he had hidden under an apparently conventional marriage.
There had been a ghastly failure of security, and heads had rolled.
But maybe it wasn't true.
Surely, Masha and I had said, there were safeguards; a madman on his own simply couldn't unleash a nuclear warhead?
But Surkov had insisted there were ways.
I glanced at my watch, and set off walking.
It was almost time for the afternoon session at the Riverside.
We were learning to treat this daily session in a casual way.
Sometimes one or two of us turned up for it, sometimes no one did.
The theme today aroused my curiosity: a Celebration of Ulrike Meinhof.
A few minutes late, I slipped into the half-full auditorium, spotted Sergei near the back, and sat beside him.
An American novelist was reading the prison letters of the West German terrorist, whose face, blown up, formed the backdrop to the stage.
After the letters there were various tributes.
I recall a few extracts.
Contrast the mass murderer, Thatcher, assassin of British working-class soldiers, miners, old people and babies, with Ulrike, who chose her victims carefully from the exploiting classes and with the aim of liberating humanity from its chains…
(Geraldine Porter)
It takes courage to execute someone, to put a bullet through their brains, or blow them to pieces with a bomb.
Ulrike had that courage.
As a man, a white, a heterosexual, from a capitalist country, the country she tried to free, I have no right, you may think, to stand on this platform, but I gladly do so in order to salute her.
I salute you, Ulrike, my friend!
…
(Helmut Hauptmann)
She was a woman.
A woman who fought her way to the top of a liberation movement which traditionally had been the preserve mainly of men.
She is a great pioneer of feminism.
Ulrike Meinhof, I ask you to accept my tears and my gratitude…
(Cita Lemminkaïnen)
I think too of another courageous woman, fighting for Irish freedom, gunned down in Gibraltar by British terrorists with her two male comrades while strolling peacefully along.
Ulrike is not alone, but she was one of the greatest…
(Sean Murphy)
Humane terrorist!
Tender assassin!
Philanthropic bomber!
Candleflame in the darkness of a diabolic world!
…
(Jean-Paul Legrand)Ulrike saw the fucking military-industrial conspiracy for what it is, and she sat on it.
And then they killed her!
Suicide?
That's crap.
Ulrike loved life too much…
Judith Steinway)
Walking back to the hotel, Rozanov and I were silent for a long time.
I was thinking of a little black cat gazing up at me with dim eyes; Rozanov of I know not what — possibly Ulrike Meinhof.
But at length he began to speak of our improvisations, and how the nights here were better than the days.
I said I could see Victor was right, I had over-complicated the plot; I should not have introduced the letters, which were paraphrases of a correspondence I'd been reading on my journey to London.
They had been a way of ‘coasting’ slightly, when I'd run out of steam.
The Eiger dreams, too, were a mistake.
‘Yes, you probably have overdone them,’ he agreed.
‘But at least you had the sense to realise Charsky's performance on the Neva embankment was a dream, and that he was the man in bed with Anna.
Victor would have got it completely wrong.’
‘It sounded all too perfect.’
‘Of course!
It's someone who envies creativity, and wishes to be younger, handsomer…
You got it!
And don't worry: Masha will bring us back to earth tonight.
She may not be brilliant, but she tells a straightforward story.
She'll set us on the right track.’
We were soon to discover that Masha might be in no condition to set us on any track.
She phoned me in my room to say she had slipped in the bath and badly bruised her face.
She sounded shaky.
She would rest and not have dinner nor, regrettably, attend the evening performance, at which I was to read.
She was very sorry; I told her not to worry.
We should ring her on our return and she would see whether she felt able to perform.
I wished her a good rest.
* Always the coach journey to the theatre was a silent one.
We all sat hunched and unspeaking.
I guessed it was because everyone felt faintly absurd.
Though literary festivals could be immensely enjoyable, especially if they took you to some pleasant distant city, like Toronto or Adelaide, there was something absurd about writers gathering together in this way.
We were all of us separate and self-absorbed; each one wrote what he was able to write.
The absurdity became clearer if one imagined twenty or thirty writers from another era occupying the air-conditioned coach that took us from the Hyde Park Regis to the Riverside.
Suppose — I reflected that evening — Stendhal, Lamartine, Poe, Jane Austen, Sir Walter Scott, De Quincey, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Keats, Percy and Mary Shelley, Ann Radcliffe, Leigh Hunt, Mickiewicz, Pushkin, Gogol, Goethe, and a dozen other well-known, forgettable writers were making this journey.
Well, it was unthinkable.
There was a depressingly thin crowd hovering in the foyer and bar.
Tonight was a night without stars.
We filed into the boxes reserved for the writers and gazed down at the acres of empty seats.
Jock in his Superman outfit took the stage and welcomed the audience to Writers Internationale.
Then he introduced Joshua N'dosi from Tanzania.
Normally I only Listened for the first couple of minutes at a reading; either I am preoccupied by having to read later myself, or some image causes my mind to drift away; but N'dosi had a powerful, hypnotic voice and his poetry sparkled with fresh, delightful metaphors.
He was altogether too good.
And Judith Steinway's streetwise Brooklyn fiction, delivered in staccato tones, surprised me also by its quality.
She also looked great — out of dungarees for the first time and into a becomingly simple black dress.
She received warm applause, and during the interval respectable queues formed before her table of books, as before N'dosi's.
After she had finished signing, I approached her, clutching a drink.
‘That was great,’ I said.
‘And I love your dress.’
‘Don't be so fucking patronising,’ she said, turning her back on me to continue a conversation with Geraldine Porter.
The interval bell sounded, and soon I was waiting for Jock to introduce me, and striding on.
I began confidently enough, with a humorous extract, but when the first couple of jokes went by with never a chuckle from the audience, I became nervous.
I dried.
Reaching for a glass of water I found there was none.
Nervousness turned to panic.
I couldn't get my tongue around the consonants; I lisped.
The rest of the reading was torture.
I stumbled off to polite applause.
Jock shook my hand in passing, and introduced the last performer, Milorad Pavic.
Pavic, a moustached and gentlemanly Yugoslav, was waiting in the wings with an actress, who would read all but the first page or two of the chosen extract in English translation.
They went on.
An astonishing double of Lech Walesa, the Yugoslav spoke briefly about his Dictionary of the Khazars , which was in two editions, one for men and one for women.
The texts, he said, differed in a single paragraph.
I felt envious of his brilliant idea.
Yet I felt too strung up about my botched performance to listen properly.
No matter — I would buy his book.
There was no substitute for reading.
Afterwards, as the sparse crowd emerged blinking, Pavic and I sat at our tables piled with books.
I was relieved to see a dozen or so people form up in front of me.
My biro and strained smile got to work.
My third or fourth customer was a man of about thirty, with the athletic, boyish, curly-haired handsomeness of David Gower, the cricketer, or Lieutenant Gonville Bromhead of Lulu .
Opening the paperback at the title page, I glanced up and asked him should I sign it for someone.
‘For Paul,’ he said diffidently; then, ‘Your work means a lot to me.
Could you please write something in it?
You see’— his voice trembled slightly, his blue eyes became haunted, his bloom of good looks seemed to collapse inwards —‘I have cancer.
I'm told I have six months to live.
If you could write something — anything — I'd appreciate it so much.’
‘My God, that's terrible!’
I said.
‘And you look so well.’
I feel well.
But…
His voice trailed away.
‘Of course I'll write something.’
I thought desperately, and wrote.
I stood up and shook his hand.
‘Good luck.’
‘Thank you.
And thank you for this.’
He moved away, and I put on my strained smile again for the next patiently waiting customer.
Out of the corner of my eye I saw the young man join Pavic's queue.
The graceful, dying face stayed before my eyes.
I hoped what I had written was okay.
What can one write for a man who is dying, who is going into a world where there are no books, no words?
When I had finished signing, I went to the bar.
I got talking to a Faber editor I knew slightly.
I told her about the tragic young man.
She asked his name.
His first name was Paul, I said, that was all I knew.
She nodded.
‘He's been at the festival every evening, buying everyone's books, telling the same story.
A couple of years ago he wrote to several of our authors saying that he was dying, their work meant a lot to him, could they write something for him.
He's a book collector.
By the time he's eighty he'll have a unique collection.’
‘Shit.’
‘What did you write?’
‘Some lines from ‘And Death Shall Have No Dominion’.’
‘That was very suitable.’
Smiling she turned away.
A slim attractive girl in jeans hovered near, her pose suggesting I could approach her; but before I could do so Señora Sanchez accosted me.
She congratulated me, then enquired after Masha, whose absence she had noticed at dinner.
Her black eyes peered intently into mine as she nodded sympathetically.
I could see, again, how striking she must once have been, when her primly drawn-back grey hair had presumably matched her eyes, ‘with all that's fair of black and bright’.
But elderly ladies make me feel uncomfortable and our small talk petered out; I was glad when she said she must go and congratulate N'dosi and moved away.
Surkov and Rozanov, escaping from admirers, joined me and we headed for the exit.
Sitting on my own behind them on the return journey I looked straight at the innocently sensuous lips of Isabella Rossellini, advertising a perfume near traffic lights.
She brought back her mother, Ingrid Bergman, and therefore the days of my youth.
I slipped into reverie.
Coming back into the present, I caught the Rolls Royce purr of central London, the purr of privilege, money, power — as far from my little cat's dying purr as it is possible to be.
For a moment, until I remembered ordinary people, children, animals, fall-out, I wanted that crazed submarine commander to have succeeded.
The anger went with me into the Regis.
Surkov rang Masha from the lobby and learnt that she felt better; we could come to her room.
We rose with several of our colleagues, who spilled out on the fifteenth floor to attend the nightly booze-up.
We continued another three floors.
A dressing-gowned Masha opened the door to us.
The right side of her face was badly bruised, already purple.
But really, she was fine.
‘How did it go?’ she asked me, as Rozanov gave her an especially tender hug.
‘He was first rate!’ enthused Surkov, using the English adjective and thereby giving his compliment an ironic tinge.
‘It was just a pity there were not many people.’
We settled ourselves.
Wine glugged.
She declared herself fit to ‘perform’.
‘Make it a firm narrative line, Masha,’ Surkov requested.
‘No more fucking dreams and letters.’
‘I'll do my best.’
8
She thought again of waking him, for he was struggling for breath in his sleep.
He reminded her of his father, who had suffered from a lung disease.
That had led to his sudden and unexpected collapse, the heart giving out.
It was called being dead.
It had really shaken her up…
On the other hand, she really wanted to go on exploring the nineteenth-century letters…
Vienna Dear Fräulein, Excuse my delay in replying — I have been very busy marking examinations, etc.
It was wrong of me to write you such an angry note: please accept my apologies.
As you can see, I am sending you a copy of Psychopathia Sexualis , as requested.
I do so with much misgiving, but I do see your point.
You will I hope realise that these cases are placed in the context of a diseased sexuality.
You are clearly a bright girl, and will throw off this disturbance.
I did not have to pay for this copy, so there is no need for you to send any money.
Sincerely yours, R. von Krafft-Ebing
Frankfurt My dear Professor!
Oh, you are too kind!
Your book is a treasure trove of unspeakable delights!
I have only dipped into it here and there, but already I know it will displace the Tales of Grimm as my favourite book.
I read one, or sometimes two, descriptions each night, curled up in bed — I cannot bear to read any more, because each one sends my brain reeling and spinning like a moth round a candleflame.
Tonight I have read the account of the gentleman who loves ladies’ pubic hair, and I understand him so well.
Do you know him personally?
If so, would you kindly forward to him the tiny little package?
It contains a few of my pubic hairs.
Tell him that a young lady who has read his story with interest and affection offers them as a gift.
It's beautiful to think there's a man who spends his life going from hotel to hotel, paying chambermaids to let him look in beds slept in by women, in the hope of finding some hairs!
I could unquestionably get him several different shades of hairs from this house.
Would you please tell him that?
If you should wish to look inside the packet, before sending it, feel free to do so.
Thank you.
Thank you!
Sincerely yours, Sophie Arandt
Ah, how touching! thought Anna: it reminds me of Dmitri, when I was on a field trip in the Urals, that summer — oh, was it ‘66 or ‘67?
He wrote to me begging me to send him some cuttings of my pubic hairs, and I did!
He really lusted after me in those days…
Vienna Fräulein, Enough!
I should never have sent you my book.
I am about to take a long vacation.
I wish you well, but do not write to me again.
R. von Krafft-Ebing PS.
I shall burn the packet unopened.
Frankfurt Dear Professor, I am hurt.
Also I do not understand.
If you were unwilling to forward my small gift, why did you send me the gentleman's name and address?
At least, I assume this card (which I am returning) concerns the man who loves collecting pubic hair — it's much too learned and technical for me to understand most of it, but there are bits of it which do seem to make it clear.
Is it that you wanted to demonstrate to me how ignorant I am?
I know that only too well.
I can see I have been a great burden to you.
I am sorry and ashamed.
You will hear no more from me.
I wish you a nice vacation.
Sincerely yours, Sophie Arandt
Vienna Dear Fräulein Arandt, I am deeply distressed, and also not a little irritated, by the direction events have taken in our correspondence.
I returned home to find your letter of 4 August, and also a more recent one from Dr Grossman.
I cannot imagine how I made the mistake of putting a patient's medical card in with my last note to you.
It was an unforgivable, though unintended, breach of confidence; and it is but a small consolation to know that Herr Sussmeyer thereby gained a correspondence with a young woman which he has doubtless found extremely gratifying.
I was angry with your letter (and packet), and also burdened with too many responsibilities.
At the same time as I was writing some correspondence (including the note to you), I was attempting to organise the hand-over of certain severely disturbed patients to various colleagues who were to assume responsibility for them during the long vacation.
Herr Sussmeyer was one such case.
In my haste, and under the influence of the contents of your letter, I evidently placed Herr Sussmeyer's medical card in the wrong envelope and sent it to you.
The colleague who ought to have received it received only my accompanying note.
I have apologised to your master for the regrettable error.
You are owed an apology also.
Though it was foolish of you to enter into correspondence with my patient, it was predictable that you would do so, in your troubled state.
You must understand that, upon discovery of such an unsavoury correspondence, your master and mistress could not possibly take the risk of leaving their young children in your hands.
I hope your new duties are not too disagreeable.
Your master has persuaded me that you found our correspondence helpful, and that I should resume it.
You strike me as a basically good-natured and decent girl, and if I can be of assistance in putting you back on the right path, I shall be happy to oblige, so long as you do not expect too lengthy or too frequent an exchange.
You cannot imagine how overwhelmed I feel with duties sometimes.
Sincerely yours, Prof. R. von Krafft-Ebing
Frankfurt Dear Professor, I don't deserve your kindness.
The mistake with the card was an understandable one.
I am sorry you are so burdened with duties.
I will try not to add to them too much.
I do not mind at all being a parlour maid, though I do you I am feeling much happier and calmer.
This is because I have at last discovered the key to my existence, the meaning of my life.
I need to be used by men — or preferably one man.
To be used in any way they see fit, even to the point of humiliation.
That's why I wrote to you about Herr Sussmeyer and enclosed the pubic hair, though I didn't realise it at the time.
Because I thought he could use me in his own way, and that would make me happy.
But when I wrote to him it didn't work out; he was much too polite and too adoring I don't want to be adored, I want to be used and abused, I want to be treated with contempt.
As soon as I found out the truth about myself, all my cares and worries fell away.
You can't imagine the relief!
I haven't been able to explain this to Dr Grossman, because he wouldn't understand, but you will understand, and I hope be happy for me.
I hope you are well, and not feeling so over-burdened.
Sincerely yours, Sophie Arandt
Stupid, stupid girl! thought Anna sadly.
At the same time, there was something poetic and almost beautiful in her extremism.
Didn't passion arise from a clash of extremes rather than the equal union she and Dmitri shared — and which they were expressing in this long, unmoving screw?
Weren't they missing something?
Vienna Dear Fräulein, I hope and believe the sad condition you describe is no more than a temporary fantasy.
Possibly you have been influenced by the examples of masochism in the book, a term I coined to define that particular perversion.
You are very unlikely to be suffering from it, as it is almost entirely confined to males.
So have no fear, it will pass; it is not, you may thank God, the real thing.
Sincerely yours, R. von Krafft-Ebing
Frankfurt Dear Professor, I am sad that you do not believe me.
What I said to you was nothing but the truth.
I don't care what it is called, and I must admit I haven't yet read anything about masochism as you call it in your book.
I have to take it a little at a time, it is so powerful.
I think I must have known the truth about myself, in some deep part of my mind, when I first read those few pages of your book in my master's study.
I thought I was disgusted by the men who liked to stab women in the breasts, etc.’ with no thought for them as persons, but just out to use them for their own satisfaction.
But it's very strange that I started to masturbate, night and morning, after that.
I remember imagining I was going to the market to buy food, and suddenly felt this agonising pain in my bottom, and saw my skirt all ripped, and blood — I thought I was revolted, and yet it was followed by masturbation.
Is it possible to know something and yet not know, if you see what I mean?
But what really brought it to light was your letter telling me I was contemptible and that you washed your hands of me!
I trembled so much I broke the vase I had been dusting, and I felt a sweet fountain of delight flow up through me.
I adored the way you made your feelings quite clear by calling me Du instead of Sie !
Oh, it drenched me with pleasure, even more than contemptible.
Well, I don't think I quite realised it even then.
I first knew it unmistakably when Herr Sussmeyer replied to my first letter, saying he had this quest for pubic hairs because he loved and respected women so much.
I remember feeling disappointed, and wondering why.
Then I knew it was because I didn't want to be loved and respected, since I don't deserve to be.
I am only worth being used.
Yes, that's when I felt that huge surge of relief and happiness.
If you could go back to calling me Du you would be more honest about our relationship and oblige Your obedient servant, Sophie Arandt.
Vienna Dear Fräulein, I must accept, with concern and sadness, the truth of what you have communicated to me.
Unless you can overcome these perverse desires, by a great effort of will, you are on the road to shame and degradation.
Fate has placed you in a situation of subservience; but in the sight of God you are the equal of an emperor.
You should really seek professional help; yet I suppose you could not afford it.
I will do what I can, if you wish, by correspondence.
I cannot deny that your condition, given its rarity among women, is of interest to me.
I should have to know a great deal more about you.
To answer your question about the mind.
It is not possible to know and yet not to know.
The mind does not play tricks with us; it holds no secret compartments.
Of course, we often push uncomfortable thoughts ‘to the back of our mind’.
This may be what you did.
When you next write to me, please try to jot down some details about yourself which might assist me to help you.
When you stop to think about it, I really know remarkably little about you.
Thank you for your enquiry.
The burdens, both professional and domestic, do not grow less onerous.
Fortunately I am of good tough stock.
R. von Krafft-Ebing
From his precarious position on an ice field, Charsky gazed down at the valley, so unutterably remote.
The world turned into empty space, into shrill wind.
This really was, as some climber had said, the loneliest place in the world.
Even your friends ceased to exist.
Why, he thought — if one can be said to think in dreams — did I ever take this on?
I was quite comfortable in Leningrad, with a pleasant, interesting job and a pleasant, interesting wife.
He mused on the state of the planet.
The recent Cuban Missile Crisis had reminded everyone that earth was on the verge of extinction; it was poised as precariously as Charsky.
Close to him was a short, narrow ledge, to which someone had lashed the corpse of a young man.
The Russian did not think he could have been dead for long.
Presumably his companion had turned back to try to get help.
Charsky, coming upon the corpse, shocking in its unexpectedness, thought he should stay with it.
Tenderly he stroked the dead man's face.
He jerked his hand back as if it had received an electric shock: a cheek nerve had quivered.
He saw the mouth twist, the eyes open.
‘You're not dead!’
‘No.
Only dying.’
‘What's your name, my friend?’
‘Barry.
Barry Brewster.’
‘Ah!
English.
Rescue is on its way.’
‘What good would that do?
I'd rather the mountain killed me than die in some hospital.’
Suddenly the young Englishman struggled with his bonds.
He seemed to have the strength of ten; he tore the ropes off him and rose to his feet, his orange windbreaker gusting in the gale like a bird's wings.
The sight must have frightened the watchers at Kleine Scheidegg and Grindelwald.
He crouched like a skier and took off, shooting down the ice field and zooming off into space, turning leisurely somersaults in the great fall, bouncing off rocks like a dummy in an adventure film.
The Russian crossed himself.
Cold.
Cold.
Anna —
As on the previous night, we were interrupted by the phone.
Surkov, lying on the bed, asked her if he should answer it.
Masha nodded.
He picked the phone up.
‘Yes.
Who is it?
…
Oh, it's you, Sonia!
Hello!’
Rozanov stiffened.
‘Yes, he's here, we're all here.’
Rozanov sprang to the held-out phone.
‘Sonia?
What's wrong?
…
But it must be the middle of the night…
It's probably just nerves.
Why don't you take a sleeping pill?
…
I tried to ring, but the lines to Moscow were engaged.
I'm okay.
The festival's boring; we're here telling a few stories…
I'm sorry I haven't called, but I did try…
Anyway, how's it been?’
Masha withdrew to the bathroom.
Surkov and I stood up and stretched.
I walked around the bedroom which, unlike mine, was neat and showed few signs of its occupant: a small pile of books, with Psychological Correspondences on top; a pair of flesh-coloured tights drying on a radiator; some cosmetics.
Sergei was saying mostly Da and Nyet , with long intervals in between.
Nodding towards the bathroom, Surkov said very softly, ‘It's a disaster.’
‘She's doing her best.
Her fall has shaken her.’
‘Okay, but most of this is just memorised stuff.
There's almost nothing original.’
I was about to respond that she'd added quite a lot to the letters, but Masha came out of the bathroom.
Sergei was promising to ring Sonia tomorrow.
When he put the phone down he said to us, ‘She has stomach pains, she can't sleep.
Ever since we married there's been something wrong with her.’
‘How did she get put through to my room?’ asked Masha.
‘I guess they transferred the call.’
He looked ashen — even more than usual.
Masha said, ‘You should have called her to let her know you'd arrived safely.’
‘She'd have heard if our plane had crashed.
She just likes to check up.’
Surkov muttered, ‘It's always the same with mistresses turned wives.
They know all the tricks you play, they're suspicious every moment of the day and night.’
‘Shall I carry on?’ asked Masha, sitting.
‘If you're up to it.’
‘I think so.’
I saw Rozanov glance discreetly at his watch.
I wondered if he was waiting to be alone with her.
Would he leave with us and then double back?
Would they melt into each other 's arms?
Would they try carezza ?
9
Cold.
Cold.
Anna in the cradle.
Her grandma trying to light some sticks.
Gunfire.
Somehow the child knew it was gunfire.
The door, her mother coming.
Swaying, skeletal, and her face like snow.
Clutching something wrapped in paper.
Red on her face and her coat.
‘What happened, darling?
Sit down, sit down!’
‘It's nothing, Mama.
A scratch.’
‘It looks more than a scratch.’
‘I got some meat.’
‘What is it?’
‘It'll make soup.
Don't let Aniushka see it.’
Cold.
Cold.
Anna shivered, returned to her book…
Frankfurt Dear Professor, Well, what can I tell you about myself?
I'm of medium height, fairly well-built except that my breasts are rather small.
They seemed to stop growing when I was thirteen.
I have brown hair, fairly curly, and blue eyes.
My nose is sort of turned up, and I have a large mouth.
That is, my lips are too thick, I'm embarrassed by them.
But everyone says I have a nice complexion.
I used to suffer from spots, but they seem to have gone in the last year or two, I'm thankful to say.
Does that tell you enough?
If not, tell me what else you want to know.
I would like to be completely open with you, only please don't tell my master.
I don't want to overcome these desires.
They give me very great pleasure and delight.
You didn't say anything about the masturbation.
Is it so very wrong?
Did you feel like washing your hands of me again?
I've been thinking about what you said, that it's very rare for a woman to feel as I do.
Isn't it because women are by nature inferior, and know it, so usually there is no need for them to crave to be treated as inferior?
Then why am I different?
I suppose I was never contented with half measures.
I am sorry your life is so burdensome, I only wish I could help in some way.
When you said you came from good tough stock it made me shiver a bit.
How I wish I could find a master like you, tough and strong.
By the way, do you have children?
I know next to nothing about you also.
I only know you are very kind and wise.
Sincerely yours, Sophie Arandt
Vienna Dear Fräulein Arandt, Thank you for your letter.
I am very sorry you feel no desire to overcome this condition.
I shall not abandon the effort to persuade you otherwise.
When I wrote that I would need to know more about you, I wasn't thinking in terms of your physical appearance.
I am particularly interested in details about your parents.
Has either of them suffered from insanity?
Masochism is congenital; that is to say, you must have inherited it.
Not infrequently the father of a masochist can be shown to have had some abnormal development of the brain.
I cannot agree that women are the inferior of men.
However, in terms of social arrangements, you are not too far off the track.
In these civilised times, husbands are no longer given the right to beat their wives (and in earlier centuries, even kill them), but society, as well as biology, still places the female in a subordinate role.
A man, if he needs to express masochistic impulses, must put a great deal more effort and imagination into it.
I do not wash my hands of you because of your masturbation; but it is a lowering, weakening habit and I strongly urge you to give it up.
Tell me about your parents.
Sincerely yours, R. von Krafft-Ebing
Frankfurt Dear Professor, I do not feel I can talk about my parents.
Somehow it doesn't seem respectful.
They are just a decent, nice couple.
I am sorry if I cannot fulfil your request on this point.
Of course if you were my master — I don't mean like Dr Grossman but my real, still-undiscovered master — you would have a right to ask anything of me; but that cannot be.
When I got to the part of your letter about masturbation, I went to my room and masturbated.
I'm sorry!
Your tone was so stern and pure and preachy, it excited me.
I often get excited in church.
I sometimes stimulate myself under my muff.
My muff under my muff!
But I will try to give it up.
I didn't understand some parts of your letter.
I'm a woman, or rather a girl, and not clever.
How can you say women are not inferior to men?
Take Frau Grossman, all she thinks about is finery and food, whereas Dr Grossman has his spectacles always in a book.
I think husbands should have the right to beat their wives, because they're so often vain and stupid and silly.
I do not suppose they should have the right to kill them, though I must confess the thought makes me a little excited.
I really do not think we are much brighter than monkeys, and monkeys are killed in experiments.
I have had a thrilling adventure!
There was a party for the servants in a neighbouring house, and a few of us were invited to it.
We had rather a lot to drink, and before I knew where I was I found myself being hustled into a broom closet by three men.
They started kissing and fondling me.
Of course I pretended to struggle, but I was really terribly excited.
Just the same, it wasn't wholly satisfying.
They were too drunk and crude, I want one man, one master, who I can respect but who won't respect me, and who will tell me what to do.
I am going to go into town more, on my night off, and just hang around where I'm told the prostitutes stand.
Of course I shan't sell myself, but it could be thrilling to see what happens.
Well, I must get back to work.
We are busy preparing for Christmas.
I wish you a Happy Christmas and remain, Your obedient servant, Sophie PS.
You didn't say if you have children.
Vienna Dear Fräulein Arandt, I am sorry you could not bring yourself to tell me about your parents.
But much more sorry that you have behaved in such an improper and perilous way.
Masturbation is undoubtedly damaging to the health.
Throwing yourself at men, men of gross natures, is a still-greater act of self-abuse, and I cannot warn you too strongly that you are placing yourself in the very gravest danger.
Give it up before it is too late.
Try and find yourself a nice, decent husband and settle down.
It is not good for a physician to confide personal details of his life to a patient.
I reciprocate your seasonal greetings.
Now I fear we really must stop corresponding.
I just have too much on my plate.
Sincerely yours, R. von Krafft-Ebing
Anna glanced at her watch.
If she rang now she might just catch Levkovich in his morning break.
Very quietly and gently she picked the phone up, and dialled the number of his school.
Dmitri stirred but did not wake.
She spoke in little more than a whisper: ‘Is it possible to speak to Comrade Levkovich?
…
Thank you.’
A few moments later she was saying: ‘Hello, Alexei, this is Anna Charsky.
I'm sorry to take up your time.
The grill of our cooker isn't working; I wondered if you could ask your brother-in-law to…
The thing is, I think I could get your car repaired for you.
I've met someone…
So if you could persuade your brother-in-law somehow to…
Splendid!
…
No, I haven't a cold: Dmitri's asleep and I don't want to wake him.
We'll be in touch.
Goodbye!’
Replacing the phone and lifting it again, she dialled.
‘Lisa, my dear!
How are you?
…
Listen, I can't stay for long, but I've twisted Dmitri's arm and he can find you a couple of tickets for Hedda!
…
Yes, it should be very good.
But I wondered if Alexei could do us a favour: a friend of ours has a problem with his car; do you think…
?
Ah, that's great!
Ask him to ring us.
Bye!’
Stealthily again she put down the phone.
Another problem solved.
But what resources of energy and cunning it took, just to survive.
Dmitri mumbled out of his almost-sleep: ‘Who was that?’
‘Lisa.’
‘Ah.
The grill.’
Then he was breathing gently again.
At the top of the Exit Cracks the three men stopped for a rest.
They squatted down on a narrow ice ledge.
They were at the foot of the Summit Icefield: only about 150 feet to go, and the weather reasonable.
The two Swiss in the three-man rope, Wyss and Gonda, had encountered the third, a Russian, at the base of the Exit Cracks.
The solo climber was in a bad way, and they invited him to rope up with them.
He spoke to the others now: ‘So — we've almost done it!’
Wyss, nodding, said, ‘It should be easy.’
‘I wonder,’ said Charsky, ‘if you both feel as I do.’
‘And how's that?’ asked Gonda.
‘Sad.’
‘Sad?’ they both exclaimed together.
‘Yes.
It's such a beautiful face.
The White Cobra.
The White Spider.
Call it what you like.
Beautiful, frightening and awesome.
In a way you feel it shouldn't be conquered.’
‘I know what you mean,’ said Gonda.
‘For years I studied photos and maps of it.
For two weeks Uli and I have spent every daylight hour gazing up at it, seeing it in its flesh and bone, so to speak, for the first time — yet so utterly familiar and loved.’
‘You're right — loved,’ agreed his comrade.
‘It looked small, too small for a camera.
Yet we could pick out every feature, as you know every pore on the face of a woman you love.
The First Pillar, the Shattered Pillar, Difficult Crack, the Hinterstoisser Traverse, the Swallow's Nest….’
Wyss took it on: ‘The Ice Hose, the Flatiron, the Waterfall Crack, the Traverse of the Gods, the Spider, Death Bivouac, the Longhi Ledge….
Places named sometimes after the dead, which adds to its beauty.
Yes, it's sad to be on the point of reaching the summit.’
‘We should give the face a chance,’ Charsky said.
‘Climb the rest of the way without pitons.’
The two Swiss stared at him as if he were mad; but then a wild humour came into their ice-rimmed eyes.
‘Why not?’ said Wyss.
‘A kind of Russian roulette.’
‘I'm game,’ agreed Gonda.
‘The odds are in our favour.’
They stood up and, abandoning their ice pitons, started up the last, short ice field, cutting foot holds with their picks.
They moved carefully, slowly; clouds blanketed them and then cleared; swirled around them again.
Wyss, in the lead, was only some fifty feet from the top when he saw a tiny movement in the snow ahead of them.
‘Brace yourselves!’ he cried.
It was only a very light avalanche: this close to the summit it had no time to gather power.
Just the same, Wyss found himself sliding, and sensed the others sliding back too, and nothing could stop them.
Charsky catapulted into a rocky obstruction after tumbling a thousand feet or so.
He heard the clean crack of a leg bone but did not lose consciousness.
The Swiss pair sped down over the Third Ice Field, zoomed out from the sheer rockface beneath it and landed with a crunch on the Second Ice Field; then, as limbs were torn from their bodies, they launched again off the cliff, landed on the First Ice Field, and again careened down the slope and zoomed out and down.
Vienna Dear Fräulein Arandt, It is a very long time since I heard from you.
I wondered how you are getting on?
Given your unusual tastes, one naturally worries.
Of course, I told you I had too much on my plate to be able to continue our correspondence, and I hope this is the reason you stopped writing.
On the other hand, similar statements of mine have never prevented you from writing back in the past.
I say that in all affection.
I would like to hear from you.
Sincerely yours, R. von Krafft-Ebing
Berlin Dear Professor, You will be surprised by my change of address.
I was so pleased to hear from you.
I am sorry I have been so long in replying but I only got your letter two days ago.
Frau Grossman was rather slow in forwarding it.
I was very upset by your note saying we shouldn't write to each other any more.
I got involved with one of the servants I told you about, that had pawed me about in a cupboard.
He made me do terrible things, things with animals, for instance.
Well, it is too disgusting for me to be able to tell you.
I was bitterly ashamed of what I was doing, or letting people do to me, but also of course I got to like it, and even crave it, in a manner of speaking.
The man in question, who is a good deal older than me, had no respect for me whatever, which I liked.
But the trouble was, he was so vile I couldn't respect him .
I have to have real respect for my master.
So to cut a long story short, in the end I managed to drag myself away from this man.
I remembered what you'd said about settling down, and as it happened I met a very nice young man from Berlin, a train driver.
He proposed to me and I said yes.
We got married last month, and now we have a tiny flat here.
I cook and wash and clean for my husband, and we are happy enough.
Of course he knows nothing about my real desires.
He treats me very well, which I find indescribably boring, but I don't reveal that to him.
I guess you can't have everything you want in life.
Receiving your letter brought so many things back.
I hope you are feeling less harassed than when you last wrote in the spring.
I would love to hear from you again, if you can spare the time.
Sincerely yours, Sophie Stolz
Vienna Dear Frau Stolz, Well!
I can hardly believe I am addressing a married lady!
My warmest congratulations.
Although you do not appear to feel the ardour which might be desirable so early in a marriage, you will find it has many rewards, I am sure.
As for myself, I cannot pretend that the time since we last corresponded has been equally fruitful or pleasant.
I have not felt terribly well; but no matter.
I half had it in mind to invite you to come and work for me here in Vienna.
It would have made it easier to help you, and I venture the opinion that our servants feel well treated.
Our household could do with some young life.
However, you have accepted a much more attractive situation!
I am delighted for you.
Sincerely yours, R. von Krafft-Ebing
Cautiously, trying not to waken him, Anna disengaged from the carezza .
Sliding out of bed, she headed for the bathroom.
She washed and dried herself between the legs and inserted a fresh tampon.
When she returned to the bedroom she was carrying a flannel.
His penis, still partially erect, was stained with her blood.
Very gently she started to clean him.
He flopped on to his back, gurgled like a sleeping infant, then opened his eyes.
‘I dozed off.’
‘Uh-huh.
It sounded as if you were having one long nightmare.
I wondered if I should wake you up.’
‘Really?
I don't think I was dreaming.’
Crouched over him, she wiped his balls clean then bent to kiss the tender, wrinkled skin.
His eyes shut again, and he stroked her hair.
‘It was wonderful, Anna,’ he murmured.
‘I think I like it even more than…than making love normally.’
He drew her down to kiss her.
‘Did you enjoy it?’ he asked as they moved apart.
‘Yes.’
‘You don't sound too sure.’
‘Oh, I am.’
‘Admit it, you were reading!’
She smiled, then brushed his mouth again with hers.
‘It didn't stop me enjoying it,’ she said.
He yawned, closed his eyes again and turned on his side.
‘I'm still so damned sleepy.’
‘Well, you can sleep.
But I must have a bath and get up, or I shall be late for work.’
just lie here for a few moments.
Please.’
Nestling against her, he stroked her back.
‘Your body is very beautiful still, Anna.
In fact I think it's becoming more beautiful.’
‘Nonsense!
Men don't age as we do.
And look how white I am compared with you; your tan still hasn't faded completely.’
Naples.
The beautiful, topless girls on the beaches.
‘I like you as you are.
You're a white mountain; the Eiger North Face.
Here's the Swallow's Nest.’
Blindly he moved his fingers to touch her between the thighs.
‘You're sure it's not Death Bivouac?
Or the Spider?’
‘No, no: the Swallow's Nest,’ he mumbled.
‘And here's the Traverse of the Gods.’
‘They're beginning to sag.’
She raised a hand to her breasts; he stroked her fingers.
He brushed a finger over her lips and her nostrils, murmuring, ‘And these are the Exit Cracks.
I felt I was filling you right up, right up to your lips.
There was no me and no you any more.’
He lay quiet, his eyes closed, and she stroked his nape.
Then she slid away from him, got out of bed and padded to the bathroom.
She ran the hot water.
While waiting for the bath to fill, she reflected on a fragmentary dream which, thanks to Dmitri, had surfaced in her memory.
She'd had a lover in Switzerland; ski slopes, snow-white sheets.
The lover was an English writer, known to her only by name.
He was a friend of Sergei Rozanov.
She liked Sergei a lot, had fancied him like mad when they'd first met, at the house of mutual acquaintances in Moscow.
Freud would probably have said the English lover was a mask for Sergei, with his deep respect for England.
And by coincidence, his letter of condolence had arrived.
Freud might have said her emotional life was frozen, like the Alps.
In a reversal of normality, the Eiger had stared through a telescope at her.
Dmitri, trying to be romantic, had found the same image.
It wasn't very flattering, being compared to a lifeless mountain.
10
I was roused from a deep sleep feeling dry in the mouth and hungover.
It was still dark.
The knocking that had woken me was repeated, and I heard Masha's voice.
Switching on the bedside light, I got out of bed and fumbled into my bathrobe.
I groped with glued-up eyes towards the door.
She stood, in her white dressing gown, looking as wan and bleary-eyed as I felt.
‘I'm sorry to disturb you, my dear.’
‘Come in.’
She ghosted past me, and curled up in an armchair.
She couldn't sleep, she explained.
She touched her cheek, wincing.
‘Is it hurting?’
‘Yes, a little.’
‘Shall I order up some juice and coffee?’
‘Not unless you want some.
Water will do.’
I went to the bathroom and filled two glasses.
I handed her the water and climbed back between the sheets.
I lit a cigarette, gulped the water, and started to feel a little better.
She picked up Memories & Hallucinations and idly turned the pages.
I had sent her a copy of my memoir, but her noncommittal letter of thanks had given no indication of whether she had read it.
Now she said ‘I was sorry you didn't mention our magical week in Switzerland.’
I nodded: wary.
Her eyes were bright, fixed on mine.
I wondered if her presence was an invitation; I felt that if I stretched out my hand to grasp hers she would have sat by me on the bed.
I evaded her eyes.
After a while she said, ‘Your account of how you wrote our books was very convincing.’
I felt myself blush.
‘A lot of that book is fictional.
You know how it is, Masha.
We live fictional lives.
Except when we fall in the bath.’
I looked at her again and she smiled fleetingly.
She put my book down, said for about the fourth time how sorry she was that she'd missed my reading, but she'd simply felt too shaky.
‘You missed nothing.
It was brave of you to improvise still — and to do it so well.’
‘Victor didn't think so.’
‘Screw him!’
‘Well, I didn't think I was much good either.
I followed you too slavishly.
It's always the same with women — no confidence.
Why did I have to rush out yesterday to Foyle's to buy Psychopathia Sexualis and Eiger, Wall of Death ?
Why did I have to borrow the correspondences?
Well, you roused my interest of course; but also I panicked, felt I must follow on from you.
I should have been able to say, Fuck you, I'll go my own way: as you did, as Sergei did.
Why are we so timid?’
I shrugged, and waited while she sat silently, her face lowered.
‘You're wondering why I've woken you up.
I've been thinking about Sophie.
I find her very disturbing; I just wanted some company and to talk.
Do you mind?’
‘Of course not.’
‘What made me develop her along masochistic lines?
I didn't intend to do so.’
I said it was always impossible to explain our spontaneous decisions.
It might mean nothing or everything.
‘What does Freud say about sadism and masochism?’
I tried to clear my sleepy brain.
She waited, sipping the water, her eyes fixed on me.
My memory began to clear.
‘I think he says they have their roots in normal human patterns — active and passive, male and female.
That's to say, it's natural for the male to be more aggressive because he's the one who has to penetrate.
And natural for the female to be more passive, because she's penetrated.
Sadomasochism is an extension of that.’
‘Then what about bisexuality?’
Her eyelashes dipped demurely.
‘Well, of course, he recognises that everyone's bisexual, so there's no simple division between aggressive males and submissive females.
Far from it.
In fact — ah, yes! it's come to me!
— the most interesting thing he has to say is that sadism and masochism are always present in the same person: a masochist is a frustrated sadist, and a sadist is a frustrated masochist.’
‘I see…
That could apply to Sophie.
In her situation, as a menial, she wouldn't have much opportunity to give pain to others.’
I nodded.
‘Opportunity — or perhaps willingness to do it.
One could be frustrated by conscience too.’
She would like some coffee after all, she said.
Decaffeinated.
And maybe some toast, since she'd missed dinner.
I rang room service.
The waiter, when he came, archly avoided looking at Masha.
Our amusement at his false assumption seemed to ease the tension between us.
She questioned why, since our meeting this time, there had been a barrier of reserve.
‘I think for my part it's because of Liubov,’ I said.
‘Ah, this coffee is good!’
‘But why?
What difference should it make?
I was married to Shimon when we first met, and that didn't put a wall between us.
Liuba doesn't try to own me.’
‘I don't know why it is…
I have the uncomfortable feeling that homosexual relationships exclude the opposite sex.
As a woman, married to a man, you had a close relationship with other women — your own kind — and also with men.
But living with another woman — it's like saying you can do without men altogether.’
‘But that's stupid!
I have loads of male friends.’
‘Of course.’
‘And I can still find some men sexually attractive.’
I took the plunge: ‘Sergei, for instance?’
‘Well, yes, he's quite attractive.’
She became involved with scraping butter and marmalade on to a piece of toast.
‘Only since he came out of the psikhushka .
And yet it's actually made him look much older and less attractive.
But he has a new power, don't you agree?’
‘Yes.’
‘Sexual attraction is very strange.
When you came to Moscow I found you intensely attractive; in Grindelwald too, with the mountains so atmospheric!
But this time, all that is gone; and it's not because you have aged a lot, or changed.
You still have the same elements of attractiveness, but I simply don't find you desirable any more.
I can sit here by your bed and simply feel affection.
I hope you're not offended.’
‘Of course not.’
‘Well, I'm glad.
So now we can be real friends.’
She paused, hesitated.
‘I wasn't telling the truth yesterday.’
‘About what?’
‘My fall.
There was none.
Well, I fell in bed rather than in my bath.’
She gave a slight, sad smile, stood up and took a few paces round the bedroom.
‘I must tell someone.
I've been unfaithful to Liuba.’
I said, ‘Well, that's not a surprise to me.
It's pretty clear you and Sergei —‘
‘Sergei?
Oh, no!
I wouldn't consider that being unfaithful.
With a man, I mean.
No, another woman…‘
She sat on my bed her face strained her hands clenched.
‘With Maria.’
‘Maria?’
‘María Sanchez.’
I exclaimed, bewildered, ‘But she must be seventy.’
‘Sixty-eight.
But she has such power, such spiritual power.
And those eyes…
You won't tell anyone, will you?
Because of her marriage and her religion, she's terrified of a scandal.
She comes to my room each afternoon.
She won't see me at night, because sometimes her husband rings up then.
She's so quiet, yet also terribly passionate.’
She touched her bruised cheek.
‘She did this to me.
It didn't seem wrong or perverted.
It was quite a heavy blow, quite out of the blue — yet I enjoyed it!’
Her eyes flashed defiantly.
‘I can't say whether I invited it or — or not; it just happened.’
‘But why should she want to hit you?’
She shook her head.
‘I don't know.
She's angry.
For not being Márquez.
For having spent most of her life, most of her energy, looking after her husband and children and grand-children.
For not having the obsessive singlemindedness — the bloody-minded selfishness — which permits a few male artists to be geniuses.
To be brigands of the wood.
But I'm guessing.
Maybe she just sensed what I needed — as you did, I'm sure, when you introduced those letters.’
It had disturbed her, though, she said: being struck hard on the face and finding she enjoyed it.
She'd felt emotionally shaky after; that was why she had given dinner and the theatre a miss.
She drained her coffee cup and put it down.
‘I must go and try to get some sleep.
You won't tell anyone, will you?’
‘Of course not.’
She bent, in a waft of musky scent, to kiss me on the cheek, rose, drawing the hem of her dressing gown about her, and left, shutting the door quietly.
* On a grey-miniskirted lap rested copies of Ararat, Swallow , and Sphinx .
Fiona Hayes-Drummond of The Times , languidly beautiful, confessed to having only dipped into them.
‘Isn't it unusual,’ she asked the Russians, ‘for a novelist to make open use of real, living people?’
Surkov: ‘It is unusual, but perhaps it should happen more often.
Perhaps every novelist should be compelled, by law, to write only about real, living people.
It would remove a lot of tedious fiction.’
Rozanov: ‘It is unusual, but I don't object to it.’
She turned her cool gaze on me.
I felt a helpless desire stirring.
I have always felt helpless and hopeless desire for beautiful, rich, elegantly dressed women.
‘Why did you do it?’ she demanded.
‘When I first met Sergei and Victor, six or seven years ago, they made a big impression on me.
As honest and honourable Russian writers, they seemed to me to be emblematic in some way.
I couldn't have got the same effect if I'd fictionalised them.’
‘You say…
’ She searched for the first page of Ararat .
‘'Sergei Rozanov had made an unnecessary journey from Moscow to Gorky, simply in order to sleep with a young blind woman.’’
She turned to Rozanov.
‘Did that happen?’
‘Certainly not.
It's clearly symbolic.
Every time a writer opens his notebook, or puts a blank sheet in a typewriter, he is making a journey to a young blind woman.’
She scribbled shorthand and asked, ‘So this isn't a sexist episode?’
‘In terms of the fiction,’ said Rozanov, ‘she is a sex object to Rozanov, clearly.
In the sense that he desires this unknown figure, he craves her warmth, her yielding flesh, her mystery.
Juliet was a sex object to Romeo, and vice versa.
It's simply a reductionist cliché used by feminists, it really has no meaning.’
‘You're a sex object to me at this moment,’ said Surkov.
‘Probably to all three of us.
What comes across to us most obviously is your electricity, your erotic charm.
Frankly I would love to go to bed with you; but that doesn't mean I fail to recognise that you have a mind, a spirit.
Indeed, I would not desire you if you did not have a mind and a spirit.
Why should we separate sex from the soul?
Sex object can be another word for soul object.
Sex is the soul's chief communication channel.
I would love to have yours open for me.’
Disconcerted, the young reporter re-crossed her shapely miniskirted legs and sat up straighter.
‘Did you have a — a threesome in bed with your mistress and a Canadian woman?’ she asked Rozanov.
‘Of course not.’
‘And did you attend a sex club in Washington?’ she asked Surkov.
‘As a matter of fact, I did; but like the novel says, I didn't take part.
It was research.’
She switched to me: ‘Why did you invent the threesome involving Rozanov?’
‘It was a symbolic act.’
Her biro hovered, waiting for more.
‘I don't believe in explaining symbols.’
Her biro dipped; a torrent of chestnut hair hung between her lowered brow and her lamb's-wool-sweatered bosom.
She raised her eyes to Surkov.
‘Did you ever interview the American President?’ she asked with a slight smile.
‘No, no!
But can I tell you something off the record?’
She hesitated.
‘Okay.’
‘I have slept with Mrs Gorbachev.’
Her large brown eyes widened.
‘How?
When?’
‘I'd have to know you a lot better before telling you such things.’
Ignoring the innuendo, she scribbled.
I said, ‘The novels are a mixture of fact and fiction.
Ararat is mostly fact;Swallow , where Victor interviews the President, is mostly fiction.
Sphinx , again, is largely true to life.
Well, except for the Russian actress who has an affair with a cardinal.’
‘In reality,’ Surkov interposed, ‘it was the Pope.’
She looked up sharply.
‘You're pulling my leg.’
‘No, there's this beautiful Leningrad actress who went to Rome for several months.
There's reasonable evidence that she was trying to ‘turn’ the Pope.’
‘I didn't dare to be truthful,’ I said, nodding agreement.
‘It weakened it; everyone knows cardinals have mistresses.
There's a fourth novel, called Summit …’
‘I didn't know about that.’
‘It's fiction.
A kind of divertimento .’
‘You've read all the novels, have you?’ she asked the Russians.
Yes, said Surkov, they took a great interest in my work; and Rozanov nodded.
She asked one or two cursory questions about their published work.
I felt guilty and embarrassed.
It was not enough that they had been questioned at length about a work in which they had secretly collaborated: they were now to be insulted by having their acknowledged work dismissed as of small account.
Yet Rozanov, at least, was much better than I, though little known in the West.
I admired their good humour, especially Surkov's.
I had always thought him to be egotistical and attention-seeking; but apart from mentioning his invitation to the Dukakis Inaugural, he answered modestly, even humbly: praising his friend's work and disparaging his own.
Raising her eyes to Rozanov, she asked in lighter tones how he was enjoying his first visit to England.
It was wonderful, he said.
He particularly loved reading the Sun .
He hoped she wasn't offended, as a Times reporter.
Today, for example, was the seventy-fifth birthday of the brassiere; but for a Sun feature called ‘All Our Breasterdays’ he would not have known this.
The poetry of England still flourished.
She smiled, scribbling, then closed her notebook; said it was also coincidentally the seventy-fifth birthday of a family friend, Lord Monkton.
She was having tea at the Dorchester with him; she had better go.
‘Thank you for your time.’
Surkov: ‘You're welcome.’
At the theatre that evening Masha, as a little-known curtain-raiser to Márquez, read simple lyrics, accompanied by her own translations, about the flora and fauna of Siberia.
She had used make-up skilfully to mask her bruise, and with the subdued stage light it was scarcely visible.
She concluded her performance — and rather stole Márquez’ thunder — with a moving, powerful ‘Elegy for a Nuclear Physicist’.
I felt hostile towards her.
I wished I had got in first by telling her I no longer found her sexually attractive.
I was too courteous, I decided, too afraid of hurting people's feelings.
At the end of the evening Surkov was surrounded by a group of admirers soliciting autographs, and he shouted at us to go on back to the hotel, he would join us in a while.
Sergei and Masha came to my room and I opened a bottle of mineral water: we all felt we needed to be abstemious.
While waiting for Surkov to arrive, Sergei spoke of the need to move the story on realistically and swiftly.
Masha had been fine last night, but we really couldn't afford any more dreams or letters.
The phone rang.
I picked it up.
It was Surkov.
‘I'm going for a drink with Miss Hayes-Drummond.
She wants the private details of my affair with Raisa.’
His voice sounded triumphant.
‘You'll have to count me out tonight, my friend.
Apologise for me.
I'll listen to the tape tomorrow.
Do svidaniya!’
‘He's seeing the girl from The Times ,’ I announced, stifling a black envy.
‘He says he'll listen to the tape tomorrow.’
‘Bastard!’ said Rozanov.
‘How does he do it?
Well, it's between you and me, Don.
We'll toss for it.’
He plucked a coin from his pocket, spun it into the air, and called correctly.
I felt a great relief at having lost the privilege of performing.
‘Okay.
How did it end?’ he asked.
‘Anna was running a bath, recalling her erotic dream about Switzerland.
Dmitri was still in bed, drowsy.
I guess he was going to have another dream.’
I smiled rather malevolently at Masha, who lay on a bed, her chin cupped in her hand.
‘Well, then — let's see…‘
Silence fell and endured.
He began to rub his jaw as if he was in pain; his normally pale face had turned white.
I asked him if he was okay.
He nodded, still clutching his jaw.
‘It's cold,’ said Masha.
‘Is the heating off?’
I felt the radiator, said, ‘No.’
Yet I shivered.
The lamplight suddenly went out.
We were in darkness, relieved only by a chink of light under the door.
From the direction of Rozanov came a voice, but it was unlike his.
It was the voice of someone old, with a speech impairment, and it was in German.
11
Existence almost unbearable.
Fortunately Schur promises to keep his promise.
‘Is this the war to end all wars?’ he asks.
‘For me at any rate, ‘I reply.
There will be a measure of relief even in Anna's sorrow.
I dream that we live in a mare's field.
It must relate to my first sight of my mother's genitals — but not the last — for we lived in just one room.
I could never see her thick black tuft of pubic hair without longing to go with my father into that dark Moravian pine forest, stretching all the way from the Carpathians, which surrounded our home.
The constant view of so much hair excited in me a love of nature, wild nature, that has never waned.
The hairs prickle on my nape whenever I see a picture representing a deep, dark forest.
I must go there.
If my past work has any value at all, it lies in my having exhorted my readers to love the forest depths; to feel the enchantment of their vast silences, their cunning hidden flowers; their murky scents; the sighing of their leaves; the teasing hints of sunlight or moonlight through the treetops. forests by coupling with his bride in full view.
My mother was a woman of great piety and orthodoxy; and when she allowed me to look into her forest depths I found them good.
Our room was an ark, and I had no wish for the dove to bring home a green leaf.
I hated the dove; I preferred the raven, that black leaf torn from the dark forest.
The other children, my playmates, meant little to me; so little that one day they all rose from the field and vanished, like angels.
Like my patient the Wolf-Man, I was fortunate or unfortunate enough to be lying awake in the night when the five candles of my destiny glimmered on the tree outside.
The candles glimmered on the moon-blanched tree like Christmas candles.
I have heard it denied that the candles — different candles — glimmer for every child when he or she reaches the age of three or four, but of course that denial is nonsense; simply, most children are asleep in the depths of the night when the candles shine out.
They represent the hand we have been dealt in life, for life.
In my case, the first and most important candle stood for the dark forest.
Ever and ever, as I have said, I return to it.
Another candle stood for the trivium, the place where three roads meet.
I know beyond question that I am Oedipus and he is I. I should make it clear that I hold no truck with the theory of reincarnation; it is just as clear to me that I am Marie Romanov, whose life overlapped with mine.
But that past tense, ‘overlapped’, is simply a necessary fiction.
All life is contemporaneous, is now.
At this very moment, Oedipus stands at the crossroads, killing the testy man, his father.
I am at that crossroads.
As with Oedipus, often we are compelled to relight the candle against our will.
It was the case with my first sexual experience.
The young woman in question, a casual acquaintance of my family in Vienna, had inflamed me with cunning caresses.
She was the type of young woman who loves danger; and she insisted that we lie down in the entrance way to a park.
At night, carriages containing prostitutes and their clients would come hurtling out of the park towards the entrance, and they could come from two directions.
Because the drives curved, it was impossible to see the carriages before they were almost on top of you.
We lay down and made love, in extreme danger.
Since I was unprepared, lacking a condom, she and I were endangered from two directions in another sense also: from disease (for we were strangers to each other), and from a pregnancy desired by neither of us.
It would have been so easy and commonplace to move into some bushes; but my partner insisted that I light my second candle.
A third candle was ambivalence, and usually takes the form of two women who are close allies and rivals.
The woman Rebecca, my father's childless and rejected wife, haunts my early years.
I would often see her watching me as I played in the fields.
She was close at hand at my birth as well as at my conception; and she and my mother were often together.
What my father felt about this conjunction I can only guess.
When we moved from Freiberg, Rebecca followed us at a distance.
I don't know where she lived, but years later, as I walked to the gymnasium , I would often turn a corner and see Rebecca's burning eyes.
I hated Vienna, because we now had several rooms and so I was further from the forest.
Days and nights merge in a common pain, relieved scarcely at all by Schur's drugs.
I dream that I am visited by a poet called T. S. Eliot.
This is surely a babyhood memory, slightly corrupted, of seeing the word ‘toilets’ reflected fleetingly in my nurse's spectacles when we travelled from London to Dover to sail for the continent.
A great fuss was made of us on that trip, according to my mother.
As well as our maid, Martha, we had her sister Minna with us.
I was very upset, I have been told, because we had to leave our chow, Lün, behind owing to quarantine restrictions.
En route for Austria, we stayed overnight in Paris.
For many years I was convinced we stayed with a lady by the name of Marie Bonaparte.
I think it likely that some enthusiastic exponent of Paris's history must have spoken the names Marie Antoinette and Napoleon Bonaparte in my hearing.
It would be extremely tedious to go through my life chronologically; therefore I shall break off, from time to time.
From time to time is a meaningless phrase, all time is instant.
The fly, which has settled on my forehead and reads to me from the Sixth Book of the Aeneid , is the same fly which buzzes round the head of Virgil in Mantua.
Man is more individuated than a fly, but not by a great margin.
I know, for instance, that I am Marie Romanov, struggling through snowdrifts in the Winter Palace in Petersburg, and finding the gold clock still ticking at her bedside.
I have even dreamed as Marie Romanov; a nightmare in which I and all my family were taken down into a cellar and shot.
They say the child is father to the man; yet looking back, across those immensities, those aeons, separating myself now from myself then, I can see almost nothing that I owe to him, almost nothing we have in common.
Yet also, at the same time, I smile with his smile, weep with his tears.
And my beloved mother — can it be that she ever existed?
The years without her stretch away; years in which I have done without her well enough, have been sometimes happy, sometimes sad for other reasons than her eternal absence.
And yet the years have lessened the gap in age between us: she is more like a sister to me now.
Sometimes I find myself calling her, in my thoughts, ‘Anna’, as a brother would, or even a father.
When I am being helped into a bath of hot water, however, I draw in my breath and cry out for her: ‘Mama!
Mama!’
To tell you something very strange, there are times when she returns, and fusses over me as before.
I said to Schur, after reminding him of his promise, ‘Tell Anna.’
Isn't that odd?
I understand life, and the family ties that make up almost all of it, much less than I ever did.
Families are like constellations of stars: we see each one as an entity, because they make some recognisable design, yet the individual stars are scattered all over the universe, apart.
And marriage?
It is like an endless, exhausting game of tennis, deuce after deuce.
No wonder its most common term is love.
Anna, my mother, is standing beside me now, I sense it.
She has returned again, and feels lost, unable to do anything for me.
A dream I had not so long ago took me back to my first year in Vienna.
I am waiting for my Mama, and neither Martha nor Minna can comfort me.
She is away for hours; perhaps a whole day.
I think she has left me forever.
She went away with some men in brown uniforms and will not come back to her little boy.
I do not understand the memory.
I scarcely know which is memory and which the recent dream.
The men in brown uniforms must belong to the dream: an image of defecation.
My mother would never have left me without telling me when she would be back.
She was not the kind of mother who by carelessness would make her child feel insecure.
I was quite sick at the time.
I was a very sickly child, and so my memories of those first years are dark.
I was in bed almost continuously.
There was something wrong with my mouth, which stopped me from talking properly.
I remember I had a dream, when I was five or six, of all the books in my mother's library being thrown on to a bonfire with piles of other books and burnt.
I must have been jealous of her life away from me, and wished to have her entirely to myself.
Ah! a very early memory…just a flash.
An autumnal garden bordered by shrubs…a maid, Paula, trimming them.
I am in a swing couch.
The garden resembles what I have been told of Primrose Hill.
Nothing connects.
Nothing —
The clumsily articulated, yet effortlessly accurate, German came to a sudden halt.
I was aware of Sergei and Masha only as invisible presences in the blackness.
I was bathed in a cold sweat.
Startlingly, then, a voice rasped in an American accent: ‘War is a sonofabitch.
I was a crew member of the Enola Gay, the B29 that dropped a bomb on Hiroshima.
That's a big enough weight to carry.
But there's something else.
I was in Sydney for a few weeks, and had an affair with a broad.
She was nice — well stacked.
Her old man was away fighting.
They had a little baby, a girl.
I was fond of her, she reminded me of my own kid back home.
This is going to sound pretty stupid, but before I left I put one of the baby's diapers in my kitbag.
I knew there'd be some big raids.
I had an idea that if I dropped this diaper when we unloaded our bombs, it might help some mother.
You know, kids get shit scared when the bombs are falling.
‘It sounds crazy.
Well, I was more than a little crazy in those days.
I'd flown too many missions, seen too many of my friends blown to pieces.
It sounds crazy to think some Jap mother might see a diaper floating down out of the sky lit up by flares and fires and grab it to put on her crying baby.
You could say I meant it as a gesture.
Of human feeling.
So I took it with me on the Hiroshima mission.
‘But this is what really gets at me: when we started our run in, and I picked up the diaper, I found it was already stained.
It was yellow and shitty.
I thought I'd picked it up off a clean pile, but I was mistaken.
‘I still dropped it, just as the first shock wave struck us.
We turned round for a look.
It was a beautiful, clear day.
The cloud was already at our height 33,000 feet.
And below us, it was like boiling tar in a barrel.
I thought, somewhere down there is a shitty diaper.
I couldn't even get that right.
Fuck it!
Anyway, why should I care about those yellow motherfuckers?’
12
My eyes shut, I could see that napkin fluttering down through the mushroom cloud.
There was a thud.
Opening my eyes I saw that Rozanov had pitched to the floor.
The lamplight flickered on.
He lay still, poleaxed.
Masha and I rushed to him.
We tried to rouse him but to no effect.
We became alarmed.
I felt for his pulse, but could feel none.
Masha unbuttoned his shirt and slid her hand down.
After a few moments she said, ‘My God, I think he's dead.’
Jumping up, I lurched to the phone.
I have never been competent in an emergency, and time was lost as I tried to figure out whether to dial 999, or 9 for an outside line then 999.
Masha, kneeling, was pressing her mouth to Rozanov's, attempting to force life into his body.
At last I got through, demanded an ambulance, and had to ask Masha for the number of the room.
She pulled back from him, sitting on her haunches.
‘It's no good.
I'm not even sure if I'm doing it right, or if it's the right thing to do.’
I helped her to her feet and hugged her.
She started to cry.
She snuffled into silence and we stood there, facing each other, feeling helpless.
I sensed from her wide, fearful eyes, that she was dreading the prospect of having to ring Moscow and wake Sonia up in the middle of the night, telling her Sergei was dead.
‘We must try to contact Victor,’ she whispered.
‘Did he tell you where he'd be?’
‘He was going back to her flat.
I'll see if she's in the book.’
I reached for the thick directory.
‘He'll have to call Sonia,’ she said.
‘She must be ex-directory.’
I put down the book and accepted a drink.
‘What's going on?’ asked Rozanov, opening his eyes, staring up at us.
‘Sergei!
Oh, thank God!’
We fell joyfully upon him, Masha devouring him with kisses.
‘We thought you were dead.
Are you all right?’
‘Perfectly.
I could do with a drink.’
We helped him get to his feet and into a chair.
‘I saw Freud,’ he said, gulping a brandy.
‘We know.’
I went to the phone, dialled the front desk, and awkwardly explained that an ambulance would be coming.
But the patient was okay, it was a false alarm, please thank them and send them on their way.
The uninterested male voice promised to do so.
‘You spoke in German,’ I pointed out to Sergei.
‘Can you speak German?’
‘Not a word.’
‘That's extraordinary!
There was even a Viennese tinge to your pronunciation.’
He had met Freud in a dark forest.
The spirit, wearing wolf skins and an eagle's mask, had read to him a kind of autobiographical fragment.
‘He told me he wrote it to distract him from pain in his last days.
His daughter destroyed it.
I'd like to hear what came out.
Will you translate it for us?’
I stopped the still-running tape, then ran it back.
We heard the wail of a siren approaching the hotel, below us.
It stopped.
A couple of minutes later the night silence outside was broken by the sound of a vehicle, presumably an ambulance, starting up and moving off.
It might have been carrying Sergei's lifeless body: so thin a line divides the dead and the living.
Playing the tape, I paused it every few seconds to translate.
They listened in fascination, but it was the American airman's account that spoke most deeply to us.
Rozanov had not seen the man, in any form, nor had he been aware of speaking those words.
He was very affected; he blinked rapidly as if warding off tears.
Perhaps, Masha said, he had been influenced by Surkov's story of London's near extinction.
But I pointed out that Sergei's Southern accent had been perfect.
We were silent.
Exhausted.
Agreed to call it a night.
We rose, from chair or bed, slowly and stiffly.
Masha hugged Sergei, thanking God again that all was well.
We said our good nights.
I had a dream in which my ex-wife, Ingrid Bergman, suggested we sit in class with our son, to make sure he was getting along happily at school.
It felt quite pleasant sitting at a desk, being taught geography and physics again, and keeping an eye on our son.
The only problem was that my present wife, Isabella Rossellini, also insisted I come to lessons with our daughter, to make sure she was happy.
I felt embarrassed, being in different classes with two different women.
And before I could resolve the problem I was struggling up in bed, in the pitch blackness, reaching for the shrilling telephone.
It was Surkov.
His agitation seemed an aspect of my fading dream, and it was several moments before I could take in what he was saying.
He was at a police station, being questioned.
He had been accused by Fiona Hayes-Drummond of raping her.
He was innocent.
The woman had allowed him to make love, but afterwards had started crying and screaming.
She had to be crazy.
He had left and walked back to the hotel, and by the time he reached it the police were waiting for him in the lobby.
This was the one call he was allowed.
He had tried his/Sergei's room first but could get no answer; presumably Sergei was with Masha.
Could we for God's sake do something?
I caught a man's voice behind him, low, authoritative, then the link was cut.
I paced around smoking while I decided what to do.
I thought I'd try their bedroom again, and the call was answered by Rozanov.
I gave him the bad news without preamble.
He uttered a Russian oath.
I said Victor had tried to call him first but could get no answer.
There was a momentary hesitation before he explained that he'd only just got to the room, he'd felt too disturbed by the shamanistic experience to sleep and had sat in the hospitality suite reading.
It sounded lame, but his nocturnal practices were his own affair; we had something serious on our hands.
We agreed that the accusation was obviously nonsense, but I warned him that rape, like child abuse, was a powerfully charged topic at present in England.
We had to hope the police would release him after questioning.
There was nothing we could do for poor Victor at five in the morning; we should meet for an early breakfast and decide then what to do.
Sergei said he would ring Masha and tell her.
We gathered, the sole figures in the restaurant, gaunt-eyed and pale.
At this murky hour the luxurious hotel had a seedy, spiritless air, matching our mood.
None of us had slept in the intervening hours.
Sergei had not been idle; he had gone to the lobby for a chat with the night porter.
Yes, a couple of policemen had turned up, at around two, and waited for Mr Surkov.
On the latter's arrival, they had talked to him for a while and then he had gone off with them.
‘I slipped him a tenner to keep quiet.
We don't want this to get around if we can possibly avoid it.’
Rozanov, it was decided, would head for the Soviet Embassy.
Masha and I would visit a friend of mine in Holborn who knew one or two influential people.
I went back to my room and took a long bath.
Just after nine we set off in a taxi and dropped Rozanov off outside his embassy in Kensington Gardens.
My friend in Holborn rang a friend who rang the Chelsea police and found they were taking the accusation very seriously.
Mr Surkov would get the chance of seeing the duty solicitor.
My friend's friend advised us on the best solicitors for a rape case, but warned that the final bill might be enough to buy a flat in Mayfair.
In any case there was no point approaching anyone today, a Friday: they'd all be intent on an early departure for their weekend retreats.
Best to let Mr Surkov see the duty solicitor on legal aid.
Masha and I found further cause for depression as, walking in search of a tube station, we came to a major intersection, a roundabout of relentless, screeching vehicles, three and four abreast: for in the centre, on the small concrete island, we saw a man lying on his side.
A tramp, a derelict.
Presumably he was drunk, but he might have been ill, or even dead.
There was no break in the mad traffic pouring from half a dozen streets; no way to reach him.
And no one else seemed to notice him.
So much, said Masha, for ‘no man is an island.’
We ourselves did nothing.
We felt helpless.
Rozanov was back before us.
He'd had little luck with the embassy.
They couldn't interfere.
He'd managed to persuade them to get a message through to British Intelligence: the words ‘Prime Minister’ and ‘Cadogan Square’.
Victor had bragged, absurdly, that he'd had a five a.m. rendezvous with her at a private house in Cadogan Square, just before her flight to Poland, and that ‘the earth had moved’.
‘He was almost certainly lying,’ Sergei said, ‘but it seemed worth a try.’
We all confessed ourselves exhausted, and headed for our rooms, though I guessed Masha would not be resting.
It was time for her afternoon appointment.
I didn't imagine Surkov's misfortune would entirely spoil her amorous pleasure.
For myself, I lay down with nothing more erotic than the Guardian .
I turned to the arts page which, every day this week, contained interview-portraits of two festival writers.
Today they were Jack Lamont, a novelist from Canada, and Geraldine Porter.
Lamont turned out to be an egotistical womaniser who had selfishly kept his marriage of twenty years intact; Porter, a woman of integrity, now on her fourth marriage and deeply fond of both her disturbed children.
I dropped the paper to the floor.
I closed my eyes.
The pressure, not of this day alone but of all our nights of little sleep, overcame me.
Darkness had fallen — in fact it was approaching midnight — when I joined the others in Sergei's room.
They too had slept and had missed both dinner and the theatre performance.
I brought grim news, and I delivered it with a certain mournful pleasure.
There is always a mournful pleasure in being the bringer of bad news, unless it affects you or the recipients intimately.
The duty solicitor had contacted me at Surkov's request.
He had been charged with the rape.
He would be appearing at Marylebone Magistrates’ Court on Monday.
‘The police are opposing bail,’ I said, tossing back a whisky.
‘They're afraid he'll skip the country, or try to intimidate the victim.
In any case, you're almost never bailed for a rape charge.
‘Did this man tell you what's supposed to have happened?’ asked Masha.
‘According to Hayes-Drummond, Victor drank too much and started pawing her around.
She tried to fob him off tactfully at first, but then he became brutal.
She has bruising on her wrists from where she says he held her down.’
‘Jesus!’ growled Rozanov.
Masha touched her cheek involuntarily.
‘Victor's story is that she was willing, she undressed and led him to the bedroom.
When they started making love she protested a little, but he thought this was just talk, since she was kissing him and caressing him.
It was only later on that she started protesting strongly, and by then it was too late, he was close to coming.
He's quite badly marked too.’
Masha: ‘So it's bad.’
I nodded.
‘Victor's a disreputable alien.
Hayes-Drummond is a respectable columnist, ex-Cambridge, aristocratic connections, her father an Old Bailey judge.
Who will the jury believe?’
‘Shit!’ murmured Rozanov.
‘It's crazy.
Victor's no rapist; he can get any girl he likes.’
‘They believe he took his revenge on Imogen,’ I continued.
‘This woman's a similar type to his English wife, and they've read that they've split up acrimoniously.
The lawyer thinks it'll be a sensational case, and I'm sure he's right.
All the feminists will be gunning for Victor.’
Secretly, though I had every sympathy for Surkov, I thought him much more likely to have raped a woman when drunk than Miss Hayes-Drummond was to have made a false accusation.
I had observed with what relish he had improvised a rape — of a Soviet actress — for a scene in one of our novels.
I had heard how lightly he dismissed the horrific offences of incestuous abuse.
And I had read many of Miss Hayes-Drummond's pieces in The Times — admirably rational, objective and sincere.
I thought it probable the police were right, he had sought revenge against Imogen Surkov for separating him from his nice third wife, Vera, and their son.
Which would make it a crime passionnel , and therefore deserving of compassion; but he would get none.
I expressed these feelings, in a censored form still more sympathetic to Surkov.
‘It may be so,’ said Rozanov.
‘Love is the most irrational of instincts, and Eros infinitely subtle.’
Masha: ‘It's perfectly possible for a woman to be responsive to a sexual advance and yet feel she has been compelled.
I've experienced it myself.’
‘So have I,’ said Rozanov thoughtfully.
‘But the law is pre-Freudian, crude — even in this country: right?’
I nodded.
‘So what sentence can he expect?’ asked Masha.
‘Five years.
No judge would dare to give less.
It's a bad time to commit rape.’
Rozanov groaned.
He was in a black hole, reflected Masha.
If it was some horrible misunderstanding, he couldn't talk to the girl to try to clear it up; instead, he had to be kept in prison to prevent any possibility of contact.
We thought of him lying in a cell.
That first night of captivity, said Rozanov, was unforgettable.
I tried to imagine it.
The nearest I could get was my first night in a barracks in Shropshire, at the start of National Service.
Should Victor's daughter be told?
Katya Surkov was living in Rostov; Sergei could probably find her number in Victor's address book.
Yes, he should probably call her — later, around breakfast time in Rostov.
Though she wouldn't be able to do anything.
And what about telling the festival people?
Jock would go crazy.
Surkov was due to perform tomorrow night, to a sell-out audience.
‘We must change our plane tickets, Sergei,’ said Masha.
‘We have to be in court on Monday; he must see that we're right behind him.’
He nodded.
‘Of course.’
I saw the outlandish figure shuffling into the dock.
The word ‘rape’, enough to freeze the bones of everyone there.
‘Will we get a chance to speak to him?’ she asked me.
‘I don't know.
I doubt it.’
‘Can we at least get some fresh clothes to him?
Some books?’
‘I don't know.
I'll ask the solicitor.
He's given me his home number.’
We lapsed into depressed silence.
Then Masha said we should improvise, for Victor's sake.
It meant a lot to him that we try to create a novel.
Rozanov said, yes, we must go on.
I agreed.
In any case, none of us felt like sleep.
Was it to be Masha or I?
She and I would toss for it.
The task fell to me.
I dragged my mind back into the world of Anna and Dmitri Charsky.
They had got lost along the way.
We still knew very little about them.
Our ‘novel’ was almost certainly a write-off, but that in a sense gave a kind of freedom.
It didn't much matter what I came out with.
My stomach rumbled.
I was hungry, but room service was extortionately expensive and it would do me no harm to fast for one night.
The lamplight was dimmed; I withdrew into my reluctant imagination.
13
Anna lay back in the bath, staring at the wall tiles.
Threads of blood mingled with the foam and hot water.
She agitated the water and dispersed the traces.
The sign of her barrenness filled her with depression, and as usual she couldn't prevent an irrational moment of anger with Dmitri for being sterile.
Dunya, the cat, was perched precariously on the rim of the bath, gazing at her with ancient green eyes, her paws extended sphinxlike.
She always liked to watch them bathing, for some reason.
Lying back, sponging soapy breasts, Anna wondered if she really loved her husband, and if he really loved her.
He'd as good as admitted he'd gone off her sexually by saying he preferred just resting in her, motionless.
Emotionless?
Oh, he was very good with compliments, but what did they mean?
No longer did he ask her for cuttings of her pubic hair!
— Now that, she could see, it was thinning out.
No, it's not his fault, she said silently to Dunya; he's a good husband and I do love him, I suppose.
But there's no language for love after twenty years of living together, mostly in the same rooms.
If we'd had a child there would have been movement; we'd have watched him growing up, seen him change, worried about his schooling, and so on.
There would be family snaps.
You can't have family snaps when there's just the two of you and a cat.
There has to be some dynamism in love.
She thought of the Richard-Sophie letters.
That relationship did not stay still.
The man and the woman tugged at one another, and fought one another , like earth and moon.
She and Dmitri could still be here when they were seventy.
He might still be saying — lying through his teeth — that her breasts were as firm as ever.
She kneaded her sagging breasts, searching anxiously for a lump; all was well.
And I still don't feel I know him, Dunya!
He's too familiar.
I must seem just the same to him.
A long marriage is like the bath foam covering the water — until, in the end, it's all foam and no water.
These women he slept with casually when he was touring — they knew him better than she, because they got an instant, naked impact.
He must sleep with other women.
He was charming, and found women desirable, so inevitably he weakened from time to time.
Why, Anna herself had weakened once, and she had far fewer opportunities.
She'd received only two or three serious propositions throughout her marriage — serious in the sense of coming from a man of intelligence and sensitivity — and to one of them she had yielded, in a matter of weeks.
And Dmitri must sometimes get propositioned two or three times a week!
This film director, Bella Kropotkin, was undoubtedly after him, and undoubtedly he would take advantage of it — tonight!
The casting couch, they called it.
Bathing always made her think of childhood.
She could vaguely remember her mother bathing her, but mostly she recalled her grandmother's strong arms.
She felt, at this moment, like crying out, ‘Mama!
Papa!’
They were lost almost beyond memory.
She shivered with cold, even though the bathwater was still warm; and she pulled herself up, causing a big splash and sending Dunya leaping for safety.
Death…
She had a sudden fearful vision of everyone in the world, the untold billions, including Gorbachev and Reagan, engaged in desperate meaningless activity to stave off the horror of death in life, the accident of life.
Life was a cinema screen, in an infinite darkness.
There was no projectionist nor projector, nor audience, nor theatre, nor a surrounding city.
Just a cinema screen.
Where characters appeared and disappeared at random, and the plot was therefore ever-changing and never got anywhere.
Many with whom she had shared the screen for a brief while, people whom she had revered, who had even seemed to define life — such as Akhmatova and Pasternak and Vysotsky — had already slipped out of the plot, and the film churned on as if they had never been.
There were others, friends, who had not died, but had departed from Russia, never to return.
Glasnost had come only just in time to prevent all the interesting, intelligent spirits from vanishing.
Unless, indeed, it actually increased the incidence of emigration!
She thought of three couples, friends, who had managed to get to Israel after a bitter struggle.
They had left a gap in the life of the city.
She contrasted their fortitude and determination with her own weaknesses.
Filled with world-weariness and self-disgust, she towelled herself zealously, as if wishing to flay herself.
Squatting, she performed the familiar ritual of menstruation.
She returned to the bedroom, slipped on pants and bra, then the overalls she wore for the factory.
Dmitri was breathing nasally.
It was almost like an old man's breathing — almost as old Yury had breathed during sleep.
Perhaps her husband was faithful to her, as he swore; in her present mood, that seemed just as deplorable as his imagined infidelities.
She sat on the bed beside him, putting on her socks.
His chin and cheeks were stubbled, his mouth was open.
Who are you? she asked silently.
What's in your soul?
Supposing there were a heaven, I couldn't stand an eternity with you.
I'd want to see you often, but not in a special way.
Rather viciously, she jerked a comb through her short hair.
In the living room she picked up a couple of wine glasses from the floor and set them down on a coffee table.
After this slight rearrangement of the chaos she paced restlessly up and down.
Pausing by the window, gazing at the apartment building opposite, she had an urge to punch her fist through the glass.
‘I'm having two poems published in Novy Mir ,’ she said aloud; ‘Dmitri's had some good luck too.
The summit looks like being a success.
It's a lovely day out.
I ought to be pleased.
Well, it's only the time of the month.’
Or the menopause!
That thought horrified her.
Mixed up with magazines and newspapers were the proofs of a book she had translated,Eiger, Wall of Death .
Dmitri had been checking it for misprints and left it to get messed up like this.
She tried to gather the pages into order.
The work had been incredibly boring; even with her husband's help it had taken an age to find out the Russian terms for the jargon of mountaineering, and the subject simply left her cold.
Heroism should have a moral or social purpose.
Dmitri agreed with her, and they had had a passionate argument last night with Marchak, who drove racing cars, and Frolovna, who had loved a matador for two weeks in Spain.
Yet now, today, she could feel the attraction of hacking one's way almost perpendicularly up an ice field, in imminent danger of being swept away.
Anything for some excitement!
She had always assumed that something would happen, sometime, to sweep away her marital comfort.
Perhaps Dmitri would find someone younger and more beautiful while on tour abroad, and would defect.
Perhaps — it had seemed for a short while — she herself might leave him.
Or else she and her husband would find some way of getting out of Russia and would share the entrancing hardship of starting afresh in the West.
And these possibilities made her cling to her actual existence with pleasure.
Whereas now…
Now they would go on lying together, here.
And the years would pass.
She crouched before a coffee table on which rested, between a wine bottle and a dirty plate, a copy of Hedda Gabler ; imagining she was feeding a manuscript into a stove, she murmured fiercely: ‘I am burning our child, I am burning our child!’
She felt destructive, like Hedda.
She felt tired of her life, tired of her self-consciousness.
How lucky Dmitri was to be able to stride on stage and become someone entirely different.
She supposed it gave him his equanimity.
He seemed to engage in a continuous carezza with himself.
A glance at her watch told her she would have to leave to catch a tram in half an hour.
She wandered into the study, thinking she would work on a poem, whose first line would be, ‘Yes, I remember the Stockhausen’.
But seeing the confusion on her desk, all the things that had to be done, she lost heart.
There was so little time to write.
Mind you, it was partly her fault; they could afford to live without her factory work, but it gave her some company and a feeling of contributing to society.
Sitting on the studio bed to the right of her desk and chair, she recalled old Yury lying there, for most of the hours of the day and night, and felt relieved, for his sake, that he was gone.
Death had been a merciful release for him.
Even Dmitri's sorrow had been mostly used up by the fading of his father's life, remorselessly, year by year.
His psyche had chosen to fly during what was to have been a two-week visit at their flat rather than fifteen storeys up in his own dismal, run-down tower block, alone with his nagging wife.
Just the day before the fatal collapse Konstantin, Dmitri's brother, had come for a meal.
His family all together.
It was good.
Still, she might have been nicer to the kindly old man.
There was always a certain resentment, whenever they came to visit, at having to give up her study.
She thought of Yevdoxia, his wife, dragging his decayed body and bruised mind around.
She was a hard-nosed bitch, but she'd had to be, to survive.
Gradually these musings dissolved into the main current of her thoughts, that vague depression and dissatisfaction.
An absurd idea took hold of her.
The more absurd it appeared, the more appealing it became.
Smiling to herself, she walked into the kitchen, switched on the kettle to make a drink, picked up the phone and dialled.
Charsky woke up to find his father, vividly present a moment before, vanished from the room.
Yet he felt convinced it had been more than a dream.
I must ring my mother, he thought, and tell her about it.
He stretched and picked up the phone, but before he could dial he realised he had cut in on a conversation.
Anna was talking to an old friend of theirs, Irena Ignatiev.
Irena was saying, in her quavery ancient voice, ‘Of course, I'll be in all evening, my dear; these days I'm always in.’
The grand old lady of the Arts Theatre was finding retirement almost unbearably tedious.
He thought of saying, ‘Hello, Irena!’ but it would have been a rude interruption and he replaced the phone.
He lay back, closing his eyes, and tried to re-constitute the extraordinary image and speech of his father.
He opened his eyes and sat up in bed as Anna came in holding a mug of coffee.
‘Thanks, darling.
I cut in on you.
I'm sorry.’
‘I thought I'd drop round to see Irena after work,’ she said.
‘You'll be very late, I guess?’
‘I guess so.’
‘Irena gets lonely.’
‘I know.
Invite her for a meal sometime.’
‘I'll do that.’
She circled the bedroom, tidying, picking up dirty clothes, ashtray, dirty plates, the glossy Italian magazine.
She stood with arms full.
‘Well, I'm leaving now.
The lounge is your job.
I hope it goes well with Kropotkin.’
‘Thanks.’
She leant over and he kissed her on the cheek.
When she had left the bedroom he heard her feet scurrying for a few minutes, then the door slammed.
At one of the tram stops on the way to the industrial estate where Anna worked, she saw an old lady in a shabby grey coat pull herself on, and recognised with surprise and a sinking of her heart her mother-in-law.
Yevdoxia revealed the same blend of feelings: the two women had a healthy disregard for each other.
Hatchet-faced, tough as the city's granite, Yevdoxia plumped herself down at Anna's side.
She'd just been visiting a widow of an old army friend of Yury's, who had a bad attack of flu.
Lots of people had flu.
Yevdoxia put it down to Chernobyl.
Now she was on her way to see a second cousin, who had the double misfortune of being a cripple and being married to a horrible man.
‘Butcher by trade and butcher by nature,’ said Yevdoxia tartly.
She stared at Anna's face.
‘You don't look too well.
You've got terrible shadows under your eyes and you're very pale, my dear.’
‘Oh, it's just the time of the month.’
‘You still have them , do you?’
Her eyes expressed incredulity that Anna hadn't reached the menopause.
‘I'm not that old!’
Anna snapped.
At once regretting that she had let herself become riled, she delved into her bag and came out with a bar of soap.
‘Here, ‘she said, ‘I managed to get some soap at —‘— The bedroom door opened and Surkov burst in.
We exclaimed our astonishment and relief, and rushed to embrace him.
Rozanov himself, in last night's shamanistic trance, had not risen more miraculously from the dead.
As befitted a resurrection, Surkov looked shattered.
‘Yes, I'm free,’ he confirmed.
Pulling off his black leather jacket and kicking off his shoes, he threw himself on to a bed.
Sergei thrust a drink into his hand.
‘I have to leave the country by Monday, but that's no problem,’ he growled.
‘What a fucking day!’
Hours of questioning, blood tests, sperm tests, photographs, examination of every inch of his body.
He'd been charged eventually and thrust into a cell for the night; then, half an hour later, without explanation, given his belt back and told he could go.
But what, we asked, had really happened?
Had she really changed her mind in the midst of having sex?
‘It seemed that way.
One minute she was enjoying it — oh, with a few protests thrown in, like she didn't know me well enough, she shouldn't be doing it, and so on— nothing serious.
And then, suddenly, she was struggling and screaming and I had to hold her wrists to stop her from scratching me.’
He pulled back his open shirt collar, showing us scars on his neck.
‘I just didn't see why I should stop, it was too late.
Maybe I did, technically, rape her.’
Surely not, we said, since she had plunged into it willingly.
‘Perfectly willingly.
We started necking on the sofa, and she undressed, and suggested the bedroom.
The bitch denied that, of course.
But why?
Why did she suddenly start screaming and scratching, and swearing that she'd get me?’
‘You touched some nerve, I guess,’ Masha offered, shrugging.
‘I tried to reason with her after, but she locked herself in the bathroom, crying.
So I dressed and left.
I wandered around for a while, in a bit of a daze, and then strolled back here.
They were here waiting for me.
She didn't waste any time…
Does anyone else know about this?’
We reassured him; no one knew, the night porter had been bribed to keep quiet.
‘Thank Christ.
Maybe we can keep it out of the papers.’
He accepted a refill.
‘She could be an old friend of Imogen's.
I wouldn't put it past that bitch to have set her up to frame me.’
We drank quietly.
Faintly Big Ben struck one.
‘It looked curtains for me,’ he sighed.
‘They told me her bra was torn.
But she turned to let me undo it and I got impatient with the damn thing.
That could happen to anybody.’
‘Still,’ said Masha, ‘you're free.
Thank God!’
‘I'm starving.
I've had nothing to eat since four o'clock.
A fucking cheese sandwich and tea with milk.’
‘Have something sent up,’ I suggested.
‘This is on me.’
I was feeling guilty, still, about the poor royalties they had had, as well as genuinely relieved at his freedom.
‘I could eat something too.
I'll have a hamburger.’
Surkov glanced through the room service menu.
‘I'd like a fillet with French fries.
And maybe a Waldorf salad to start.’
‘Fine.
I'll ring down.’
Masha and Sergei said they could eat a sandwich.
‘And why don't we have a bottle of champagne sent up?’
Surkov suggested.
He looked again at the menu and chose a Dom Perignon.
My blood froze as I looked at the prices.
This would cost me a fortune.
Then I accused myself of ungenerosity.
I could be a mean bastard at times.
I had had endless hospitality in Moscow, and it was only natural Surkov would want to celebrate.
I rang room service and placed the order.
‘So why do you think they let you go?’
Masha asked.
‘God only knows.’
‘I guess they realised she was telling lies,’ said Rozanov.
Unseen by Victor, he mouthed to me, ‘Maggie?’, lifting an eyebrow in query.
That possibility had already occurred to me.
And I became conscious that, alongside a genuine pleasure that he had been released, there was also a resentment that he had got away with it.
Whatever ‘it’ was.
Even by his own account, he had continued to make love to her when he knew she didn't want him to.
That behaviour demanded more suffering than just a few uncomfortable hours.
His cockiness would be unbearable from now on.
After a couple of glasses of champagne and a hamburger, and under the influence of my friends' euphoria, I cheered up.
Aware that he had broken in, Surkov urged me to go on improvising.
He was exhausted but not sleepy.
Masha sketched for him what had happened so far.
‘We'll dedicate this section to fucking Fiona Hayes-Drummond,’ he said in English, raising his glass.
The ambiguous obscenity seemed crude and callous.
His eyes gleamed malevolently.
At that moment, in my mind, the scales lurched against Surkov's version of events.
The others looked uncomfortable too, and none of us joined him in his toast.
When her mother-in-law got off the tram, Anna, waving to her, felt glad she had given her a bar of Zoya's soap.
And remorseful that she didn't like her more.
She wasn't a bad woman.
She was feeling her loss much more than she revealed; she was schooled in hiding her emotions.
There was no malice in her; on the contrary, she was kind.
These sick visits were genuinely meant to be helpful.
It wasn't her fault if she had a gift for putting her foot in it.
Her negative attitudes were the result of a harsh life: a sickly, poverty-stricken childhood, the horrors of the war, the struggle to bring up two children and look after an invalid husband.
I must be kinder to her, Anna thought.
She remembered an American Indian saying that you shouldn't condemn a man until you had walked a mile in his shoes.
Dmitri, trying and failing to reach his mother through the bedside phone, was also thinking about her a little more charitably.
She had had no life of her own for several years; if she went out for half an hour, she had to leave messages all round the flat, telling Yury she'd be back soon, otherwise he would panic.
And she could never be sure he wouldn't turn the gas on and forget to light it.
So now she was having a splendid time visiting friends, and who could blame her?
He rang his brother, who was in.
‘I've had a strange experience, Konstantin!
I'm sure Father was here!
…
Well, yes, I was just waking up, but I'm sure it wasn't a dream!
Much too vivid; my dreams are always so nondescript I always forget them, you know that.…’
I can't really blame her either, thought Charsky as he reclined in a hot bath, for feeling a sense of relief.
And yet it's rather cold-blooded.
She could at least pretend some sorrow.
She had superhuman control of her feelings.
If either or both of her sons had decamped to the West, she'd have shrugged her shoulders and got on with existence.
‘Well, anyway, there's no question of trying to get out now, ‘he said aloud, addressing the cat who had come and perched beside him.
‘We shan't have to look for another home for you, my friend.
Gorbachev is a good guy.
He'll drag this country into the West, as Peter the Great tried to do.’
The cat gazed sphinxlike into his eyes with every appearance of understanding.
It was a great relief that they would no longer have to scheme some way of getting Anna out, at the right moment, while he himself was touring somewhere.
They could go on living in this flat they both loved.
He would probably die here.
The thought was pleasing and oppressive at the same time.
They could become like the old couple in fathers and Sons —so entwined they would even look alike.
This thought, too, caused him a few moments of depression before it was drowned by feelings of tranquil pleasure.
Sliding deeper, he let the warm water lap around him.
Was this, he wondered — thinking of Freud — the amniotic fluid?
In the Leningrad of 1942, besieged by the Nazis, explosions everywhere, he could imagine himself shrinking from birth.
He hated seeing wartime documentaries; they didn't seem to affect Anna in the same way — she seemed to thrill with excitement as the guns flashed and the tanks churned through ruined streets.
Only now, he reflected, was he beginning to feel really secure.
He pulled himself up, towelled himself dry, then slipped into his dressing gown.
A peaceful lunch, some bread and cheese — or should he perhaps tidy the lounge first?
Neither.
He would get dressed.
Slowly: he felt pleasantly languid, a shade hungover still.
From long experience he knew the hangover would pass before it was time for him to stalk on stage and rebuke Hamlet for grieving overmuch for his father.
Halfway through dressing, wearing his shirt and underpants, he looked for Moda in the workroom, where he assumed she would have thrown it on their pile of magazines; he wanted to gaze at Bella Kropotkin again, but he couldn't find the magazine.
Well, it didn't matter.
Komarovsky!
That would be a splendid role!
To sit in a plush cinema with Anna, Mama and Konstantin on the first night, watching the titles unroll!
Dmitri Charsky!
Then observing himself as he fluttered and flustered the teenaged Lara in a restaurant!
Life was really opening up, thanks to Gorbachev.
He wondered if she would indeed try to seduce him.
It was conceivable; she had a reputation.
Well, she would not succeed.
Greater beauties than Bella Kropotkin had tried and failed.
The workroom was in a mess.
She hadn't really had time to set it straight since his father's death.
How strange, thought Charsky, that he had watched him fall asleep here on his last night on earth.
He'd been put to bed early, exhausted after a visit from Konstantin and his girlfriend.
Dmitri, typing letters of thanks for the Freud books sent by American friends, was a little irritated to be interrupted.
His mother, undressing the panting old man, had told her son not to disturb himself — Yury was almost asleep already.
Indeed, standing in his vest, his eyes closed, he was swaying like a punch-drunk boxer.
Yevdoxia had rolled him into bed then, kissing him, whispered not ‘Goodnight’ but ‘Goodbye’.
His father rolls on to his side, facing him.
One hand rests between his cheek and the pillow, cupping his head almost maternally; the other, hairy but oddly sensitive for so big and coarse a man, lies outside the sheet.
He continues to pant for breath.
His eyes open once, and he murmurs ‘Dmitri’ in recognition and greeting.
Charsky gazes at him for a long time, sadly.
Recalling those moments now, he opened Anna's file of typed poems, seeking the one she'd written, only a couple of weeks ago, about the funeral flowers.
There were several alterations in ink; she'd changed it again since he'd last looked.
And now it had a title: ‘Varvara’.
Varvara wants to put ‘Rest in Peace’ on Ivan's wreath.
Her son begs her to write ‘With Fondest Memories’, But she refuses.
‘I don't like lies, Not fondest memories.
No, not the last few years.’
She settles reluctantly for ‘God bless you, Vanya, And keep you safe’.
That's fairly meaningless In Varvara's eyes, not being religious.
Then there are problems of translation; A distant relative's long-distant and fairly Meaningless tribute, ‘We shan't forget old Vanya’, Gets translated into funeralese as ‘We shall never forget you’, which in turn Gets translated by a deaf florist into ‘We shall love you forever’.
So the world Maintains its confusion round the silent corpse Of the old warrior; and the flowers, Beset by astonishing messages, Wear his familiar, wry and bemused smile.
Charsky sighed.
The poem hurt him.
There was something cold-blooded about using his father's death to make a poem; she had changed the names so that she could attempt to get it published, and it was going to be.
Her response, when he'd said he hadn't read ‘Varvara’, had shown guilt.
Do I really know her? he thought.
There was something a little cold at her heart — as when she had picked up that book to read while he was fucking her.
Having been blessed with a cold mother, did I seek a cold wife?
He heard the phone ring.
He padded to the kitchen to answer it.
He recognised the drawling, somewhat condescending voice or Bella Kropotkin.
For a moment his heart sank, as he thought she might be cancelling their meeting.
But she was merely changing the venue.
‘I'm moving from the hotel.
It's perfectly dreadful!
Luckily some friends of mine, who are in Georgia at the moment, have said I can stay in their flat for a couple of nights.
It's very sweet of them.
Can you meet me there?
It's Flat 5, 238 Kirov Street.
Good!
It will be much quieter and more pleasant and there's always plenty to drink.
I'm looking forward to Hamlet , but I won't bother you at the theatre; I'll see you at the flat.
I look forward to meeting you immensely .
Goodbye.’
Charsky poured himself a glass of apple juice, then wandered back to the bedroom to finish dressing.
The change might be entirely innocent, the hotel might be dreadful — though it was the smartest in Leningrad; on the other hand it might confirm Anna's suspicions about the casting couch.
He would have to be careful.
He drew on socks, a tight pair of Italian jeans, and plimsolls, combed his receding hair before a mirror.
He mustn't foul up tonight.
He addressed to the mirror a few noble lines of the ignoble king.