

‘No longer content to be preachers’
THE NONCONFORMIST MINISTER
In his Autobiography , published in 1903, J. Guinness Rogers reflected on the position of Nonconformist ministers in his youth in the 1830s:
The general world outside knew little or nothing of them.
Now and then, members of the aristocracy, perhaps even royalties, became acquainted with some Dissenting leader, and this was greatly talked about.
But a Dissenting preacher who had no such exceptional distinction as this…was little known either to the press or to the public.
He belonged, in truth, to a different nation.
‘Happily’ Rogers added, ‘this is changed’.
Indeed it had and the Nonconformist minister stood at the very centre of the Nonconformist world we are discussing.
Likewise, there is no single aspect of English Nonconformist life where the changes wrought by the nineteenth century are more obvious than in the position of ministers.
An official at the Board of Education compiled a Memorandum on them in 1902: ministers were ‘no longer content to be preachers and pastors for their own congregations’ he wrote.
They were ‘now missioners to those who stand outside the pale of Church and Chapel.
They are in closer contact with social problems and have a greater hold on political questions.’
Nonconformists may have preached the ‘priesthood of all believers’ but they did not practise it.
Their natural opponents, who had often been lashed for undue subservience to clerical domination, joyfully pointed this out: ‘It is one of the ironies on English political life’ declared The Tablet , the leading Roman Catholic weekly, ‘that people who, when they are thinking of lies, are never tired of denouncing the influence of the clergy in politics, at the same time are quite ready to give up their political consciences to the keeping of their ministers.’
By 1901 there were just over 10,000 ministers at work in England and Wales into whose hands the faithful could, if they wanted, surrender their consciences.
The ministers were supported by almost 52,000 local or lay preachers: of these totals the four leading denominations we have been surveying had a total of 6,409 ministers and 44,142 lay preachers in England.
The importance of these men cannot be over-estimated in any examination of English Nonconformity.
The success of any chapel or Methodist circuit largely depended on the minister.
He was ‘virtually the general of a powerful and willing army and if he is a wise man, his opportunities for good will be as large as the sphere he occupies’.
The deacons of R. F. Horton's church in Hampstead declared in 1902 that ‘the Church…is, humanly speaking, the creation of Mr Horton’.
In 1885 there had been 402 members; in 1903 there were 1,248.
By the end of the century some might still moan that ‘it would shock many to suggest that a plain dissenting preacher might be as great a man as an Archbishop’ but this was simply twaddle.
Nonconformist ministers, like Charles Haddon Spurgeon, Joseph Parker, Henry Allon, R. F. Horton, R. J. Campbell, John Clifford, F. B. Meyer, R. W. Dale, Alexander Maclaren, Hugh Price Hughes, C. S. Horne or Newman Hall ranked with John Keble, Cardinal Newman, Charles Kingsley, Bishop Wilberforce, E. B. Pusey or Archbishop Tait as household names to be adored or vilified, depending on one's religious loyalties.
Charles Haddon Spurgeon had been a major force in English religious life for almost forty years when he died in 1892.
His published sermons on their own had a weekly circulation of 25,000 and his John Ploughman's Talks sold over 400,000 copies: they are still on sale today.
No archbishop equalled that.
His critics agreed in their analysis: to the Earl of Rosebery who heard Spurgeon in 1873 he was the ‘apostle of the grocers’, echoing George Eliot's view that he had ‘the most superficial grocer's back-parlour view of Calvinistic Christianity’.
In 1884 Baptists celebrated Spurgeon's fiftieth birthday.
A writer for Temple Bar visited the Tabernacle and reported that the congregation dictated the style.
The Tabernacle, he wrote, did not hold ‘a high-class congregation’, and, in a passage quoted earlier, he added that, ‘the preacher knows  that its understanding can best be opened by metaphors and parables taken from the customs of the retail trade, with similes taken from the colloquialisms of the streets’.
To those who did not criticize, Spurgeon was virtually a demi-god: when it got out that ‘the pastor’, a vegetarian and total abstainer, also smoked a cigar a day —‘to the glory of God’, he quipped to a visiting American — the news ‘caused a terrible scandal in the dissenting world’.
Of course cliques centred on ministers are not confined to Nonconformists and Spurgeon's plain speaking was in the tradition of Bunyan and before him of generations of mediaeval preachers.
A similar criticism could have been made against many of Jesus's parables and sermons and some of his listeners were certainly not of the highest social class.
Even those involved in Victorian retail trade needed to be saved, perhaps as much as intellectuals and aristocrats.
Some critics, however, still gave praise where praise was due.
Rosebery left the Tabernacle, reflecting as was his wont, and
thinking of this vast power wielded by one man.
He has raised a sort of spiritual city in the midst of London…
Here is a great multitude, powerful, wealthy, devoted, with a perfect organization…with a leader of genius…
Would it not be well for ‘society’ to ponder this?
Even the anonymous writer in Temple Bar admitted that Spurgeon had ‘truly inspired eloquence’ and his voice had ‘the power of troubling men to the depths of their hearts’.
Some, however, refused to be impressed: in 1858, when his fame was just beginning, a lady known to history only as Miss Marsh, and someone who occupied herself in converting Irish navvies, was told that the man in the railway carriage she was about to enter was Mr Spurgeon.
As the diarist, Henry Greville, recorded, Spurgeon spoke to her,
on passing a distant village, and pointing to it, he said, ‘Perhaps, Madam, you are not aware that that small spot is remarkable as being the birthplace of the celebrated Mr Spurgeon.’
‘Indeed!’ she replied.
‘Pray, sir, may I ask you, do you think that if St. Paul happened to be travelling with us and had passed the place where he was born, that he would have pointed out the fact to us?’
Apart from Miss Marsh, observers of Victorian religion acknowledged that Spurgeon was, as Bishop Boyd Carpenter of Ripon wrote, ‘a recognised power in the religious life of England’.
To Newman Hall he was ‘the greatest Preacher of the Church of Christ’.
The Times in an extremely complimentary lead article about Spurgeon in 1884 concluded:
The boy who began to convert souls while our future rectors and curates were deep in criticism, history and examination subjects, and who has never had time to go to school or university since, is not impeccable in taste.
He occasionally drops a phrase to provoke a smile from the soft cheeks of ladies and gentlemen, and to make them think that they could say the thing better…
We are not sure that Latimer's and Ridley's sermons would not jar on modern refinement quite as much…
After his death in the south of France, which he had been visiting almost annually since the 1870s, his body was brought back and some 60,000 people filed past the coffin.
More or less equal to Spurgeon in fame, and surpassing him in notoriety (for Spurgeon avoided party politics and was in many ways sui generis ) was the Congregationalist, Joseph Parker.
Like Spurgeon he had worked his way up from humble beginnings — his father had been a Northumberland stone-mason — and like Spurgeon he had had a chapel built round him.
The 1886 British Weekly survey showed an attendance of 3,625 at his Sunday services although when his successor, R. J. Campbell, came, attendances soared to 10,589.
Parker was famous for his Thursday lunchtime services designed for men, especially those working in the City, and among his guest speakers in 1877 was Gladstone.
In addition to his rather rough looks and leonine hair-style Parker was famous for his unconventionality, dramatic preaching and rounded oratory: he once claimed the Church of England was based on ‘a blasphemous inversion of sequence and a mischievous usurpation of prerogative’.
No one was quite sure what it meant but it sounded impressive.
He also described the Anglican clergyman as ‘the self-conceited, pedantic, presumptuous priest…[who]stands between the flower and the sun…the soul and God.’
In 1899 he  was a guest at the Wesleyan Methodist Conference and caused the normally sombre gathering to explode in laughter: the speaker before him had referred to himself as ‘a humble Presbyterian’.
When Parker got up he told his audience that as he had heard this he had thought to himself, ‘I will turn aside and see this great sight’.
In that same year he spoke at the National Free Church Council's tercentenary celebration of Cromwell's birth, held in his own City Temple.
The reporter from The Times was obviously unaware of Nonconformity's great appeal to ‘the stronger sex’ and noted that the audience ‘consisted almost entirely of men, who interrupted the sermon again and again by enthusiastic cheering’.
In the course of his address Parker attacked: the Prince of Wales and Lord Rosebery for frequenting the turf, wealthy Nonconformists who left Dissent for the Church of England, and ‘shifty and superficial’ political programmes (a warning against Liberal ‘wire-pullers’who were tempted to down-grade issues which Nonconformists wished emphasized).
He then turned his guns on Wilhelm II:
When he heard of a Kaiser talking in an after-dinner speech about ‘my friend the Sultan’ he was astonished, and could have rent his garments.
The Great Assassin had insulted civilization (loud cheers), and by all manner of hellish iniquities had outraged every Christian sentiment.
He might be the Kaiser's friend, but he was not God's friend.
In the name of God, and speaking of the Sultan, not merely as a man, but as the Great Assassin, I say ‘God damn the Sultan!’
After this he wound up by attacking Anglo-Catholics and ‘Nonconformist ritualism’: why, he asked, should only ministers with their ‘little May meeting bag’ administer the Lord's Supper: why not any Christian man or woman?
He finished with praise for the Free Church Council movement.
To his credit he, along with most Nonconformists, was among those who insisted that England as a Christian nation had an obligation to rescue fellow Christians from brutal death at the hands of fanatical Mohammedans.
The following year Parker was one of those asked by Horatio Bottomley, editor of The Sun , to become guest editor for a week.
Parker agreed to do so ‘on Christian  principles’ which included taking no pay and banning racing results: this was somewhat ironic, given Bottomley's links to the racing world.
The paper's circulation increased by 150,000.
Unlike Spurgeon, Parker was a keen and fairly radical Liberal although he did support the Boer War.
In 1880 he had had a political fling and stood as a Liberal candidate for the City of London in favour of disestablishment, temperance legislation, social and political reform.
The industrialist MP Samuel Morley and others persuaded him to stand down on the grounds that ministers should not directly enter the political arena and Morley paid all his expenses when he gave up the contest.
The same anonymous writer who heard Spurgeon in 1884 went across the river to the City Temple but again was not complimentary: ‘If you can forgive a bad delivery with occasional dropping of aspirates, and the incessant introduction of Gladstonian politics in connection with holy things, you will find in Dr Parker's sermons much that is impressive and certainly a great deal that is novel.’
London did not enjoy a monopoly of famous ministers.
In Birmingham, R. W. Dale was pastor of Carr's Lane Chapel from 1859 to 1891 and gained considerable fame for his theological writings, his involvement in political issues as a Liberal and his compilation in 1874 of The English Hymn Book .
He withdrew from the Congregational Union for a while because of his opposition to Irish Home Rule but peace was restored before he died in 1895.
He was succeeded at Carr's Lane by J. H. Jowett who transformed the chapel, by now surrounded by slums, into an ‘institutional church’ with its own ‘Institute’which had a cafe, billiards room, lecture hall and cinema.
When he accepted a call from Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York City in 1911 the Mayor and Corporation of Birmingham tried unsuccessfully to keep him in Birmingham.
Before he left he was invited to dinner at Buckingham Palace by George V and Queen Mary.
Another minister to leave for Fifth Avenue was the Rev. Charles Aked, minister of Liverpool's Pembroke Baptist Church, where he had succeeded Augustine Birrell's father.
He became pastor of the Fifth Avenue Baptist Church.
In Manchester, when the Baptist minister of Union  Chapel, Alexander Maclaren celebrated his silver jubilee, his portrait was presented to Manchester Corporation.
In Bristol, Augustine Birrell, MP for Bristol North, remembered that Henry Arnold Thomas, pastor of Highbury Congregational Chapel, which was home to the Wills family, was said to ‘cut a greater figure on the Downs than the Bishop of the Diocese’.
In London the President of the Wesleyan Conference in 1899–1900, the Rev. F. W. Macdonald, was ‘presented at Court…[and]dined with the President and members of the Royal Academy, with the Lord Mayor of London, the Lord Mayor of Liverpool, and with two or three Cabinet Ministers.’
In 1902 the President of the National Free Church Council was also presented at Court and given a seat at the Coronation.
Even the fire-brand radical, John Clifford, was invited to a Garden Party at Windsor Castle in 1907 which both he and Edward VII survived intact.
Many ministers, the most famous of whom were J. Guinness Rogers and A. M. Fairbairn, wrote in the leading monthlies, at least the Liberal ones, and for many years the Congregational minister of Union Chapel, Islington, Henry Allon, edited the much respected British Quarterly Review .
His papers show that contributors even included Thomas Trollope who lived in Rome, was Anthony's elder brother and who, like him, had been brought up thoroughly to dislike Dissenters.
His contributions, however, were confined to Italian topics.
Percy Bunting, a grandson of Jabez, the second founder of Wesleyan Methodism, edited the Contemporary Review from 1882 to 1911, although on admittedly slightly more liberal lines than his grandfather would have approved.
The Unitarian, L. P. Jacks, was Principal of Manchester College, Oxford, from 1903–1931 and the first editor of Hibbert's Journal .
He was also a friend of Lady Elcho through whom he was introduced to her special friend, A. J. Balfour, with whom he could discuss philosophy.
Some ministers, like John Stoughton or Henry W. Clark, who for an inexplicable reason named his Harpenden home, ‘Charisma’, became respected historians.
Stoughton was even a friend of Matthew Arnold, who proposed him for the Athenaeum.
A. M. Fairbairn, in addition to his own works, wrote two entries for the Cambridge Modern  History and was a member of the first Council of the British Academy.
Various ministers even attempted novels, but of these the less said the better.
Others, like Clifford or J. B. Paton, were leaders in various reform movements: in Clifford's case for a national health service and the abolition of capital punishment; in Paton's, for rural colonization.
In biblical scholarship Nonconformist ministers were recognized by the last third of the century for their achievements and three — the Wesleyan, W. F. Moulton, the Unitarian, Dr Vance Smith, and the Baptist, Dr Joseph Angus — worked on the Revised Authorised Version between 1870 and 1873.
W. B. Glover maintains in his valuable study of Nonconformist reaction to ‘higher criticism’ that ‘by 1900 the Nonconformists were producing biblical scholars with international reputations’.
In the twentieth century they were succeeded by men like A. S. Peake (Primitive Methodist), C. H. Dodd (Congregationalist), H. Wheeler Robinson (Baptist) and P. T. Forsyth (Congregationalist) whose work was similar to Barth's and whose ‘true spiritual stature was not seen or even glimpsed’ until after the Second World War.
Many children of leading ministers took advantage of the wider world their fathers' success had opened for them.
R. W. Dale's son became a fellow of Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and one survey of leading Victorians noted, ‘As the elder Dale did much to spiritualize the business men of the Midlands, the younger carries on his father's work in traditionally the most [sic]liberal of our two national seats of learning’.
The younger Dale went on to become a member of the Athenaeum, a knight and Vice-Chancellor of Liverpool University.
One of the Baptist J. H. Shakespeare's sons became private secretary to Lloyd George and an MP.
In the Liberal landslide in 1906, there were three Nonconformist ministers returned and sixteen MPs who were sons of ministers, including Augustine Birrell, R. W. Perks, Sir Henry Fowler and Sir John Brunner, whose own son was also returned as an MP in the same election.
The four daughters of the Wesleyan George Browne Macdonald, married respectively Edward Burne-Jones, Lockwood Kipling, father of Rudyard, Edward Poynter, later President of the Royal Academy and the industrialist MP Alfred Baldwin, father of the  future Tory Prime Minister, Stanley.
Robertson Nicoll's daughters married army officers while his son became a physician; J. H. Paton's son became High Master of Manchester Grammar School; Silvester Horne's eldest daughter went up to Oxford while one son became a barrister and the other, Kenneth, the star of BBC Radio's ‘Round the Horne’ series, programmes which did not always accord with the Nonconformist Conscience.
The Rev. Basil Martin's son Kingsley was to become editor of The New Statesman .
We noted in Chapter 3 that the son of Richard Glover, of Tyndale Baptist Chapel in Bristol, became a classics don at Cambridge and eventually University Orator.
The conservative Wesleyan leader, J. H. Rigg, helped his son get a position at the Historical Manuscripts Commission by contacting the Prime Minister, Arthur Balfour.
By the end of the century Nonconformity's most famous ministers had established themselves as leaders in a wide variety of fields: biblical scholarship, local government, reform movements, journalism, history, theology, apologetics and writing.
R. J. Campbell even had the honour of seeing himself in wax at Madame Tussauds.
It is, of course, very easy to pay too much attention to the famous names in Nonconformity, partially because of their importance, partially because information about them is more readily available and partially because they tended to be more involved in politics.
Yet it was in the rank and file, those men known only in their own chapel and town, that Nonconformity made itself felt in English religious life.
Luckily the annual Year Books contained small biographies of deceased ministers and these sometimes tell us much about the ‘average’ minister.
For example, the Congregationalist Simeon Dyson was born in Hartshead, near Ashton-under-Lyne, in 1823.
He went to work in the local cotton mill where his father was an ‘overlooker’.
His ‘conversion’ came early in life and he taught in the Sunday School of a local chapel.
He began attending evening classes in the Mechanics' Institute and ‘thereby developed the gifts of teaching and speaking, and habits of thought and reading, with so much success as to mark him out as one called of God’.
He entered Lancashire  Independent College, Manchester, in 1844 to study for the ministry, and hard work made up for ‘the lack of university training and degree, not then so accessible’.
He spent his life in two Yorkshire pastorates, ‘gaining the affection and respect of the people, and guiding the affairs of the Church with great discretion, preserving perfect harmony and living peace’.
‘The pulpit’ his obituary said, ‘was his chosen sphere in preference to the press and the platform’.
He was not ‘speculative or sensational’ and ‘held the balance even between old and new’.
He held various denominational offices, retired in 1891 and died in 1904.
‘His memory will live’ the obituary concluded ‘and his influence will be continued, not by books written, nor by the booming paragraphs of journalists…nor by flattering epitaph…but in the honest lives…and manly independence of those who gratefully remember how he moulded their characters’.
William Shaw was a Primitive Methodist circuit minister who was born in 1854 and died in 1931.
He came from a Methodist home, made his ‘supreme decision’ at fourteen and became a Sunday School teacher, local preacher and eventually, in 1875, a minister.
After his four year ‘probation’ he became a circuit superintendent and served the Connexion until he was ‘superannuated’in 1919.
‘It was his joyous privilege to lead many to Christ’ his biography said, and ‘his passion was to preach.’
He was ‘permitted to put in a long day's work for his Master, and it can be truly said that he gave his best’.
Some ministers devoted part of their time to local affairs: S. J. Smith, for example, was born in Bedford in 1822 and became a Congregational minister in Enfield after attending a denominational college and taking the London BA.
‘He was recognised by all classes as a Christian gentleman, courteous, affable, and sympathetic.’
Although he ‘sought to avoid public controversy’— a standard Victorian prefix to anyone who enthusiastically engaged in political warfare — he was elected as a Poor Law Guardian and a member of the Burial Board and the Public Library Committee.
He was also co-secretary of the Enfield British School and chairman of the local Sunday School Union.
Most ministers tended to face similar tasks: their primary work was to lead the church or, if a Methodist, to  work in his assigned circuit and to supervise the ‘stations’ with their local preachers.
His work included preparing sermons, managing a variety of organizations attached to the chapel, supervising the finances with the help of the deacons and trustees, if Baptist or Congregational, or the circuit stewards, if Methodist.
Normally the financial goal was to reduce the existing debt, much of which would be due to building.
Finally he would spend a great deal of time in preparing people for membership and in visiting members although here he could be helped by the deacons and stewards.
Occasionally he would have problems.
Sometimes he would discover that he had not really had a ‘call to the ministry’.
The novelist, William Hale White, felt that some of the men he had known before being expelled from a Congregational theological college ‘would have had more genuine lives if they had stood behind counters or learned some craft than they ever had in the ministry’.
H. R. Williamson recalled the tension between the wealthier members of his Congregational chapel and his father, the minister, a tension produced by the power which came with money.
Likewise, Kingsley Martin recalled in his autobiography how one coal-merchant ‘noisily walked out of the church and slammed the door’ in the middle of a sermon by his father, a Congregational minister, because the merchant felt that as an employer he had been attacked.
The Rev. Richard Westrope left Belgrave Chapel in Leeds when there were complaints about the ‘social gospel’ topics he had chosen for his Sunday evening social addresses: of course these problems were not unique to Nonconformist ministers.
In the small Essex village of Great Leighs the lord of the Manor and a Director of Barclay's Bank stormed out of Sunday Matins when the Psalm was chanted.
Unlike the Rector of Great Leighs the Nonconformist minister had no security of tenure.
Ministers could also face congregations split over questions of finance, doctrine or politics — the last especially after 1886.
At the small Wintoun Street Baptist Chapel in Leeds, for example, quarrels over finance and personalities raged for twenty-five years.
Likewise it was not unusual for Congregationalists to worry about Unitarian trends in their ministers or for Baptists to bring the trust deed into  debate, and sometimes into court, over the question of
closed communion' (limiting the Lord's Supper to those attenders who had been baptized by immersion)versus ‘open communion’(allowing non-baptized attenders to participate).
Perhaps the most famous row over this took place at St Mary's Baptist Church in Norwich in the 1850s.
There were constantly laments about ministerial income and the ‘poverty, indifference [and]unappreciated labour’ of many men.
Similar complaints were heard in the Church of England about the condition of curates during the nineteenth century, a time when what pay they got came from the parish priest under whom they served or whose place they took in the parish while he lived elsewhere.
In the Nonconformists' laissez faire way of life, ministers were frequently moving about, usually to a more advantageous and better paid position.
Some ministers, like some clergymen and bishops in the Church of England, were extremely well paid: Parker appears to have received an annual salary of £1,700 (nearly £60,000 in 1990) while Spurgeon received £1,500.
(He told a visiting American that £1,000 of this went to the orphanage and theological college he had founded while the rest went towards the stipends of his assistant ministers.
He supported his family and himself by his writing and his dairy farm.)
Both Parker and Spurgeon were able to maintain elegant homes and a carriage and pair which took them to their respective chapels.
However, when the Parkers passed by, some were cruel enough to refer to the minister and his attractive wife as ‘The Beauty and the Beast’.
Famous ministers, like most of those who are well paid, tended to be defensive of their income: Newman Hall was very loath to talk about his £500 a year although he need not have been.
John Clifford never accepted offers to increase his stipend above £600.
For a comparison we should note that a headmaster of an average Board school in 1901 received £170.
10s.
9d.; the stenographer who took down Parker's sermons received £100 per annum; the average annual wage for manual workers in 1896 was £64 while the highest yearly wage for agricultural workers in 1902 was £534s.
Ministers' remuneration had improved with the century: in 1851 a Primitive Methodist minister with three children received £71 a year and Baptists generally received less than £80; within Congregationalism the divergence was too great to allow for any average figure.
In the 1860s Wesleyan ministers received £120 p.a.
Stipends were generally better in town churches: when Joseph Parker began his ministry in Banbury in 1853 he received 50s. a week or £130 p.a. although when he left Banbury for the affluent Cavendish Street Chapel in Manchester in 1858 his income jumped to £1,700.
By the 1870s matters had improved for some: a survey of Nonconformist ministers in the city of Oxford in 1875 showed stipends ranging from £60 p.a. plus house and allowances for a Primitive Methodist minister to about £300 p.a. for the Wesleyan Superintendent of the Oxford Circuit.
In the same decade Peter Thompson was sent to an impoverished Wesleyan circuit in Broughton-in-Furness with six members and no chapel: he lived on sixpence a day.
In 1882 the Congregational Union studied the problem of low stipends and reported that of 1,527 ministers in charge of chapels in England and Wales, 668 or over 43 per cent received under £150 p.a.
Four years later the Union admitted that an annual minimum salary of £150 was still a goal but it was one which was never reached in the nineteenth century.
In Stroud, the minister of the Old Meeting House in 1897 was promised all revenue from seat rents, all weekly offerings and £75 or a total of £180 p.a.
In the same period the pastor of Aylesbury's Congregational chapel got £200 p.a. plus £9.
1s. for supplies.
The pastor of Nottingham's Broad Street Chapel had his salary raised in 1892 from £250 to £300.
Of course ministers, like everyone else, were helped by the increase in the purchasing power of the pound from 20s. in the pound in 1873 to 23s.
1d. in 1900.
In addition there were various ‘perks’ such as the NFCC's free lending library, the ‘J. A. Spurgeon Home of Rest for Ministers’opened by the Baptists in 1900, and denominational pension funds.
Retired Baptist ministers, for example, were getting an average of £32.
15s. a year in 1889 from their Society for Aged or Infirm Baptist Ministers; Wesleyan retired ministers, after thirty years' work, got $44 p.a.
In some cases there was help towards the cost of  educating minister's children and towards a retirement home.
In addition, since the vast majority of people rented their homes, retiring ministers were not faced with the late twentieth-century dilemma of buying a house when one's income ceased.
Frequently congregations made free gilts to their ministers but as these were often wealthy congregations which could also afford a high salary the bonus served as icing to an already rich cake: Joseph Parker, for example, got £1,000 to mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of his ministry and John Clifford was given a round-the-world trip when his health failed in 1897.
In this case the money came from a single, wealthy shipowner who attended his chapel.
On the other hand, there were gifts in kind: when Alfred Rowland was in Frome in the 1860s and 1870s he got free milk, and sometimes game and fowls.
It was fairly standard practice for retiring ministers to receive a departing gift: John Stoughton, for example, received a magnificent gift of £4,000 when he resigned as pastor of the Congregational church in Kensington in 1874.
Fourteen years later the minister of Nottingham's Mansfield Road Baptist Church got a more typical £75 when he left.
Throughout the century the basic problem remained the same: a wide divergence meant that while some men were extremely well paid, others, no less devoted or hard working, lived in straitened circumstances.
Secondly, there was no agreed minimum.
If it was any consolation the same basic problems existed in the Church of England, while among Roman Catholics few if any clergy were well paid.
By the end of the century things had at last begun to change: in 1899 Primitive Methodists agreed a minimum of £100 while Congregationalists and Baptists set aside part of their Twentieth Century Funds for salaries.
In 1908 the Congregational Union agreed a minimum of £120 (£30 less than that recommended by Mearns in 1886).
Baptists began raising a Sustentation Fund in 1908 and set a minimum salary of £160 in 1912.
There was less real poverty among ministers by the end of the century than there had been, but for men who insisted on their professional status and were increasingly better educated, the dilemma was always present.
The education and social status of the minister had risen notably during the century  while his income had not.
His dilemma lay ‘in always having rather less than you need by the standards to which you are brought up’.
For the Nonconformist minister as well as for the man in the pew, preaching lay at the heart of chapel life.
In his reflections on the religious census of London, Mudie-Smith insisted that ‘the outstanding lesson of the Census is that the power of preaching is undiminished’.
C. F. G. Masterman in his contribution to Smith's report observed the ‘manifest tendency of the Nonconformist worshippers to collect together into strong centres…which is inevitable where preaching is so emphasised and the stimulus and guidance of the pulpit so much desired’.
To an American observer, preachers were ‘the very mouthpieces of their congregations, expressing for them their better selves, the very voice of their inmost hearts so that the whole congregation found itself raised above its ordinary self’.
There were, inevitably, undesirable aspects in this emphasis on preaching: congregations shopped about and when a preacher died the congregation dwindled: after Spurgeon's death the attendance at the Tabernacle fell from over ten thousand to just over 3,500.
R. J. Campbell was himself a highly successful, because dramatic and controversial, preacher who eventually left Congregationalism for the Church of England.
Afterwards he reflected on the preacher's dilemma: ‘If he is a strong man, the possessor of popular gifts, he will be treated with plenty of consideration; but the consideration is not due to his office so much as to his personal qualities.’
A more severe critic simply referred to ‘this tendency of the Free Churches to man-worship’.
Again, the system could produce a cosy relationship in which no one was challenged and everyone was entertained: one writer recalled that ‘there was certainty in the pews and certainty in the pulpit, and the pews settled down snugly to hear the champion declaim his variations, so to speak, on a classically familiar theme’.
Of course, sermon-tasting was one of the few traits shared by all church-going Victorians.
If Anglicans flocked to hear Scott Holland at Westminster Abbey, Frederick Robertson at Trinity Chapel, Brighton, or Fr Ignatius  during one of his missions, Roman Catholic ladies swooned under the eloquent passion of Fr Bernard Vaughan.
Not a few Victorians followed Gladstone's example and shopped round; the Liberal Prime Minister much enjoyed Parker's Thursday sermons for men.
Others, visiting Paris, would sit in Notre Dame to observe the pulpit techniques of French preachers although the listeners would have found it impossible to order a bifteck from a tolerant waiter.
Where Nonconformist preachers differed was in their isolation: they stood alone without a liturgy on which to fall back or a priestly vocation which made good preaching a desirable but not essential option.
They had, however, no doubt about the sacred nature of preaching.
To A. M. Fairbairn, preaching was ‘when the man possessed of God speaks of the God Who possesses him’.
The biographer of J. A. Macfadyen recalled that ‘whenever he preached he seemed overcharged with the sense of the reality and supreme importance of the Gospel’.
Joseph Parker, before preaching in a village chapel, was overheard to say, ‘Jesus be near me, very near me, near me all the time’.
Hugh Price Hughes once referred to the ‘unspeakable joy of beholding eleven penitents’ who came forward because of his preaching.
Some, like P. T. Forsyth or John Hunter, referred to the preaching as the ‘Sacrament of the Word’ and saw it as ‘the distinctly Protestant Sacrament’.
The emotional setting in which sermons could be preached was made possible by a sympathetic audience: indeed, reciprocity was essential.
The great preachers were masters of their craft.
E. E. Kellett wrote of Joseph Parker, ‘Why should people to whom such a pleasure as this was open, desire to go to the theatre?
Had they gone, they would only have heard the pupils: in the City Temple they heard the master.’
J. C. Carlile wrote of Spurgeon's preaching thus:
When the clock struck, the preacher came down from a little room behind the platform, followed by ten or a dozen men who looked like prosperous City merchants.
It did not appeal to me, but when the preacher advanced to the platform and prayed, there was a transformation…
It must have been the totality of the situation that made me feel that heaven was very near and the invisible clearly seen.
Spurgeon was, in short, ‘like Paganini with one string’.
When writing of R. F. Horton, A. G. Gardiner remembered that ‘he leans forward with outstretched hands…
He is torn with bitter agony.
His voice is shaken by the tumult of his feelings…
Outside some one touches you…with a light greeting.
It is like the breaking of a spell.’
Another admirer, a woman who went into the mission field, recalled that ‘the silence of a great congregation, held by the power of an eloquence which we felt rather than understood, endued him with an ‘other-worldliness’ which could not be explained’.
The preaching of the Wesleyan Morley Punshon in the 1850s was described as follows: ‘After the text was announced there was a kind of subdued rustling and expectancy…
At intervals…there were breathing spaces when…the spell-bound hearers had a brief release and there was a movement…as of pent-up emotion set free.’
The writer, Marianne Farningham, wrote of the preaching of her pastor at College Street Baptist Chapel in Northampton in equally rapturous terms: ‘Not a sound was heard but the musical voice of the speaker, who held the great crowd in rapt and absolute attention.
It was only when he paused…that the tension was relaxed.’
Had such language been used of an Anglican or Roman Catholic Eucharist the user would have quickly been castigated by Victorian Nonconformists as a ‘wafer worshipper’.
Much was heard by the end of the Victorian era about changes in the content of sermons.
Some complained that ‘verbal inspiration [of the Scriptures]has become an untenable doctrine’ and that ‘doctrine has lost its hold of the pulpit’.
Robertson Nicoll told A. S. Peake in 1898, ‘You would not believe what hosts of letters I get, and do not print, about the kind of thing that is preached in many of our chapels just now, especially by the younger men’.
The Northamptonshire Nonconformist listed three reasons for the ‘decline’ they saw in Nonconformity: the first was ‘a cultured ministry which repels rather than attracts [for]it shoots over the heads of the people’; the second was a ministry which disregarded the central truths of the Gospel in favour of‘the latest theories of the…
Fortnightly [Review]hashed up’; the third was a minister who ‘dresses  himself as much as a Church…parson as possible, as much as possible copies the ritual of the Establishment, and poses almost as a full-blown priest’.
Complaints about the content of sermons were not new nor were they confined to Nonconformists.
What was new was the diversity which people were finding by the end of the century: many of the greatest preachers remained ‘orthodox’ including Spurgeon and his many protégés or Wesleyans like Dinsdale T. Young and F. Luke Wiseman.
Others, like Hugh Price Hughes or Joseph Parker, laced their sermons with political allusions based on the assumption that their listeners were Liberals, but their orthodoxy was not questioned.
Still others like John Clifford, Horton, Silvester Horne or R. J. Campbell became exponents of a much more liberal or ‘social’ interpretation of the Gospel and in some cases, such as Clifford's, adopted a very ‘open’view regarding miracles and traditional Christian doctrines.
Clifford's unorthodoxy was never in doubt: ‘The Church’ he claimed, ‘has made too much of theology.’
Again he said, in an argument strangely reminiscent of Erastus, Richard Hooker and Matthew Arnold, that ‘the State is more sacred than any Church…for the State stands for the whole people in their manifold collective life; and any Church is but a fragment of that life, though one of the most important fragments’.
It was but a small step from this to the ‘social gospel’: one started with an application of the Christian Gospel to evils in society and errors in politics.
This then led to an obsession with political and social questions with decreasing reference to the criterion by which they were being examined, namely the Christian gospel of salvation for all mankind.
The attempt to see the Christian message in the secular world ended up in seeing the secular world in the Christian message and then in confusing the two.
This writer remembers one Good Friday sermon in an Anglican parish church in which the preacher referred to the crucifixion not as the self-offering of God's only Son and an event unique in man's history but as an example of the ‘little man’ being maltreated by the all-powerful state.
A metaphor based on a current political concern had ousted the doctrine of the atonement.
Campbell's ‘New Theology’ movement which began in 1907 was an example  of this same process at work.
His claim that to see the atonement at work one should visit the House of Commons was made in those happy days before its proceedings were televised.
It is too much to say that ‘ministers, uncertain about everything else, had at times found a refuge in social righteousness’ and that ‘Bunyan…might have said that social righteousness was his old village of Morality transformed, like Manchester, to a town, by the industrial revolution’.
While there were many ministers who advocated the ‘social gospel’ the majority remained orthodox in their belief and teaching.
Again, men like John Clifford or Silvester Horne, active in Liberal politics, saw their preaching labelled as more ‘social’ than it actually was precisely because of their political work.
On the other hand, others, like Joseph Parker, to whom Gladstonian Liberalism and Protestant Christianity were one faith, were not therefore accused of preaching the ‘social gospel’.
Clifford always insisted that there must be a real ‘conversion’ for each individual although he also thought that the belief in individualism had been pushed too far both in the Church and in society.
With increasing concern for social problems as opposed to individual ‘sins’ came an increasing amount of ‘social work’as opposed to individual acts of charity.
The temptation was that the churches' social work, begun as a way to win the unchurched as well as to help them physically, would cease being the means and instead become the end.
The justification for doing the work might be seen to lie in the material benefits it produced.
It was against this that the veteran Baptist minister, Alexander Maclaren, gave a warning when he asked ‘whether the abundant works of the Churches at present are the outcome of life, or whether they are not, in some cases, galvanic movements that simulate vitality and mask death.
Martha has it all her own way now.’
‘We are’ he said later, ‘in danger of building so many mills and factories on the river's bank…that the stream will be all used up and its bed dry.’
The change in emphasis was noted in 1893 by another Baptist minister, Thomas Morris: ‘It is the fashion of the present day to exaggerate the importance and power of circumstances’, to put ‘society’ above individuals, whereas Christianity, he argued, ‘must begin at the centre, and not at the circumference.’
Insofar as the ‘social gospel’ aimed at a transformation of society in lieu of a conversion of sinners it was never the view of the vast majority of Nonconformist ministers.
Insofar as younger ministers believed that a Christian state should improve housing, lay drains or provide pensions, they could be said to have advocated a form of social gospel.
When viewed from a distance, however, were they that different from their fathers who had urged the state to legislate against intemperance or social impurity or, indeed, from mediaeval bishops who urged the state to build better bridges for pilgrims on their way to Canterbury or to put down heresy?
It was not so much a new view as an old view applied to new problems.
Again, we must remember that those sermons which got into print or were noticed and attacked in newspapers were not always typical: the typical is seldom noticed.
What had happened in the nineteenth century was a relaxation in the definition of orthodoxy: Nonconformists no longer saw their chapels in virtual juxtaposition to the world about them.
This had been the view of the enclosed Calvinist chapel or Methodist station, hidden away from the high streets of life.
Nonconformity had now become part of that high street and as such had a responsibility not just for the souls of the gathered faithful but for society as a whole.
Guinness Rogers wrote that in the Victorian era ‘our theological conception has changed and with it our spiritual ideal also’.
Preachers now recognized ‘God is Love’ as the central truth of the Gospel’and saw that ‘conversion’was far more varied than hitherto thought.
This liberalizing trend was, of course, not confined to Nonconformity and marked the Church of England as well : witness the fierce debates over the doctrine of eternal punishment, the recitation of the Athanasian Creed and the verbal inspiration of the Old Testament.
Because Nonconformists had done so well out of the changes brought about in the nineteenth century it is not surprising that increasing numbers assumed the inevitability of liberal progress to be as much part of the natural order as the law of gravity.
Since so much had been done peacefully through economic change, population increases, emigration and Parliamentary legislation, it is not surprising that ministers, like others, naturally assumed that progress through the same channels would continue ad infinitum .
Victorian culture, with its concentration on individual responsibility and the primacy of the family, had played the dominant role in shaping much of Nonconformity; it was inevitable that in its turn Nonconformity should absorb much of that culture into its way of thinking.
The world, at least the British world, was better off in 1901 than it had been in 1801, so why should it not be even better in 2001?
In 1937 the Congregationalist Albert Peel reflected on the late Victorian and Edwardian periods: ‘Ministers who began their pastorates in the twenty years before the war look back in amazement at sermons they then preached, with their acceptance of the inevitability of progress.’
People were increasingly better informed about social ills as the century wore on and how these could undermine and inhibit individual responsibility and freedom.
As we shall see in Chapter 6 the closing decades of the century and the early years of the new century were more concerned with the ‘collective’ approach than the individual, and younger ministers were only mirroring this change.
Therefore, to a degree, the ‘social gospel’ was criticized not because it called for political action but because it called into question Victorian cultural and economic truisms.
Some of those who attacked ministers' devotion to the ‘social gospel’ were attacking a penchant for education bills, county council elections and slum clearance, but they would not have been as upset by a renewed campaign for disestablishment, which, no less than educational reform, could not be achieved without political action.
It was, therefore, to some degree the older generation attacking the younger, much as an eighteenth century minister might have attacked the political involvement by ministers in the 1830s and 1840s when they refused to pay Church Rates and supported the Rev. Edward Miall's British Anti-State Church Association.
In some ways the difficulty was not some ministers' demanding social solutions to social problems above individual solutions, but the underlying extent of the  cultural absorption by Nonconformists discussed above.
The question is one of degree and not of kind, for, were Christianity not to some extent shaped by those cultures in which it existed, it would not speak a language understood by the majority of those whom it addressed.
It would then speak only to isolated minorities.
Nonconformists had two identities — as Baptists or Methodists or Congregationalists and, secondly, as Nonconformists.
The first was doctrinal and ecclesiastical; the second was peculiarly English and ‘parliamentary’ and, as such, political.
There had always been an inclination among ministers to preach on their Nonconformity and not on their Christianity and to end up ‘talking politics’.
This was more so in the nineteenth century as Nonconformity grew stronger and more involved in the mainstream of national life, but it had always been the case.
Added to this was an acceptance of liberal Victorian culture to such a degree that it was assumed to be as eternal as the gospel itself.
When these aspects of Nonconformity, its inherent political bias and its identification with Victorian values, led ministers into the political arena, it was not surprising that critics complained: ‘The men whom the churches care to hear…are the men who speak most loudly upon the current political topics, and who…‘play to the gallery’ and, echoing the gallery's political watchwords, rouse the gallery to re-echo them in its turn.’
It was the price Nonconformity had to pay for its absorption into the mainstream of liberal Victorian culture.
There was, however, this to be said: there had been political involvement under Miall in the 1840s but this had been to achieve a narrow, sectarian goal — disestablishment.
Political involvement by the end of the century, even if it was almost totally through the Liberal party, aimed to achieve national not sectarian goals.
If that achievement would benefit Nonconformity, it would benefit others as well.
Having said all this, there were still those who wondered if it was not all too easy to confuse the eternal with the transitory.
A prophetic warning came from Canon Hensley Henson in his pamphlet Cui Bono ?, published in the last years of the century.
Nonconformists' ‘strength and…weakness’ he  claimed, ‘lie in the fact that they tend to reflect contemporary social and political movements’.
However fascinating the ‘social gospel’ has proved to historians, it was not the most important aspect of the ministry to Nonconformity: this was the need to improve the quality of ministers' education in order to equip them for the position they had achieved in English life.
When Robertson Nicoll came to England in the 1880s he went to Dawlish where he complained: ‘Dissent here is nowhere…
The ministers get about £80 a year and are quite uneducated.
The Church…has it all its own way…
No educated man could stand the Dissenters.’
While Nicoll's judgement was reached in the heat of the moment the facts bear out his basic impression: a detailed survey of all the ministers of the four leading denominations in 1870 shows that roughly eight out of every ten Primitive Methodist ministers had no formal education beyond school and among Wesleyan ministers the numbers were little better, seven out of every ten.
The situation was considerably better among Baptists where half the ministers had received some form of higher education.
Better still was the situation for Congregationalists where seven out of every ten men had some form of higher education.
By the first year of the new century — 1901 — the numbers without formal education of some kind were, roughly speaking, halved in all four denominations.
Less and less did Nonconformists like to have it said of them as was said of the Primitive Methodist evangelist and erstwhile coal-miner, James Flanagan, ‘He waited not for an abundance of knowledge but used what he possessed’.
The cry by 1901 was for educated men ‘of good social standing’ to become ministers: ‘Such men…are more needed now than before Board Schools provided hearers whose improved education demands preaching of a higher order than formerly.’
The Primitive Methodists, whose work was mostly amongst working people, admitted with a sorrow they could not hide that ‘the growing worldliness of men needs a faithful and independent ministry; the increased educational facilities and the advance of science challenge us to put the best talent we can produce into the pulpit’.
The conference of 1891 was urged to ‘create in  your respective centres a healthier yearning for an educated ministry, which may also retain the grand, sterling qualities of our fathers’.
Wesleyans had smarted most from criticisms that their ministers were neither educated nor cultured and admitted the need for a ‘cultivated as well as a consecrated ministry’, a ministry of young men of ‘piety and culture’ with ‘a more thorough training…and a more complete equipment for the Ministry’.
The principal means for educating Nonconformist ministers were the various denominational colleges.
All the major denominations made great strides between 1870, when Board schools began supplementing the work done by older bodies to give elementary education to working people, and the end of the century, in creating a ministry with at least some higher education.
In those years the number of Wesleyan ministers without any college training dropped by 51 per cent and the number of those attending a theological college rose by 46 per cent.
Baptists saw the number of ministers without any college training drop by 32 per cent while those going to a college rose by twenty per cent.
Those with a university degree rose by twelve per cent.
For Congregationalists the percentage with a college training remained, surprisingly, the same.
Primitive Methodists made the greatest strides of all: the number of their ministers without any college training fell by 60 per cent while the number with, rose by 59 per cent.
Naturally, much depended on the quality of the education these men received.
The older colleges, which traced their history back to the eighteenth century's ‘dissenting academies’ had not kept the high standing they had then enjoyed.
In the 1870s R. F. Horton's father, himself a Congregational minister, refused to let his son enter a Congregational college because, he wrote, ‘there is not one of them fit for you to enter.
The professors are of an inferior order, and very few of the students even approach mediocrity.’
Charles Brown recalled Bristol Baptist College when he was there from 1879 to 1882: there was only one instructor while the course was ‘not altogether satisfactory’.
The other change which took place was the growth of a minority who went on to take advantage of new opportunities to get a university degree.
The number of men in all four major denominations who had done a university degree more than doubled between 1870 and 1900, from 14 to 37 per cent.
The traditional dependence on Scottish universities was replaced by the expanding university college system, London University and the Victoria University group of colleges.
It was a sizeable achievement.
The distance that had to be covered can be seen in the case of the Primitive Methodists: they had no theological college until 1881 and when the new college in Manchester faced collapse it was only saved by the generosity of Sir William Hartley.
It was he who persuaded A. S. Peake to leave Merton College, Oxford, for Manchester in 1892.
Peake introduced Greek, increased the course from one year to two and increased accommodation to sixty.
Even so, expenditure per student, admittedly only a rough guide, fell from £81 per student in 1890 to £38 in 1901; it was not unusual for the college to spend more on the gardens than on buying books.
Again, entrance to the probationary ministry, from which students were taken, was controlled by the districts, not the college.
The problem was too many men applying for too few places; in 1895, eighty-seven men passed the required examination for the ministry although the college still had only sixty places.
Even for those sixty, there were only vacancies in the circuits for twenty-seven.
For their part, Congregationalists suffered from a glut of colleges: there were eight in England, three in Wales and one in Scotland.
There was virtually no denominational control.
All was left ‘to the working of chance or of economic forces…
Clearly this is a thoroughly British policy, but it is also thoroughly pagan.’
If a man had a ‘call’ to a chapel he could become a minister without any denominational approval and with no educational qualifications required.
Even so, by the beginning of the new century only six per cent of the ministers newly appointed to a church were without some form of higher education.
Again, as with the Primitive Methodists, there were too many men chasing too few churches: 223 ministers in 1901 could not find a church.
Expenditure in the various colleges varied tremendously: in Nottingham Institute (admittedly non-residential) it was £30 on each of its 60  students; Western College in Plymouth spent £136 but it had only fourteen students.
As a general rule, expenditure only rose as enrolment fell.
Baptists had six colleges in England and two in Wales although in 1904 the number was reduced to four in England through amalgamation.
After 1893 expenditure fell although enrolment remained virtually at the 1890 level.
Expenditure varied enormously: Regent's Park College in London spent £140 on each of its twenty-nine students in 190 1, while Pastor's College, founded by Spurgeon in 1856, spent £64 on each of its sixty men.
There were certain problems common to all nineteen denominational colleges: the first was the quality of men who entered the ministry and from whom students were recruited.
Only the Wesleyans had a system whereby the national organization had any control and even they had problems.
For the other three bodies the problem was the same: either the districts (for Primitive Methodists) or the individual chapels (for Congregationalists and Baptists) allowed men into the ministry who had no academic qualifications.
Some colleges, such as Pastor's, existed specifically in order to train men who would not put off people by too much learning.
Again, some colleges were simply too small and had too little money: the Primitive Methodist college had only one tutor until Peake arrived.
In 1901 the Congregationalists' Western and Hackney Colleges had only fourteen and twenty-one students respectively while the Baptists' Nottingham and Bristol colleges had only eleven and twenty-one.
With so many colleges there simply were not enough funds to go round: a twelve year survey (1890–1901) of the Baptist colleges shows that of eighty-five annual budgets for which there is full evidence, fifty-five had over-spent.
As a general rule the only way to spend more per student was to have fewer students.
The colleges' incomes were either constant or declining.
The greatest problem, therefore, was not in getting men into the colleges but in raising the level of the education they received once they were there.
Wesleyan colleges were established as theological training centres but Baptist and Congregational colleges, because of their origins as dissenting academies, still had a bias towards giving a  general arts education and not just a theological training.
As there was no national system of state secondary schools until 1902 there was a constant struggle between those who wanted to raise the level of theological education in the colleges and those who knew that many of the men coming into them had nothing but a primary school education.
Charles Brown, for example, was born in Northamptonshire in 1855 and had to go to work as a boy when his father, an agricultural labourer earning 12s. a week, was taken ill.
The boy earned 1s.
6d. a week scaring birds away from crops.
At fourteen he began to work as a postman at 2d. a round, one round each morning.
He left home in 1871 to work in Birmingham, was converted during a Moody-Sankey campaign, and in 1879 entered Bristol Baptist College.
It is not surprising that the course in Baptist and Congregational colleges ran to six years: there was a lot of ground to cover.
Salvation came from without: the development of some de facto secondary work in the higher ‘standards’ or years of Board schools, the improvements in the older grammar schools, the use of various ‘institutes’dedicated to helping working men get more education, the creation of new, civic universities like Owens in Manchester, and the expansion of London University, gave men who wanted a basic education beyond primary school new opportunities, after which they could go on to a denominational college which was now more able to concentrate on theology.
The theological colleges were eager to take up the new opportunities and transfer the teaching of arts subjects to the new colleges and universities.
In 1881, for example, Lancashire Independent College abolished all preparatory classes as Owens College could do it so much better.
When the Congregational Union officially urged this new course on the colleges in 1902 there was still a long way to go: A. M. Fairbairn warned Sir Alfred Dale, then Principal of University College, Liverpool, ‘I think one has to be very careful as to giving the theological colleges power over the regulation of degrees.
You must not let them level down the University, but rather use your position to level them up.’
Wesleyans, along with Primitive Methodists, seemed less concerned with the need for an educated ministry  than the Baptists and Congregationalists.
They insisted their four colleges have a spirit which was ‘practical rather than academical’ although it was agreed that the 254 places provided in the colleges were not enough by the end of the century.
A committee was appointed to report on the situation in 1901 because Conference wanted to know how to secure candidates ‘of higher educational proficiency and others of special promise’ and they wanted the committee's views on the ‘desirability of raising the standard of the examinations for the ministry’as well as the possible need to give candidates ‘a more thorough training…and a more complete equipment’.
Two additional problems were shared by all denominations.
The first concerned the large army of lay or local preachers: for every minister in the four leading denominations there were seven lay preachers.
To onlookers these men were seen in many cases as ‘Nonconformist ministers’ and of many it could be said that ‘his prayer was like himself, rough and earnest’.
All major denominations strove to raise standards for lay preachers; methods chosen included free circulating libraries and denominational courses and examinations.
The second problem was the influx of men trying to enter the ministry by the end of the century; if we look at ministers actively engaged in church work in 1901 we see that three out of every ten Primitive Methodists, four out of every ten Wesleyans, five out of every ten Congregationalists and seven out of every ten Baptists had entered the ministry in the 1890s.
(Except for the Baptists the influx did not lower the trend towards a more educated ministry: the total of all Baptist ministers without any formal higher education was only eighteen per cent by 1901.
However among those men ‘settled’ in the 1890s it was over twice that, at 41 per cent.)
Unlike the Church of England, Nonconformity suffered not from too few but from too many candidates.
There was a real embarrassment of riches.
The problem of too many men wanting to become ministers and too many lay preachers who inevitably lowered the educational average pointed up a fundamental dilemma.
Robertson Nicoll, with his journalistic exuberance, boasted in 1902 that ‘the average Dissenting minister  has…a better literary and theological culture than the average minister of the Church [of England]’ who were ‘the worst educated [ministry]in this country’.
Against this was the tradition that Nonconformity was the religion of ‘the people’ and not of the ‘privileged classes’.
How far could a minister of the people be educated beyond their level?
When Spurgeon opened Pastor's College in 1856 some of the first pupils were illiterate but he insisted that his aim was to equip ‘a class of ministers who will not aim at lofty scholarship, but at the winning of souls — men of the people’.
High standards of education were not needed for work among the ‘neglected classes, to whom a more cultured ministry would have appealed less strongly’.
Yet the same writer lamented that some of the first students ‘in many cases alienated the more thoughtful minds from the denomination’.
Primitive Methodists rejoiced that ‘we are of the people, and know their needs’ yet, as we have seen, they were also glad that ‘our people are everywhere participating in the social and intellectual advance of the times’.
We saw earlier that critics in Northampton had protested against what they called a ‘cultured ministry which…shoots over the heads of the people’.
This was the voice of the ‘grass roots’ and not of the annual meetings in London.
There was a genuine dilemma and conservatives like Spurgeon could, if they had wanted, cite a famous precedent: St Francis of Assisi never disguised his hostility towards learning yet, within a few years of his death, his new Order was dominating much of Europe's University life.
Spurgeon might also have asked if an ‘Oxbridge’ -educated ministry had helped or hindered the Church of England's work among working people.
How far should Nonconformity work to avoid the type of praise given by the Bishop of Ripon in his 1892 article on Spurgeon: ‘The Puritan type may mean heedlessness of culture and loss of sweetness and light, but it also means seriousness, earnestness and a courageous bearing.’
Was this to be regarded as a compliment or a criticism?
In the attempt to win society's approval by a cultured ministry that had both sweetness and light, would Nonconformity produce a ministry cut off from the faithful?
Would one pay too high a price for approval?
As one reporter said when talking about the Baptist minister and ex-butcher, William Cuff of Shoreditch: ‘When God calls into His vineyard men who are not scholars, we do not show our wisdom by disapproving of the choice.’
But, as R. J. Campbell pointed out, the respect paid a minister could often be based on his performance as a preacher and a leader.
He did not have the ‘prerogatives of his office’ available to peasant priests in Russia, Spain or France or the traditional respect given to English clergymen as gentlemen if not always as priests.
If his education were below that of his audience he could not fall back on the validity of the Sacraments he administered for support.
By the end of the century many were moaning that ‘the pulpit can never again be what it was once — the chief organ of information to the people, the great agent in moulding public thought’.
‘The journalist’ the Baptist James Owen declared in 1890, ‘the reviewer, the historian, the essayist have assumed the sceptre which the teacher in the pulpit long ago wielded.’
This was a legitimate reaction to a real change: it was, arguably, the price exacted by the nineteenth century from Nonconformist ministers for the multitude of benefits they and Nonconformity had obtained from that century.
Nonconformist ministers had become part of Victorian England as famous preachers, writers, controversialists, politicians and local leaders.
They were better educated and better paid.
They participated more fully in the intellectual and political life of their time — some argued that they participated too much — and reflected their society's values, again, perhaps, too much if the criticisms of the ‘social gospel’ were accepted.
One Tory JP saw this reflected in the gradual substitution of the old toast of ‘Church and State’ by the newer one of ‘Ministers of all Denominations’, due he said, ‘to the increasing importance of the Dissenting element’.
Even so, he felt, it was ‘a bitter morsel for old Tories to swallow’.
The ministers of that ‘element’ held positions of authority and influence within their various denominations perhaps unequalled, whatever Owen might argue, in any Protestant country.
Their identification with the Liberal, self-help, individualistic Victorian creed and their coupling of this with the Christian gospel gave them a bond with their congregations.
It was ultimately  because of this that Nonconformity, unlike the Church of England, was able to achieve something no church has equalled since: it attracted and kept men in church.
Late Victorian Nonconformity was to a considerable extent a man's religion.
An anonymous Anglican critic summed up the vitality and confidence of the ministry by the end of the century.
Ministers were generally ‘men of great ability’ who read widely.
As a group
their enthusiasm is still that of a child who asks all kinds of fascinating questions about the new world in which he finds himself.
A man like Mr Silvester Horne is regarded by his congregation with feelings of almost unmeasured adoration, due to the fact that he and they are really opening the book of life for the first time together and comparing impressions.
Pastor and people are alike laymen.
‘Worshipping the Lord and Mr Spurgeon’
THE NONCONFORMISTS' SEARCH FOR DIGNITY
In 1895 the Congregational Chapel in Aylesbury agreed to repeat the Lord's Prayer during Sunday services; three years later the Church accepted a proposal from its younger members to have a vase of flowers in chapel during services and someone donated a vase.
These were small events but when repeated up and down the country, they amounted to a vast change in Nonconformist attitudes towards worship.
There had gradually developed in chapel life during the second half of the century a desire for greater dignity, order and something akin to the ‘beauty of holiness’, if not that beauty itself.
People wanted to get away from the stereotyped chapels of plain benches, unvarnished woodwork and oil-lamps, chapels filled with the drone of ‘psalm-singing green-grocers’ and their families.
The desire for improved services was centred among Congregationalists and Baptists while what we might call a larger search for dignity pertained to all the major denominations; the Congregationalist, Dr George Barrett, told a 1900 meeting of the Free Church Council that ‘Nonconformists have not yet enlisted the imagination as a handmaid to faith…
We have yet to learn that form counts for something even in the holiest adoration of the heart.’
There was also a growing belief that worship had a corporate dimension.
Chapel services were, or should be, more than just opportunities to hear a sermon: when Major J. B. Pond, the American entrepreneur who arranged lecture tours for British writers visiting America, came to London in 1879, he visited Spurgeon's Metropolitan Tabernacle.
He secured two admission tickets but when he arrived he found they were only good for the front doors where ‘already hundreds were waiting’.
Then he  noticed an open gate and beyond it a side door which he approached; here he was told that his tickets were only good for the front door while the side doors were reserved for members.
When asked why he could not enter, the guard replied, ‘Oh, you can by dropping something in the box’.
(As an American he would have been used to ‘collections’ being taken up during the service.
In England the custom was still to rely on pew rents and on subscriptions being paid directly to the chapel.
If donations were taken at a service, they were left at the door either on the way in or on the way out.
By the end of the century the older ways were being overtaken by the American custom.)
Pond then described what happened: ‘I saw people were dropping pieces of silver into the box and passing in.
I said to him, ‘How much am I expected to drop in?’
He replied, ‘Anything you please.
A half-crown is the usual amount.’’
Just to make sure of getting seats, Pond put in two half-crowns, not much under a week's wages for thousands of agricultural labourers.
Once inside
a gentlemanly usher gave our party good seats.
Already several hundred people had entered in this way, and before the doors were open the lower floor was about filled…
When the main doors were thrown open, there was a general rush of men and women in all directions, carrying umbrellas and jumping over the pews to get to the very nearest available seats, and almost immediately every seat in the church was occupied and great crowds were standing against the wall in the back galleries.
I think I never witnessed such a squabble of people rushing into a building.
They created a dust that was almost suffocating.
Afterwards, however, Pond, himself a Baptist and used to Beecher's Plymouth Church, described the congregation as ‘a very devout crowd of worshippers who entered into the spirit of the occasion and did worship the Lord and Mr Spurgeon with tremendous intensity’.
It was against this sort of thing — the view that chapel attendance was nothing more than an opportunity to sit, to listen and, in part, to worship the preacher — that many Nonconformists reacted.
In doing so they were part of their time.
The Christian World noted in 1882, ‘The great  wave of Catholic sentiment which has been sweeping over the Established Church…has sensibly cast its spray over the Nonconformist bodies of the country’.
Undoubtedly the Oxford Movement's influences had been felt outside the Church of England.
The movement was arguably a result of cultural changes affecting not only Britain but America and Europe.
The Rev. Arnold Thomas of Bristol told Congregationalists that ‘it is good to make beautiful our buildings and services.
No one need quarrel with the improvements that are taking place in these directions.’
Many Nonconformist leaders were outspoken in their criticisms of public behaviour at religious meetings and services: the Rev. Alfred Rowland told Nonconformists in 1898 that they were ‘sadly deficient in reverence’, while some services were marked by ‘downright vulgarity’ and an abundance of chattering and unpunctuality which often indicated a ‘lack of inward reverence and true spirituality’.
‘In many Free Churches I fear that awe is an unknown factor’ and ‘some who sneer at elaborately worked altar-cloths would do well to cultivate the spirit of those by whom they were presented.’
The greatest occasions for offence came with the biennial meetings of the Baptist and Congregational Unions and the annual gatherings of the National Free Church Council.
(Methodists, most notably Wesleyans, along with Presbyterians were recognized as being the best behaved.)
These meetings were often passionate affairs: the deadening decorum which in the twentieth century has come to be identified with religious gatherings did not prevail in the nineteenth century.
Victorians, who had yet to discover the stiff upper lip and the view that religion had always to be a serious matter, were passionate people who expressed their feelings freely and often loudly.
Just as they loved colour, they loved oratory, even when they could not understand it: in 1901 delegates at the Free Church Council meeting in Cardiff stood up to welcome five former French priests.
They were addressed by a M. Corneloup who told them that some 103 priests had ‘escaped from the land of slavery…and had entered the…
Canaan of the Gospel of Christ’ due to his work.
Afterwards one of these new Canaanites, M. Joseph Ver, spoke but unfortunately he knew no English.
His French  proved too voluble for the interpreter but the audience did not mind; cries arose of ‘Let him go.
Let him go’, so the interpreter sat down and M. Ver carried on for five minutes more.
It was normal for impassioned orators to be greeted by a sea of waving handkerchiefs and raised umbrellas.
(Even during services it was not unusual for the audience to break into applause.)
In that imperial annus mirabilis of 1897 Nonconformist representatives were invited for the first time in English history to take part in a royal celebration when thirty representatives were allowed places at St Paul's to witness the short act of worship in the midst of the Queen's Jubilee procession through London.
At the Free Church Council's meeting an address of congratulation to Queen Victoria was adopted after which delegates sprang to their feet and burst into singing the National Anthem.
The year before the Baptists had sent a telegram to Queen Victoria congratulating her on completing the longest reign in British history.
When a reply arrived which simply said, ‘The Private Secretary is commanded to express the thanks of The Queen for the kind message of congratulation which you have forwarded to Her Majesty’, the assembly rose to its feet and cheered.
As in so many things, the ways of the Victorians, while looked on with horror in late twentieth-century England, have survived in America; unashamed fervour in holding and expressing religious and patriotic beliefs which easily blend into one another is but one example.
The reaction was not against passionate expression of beliefs or against an audience's supporting a speaker: it was against excessive displays and rhetoric more appropriate to a political rally than to a religious meeting.
R. F. Horton ‘deplored the immoderate pleasure in witticisms and laughable anecdotes’ that marred meetings of the Congregational Union.
Hugh Price Hughes chastised the 1896 Free Church Council meetings for its vociferousness and insisted that all should ‘submit to those restraints and regulations which the experience of the greatest representative assemblies of the world has proved to be necessary to an intelligent participation in the business as it proceeds’.
The following year the new President, a Presbyterian, had to repeat the injunction, this time  directed at the gallery, insisting that there be no applause, either ‘by our hands, and still less by our feet’.
One should remember, however, that similar criticisms were levied at delegates to the Church Congresses of the period.
Some leaders spoke out against the new trend; in a paper on preaching delivered at a Free Church Council meeting the quixotic Joseph Parker defended congregational applause during a sermon because it encouraged the preacher and allowed the Holy Spirit to work through the listeners.
(Ballet dancers of the same period used the same argument about applause during their performances.)
Many opponents of the new desire for dignity were ministers trained by Spurgeon.
A. G. Brown, who refused either to wear a white tie to show his ministerial status or to allow an organ in his chapel, was pastor of the East London Tabernacle.
He insisted that ‘we shall never win the people by keeping aloof from them…
I would send dignity to the devil, where it came from.’
Others, like John Clifford, regarded the new movement as a humorous irrelevance.
When Hugh Price Hughes urged that he, as President of the Free Church Council, wear academic dress at Council sessions, a ‘heated discussion’ resulted.
Clifford said he did not know which academic dress to wear as he had three London degrees, and ‘I can't wear them all at once’.
To the rejoinder that he wear the gown showing his ‘highest proficiency’ he replied, ‘Ah, well, 1 should not need to put any other gown in my bag than 1 usually carry’, by which he meant his night-gown, as ‘that represents my greatest proficiency’.
Hughes was not amused.
There were, of course, other causes than ecclesiastical for the changing attitudes: public decorum, proper behaviour and increasingly complicated social rituals — as in mourning, dining, dressing and visiting — were part of Victorian middle and upper-class life and the churches could not stand outside these changes.
In the Chairman's Address by the Rev. Arnold Thomas quoted above he went on to expand on a definition of the Nonconformist Conscience and in so doing showed how social attitudes and religious arguments had become fused.
‘Our witness’ he said, ‘is to be for goodness’, which he defined not only as being ‘honest, temperate, chaste’and leading an  ‘upright, decent, useful life’, but as the spirit or motivation behind all this.
One must try to avoid, he said, what George Macdonald called the ‘general disagreeableness of good people’.
‘To put it plainly’, Thomas concluded, one needed the grace to ‘be a gentleman’.
This is not the language of Spurgeon or of the stereotyped minister of hole-in-the-corner chapels.
Ironically, in the midst of the education controversy of 1902, the Prime Minister, A. J. Balfour, who had known Thomas at Cambridge, singled him out amongst his opponents as ‘a gentleman aiming at fairness’.
Increasingly Nonconformity was becoming a religion of ‘gentlemen’ or at least of those who wished to become such, and gentlemen preferred dignity and decorum in religious worship.
To a large degree this was centred, although not confined, to the newer, suburban churches, but it affected all aspects of Nonconformist church-life.
(Once again Nonconformity was in step with the Church of England which likewise saw tremendous improvements in the quality of her religious services.)
In Islington's famous Union Chapel, for example, the doors which opened into the auditorium had fixed to the wall beside them small boxes with a slit on the top; these were for worshippers' donations.
Someone had been thoughtful enough to provide a felt lining to the bottom of the box so that there would be no noise from the falling coins.
Union Chapel was also the home from 1852 to 1892 of Henry Allon.
The Congregational historian, Albert Peel, wrote that ‘it is probably true to say that no one did more to raise the standard of worship in Nonconformist churches’ than he.
This was especially the case with regard to the use of music: a memorial in Union Chapel referred to his ‘successful endeavours to promote a nobler service of song in public worship’.
Allon advocated the use of chanting but this was taken up by few chapels; the much greater growth lay in the use of hymns.
In 1887, eleven years after Allon had advocated liturgical chanting, George Barrett edited the Congregational Church Hymnal .
By the end of the century it had sold 1,250,000 copies and unlike Allon's own collection of hymns, it had been an official publication, part of the growth in musical taste and improved choirs.
If music  were important then choirs needed to be improved; in Gloucestershire a Nonconformist United Choirs Union was formed in 1892 and music festivals were held in Gloucester in 1892 and 1894.
‘The Union was formed’ records at Wotton-under-Edge show, ‘with the intention of drawing these Congregational Church[es] into closer union with each other, and also of improving the service of praise in the house of the Lord.’
Organs were also important for, just as Gothic was the ‘English style’ for churches, so the organ was the English instrument for church music.
Congregationalists, for example, noted in their Year Books from 1898 to 1901 that they had installed 144 new organs; as early as 1873 William Shepherdson, a Member of the College of Organists, reminded Nonconformists that a hundred years before, organs ‘were beyond the reach of small Churches, while as to Chapels…the placing of an organ…would have been regarded as an act of profanation.’
Things had changed and ‘the organ has now become a necessity.
No Church or Chapel is complete without it.’
Organs ranged from the 1,000 guinea pipe organ to ‘The Sunday School Union's ‘New Baby Organ’’ which sold for five guineas and promised a ‘very sweet tone’.
Back at Wotton-under-Edge in Gloucestershire the Congregational Tabernacle's Mutual Improvement Society resolved in November 1893 ‘that the time has now come for an Organ to be obtained for the Tabernacle Services’.
The following February the Church agreed and allocated £250; an organ was dedicated on 29 May 1895.
The Church records noted proudly, ‘That Memorial Organ on the very day of its dedication is free — it has no debt on it — it belongs to no human being — but like the sanctuary is dedicated to Almighty God & belongs only to Him.’
Another leading advocate for a more ‘religious’ style of worship was also Congregational: John Hunter was pastor of four churches in Scotland and England.
He is mainly remembered for his Devotional Services for Public Worship , first published in 1882.
In it he insisted that ‘worship requires serious effort, not only in the one who is to lead it, but in those who are to follow it and make it theirs’.
He wanted people to kneel during prayer (as had once been done) and ministers to close their sermons with the Gloria  Patri .
When he came to the King's Weigh House Chapel in Duke Street, London, off Grosvenor Square, he surpassed most of his contemporaries by introducing an elaborate ritual centred on a Holy Table.
His methods had an appeal among the wealthy, professional classes who made up the congregation.
In 1903 he addressed a conference in Liverpool where he made ‘a Plea for a Worshipful Church’.
‘It is time’ he argued, that ‘the Free Churches…had outgrown their fear of everything Roman or Anglican’.
A congregation's attention should focus not on the pulpit, the choir gallery or the organ behind it, but on the Holy Table.
Hunter, far more than Allon, was in a very small minority.
Many ministers, especially those working in suburban areas and themselves graduates of universities, accepted the need for great decorum but decried liturgical worship; R. F. Horton attacked prescribed prayers, as used for example by Wesleyan Methodists, as belonging ‘to a pre-Christian epoch’.
The demand which grew up amongst Congregationalists and, to a lesser degree, Baptists was not for a radical shift in the nature of their worship but for the external embellishment of traditional worship: flowers, organs and stained glass, but not chants, Holy Tables and liturgical seasons.
As Horton Davies, who has explored this subject deeply, wrote: ‘More worshipful churches proved incentives to, if not a deeper, yet a better ordered and more dignified worship among congregations that had previously regarded worship as merely a preliminary to preaching.’
The degree to which the trend had affected Nonconformist life can be seen by a return to the Metropolitan Tabernacle after Spurgeon's death.
The pastorate had passed first to his brother; on his death it had reverted to one of the famous preacher's twin sons.
It was some twenty years since Major Pond's visit and the visitor from Booth's enquiry team observed a communion service on a Sunday evening in 1901:
Before us, in a sort of alcove brilliantly lighted…was a long table set out as one sees the Last Supper pourtrayed at Milan or elsewhere, with no one on the near side of the table…
At the table before us Mr. Spurgeon occupied the central position; the others were, I suppose, his deacons…
Then Mr. Spurgeon rose, and all present rose with him, and, after breaking the bread, spoke the accustomed words: ‘This is my body —.’
Then from the back of the platform, where they had been seated, there stepped forward some twenty or perhaps thirty men, to whom were given silver plates containing little cubes of bread, and with these they moved down among the congregation…
The pastor and deacons partook first…
It was the same with the wine.
Again all were seated.
and again rose, the pastor taking the cup and speaking the chosen words, whilst those who served went with the cups among the congregation…
Lastly, they brought round the collection plates…
When this was all done, and partly, too, during it, prayer was offered and a hymn sung…finally, Mr. Spurgeon spoke…and made his jokes.
It was a marvellous scene — a strange incongruous medley of simplicity and ceremonial.
Simplicity and ceremonial seem to express the changing pattern of Nonconformist worship but that worship was only part of a wider search for dignity, a dignity which was mainly realized in the new and improved buildings Nonconformity was erecting up and down the country.
To their own generation the new-found power and confidence of English Nonconformists were most visible in the buildings they erected in town centres, suburbs and villages throughout England.
They influenced the appearance of England's expanding cities in the same way, and sometimes to the same degree as mediaeval parish churches and cathedrals had influenced the appearance of English villages and cities of their time.
After Spurgeon's Metropolitan Tabernacle was erected in 1860 at the Elephant and Castle it quickly became one of the sights of London.
It was Spurgeon who insisted on a classical design by which he meant a rectangular building with portico and six Corinthian columns.
Just as Greek was to him a ‘sacred language’, so ‘every Baptist place should be Grecian, never Gothic’.
The Tabernacle cost £31,383, over a million pounds today.
There were sixteen doors, excluding private entrances.
The building, which was 174 feet long and 85 feet wide, had 5,000 seats on the floor and in two galleries.
In addition there was standing room for 1,000.
The Building News said in 1860 that the new chapel, which was then the largest building in England for public worship, had solved Wren's query as to how 5,000 people in one building could all both see and hear a service.
ln the Tabernacle all but fifty had a perfect view.
As Major Pond discovered, seat-holders were let in through side doors while hoi polloi had to come in through the front in the hope of getting what they could.
‘There are dense, compact masses swarming everywhere around the chapel, like people round opera-house doors on a Jenny Lind night.’
Inside, the building was remarkably plain with no pulpit but a platform or ‘tribune’; the walls were painted a light green.
One guide in 1861 ranked it with St Paul's and Buckingham Palace and began its report: ‘We are not a race of giants, but we enter on gigantic works.
We have, in our age, a predilection for great things…
Mr Spurgeon and Mr Spurgeon's people were determined to have a great chapel.’
It became ‘unquestionably one of the sights of London’.
In 1898, six years after Spurgeon's death, the building suffered a disastrous fire and had to be rebuilt.
Spurgeon's six Corinthian columns were kept but the number of seats was reduced to 2,700 due to the decline in the congregation after the great preacher's death.
Fourteen years later, on 19 May 1874, in the City of London, the City Temple, the new name for the old Poultry Lane Congregational Chapel, opened the doors to its new home on Holborn Viaduct.
The Lord Mayor attended in state and a special service was intoned which included the Sanctus and a Te Deum .
The building became known as London's Nonconformist Cathedral; unlike the Tabernacle, the Temple was elaborately furnished with stained glass windows and a tower of 145 feet in the ‘Italian style’.
The building was designed by the same Bradford firm which had built Sir Titus Salt's church at Saltaire.
Like the Tabernacle, the Temple was built round the preacher, in this case Joseph Parker.
The floor sloped slightly and the pews, which held 2,500, were slightly curved so that the preacher ‘can be seen from every part of the building’.
Behind the pulpit was room for an orchestra although in 1882 an organ was installed, something the more old-fashioned Puritan, Spurgeon, would never allow.
As is always the case not everyone was pleased: one of Booth's  team described it as a ‘large and rather ugly building’ although ‘its interior looks well enough when crowded with people.’
An even less sympathetic visitor, writing in Truth , described it as ‘very like a City Hall in oleograph’.
A twentieth century writer on church architecture called it a ‘pretentious pseudo-classical building’ whose principal feature was the famous ‘Great White Pulpit’’.
The total cost was estimated at nearly £70,000 (well over £2,000,000 today).
Structures like those built for Spurgeon and Parker were only two of a myriad of building enterprises entered into by various Nonconformist denominations.
London was now the home of striking Nonconformist churches like Christ Church, Westminster Bridge Road, the Wesleyan Hinde Street Chapel, Islington's Union Chapel or Mayfair's King's Weigh House, now the Ukrainian Catholic Cathedral of the Holy Family in Exile.
Not all were built as auditoria in which an enrapt audience could listen to their chosen hero.
As we have seen, attitudes were changing even when the builders were at work in the Elephant and Castle.
Nonconformity was slowly and unevenly moving towards the idea of a worshipping community as well as a gathered audience eager to hear the Gospel preached.
By 1902 one observer could note that the chapel had become
a place for worship, instead of a theatre for listening.
Money has been lavished upon towers, spires, gargoyles, tracery, carved capitals…and the general arrangements begin to approximate, in many instances, to those of a large parish church…the plastered wall, the unmanageable oil-lamps, the varnished reading-desk, and the big black stove have vanished forever.
Occasionally an innovative structure was put up without spires and gargoyles: Congregationalists in the Hertfordshire villages of Braughing and Puckeridge spent £1,275 not just in refitting the chapels and manse but in building an unsectarian village centre where the minister acted as warden.
The greatest building work, however, took place in the suburbs and followed the prevailing fashions.
With the building boom brought on by suburbanization, land for a chapel could now be bought in prominent locations: the  days of buildings tucked into a court of back lane had passed.
The 1897 President of the Baptist Union declared that Baptists were ‘no longer treated as social pariahs, to be trampled under foot of men’ as seen in their new ‘sanctuaries in main thoroughfares’of which many were ‘beautiful and costly’.
They now carpeted the aisles and cushioned the pews while ‘organ notes and well-trained voices’ led the congregations.
In the event it had not been so much religious ‘discrimination’ as the limits imposed by lack of money and of land in over-built ancient towns and villages.
Today, when councils like that in Tewkesbury restore old Meeting Houses — in Tewkesbury's case a Baptist chapel down a narrow lane opposite the great Abbey Church — Baptist visitors are as surprised as everyone else at the austerity of the past.
All this vanished in the suburbs.
By the end of the century expenditure on building new churches, improving existing ones, paying off debts, erecting towers and spires and on constructing missions, settlements, central halls and school rooms had reached incredible amounts.
This building campaign soared in the 1890s: Wesleyans, Baptists and Primitive Methodists (there are no accurate statistics for Congregationalists) spent at least £8,316,920 on building, equivalent to some £275,000,000 in 1990.
Because Congregationalists were such a wealthy denomination the true figure would be considerably larger.
The importance of this expenditure is realized when we contrast it with the £701,469 these three same denominations spent on ministerial training and the £692,054 spent on home missions.
In the case of the Primitive Methodists, the poorest of the four leading denominations, the Connexion faced a debt of £1,003,207 by 1901.
Ironically, while they erected 660 churches, they closed thirty-three for every twenty-one new ones they built.
In most cases the money went on replacing or improving old buildings, not in building chapels where there had been none before.
Both Baptists and Wesleyan Methodists actually had fewer churches in 1901 than they had had in 1870.
As we have seen Nonconformists benefited greatly from rising standards of living and the movement to the suburbs.
The Primitive Methodists boasted that their  Connexion was ‘year by year…erecting new chapels, some of them magnificent and even sumptuous in their appointments’.
As the denomination most solidly based in the countryside, they also realized they had little choice in the thousands of new streets with their red and yellow brick terraces that were covering England's acres.
‘Families are more inclined to settle permanently as worshippers in good, commodious, and well-situated buildings than in small, ill-arranged, and badly situated chapels.’
In other words the money spent was one way of stopping ‘leakage’ to other denominations; the new chapels also tended to enhance loyalty and to lessen disaffection over trifling matters.
While Nonconformists were not ‘ashamed of the many-windowed chapel, the vulgar conventicle’, a Chairman of the Congregational Union told his audience during the 1897 May meetings, they had shown that they could ‘also appreciate the noblest architecture, and pay for it, too!’
Indeed, they could.
A demand for the ‘noblest’ architecture inevitably meant that Nonconformity was caught up in the debates over the value of Gothic architecture which went on for most of the Victorian period.
The two sides may be called the Goths and the Greeks, and while the Goths won the war, the Greeks took quite a few battle honours.
When the Birmingham architect Joseph Crouch looked back on the nineteenth century, he reflected that ‘the spirit of Evangelical religion in England has changed in a singular manner during the past fifty or sixty years.
This change has been chiefly in the direction of the broadening of its outlook on life.’
The victory of Gothic architecture showed that Nonconformity had kept pace with the spirit of the times; to have done otherwise would have turned them back into hole-and-corner chapels appealing, like the Quakers with their simple meeting-houses, to ‘men and women of a certain temper’.
It is ironic that the man who did so much to revive Gothic design, Thomas Rickman, was himself a Quaker.
His 1817 book,An Attempt to Discriminate the Styles of English Architecture , asserted that Gothic was essentially an English architecture.
The idea that the appropriate design for those new churches being built for England's expanding towns should be  ‘Gothic’ first gained public favour as a result of the 1818 Church Building Act.
Many of the new parish churches built with the funds provided by Parliament were in ‘Commissioners' Gothic’.
The first recorded Nonconformist Gothic chapel came in 1839 when Sir Charles Barry, who started work on the new Houses of Parliament the following year, designed a new church for Upper Brook Street Unitarian Chapel in Manchester, although the interior design still had the pulpit as the central feature against the east wall and facing the congregation.
By the 1840s Gothic was growing in favour among Nonconformists generally.
Denominational year books were featuring ‘Gothic’ chapels: these were usually brick buildings of traditional rectangular shape but with pinnacles , mullioned windows, buttresses and arches.
Internally the design was the same.
In 1847 the Congregational Union Year Book included a thirteen-page section, ‘Remarks on Ecclesiastical Architecture as Applied to Nonconformist Chapels’.
The author rejoiced that ‘the improvement in public taste…during the last twenty-five years has at length reached the meeting-houses of Nonconformity’.
Gothic was not only the English style but the ‘Christian’ style.
Lancashire Independent College, one of the denomination's theological colleges, was especially commended for its ‘Gothic’ design which included cloisters, a tower and ‘orial [sic]windows’.
Brick must be eschewed for stone whenever possible.
Three years later the Methodist minister, F. J. Jobson, who had trained as an architect, published a practical guide with the blessing of the Wesleyan Connexional authorities.
His aim was to overcome a fear of ‘extravagance’ in chapel design; God did not dislike adornment, but ‘unnecessary adornment’.
Gothic architecture, he insisted, ‘is English CHURCH ARCHITECTURE’ and, by implication, if Nonconformists wanted their denominations to be considered as part of the Christian Church in England then their buildings must be Gothic.
However, the design was only to affect the outside; inside things must remain the same.
There were to be no aisles, crosses or altars; the pulpit must be against the end wall facing the congregation.
Also, like the writer in the Congregational Year Book he insisted that Gothic architecture was ‘the  most economic style of Chapel Building’.
The book was said to have had a sizeable effect.
In 1853 the English Congregational Chapel-building Society was founded to help local chapels and two years later the Rev. J. C. Gallaway published for the Society a tract on Practical Hints on the Erection of Places of Public Worship .
Congregationalists must convince their fellow Englishmen that they were ‘fully up to the spirit of the age’.
‘We are aiming not at the elaboration of a few but at the erection of many temples or houses of our Lord’ and therefore ‘cheapness in the construction of each is indispensable to success’and Gothic chapels need not be expensive.
Their great value was that Gothic structures ‘are seldom mistaken for Mechanics' Institutes, Post Offices or Banks'.
Congregationalists should welcome the erection of towers and spires not, he insisted, ‘for the sake of display still less as affecting mere imitation of a wealthier body [i.e. the Church of England]but for purely practical purposes.’
These included ‘conspicuousness’ to attract the public and space for lobbies, clock chambers, staircases, belfries and better ventilation.
Galleries should be avoided, to get away from the idea of a theatre with an audience watching an actor but the pulpit must still remain the central feature.
A lecturer at the Architectural Exhibition of 1861 noted that ‘we cannot afford to ignore the element of association which now more than ever connects our idea of churches with good Gothic architecture.
We want our churches to be church-like.’
‘Dissenting Gothic’ had arrived: external Gothic features cheaply built, combined with traditional arrangements inside, or what Sir John Betjeman later called ‘terra cotta Gothic, riddled with dedication stones’.
Throughout the Victorian era there were constant criticisms of the devotion to Gothic architecture and especially ‘Carpenter's Gothic’.
R. W. Dale accepted in 1862 that the sneers against Dissenters' Gothic had some validity but, he added, ‘we can only say that we are inexperienced hands at this work.
We are improving already, and hope to do better still by and by.’
Amateurishness and lack of money were the prevailing weaknesses.
The writer, Christopher Stell, has pointed out that of some 600 ‘architects’ whose buildings were described in the  Congregational Union's Year Books in the nineteenth century, ‘very few’are credited with having built more than one or two.
‘R.D.W.’ told his fellow architects in 1859 that ‘Since the revival of gothic architecture, and the general advance in public taste, a great advance has been made in chapel-building’regardless of the style chosen.
Money, however, remained the chief problem.
If the architect chose Gothic and was asked, as increasingly he was asked, to provide stained glass windows, columns for aisles, ‘showy’ decoration and in some cases even chancels, holy tables and clerestories, he faced an impossible task.
Always he had to exercise ‘great economy’.
While the demand for ‘great economy’ meant that Dissenting Gothic became a byword for machine-produced, dull buildings, this was not always the case.
Observers agreed that Nonconformist buildings improved with the century, especially during the last twenty-five years.
To a large degree this was due to the examples of famous churches such as Christ Church, Westminster Bridge Road, to which we have referred before.
The new building, opened in 1876, cost £62,000 (approximately £2,000,000) but this included not just the church but the organ, the famous Lincoln Tower, the land and the various subsidiary buildings.
The architect did not try to reproduce a mediaeval church with aisles and chancel but chose an octagon shape with one side designated as an ‘east end’ with a window under which stood a Holy Table.
The pulpit was to the side.
When Booth's assistant visited the church he praised it as a ‘great and successful attempt to adapt the aspiring and inspiriting beauty of Gothic architecture to the congregational ideal’.
‘The worshippers’ he continued, ‘are still regarded mainly as an audience but the house is manifestly a house of God’: Newman Hall intended it to be both a non-denominational centre and a ‘Cathedral of Nonconformity’.
At Ashton-under-Lyne the congregation of Albion Church spent £50,000 (£1,600,000) on the ‘Nonconformist Cathedral of Lancashire’.
The ‘early perpendicular’ building was 175 feet long with windows designed by Morris and Burne-Jones and a hammer-beam roof.
The spire was 200 feet high.
Most of the cost was met by the wealthy Congregationalist, Abel Buckley, who had been the MP for Prestwich Division in the Home Rule  Parliament of 1885.
(W. H. Lever would soon follow Buckley's example with his ‘Christ Church’ in Port Sunlight).
Where there was a wealthy patron the chances of a first-rate building were obviously greater.
In Liverpool Miss Ruth Evans donated £25,000 (£825,000) to build a Congregational chapel at Rainhill to seat 650, as a memorial to her brother, Joseph, a colliery proprietor at Haydock.
The new building had an organ and the obligatory tower, this time 120 feet high.
In addition there was a gymnasium, swimming baths, club house, reading and ‘cocoa’ rooms.
In Bolton, W. H. and J. D. Lever gave the money to build Blackburn Road Congregational Chapel to replace a temporary prefabricated ‘iron church’.
The new building had both an organ and stained glass windows and was meant as a memorial to the brothers' parents.
In Port Sunlight W. H. Lever paid for Christ Church Congregational Chapel.
In West Ham, Mr James Duncan, ‘a large employer of labour in that locality’ gave £4,000 (£132,000) to build Union Congregational Church, Victoria Docks, and provided funds for its upkeep.
ln Halifax, as we have seen, the Crossley family provided most of the funds for Square Congregational Chapel.
In Bristol the Wills family got the young William Butterfield, a relation through marriage, to design Highbury Chapel.
This was the only Nonconformist chapel Butterfield ever designed and in 1976 it became a parish church.
The greatest single expenditure on a Nonconformist chapel came not from the Congregationalists but from the Baptists and not in England but in Scotland.
In 1894 the Coats Memorial Baptist Church in Paisley replaced the old Storie Street Chapel when the congregation moved into the northern suburbs after the decline of the area round Storie Street.
It was paid for by the Coats family and cost a phenomenal £100,000 or £3,300,000 in 1990 terms.
It was built as a monument to Thomas Coats, the man who had established the family's cotton thread empire.
The style was Gothic and followed ‘the best traditions of mediaeval church architecture, but to meet more advantageously the requirements of Protestant worship the nave is kept broader and shorter’.
Stone, not brick, was used.
While there was a chancel and a holy table the chancel  was not long and the table was not put against the east wall; the pulpit was to the side, an unusual feature in Baptist Gothic buildings.
There was the obligatory tower which rose 220 feet above street level.
‘The edifice’, the Baptist Union Hand Book declared, ‘may fairly claim to be one of the finest ecclesiastical buildings reared in this generation.
Towers and spires had become something of an obsession with Nonconformists during the last forty years of the century.
A glance at the architectural section of any of the annual handbooks published by the leading denominations or a survey of the denominational press shows how important they had become.
This was largely but not exclusively an obsession of Congregationalists, much as it had been of mediaeval bishops.
Frequently the tower had to be left unfinished or left on the drawing-board, awaiting more funds.
At Lavender Hill in London in 1900 the Congregational church added a tower and spire to a church built in 1883.
In 1897 Congregationalists in East Dereham raised £500 by public subscription to complete their tower, complete with chimes and clock, to celebrate Queen Victoria's Diamond Jubilee.
In Leeds, Newton Park Union Church not only had a seventy-foot tower but a clock which Leeds Corporation agreed to illuminate at night.
Whether or not this constituted a form of ‘corporation establishment’ was not recorded.
Other denominations had their share of towers and spires; indeed, one of the more prominent of Oxford's dreaming spires is that of the Wesley Memorial Chapel on New Inn Hall Street.
Its spire was said by a contemporary guide to Oxford to form ‘a conspicuous addition to the architectural adornments of the city’.
Gothic architecture was never, however, totally accepted.
In many cases small congregations, especially in villages, simply could not afford even ‘Dissenters' Gothic’.
They continued to build plain, cheap red brick chapels.
In 1896, for example, the year in which Radnor Park Congregational Chapel in Folkestone spent £7,000 and Albion Church in Ashton-under-Lyne spent £50,000 on new buildings, Congregationalists at Rothbury in Northumberland built a new chapel for £1,400 but they were fortunate in having  the land given them by Lord Armstrong, the arms magnate.
Again, among Baptists, a survey of 248 new buildings erected in the last decade of the century shows that of the total, 60 per cent cost under £2,000 and 42 per cent cost under £1,000.
Primitive Methodists, the most rural of the four leading denominations, built a total of 660 chapels between 1890 and 1901 and the average cost was £1, 151.
14s.
6d. and many would have been under the average.
Again, those who preferred the Greeks to the Goths were never vanquished.
As we have seen, two of the most famous chapels built in the Victorian era, Metropolitan Tabernacle and the City Temple, were not Gothic.
While the heyday for Greek columns was between the 1830s and the 1850s, the classical style carried on although not to the same degree.
They tended to be built round ministers who disliked the slowly developing penchant for what were called ‘liturgical’ forms of worship associated with Gothic chapels.
Such men included Dale of Carr's Lane, the first Greek revival chapel in England, Spurgeon and Parker.
The classical style, which included Spurgeon's Greek temple facade, was used by all denominations and stretched from Belvoir Street Baptist Chapel in Leicester, built in 1845, to the Wesleyan Hinde Street Chapel in London, built in the 1880s with a two-storeyed portico-front copied after St Paul's Cathedral.
Spurgeon's was the greatest single influence in ensuring that the Greeks were never totally defeated.
One of his many acts was to open the Pastor's College, originally in the basement of the ‘Monster Tabernacle’.
From here he sent out young men committed to his style of preaching.
They took with them the word ‘Tabernacle’ which came to mean in architectural terms a building in rectangular shape, with a Greek temple frontage outside and inside, little decoration and preaching in the conservative, earthy, evangelistic and Calvinistic tradition.
Such buildings tended to be comparatively inexpensive.
Woolwich Tabernacle, erected between 1895 and 1896, sat 1,690 but cost only £13,936 for both the land and the building.
The secret was that the man made the Tabernacle.
When ‘A Travelling Correspondent’ in the 1870s asked why Shoreditch needed a Tabernacle, he answered ‘because a man has lately  settled there who, as a preacher of the Gospel, can attract a full house’.
The preacher in this case was the Rev. William Cuff, a Spurgeon man.
After 1860 Tabernacles reached Battersea Park, South Lee, Dulwich, Peckham, Highgate, Barking, Enfield, Poplar, Shepherd's Bush, Uxbridge Road, Walthamstow, Croydon and Tunbridge Wells.
One final reason why Gothic's victory was never complete lay in the new Settlements and Central Halls which Nonconformity erected in town centres.
Any form of ‘ecclesiastical’ architecture was seen as a hindrance to the ‘unchurched millions’.
The Leysian Mission on City Road was opened in 1904 by the Prince and Princess of Wales (later King George V and Queen Mary).
The cost was £110,000 (over £3,600,000).
The Wesleyan mission had been started in 1886 by the old boys of The Leys School as a settlement for the poor of Finsbury and it had the usual assortment of activities such as clubs, bands, and concerts.
It was designed not to resemble a church of any sort but, if anything, a town hall.
Likewise there was little ‘church like’ about Whitefield's Tabernacle on the Tottenham Court Road to which C. S. Horne came in 1903 while the Wesleyan mission at Ancoats, Manchester, had an eclectic design consisting of Tudor half-timbers plus towers.
Gothic design always had its critics.
Some at the grass roots feared that it was a rejection of traditional Puritan virtues.
In 1863 J. A. Tabor wrote a pamphlet attacking the new Gothic building put up for Lion Walk Congregational Chapel in Colchester.
He denounced the ‘vainglorious erections…of…gorgeous edifices with…lofty and defiant spires’ because they proved that Nonconformity had become ‘tainted with the spirit of the world’.
Protestant Christianity was not an ‘Exhibition , but an internal, vital principle’.
The new buildings were ‘so many monuments, not of piety, but of pride — not of spirituality, but of rank carnality’.
More often critics attacked the craze for Gothic architecture not because it was wrong in itself but because the mediaeval arrangement, as opposed to mere decoration, was not suitable to a religion based on preaching, not on eucharistic sacrifice.
In 1862 the  architectural historian, James Fergusson, denounced Victorian Gothic, by which he meant a servile copying, as a ‘forgery’.
It was not a ‘true’ style because it had not developed within an era to meet a genuine need; it was merely copying the dead and it ‘degrades architecture from its high position of a quasi-natural production to that of a mere imitative art’, a criticism often levied by professional architects against the wishes of the man in the street.
The simple fact was that large numbers of Victorians, if not the vast majority, liked Gothic.
In 1870 the architect James Cubitt denounced the Gothic design for chapels as being as ‘undesirable as it is inappropriate’ for Protestant worship.
His attack was not so much on ‘Gothic’ decorations but on the cruciform pattern with columns, aisles and a chancel.
He felt ‘their day is nearly over’ and recommended alternative styles.
‘If we are ever to have a real modern church, it must be by adopting a fresh church arrangement.’
In 1876, the same year in which Christ Church Westminster Bridge Road was built, Cubitt had an opportunity to put his theories into practice.
He was chosen to design a new building for the Congregationalists' Union Chapel in Islington.
While the congregation was only prepared to spend £25,000 (£825,000) they also only wanted 1,650 seats which took some of the pressure off Cubitt.
In his design he is credited for seeing that‘auditorium planning need not be inconsistent with good architecture’.
Like Christ Church, Union Chapel was an octagon which focused on the pulpit without being centred on it.
Unfortunately for Cubitt he had to have a gallery but he made it far more acceptable by supporting it with pointed arches.
He also designed a fascinating roof of wood and glass.
The organ was behind the pulpit but was hidden by an attractive grill.
The building was set in its own garden, since vanished, and was built of red brick.
Ten years later came another blow for Cubitt when a large tower was added; while it was ‘ecclesiastical’, it was not Gothic.
Nicholas Pevsner later referred to it as having a ‘blustering High Victorian effect’.
If the building did not look like a church, Cubitt could have replied that Englishmen needed to ask themselves what a church should look like.
Twenty-two years later Cubitt returned to the attack  when he published his Popular Handbook of Nonconformist Church Building .
He accepted that people had a right to prefer buildings ‘such as custom and habit associate with the name of ‘church’’.
The need was to reconcile the ‘ecclesiastical’ and the ‘congregational’elements, and while he insisted that ‘Nonconformist churches must, beyond all question, be built to see and hear in’he had nothing good to say about the vast preaching halls, such as the Metropolitan Tabernacle, with a bit of tracery and the proportions of a barn.
He also criticized the competition among Nonconformists ‘of having the ‘highest spire in the neighbourhood’’.
Cubitt's greatest savagery was reserved for the ‘Meeting-House Gallery’’ which he described as ‘about the crudest attempt ever made at providing seats for a certain number of people over the heads of the rest’, a ‘failure practically, and a horror artistically’, ‘uncouth’and a ‘gigantic misfit’.
He was delighted that ‘Dissenters' Gothic’ seemed to be a thing of the past.
The things ‘one most misses in the Nonconformist church-building of today are character, self-reliance, individuality’.
While there were still some mongrel structures —‘half meeting house, half music hall’— things were improving.
Let Nonconformity ‘only have courage to develop on its own lines, to be itself, and not a pale imitation of Anglican architecture, and the possibilities before it are very great.’
By the 1890s architectural styles generally were changing and Gothic had largely run its course; Cubitt's arguments were in step with the times.
The reaction against Gothic continued despite its decline.
In 1902 J. Compton Rickett, Liberal MP for Scarborough and a wealthy coal merchant, denounced Gothic architecture in his book,The Free Churchman of To-Day .
Except in a few cases it was pronounced a failure because of the need to use cheaper materials.
He wondered if it was ever right to spend ‘large sums of money…in attempting to compete with’ the Church of England.
Could Nonconformists ‘with advantage surrender the outline of the meeting-house’ which often ‘more fitly accords with the genius of the Free Churches than many an ambitious structure which ministers to the cultured taste of a suburban congregation’?
In 1911 P. T. Forsyth insisted that a Protestant church ‘must be primarily an auditorium’.
Even though Gothic was ‘the purest, most adequate, and most congenial expression of the Christian spirit in architecture’, Nonconformity needed its own expression.
The difficulty with all these criticisms is that they never specified exactly what was the ‘correct’ style for Nonconformist chapels.
In the event, Gothic was succeeded in the 1890s by a variety of new styles.
The first we must call Eclectic Gothic: this used red brick and stone facings and, as Cubitt suggested, a variety of designs for towers, some of them quite ingenious.
It eschewed the Gothic spire and mediaeval internal arrangements.
Chapels on this pattern were barely distinguishable from parish churches of the same period and they both fitted perfectly into the leafy suburbs for which they were intended.
In many instances they closely resemble Protestant churches built in America except that there stone was used as frequently as brick.
The architect most commonly associated with this work was George Baines who designed quite a few churches for Baptists.
Other new styles were created by adapting traditional designs other than Gothic as Cubitt had suggested; as we have mentioned before, Hinde Street had a facade based on St Paul's Cathedral while Westminster Congregational Chapel, near Buckingham Palace, had a ‘Lombardic’ design.
In the village of Thornton Hough in Cheshire, W. H. Lever gave a Congregational chapel in 1907.
He had it named St George's Church and also had it built in the centre of the village in impeccable Norman style with nave, transepts, chancel, altar, choir stalls, altar rails and tower.
There was even a lych gate.
Yet another new style was created when Nonconformist buildings adapted the designs of the public buildings which arose in the final years of the nineteenth century.
This may be called the ‘monumental or Renaissance’, a style which made an enormous impact on ‘townscapes’ throughout Europe, especially in the years before and after the Great War.
It is now mainly associated with government offices in most major capitals and in Britain with the Methodist Central Hall in London and the Civic Centre in Cardiff, both designed by Rickards and Lanchester.
In Brighton the monumental style was to find favour with Nonconformists planning a new church, not a denominational headquarters like Central Hall.
In 1898  Union Chapel was created by joining Union Street and Queen Square Congregational churches.
R. J. Campbell, pastor of Union Street, became the minister of the new church, inadequately housed in the Gothic buildings in Queen Square.
The old Gothic was felt to be as inadequate in the 1890s as the old meeting-house had been in the 1860s so plans were made for a new building worthy of their pastor whose fame was rapidly increasing.
Land was bought, an architect hired and the cost agreed: £70,000 (£2,310,000).
It would be yet another ‘great Nonconformist cathedral’.
The architect's plans were exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1899.
The building would be built of stone and there would be niches in the outside walls to be filled with statues of dissenting saints like Cromwell.
Inside there would be seating for 2,000.
To the German architectural historian, Hermann Muthesius, the building's ‘expense, splendour and technological worth will have no equal amongst English nonconformist buildings’.
However, after Joseph Parker died in 1902 the City Temple invited Campbell to take his place.
He therefore left Brighton for the greater glory of London; fortunately for his less famous successors, ‘the scheme never materialised’.
One example of the monumental style which did get built was the Wesleyans' new London home, the Central Hall in Westminster.
For years it had been a dream of Methodist leaders like Hughes, Sir Robert Perks MP and Sir Henry Lunn to have a ‘monumental Connexional building’ worthy of Wesleyanism.
They were lucky when the freehold of the old Aquarium Theatre, opposite Westminster Abbey, came up for sale.
It was a perfect site because the building, for which a quarter of a million pounds (£8,250,000) had been set aside from the Twentieth Century Fund, was meant to be ‘a challenge to the Church of England’.
The historian, Robert Currie, has justly described it as the ‘architectural monument to Methodist ambitions at the beginning of the twentieth century’.
Nothing better illustrates the change in English religious life produced by the nineteenth century than the proximity of the Wesleyans' new Central Hall to the Anglicans' new Church House (put up between 1891 and 1902) and the Roman Catholics' Westminster Cathedral  further down Victoria Street.
The building's hall is still frequently a venue for those exercising their Nonconformist Consciences on current political controversies.
Whatever the criticisms that were and are levied against Nonconformist chapel building in the nineteenth century, no one can deny that it was a tremendous undertaking.
Nonconformity did not will migration into the towns nor the migration out again to the suburbs but it did meet the challenges presented by these mammoth social changes.
The worse criticism, of course, is not that Carpenter's Gothic was cheap nor that most of the styles chosen were imitative but that it did no good.
Newman Hall, whose Christ Church, Westminster Bridge Road, was to many the epitome of Gothic extravagance, is said to have told F. B. Meyer's biographer, ‘Had I my time over again with my present knowledge, I would build a Workmen's Hall at Westminster and use the surplus money to build three or four churches in the suburbs of London’.
This was a criticism not of Gothic design nor of church building but of extravagant expenditure.
An even greater criticism is that the vast sums spent should have been spent elsewhere, especially in missionary efforts among the growing number of Englishmen who never went to church or chapel.
The expenditure was a commentary on the disunity within Methodism and the lack of supervision within the Baptist and Congregational Unions.
Critics then and now say that Nonconformity did not create a new architecture after they had given up the old seventeenth and eighteenth-century meeting house.
Nonconformists could not win: if they followed normal Victorian uses and imitated the past, whether it was Greek, Gothic, Lombard, Norman or St Paul's Cathedral, they were and are criticized for not having a new style.
If, on the other hand, they had remained loyal to the meetinghouse style they would have still been criticized for not having a style which met the needs of their time.
If they stood apart from their era, assuming human nature can ever do this, their fear was that they would have faded away as irrelevant oddities; if on the other hand they became fully part of their century their fear was that they would not be giving an alternate witness, another voice.
Their imitation was not wrong and, if they were actually a vital and in some cases dominant part of English Christianity, was their ‘imitation’ of Gothic buildings any more wrong than that of their Anglican competitors?
What was wrong was cheap imitation.
Likewise, they did use innovative architects, men like George Baines, W. W. Pocock, James Cubitt and Alfred Waterhouse.
If their buildings were garish then so, too, were most Victorian creations.
As Bishop Edward King, at the opposite end of the English religious spectrum from Nonconformists, noted, ‘We live in an age of decoration…
It is in all matters, not merely ecclesiastical ones, that the spirit of adornment has caught hold of us, and unless there is positive wrong in any of these things, we have no call to repress them.’
It was Cubitt who noted that ‘artistic knowledge and cultured tastes are not now confined to what are sometimes called the upper classes’ and the German historian, Muthesius, saw that ‘within Nonconformity, each individual layman's romanticism has begun to show itself — as seen in the architectural achievements of the Congregationalists’.
Those who eschewed colour and decoration, like Spurgeon, and built what were really mammoth meeting-houses with a Greek front, were criticized for lack of taste and for concentrating too much on the preacher.
Those who, like Newman Hall, let Gothic design take over, were criticized for being imitative and for demeaning the sermon.
It took professional journals like Building News and foreign observers like Muthesius to recognize Nonconformity's achievements.
In his book,Die neurere kirkliche  Baukunst , Muthesius devoted one-third of his space to Nonconformist buildings and noted the proposed Union Chapel in Brighton, Melbourne Hall in Leicester, Newman Hall's Christ Church, Union Chapel, Islington, Victoria Hall, Ancoats, Manchester and Whitefield's Tabernacle.
He was impressed by the variety, originality and eclecticism of Nonconformist architecture: ‘The grateful lesson, which, as the preceding [discussion]obviously shows, English Nonconformist architecture has given architects, serves as a means of liberation which, from the architectural point of view, deserves a thorough consideration.’
In some cases even those more conservative  chapels which stood aside from the changing fashions made notable contributions to their own town's architecture.
In Bedford, Bunyan Meeting House still possesses bronze doors of a very high quality and showing scenes from Bunyan's works.
They were given by the Duke of Bedford, who also gave a statue of Bunyan to Bedford Corporation.
(Another member of the Russell family, Lord Charles, used his influence as the Queen's Serjeant-at-Arms to get William Hale White's father the position of Door-Keeper to the House of Commons.)
The fact remains, however, that there was a certain defensive quality in many Nonconformist discussions on their new buildings; the Editor of the Baptist Times insisted in 1902 that ‘today, under changed conditions, we are false to no principle and to no tradition in making our Sanctuaries beautiful as well as useful’.
In 1914 Ronald Jones argued that ‘Everyone will now agree that a building should sincerely interpret the object for which it was erected, and should be the natural outcome of the conditions…of its own period and place’.
The trouble was that the old meeting-house had become a symbol of religious and cultural isolation.
Nonconformity no longer felt itself to be a gathered community of dissenters but part and parcel of the English Christian Church and for better or worse the architectural tradition of that Church and nation was Gothic.
To revert to an old style would be to try to set back the clock and deny the progress which had been made and made under divine providence.
If Nonconformists were imitators they were no more so than Anglicans or Roman Catholics.
The tension was never resolved.
Even within the bounds of their overwhelming devotion to Gothic they showed by the end of the century an openness to new styles which other denominations were not as quick to learn.
If their new buildings did not look like churches they had a right to say that people should re-examine what they thought a church ought to look like.
The debates which raged round their building programmes were themselves healthy signs, showing that they were in the mainstream of Victorian life which is where they wanted to be.
The one fact which does stand out is this: in the creation of the Victorian  town, just as in the life of the ancient universities, in the spread of learning and in the writing and publishing of Victorian literature, Nonconformists were a vital element in English life wielding an importance far beyond their numbers.
‘An irresistible movement towards co-operation’
THE MOVEMENT TO UNITY
It is hardly surprising given the enhanced status, power and influence which the nineteenth century had brought, that Nonconformists had come to identify the Christian religion with the values and secular goals of their times, the most important of which was an acceptance of the inevitability of progress through change.
The older dissenting bodies — the Baptists and Congregationalists — had largely thrown off their heritage as ‘gathered communities’ founded on an old High Calvinism for a more flexible biblical Protestant creed in a world of expanding knowledge and opportunities.
They had retained a firm conviction, despite the talk about the ‘social gospel’, of the need for personal salvation through individual conversion, a belief which accorded with the century's emphasis on individualism.
Methodists, likewise, were being gathered up into what the veteran Congregational leader, J. Guinness Rogers, called ‘the general intellectual movement of the generation’, even if at a slower pace.
The century had been one of tremendous change and older views, like the emphasis on individualism, were being modified and in some cases challenged by the closing decades of the century.
Then, as always, various ‘catchphrases’ were strung together like shells on a necklace to form a complete view that was repeated over and again and formed men's attitudes.
The two most important catchphrases, certainly by the 1890s, were the ‘law of evolution’ and what may be called the spirit of organization.
As Sir Percy Bunting, Methodist editor of the Contemporary Review , wrote: ‘The influence of the evolutionary idea in all subjects of human thought is permanent, and has deeply affected theology.
The ‘law’ of natural evolution or development, especially when popularized by Herbert Spencer and applied to society, was said to parallel traditional Christian reliance on Divine Providence and  meant that the expansion of Nonconformity at home and the extraordinary growth of British power and influence abroad could be seen as part of the same phenomenon.
Many leaders, including the imperialist Hugh Price Hughes, the Fabian Socialist John Clifford and the Gladstonian Liberal Joseph Parker, also urged the need for organization and cooperation.
To them the traditional emphasis on voluntarism and private initiative, which had laid the foundation for Nonconformist power, needed re-examination or what a later generation would call ‘rationalization’.
Nonconformity's dependence on laissez faire and, in the case of Methodism, on competition among five separate bodies, had not always worked for the best and there had been a lot of wasted effort.
The 1901 President of the National Free Church Council was only pointing to the obvious when he told his audience that there was throughout the country and Empire ‘an irresistible movement towards co-operation, combination, collectivism, solidarity, centralisation…
The whole bent of thought, and what we call the spirit of the age, point straight in that direction.’
He added that ‘the survival of the fittest is sometimes the apotheosis of the unfit’.
Here again Nonconformists were only adapting current political and social ideas to religious ends.
In politics Charles Dilke had referred to ‘Greater Britain’ and Joseph Chamberlain to Imperial Unity, while the quixotic Lord Rosebery, with his usual flair for vacuous terms, demanded ‘Efficiency’in government, education and industry.
As an anonymous pamphleteer wrote, ‘The growth of an Imperial sentiment in politics…is not more remarkable than the corresponding sentiment in favour of the unity of all baptised Christians’.
As we have seen, attitudes had been changing regarding the corporate nature of chapel life and of the individual Christian's duty concerning social ills.
People were coming to accept that Nonconformist chapels should look like ‘churches’ and that Nonconformist services should be more ‘dignified’and ‘ecclesiastical’; it was not surprising that people should come to view the nature of the Church itself in a different vein from their forefathers.
This increasing emphasis on ‘dignity’ was not only a reference to behaviour within the chapel but to the nature of the Church as a  body.
As one of Nonconformity's most severe but incisive critics observed, ‘powerful influences have intervened to elevate the corporate as opposed to the individualist aspect of dissent’.
These changing attitudes can be seen as part of the general reaction against the older voluntarism.
Signs of change had been evident within various protest movements, like the Teetotallers, from the 1850s when they realized that without state action they could not achieve their goals.
A widespread reaction, however, can be dated from the 1880s.
Knowledge of the effects of urbanization, industrialization and poverty proliferated throughout society, partly due to the efforts of Nonconformists like Rowntree, Cadbury, Mearns and General Booth; fears developed about the industrial competition from America and Germany; demands grew within the Liberal party for more state action with regard to education, public health and housing.
Increasingly people looked to the state to provide services, to regulate more of the affairs between men and to effect overall improvement in the quality of the nation's life.
The Empire likewise needed organization if it were to survive.
All this was perhaps an inevitable reaction by a new generation to the old creed of individualism and laissez faire which G. W. E. Russell, a Liberal MP and High Churchman, denounced in a Manchester Guardian article at the turn of the century as ‘this intellectual but unmoral theory’.
To him, ‘the cause of collectivism seems to be the cause of Social Progress.
It is the new and better Revolution.’
When Joseph Parker urged a radical reorganization of the Congregational Union to create a ‘Congregational Church’ he asked pointedly, ‘What right has Congregationalism to stand outside the law of evolution?’
Increasingly the answer was: none at all.
For centuries one of the most telling criticisms of Nonconformity had been its penchant towards disintegration, what Edmund Burke called ‘the dissidence of dissent’.
In his Letter to Sir Hercules Langrishe of 1792 Burke carried the argument to its logical conclusion:
If mere dissent from the church of Rome be a merit, he that dissents the most perfectly is the most meritorious…
He  that dissents throughout with that church, will dissent with the church of England…
A man is certainly the most perfect Protestant, who protests against the whole Christian religion.
The problem extended both to Old Dissent — what had become in the nineteenth century Independents or Congregationalists and Baptists — and to the Methodists who were wracked by schisms until 1849.
Silvester Horne, in his popular survey of nineteenth-century Nonconformity, admitted, ‘The easiest accusation to sustain against Nonconformity has been hitherto its tendency to disintegration and division’.
Other leaders, like the Rev. Alexander Mackennal, pointed out that the original Separatists of the sixteenth century had not venerated that ‘extravagant individualism against which we are now witnessing a somewhat excessive revolt’.
Extreme religious individualism, he insisted, was an outgrowth of the Methodist Revival, amongst other sources, presumably because of its emphasis on individual experiences of ‘salvation’.
The essence of Congregationalism, he insisted, was not isolated individual salvation but a ‘pure and disciplined’ Church, an argument which retained a traditional Calvinist flavour.
A Congregational Union pamphlet issued in 1901 cited Article XXIV in the Savoy Declaration of 1658 which had warned against too many ‘distinct societies’ and Article XXVl, which urged cooperation.
The tract also admitted that ‘there are churches that ought never to have come into existence, churches of dispute and personal pique or eccentricity’.
The Old Dissent had traditionally held that ‘the Church’ meant the gathered, local body of true believers.
Organization to control local initiative, let alone to define belief and practice and to fight the eighteenth-century tendency towards Unitarianism, had not been easy to achieve.
The power the respective Unions exercised over Baptists and Congregationalists was very small, compared to that of the various Methodist Connexions.
Another tract in the same Congregational Union series argued that to join a local church was, in effect, to join ‘Christ's universal church’, which was ‘Christ's own society’, not a ‘private society organised by pious men.’
As often happens, this younger generation of ‘Tractarians’ who were leading the  crusade on the side of ‘collectivism’joined forces with the older generation like J. A. Macfadyen who had remained Calvinist in their views and ‘deplored the modern nondenominational spirit, the temper of indifference to questions of church order’, the spirit which saw local churches as ‘mere voluntary associations for religious purposes, with power to determine their own polity and prescribe their own sphere of action’.
In many chapels a more traditional, eighteenth-century practice as to church discipline was followed well into the twentieth century.
These were located mainly in rural areas and in smaller market towns where conservative practices inherited from the past stood a better chance of survival.
These were chapels which did not have the coming-and-going of suburban churches where people sought out the latest new preacher or moved on once their income increased.
At Holmer Green Baptist Church in Buckinghamshire, for example, in February, 1890, ‘the deacons were requested to visit Mr and Mrs R — in consequence of their long absence from Communion’.
In April ‘The visitors reported the result of their interviews with Mr & Mrs R ———…and no action was taken’.
The problem, however, did not go away and in January, 1897 ‘A revision of the Church Roll was then made and the following name was erased for absence from Communion [:]Miss R —.’
Two other people were to be visited regarding their absences.
In Amersham, the church meeting of the Lower Meeting House (Baptist) heard in 1892 that ‘several of our young members have been absent from the means of grace [communion]for many months and it was resolved that they be visited by two members of the Church’.
Five years later the Meeting considered another problem and in its wisdom inverted the common law assumption that an accusation was not a conviction: ‘The Case of Mr. H. R ——— was brought before the Church, who had misconducted himself and at the recommendation of the Pastor and Officers was suspended until his guilt was proved.’
The Minutes do not tell us in what Mr R ———‘s ‘misconduct’ consisted and he is heard of no more.
Like the Baptists in Holmer Green, the Amersham  Baptists' main problem concerned attendance; following traditional Christian practice they held that the indispensable sign of membership, of being ‘in communion’, was partaking in the Communion Service, whether this was held quarterly or, in their case, monthly.
In 1898 the Church Meeting resolved to draw up the membership list on the basis that ‘those who wished to be regular communicants be voted upon at the Church Meeting’.
The following year the question of non-attendance arose.
It was resolved that any member absent for twelve months should be visited by a deputation to ‘ascertain the cause’.
Afterwards the church would decide each case ‘on its merits’.
Members also appointed six ‘pew-stewards’ who were ‘to look after the pew demands [rental fees]and the non-attendance of Divine Service and the monthly ordinance [i.e.
Communion].’
In 1900 the two senior deacons were appointed to look into three cases of ‘non attendance to the table’ and reported back that there were twenty-one cases out of a membership of 109.
It was obviously a real problem.
Of the three cases investigated by the deacons, one was put on probation and two, ‘after confession and promises for better attendance…were left upon the Church books’.
To some all this will appear to be petty, intrusive and narrow-minded along the lines of ‘What right had they to…’; to others it will appear an example of the chapel's commitment to their beliefs.
The Baptists of Amersham were only doing what the universal Church had done for centuries in insisting on partaking in the Communion as a sign of being ‘in communion’ with the church.
As the Prayer Book enjoined in the Notes appended to the Communion Service, ‘every Parishioner shall communicate at the least three times in the year, of which Easter to be one’.
It shows that the older, ‘high’ view of the Church had survived and that not all Nonconformist chapels could be lambasted as mere preaching barns in which the faithful could hear the minister dilate on the role religion could play in politics.
It was the Congregationalists who suffered most from what R. F. Horton called an ‘exaggerated and perverted notion of independency’, partially because of their history and partially because there was a greater diversity of beliefs than in the other denominations being discussed.
The 1898 Chairman of the Union told his listeners that ‘religious atomism is the bane of Congregationalism’.
‘Among us the sin of schism is too often committed and too quickly condoned.’
Local churches had a ‘spiritual responsibility to the Church of God’.
The most important challenge to the laissez faire mentality within Congregationalism came from Joseph Parker in 1901 when as Chairman he placed a cat among the pigeons with his usual dexterity.
He had himself witnessed the ‘dissidence of dissent’ as a child: his father, a stonemason in Hexham, left the local Congregational chapel when the new minister turned out to be an Arminian, and migrated, somewhat illogically for a Calvinist, to the local Wesleyan chapel.
When the offending Arminian left he returned to the fold.
Not surprisingly he had not been happy as a Wesleyan.
Parker called for a ‘United Congregational Church’ and despite vociferous interruptions from the floor he asked, ‘Is it really a glorious thing to be absolutely independent of each other?’
He wanted more control in order to level up, to get rid of ‘jerry building being described as Congregationalism’.
He wanted all the theological colleges to be combined into three, at Oxford, Cambridge and Durham; he wanted the numerous funds, societies, urban work and foreign missions combined for greater effect.
He spoke not because he felt that the denomination was threatened or was losing ground but because the status quo did not give Congregationalism the dignity its growing wealth and membership had earned for it.
Parker was applying Herbert Spencer's law of social evolution and the current devotion to organization to the denomination.
It was an act of confidence, based on strength, not of fear based on weakness.
Greater unity would strengthen the weakest link in the chain, the village minister: ‘When sneerers and wonderers ask [him], ‘Hath any man brought him ought to eat?’ it will soon be made clear that good men eat at the table of Divine plenteousness.’
A new constitution was adopted in September 1904 but Congregationalists fought shy of using the word ‘church’, with the implication that local chapels were de facto parishes within a new national body, and retained their old title of ‘Union’: churches remained the local bodies of gathered believers.
It proved only a partial victory for Parker who  had died in 1902 and it was not until 1919 that the first Moderators or de facto bishops were inducted to ensure higher, more uniform standards and greater control from London.
To many people, talk of greater denominational unity was nothing more than the application to religion of current political nostrums like collectivism or, worse, ‘socialism’.
Among the more doctrinally united Baptists some conservatives were rather defensive by the end of the century and accepted the need for a middle course between ‘exaggerated and ill-directed individualism’ on the one hand and ‘exaggerated and ill-directed socialism, on the other.
Others, however, retained their traditional belief: T. M. Morris declared in his 1893 Presidential Address to the Baptist Union that the ‘fashion of the present day’ was to ‘exaggerate the importance and power of circumstances’whereas Christianity was based on the individual.
The Church, he insisted, was ‘nothing more than the aggregation of these individuals.’
Two years later the Union President, J. G. Greenhough, called up the old world to attack the new: he expounded traditional Calvinism with its high doctrine of church order although he accepted that it had ‘little favour’ in 1895.
Then he attacked the new belief in collectivism as a political, not an ecclesiastical cry: socialism would produce a ‘kingdom of Lilliputians, not men’.
‘If there be no free play for the individual forces there will be a speedy decay of manhood.’
In the following year the President argued that man's nature had been used by God and that state-imposed collective responsibility was unnecessary: Christian altruism had worked through an ‘inevitable though almost undetected stimulation of Egoism’.
The argument against individualism in religion and politics was led by men like J. C. Carlile and John Clifford.
(Clifford's London church had emphasized the corporate nature of Christianity by having a service of ‘infant dedication’ while retaining baptism by total immersion for those who had experienced ‘conversion’at a later date.
They were by no means alone in this practice.)
In 1899 Clifford, as President of the Baptist Union, had argued that ‘that separate entity called the individual is not a concrete existence…
You cannot insulate a man…
The  highest life of the unit is only attainable through the fullest life of all.’
Salvation may begin with the individual, he argued, but is only fulfilled in a life of shared brotherhood.
Four years later Carlile argued that ‘the Church is an organism and an organisation.
As a living body in which dwells the Divine Spirit, it is fashioned and shaped by the Divine Power.
It is a Divine creation.’
The Church is not merely ‘a company of faithful men in which the pure word of God is preached’ but is in truth, ‘Christ in the world’.
We may question how far these arguments were heeded, given the radical reputation of their proponents.
Where a ‘corporate’ sense of the Church survived it usually did so, as at Holmer's Green, through the survival of the older, Calvinist tradition which was alien to men like Clifford.
To Methodists the talk of collectivism remained largely a political debate because, despite their numerous schisms, all five Methodist connexions had strong central authorities much envied by some Baptists and Congregationalists.
Methodists might reject the right of Rome or Canterbury to speak with authority on matters of faith, but they had no doubt about Conference's role as ecclesia docens .
The Wesleyans, especially, maintained a very ‘high’ view of their Connexion and of Methodist order: ‘Its remedies have been tested everywhere’Conference declared in 1896, ‘and the first failure has yet to be recorded.’
In short, the connexional system seemed infallible.
There were those like Hugh Price Hughes who joined in the reaction against individualism because they felt it had narrowed the churches' work among working people:
The manhood of England has been largely alienated from the organised Churches because we have been so absorbed by the interests of the individual soul as to neglect the woes of society, and so preoccupied with the delights of heaven as to overlook some of the most urgent duties of earth.
Methodists' main concern was not so much the debate over collectivism v. individualism as over reunion of the various Methodist divisions.
There was, of course, talk of union all round; it was in the early 1890s, as we have noted, that the historic divisions between General and Particular Baptists were finally consolidated into the  Baptist Union.
In the year in which Joseph Parker made his controversial speech the Baptists and Congregationalists held some of their ‘May Meetings’ jointly but talk of the two denominations uniting found little support.
With Methodists, however, the talk of reunion bore fruit not only at home but abroad where English divisions had been taken by emigrants.
In Canada a united Methodist Church was created in the 1880s and in Australia in 1902.
In America the divisions over slavery in the 1840s and 1850s continued with separate Northern and Southern churches.
In England there had been talk of reunion since the 1830s and some reunions had taken place.
Most talk occurred among the four non-Wesleyan groups although in 1886 Hughes and his Methodist Times began urging a total reunion which would create one church.
As we have seen, in 1907 the Methodist New Connexion, the Bible Christians and the United Methodist Free Churches united to form the United Methodist Church.
To their ‘uniting conference’ came the Lord Mayors of London, Bristol, Cardiff and Leeds and with them twelve other mayors, all sixteen of whom were members of the new body.
Also among the visitors was a representative of the National Free Church Council, the most important example of Nonconformist ‘imperialist efficiency’ to emerge in the nineteenth century.
The movement for a national Nonconformist forum, and with it for a union in some form of English Nonconformist churches, was a product of the 1890s.
If the ‘Free Church Movement’ was bound up, at least in its leaders' minds with the cause of union, it was also bound up with politics, at least in the minds of its supporters.
A union of Baptists or of Methodists could be based on shared theological foundations; a union of Nonconformists could only be based on the one thing they shared, their nonconforming status as English Protestant Christians outside the established church of the land.
The movement could never be separated from political questions whatever its leaders wanted, for the question of non-conforming raised the question of establishment, itself a political question dating to the anti-church rate campaigns of the 1830s and the creation of the British Anti-State Church Society by  Edward Miall in 1844.
In 1853 this became the Liberation Society and nearly fifty years later, Joseph Parker said in the midst of his speech on reorganizing the Congregational Union, ‘Every Council of Free Churches is an auxiliary of that Society [Liberation Society], whether nominally so or not’.
The question of establishment raised mutatis mutandis other causes dear to radical hearts.
It was as much the way of the world for a Congregationalist keen on disestablishment to be keen on electoral reform, state education and ‘reform’ of the House of Lords as it was for an Anglo-Catholic priest who was a member of the Confraternity of the Blessed Sacrament also to belong to the Guild of All Souls.
There had been for many years various organizations to co-ordinate Nonconformist work in both political and religious fields and the oldest bodies dated back to the previous century.
The General Body of Protestant Dissenting Ministers of the Three Denominations had been formed in 1727 and included ministers from Baptist, Congregational and Presbyterian chapels in London.
Although they were not avowedly political, they did make political pronouncements and had a ‘privilege of approaching the Throne’ which, by the end of the nineteenth century, had lapsed through disuse.
During the height of the controversy over the 1902 Education Bill, its membership numbered 396 but attendance at annual and special meetings ranged from ‘small’ to ‘fair’.
A second body was the Protestant Dissenting Deputies which had been founded in 1732 and was, by the end of the nineteenth century, healthier than its older friend although The Christian World noted in 1901 that it ‘seems to have fallen on evil days’.
At that year's annual general meeting there were ‘about 35’ present of whom one-third were reporters.
The annual report was long and ‘somewhat pessimistic’ and the meeting was ‘by no means characterised by enthusiasm.’
During the 1902 controversy the annual meeting could only muster forty attenders despite the attraction as guest speaker of W. S. Caine, Liberal Member for Camborne.
The nineteenth century had seen a variety of ad hoc political bodies.
The Protestant Society for the Protection of Religious Liberty flourished between 1811 and 1857  and was especially active in the heady days of 1827–1829, when the Corporation and Test Acts were repealed.
The Society had eventually been eclipsed by the more active and famous Liberation Society.
However, by the end of the century it was in no better health than the older, eighteenth-century bodies: the 1902 Parliamentary Breakfast saw only thirteen MPs present.
Despite the desire of some supporters to ‘take advantage of the condition of the Public mind, brought about by the…
Education Bill’ the Society was unable to make any real headway.
In 1893 Nonconformist MPs formed a Committee for Religious Equality under the chairmanship of Sir Osborne Morgan to challenge the Church Defence Committee formed the same year.
Five years later there was another attempt with a Nonconformist Parliamentary Council, led by R. W. Perks, Lloyd George and J. Hirst Hollowell but the venture was not warmly received by the Nonconformist establishment.
All of these bodies had either been confined to MPs or had been expressions of ‘Political Dissent’ and had overlapped in membership, support and aims; all had been shunned by most Methodists.
There were, of course, bodies devoted specifically to religious aims.
A ‘Society for Promoting Ecclesiastical Knowledge’ was formed in 1829 (a balance to the older, Anglican Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge); in 1846 the Evangelical Alliance was begun although it was not, at least in the beginning, mainly Nonconformist.
The need, however, was for a permanent body to deal with matters affecting Nonconformity, to encourage unity amongst the various denominations or at least to cut down on needless competition, to present a united Nonconformist ‘witness’ when required and to give a ‘Nonconformist’answer to political questions whenever possible, that is, when this could be done without alienating the Methodists, especially the Wesleyans.
The Church of England set an example in its semi-official Church Congresses which date from 1861.
Seventeen years later the Congregational Union's Executive called for a Nonconformist equivalent but nothing came of it.
The differences in history, theology and practices, combined with historic jealousies and denominational structures  which prospered as membership grew were enormous stumbling blocks.
The only solution appeared to be to go round existing denominational organizations and to create a new body which would emphasize non-political aims and gather a following based on individuals, not denominations.
Not surprisingly the impetus for what became the National Council of Evangelical Free Churches (normally called the National Free Church Council) came from a Congregationalist, J. Guinness Rogers.
An article by him advocating a national Nonconformist congress appeared in Hughes' Methodist Times on 20 February 1890 and was written at Hughes' request.
Rogers' call was supported by the Baptists John Clifford and F. B. Meyer and the Methodist New Connexion leader W. J. Townsend in the 27 February issue.
Local ‘Nonconformist Councils’ based on individual, not denominational, membership had already been formed in Worcester in 1881, in Stratford-on-Avon in 1884, in Leamington and in Warwick in 1890.
Another would follow in Walsall in 1892; it was obviously largely a Midlands phenomenon.
In 1891 the Review of the Churches began publication and it included representative editors from not only Nonconformity but from the Roman Catholic Church and the Church of England.
There were also monthly roundtable meetings, the first of which included a paper on reunion by Gladstone.
In that same year a circular was sent to every Nonconformist minister in England and Wales by the Rev. J. B. Paton and a committee which included Hughes, Clifford, R. F. Horton, J. Scott Lidgett, Richard Westrope and A. T. Guttery.
Its aim was to encourage the establishment of ‘Unions of Evangelical Churches’ on the town or district level and based on individual membership.
The aim was cooperation to secure ‘social redemptive work’ which must by nature be ‘thoroughly and systematically undertaken’.
At the same time the first inter-denominational ministerial conference met at Grindelwald, in Switzerland.
In November of the following year, 1892, the first ‘Free Church Congress’ met in Manchester and was composed of personal delegates.
There was no Congress in 1893  although there was an important meeting in Birmingham where the new movement was gaining strength due partially to the support of the Cadbury family.
In 1894 a second Congress was held in Leeds and delegates began constructing a national organization composed of county federations and councils in towns with a population over 50,000.
The movement was not without criticism from those whose support might have been taken for granted; Robertson Nicoll pronounced the 1894 Congress a ‘failure’ because ‘it does not represent Nonconformity and it is wholly lacking in enthusiasm and initiative.’
He added that it also omitted the question of disestablishment.
It had refused to discuss an issue which to many was becoming a red herring in an attempt to win Presbyterian and, more importantly, Wesleyan support.
The organization was already suspect because of the support of veteran radicals like Clifford and Rogers, and Liberals like Hughes.
The Council's Liberal bias, however, was never really in doubt: when the 1895 meeting met in Birmingham the Conservative Mayor welcomed delegates.
The official resolution said in reply that the gracefulness of his welcome was only increased because he ‘did not belong to any of the Free Churches…and did not belong to any section of those political parties to which they might be supposed to belong’.
There was seldom a meeting in which some speaker did not refer to the need for disestablishment and resolutions were passed in support of Welsh disestablishment, temperance and international arbitration, and against Tory bills on education.
One speaker warned the Liberal party leadership that Nonconformists were not ‘mere hewers of wood and drawers of water…
As Free Churchmen we will not be the helots of either Mr John Morley or Mr Chamberlain.’
No one thought the speaker should have added that they would not hew wood for Lord Salisbury; the divisions within the Council which would become so painfully evident over the Boer War were between Gladstonian Liberals and Liberal Imperialists, with the odd Liberal Unionist added for decoration, not between Liberals and Conservatives.
New councils began appearing throughout England and Wales.
They described themselves as a ‘movement’ for the simple reason that ‘movements’tend to be better things  (implying progress and struggle for right against entrenched powers) than ‘establishments’or ‘institutions’.
Later decades have seen other organizations use the term so that we speak in the twentieth century about the trade union ‘movement’ or the ‘peace movement’; we seldom think to describe the Conservative Party, the Confederation of British Industry or the North Atlantic Treaty Organization as ‘movements’.
In 1895 the Congress had delegates from two county federations and sixty-eight towns.
The 50,000 limit had been dropped.
In 1896 the fourth Congress resolved itself into the first National Council with a permanent staff and offices, at first in Birmingham and then in the Congregationalists' London headquarters, Memorial Hall.
By 1896 leadership had passed to London and to three men — Hugh Price Hughes, C. A. Berry and Alexander Mackennal and there was a new emphasis.
Coordinating social work amongst Nonconformist churches, stopping overlapping, as in Paton's 1891 circular, and providing a national forum for debate and possible agreement remained goals, but the real inspiration was the desire to build an extra-denominational basis for a grand scheme which would unite English Nonconformity into one body.
As one President put it, ‘this Federation forms the great Free Church of Great Britain’.
(In fact the Council was confined to England and Wales and did not exist in Scotland.)
By using the term ‘evangelical’ the leaders were purposefully excluding Unitarians who could easily be sacrificed in order to get Methodists.
It was also something of a reassurance to conservative waverers frightened of political radicalism; the Council was committed to evangelization of the Christian gospel.
By adopting the Scottish term, Free Church, instead of Nonconformist, the movement was showing that it was making a new start with an eye to the twentieth, not to the nineteenth or even eighteenth century.
It was also a positive term with none of the negative connotations of Nonconformist or Dissenter.
In theory delegates met not as Nonconformists but as evangelical Christians who were free of state control because outside the Established Church.
The movement was also the best example of the ‘spirit of the times’ working within Nonconformity; if evolutionary progress  led to Lord Rosebery's ‘Efficiency’, a decline in unnecessary competition and a new emphasis on cooperation and order as opposed to unregulated competition, then the twentieth century demanded a better organized Nonconformity to assume the place hitherto occupied by the Church of England.
Robertson Nicoll, who now supported the movement, told the 1896 Council that ‘our business is to claim our heritage boldly, hopefully, with ceaseless energy and unflinching resolution’.
Two years later John Clifford told delegates that ‘unification is and has been the note of our time’.
Enthusiastic supporters claimed that the movement gave to ‘the Free Churches a unity they have never had before’ although this same observer recognized that it was ‘the Establishment that lies at the foundation of our contention’.
The new Council hoped to provide evidence of unity by having unified positions on public questions and unified activities on the assumption that where there is smoke there must also be fire.
Annual Councils continued and there were special conferences on the Education Bill of 1896, the Armenian massacres, the ‘Ritualist Crisis’ in the Church of England and the 300th anniversary of Cromwell's birth.
There were special services to commemorate the Queen's death in 1901 as well as‘United Communion Services’ which took place at each National Council.
Money was not lacking: George Cadbury promised £600 a year for five years beginning in 1895 and his brother, Richard, agreed to do the same.
After the latter's death in 1899, his brother raised his contribution to £900 per annum.
Cadbury's financial support continued to his death as did his two stipulations: the movement should avoid politics if possible (it was not possible) and it should try to create Free Church parishes to end ‘overlapping’ between denominations (it did so but to little effect).
Between 1897 and 1900, George Cadbury alone gave £3,065 as well as an original gift of £2,000.
W. P. Hartley also made donations so that the movement could be said to have been financially based on Quaker chocolate and Methodist jam.
It received no funds from any denomination although the Congregational Union provided office space in London.
One of the movement's greatest assets, perhaps its  greatest, was its Organizing Secretary from 1895 to his death in 1910.
Thomas Law was a shrewd Yorkshireman from Sowerby.
He was born in 1854 and in 1877 became a circuit minister in the United Methodist Free Church.
He was released from his duties by Conference the year after he became Secretary.
Law was ‘obsessed by one large and absorbing idea’, the creation of a single, united, powerful ‘Free Church of England’, and he ‘personally formed almost every Council in England’ which by his death meant over 1,000.
In 1910 the Executive decided that Law, who seems to have been suffering from nervous exhaustion, should be dismissed and sent Sir J. C. Compton Rickett to break the news to him.
The wretched man made his way to Brighton where after one bungled attempt he walked off the pier and killed himself by drowning.
The obituary in The Times said that while he was known as the ‘chief engineer of a great ecclesiastical machine’, to his friends he was a ‘most kindly man’.
Without him, Arthur Porritt later recalled, ‘the momentum of the movement swiftly spent itself’ and although many had criticized him greatly for his involvement in Liberal party manoeuvrings (which will be discussed in Chapter 9), all recognized his gift of organization, something which ‘amounted to genius’.
It seems reasonable to say that without Law there would have been no NFCC, at least not in the powerful form it reached in the early years of the twentieth century.
In 1899 the movement's leaders achieved a striking coup when they published, without reference to the annual Council, a ‘Free Church Catechism’.
The Catechism was Hughes' brain-child and was published on 5 January as a penny pamphlet.
By March 1900, 190,000 copies had been sold in England and there were special Welsh and American editions.
In Liverpool the local School Board, which controlled the state primary schools in the city, voted by a majority of one to use the Catechism for its ‘non-denominational religious instruction’.
The Free Church Executive was embarrassed by the action and refused permission even though specifically ‘Nonconformist’ principles had been expunged by the Board.
Prebendary Wace of Canterbury praised the pamphlet during the 1899 Church Congress and Charles Gore, from the opposite wing of the Church, called it ‘an extraordinarily important  document, because it defined what the nineteenth century's latest religion, ‘undenominational Christianity’ actually was.
However Gore pointed out that it was silent on the ‘characteristic doctrines of Calvinism and many of those [doctrines]most associated with popular Protestantism’.
The Catechism was considerably in advance of the thinking of average Nonconformists in England and Wales and reflected more the thinking of the self-appointed leaders than the followers; this was especially the case in the section on the church in which it emphatically taught the existence of a visible Christian Church and not an invisible ‘union’ of believers, a very ‘high’doctrine.
It was an exercise to prove the existence of a Nonconformist unity which only came into existence by the exercise.
Supporters, however, were keen on its value and C. Silvester Horne wrote that its creation showed that no one could now argue that Nonconformist ‘unity cannot be permanently reared because of an inadequate basis of agreement in matters of faith’.
The movement's historian has described it as ‘a landmark in Free Church history’ although he admitted ‘it did not take hold on the life of the Free Churches in the way that might have been expected’.
The National Council annually met in a variety of cities in March, so as not to clash with the customary ‘May Meetings’ of the various denominations.
These annual Councils normally lasted for three days and were composed of official sermons, addresses and conferences on various topics.
Perennial favourites included ‘overlapping’ in towns and villages and, tied to this, the creation of ‘Free Church parishes’, urban work among the unchurched millions, the role of women in Nonconformist church life (there was very little), the need for house-to-house surveys, the present state of the Church of England (normally the increasing power of the Ritualists and their threat to England's ‘Protestant heritage’) and political questions such as land redistribution in the villages or, especially, education.
Divisive questions like the Boer War were carefully avoided if at all possible.
There was an Annual Report read by the Secretary and a United Communion Service, something which upset some of the more ‘strict’ Welsh Baptists.
On a local level Free Church Councils grew not only in number but in the work they undertook.
Whereas in 1890 there were said to have been two councils, by 1901 there were 720.
In addition there were regional and county federations: by 1901 these had risen to thirty-six, with each centred on a major town to enable the stronger, urban Councils to help the weaker, rural ones.
The Council's work can be divided into four areas: religious, social, ‘nonconformist’ and political.
The religious work centred on evangelism: George Cadbury supported ‘Free Church parishes’ in order better to coordinate as well as to encourage evangelistic effort.
‘In this way’ he declared in 1895, ‘they would do a thousand times more good than by denouncing Roman Catholics, Unitarians or anyone else., There were united missionary services and neighbourhood ‘visitations’after which the names of those visited were passed on to a minister of their denomination.
In Birmingham the survey covered 160,000 houses over a forty-eight square mile area although the 75,000 reports turned in were officially recognized as ‘unreliable’ due to ignorance or incomplete forms.
Still, the reality of the unchurched millions was brought home.
By 1900 it was reported that 500,000 households in England and Wales had been visited.
Councils began Saturday night entertainments to lure people away from pubs.
There were open-air services during the summer on the beaches at Yarmouth and Bournemouth and there were inter-denominational Communion Services as an exercise in ecumenism.
There were exchanges of pulpits, especially between village and town, lay preachers' unions were organized and, by 1898, there were two full-time national missioners, the more famous of whom was ‘Gipsy’ Smith.
A ‘Simultaneous Mission’ throughout England and Wales was planned for the first month of the new century; the Queen's death on 21 January did not alter plans and some said the mission was helped by the heightened emotions produced by her death.
The social activities of the Councils were numerous and varied according to the locality.
Watch Committees were organized to keep an eye on prostitution and the granting of licences to publicans.
In some areas nursing corps were organized to visit the poor and, sometimes, a Free Church  Help Society to assist in cases arising from previous visits.
In Gillingham there was a ‘Free Church Employment Bureau’ and in Newport a home for ‘friendless girls’.
Some Councils established a Legal Advice Bureau for alleged cases of discrimination against Nonconformists.
The Hambledon Council sponsored a fortnight's holiday for forty-six London school-children while another, in the north of England, got the local School Board to institute a regular course of lessons in temperance.
There were choir contests, religious retreats, boys' clubs and cycling clubs.
The London headquarters created a ‘circulating library, paid for by the Cadbury brothers, which numbered 7,000 volumes by 1900.
Ministers could borrow up to fifty books at a time.
That same year the National Council began a Free Church Temperance Crusade to obtain one million new pledges.
The third division was the propagation of Nonconformist principles.
Various councils organized lectures and magic-lantern shows; pamphlets and tracts were distributed by the thousands and there were courses of study complete with examinations in Nonconformist history and teaching with prizes for the winners.
Local magazines were started and in time there was a national monthly,The Free Church Chronicle as well as a monthly magazine for the family,The Freechurchman .
In addition to the official annual Reports there was a Hand Book and in 1900 they were combined to form the Free Church Year Book .
The NFCC published an eleven-volume historical series entitled ‘Eras of Nonconformity’ edited by C. Silvester Horne, a Free Churchman's Legal Handbook to aid ministers and chapel officials, hymnals, leaflets (100 for 1s.) and booklets.
Political involvement at the national level was, as we shall see in Chapter 9, fraught with dangers.
On the local level, where a much greater chance of agreement could be assumed and where Hughes could not veto their action, political work was easier.
J. Scott Lidgett, head of the Wesleyans' Bermondsey Settlement, warned delegates in 1901 about their political work:
The free Church Council, special emergencies apart, will therefore best serve the administration of its city or town, neither by meddlesome interference with it, nor by attempting  to be represented as such in its political caucuses, or even on its administrative boards; but by training men who, representing its views and coming under its influence, have at once the strength of character and the breadth of conception, which will cause them to secure its great ends…in the ordinary arena of public life.
The advice was not followed.
Local councils did avoid using national party labels but there was no real need to use them anyway.
Political work was made easier by the number of elected bodies; in addition to borough and county councils there were, after 1894, rural and urban district councils and the various ad hoc boards, the most important of which were the Boards of Guardians and the School Boards.
These last were elected by all ratepayers including women, who could also be elected; in addition to, electors had a cumulative vote with as many votes as there were members of the local board.
This last provision was included in the enabling legislation to allow for representation of minority religious groups, but it made the triennial elections a running denominational sore and made the Boards particularly sensitive to pressure from minority interests.
By the 1890s it was the established practice for Nonconformist ministers, along with local clergymen, to stand for election to the Boards.
They were, therefore, a superb battle ground for the new movement.
Thomas Law reported in 1896 that in one Lancashire town the local Council nominated nine men for election to eleven vacancies on the Board of Guardians and all nine were elected.
In another Lancashire town the Council nominated four candidates for the School Board of whom three were elected.
In Nottingham a six-year period of ‘clerical, dominance of the School Board was ended in a recent election when the Council put forward eight ‘unsectarian’ candidates and all were elected.
Similar victories in elections for other School Boards, rural and urban district councils as well as town councils were reported in Lincolnshire and Norfolk.
As Law said, ‘we are realizing our power, and are beginning to use it.
In 1898 he reported that in Bridlington the local Council opposed candidates for the Urban District Council election who favoured Sunday concerts on the Parade and were  able to get one ‘anti-musician’ at the top of the poll.
In 1899 the Secretary could report that at a special election in the village of Barnton, near Northwich, to decide on whether the new school should be Church of England or ‘unsectarian’ the Council put up ‘Progressive’candidates who won the election.
The following year Law told his audience that Council candidates won School Board elections in Stratford-on-Avon and Sutton Coldfield while in Cardiff they worked to return an ‘unsectarian’ majority.
Aside from elections, Councils were able to use pressure to win victories for Nonconformity.
In Leeds the Council secured a Nonconformist chaplain in the Infirmary; in Sheffield the Council worked with local clergymen to provide an inspection team for religious instruction in Board schools.
The Rochester and Chatham Council accepted a similar invitation from their local School Board: hitherto the Board's inspector had been an Anglican priest so that Anglican ‘exclusiveness’ was yielding in this microcosm to the new England.
In Leicester the Council got a Nonconformist chaplain for the workhouse and it was also able to ensure that the new public cemetery would be ‘unsectarian’, that is, without an Anglican Chapel.
In Chichester the local Council was able to force the Bishop to dedicate, and not to consecrate, the new chapel at the local asylum; even the mad could not escape the Council's power.
In Kirby-in-Ashfield the Council successfully petitioned against the establishment of a Sunday postal collection.
In Dewsbury the Council got the magistrates to cooperate in reporting pubs which gave sweets to children under thirteen in order to entice them inside the Wigan Council got the Home Secretary to the local police force.
In Sheffield the Council got the local School Board to stop supplying boys in Standard VII (the oldest class in the schools) with dummy rifles; the Board also agreed to stop teaching them how to use them.
The British Weekly reported that by 1899, 460 out of 646 Poor Law Unions had Nonconformist chaplains.
Of the 186 without chaplains there were voluntary Nonconformist services in 128 leaving only 58 Unions without a Nonconformist ‘presence’.
By the turn of the century the Free Church Movement presented an imposing facade but it was only a facade.
Guinness Rogers admitted that ‘the Federation may not be so potent a factor as its promoters suppose, and one of its nearest perils may be the temptation to take itself too seriously’.
Many leaders did just that: Hugh Price Hughes could declare in writing that the National council ‘represents the view of a majority of the Christian people of England’.
It did of course no such thing.
There were many weaknesses which could not be cured.
Wesleyan support, as the Spectator observed in 1897, ‘was not so extensive as outsiders might gather from some inside declarations’.
While prominent Wesleyans like Hughes, J. Scott Lidgett, R. W. Perks, Charles Kelly and Henry Lunn were active and, in Hughes' case, vital to the movement, the majority held aloof and Conference refused to take any notice of the Council.
Many conservative leaders were openly hostile to it.
While most Primitive Methodists were more favourable, their Conference likewise took no notice.
The one exception in both cases was the Simultaneous Mission of 1901 but as this was avowedly non-political their normal wariness was made even more obvious.
Surveys of local records that have survived show clearly that the rank and file of local Councils were overwhelming Baptist and Congregational.
Law was only giving credit where due when he said that these two groups ‘have from the first been the main-props of the new National Free Church movement’.
Likewise, both Unions repeatedly gave their support.
National growth was uneven; in the north of England it quickly took root although in the northwest and in Wales it grew more slowly; it was always weak in Liverpool.
It grew slowly in the West Country but rapidly in the South of England, the Midlands and in London.
To a very large extent the movement was urban; as Arthur Porritt later recalled, the councils ‘were never as strong in the provincial areas as Law represented’.
Its leadership established itself in London although its real strength was centred in the towns and cities of the Midlands.
Statistics gave a misleading impression.
It is true that by the time of Law's dismissal the number of Councils had grown to 1,005.
But Councils varied enormously in size and  strength: the Chew Magna FCC could not compare with that of Leicester, Coventry or Birmingham.
Much of the Councils, work was simply duplication of what was already being done by denominations or denominational societies.
The movement was, despite all its rhetoric about the need for ‘organization’ and Roseberian efficiency, one of the last examples of Nonconformist voluntarism because ultimately it was only a collection of men, and sometimes women, who wanted to promote their identity as ‘Free Churchmen’.
The National headquarters could advise local Councils but it could not order or control them.
The Councils could never rid themselves of their reputation as just another manifestation of Political Dissent for the simple reason that the charge was essentially true.
If one looks at the speeches, reads the pamphlets and studies the discussions of Councils one sees that an aggressive political tone was never far from the surface and this was before their wholesale involvement in the debates over the 1902 Education Act.
During this, the Wesleyan Sir George Chubb, referred to the ‘pernicious influence of that self-constituted and irresponsible body, the Free Church Council’.
Again, while the cry for disestablishment was not a major factor in the political make-up of Hughes or Perks, it was so for the bulk of the movement's leaders, men like C. A. Berry, Alexander Mackennal, John Clifford, J. B. Paton, A. T. Guttery, W. J. Townsend, C. Silvester Home, R. F. Horton, J. H. Hollowell, J. Carvell Williams, J. E. Ellis, Henry Broadhurst, J. Compton Rickett, Albert Spicer and W. P. Hartley.
Berry might insist that the movement owed its existence to ‘the present-day inspiration of the Holy Ghost.
To no other, to no less divine a source can I trace the movement’, but as we have seen, other speakers, like Joseph Parker, were more perceptive while the 1897 National Council president admitted that ‘perhaps it can scarcely be denied that in some of our earliest Nonconformist Councils…at first the inspiration was to a large extent political’.
To others the Councils were a natural response to the growing power of the High Church party in the Church of England.
In 1899 Silvester Horne in his Popular History of the Free Churches claimed that Councils ‘came together under the shadow of a great common peril…whenever  sacerdotal intolerance had to be resisted the machinery should be in existence…
The Councils took root.’
Hughes admitted that one reason for the slow growth of the movement in Wales was that the Church of Wales was in a minority ‘and there did not exist the sense of peril which, he feared, must be admitted, had done so much in driving them together in England’.
Most Nonconformists were genuinely distressed at the changing character of the Established Church; whatever they might say to the contrary, they lived in the shadow of ‘the establishment’ and continued to feel a certain proprietary if illogical interest in the Church.
They seldom could avoid looking over their shoulders at her and when forced to explain this, they normally fell back on one of three arguments.
The first was that they were legally members of the National Church by virtue of being Crown Subjects; this was nonsense of course as the tolerance introduced after the ‘Glorious Revolution’ recognized Dissenters' right to exist, even if it were a restricted right.
What restrictions had been imposed were largely removed in the nineteenth century.
The second explanation was that as English Christians and as Protestants they had to fight the inroads of Popery wherever it occurred.
Roman Catholics could be tolerated but not pseudo-Romanists in the guise of Anglo-Catholics.
The third was that Nonconformists still continued to ‘pay for’ the Church: a Primitive Methodist home missioner complained in 1896 in a mixture of theological disagreement and social envy of the ‘little priestling’’who is ‘clothed with national authority and paid by national money’.
Once again this was not the case.
Endowments dated from the earliest days of England's Christian history and compulsory Church Rates were no longer being levied throughout the Kingdom.
In 1896 it had been well over half a century since Parliament had made specific grants to build parish churches and if Church schools got grants they did so as voluntary, not as Church schools: Roman Catholic, Methodist and ‘British’ schools were equally entitled to the grants.
As Anglican church discipline was tightened and as the Oxford Movement spread its influence throughout the clergy the happy-go-lucky attitude of older Broad and Low  Churchmen was put on the defensive.
The humorists needed to find new caricatures for the clergy; the older, fox-hunting parson was replaced by fanatic young curates.
Nonconformists were left bewildered.
A. M. Fairbairn complained that the clergy had become ‘more professional than social’ and the Baptist C. F. Aked attacked ‘the funny little assistant priest, who has taken the place of the old-fashioned curate’, the man who says
with the ineffable modesty that, because he stood in the direct line of the Apostolic Succession, he had a better right to preach the Gospel and to administer the Sacraments, and was more a minister of Christ than Dr Dale or Mr Spurgeon or Henry Ward Beecher…what could they do but laugh?
Hughes, for his part, never tired of pointing out his opponents' errors.
His daughter wrote, in a biography even more adulatory than most Victorian daughters' biographies of their fathers, ‘He loved conversing with all manner of persons, but I do think he preferred a parson to any other.
There was so much that he could tell him.’
Of course, none of us particularly likes an opponent to change his tack, let alone his apparent nature, and Nonconformists who had listened to Dean Stanley and remembered the latitudinarianism of Thomas Arnold found it difficult to tolerate Lord Halifax and Bishop King.
The success of the Anglo-Catholics and the revival of the Church of England produced by both Evangelicals and High Churchmen did not fit into the plan prepared for the new century: it is no coincidence that both Anglo-Catholicism and the new Free Church Councils were mainly confined to England's towns and cities.
It was Protestantism, not Anglicanism, that should be the vibrant, all-conquering force.
The Church of England was meant to wither and die on the vine, not to survive.
Many Nonconformists, including here especially the Wesleyans, felt that the defence of Protestantism was now their concern.
(For many years the Wesleyan Methodist Year Book included a section on the ‘Statistics of Popery’, something not found in the annual publications of the other main denominations.)
The official National Council resolution ‘deeply deploring’ the Anglo Catholics' language and their audacity in referring to the Reformation as a  ‘flagrant wrong’, resolved that such behaviour was inconsistent with ‘the letter and…spirit of their contract with the State’.
If the Church of England, which many preferred to call simply ‘the Establishment’ or, copying the Scots, ‘the Episcopalian Church’violated its ‘contract’and failed to provide a Protestant religion for England, then the Nonconformists, cooperating through the Council, would willingly take up the contract and deliver the appropriate religion.
In 1901 the question of the Sovereign's Accession Declaration and Coronation Oath became public when Edward VII, with his High Church views, let it be known that he thoroughly detested the clauses denouncing the Mass.
Primitive Methodists, Baptists and Congregationalists took no public position although many of their leaders like Clifford and Parker agreed with Edward VII's attitude in 1901–2 and favoured omitting the passages.
Wesleyans, however, declared their ‘strenuous opposition to any change…which would, in the slightest degree, weaken the guarantees of the Protestant Succession’.
That same year they took up that old chestnut, the inspection of laundries attached to Roman Catholic (and now Anglican) nunneries; they were annoyed that these had been excluded from the Factory Bill then before Parliament.
One of the many boasts made by the Free Church Council's driving force, Hughes, was that the Free Church Council was the real representative in England not only of undiluted Protestantism but of the de facto Church of the English-speaking world.
With a somewhat carefree use of statistics he claimed at one National Council meeting in 1897 that the delegates represented 70,000,000 Nonconformists, on the assumption that they represented all non-Anglican and non-Roman Catholic Christians in the English-speaking world.
They did of course no such thing for membership was on a voluntary basis and they only represented the local Councils who had sent them.
The year before Hughes had told his audience that
the future belongs neither to small States, nor to small Churches, but to great federal unions of self-governing communities…
I believe that our future and the future of the British empire, and therefore to a great extent the future of  the human race, depends [sic], under God, upon the extent to which the churches we represent are able to distinguish between denominational loyalty and bigotry…between denominational activity and schism.
It was increasingly to those churches outside England, to Hughes' seventy million, especially those in America, that English Nonconformists looked for reinforcements.
The world produced by the English diaspora had increasingly played an important role in Nonconformist life; in the first year of the new century the anonymous critic in the Church Quarterly Review acknowledged the ‘spectacle of vast religious organisations throughout the whole Anglo-Saxon world’.
It is to the importance of this often underestimated ‘Anglo-Saxon world’ and the influence it had on English Nonconformity that we shall now turn.
‘God's Greater Britain’
NONCONFORMISTS AND THE ANGLO-SAXON WORLD
In 1906 a ship left England bound for Australasia.
Once at sea the Church of England chaplain read the Prayer Book's ‘stately intercessions’ on the first class deck.
Down below, in the third class, James Flanagan, a Primitive Methodist minister who began his working life at seven and taught himself to read at twenty-one, preached and ‘frequently pleaded with the God of earth and sea’ for a safe journey.
Once in New Zealand, Flanagan, the Home Missionary Advocate and Connexional Evangelist, found himself in a very different world from England.
He was presented to the Governor, Lord Plunkett, who presented him with a portrait of himself.
When he visited Parliament he was shown to a seat beside the Speaker in the House of Representatives.
The Liberal Prime Minister, Sir Joseph Ward, came up to shake his hand.
As he toured the Colony he was introduced to mayors, civic leaders and clergymen, men ‘with an outlook, who had escaped the ruts of tradition’.
He travelled on to Australia where he was the guest in Adelaide of the Lord Chief Justice and his wife who were fellow Methodists.
No story better illustrates the importance of the English-speaking world that Britain had brought into being, than James Flanagan's reception.
Nonconformists were as alive as other Englishmen to the wealth, influence and achievements of the Empire and the ‘English republic’ across the Atlantic.
Love of the Empire and a belief in its mission cut across all denominations, ages and social classes.
It was not the prerogative of Conservatives or ‘Imperialists’.
It was the radical MP, Sir Charles Dilke, who had created the phrase, ‘Greater Britain’, and it was the radical Baptist minister, John Clifford, who later wrote of his Empire tour under the title, ‘God's Greater Britain'.
When the Wesleyan, Hugh Price Hughes, returned from a tour of Egypt he burst out: ‘Everywhere, justice and the Pax Britannica.
The very donkey boys were full of it.
They said to me, ‘Wonderful! wonderful! a donkey boy and a cadi [civil judge]equal before the law!
Wonderful, wonderful!’’
As the century wore on more and more people became convinced of the need to ‘organize’ the dispersion of the English race round the globe.
Nonconformists were slower to attempt some degree of unity than the Church of England, which began the Lambeth Conferences in 1867.
It was not until 1881 that the world's Methodists held their first Oecumenical Conference in London's City Road Chapel: the suggestion had come from America.
Ten years later the Congregationalists followed suit with their first International Council: the suggestion here had come from Australia.
In 1904 the first Pan-Presbyterian Council was held and in 1905 the Baptist World Alliance was formed at Exeter Hall.
If Nonconformists were slow to start, once they had they were eager to point out that while in England the Church outnumbered them (as far as baptized members were concerned), in the Empire and America it was a different story as regards active members.
The 1902 Free Church Year Book , for example, had tables showing that while Anglican ‘communicants’ came to 3,367,052, equivalent statistics for Methodists, Baptists, Presbyterians and Congregationalists numbered 18,231,588.
The future was also theirs: Nonconformist Sunday School students came to 14,091,034.
The message was clear: throughout ‘the great English Republic, which we call…
America, and…the yet vaster territories of the British Colonial Empire’ it was Nonconformity, not Anglicanism, which bore the brunt of English Christian witness.
Because of geography, population and economic ties, America was the most important element in Nonconformity's new awareness of its international strength.
It was in the development of the ‘special relationship’ between Britain and America that Nonconformists once again influenced subsequent English history, however little that contribution has been valued by historians.
New ways of thought, concentrated but largely ineffectual attempts to persuade the British that they are ‘European’, a fear of  talking about the English ‘race’ and its diaspora round the world and the virtual disappearance of the word ‘Protestant’as an adjective to describe anyone other than Ulster fanatics, has meant that a once powerful cultural and historic bond is little understood in the late twentieth century.
A shared Protestant Christianity, combined with the legend of the persecuted Puritans seeking refuge in the new world to worship freely (and pari passu to prevent those disagreeing with them from worshipping at all) and based on the Authorized Version of the Bible, Shakespeare, Bunyan and Foxe's Book of Martyrs , transcended political separation.
The very fact that terms like ‘dissenter’ and ‘nonconformist’made no sense in America shows the attraction that she held for English Nonconformists: America to them was what England might become.
As Tocqueville wrote, ‘the American is the Englishman left to himself’.
America had no established church and provided the free market place for religion with no state monopolies which Nonconformists wanted in England.
Joseph Parker returned home from a visit, to refer to the ‘spirit of equality and brotherhood [which]everywhere prevailed’ and Silvester Horne praised the ‘freer ecclesiastical atmosphere of America’.
The bond between the mother country and her former colonies grew stronger as the century wore to its close.
America was hailed as the ‘great English Republic’ and orators hoped that England would become a country in which ‘all denominations will be as free from State patronage or persecution as they are in the great land over which waves ‘the star-spangled banner’’.
To A. M. Fairbairn, one had to visit America ‘to discover how far we have travelled out of the darkness towards the light’, while to R. F. Horton, it was a land with ‘truth open to all who have eyes to see it and those who have not eyes held in wholesome restraint from meddling with those who have’.
To John Watson, who travelled under his pen-name, Ian Maclaren, and was undoubtedly pleased with the £19,200 (over £600,000 in today's currency) earned from public readings of his novel,Beside the Bonnie Brier Bush , ‘the American influence was in general reforming and deodorizing ’.
When poor Col. Griffin was laughed at for suggesting  that Baptists establish a University in England, the laughter did not come from the descendants of Matthew Arnold who saw them as psalm-singing greengrocers, but from his fellow Baptists.
In America Baptists built universities like Chicago, Brown, Colgate and Baylor as well as imposing churches on New York's Fifth Avenue to compete with the Presbyterians, Episcopalians and Roman Catholics.
When John Clifford, who began his working life in a mill, wrote home after preaching in New York, he told his family that, ‘Mr J. D. Rockefeller came and spoke to me, thanked me, and said he would like to take hold of my skirts when I ascended and go up with me.
Attended a luncheon…one of the most magnificent and costly I ever attended.’
‘The Americans’, he concluded after giving the Commencement Address at Chicago, ‘are an inexhaustible marvel.’
Ironically, Rockefeller was exactly that type of capitalist he would have despised back in England.
Few Englishmen would have disagreed with Archbishop Benson when he was describing the visitors to London for the 1887 Jubilee.
He referred to ‘the Americans in general, as well as the foreigners’.
The bond was as strong as it was between those who had emigrated to Australia, New Zealand, Canada or Southern Africa: it was a shared race, religion, history, language and culture.
It took a foreign observer like Alexis de Tocqueville earlier in the century to describe ‘the people of the United States as that portion of the English people which is commissioned to explore the wilds of the New World’.
Where there were differences they were between London and America, not England and America and were no greater than between London and the provinces where the industrial revolution was changing the world.
In Birmingham people ‘never have a minute to themselves.
They work as if they must get rich by the evening and die the next day.
They are generally very intelligent people but intelligent’, Tocqueville added, ‘in the American way.’
Here was the bond: it was the provinces, not London society, which were peopling America and it was in the mushrooming towns of industrial England that Nonconformity was strongest.
Matthew Arnold put it more succinctly:
America is just ourselves, with the Barbarians [upper classes]quite left out.
and the Populace nearly.
This leaves the Philistines [middle-classes]for the great bulk of the nation;— a livelier sort of Philistine than ours, and with the pressure and false ideal of our Barbarians taken away, but left all the more to himself and to have his full swing.
This bond held despite the massive immigration into America after the 1840s of peoples who had nothing in common with England, let alone with the Puritan and Protestant traditions.
Oliver Wendell Holmes, the product of a Boston culture based on Puritanism, reflected on these changes after an 1886 visit to England.
He accepted that those of English descent were decreasing as a percentage of the population but their cultural loyalty was as strong as ever, as was their influence in shaping American thought, especially through literature.
As the twentieth century has shown, this bond was strong enough to withstand even greater demographic changes than Holmes ever could have feared.
In his book,One Hundred Days in Europe , he wrote: ‘Our recently naturalized fellow-citizens, of a different blood and different religion, must not suppose that we are going to forget our inborn love for the mother to whom we owe our being.’
Holmes was addressing those who traced their roots back to the Puritans: ‘We must not forget that our fathers were exiles from their dearly loved native land, driven by causes which no longer exist.
‘Freedom to worship God’ is found in England as fully as in America, in our day.’
While recognizing the changes that were taking place Holmes described a characteristic which has survived intact:
It is true that the wonderful advance of our people…has transformed the wilderness into a home where men and women can live comfortably, elegantly, happily, if they are of contented disposition…
[Yet]give him [the American]all these advantages, and he will still be longing to cross the water, to get back to that old home of his fathers, so delightful in itself…the less wealthy, less cultivated, less fastidious class of Americans are not so much haunted by these longings…
Holmes had felt that ‘Protestant England and Protestant America are coming nearer and nearer to each other every  year.
The interchange of the two peoples is more and more frequent, and…is likely to continue increasing’.
This ‘interchange’ took many forms.
Economically, of course, it had never ceased and had been to both countries' benefit.
However, as we have noted before, by the end of the nineteenth century Englishmen began to worry about American competition, especially in cheaper means of manufacture.
It was a Nonconformist shipowner, Sir Christopher Furness, who warned that England must realize that ‘we are neither omnipotent nor omniscient, that as our fathers have struggled to obtain supremacy, so we their sons must struggle to maintain it’.
Equally, of course, the massive emigration of Englishmen, many of whom were Nonconformist, continued up to the outbreak of war in 1914.
After that year it never neared the peak of 470,000, which occurred in 1913.
If the traffic in emigrants was almost totally from the British Isles to America, the exchange in religious influences has often been seen as going the other way, from America to Britain.
In the eighteenth century, for example, Jonathan Edwards' defence of High Calvinism was read and appreciated in England; ministerial exchanges between the two countries never ceased and religious developments and controversies in one country normally occurred in the other.
As early as 1805 Lorenzo Dow visited England and was the first of those many American evangelists committed to ‘saving Britain’.
By the 1830s the number had increased and these visits coincided with fundamental changes in English Nonconformity, especially within the older Calvinism of the eighteenth century among Congregationalists and Baptists.
The most important of these evangelists, in addition to Dow, were James Caughey and Charles Finney, whose last revival tour ended in 1860.
It was only thirteen years later that the most famous evangelist, Dwight L. Moody, launched his first revival campaign which reached its peak in 1875.
He returned to England in 1881–3 and in 1891–2.
As important as the preaching of Moody were the songs of Ira Sankey with their simple words, clear message and catchy tunes.
Nothing like them had ever before been heard in England.
It has been estimated that Moody and  Sankey were heard by upwards of one-and-a-half million Londoners in 1875.
The American influences on English Nonconformity were far more than just catchy songs, the taking of collections during services, ‘American organs’ and individual communion cups.
There was the underlying, common culture, a Protestant bond strengthened by those churches which built up their own special relationship: in 1874, for example, it was the American Ambassador who laid the foundation-stone for the ‘Lincoln Tower’ at Newman Hall's new Christ Church, Westminster Bridge Road.
The tower, designed by Sir Gilbert Scott, cost £7,000, which was met half by Americans and half by Englishmen.
To Hall, the 220 foot tower was ‘second to none…erected in London during the last one hundred years’.
The tower had a suitable motif of stars and stripes and somewhat ironically commemorated a man no more remarkable for his Christianity than for his constitutionalism.
In 1891 the Methodists held their second Oecumenical Conference in Washington.
The meetings showed
the great part which Methodism is called to play in the Providential order of the world, through its influence among those nations which seem appointed to lead the development of mankind.
Methodism is knitting those spiritual bands which will help to draw the scattered fragments of the English race into that great Confederation which every wise statesman desires.
In 1899 the second International Congregational Conference met in Boston and the Governor of Massachusetts, the Mayor of Boston, the Bishop of Massachusetts and the President of Harvard participated.
The meetings, English Congregationalists were told, helped to cement Anglo-American relations, ‘one of the most potent factors in preserving the peace of the world’.
In 1896 it was, once again, the American Ambassador who laid another foundation stone.
This time it was for a new church in Gainsborough to honour the Lincolnshire-born John Robinson, pastor to the ‘Pilgrim Fathers’ although he did not actually sail in the Mayflower .
In 1883 the pilgrim fathers' theme led the Rev. Henry Allon, minister of Islington's Union Chapel, to ask for a piece of  the ‘Pilgrim Rock’(the rock onto which the pilgrims were believed to have stepped) for his chapel.
The trustees of the Pilgrim Society obliged and sent a piece of the relic which was placed in a special niche above a door to the right of the pulpit.
In talking about American influences on English Nonconformity we must not give an unbalanced picture.
Certainly by the last third of the nineteenth century the influences were becoming more noted although they had always been there.
While England sent no revivalist as famous as Moody she did send a number of famous ministers and the works of her most famous preachers were avidly bought and consumed in America.
Men like Spurgeon, John Stoughton, R. F. Horton, J. H. Rigg or F. B. Meyer could be as famous in America as in England.
Even lesser known men were received with open arms and, in some cases, cheque books: when the Rev. J. A. Macfadyen went to America to ‘supply’ the pulpit of Brooklyn's Central Congregational Church he was offered a church in Chicago at the princely stipend of £2,000 — over £60,000 today — but he turned down the offer.
During the latter part of the century visits by famous Nonconformist ministers as great public figures, and not as denominational delegates or visiting preachers, became part of American cultural and religious life.
In 1867 Newman Hall visited America, or at least the northern states, where he was assured a warm welcome because of his support of the North during the recent war.
Senator Sumner, the chairman of the Senate's foreign affairs committee, wanted him to address the Senate but decided this would be a bad precedent.
Instead Sumner went with various other senators, representatives and the President, Johnson, to hear Hall speak in the largest Presbyterian Church in Washington.
Hall later had the honour of being presented to Johnson.
When Congress assembled the Speaker of the House of Representatives asked Hall to give the opening prayer and on a Sunday he preached before both Houses in the Capitol building.
Once in New York he was invited to Wall Street where he addressed the assembled and hushed stockbrokers who  had suspended business with the understanding that the talk would not exceed three minutes.
Afterwards the brokers and traders erupted into ‘God Save The Queen’, a thank-you from northern capitalists for his support of the North during the war.
It was during this trip that the idea of a ‘Lincoln Tower’ arose.
Hall's devotion to America became a byword and in the 1880s he was called ‘an American preacher’ although one listener added, ‘though allusions to things American are frequent in the sermons…he is heartily English in thought and speech’.
In 1877 a new strand was created in the bond between Nonconformist England and Protestant America.
R. W. Dale was invited by the theology faculty of Yale University to give the Lyman Beecher Lectures on Preaching.
Beecher, the paterfamilias of the well known family, had been one of the major liberalizing influences in American Puritanism (despite his rabid anti-Catholic feelings) and had helped to transform the old High Calvinism into the broader stream of liberal protestantism.
He was also a key factor in transplanting New England religion to the newer Northern states, especially Ohio.
Dale was the first Englishman asked to give the lectures and it was a visible sign of a shared heritage.
He toured widely but was dismayed at the corruption of public life which had arisen after the Northern victory and the Republican domination of Washington, led by men like Sumner: ‘The rogues do public work in order to make money, and the honest men neglect public work in order to save money.
Judged by the laws of public morality, there is not much to choose between them.’
Before returning to England he was asked to persuade Gladstone to come over for the 1878 Yale ‘commencement’ but he would plead in vain.
On his return he also acted as an unpaid adviser to Yale about other possible English choices.
One of the men he approached was Spurgeon who gave him this characteristic response: ‘I sit on my own gate, and whistle my own tunes, and am quite content.’
Despite Spurgeon's refusal, the University went on to invite several famous ministers to give the annual lectures.
These included R. F. Horton in 1893, followed by John Watson in 1896, P. T. Forsyth in 1907 and C. Silvester Horne in 1914.
Famous ministers like Horne, Clifford, Watson, Horton, Charles Berry of Wolverhampton's Queen Street Congregational Church and Forsyth often visited America to conduct long preaching and lecturing tours.
Sometimes they had the help of the same Major Pond who had visited Spurgeon's Metropolitan Tabernacle.
The redoubtable Joseph Parker made four visits although it was not until 1887 that he made a lecture tour which was not a success due to ill health and financial disagreements.
Although Pond praised him as a ‘middle-class Englishman…the personification of all their sterling traits and sturdy characteristics’, there were problems over whether or not he should have taken a fee for giving a eulogy on his friend, Henry Ward Beecher, at Beecher's Brooklyn church.
The most successful tour was that of John Watson —‘Ian Maclaren’— in 1896, two months after the publication of his best-seller,Beside the Bonnie Brier Bush .
In under ten weeks Watson, ‘dressed in a plain business garb — rather more like a Scotch merchant than a minister’, had ninety-six engagements, mainly readings but including some lectures.
Pond, who ‘cleared’ $35,795.91 was, not surprisingly, enthusiastic and offered Watson an additional $24,000 if he would extend his tour by twelve weeks but the exhausted man refused.
The Major later claimed that his takings on Watson's tour exceeded that from H. J. Stanley's after his famous meeting with Dr Livingstone.
He also said, to the delight of those Nonconformists who read his memoirs, that Watson's tour was far more successful than Matthew Arnold's.
(Part of Arnold's failure had been due to his poor delivery as few could actually hear his mumbled address.)
In Washington, Watson and his wife took lunch with President and Mrs Cleveland who later came to that night's lecture.
In 1899 Watson came on a second tour and this time went to the far west.
Like almost all other ministers he avoided visiting the defeated South as such a trip would not have fitted the received view of America which both hosts and visitors wished to retain.
(Sometimes a fleeting visit to Kentucky was included.)
There were also, throughout the century, various international bodies (which in the nineteenth century, as now, frequently meant bodies dominated by or confined to Britain and America) concerned with promoting various radical reforms or building up new ventures like Sunday Schools.
Through these bodies there was a continuous exchange of Englishmen and Americans in which English Nonconformist ministers took the lead.
These were particularly important in the decades before denominations established their own international organizations.
Antislavery, temperance, teetotalism and Sunday Schools each had international conferences normally either in America or in England.
As the century wore on and transatlantic travel improved, the exchanges increased.
In addition, traditional anti-popery was as alive in America as in England and politically as important, especially after the arrival of Catholic immigrants in the 1840s.
The Evangelical Alliance was founded in 1846 largely under the inspiration of a Polish Jew, Ridley Herschell, who had been converted in London and became a notable Nonconformist preacher in the capital.
He probably served as the model for Trollope's Joseph Emilius in The Eustace Diamonds and Phineas Redux .
The Alliance, which increasingly became a de facto Nonconformist organization, existed not just to fight popery but Puseyism and also to coordinate Evangelical work.
From its first meeting it was also identified with the anti-slavery movement and this meant that it did not establish itself in America, where many religious leaders were wary of too close an identification with such a divisive issue.
When Joseph Parker paid his first visit to America in 1873 it was for an Alliance conference: on that occasion the delegates were presented to General Grant, the President.
A more important transatlantic forum for cooperation and exchange of knowledge was the Teetotal Movement in which Nonconformists predominated.
The Temperance movement, requiring an oath to moderate drinking or to abstain from certain drinks, seems to have begun in America: the first Temperance society was established in Puritan Connecticut in 1789.
By the 1820s the movement had spread to England.
The British and Foreign Temperance Society was formed in 1830 and was dominated by the Church of England.
Teetotalism, however, was a radical, working-class, provincial and largely Nonconformist  movement which began in Lancashire in 1832.
It insisted on a total abstention from not only spirits but beer, the staple drink of the working man.
It was part of the larger movement of self-improvement by working people and not surprisingly, given Nonconformist domination, it used religious language and insisted on ‘conversion’ and renunciation.
It soon established its own organization and meeting houses which were hardly distinguishable from chapels.
Not surprisingly Teetotalism at first ran into opposition from some Nonconformists who saw it as a rival pseudo-religion.
With the passage of time attitudes changed and support grew, mainly from Baptists, non-Wesleyan Methodists and smaller Congregational chapels.
Although by the end of the century all four leading denominations had temperance committees and urged parliamentary action to curb ‘the trade’, Teetotal organizations were confined to the Baptists and Congregationalists.
The degree to which these denominations had come to terms with Teetotalism and a sign of the strength it had acquired are seen in some figures for 1890.
The Baptist Total Abstinence Association recorded a membership for England and Wales of 1,315 ministers and 205 ministerial students or nine out of every ten Baptist ministers and candidates.
The teetotal movement had another important effect: once it took root in America it strengthened the Anglo-American bond.
In one area American Teetotalism then affected the English movement which in turn set an example for Nonconformity as a whole.
In both countries the movement away from the pure gospel of self-help to a demand for state action can be dated from the late 1840s.
On 2 June 1851, the state of Maine enacted its famous act for the Suppression of Drinking Houses and Tippling Shops’— the ‘Maine Act’.
It was an attempt at prohibition that was never wholly successful but it did set an example.
Two years later in Britain the United Kingdom Alliance began its work to secure state action.
Teetotallers did not stop insisting on the primary importance of individual commitment but the change in attitude did begin to filter through Nonconformity as a whole and it would have long-lasting effects on attitudes towards the state.
The second area where Teetotalism strengthened the  Anglo-American bond lay in visits between leaders from both countries and this was especially the case with the Rev. Lyman Beecher who visited England in 1846 and stayed with the publisher, John Cassell, in his St John s Wood house.
Beecher was not only keen on Teetotalism but on the abolition of slavery.
The two causes were closely linked from the 1840s and it is not surprising that when Cassell visited New York in 1853 as a delegate to a World Temperance Convention he would also use Beecher at work in Ohio.
From early days English Teetotallers had felt it their duty to correct their American brethren when they fell short, a trait which has become an intricate part of general English attitudes towards America.
(In this way they were of course only following the examples set down in the 1820s and '30s by British visitors to America such as Captain Basil Hall or Mrs Frances Trollope.) ln 1850 the Teetotal Times recorded an ‘atrocious outrage’.
The Sons of Temperance, a secret American Temperance body, had excluded Negroes.
In the same year the paper gave considerable coverage to the tour of the Rev. Kah-gega-gah-bowh, an Ojibway chief, who was a Teetotal crusader.
What is important, however, is that the chief was also promoting the idea of an all-Indian state and felt that persuading English Radical opinion would help his cause in America.
The fact that Englishmen were upset at what the Sons of Temperance did and that American crusaders felt they could advance their cause by rousing English opinion show the degree to which a common culture had survived the political separation of the previous century.
The ‘special relationship’ was well under way.
The Beechers, however, became something of an institution in their own right.
The paterfamilias, Lyman, was exceeded in fame and influence by his son, Henry Ward Beecher, minister of Brooklyn's Plymouth Congregational Church from 1847 until his death in 1887.
Beecher was the prototype of the ‘political parson’ and put some of his words into action, or rather, equipped others to do so.
During the fighting in Kansas Territory in the 1850s between Southern settlers who brought their slaves with them, and Northern settlers who wanted no Negroes in  Kansas, abolitionist terrorists like John Brown began murdering the families of Southern farmers.
Beecher, safe in Brooklyn, began sending not only his prayers for the abolitionists but arms in boxes labelled Bibles.
This gave rise to the phrase Beecher's Bibles, a harking back to the nickname — Breeches Bible — for the translation of the Bible issued in 1560.
Yet, in Brooklyn, Beecher acted somewhat differently as Dickens found when he paid his last visit to America in 1868.
The author went to Beecher's chapel to give a public reading.
When he arrived at the chapel, which sat about 3,000, he was shocked to learn that ‘a certain upper gallery holding 150 was ‘the Coloured Gallery’.
On the first night not a soul could be induced to enter it.’
This had been kept secret from Dickens by the chapel trustees.
Beecher's reputation as a preacher, let alone as a Man of God, was not universally accepted.
When Lord Rosebery toured America in 1873 he went to Plymouth Church and was ‘greatly disappointed’.
Beecher, he found, could not equal Spurgeon in oratorical powers and, of course, Spurgeon was never a political parson.
The preacher's arrogance and pomposity made Rosebery erupt: ‘He is a buffoon without the merits of a buffoon.’
One of Beecher's favourite oratorical gimmicks, which he used to great effect in England, was to lean down from the dais to tell a humorous story but only audible to the front row.
They laughed.
The row behind leaned forward to ask what was so funny and were told the story.
The third row followed suit and before long enough people were laughing and questioning that Beecher raised his hand and told the story so that all could hear.
In 1874 Beecher's career received a setback of sorts when a newspaper editor with whom he had worked sued him for alienating his wife's affections.
The jury hearing the suit was unable to reach a decision and although the six-month trial was reported in England it did not destroy his reputation.
This had been built during the American War when he toured England to rally support among Radical and Nonconformist circles for Lincoln's armies.
He had also become a close friend of Joseph Parker who had visited America in 1873 and 1884.
The two had much in common: conceit, fame, unorthodox pulpit manners  and a trenchant belief in liberal progress.
In 1886 he came on his last lecture tour, managed by Pond, and at the invitation of Parker.
His first lecture was given at the City Temple.
The following year Parker paid his first visit to America to give his own series of lectures on non-religious topics such as‘Mr Gladstone’ or ‘Clocks and Watches’.
He delivered fifty lectures in the course of three months but, as we have noted, was not a great success.
One final example of the influences which the Beecher family exerted on English life is, of course, the antislavery novel of Henry Ward Beecher's sister, Harriet Beecher Stowe.
Seldom in history has a work of fiction had such influence in forming public attitudes and the full fruit of this influence would only be recognized in 1861: it was Lincoln himself who would refer to the little lady who started the war.
Dislike of American slavery had never vanished and was a favourite topic for novelists like Mrs Trollope to tackle in the 1830s.
It was part of that ‘love-hate’ aspect of the special relationship between the two countries.
Englishmen could always apply a degree of moral superiority, when necessary, to the upstarts across the Atlantic, by condemning Negro slavery.
Their American allies among the northern intelligentsia were led by the Beecher family and in this the Nonconformist contribution to Anglo-American relations was vital.
Mrs Stowe was the wife of an ill-paid professor in an Ohio teacher training college and she shared the family's abolitionist feelings.
She also collected tales from those runaway slaves who escaped via the Underground Railroad.
She wrote her novel to attack slavery and to supplement her husband, Calvin's, income.
Although she was a somewhat morbid woman she also had a vivid imagination and was able to combine an exciting story with a good dose of sentimentality, much as Ian Maclaren would do later.
The novel first appeared in serialization in 1851 and was then published as a book.
By the end of September that year it had sold 100,000 copies.
It first appeared in England in April 1852 and was not a success despite good reviews in trade journals.
She knew that success would come if she could convince readers that it was not a novel designed as mere entertainment but a moral tale designed to expose an evil and enhance the  moral status of the reader.
She had therefore sent advance copies to Prince Albert, the Earl of Shaftesbury and Charles Kingsley to whom she referred to ‘that awful book I have been forced to write’.
In another letter to a Scottish admirer, she said ‘I can only say that this bubble of my mind has risen on the mighty stream of a Divine purpose’.
In September the log-jam thwarting the ‘mighty stream’ gave way: throughout that month London publishers of the book were furnishing to one distribution house alone some 10,000 copies a day.
Before 1852 was out Mrs Stowe's ‘awful book’ had sold an amazing 1,000,000 copies, over three times the total sold in America.
A Welsh translation was soon published by John Cassell and eventually the book was translated into all the major European languages.
There had never been such a literary success in England.
Unfortunately, as there was no international copyright agreement, Mrs Stowe received nothing although one publisher, James Bosworth, did promise to pay her threepence on every copy sold at 3s.
6d., less than she could have expected from a modern royalty.
A favourite comparison among the book's enthusiasts was to see in Uncle Tom a ‘Christ figure’.
‘Reader’, John Cassell wrote in his own introduction to his English edition, ‘we must caution you in reading this book to take care of your heart.’
In 1853 Mrs Stowe came to Britain to be lauded while Calvin came to lecture on Teetotalism.
Not everyone, however, liked Mrs Stowe: Thackeray began, but does not appear to have finished, a spoof, now in the New York Public Library, which begins: ‘An army of 500 thousand ladies with tasteful banners on which poor Gumbo is displayed kneeling in his chains…’.
The ladies carried with them ‘their Koran, their Book of Mormon, the book of their law’.
The book was a triumph not just for the ‘Nonconformist’ Mrs Stowe but for English Nonconformity.
It was the Nonconformist Beecher connection and the special relationship between American and British reformers which Nonconformists were doing so much to cement that paved the way for Uncle Tom.
The book's success, like that later of Moody and Sankey, showed that it was Nonconformity, not the Church of England, which had conquered one of  the most important mountain peaks of public morality and sentiment produced in the Victorian era.
It was a conquest which would be theirs for more than half a century.
This was symbolized in 1908 when the World Sunday School Association held its sixth conference in Washington, under the presidency of F. B. Meyer, the Baptist who succeeded Newman Hall as minister of Christ Church, Westminster Bridge Road.
The House of Representatives adjourned to enable Congressmen either to watch or to march in the procession of delegates past the east front of the Capitol.
The special relationship was not without its trials, one of which occurred some thirteen years before the Sunday School march-past in Washington.
Late in 1895 a diplomatic storm blew up between Britain and America over Venezuela.
At issue was a boundary question between Venezuela and British Guiana which had been under discussion for some time.
President Grover Cleveland sought to make political capital by ‘twisting the lion's tail’ and gave an ultimatum to the British Government: an American commission appointed by Cleveland would investigate the dispute and decide the matter.
Britain would have to accept the decision or America would enforce it by arms.
It was one of the worst examples of the American penchant for using foreign affairs to win elections.
In London the government's policy was clear, as Lord Salisbury told the Queen in a cypher telegram: ‘Until United States [make]some communication to us no further step on our part is necessary.
My impression is that if we remain quiet this feeling will shortly disappear.’
If the government were calm most people in Britain took the American threats seriously: the thought of war was inconceivable and Nonconformity united in support of a negotiated settlement.
Again the Beecher connection was used.
The Rev. Charles A. Berry was one of the many Nonconformist ministers to visit America: in 1887, on his second visit, he had preached at Beecher's Plymouth Church, a visit organized before the American's death.
Indeed, Berry was offered the Brooklyn pastorate after Beecher's death but declined it.
At the height of the crisis his church sent a  cablegram to Brooklyn: ‘Queen Street Church, Wolverhampton, sends greetings and prays for perfect peace between England and America.
Berry.’
In reply came another cablegram signed by Beecher's successor: ‘The great congregation of Plymouth Church by unanimous rising vote returns greetings.
We join in prayers for peace with kin beyond sea.
Abbot.’
(Two years later Berry paid his fifth visit to America where he spoke 101 times and travelled over 3,000 miles.
When in Washington both Houses, in an extraordinary mark of respect, asked him to give the opening prayer as they assembled for the fifty-fifth Congress.)
The Congregational Union's executive cabled to Washington on 7 January 1896 also urging a peaceful settlement.
The day before, W. T. Stead, now editor of the Review of Reviews and, before that, of the Pall Mall Gazette , wrote to Arthur Balfour, First Lord of the Treasury in Lord Salisbury's government.
Stead, a Congregationalist, and the son and brother of Congregational ministers, had gained fame for his ‘new journalism’, in which newspapers ‘made’ news as well as reported it.
He now urged the establishment of a permanent tribunal for settling Anglo-American disputes.
Later that same month he forwarded a copy of a declaration in favour of arbitration signed by Nonconformist ministers so that the Foreign Secretary could approve the wording before it was sent.
In addition the National Free Church Council supported a peace mission by W. R. Cremer, Radical MP for Haggerston from 1885 to 1895 and a Wesleyan.
Cremer had started life as a joiner and had then become a trade unionist.
In 1870 he established what became the Workmen's Peace Association of which he was secretary.
He had travelled widely in America on behalf of peaceful arbitration of international disputes and in 1893 had persuaded the Commons to resolve in favour of an Anglo-American Treaty of Arbitration.
He would be re-elected for Haggerston in 1900 and in 1903 would be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.
When he died in 1908 his Memorial Service was held at Horne's church on the Tottenham Court Road.
Although the crisis passed without armed conflict, Nonconformists added a call for a permanent ‘court’ to settle disputes between nations to their long-standing  demand for international arbitration to avoid war.
However, in 1898, when America went to war with Catholic Spain over Cuba, international arbitration was forgotten and English Nonconformists were united in their support for Protestant America.
As we shall see, this was a unity they found impossible when their own country went to war with the Boers in the following year.
In 1898 the Baptists expressed their ‘sympathy with the people of the United States in their honourable resolve to put an end to the intolerable oppression by Spain in the Island of Cuba.’
The President of the Baptist Union called on the United States' ambassador but unfortunately he was out.
He had better luck when sending a cablegram to the American President who replied, ‘The President deeply appreciates the friendly sentiment expressed by you on behalf of the influential body which you represent.’
The following year the Baptists rejoiced in the American victory and recorded the ‘confident hope that henceforth America and Britain will alike and together, in every part of the world, be the friends of the oppressed and down-trodden, the champions of civil and religious freedom, and the promoters of righteousness and peace.’
Congregationalists at the 1899 May meetings gave a rapturous ovation to the American deputation to show their support for America's ‘high-minded purpose’.
Not to be outdone the Wesleyan Methodists rejoiced in 1898 ‘in the growing sense of kinship that marks our relations with the United States’, expressed their ‘warmest sympathy’ with America's efforts to ‘disburden suffering peoples of the pitiless and truculent misgovernments under which they have groaned’and rejoiced that ‘In fusing together the two great divisions of the Anglo-Saxon race, the Churches have played the chief part although’, they added as a reprove to their more ‘political’friends, the Baptists and Congregationalists, ‘like their Lord, they do not cry nor uplift their voice in the highways of International politics’.
The whole question of political cooperation between Methodists and what they traditionally called ‘the Nonconformist churches’ was one which vexed leaders like Hugh Price Hughes.
In 1890 a chance arose for united action but even here divisions remained.