

I GREW up between two households, my father's and that of my mother's father and mother.
My father had one especial hero: William III, King of Great Britain and Ireland and Prince of Orange.
To my father the Dutchman, by smashing the forces of James II at the Boyne and, more decisively, at Aughrim on 12th July 1691, saved the country from an Irish-Catholic tyranny of popish servitude, idolatry and nameless superstition.
Those battles were not events of long ago which no longer mattered.
Rather, they were of decisive moment in how we lived from day to day and deserved the commemoration of daily objects, so that William's figure, seated on his prancing white charger, sword-arm raised in a gesture of advance, decorated tea-towels and plates.
William's victories served to divide us for ever from those wretched people whose popish sedition would undermine the fabric of our world and who were known to hate everything Britain was and stood for.
Their sympathies automatically lay with Britain's enemies, whoever they might be; a range of people from Hitler's Nazis, to the Kennedy tribe in America.
Nor was my father in any way unusual in his opinions, though he was unusually fierce in the vehemence with which he expressed them.
On the Twelfth of July each year, he would be one of tens of thousands who marched to display their common purpose and faith.
And of those tens of thousands the overwhelming number were decent, god-fearing men and women.
The Twelfth of July parades, actually held on the Saturday nearest to the date in Scotland, were days of high excitement.
The order of events was the same each year: first, the bus or train ride to whatever town The Walk was to be held in; then being stationed somewhere from which I could see the parade.
It was a tremendous spectacle, part carnival, part mystical communion of the Elect.
At the front of the parade, the solemn men in dark suits and bowler hats, one of whom carried a Bible on a purple cushion.
Then came the ranks of the individual lodges, men's and women's lodges separate, all in good order, with parade marshals keeping to the side of the ranks.
Each lodge had its own brightly coloured banner, mounted on heavy poles and carried by two strong men.
The long tasselled ropes which could keep the banner steady in a breeze were carried by four others.
And on the banners scenes from the common story; William of Orange, or a secret conventicle; or the face of some favoured hero such as Lord Edward Carson.
Hour after hour the great multicoloured sails swept past.
Best of all, of course, were the bands; flute, accordion or pipe and their wonderful marching tunes, some of which, like Lilibulero , had taken British armies into battle for centuries.
Those traditional marching tunes of Ulster must be among the most stirring and spirited airs any child could wish for: the melodiousness of Derry's Walls , the bravado of The Sash or, best of all, the sweet austerity of the pipes playing Rowan Tree or some of the gentler hymns as four/four marches.
After the parade, along to the park where the speeches boomed from ancient public address systems to an audience more intent on its flasks of tea and sandwiches or, for the men, bottles of beer or whisky.
Here my mother or grandmother would meet up with my great-aunts and uncles, cousins and second cousins.
The whole day's spectacle was an affirmation that a common history mattered and would be maintained.
I knew even then that I inherited a history which defined who I was.
In the villages where I grew up, we did not play with Catholics.
My father's father, a soldier in the Black Watch, had helped put down a rebellion one Easter in Dublin.
In my paternal grandparents' house, things were ordered differently.
Religion was more a background, a context.
My grandfather was a miner, a staunch socialist and very anti-Tory.
His and my granny's stories and memories centred round the struggles they had come through, especially the terrible days following the collapse of the General Strike in 1926 when the miners stayed out for many months.
My granny would tell how her mother, Jane Blackley, née Sharp, would bring a basket of potatoes, eggs and ham, or how my grandfather and his brother-in-law operated an illicit mine and sold the coal to local farmers on the sly, for there were young children to be fed.
My grandfather would tell how he and some village musicians persuaded a local sympathiser to part with a lorry with which they toured round Scotland to raise money for the village.
My grandfather was the singer.
The tour travelled up the west coast to Oban, round the far north and down through Inverness to Aberdeen and Edinburgh, finishing up  in Dumfries.
As the last concert was held in a field in a howling wind, my grandfather sang one of his favourite Burns songs;O' aa the Airts the Wind can Blaw .
And both, but most often my grandmother, would speak of her brother, Nethan (Nathaniel); of his good looks, of his skill as a musician, of how he had tried several times and failed to persuade my grandfather to enlist.
Here was another history, intimate and intensely alive.
It was not until my teenage years that my notions of which history was mine began to be complicated.
One history teacher, more imaginative than the others, not content with facts and analyses, supplemented these by reading aloud lengthy passages from the diaries or memoirs of people who had witnessed the events we were studying.
Two such passages stand out in my memory: one was of a forced march during the Crimean War; the other, an account by someone who had travelled in the west of Ireland in the years of the Great Hunger.
Famine, we were told, was what happened when there was no food.
However, in the years when the population of Ireland was halved through starvation, disease and emigration, we learned that there had been food; eggs and beef, grain, butter and pork, but that much of it was exported to England to pay rents.
Gradually, over the years, I would piece together another family history; of those who had come to Scotland in the terrible years of the 1840s, some of whom, indeed, had even been Irish Catholics.
Later still, living in Canada, travelling in the United States and working with Americans, I came to understand that not everyone lived history in the same way; that for many Americans, history was only a bunch of dead stories.
Maybe we Scots and Irish have paid a high price for our long memories, but who in Scotland or Ireland has not some attitude to the Great Hunger, or the Clearances, or just to a vague morass of names, Culloden and Robert the Bruce and Rebel Songs?
There was, too, another, more private, childhood.
My favourite stories were of exotic places, of Fawcett exploring the Amazon or of Arctic whalers.
And my favourite fantasies were of walking across country after country until I reached some strange place no one had ever visited.
I would trace out the courses of rivers in my school atlas and imagine following them to their sources or to some foreign sea.
Where and when I first heard the names ‘Rhine’ or ‘Danube’I cannot now remember.
Wherever it was, they have always had a more than casual fascination for me, and when I read  Patrick Leigh-Fermor's splendid books recounting his year-long walk down the Rhine and along the Danube, those childish fantasies resurfaced like long-forgotten toys rediscovered.
For anyone interested in history, 1989 was clearly a year to match 1789 or 1914 in the momentous import of events in Eastern Europe.
As revolution followed revolution, I recalled Neville Chamberlain's infamous remark in the days after he sanctioned Hitler's partition of Czechoslovakia: ‘A distant people of whom we know nothing.’
I wanted to see something of those countries which were so much part of what Europe has been and will become, and which were yet so unknown.
This book is the result of that journey.
I had for company a silver-grey, two-litre Volvo and the Pensées of Blaise Pascal.
The latter I had been intending to read for years and, by happenstance, had come across a cheap edition in a book sale just days before setting out.
When a friend asked me the car's name I answered at once— Anastasia Fyodorovna Romanova, Princess of all the Russias.
Perhaps a teenage fascination for Russian history had resurfaced in my pre-journey efforts to revive a too-long-neglected language.
Whatever the reason, the name stuck and Anastasia she remained.
The journey was conceived and prepared through a Scottish winter with the idea of setting out in the spring.
I once knew by heart a poem by the Russian, Fyodor Tyuchev entitled Vyesna (Spring).
It began: ‘Already in the fields the snow is melting and the swollen rivers herald Spring .’
After the terrible decades of Cold War and such near approaches to Hot War as the Cuba crisis, after decades in which the whole of Eastern Europe was a remote and hostile armed camp, the sudden thaw in which all of Europe seemed caught up was more than a political event.
It was a load lifted from the heart, a load we had not even known weighed us down.
So it was that with high spirits I packed Baedekers and prejudices, boots and a bootload of assumptions and set out for Dover.
THE roar of Dunning Burn in its January spate fills my house.
This reddish-brown turmoil of turbid waters is the  run-off from the grazing lands of Middle Third, Pitmeadow and Balquhandie, gushing over the clays and old red sandstone of Dunning Glen to swirl down the ford behind my study window.
From here, along with many other tributaries from the north-eastern corner of the Ochil Hills, the waters thrust into the Earn and thence, between Rhynd and Newburgh, into the slower-moving waters of the Tay to merge and circulate, ever-so-slowly, in the world sea.
Dunning.
It is half past three of the afternoon and already the houses across the burn are fading into a sodden gloom.
Rain gusts at the kitchen window and the outer door, its wood swollen by damp, has to be wrenched open.
Outside, in my strip of garden, the shrubs are tilted north-eastwards by the storming wind and bits of tree and deadwood waltz past on the surface of the spate.
It was another kind of January, a January of sudden snow storms and hard frosts at the end of the month, when a rabble of Catholic Jacobite clansmen under the nominal control of John Erskine, Earl of Mar, came to burn the protestant villages of Dunning, Muthill, Blackford, Auchterarder and Crieff.
That was in 1716.
It was the 1730s before the government stumped up compensation for those whose houses had been damaged or destroyed and among them was one James Sharp, ancestor of Jane, my great-grandmother, whom I still remember being taken to visit as a child.
One man who, greatly to the relief of his family and parishioners, did not see the burning, for he died while the rebels were on their way, was the minister, William Reid.
He was a fierce old Covenanter and an unrelenting opponent of the Jacobite cause.
Hours before the rebels arrived his body was hurriedly wrapped in a blanket and secreted in a shallow grave.
As a young man, in 1679, Reid had fought in the protestant fiasco at Bothwell Bridge when their armies were smashed by Monmouth.
Fleeing the slaughter, he hid himself in Hamilton Kirk where: ‘A number of other fugitives following him into the church were pursued by the dragoons, who, regardless of their cries for mercy, butchered them in the sacred place.’
Reid watched the mess from his hidey-hole in the roof-space where he hid for three days.
It was at Hamilton also that, early in 1916, Nathaniel Blackley became Private Blackley 40639 in the 9th battalion, The Cameronians (Scottish Rifles), the regiment whose origins lay in standing guard over the meetings of the Covenanters.
Nathaniel Blackley was named after his maternal grandfather, Nathanael Sharp, who had  been raised by his grandfather on the family farm at Tillicoultry, just west of the head of Dunning Glen.
The Blackleys were a ferocious tribe of Orangemen from the County Down who had settled in Scotland in the 1860s.
Nathaniel was the favourite son, fair-haired and blue-eyed, and his sister Annie, my grandmother, kept a lock of his curls until she died.
He was a gifted musician and the army used his talents as a bugler on recruiting drives.
Eventually he went with his battalion to France.
On his last leave before sailing he had said his goodbyes to his mother and gone out but, stopping at the gate, turned and gone back in again, leaving with her his signet ring and pocket watch.
Six weeks later, on 23rd October 1916, he was killed, shot through the head by a sniper's bullet in one of the endless and inglorious messes on the river Somme.
He was twenty-two.
…after the War the Army Graves Service were unable to locate his grave and he is therefore commemorated by name on the Thiepval Memorial, France, on which the names of the casualties from the Cameronians appear on Pier 4, Panel D…
This memorial is 8 kilometres north-east of Beaucourt-Hamel railway station and south of Thiepval village.
It records the names of some 70,000 of the forces of the British Commonwealth and Empire who fell in the battle in the neighbourhood and have no known grave.
From Calais to Albert, the nearest town to Thiepval, is but a two hour drive.
IT is warm for April.
Somewhere distant, faint, off to my right, I can hear a cuckoo calling as he moves among the coppices and hedgerows.
Springtime flatters this part of the Somme countryside, undramatic with its flat fields and scattered villages.
The largest object for miles, dominating the shallow depression which is the valley of the Ancre, is the Thiepval Memorial.
You approach the park down a long avenue, past lawns carefully tended and set in a girdle of trees.
The massive triple-arch of dark-red brick, each leg of the arch four piers deep, each pier with its four high panels of dun-coloured marble on which the names of the dead are engraved, is, for all its height, a squat, graceless thing.
Climbing the steps through the central arch to the altar-like plinth, I see that someone has left a pot of red begonias.
A wreath of artificial poppies has been held down by a brick.
I place my three long-stemmed, red roses beside the begonias.
There is not another soul in sight and no sound.
From the plinth you look down long rows of white crosses and plain headstones on the far side of the memorial; some say inconnu , others ‘A Soldier of the Great War’.
Beyond them, beyond this enclosure, the lush countryside meanders to its low horizon.
Nathaniel's name is high up on an inner wall of one of the piers.
The dead are listed by regiment, then by rank and then alphabetically -nothing disordered here.
This dismal monumentalism is the apotheosis of impersonality, a confirmation rather than a denial of the mindset which led to such slaughter in the first place, though the architect intended no irony.
The monument was raised by the power of the state as a piece of political theatre extravagant enough to be seen from miles and years away, as it was by my father when he passed on the Bapaume Road in the summer of 1944.
‘Shambles’: Latin;scamnum , a bench or stool, or table from which meat is sold, hence; a meat-market, a slaughter-house or, figuratively;a place of carnage .
On 1st July 1916 at 7.30 a.m., to the sound of exploding mines and a massive artillery barrage, British and Commonwealth forces attempted to storm these low hills around Thiepval.
The dead and wounded in that one attack amounted to 59,000.
Thiepval and Beaumont-Hamel were not taken until September and November respectively.
Between July and November 1916 on this front there were on both sides three million men in arms, of which the dead, wounded and shell-shocked would amount to one million two hundred thousand.
I left Thiepval having had enough of cemeteries.
But the landscape here is a charnel-house and graveyard follows graveyard.
Only a few hundred yards to the north-west of Thiepval is the Ulster Tower, commemorating the soldiers of the 36th (Ulster) Division and across the road is the Connaught Cemetery.
A little to the west lies the village of Hamel.
Here are commemorated the  Scots of the 51st (Highland) Division who set out, pipes playing, on that morning of 1st July and who suffered high casualties.
Here also are commemorated the men of the Newfoundland Regiment whose monument is a splendid bronze caribou, looking out over the trenches of Camp Terre Neuve .
The trenches here have been left untouched, eroding away year by year.
The stanchions to which the rolls of barbed wire were attached are still here, rusted now.
The mud and corpses and rats have gone.
That was three-quarters of a century ago when most of those who fought here were not much more than boys.
On my way back to Anastasia, I catch sight of a tree-creeper and watch him flit from tree to tree, scurrying mouse-like up their trunks as though nothing else had ever happened here.
When the Battle of the Somme began, Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia did not exist; Hungary was twice its present size and Austria was the centre of a ramshackle empire which had lasted for centuries.
The Sultan, the Kaiser and the Tsar still sat on their thrones.
The world changes and the world does not change.
Formal logic cannot cope with even so simple a contradiction, though we live with such conflicts as matters of course.
Part of my process of becoming who I am involved rejecting some of what I had been born into.
What Nathaniel was born into was perhaps a boring life in the pits.
Perhaps the war offered adventure, travel, a use for his gifts.
Perhaps, like so many others, he sincerely believed that it was a just war and fought for his values in righteousness.
Therefore the nostalgic gloss my grandmother cast backwards upon her own childhood and on her favourite brother, cannot be separated from their histories, and our easy condemnations of slaughter miss the complicated realities.
As a soldier, Nathaniel was no longer Nathaniel.
He was a name, rank and number, his individuality merely an accident, irrelevant to the great machinery of a war between states, not persons.
And yet it was persons who died in such numbers, without ever necessarily subscribing to the consequences of their own actions.
That impersonality is the essence of war and the Thiepval Memorial attempts to disguise that fact by pretending to commemorate persons.
But what it truly commemorates is the surrender of individuality by all those persons.
The horrible irony is that it is in that very surrender that community itself is founded.
THE town of Albert was reduced to rubble in the First World War and rebuilt in the 1920s.
Now it is a prosperous place, making its living from light industry and the visitors who come to tour the battlefields.
A light cloud cover in the late afternoon had given way to a lovely, pale, evening sky as I wandered through the town to its main tourist attraction, the red-brick basilica of  Nôtre -Dame de Brebières.
Its two-hundred-foot-high tower is surmounted by a dome on which stands a golden Virgin holding aloft the Christ-child.
In January 1915 a shell struck the base of the dome, toppling the fifteen-foot-high statue which hung horizontally above the town until 1918, becoming known as The Leaning Virgin.
Postcards of the ‘then and now’ variety were on sale in the vestibule, showing the rubble to which the basilica had been largely reduced.
Albert has two hotels and, there being nothing in the guidebook to distinguish them, I settled on the Grand Hôtel de la Paix, sight unseen.
It was not long before I was ensconced in the dining-room with a pastis and looking forward to dinner.
The patron , M. Duthoit, was a comfortable sort of fellow with his green and blue patterned cardigan and spectacles dangling at his breast.
I expected slippers but he was more spruce than that and clearly businesslike in the way he ran this family hotel.
From his slight paunch he also looked as though he enjoyed his own cuisine.
French restaurants, real ones, are indefinably different from anything one finds in Britain.
It shows in the lack of fuss about décor.
The dining room of the Hôtel de la Paix had a red-tiled floor.
The walls were wood-panelled for most of their height and the old wicker and wooden chairs were well worn.
The linen was good quality, plain white.
Eating here is a mundane but important matter.
It is not an excuse for social display.
For a small-town, one-star hotel, the menu was more ambitious than anything likely to be found in its British equivalent and included such delights as scallops and sweetbreads.
I settled for the terrine du chef followed by rognons d'agneau and pommes vapeur .
To drink, I settled on a half bottle of Passetoutgrain.
Tomorrow I shall be in Germany, France's traditional enemy and new-found friend.
Before sleeping I wonder what Pascal had in mind when he wrote in the Pensées : ‘Time heals griefs and quarrels, for we change and are no longer the same persons.
Neither the offender nor the offended are any more themselves.
It is like a nation which we have provoked, but meet again after two generations.
They are still Frenchmen, but not the same.’
I DO not remember that as a child I played cowboys and Indians very much.
Our usual game, played in the woods behind our house, was Germans v. British.
The trouble was that, naturally, no one wanted to be a German.
Germans, therefore, had to be selected on an ‘eeney, meeney, miney mo’ basis.
If you did end up as a German, however, you still played to win and I can remember a kind of perverse pleasure in being determined to win,even though I was a German, which was something of a contradiction.
A cousin of my granny's lived only a few hundred yards from us.
He had been injured in the pits many years before and supplemented his income by hunting and fishing.
He was a regular provider in our house of bum trout and other delicacies.
His wife, Vera, who had left Germany just before the war, was very nice.
I still wondered though, how it must feel to be a German.
It had to be very different.
Thirty and more years later, those underlying attitudes persist as unthinking sympathies and antipathies far below the level of articulate rationality.
They require a kind of check placed upon them, in order that one should not be captured by them.
Prejudice is like that.
It is not rational.
All too often, what follows from it is rationalisation; the justification of what we feel against all the evidence of our intelligence.
A whole history has been assimilated long before conscious self-criticism is a realistic option.
It cannot simply be thought away.
It is part of the fabric of one's being.
One is also that cluster of prejudices.
Germans were not, of course, the only targets of our childish hostility, nor was hostility the only bias we absorbed.
School atlases in the 1950s were still coloured half in red.
The Empire  might have become the Commonwealth, but that was just a new name for the same thing as far as we were concerned.
It proved that, in the whole world, British was best.
Luckier still, out of the British pot pourri , Scots were definitely the best of the lot.
The Empire and the superiority it evidenced, was just the way things were, entirely natural.
Not that I knew any foreigners, though I recall thinking that there were two kinds.
The good ones were those like the Gurkhas and Queen Salote who were part of the Empire and the baddies were nasty little creatures like the Japs or Koreans — or Germans.
As we get older and perhaps more worldly, it is sometimes awkward to admit that we ever believed such nonsense, and even more difficult to admit that not everything we imbibed was bad or wrong.
Pascal knew all this very well.
He wrote:
For we must not misunderstand ourselves; we are as much automatic as intellectual; and hence it comes that the instrument by which conviction is attained is not demonstrated alone.
How few things are demonstrated?
Proofs only convince the mind.
Custom is the source of our strongest and most believed proofs.
It bends the automaton, which persuades the mind without its thing about the matter.
Who has demonstrated that there will be a tomorrow, and that we shall die?
And what is more believed?
It is, then, custom which persuades us of it; it is custom that makes so many men Christians; custom that makes them Turks, heathens, artisans, soldiers etc.
SUCH of that European history which came to so terrible an ending in and around the battlefields of the Somme had its beginnings in the north Rhineland town of Aachen, Charlemagne's capital, Aix-la-Chapelle; because it was here, for more than half a millennium, that the Holy Roman Empire celebrated its mysteries.
Between 936 and 1531 no less than thirty-two kings and emperors were crowned in Aachen.
Driving across the flat and prosperous farmlands of Picardy and through the shabby industrial suburbs of Charleroi and Liège to the German/Belgian frontier on which Aachen sits, the first thing  you notice is its novelty.
Having had the misfortune to have good rail links, a large aerodrome and to be within easy reach, Aachen was a regular target for Allied bombing raids, so that much of it is recent.
French towns, large or small, have a raffish, down-at-heel quality which shows up as a relaxed attitude to their urban fabric.
Exterior plaster and paintwork, whether on public buildings or private housing, is allowed to flake and crumble.
Not so in Aachen, or anywhere in the old Federal Republic where the townscapes are sprightly and well kept, the public parks devoid of litter and the shopping malls reek of prosperity.
The downtown antique shops which clustered in the streets off the Marktplatz sold the bric-a-brac, not of the nineteenth but of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
It is less a question of efficiency or cleanliness than a refusal to let past and present blur together.
Some anxiety keeps them distinct, the past properly categorised and preserved, the present carefully renewed.
Whatever the cause, decay is not a feature of Federal townscapes.
Ancient Aachen was, above all, the site of an idea and the idea was empire .
Charlemagne made it his capital because it was a defendable town in his own territory.
There he built his palace and chapel, part of which survives in the present cathedral.
There in 796 the Avars, nomad warriors who roamed the Pannonian plain before the Magyars came, made their submission to Frankish arms.
There too came Greek envoys from Constantinople to acknowledge Charles's claim as Western Emperor.
But after Charles's death, his empire dissolved in a turbulence of Frankish feud.
The real founders of the Empire were the Saxon emperors, Otto the Great and his son and grandson.
They married the fact of a German kingdom to the theory of Italian churchmen and the offspring survived for nearly a thousand years.
Originally, in early Republican Rome,imperium meant that power exercised over individuals by officers of the state and that power was specific in its limits and granted by the people.
So at least ran the theory, and, for a time, it did operate that way, very much along the lines of the Athenian polis in its democratic phase.
By the time of Pompey, the distinction between the powers granted to an office and the authority of the man who held that office had begun to blur.
By the time of Constantine, who christianised the empire, it had ceased to exist.
Power had grown absolute and derived not from the people, but from God.
That concept of authority deriving from God was, above all, the claim  of the bishops of Rome and, as their influence grew, it was they who nourished the idea of a unitary empire.
It was the popes of Rome, those caesars of the Christian churches, who insisted on a continuity not just from Christ, but from Constantine.
They wanted one over-arching political structure which would be their temporal instrument.
If they could not exercise that power themselves, or count on the eastern empire to do it for them, then they would find it where they could.
For a time the eastern empire was able to maintain itself in Italy, but thereafter the popes had to look to the new Frankish power in the north for their temporal defences.
Charlemagne's empire was German and tribal.
That of the Ottos  ' was, at least in its ideology, universal and feudal.
Much of the history of the Middle Ages follows from that fact, as the papacy struggled to separate the concept of the Empire from the property of any one dynasty, and the emperors strove to make of the Church an instrument of state.
For Otto the Great, crowned in Aachen in 936, Charlemagne and his capital were key elements in his effort to legitimise his ascendancy over a rabble of dukes, princelings and petty kings.
He understood the value of public relations.
For his coronation he did not just go to Aachen to be ‘elected’ king of the Franks in the old way, but dressed up in Frankish costume for the occasion.
By fostering an image of himself as the inheritor of Charlemagne's empire, he did much to create that image of Charlemagne which dominated the later middle ages.
Otto's authority rested on the success of his armies, most spectacularly in 955 at the battle of the Lechfeld when he defeated the Magyar hosts who were attacking Augsburg.
That defeat closed the west to the Magyars who then set about colonising the Pannonian plain and founding the state we now know as Hungary.
More curiously still, by promoting the figure of Charlemagne, Otto has also been seen as contributing to the creation of the French state: ‘The notion that there was such a country as France, at a time when the royal authority was very little recognised outside the narrow boundaries of the royal domain, the Île de France, was fostered by the legend of Charlemagne.’
Once Otto had consolidated his hold over Germany and secured his external frontiers, he went to Rome in 962 for a second coronation, following again in the steps of Charlemagne.
His new imperial title did not change the basis of his power.
It did, however, enhance his prestige and set precedents which  drew German and Austrian rulers southwards for a thousand years.
Otto III, his grandson, went further still in his pursuit of the imperial idea by establishing his capital in Rome itself.
In the year 1000 Otto III had Charlemagne's tomb opened and removed from it the gold cross which hung round the neck of the skeleton and the marble throne on which the body had been placed.
That cream-coloured stone chair can still be seen in the cathedral treasury in Aachen.
It became the coronation seat of the emperors.
Eventually, of course, the empire was captured by a dynasty, the Habsburgs, whose first emperor, Rudolf, was crowned in Aachen in 1273.
But by that time there had been two centuries of strife between Empire and Papacy and the Empire no longer had any special connection to the City of Rome.
It was Voltaire who observed that the Holy Roman Empire was neither Holy, nor Roman, nor an Empire.
By the eighteenth century, no one believed in it.
Nevertheless, that Empire which, as Dryden said, ‘is no more than power in trust’, provoked a world war.
What was it that so introverted a man as Ludwig Wittgenstein thought he believed in, when he volunteered to fight for the Emperor?
Or was he, like so many millions of others, caught up in a swell of mindless sentiment which hardly knew what it was doing?
Having performed my duty and wandered around the coronation hall of the fourteenth century Rathaus with its dreadful nineteenth-century frescoes on the life of Charlemagne, and gazed at Charlemagne's marble throne in the Cathedral, it was time to sit in the sun for a while and eat an ice-cream.
Whatever Aachen may have been in the past, it has settled down now to being a prosperous commercial town with few pretensions.
FROM Aachen to Bonn, the ancient to the modern capital, is but an hour's drive.
From where I am sitting on the Rhine embankment I can see the Siebengebirge and the Drachenfels, named for the dragon which guarded the treasure-hoard of the Nibelungs.
After killing it, Siegfried bathed in its blood, thereby  rendering himself invulnerable.
As he bathed, a sycamore leaf fell between his shoulder blades so that, like Achilles, his perfection was flawed and it was there that the treacherous Lord Hagen thrust his spear.
That the Nibelungenlied , the Ur-epic of both Rhine and Danube, should have as its ending the annihilation of the German army at the court of King Etzel (Attila) in Hungary, sounds like the over-stretched irony of some modern tragedian.
The hills are wrapped in a shawl of pink light gradually fading into dusk.
A thin moon is already hanging over the river and the swallows are feeding very high, a sign of continuing fine weather.
The pollarded limes along the promenade look like irregular candelabra.
At this hour it is still pleasantly warm and numbers of elegantly dressed strollers are converging on a pleasure cruiser, the Filia Rheni , moored just upstream.
Further out in the channel the Petite France is heading upriver with another freight of day-trippers.
Although the lights of the pleasure cruisers sparkling from the water make the river look attractive, Baedeker's advice is forthright: ‘Bathing in the Rhine should be avoided at all costs.’
By day it is a fast current of murky water.
Though it once supported salmon and sea-trout runs, little flourishes in it now.
Bonn is usually taken to be the dividing line between the upper and lower Rhine, western Europe's longest river at 1,320 kilometres.
From Bonn it heads north across the relatively flat north German plain, but southward it has to cut its way through the hard rocks of the Taunus range where narrow gorges once made the upper reaches of the river dangerous to navigate.
The Rhine is one of the central facts of European geography and has always marked a boundary.
It was a frontier to the northeast for the Romans who had a camp here,Castra Bonnensia , where they suffered a defeat at the hands of the German tribes in AD 70.
From the late thirteenth century it was the residence of the Archbishop Electors of Cologne.
The Holy Roman Emperors were elected by three lay and three clerical Electors plus the King of Bohemia, a title always held by the Habsburgs after the Thirty Years War.
There were no elections after 1794 when the town was occupied by French troops of the Revolutionary Army for, in 1805, under pressure from Napoleon, the emperor Francis II gave up his imperial title and became just plain old Emperor of Austria.
At the Congress of Vienna in 1815, Bonn, like Aachen, was given  to Prussia.
In 1949 it became the capital of the Federal Republic which grew out of the amalgamation of the French, British and American zones of occupation.
Bonn is a handsome town but, far as it is from the historic centres of German power, it seems an odd choice for a capital, even allowing for the Allies' post-war policy of de-centralisation.
Still, Germany has no very long history as a unitary state (less than a century) and has had three capitals since 1918 — Weimar, Berlin and Bonn.
One reason why Bonn became the capital was that it was favoured by Konrad Adenauer,der alte Fuchs (the Old Fox), the Federal Republic's first post-war chancellor who had his political base in the North Rhineland.
He had been mayor of Cologne before being expelled by the Nazis.
He became mayor again after the war only to be dismissed by a British officer of the occupying forces, who found him as awkward to deal with as the Nazis had.
Adenauer was chairman of the parliamentary council which drafted the constitution and the basic law for the new state and, with the success of his party in the 1949 elections — he was a Christian Democrat — he was the obvious candidate for chancellor.
After the Potsdam agreement, by which Germany lost a fifth of its territory to Poland and the Soviet Union and with the Oder-Neise line as its eastern border, eleven million refugees were expelled from Eastern Europe, principally from the Czech Sudetenland, East Prussia and the Banat in north-east Yugoslavia.
When Adenauer took over domestic administration from the occupying forces in 1949, an estimated seven million of those found themselves in the new Republic.
In the course of a few years Hider had managed to undo a thousand-year-long German expansion eastwards.
It was the largest movement of peoples since the tribal wanderings of the first millennium.
Adenauer's other achievement was to build up a personal relationship with Charles de Gaulle which made possible a Franco-German rapprochement of real depth and made the European Economic Community a reality.
Now that the Federal Republic has vanished, François  Mitterrand 's efforts to lock Germany into a system of political as well as economic interdependencies seems the only secure way to stabilise Western Europe.
Given the political will, a primitive nationalism can be generated by governments in a remarkably short space of time, certainly in less than a generation.
The Thatcherite view of a loosely associated  Europe, including some of the Eastern European states, rests on a nationalistic suspicion of things European.
More importantly, it fails to lock Germany into a European confederation.
Many sophisticated Germans such as Günter Grass have regarded the unification process with dismay, arguing that a return to the traditional German pattern of a confederation of states would be healthier.
But it is too late for that.
The young research scientist with whom I chatted in a Bonn café was not worried about nationalism.
His anxiety was that the cost of unification would cripple the West German economy, an anxiety I was to hear expressed on several occasions.
Unfortunately, economics and nationalism are profoundly linked.
The Scottish poet Hugh MacDiarmid, who was expelled from the British Communist Party for his nationalism and from the Scottish Nationalist Party for his communism, thought that economics and nationalism could not be separated.
In that he was wiser than Marx and his Eastern European successors, though the root issues go deeper than either economics or nationality.
Marxism grotesquely underestimated the power of nationalism, as it did that of religion.
But that is because both those phenomena address human problems of identity and motivation at an individual level in a way that Marxism cannot.
Marxism has no philosophy of the individual.
Marx never interested himself in how individuals arrive at their sense of themselves or in what motivates them to behave well or badly.
Marxism has no psychology of experience, an omission which warped its radicalism from the outset.
As Federal capital Bonn is naturally a political town.
In warm afternoon sunshine I spent a pleasing hour wandering the narrow Gassen (lanes) round the Münsterplatz.
At one end of the Square, presided over by the statue of Beethoven, a group of Vietnamese were staging an anti-communist demonstration complete with public address system.
They waved their banners, sang songs, made speeches and shouted slogans in unison, mostly in Vietnamese.
A few yards away, a group of police motorcyclists in their olive-green leathers lounged by their bikes and chatted with friends.
On the other side of the Square, attracting a much larger crowd, a fire-eater was doing his thing watched by amazed children as he threw his head back and spewed flame a couple of yards into the air.
One little girl dropped her ice-cream in the excitement of it all and began to howl like a banshee.
It was the run-up period  to a series of local elections, which were being widely viewed as a test of chancellor Kohl's handling of the unification issue.
But the only posters I could see disfiguring the town were those of the ecology party.
By far the most attractive part of the town was the area between the university and the Rhine embankment with its splendidly kept lawns and gardens and a huge magnolia tree in full bloom, a riot of purple-tinged blossoms.
But it is the university itself which gives the scene its elegance.
A three-storeyed neo-classical frontage of immense length, the ground level is in grey stone, the upper storeys in pale ochre.
The great sweep of lawn and stone, is not overwhelming, imposing though it is, being softened by paths and trees, the former much frequented by courting couples and idling students.
When Bonn's old-town fortifications were dismantled in 1717, the stone was used to build a new palace for the Elector, Joseph Clemens.
When the electors became redundant the buildings were turned into a university.
It was in the Elector's private chapel here that Beethoven, a native of Bonn, gave his first public performance.
It was here too that the young Friedrich Nietzsche came to study philology and theology in 1864, though he quickly abandoned the latter.
Nietzsche is hardly read now as a serious philosopher and his influence on writers and artists was always greater than on philosophers.
Sadly, it was not confined to writers and artists, for though it may be unfair to blame Nietzsche for his appropriation by Nazi ideologues, there is no question but that his doctrine of the superman and his apparent anti-semitism provided them with fertile soil.
There is, in any case, a tradition of romantic nationalism among German philosophers extending long before Nietzsche.
Its seeds can be found in Hegel's glorification of the Prussian State, but its chief exponent was Johann Fichte.
Hugh Seton-Watson has some perceptive things to say about it:
After the defeat of the German Revolution of 1848 German Nationalism lost much of its original liberalism.
Worship of State and Race…began to predominate over the principle of Liberty, taken by the Germans from the French Revolution…
The Austro-German bourgeoisie of Vienna and Bohemia turned its back on liberalism, and plunged into an orgy of intolerant romantic  nationalism.
Liberalism was Left more and more to the Jews who, as a socially inferior group, were naturally more inclined to see the value of individual liberty and equality than the Germans, intoxicated since the victory of 1870 (over France) by a sense of the strength of the German people…
(Eastern Europe Between the Wars ).
Nietzsche's achievement is rather to have prefigured so much of twentieth-century thought.
He is a precursor of both existentialism and psychoanalysis even if both have turned out to be disappointing by comparison with the hopes once placed in them.
I found it difficult to associate the storms of either Beethoven or Nietzsche with this douce façade and pleasant park.
THE following morning dawned bright and warm and, being weary of towns, I settled on driving some way down the Rhine and then exploring one of the country roads.
Following the left bank of the river, you are rarely out of sight of the water.
First, you follow the Adenauer Allee out of Bonn through the suburb of Bad Godesberg where Neville Chamberlain came for his chats with Herr Hitler in the days before Munich.
Now it is largely the diplomatic quarter of Bonn with a mixture of new office buildings and elegant old villas.
By half past seven the sun was just surfacing above the silhouette of the mist-shrouded Siebengebirge, looking like a vast behemoth shouldering its way up into the light.
The scene was sufficiently oriental that one could easily imagine some Hokusai image of a dragon rising into the skies above the Drachenfels.
The riverside landscapes were startlingly beautiful, a riot of castles, châteaux and towers perched on any available rock high above the wooded slopes.
Many of the trees, chestnuts, thorns, an occasional lilac, were already in blossom and the river glittered in the sunlight.
Around Remagen you cross from Westphalia into the Pfalz, the old Palatinate, so much fought over in the Thirty Years War.
At Koblenz the Mosel enters the Rhine — wine country — and, wherever possible, the hillsides have been terraced.
The soil between the long rows of vines is kept weed-free, so this early in the year the hills look rather bare.
It is also fruit-growing country and the vineyards are interspersed with orchards of apple, plum and pear.
The little towns through which the road runs may once have been important, but are now picturesque backwaters.
Boppard, for example, was a royal residence of the Merovingian Franks and later became a Free Imperial City.
Now it is a pretty village, much frequented by tourists.
After the narrows at St Goar and the infamous Lorelei, the river opens out again and begins to look a little cleaner, as though it might even, once upon a time, have been blue.
Pausing long enough at Bingen to have a coffee and look at maps, I decide it is time to abandon the Rhine for a while and cut up the valley of the river Nahe towards Idar-Oberstein and the Palatinate Forest.
A few miles outside Idar I found a meadow by the side of the Nahe where I could picnic.
Lunch was a collation of local salami, black olives, spring onions and dark soft rye-bread.
On the opposite bank, not much more than a stream at this point, the hillside was thick with scrub hazel and thorn.
Further over, in the dandelion-dotted meadow, a man and a boy were kicking a football through the foot-high grass while two women laid out a picnic lunch.
The only other sound to be heard was the chirping of birds.
Dunning and its January tempests seemed a world away.
The smallest road I could find on my not-very-good road map headed south-east from Idar towards Kaiserslautern, through the hill country of the Bergland.
Near Wolfstein the roads run along a valley floor, the hills on either side rising to above 1,000 feet.
It is a rich dairy-farming district of lush pastures and scattered woodland.
Just outside Wolfstein I found an attractive-looking Gasthof at the tiny settlement of Reckweilerhof which is no more really than two large farm steadings, one of which has been turned into a guesthouse.
The steadings had been built three sides of a square, with the fourth side open to the road.
They were big, comfortable-looking farm buildings, not much different from what one might find in parts of Perthshire, except that the upper floor had a roofed balcony running along one side.
That the farm opposite was still in use was obvious from the great mound of steaming manure in the middle of the courtyard.
For thirty-eight marks (about £12) I had a large, modem double room, pleasantly furnished.
As the day began to cool in the later afternoon, I walked up the hill road behind Reckweilerhof through twelve hundred feet of gently sloping sward.
The meadows were scattered with wild flowers some of which I did not recognise.
There were certainly forget-me-nots, violets, white wood anemones, huge numbers of dandelions and some buttercups.
At a muddy little pond halfway up the hill swallows were dive-bombing its insect life and three brown pigs browsed at the further end of the meadow.
High overhead, a buzzard circled lazily on a column of warm air and on the roadway a butterfly with big white-ringed, russet-coloured eyes staring from its black wingtips, opened and closed its wings.
I had certainly found the rural setting I had been hankering after.
A couple of miles on, just over the rounded summit, lay the village of Einôllen, a settlement of two or three hundred souls.
The village was built on a fairly steep hillside and on a terrace which functioned as the village square a party was getting under way with a barbecue and a band consisting of sound-system, drums, electric guitar, bass guitar and electric keyboard.
Crates of beer were stacked ready for consumption.
The tunes were in a slow waltz time but played with that characteristic thump which accentuates the first beat of the bar so strongly as to obliterate everything else, reducing any melodic line to a tribal dance.
In the north-east of Scotland it would be described as ‘playing wi' a guid dunt’.
It looked as though it would be a good party.
Some of the houses had a curious cruciform shape, with mottoes carved into the lintels, usually invoking God's blessing.
Since all of them were built in traditional style, it was difficult to tell which were old and which new.
The deep-sand colour of the plasterwork, the dark-red tiled roofs with the little balconies and shuttered windows looked like the kind of house one might be content to live in.
A few new houses were under construction, using breeze-blocks rather than the traditional brick.
But their complete conformity to traditional styles gave the village a coherence one would rarely find in Britain and never where much new building was involved.
Back at Reckweilerhof in time for dinner, an old man was leaving the restaurant with a couple who were probably his son and daughter-in-law.
He beamed widely as he was helped down the steps and said to me:‘O, gib's nichts mehr’(Don't give us any more).
He had clearly had a splendid day out.
I sat in the evening twilight with a glass of straw-coloured wine  in its traditional glass of heavy amber stem and base.
The glass must have held nearly half a pint and I thought I too had had a splendid day out.
SINCE I was in the Palatinate, I spent the evening with C.V.
Wedgewood's great account of the Thirty Years War.
That struggle shaped Germany for the subsequent two centuries and it also determined much of the shape of Europe prior to the First World War.
The Palatinate was a major player in the war which was both political and religious with alignments changing as events developed.
It is a difficult tale to tell simply.
After the early years of the Reformation, a settlement between the Lutherans and Catholics had been arrived at in Augsburg in 1555.
The gist of it was summed up in the formula cuius regio, eius religio which meant that each king or prince had the right to choose the religion of his subjects.
A decade later, however, Calvinism appeared on the scene to make an already complicated matter more so.
The Calvinists detested the Lutherans almost as much as they did the Catholics but, as Wedgewood has observed: ‘The fundamental issue was between revealed and rationalised belief.’
The Counter-Reformation really began with the formation of the last great ‘military’ order of the Catholic Church, the Society of Jesus, in 1534.
Its leading European supporters were the Spanish and Austrian Habsburgs.
So if the Protestant camp was divided between Calvinist and Lutheran, the Catholic Camp was divided between the Habsburgs and all those who opposed the ambitions of that dynasty, a group which included the ‘Most Christian Majesty’ of France, the popes of Rome, the Protestant powers such as the Dutch, English, Bohemians and Swedes and assorted Protestant princes of Germany concerned to preserve the ‘German Liberties’.
It is worth recalling that there were some three hundred autonomous legislative powers in what we now call Germany in the years during which the war took place, 1618–1648.
The Habsburg Ferdinand of Styria became King of Bohemia, by election, in 1617.
Of all the Habsburgs, he was perhaps the least attractive of that long line.
Educated by the Jesuits, he was a  fanatical bigot, determined to crush heresy wherever he could.
The immediate trouble began in Prague.
When the Bohemians realised the mistake they had made in electing Ferdinand, they deposed him and elected in his place the Palatine Elector, Frederick V, a weak if romantic figure.
From his father he had inherited the leadership of that association of Protestant princes known as the Party of the German Liberties.
Their aim was to keep the Catholic Habsburgs from swallowing them up.
Frederick and his queen, Elizabeth, daughter of James VI and I, held court in Prague for a brief season as The Winter King and Queen.
Through his mother, a daughter of William the Silent, Frederick was also a prince of the House of Orange.
At the battle of The White Hill, near Prague, Frederick's forces were utterly crushed.
That defeat effectively extinguished the independence of the Bohemian kingdom which did not find expression again until 1918 in the new state of Czechoslovakia.
Ferdinand was ruthless in victory and made the Bohemian kingship hereditary in the House of Habsburg.
Frederick had to flee and the Palatinate was over-run by Spanish armies and the forces of the Catholic League headed by Maximilian I of Bavaria who coveted the Electoral dignity and to whom it was awarded in 1623.
Too late, those who should have been Frederick's allies realised their mistake in letting him be crushed.
Thereafter, and for more than a generation, Germany was the stage on which the rival powers played out their conflicts.
Armies from Sweden and Spain, France, the Netherlands and from as far away as Transylvania contended for superiority.
The results were catastrophic.
The German economy, already in difficulties before the war, was ruined.
Plague followed the armies like a faithful dog.
It is estimated that about a third of the population of Germany perished in the struggle.
The countryside lay half-deserted and stricken by famine.
As in the period following the Black Death in the fourteenth century, the acute shortage of labour led to a tightening of feudal restrictions on the peasantry.
Together with the wreck of the economy, it produced a chasm between the aristocratic/military caste and a peasantry bereft of any opportunity for social mobility through a bourgeoisie.
The militarism and caste rigidity which has been the bane of Germany in Europe, has its roots in the Thirty Years War.
Thereafter, the divisions between north and south Germany also became fixed and the balance of influence  in Germany began to shift away from Austria and towards the rising power in the north, Brandenburg-Prussia, under whose aegis Germany was eventually united.
Ironically, it was the last great European conflict in which religion played a dominant role.
Thereafter, religion became increasingly impotent to sway political history.
As Wedgewood concludes: ‘The war solved no problem.
Its effects, both immediate and indirect, were either negative or disastrous.
Morally subversive, economically destructive, socially degrading, confused in its causes, devious in its course, futile in its result, it is the outstanding example in European history of meaningless conflict.’
DRIVING in the early morning sunshine along quiet country roads through the Palatinate Forest, was a fine start to the day.
Most of the villages, often with charming names like Schwanheim (swan-home) or Petersberg, looked more or less intact.
Many of the houses were eighteenth century or earlier with steeply sloping red-tiled roofs and half-timbered gables painted white or pale green.
At Karlsruhe, the Rhine had finally turned blue and the river here is the boundary between the Palatinate and Baden-Württemberg.
Having decided to press on southwards and finish the day somewhere in the region of Freiburg, I joined the autobahn at Karlsruhe.
Driving on German motorways can require strong nerves and does not leave much attention for observing the countryside.
By mid-afternoon I was almost at Freiburg and left the motorway to look for a village in which to stay, preferably near the Rhine.
I soon found myself at the Gasthof Lôwen in the little village of Sasbach.
Sasbach is really no more than a scatter of houses, a couple of shops, a garage and a church set down in the middle of vineyards and orchards.
From it, one road crosses the Rhine into France and Colmar, the other takes you to Breisach and Freiburg.
It is a pretty village.
The houses are pink or yellow with white sills and dark shutters.
Even prettier was the petite brunette of about seventeen who showed me to my room.
Her name was Annette and she seemed to do all the serving and running up and down  while her rather dour and unhealthy-looking mother issued the orders.
Father looked after the bar.
Annette was studying English at school but was too shy to try using it.
Her parents spoke only German.
I asked whether they did not find it inconvenient, living so near the French border, not to speak French, but they said not.
There seems to be a profound antipathy between the French and Germans about learning each other 's language.
They would rather converse in English.
The Gasthof Löwen was spotlessly clean and the Gute Frau obviously intended, by her acerbic tone and more acerbic expression, that it would be kept that way.
Situated on a comer opposite the church, one could survey much of Sasbach from its little courtyard where three tables had been set out under three chestnut trees.
The trees, two white and one pink, were an extravaganza of blossom which floated down onto the chequered tablecloths.
Having refreshed myself with a glass of one of the excellent local wines and a vision of two large ladies at the adjoining table munching their way through what looked like several pounds of ice-cream, I decided it would be fun to walk to France.
Half a mile along the road, however, I was diverted by a nature-trail which wound up the side of a hill and promised a fine view.
From the summit one looked beyond Colmar to the hills of the Vosges and east to the hills of the Black Forest.
But what one chiefly saw was a landscape patterned by the long lines of vine running up to the wooded hilltops, a supremely domesticated landscape.
This bounty was reflected in the Gasthof Löwen's wine list on which there were eleven local wines.
I accompanied the asparagus I had for dinner (over-cooked) with a couple of glasses of the Sasbacher Scheibenbuck Müller Thurgau (trocken).
Despite its name, the wine was easy to drink, fruity and a greeny-yellow colour and served in a traditional long-stemmed wide glass.
The ‘trocken’ part is just ‘dry’.
Müller-Thurgau is the grape variety, an early ripening and highly flavoured variety, much favoured along the Upper Rhine.
For ‘Scheibenbuck’ I have not a clue, though it is probably the name of the vintner.
Scheibe is a wheel or disc and bücken is the transitive verb for ‘to bend’ so I would like to think it meant ‘wheel-buckler’though I greatly doubt it.
I revised my estimate of the Mother that evening when an elderly man arrived, one of whose arms was in a sling.
She cut up his dinner for him in a charming, solicitous way.
The bar was well patronised by the locals.
Mostly, they  drank beer, so much of it that one old man stumbled out into the night entirely on automatic pilot and a middle-aged, tired-looking woman with a wooden leg lapsed into a coma.
On one wall hung a large framed text in black-letter Gothic.
It read:
Village communities anywhere are notoriously conservative, so when two young cyclists wandered in to the Gasthof Löwen with shoulder-length hair and matching headbands, they received some doubtful glances from the table where five farm-workers sat steadily drinking their way through the evening.
Their long, slurred vowels rendered their German almost incomprehensible to me, though it was impossible not to listen in as they argued more loudly and grinned more broadly at each other 's jokes as the beer did its work.
I cannot resist quoting C.V.
Wedgewood on German drinking habits: ‘The Landgrave of Hesse founded a Temperance society but its first president died of drink; Lewis of Württemberg, surnamed the pious, drank two challengers into stupor and, being himself still sober, had them sent home in a cart with a pig.
The vice ran through all classes of society….’
Later in the evening when the place had quietened a little and the cyclists had eaten, I invited them to join me for a glass of wine.
They were clearly impecunious and I was curious.
The elder of the two, Kurt, was in his late twenties and his companion, Wolfgang, was perhaps twenty-three.
With their youthful good looks and bronzed faces they were an attractive couple.
It emerged, they were from a small town in the former German Democratic Republic near the Polish border.
It was their first time in ‘the West’ and they intended to cycle on into France and thence home  via Belgium, the Netherlands and North Germany.
Kurt was a physicist.
He had worked for a year in the Ukraine and said he liked the people there more than those he had met in the West -they were more open and friendly.
Both were scathing about the failures of state socialism in the DDR which they referred to as ‘the Russian system’.
Ultimately, they said, it broke down because it simply could not deliver the goods.
They were not, however, impressed by what they found to be the ‘superfluous materialism’ of the Federal Republic which they said was ‘rather stupid’.
Kurt and Wolfgang's main worry was that large-scale unemployment among people not accustomed to a winners-and-losers system, which capitalism is, would create lasting resentments with dire social consequences.
When Kurt had finished his training as a physicist, there had been sixteen other graduates on his course.
But there had been eighteen jobs on offer.
While that might also be true in Britain for people with such sought-after qualifications as physics, Kurt pointed out that that was the norm in East Germany.
What he found difficult to accept was the size of the gap between winners and losers in a system in which inheritance could automatically make one a winner.
Corruption in the DDR was, they said, rampant.
The entire system depended on ‘arrangements’ and favours if you wanted to get hold of any particular commodity.
The corruption went unchecked because the system could not afford to acknowledge the extent of its own inefficiencies and failures.
The other cyclist, Wolfgang, taught Russian and spoke good English.
His enthusiasm was to visit Ireland and he had read whatever he could get hold of by Irish writers, but especially by Flann O'Brien.
His view of Ireland, a highly romanticised one, had been initiated by his reading of Heinrich Böll's Irisches Tagebuch which, coincidentally, I had just read as a way of getting into German again after two decades of neglect.
It was late by the time we had finished chatting and they cycled off to find somewhere to pitch their tent.
They were an intelligent and charming pair.
I hoped they were not to be disappointed by the rest of their tour and wondered whether that residue of egalitarianism which their culture had instilled in them, for all its dreadfulness, might not in time lead them to question whether unification was wholly to their advantage.
ONE of the great advantages of villages over cities for chronic insomniacs, such as I am, is that late at night there is nothing to do in a village except read.
Sasbach was no exception and I made good progress with Pascal's Pensées .
Perhaps almost by definition, travel, like philosophy, is for those who find themselves in some sense displaced.
The cult word would be ‘alienated’.
Perhaps some component of Pascal's restless questioning was due to his displacement through recurrent ill-health, but what makes his questionings still worth reading, is that they confront the foundations of our existence and that despite the fact that he is sometimes seen merely as a Catholic apologist.
Like Heidegger, he understands that the root of the problem is not that we are born black or Jewish or rich or blind, but that we are born at all and much of his best writing deals with that most fundamental of displacements.
His response is to try to see clearly what we are in the scale of things:
Man is but a reed, the most feeble thing in nature; but he is a thinking reed.
The entire universe need not arm itself to crush him.
A vapour, a drop of water suffices to kill him.
But, if the universe were to crush him, man would still be more noble than that which killed him, because he knows that he dies and the advantage which the universe has over him; the universe knows nothing of this.
All our dignity consists, then, in thought.
By it we must elevate ourselves, and not by space and time which we cannot fill.
Let us endeavour, then, to think well; this is the principle of morality.
And there is all the critique we need of the notion of empire.
By ‘thought’, however, Pascal does not mean that somewhat shallow notion of Reason which became fashionable in the eighteenth century and which has become fashionable again in the twentieth in the guise of formal logic.
Rather, he means the workings of a live intelligence which draws on experience and intuition as much as on a more narrowly conceived logic.
The twentieth century has become notorious  for its rejections of rationality, but that is not a case, as with Pascal, of pushing thought to its limit and finding it wanting.
More often, it is a case of a rejection of serious thought for the sake of some prejudice or desire.
The pernicious notion that we can believe whatever we feel like believing may not be unique to the twentieth century but it has certainly found great popularity in it.
One other respect in which Pascal is a modem thinker is in his view, which he shared with the Jansenists, that language had proven too strong for mystery, so that theology had become merely a branch of rhetoric.
That scepticism about language -especially when it is divorced from the purposes of daily life — has become a hallmark of much contemporary thought.
Philosophy, if it is anything, is a linguistic activity which teaches us to be critical about linguistic categories.
There is a Dunning story of the Canadian who asked where Dunning was and was told that it was next to Forteviot, a village only a tenth the size of Dunning.
What we answer to ‘what am I’, categories like Scot or Jew or Protestant are vague by comparison with Dunningite or excellent-maker-of-baskets or enthusiast-for-books-about Ireland .
Pascal's insistence that rigorous, self-searching thought is the basis of morality needs as much hammering home now as it did three centuries ago.
He cannot have been an easy man and had, at least, a ferociously sober intelligence.
Maybe at the end of our enquiry we shall decide that no philosophical sense can be made of the world — and the world does not seem to be primarily linguistic.
But, Pascal tells us, we need to make the effort: ‘Imagination cannot make fools wise, but she can make them happy, to the envy of reason which can only make its friends miserable.’
THE war memorial in Dunning, as in most Scottish villages, occupies a conspicuous place.
Erected in 1919, it has an addendum for those who died in the Second World War.
In Albert, the memorial was large and conspicuous, draped with the  tricouleur  .
In the little churchyard in Sasbach, by contrast, two inconspicuous marble tablets are set into a wall.
They list the names of those killed in Hitler's war.
Below the list of names is the legend:Unser Opfer/Eure Verpflichtung/Frieden .
(Our sacrifice is your duty to peace.)
Though there is nothing to commemorate the fact, one of Europe's greatest soldiers died in Sasbach; the Vicomte de Turenne, marshal of France, in 1675.
A cousin of Frederick, the Elector Palatine, he was a physically feeble young man who by dint of self-discipline transformed himself into a vigorous soldier.
In 1630 he entered the service of Richelieu, despite the difference in their religious convictions.
In 1643 he was made a marshal of France and his first command with that rank required him to reorganise the army of Weimar which had been smashed at the battle of Tüttlingen.
That done, he crossed the Rhine at Breisach and in four extraordinary campaigns brought an end to the Thirty Years War.
The most important engagement of that first campaign was the fiercely contested battle at Freiburg against Bavarian forces.
Louis XIV offered to revive the office of Constable of France for him if he would become a Catholic but he declined the offer (1661).
In 1668, however, persuaded by Bossuet, he did join the Catholic church.
In the summer of 1675, in the course of Louis XIV's Dutch War, he found himself up against the great imperial general Montecucculi, who in the previous year had outmanoeuvred Turenne to capture Bonn.
This time Turenne forced him to battle at Sasbach but was struck by one of the first shots fired.
He was buried with the kings of France until Napoleon had the remains removed to the Invalides in 1800.
Napoleon claimed that Turenne had ‘grown bolder as he grew older’; not a bad epitaph.
Dunning and Sasbach, two inconspicuous villages which happenstance has made part of my experience.
Neither of the least strategic value and yet, wherever you go in Europe, there is no escape from the fact that every atom of the continent has played some part in an interminable saga of warfare and violence.
Turenne's death in Sasbach is, for me, a fact of negligible emotional gravity.
More touching was the sad list of names in Sasbach churchyard, each of them representing a large loss in a small community.
What we do not know passionately, offers us no resistance, we pass through it as through air.
FROM Sasbach my next target was the Danube, a drive that took me through the Black Forest.
The first part was splendid, since on the west side the Forest rises steeply to about eight hundred metres before the high plateau slopes gradually down to the Danube basin.
Climbing the steep mountain roads round hairpin bends was quite dramatic and more than once I had glimpses of distant eagles.
In striking contrast to the Scottish hills which are often exposed rock and almost infertile at higher altitudes, the Black Forest plateau is prime cattle country with lush pasturage.
Many of the pastures looked as though dandelions were being grown commercially, for they formed carpets of unbroken yellow.
The source of the Danube has been the subject of vigorous debate and in his Danube , Claudio Magris devotes several droll pages to the matter.
I am content with the orthodox view that the spring which flows into the Brigach in the Schlosspark at Donaueschingen, and which shortly thereafter is joined by the Breg, constitutes the source of the greatest of European rivers, all 2,840 kilometres of it.
The Danube has a different name in every country through which it flows: in Germany it is the Donau, in Slovakia, Dunaj, when it reaches Budapest it becomes the Duna, at Belgrade it is the Dunav and in Romania it is the Dunarea.
Only the Volga is longer, though less voluminous.
Like the Rhine it also marked a boundary for the Romans; beyond it — unknowable nomads!
As a route into Europe the Danube valley has been a funnel for migrating peoples since before history.
Celts, Goths, Visigoths, Huns, Avars, Magyars, Cumans, Pechenegs, Tatars, Mongols, Turks have all had to take or occupy its key fortresses; hence the importance of Belgrade, of Budapest, even of Vienna, for that gap between the Northern Carpathians and the Eastern Alps which lies between Vienna and Bratislava has to be traversed to gain access to the German plain.
The Schlosspark at Donaueschingen was laid out for the princes of Fürstenberg in the eighteenth century.
In the nineteenth the little  stream which, when it joins the Brigach in the palace grounds becomes the Danube, was channelled underground.
However, an elaborate Baroque-style stone basin has been constructed, seven or eight yards in diameter, through which the stream flows.
A couple of hundred yards downstream it gushes out below a ceremonial arch into the Brigach.
Here one can run one's hands through the limpid water, at one moment in the Brigach and at the next in the Danube.
The handsome park adjoining the palace was almost empty of people but two screaming peacocks on a little island provided company enough.
As I walked round the lake, a flotilla of ducks paddled furiously after me, hoping to be fed, while fieldfares fluttered about on the lawns.
Until now the greeting I most often heard had been G'Tag or Morgen .
Here it began to be replaced by the South German Grüss Gott .
THE rest of the day was less pleasing.
Stopping for lunch near Messkirch,en route for Ulm, I discovered that my three days' neglect of the groceries in the car boot, together with the intense heat, had reduced some of them to a suppurating, soggy mess.
Having gingerly discarded over a hedge bits of rotted fruit and suspect cheese, I lunched on olives and mineral water in the shade of a great oak wood.
Thereafter, someone had decided to make it well-nigh impossible to get to Ulm from Messkirch and had constructed an obstacle course of road-works, diversions, traffic jams and misplaced signposts which did my temper no good at all in the sweltering heat.
Arriving, triumphant, in Ulm in the late afternoon, I had within half an hour found the worst hotel I had been in in years, with the modest staff and a parking ticket to boot.
Deciding to cut my losses, I fled Ulm and promptly got lost in one of its industrial suburbs.
By now it was after six o'clock and time to find somewhere to stay.
A few miles outside Ulm in the little town of Rammingen I got the last available room in the Landgasthof Adler (Eagle).
Rammingen, near Langenau, lies just over the Baden-Württemberg border in Bavaria and the Adler , run by an Italian family, was decked out in full Bavarian kitsch.
The rooms  were ‘done’ in Loden-green wood, ornamented with floral motifs.
This extended to the headboards of the bed, the ashtray, the mirror-frame and anything else with a paintable surface, including the milk-churns and cartwheels which littered the hallway.
Nevertheless, it was a relief to have found anywhere, since the Adler was my fifth attempt since Ulm.
Having changed from sweat-sodden clothes, I found that, as the hotel had been taken over for the evening by a wedding party, I and an English couple had a dining-room to ourselves.
After a reasonable dinner: watercress soup, steak with a peppercorn sauce, a shared bottle of Barolo and insipid conversation, I excused myself and sank into oblivion for ten hours.
INGOLSTADT was having a kind of festival, a Projectwoche , entitled Eine Welt für Alle (One World for All).
It was, naturally, heavy with lectures and discussion groups but there was also a scenes of him shows and plays as well as street theatre, concerts and exhibitions.
It was very much a local affair with the town's voluntary groups playing the largest part in the proceedings.
Although the town centre is quite compact, Ingolstadt has extensive suburbs and a population of ninety thousand.
Those suburbs house most of the industry, which is largely oil-refining and motor-car manufacture.
Along at the High School where the films were being shown, Charlie Chaplin was starring with Paulette Goddard in The Great Dictator (1940) and at the Statdtheater George Tabori's Mein Kampf was playing in the evenings while, during the day, there was a week-long symposium entitled Mein Kampf — Theatre after Auschwitz .
The downtown area was a strange mixture of the very modem and the very old, like so many German towns where post-war reconstruction saved what it could, keeping to the old street patterns.
A row of eighteenth-century baroque merchants' houses was interrupted half-way along by a steel and concrete structure.
But much of the older Ingolstadt has survived, from the medieval town gates to the nineteenth-century Rathaus.
Having found a comfortable Gasthof in the suburb of Spitalhof, I passed a few hours wandering the old town.
A street market in the Rathausplatz selling everything from pottery to radios was too busy for comfort.
Another market on the main shopping street, the Ludwigstrasse, was equally busy and there a number of the stalls were manned by Turks selling cheap jeans or asparagus or pots and kettles.
On one corner a Turkish woman squatted with her child, hand extended in the age-old gesture of the beggar.
Amid this busy prosperity it was curiously incongruous, unlike in Tunis or Cairo.
At the eastern end of the Ludwigstrasse the street opened out into a small square below the towering walls of the Herzogschloss, a massive fortification dating from the fifteenth century and set back only a few yards from the Danube.
Ingolstadt was for some centuries the principal seat of the Bavarian dukes when Munich was not much more than a village.
A platform had been raised in the square and, backed by a huge sound-system, half-a-dozen young people were giving a very energetic display of disco-dancing.
Standing behind the platform was a group of bandsmen in traditional Bavarian costume, green cord breeches with white stockings and black shoes, white shirt and green cut-away waistcoat with red trim completed by green Loden jacket and soft hat.
The fortress, begun in 1418, is now the Bavarian military museum and its courtyard houses ten huge cannon and several smaller ones.
The largest of them have lion mouths and a lion face on the base of the barrel; these were cast in 1599 in Munich for Duke Maximilian I. Each of them weighs 7,225 lbs.
Even now, these black monstrosities look full of menace.
As I was examining the cannon, the bandsmen began to play some Bavarian tune in a slow, swinging waltz time, all drums and brass and oompahing sentiment.
The main tower of the fortress is nine storeys high and even today looks forbidding.
That and the enormous city walls — to judge by the surviving gates — made the town well-nigh impregnable and, indeed, it withstood several sieges.
The most famous occurred in 1632 when the armies of Gustavus Adolphus besieged the forces of the dying Tilly.
King Gustavus displayed his usual foolhardy courage and had a horse shot from under him.
It was in his camp here that he was approached by a French envoy on behalf of Duke Maximilian of Bavaria, the same Maximilian who had been given the Palatine Electorate in 1623, with a view to saving his lands from the depredations of Gustavus.
The envoy  pleaded that there was much to be said for the Duke, to which Gustavus replied that there was much to be said for lice by those who cared for them.
Tilly and Gustavus had crossed swords several times, generally to Tilly's disadvantage.
If Turenne and Gustavus were the leading soldiers on the Protestant side, then Tilly and Wallenstein were the leading figures in the armies of Ferdinand, who had himself been educated by the Jesuits at Ingolstadt.
It was Tilly who crushed the Bohemians at the White Mountain and who established a terrible reputation for ferocity by his sack of Magdeburg.
Out of thirty thousand inhabitants, only about five thousand survived and the city was left a burning wreck.
Thereafter, whenever Ferdinand's armies asked for quarter, they were likely to receive ‘Magdeburg quarter’.
Now, aged seventy-three, he was dying of his wounds.
Gustavus did not wait to reduce Ingolstadt but rode off to meet his own death at Lützen.
Back in the Rathausplatz a seven-piece jazz band of students dressed up in 1920s' costume was keeping a large crowd entertained.
The top half of the square had been turned into a huge outdoor café with trestle tables.
Vast quantities of beer and food were being consumed.
It was still busy at eight in the evening.
Street-stalls selling hamburgers and sausages were doing good business.
Food does seem to be a German, especially a South German (and Austrian) obsession.
The food in the Gasthof Widman where I was staying was remarkable.
The restaurant, pleasantly situated by a patio, looked out across farmland.
It was plainly furnished with wood-panelling.
The only oddity, from a Scottish point of view, being the large crucifix which decorated one wall.
The table linen was fashionably pink, but the large octagonal black plates displayed the food wonderfully well and much attention had been given to presentation.
Each meal began with a warm, two-inch, wholemeal roll and a little dish of Griebenschmaltz, a browned, salted pork-dripping.
One thing I did appreciate in almost all the French and German restaurants I ate in, was the happy absence of  Muzak .
For a first course at dinner I ordered a mixed starter, not sure what I would get.
What turned up both looked and tasted extraordinary.
The plate measured about twelve inches in diameter.
Beautifully displayed on it were two twists of marinated salmon, sprigs of red and green lettuce and watercress, slices of passion fruit, two slices of filet of hare, a sprig of broccoli, two crumbed and fried mushrooms in a pale-gold sauce which I  guessed to be pan juices, reduced and bodied out with cream.
A rosette of tomato garnished a slice of green and pink asparagus and smoked-salmon terrine topped with a teaspoonful of dill mayonnaise and a tiny crescent of puff pastry.
Accompanied by an excellent dry Franconian wine, it was a delight to eat and very clever in its balance of colour, flavour and texture, something I do not always associate with German cuisine.
For an unpretentious suburban Gasthof it was all rather a surprise.
It was very much a family restaurant with children, teenagers and grandparents all eating together and was clearly somewhere to which the locals repaired for a weekend dinner.
As I finished my meal an entire flotilla of portly Bavarians waddled out, having consumed vast quantities of beer with their enormous meal.
I retired to the patio and listened to a blackbird.
With no hills to diminish it, the sky was a great bowl of graduated blues and greens from the palest turquoise to deep indigo.
In two days' time (7th May), it would be the forty-fifth anniversary of the final German surrender in the Second World War though the cease-fire was not to take effect until midnight on 8th May.
With the unification process underway (it happened at midnight on 2nd October, 1990), the anniversary of the European war's end had special significance in Germany.
Back in my room I watched a devastatingly well-made history of European Jews from 1933–1945.
It took as its title the poem by Paul Celan,Death Comes as a Master from Germany .
A good deal of the historical footage I had already seen over the years and some of it, such as the dreadful footage of the Warsaw Ghetto, was only too familiar.
I suspect that for many young Germans it might be pretty meaningless, as it would be for their British or French contemporaries, who simply want to get on with their lives without having to attend to the doings of another generation.
Perhaps prejudice now has other targets, but it has not gone away.
IT was a fine, warm Sunday morning and a sprinkling of elderly ladies were making their way to church.
In the Rathausplatz the stallholders were setting-up for the day's business.
Bicyclists were  out in numbers and along the Danube, on the Parkstrasse, the air was heavy with the scent of lilac.
Then the bells began their message.
The Minster was first and the neighbouring churches replied like answering sea-monsters.
The Minster had the gruffest basso but the others were undeterred and the whole tribe of them made a tremendous clangour.
Without the traffic-free tranquillity of the town centre, none of them would have been noticeable.
Next to the Kreuztor (1385) a shop specialised in devotional candles.
Some of these were positively baroque in their splendid extravagance.
One in particular, about a metre high, pale lemon in colour, was ornamented with neo-classical bandings in blue and gold.
In its centre a hand-sculpted Virgin painted in blues, reds and flesh tones lifted the Christ-child heavenwards as she ascended through fragments of cloud.
One reason for visiting Ingolstadt is its several claims to religious fame, or notoriety.
The Jesuit college here was the first in Germany (1555).
But Ingolstadt was also the town where Dr Johann Eck spent most of his life.
Eck was Luther's most unrelenting opponent and he is buried in the Minster.
Patronised by the wealthy Fuggers of nearby Augsburg, he issued a defence of money-lending in 1514, although usury was condemned by the Church.
Eck, in fact, became the leading theological defender of the establishment of his day.
He accused Luther of being a Hussite and in 1519 at Leipzig debated Luther's Ninety-five Theses with him.
In the debate Eck relied on his considerable knowledge of patristic and conciliar learning, whereas Luther relied on the Scriptures.
The arbitrators declined to issue a verdict.
Eck, however, made his way to Rome and got himself appointed papal nuncio.
Returning to Germany in 1520 with the papal bull Exsurge Domine , he sought to have the Emperor Charles V outlaw Luther and all his works.
Eck's reputation was that of a sophist or dialectician rather than a profound thinker but in his day he exercised tremendous influence.
He died at Ingolstadt in 1543, aged fifty-seven.
His patrons, the Fuggers, the Wall Street tycoons of the sixteenth century, were a similarly ruthless lot.
Their fortunes were begun by Johann, a weaver, in the fourteenth century, but it was his great-great-grandson, Ulrich, who became banker to the Habsburgs, winning concessions for silver mines in the Tirol and copper mines in Hungary.
They traded in spices, wool, silk and money at a time when Augsburg and Ingolstadt lay on the main trade route from the Mediterranean to the Baltic.
Like any shrewd businessmen, the Fuggers knew how to put their cash to political uses.
In 1515 they bribed the Electors to vote in the Emperor Charles V and then farmed his silver mines at Guadalcanal and his mercury mines at Almaden.
In 1534 they were granted the right to coin money.
They farmed indulgences for the Popes which, naturally, led them to patronise Luther's opponents.
In the early sixteenth century the family assets were estimated at more than sixty-three million florins.
In effect, they funded the Empire.
The ruin of the German economy which was completed by the Thirty Years War also brought the ruin of the Fuggers.
Their finances were heavily embroiled with those of the Spanish Habsburgs and when their finances collapsed the Fuggers also went bust, in 1627.
The great French historian, Fernand Braudel, in his massive Civilisation and Capitalism traces, among much else, the gradual shift northwards and westwards of European banking from its beginnings in central Italy in the thirteenth century.
When Edward I, Langshanks, waged his wars against Wales and Scotland, his armies were paid for by loans from Luccan bankers and when he reneged on the loans, the bankers went bust and Florence became the international financier of the day.
Thence it goes via Venice to the great German families, the Welsers and Fuggers, westwards to Antwerp, Amsterdam and, eventually, London.
Now London has to compete with New York and Tokyo.
The reasons for the migration are hugely complex but the opening up of the New World and the Ottoman closure of Eastern Europe were crucial to it.
One result was that Germany and Italy lost out because neither could achieve a strong centralised government.
Neither became nation states until the nineteenth century.
Both retained large peasant populations and in this century both tried to resolve their economic and social failures by resort to fascism.
Even if that analysis is too simple, the threads that lead from the sixteenth to the twentieth centuries can still be followed.
THE next leg of my journey takes me the short drive to Regensburg and from there I follow a minor road to Cham, last stop before the German-Czech border post.
The landscape becomes gradually more mountainous as you climb through the Bohemian Forest with its stands of tall, dark pines.
Some of the scenery is very Scottish-looking with clumps of birch and hawthorn by the roadside and a scatter of tiny farming villages.
The country women are wearing the sort of clothes my grandmother wore in the 1920s and 1930s, pinafores tied over rid-calf-length frocks, topped with cardigan and headscarf.
In the little town of Roding an elderly woman is sweeping the streets with a birch-twig besom.
The border post formalities are quickly completed.
A couple of boy-soldiers spend a few moments admiring Anastasia.
Then, at once, everything seems different, no longer Western Europe.
Passing through a tiny village called Babylon, the buildings are shabby and unkempt.
There is a smell of dung from the fields, something I never encountered in West Germany.
The village gardens are a mass of pink and white cherry blossom.
The zebra crossings are faded to near invisibility and pedestrians look astonished to be allowed to cross by them.
Every few metres along the Plzeň Road, is another cherry tree, which partly compensates for the immediate deterioration in the quality of the road surface.
But what is most extraordinary is that in all these little villages and towns there are Stars and Stripes displayed everywhere, usually in association with the red, white and blue of the Czech flag.
One house had pattered United States and Czech flags alternately across each of its window-panes.
Then, in the little village of Chotesov, all becomes clear.
A banner strung across the road says, in English:
MANY THANKS TO THE AMERICAN ARMIES FOR THE LIBERATION OF CZECHOSLOVAKIA.
I felt I was in a time-warp.
And where did they get so many Stars and Stripes, not, surely, a commodity much on sale in the socialist republic?
And, of course, the American army did liberate this south-western corner of Bohemia, though it is only in recent weeks that the new government has permitted the fact to be acknowledged.
I find it all rather spooky.
On the car radio the BBC World Service announces that this morning (6th May), for the first time in forty years, the authorities in Soviet Moldavia have opened the Soviet-Romanian border across the river Pruth  and that people on both sides of the border have launched millions of flowers into the waters, with thanksgiving services being held on both sides of the border.
Strange times indeed.
On the outskirts of Plzeň I see that bizarre mixture of heavy industrial plant and allotments which is so characteristic of almost every major East European city.
It is a revealing combination.
No landscaping here of unsightly factories.
Groups of soldiers on the streets of Plzeň, lounging or looking in shop windows.
An air of ancient neglect about the town, making French raffishness look positively house-proud.
It was this western part of Czechoslovakia that Hitler was so keen to get his hands on; not so much for the Pilsener lagers, but for the Skoda machine plants and the iron and coal resources of Western Bohemia.
He let Slovakia go more or less its own way under the puppet regime of Father Tiso.
Now that Czechoslovakia is stepping out of the Stalinist ice-box, nationalist voices in Slovakia are beginning to be heard again.
On the E12, the Plzeň-Prague highway, outside Plzeň, a queue of hitch-hikers, including a number of soldiers, is strung along the road.
Having checked that they are heading for Prague, I give a lift to the two young men at the head of the queue.
Neither speaks French or German but one has a few words of English, so he sits in the front.
As Anastasia has a right-hand drive, overtaking safely can be difficult, and a passenger is an invaluable set of additional eyes.
Conversation had to be minimal, but they did guide me through the maze of one-way streets, diversions and road-works which makes driving in Prague difficult even if there are no other cars on the streets.
Alas, the streets are full of Czech drivers intent on displaying maximum aggression.
The general standard of driving was only slightly above that of the average twelve-year-old at the dodgems.
Amazingly, we arrived unscathed in Wenceslas Square and I set off to find the Čedok offices to arrange accommodation.
Officially, all visitors have to book their accommodation and change currency through Čedok.
As an organisation, it represents everything rotten about a Stalinist bureaucracy.
Czechoslovakia still insists on an inflated hard currency exchange rate which reflects its closed economy.
The girl at the Čedok desk had clearly been chosen for her conventional good looks.
Her charm rating was negligible.
Having changed money in one office, I was directed to another office a few streets away to arrange accommodation.
The town centre hotels which were suggested were fiendishly expensive and at first I was told nothing else was available.
Forewarned, and insisting on something cheaper, I was booked into The Hotel Olympik, a couple of miles from the centre, but still expensive.
I explained that I was driving and asked for directions.
These I was given, but, as I soon discovered, directions which would have taken me there in an almost straight line.
No such route was possible or had probably ever been possible.
It took over an hour to negotiate the couple of miles to the hotel and only then because, in exasperation, I ignored all rules of good driving not to mention half-a-dozen laws, and made my way blithely down a one-way street (the wrong way, of course) and down a (prohibited) tram-only lane.
Half the streets have no name-plates.
My hotel room was everything I knew to expect from previous sojourns in socialist Europe.
The view looked across a concrete courtyard from the thirteenth floor of a planning disaster, a delicious confection of grey concrete and dirty glass, to another, equally hideous architectural gem.
The plastic-covered swivel chair had been torn.
The brown carpet was cigarette-burned and none too clean, but at least it did not clash with the shabby beige of the walls.
The bed was hard and absolutely spotless.
Lighting consisted of a 40-watt bulb in the ceiling and a bedside lamp with another 40-watt bulb.
After dark, reading or writing was a difficult operation.
There was, of course, no plug for the shower or wash-hand basin, but I had brought my own.
It was, all in all, a tourist factory, at once pretentious, shabby and expensive, and boasting levels of service unique to Eastern Europe, for no one in Western Europe would tolerate them for a moment.
The clientele were mainly, it seemed, Germans and, to my surprise, bus parties of Russians.
Feeling pleased that I had at least negotiated the day's essentials, and the afternoon being well advanced, I thought it would be good to have a more leisurely look round Wenceslas Square and find somewhere to eat.
As I refused so soon to repeat the horrors of the afternoon, the taxi ride from the Olympik to Nove Mesto (the New Town) was a real treat.
The driver, a heavily built, mustachioed man in his fifties, elegant in sweat-sodden T-shirt, opened the conversation with (in German)‘You need here no seat belt’.
My usual response to being addressed in German was to reply (in Russian)‘Ya nye Nyemyets ’(‘I'm not a German’) which confused them since I clearly was not Russian.
My driver was under the impression that I had instructed him to break the world land-speed  record.
One would not have believed his grubby Lada capable of such manoeuvres as he coaxed from its grinding engine but, after a moment of horror, I sat back and enjoyed the ride.
Prague pedestrians show a sage and absolute distrust of Prague drivers.
As it turned out, he was the only taxi driver not to try to cheat me.
Wenceslas Square is a long, wide, gently sloping rectangle with the famous bronze statue of the equestrian warrior-king at its head.
This is the heart of Prague's business and tourist quarter and the Square is lined with hotels and what are, by Prague standards, up-market shops.
The Square was busy with window-shoppers.
There were a couple of queues out into the street for toiletries.
The sinking sun was just catching the gilding on the green dome of the buildings behind St Wenceslas.
Most of the buildings were grey or black with age and pollution.
There had been no refurbishment programmes here.
My associations with Wenceslas Square were not so much with the events of 1989, though it was here on the 18th November that the crowds gathered to protest about the police violence of the night before.
From then on the snowball gathered momentum until on 24th November, the entire Politburo resigned, to be followed by the collapse of its still communist-dominated replacement government on 7th December.
Rather, they were with the events of August 1968 and, in particular, with the self-immolation of the young philosophy student, Jan Palach, in January 1969.
His suicide, in protest at the invasion of Czechoslovakia by the forces of the Warsaw Pact — only Romania declined to participate -seemed to catch at the Western conscience as somehow symbolic of those dreadful days, though it produced no result other than a further deepening of the Cold War.
Apart from the Cuban missile crisis, it was the first political event really to break into my late adolescent consciousness.
It was also, I suspect, together with the defeat of the ‘radical unrest’ in Paris and elsewhere in the spring of 1968, a final body-blow to any hopes of a revival in the fortunes of West European communist parties.
Indeed, it led to the so-called Euro-communism of the 1970s, when communist parties with quite substantial support, as in Spain, Portugal and Italy, began to distance themselves from the policies of the Soviet Union and its satellites.
Wenceslas Square was laid out for one of Bohemia's most attractive rulers, King Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor, who was born and died in Prague.
Charles was the eldest son of John of  Luxemburg, King of Bohemia, one of those knights errant of late medieval history and cousin to Philip VI of France.
When Edward III of England invaded France, John went to Philip's aid and fought at the battle of Crecy where, as R.W. Seton-Watson describes it: ‘giving the reins of his horse to two of his companions, and shouting the battle-cry of ‘Prague'’, he charged into the thick of the fray and, blind as he was, soon went down fighting (26th August, 1346).
His son Charles was also wounded in the battle and only escaped with difficulty.’
Charles was thirty at the time.
Three months later he was crowned German King at Bonn.
In the fourteenth century Prague was very much at the centre of European affairs.
Charles married his second cousin, Blanche, sister of the French king, and it was on the Parisian model that he founded the University of Prague in 1348.
Along with Bologna, Oxford and Paris, it became one of the great centres of medieval scholarship, attracting students from all over Europe.
Charles set out to turn Prague into a city to rival any in Europe.
He ordered the construction of the Karlovy Most (Charles Bridge) and began the rebuilding of the Hradčany Castle and St Vitus Cathedral which still dominate the Prague skyline.
It was Charles also who, in the Golden Bull of 1356, regularised the constitution of the Empire and the rights of its seven electors.
His daughter, Anne, married the unfortunate English king Richard II.
Having been turned away from two restaurants, rather to my surprise for it was still early evening, I finally secured a table at the Restaurant Français of the Hotel Ambassador in Wenceslas Square.
The upstairs restaurant was a split-level affair which might once have been elegant.
There were some pretty stained-glass windows in art-deco style and some painted porcelain chandeliers.
Most of the bulbs in the chandeliers, however, did not work and the once-fine carpets were worn threadbare.
I was lucky with the aperitif, a campari, which it is difficult to destroy.
I began with what the menu described as bouillon .
It was a lukewarm liquid on which floated a thin layer of fat and which contained in its suspicious-looking depths lumps of boiling beef, pieces of cauliflower and other assorted vegetables.
It was dreadful.
Unlike most of what was on the menu, two wines were actually available, a semi-sweet white and a semi-sweet red.
The red was sharp and thin but drinkable, though one would not care for a second glass.
The pièce de resistance (or coup de grâce ) was the main course, imaginatively described as Filet de Boeuf Madagascar .
It was, at best, stewing steak from a very ill and elderly cow.
Its elasticity would have made it the ideal candidate for a trampoline-cover.
It was topped with a slice of ham, a layer of plastic cheese and served with pickled onions and chips, the latter being of the fifty-fifty variety, that is: fifty per cent potato and fifty per cent grease.
Being exceedingly hungry, I ate the slice of ham.
It was as disgusting a concoction as I have seen and not particularly cheap.
The meal was accompanied by the tinklings of a white jacketed and clearly talented pianist who was equally clearly bored.
The whole place had the glamour and attractiveness of an elderly whore still on the game long after her teeth have gone.
During this trial by ordeal the restaurant was almost empty although people kept arriving and being turned away because: ‘There are no tables.’
Several groups of Americans were turned away despite protests that tables had been booked for them by Čedok or by their hotels.
Most persistent was an aristocratic-looking Japanese boy who returned several times to his protest.
The maitre d'hôtel was not impressed and eventually the Japanese boy, like the others, had to admit defeat.
The mystery of this curious behaviour intrigued me, but it was several days before I discovered its logic from a Prague friend.
The tables were and would remain empty.
They had been booked in advance on a quota basis by Čedok, so they would be paid for whether any one ate at them or not.
As this met the requirements of the hotel, serving customers would merely have been a needless waste of effort and resources which could be profitably siphoned off elsewhere.
If any of those who had been turned away chose to complain, they would meet the same bored lack of interest.
No one is personally responsible for anything, so everyone gets away with it.
It is a phenomenon one encounters continually in Eastern Europe, but most blatantly when one has to have any dealings with state-run organisations.
If a market economy is introduced, an awful lot of people are going to have serious problems of adjustment.
The best part of the meal was the coffee and slivović I nursed while I watched the charade unroll.
By the end of the evening I had come to feel sorry for the waiters who had so debased themselves by their participation in the comedy; not because they were cheating the state, but because they never responded to anyone except as an object, a part of the system in which they were trapped.
It was a relief to be in the open air again but, lacking a street-rap, I decided to take a taxi to the riverside and find  my way about from there.
The Vltava here is wide and the Charles Bridge by night was stunningly beautiful.
An almost full, yellow moon hung above the Castle.
The street-lamps lining the promenade on the right bank glittered in the waters below the bridge where a flotilla of ghostly swans floated in the current.
The bridge was pedestrian-only and had been taken over by assorted buskers playing jazz or folk music.
Little knots of people, mainly young, clustered round them.
But not everyone; a young soldier and his girlfriend sat on the balustrade, dangling their legs over the water, oblivious of anyone else.
The Charles Bridge was Prague's only bridge until 1841.
At the Castle end is a romanesque tower, the only remnant of the Judith Bridge which was swept away in 1342.
Most of the bronze statues which line the present bridge were added in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
There is a story that the Charles Bridge was to be stronger than any other bridge so the mortar had to be mixed with wine and eggs.
All the villages in Bohemia were asked to contribute but one village, afraid the eggs would get broken, hard-boiled them first.
Not much of the bridge's history is as droll.
In 1393 Charles IV's son, Wenceslas IV, quarrelled with archbishop Jenstein over a matter of monastic revenues.
Wenceslas captured and imprisoned the archbishop and his vicar-general, John of Nepomuk.
After having been broken by torture, the poor Nepomuk was bound and thrown into the Vltava from Charles Bridge.
Much later, in 1729, at the behest of the Jesuits, John Nepomuk was canonised on the basis that, as the queen's confessor, he had been executed by a jealous king because he refused to reveal her confessional secrets.
John Nepomuk never was the queen's confessor.
The motive for Nepomuk's canonisation appears to have been an attempt by the Jesuits to set up an alternative national hero to the heretical Hus.
Religious problems came back to haunt Wenceslas for, at the time of his death in 1419, the Hussite movement which prefigured the Reformation was already a cause of conflict throughout his kingdom.
When Ferdinand II attempted to impose Catholicism on largely Protestant Bohemia, the citizens of Prague rebelled, thereby opening the struggles of the Thirty Years War.
After the defeat of the White Hill, Ferdinand sentenced the leaders of the revolt to public execution in front of the Rathaus in Prague.
Twelve of their heads were impaled on the Charles Bridge pour encourager les  autres and remained there for more than a decade.
Ironically, when, at the very end of the war, Prague was again under siege, this time by the protestant forces, the by-now Catholic citizens of Prague defended the bridge for three months with a zeal they had failed to show in 1620.
At every point in those historic struggles which founded the Protestant and radical traditions in Europe, and which severed radicalism from the body of the Catholic Church, the struggle was as much for personal gain or for political or economic dominance as it was for any pure-hearted vision of goodness.
Untainted heroes are, with the rarest of exceptions, an invention of ideologues with something to sell.
From the Charles Bridge I gradually worked my way back to Wenceslas Square.
By ten o'clock the town was only half-lit and many of the smaller back streets not at all.
The almost complete absence of neon advertising signs from buildings and shop windows increased my sense of berg in an ancient city.
At the north end of Wenceslas Square, not far from where Palach immolated himself, a pop band and disco-dance group were doing their thing to an audience of enthusiastic youngsters.
I encountered a lot of very drunk people in Prague, more than in any other city I have visited except perhaps Belfast.
And a lot of aggressive drunks.
For all that, it had the feel of a city wakening up after a long sleep and beginning to shake off decades of despair.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA is an invention of the twentieth century and, in particular, of the Allied victories of 1918.
The history of Austro-Hungary through the nineteenth century is one of alteration between repression and compromise in its effort to maintain the fabric of the empire against its increasingly centrifugal tendencies.
It had never been a homogeneous state, more a collection of dynastic holdings, and its ruling caste never subscribed to the liberal notions of the Enlightenment or the French Revolution.
They did, however, take up that romantic nationalism which went hand in hand with them.
As the nineteenth century progressed, German nationalism became increasingly the blunt  instrument with which Austro-Hungary attempted to bludgeon Bohemia and Moravia into quiescence, while in Slovakia the Hungarian ruling caste pursued a policy of Magyarisation.
But nationalism is a treacherous weapon and may rebound on its user and, especially after the failure of the European radical movements in 1848, the Pan-Germanism and anti-semitism which Vienna adopted only served to stir the embers of Bohemian nationality.
The leader of the national movement in Bohemia and Moravia was T. G. Masaryk.
Masaryk was an eminent liberal scholar who stood out against the Catholic-led anti-semitic hysteria of the 1890s.
In particular, he denounced the accusations of child-murder and ritual abuse which became standard elements in Viennese demonology in that decade.
Early in the First World War substantial numbers of Czech and Slovak troops went over to the Allied side.
This was followed by the creation of a national committee in exile headed by Masaryk in London.
By the end of the war there were independent Czechoslovak legions in France and in Russia.
Once the Allied powers had recognised the creation of a Czechoslovak state as one of their war aims, it was not long until that state came into existence, which it did in October 1918.
Masaryk was its first president.
Significantly, when elections were held for the new parliament, the German politicians refused to participate.
The new state comprised the historic provinces of Bohemia and Moravia together with Slovakia which, until 1918, had been part of Hungary, together with Ruthenia and a northern fringe of the Hungarian plain which, though it was Magyar-speaking, the new state claimed it needed on economic grounds.
From the very beginning the new state was founded on a contradiction: the basis of the post-war settlement was the self-determination of peoples, especially as proselytised by president Wilson of the United States.
At the same time, economic and political realities had to be accommodated.
The result was a fusion of Czechs and Slovaks with neither having much time for the other.
In Slovakia the nationalists supported a clerical fascism.
Any state founded on nationalist principles is going to find it difficult to accommodate more than one nationality.
The census of 1930 revealed the the state of affairs when it showed that more than twenty-two per cent of the population were ethnic and linguistic Germans.
That alienation of the German Bohemians showed up in the  1935 elections when Konrad Henlein's pro-Nazi Sudetendeutsche Partei became the second largest parliamentary party.
Hitler saw Czechoslovakia as the key to breaking Germany's encirclement while Neville Chamberlain excused his appeasement of Hitler with the excuse that he knew nothing about the Czechs.
Hitler occupied Bohemia and Moravia in March 1939, Hungary swallowed Ruthenia, and Slovakia became a fascist, pro-Nazi state under the leadership of Father Tiso.
For many Czechs the failure of the Republic was deeply demoralising, for it was never contested in any serious way.
Europe may have turned its back, but the Czechs also sold themselves out as the poles did not.
Although there was a resistance movement to the German occupation, it never developed on any scale and did not have the support of the mass of the people who were coddled by the occupying regime.
The Jews and the intellectuals suffered most.
After the liberation, elections were held in 1946 in which the Communists gained thirty-eight per cent of the national vote.
The demoralisation generated by the occupation was taken full advantage of by the Communists to establish a socialist republic.
Prague has a long history of defenestrations and in 1948 Jan Masaryk, the foreign minister, the founding president's son and one of only three non-communist ministers in the government, was found dead, having apparently exited from his office window.
By 1952, at the height of the Stalinist purges which swept the Eastern bloc as part of the anti-Titoist crusade,Rude Pravo , the Party newspaper, could write that ‘Love of the Soviet Union does not tolerate the slightest reservation’.
It was widely rumoured that when the party leader, Klement Gottwald, died, in March 1953, it was from grief at the death of Stalin a few weeks earlier.
Amid economic recession, the purges continued through 1954.
Joseph Rothschild sums up the effect of these events: ‘Facts became taboo and suspicion pervasive.
Politically, power drifted toward the security services…while the inner life of the Communist parties petrified.
An orgy of denunciations and evasions of responsibility was unleashed throughout the upper and middle levels of the bureaucracy.
As a consequence, the very idea of politics became degraded and execrated in the minds of the citizens, as it seemed to them synonymous with lawlessness, mendacity and opportunism.’
Gottwald was succeeded by the equally devout Antonin  Novotný.
It was not until 1963 that a reformist element was able to make itself heard, with the election to the position of first secretary of the Slovak party of Alexander Dubček.
The Soviets trusted Dubček.
He had spent his childhood in the Soviet Union and had studied there.
His reformist programme, partly economic, partly political, was aimed at creating a more open ‘communism with a human face’.
After the crushing of the Prague Spring in August 1968, Gustâv Husâk's regime entered on a two-decade-long period of economic stagnation and social demoralisation.
An underground, ‘black’ economy was allowed to flourish as a substitute for politically indigestible reforms, with the result that corruption became a way of life.
What finally shook the edifice apart were not so much domestic events as Gorbachev's abandonment of the Brezhnev doctrine of interference in the affairs of the Soviet satellites.
When a peaceful demonstration of some 50,000 people in Prague was suppressed with the usual police violence on 17th November 1989, rumour quickly created a martyrology of murdered saints.
In fact, no one was killed, but the tinder had been lit and, bereft of foreign support, the regime crumbled in the space of three weeks.
I KNEW of Doctor Ladislav Mareda through British friends who had worked with him for the English-language section of Prague radio until the crushing of the Prague Spring in 1968.
Having tried unsuccessfully to reach him through his office — he edits a weekly newspaper for veterans of the wartime resistance — I decided finally to drive out to the village of Roztoky where he spends much of his time.
Ladislav is seventy.
He studied law before the war and during it worked with the resistance in Prague where he had been born.
After the war he became a journalist and, eventually, head of the English section of Czech radio.
Ladislav was a party member who supported Dubček's reforms and was partly responsible for organising a famous Party Congress during the Warsaw Pact invasion in 1968.
The Congress, held in a factory, condemned the invasion.
Thereafter Ladislav could not keep any post  for long before the authorities hounded him out of it.
For the next two decades he made a sort of living finding bits and pieces of editing and translation work.
He is not a large man, but portly now and rather short of breath.
Quiet-spoken and deeply read, he is an instructive and entertaining conversationalist with a sardonic sense of humour.
My first efforts to find Roztoky, which is only a few miles outside Prague, were a horror story of wrong turnings, lengthy detours and rush-hour traffic.
Eventually, I did get to the village, which perches high on a hillside above the Vltava.
Stopping to ask a local woman where I might find Dr Mareda, I discovered that I was speaking to his companion, Vera, and that I had stopped outside their front door.
Ladislav was at a lecture in the philosophy department of the university but would be back in an hour or so.
Vera and Ladislav share a small upstairs flat in a detached house set in its own, rather over-grown garden in a quiet tree-lined avenue.
Vera's mother occupies the downstairs apartment.
There is a small sitting-room, a small bedroom and kitchen.
The walls of the sitting-room are lined with Ladislav's paintings, mostly unframed.
In the main they are brightly coloured works in the expressionist tradition.
Books are much in evidence, in Russian, Czech, German and English, lining an old, elegant glass-fronted display cabinet.
Another cabinet is filled with glass and china.
On top of both, displayed like trophies, are reminders of gifts from Western visitors, a packet of Nairn's oatcakes, an empty bottle of Macallan whisky, a packet of Silk Cut cigarettes.
Strangely, they do not look out of place or incongruous and in the context of Czech commodities, the sophistication of their design is immediately apparent.
I am hot and sticky from my drive, but the scent of lilac drifts in from the garden with the sound of blackbirds, and within a few minutes I feel much at home.
While Vera prepares something to eat, we chatter.
Vera is younger than Ladislav, slim, cheerful and vivacious.
Her English is tentative, correct but rather old-fashioned and uncolloquial.
She teaches history and Russian at the equivalent of a British junior secondary school.
Since 1948 Russian has been a compulsory language in Czech schools, but as of next month, she will be able to switch to teaching English and German.
Within a few minutes, I am presented with a plate of cold meats, cheeses, breads and a salad of cabbage and herring in a sour-cream  dressing, bottles of soda-water and coffee.
It was the best meal I had in Czechoslovakia.
I feel mildly guilty about accepting such hospitality.
Neither she nor Ladislav could be said to be well-off.
Neither has a car and journeys into Prague have to be carefully planned.
Both are heavy smokers.
Asked for her impressions of the events of the past six months, Vera admits to twinges of pessimism about the slow rate at which progress is being made.
‘We still have no elected government.
Only Havel has been elected, the rest are appointees.
The interior minister for example, Mr Sacher, held office as a member of the People's Party under the Communists, although he was not a minister.
But he is in control of the police and the security services.
The bureaucracy, which is largely a Communist nomenclatura , is still in place and that is worrying.
They talk, for example, about the continuing need for state secrets and Havel seems to go along with that.
Until November, we still believed that the tanks might come back.
I heard on the television yesterday that thirty-five people had been sacked from the interior ministry so that may be an encouraging sign.
And there are other difficulties.
After the revolution there was a general amnesty for prisoners and that included criminal elements.
Was that a move by the police to undermine the new authorities?
Who advised Havel to do that?
Even here in Roztoky there have been burglaries.’
Ladislav and Vera are careful to lock their door even when in the house.
Ladislav said later that there had been a murder in Roztoky just a few weeks earlier.
Vera did not eat anything while we talked but sipped at some of her excellent black coffee and smoked endless cigarettes.
Asked about the possibility of economic difficulties, she was concerned about how they would manage: ‘The new government does not know where to begin with the economy, which is in a shambles.
It is appalling to think that the prices of basics like meat and butter could double.
The ministers claim we have to take a different approach from the Poles or Hungarians but they do not say in what way different.
Certainly, we have less international debt than Poland or Hungary and we are owed money by the Soviet Union.
But the Soviets refuse to give their tourists who come here any Czech currency.
It is difficult to say what will happen.
The elections are scheduled for mid-June, a month from now.
But the campaigns have been very amateurish and low-key and many of the younger people are not interested.
Too many parents have  been too afraid ever to acknowledge the real state of our affairs to their children.
So there is a lot of apathy.
There is a real change though.
People are no longer afraid to speak out — loudly — and that is wonderful.
The rest will depend on what happens in the economy and that, as I say, is a mess.’
Asked about whether she thought nationalist tensions would resurface in any significant way, Vera explained: ‘A few weeks ago Havel said that the word ‘socialist'’ would have to be removed from our country's name.
As a result of that, the federal assembly spent two weeks squabbling over the issue.
Everyone agreed that ‘socialist'’ should be removed but the debate exacerbated nationalist tensions between Czechs and Slovaks.
There were even demonstrations in Slovakia for an independent republic.
Finally the assembly agreed on ‘The Czech and Slovak Federal Republic'’.
All the different interest groups have suddenly been allowed to come out into the open and in some cases it is a question of each for himself and damn the rest.’
Just then, Ladislav arrived and Vera's welcomes were repeated over again.
He found it extraordinary that I had been able simply to get into a car in Britain and drive unhindered to Roztoky.
‘It is a good omen,’ he said.
Ladislav toasts us with nadraži and laughs.
He explains that an Englishman he knew at Czech radio used always to get the usual toast na zdrave (health) wrong, confusing it with nadraži , meaning ‘railway station’.
So, we toast the railway station and I tell him the only Czech joke I know.
It dates from 1968 and I have no memory of where I first heard it.
An old man who has been living in exile returns to Prague in 1998.
He goes up to a kiosk in Wenceslas Square and asks for a copy of Rude Pravo (Red Truth), the Party newspaper.
The old woman behind the counter says, ‘Where have you been?
Rude Pravo hasn't been published for fifteen years.’
He thanks her and goes away.
Fifteen minutes later, he is back again, ‘A copy of Rude Pravo , please.’
She explains patiently, again, that Rude Pravo has not been published for fifteen years.
He thanks her.
Fifteen minutes later, same thing again, but by now she is very angry and starts shouting at him, ‘Don't you bloody listen?
I've told you,Rude Pravo hasn't been published for fifteen years.’
The man smiles at her and says, ‘Oh, I know.
I know.
I just love to hear you say it.’
I ask about his work with the veterans' organisation.
He explains: ‘There was a group of army officers who organised  themselves as ‘Defence of the Nation'’.
This began before the war, from the time of the Munich agreement in 1938, for it was then that the Communist Party was made illegal.
Later, of course, the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact divided the movement.
This officers' group lasted for the duration of the occupation, which is to say, for six years, though most of its leaders were caught and executed in the course of the war.
You have to bear in mind that the occupation did not apply to Slovakia.
A different section of the resistance consisted of the political wing led by ex-President Beneš.
He kept in touch with General Nečas, leader of the officers' group, by radio.
But this is a small country and the Nazis were quite efficient and had a good network of informers so General Nečas was eventually executed.
Prior to 1968 the veterans' organisation was called ‘Fighters for Freedom'’ which was really an umbrella organisation.
After the events of 1968 it was renamed ‘The Union of Anti-Fascist Fighters'’ which was an attempt to make us restrict our goals.
Now, since December of 1989, we have changed it to ‘The Union of Freedom Fighters'’.'
Asked whether he shared Vera's doubts about progress since the collapse of the communist regime, Ladislav lights another cigarette and settles himself at the table: ‘A lot of the intellectuals are unhappy that the so-called ‘transition'’ is taking so long.
And this unelected government should not be making so many new and fundamental laws, for some of these will be an embarrassment to an elected government and it will take time and trouble to repeal them.
On the other hand, Havel is a figure who commands trust and respect, unlike Iliescu.
He has a moral stature which comes from being wholly untainted by the previous regime.
He has no history of political manoeuvring.’
Since the conversation was outpacing my efforts to note the salient points, I gave up trying and used the little tape-recorder I had brought with me.
I dislike using them in conversation, for they can add a measure of artificiality to what should otherwise be casual.
But Ladislav had no objections and we were already well launched.
What follows is an edited version of some of that conversation:
WP Why is it that Czechoslovakia in its moments of crisis turns to scholars and writers?
I am thinking of Masaryk and, obviously, Havel?
LM That will happen in any small country trying to establish  itself or struggling to survive.
In such cases cultural values acquire a new importance and can become decisive.
I suspect that cultural matters here have a higher significance in the lives of ordinary people than is the case in the West.
WP I suppose Scotland could be a case in point, with the status given to writers such as Burns and MacDiarmid who are national as much as literary figures.
And Yeats in Ireland.
It is difficult trying to imagine England according that kind of status to a writer.
But in Britain, in any case, the issue is complicated by class.
There is an underlying hostility to the arts in Britain on the part of the mass of people and that, I think, is a result of the way in which the arts have become associated in many people's minds with snobbery, with money and, in the case of Scotland, with anglicisation.
LM But don't you think England is interesting inasmuch as its outstanding feature, as a political culture, is its traditionalism?
WP I think you have to distinguish the appearance from the reality.
English history has a tendency to assimilate developments into a mythic story, so that events which were a victory for some faction or interest group get retrospectively sanctioned as a sacred progress of democratic tradition.
The outstanding example of that is the so-called Glorious Revolution.
Universal suffrage in Britain dates only from after the Great War and the right for non-property holders to participate in local elections only dates back to 1949.
But I'm more interested to hear your views on Czechoslovakia than my own on Britain.
What do you think is going to happen next?
LM There are two essentials which should happen next.
The first thing is to get rid of the Soviet Union's presence here.
The NKVD (security service) has a deep-rooted hold.
It has cast its net right across Eastern Europe.
The dismantling of that establishment is only just getting under way.
What Havel recently referred to when he said that ‘I  cannot speak about everything I know’ were secret treaties between Czechoslovakia and the USSR which cannot as yet be disclosed.
The second essential is to try to get the economy into some kind of shape.
Our present minister for finance, Mr Klaus, is widely known as The Playboy.
He is something of a monetarist and, as such, the devaluation of wages, not to mention the debasement of people, doesn't seem to worry him.
WP It will inevitably be confusing for those in Eastern Europe who mistake the rhetoric of Western ideology for the reality of economic life — just as it is for many in the West.
Capitalist accompanies its development with a fanfare about freedom of choice, free markets, and all the rest of it.
But it is a system of winners and losers and in periods of crisis there are far more losers than winners.
The difference between the West now and the West in the nineteenth century, is that now the largest part of the price for development is paid by the invisible people of the so-called Third World, rather than by the pauperised urban proletariat of mills, mines and factories, though there are still some of them about too.
There will be some serious disillusion to follow on the heels of the euphoria of freedom.
LM The, but in domestic terms our debate is not so finely drawn.
We are at the stage of trying to work with a broad brush without much understanding of the problems of detail.
We have always in Czechoslovakia been proud of being Europeans, as we were before the First World War and between the wars.
For us to be reduced to the level of a Balkan state is very hard.
Soviet policy with regard to Eastern Europe was sloganised as ‘development in groups’, as though we had to wait for Mongolia to catch up before we could be allowed to develop.
Bohemia, unlike Britain, was historically the crossroads of Europe.
In the later Middle Ages, Prague was an important merchant city and cultural centre.
WP Yes, but then the fringe moved, so to speak.
I mean that  Britain, for example, became more central to the currents of world trade.
When Prague lay near to the great trade routes between East and West and from the Mediterranean to the Baltic, then it was a valuable staging post for all of Europe, including the far West.
But when the Cape route opened and the New World beckoned, the centrality of Prague diminished.
The Thirty Years War was more a symptom than a cause of processes already well advanced.
With the Turks at the gates of Vienna as late as the seventeenth century, it is not surprising that Bohemia came to be half-forgotten by Western Europe.
LM It is very easy in the kind of society Czechoslovakia has been in the past twenty years to lose a more general perspective on events.
And one of the distinctive features of life here has been a gradual loss of the ability to distinguish right from wrong.
And that wears you down.
You end up speaking the same jargon or formulae as the establishment without stopping to think.
So, I have always to go back to the beginning if I want to sort something out.
And for me the beginning was when I was young; before the Soviets, before the Nazis.
It is like living in a low-level but persistent depression.
It is hard to think reasonably , to keep your brain working, not to repeat the old slogans.
I trained as a lawyer and I think that helps.
I first came to distrust communist ideology with the concept of the ‘new man’, the idea that after social conditions have changed,then human nature will improve.
I cannot believe that.
People are bad and good, are primitive and clever, and so on.
WP Certainly, people respond to whether they perceive the world as threatening or reassuring.
But that doesn't rule out altruism.
LM But natural beings are always living in the expectation or half-expectation of aggression.
WP That's too simple.
Socially, it is not too difficult to imagine  getting rid of some of the provocations which produce aggression.
Existentially, it is another question.
Heidegger's Geworfenheit , the fact that we are thrown onto the dice-board, without choosing when or where or whether, that must always be a source of anxiety.
The world abuses our rationality, as Pascal acknowledges.
It treats us arbitrarily, as though we were mindless and could not care.
But we do care and in that sense, yes, aggression is rooted in the world.
LM And I suppose we have already eliminated many of the causes of aggression — in some measure.
But even in sex we do not behave rationally!
(At which Ladislav chuckles.)
The evening was wearing on and I was nervous of finding my way through the maze of central Prague by night.
We arranged to meet at the hotel the following morning.
As I drove back towards town, a rich, yellow moon hung suspended between violet clouds and another glowed in the Vltava.
I did lose my way in the network of Prague alleyways.
There was almost no traffic on the roads, though it was only ten-thirty.
A few staggering drinks near the centre were the only people about.
Back at the Olympik, I looked up a passage in Pascal which had been in my mind earlier in the evening:
The whole visible world is only an imperceptible atom in the ample bosom of nature.
No idea approaches it.
We may enlarge our conceptions beyond all imaginable space; we only produce atoms in comparison with the reality of things.
It is an infinite sphere, the centre of which is everywhere, the circumference nowhere…
But to show him another prodigy equally astonishing, let him examine the most delicate things he knows…
Perhaps he will think that here is the smallest point in nature.
I will let him see therein a new abyss.
I will paint for him not only the visible universe, but all that he can conceive of nature's immensity in the womb of this abridged atom.
Let him see therein an infinity of universes, each of which has its firmament, its planets, its earth, in the same proportion as in the visible world…
For in fact what is man in nature?
A Nothing in comparison with the Infinite, an All in comparison with the Nothing, a mean between nothing and everything.
Since he is infinitely removed from comprehending the extremes, the end of things and their beginning are hopelessly sudden from him in an impenetrable secret…
Let us then take our compass; we are something, and we are not everything.
The nature or our existence hides from us the knowledge of first beginnings which are born of the Nothing; and the littleness of our being conceals from us the sight of the Infinite.
LADISLAV arrived at the Olympik, promptly at ten o'clock.
I offered a taxi into town but he preferred to walk to the exhibition he wanted me to see in Na Příkopě, near the centre.
It used to be called Am Graben which is German for ‘the moat’ because that was where the medieval city walls ran.
As Ladislav has a mild heart condition, we dawdled towards the Centre in the morning sunlight.
He conducts an imaginary interview: ‘And what are you doing here, Mr Perrie?
Ah, so you are taking photographs.
I see.
And you are taking notes.
Yes.
And you are speaking with people and gathering information?
So, you admit that you are here as a spy.
It will help if you confess all at the trial.
‘When the Germans came, in March 1939, it all happened in one night.
People in Bohemia had been so full of self-confidence that they were taken by surprise.
There is a story that two painters had been drinking until dawn and, on hearing the news of the occupation on the radio, went out and found themselves an inspector of police.
They just said to him: ‘Come with us!'’
And he did.
They took him to their rooms and gave him a glass of vodka or slivović and teased him.
So it is in times of confusion.
Just as in Bulgaria you need only say Derzhala sigurnost (state security) to make people very nervous.
‘We say that the Slovaks are cousins to the poles and the Ukrainians whereas the Czechs are more like the Germans.
Moravia is not so much another nationality in the blend but, rather, a district.
We say too that the Czechs drink beer, the Slovaks drink wine and the Moravians whatever they can get hold of.’
Walking with Ladislav, I became aware of just how noisy a city Prague is, with its trams and cars with broken or inadequate silencers.
I asked him about the disrepair of the buildings.
‘During the war,’ he said, ‘people had other things to think about.
After the war most of the proprietors were dispossessed.
The state here is only a collection of functionaries, so it does not care about the aesthetic condition of the buildings it administers.
And people are demoralised.
If Stalin came back tomorrow, most people would quite soon knuckle down.
‘I grew up in what was, at least in principle, a model democracy.
In school, we were taught by teachers who were conscientious and honest people.
Some were Christians.
Some were even good communists.
Most, though, were liberals who instilled in us, or tried to, the values of decency, hard work, truthfulness and honesty.
Then the war brought a climate of repression.
The new generation has grown up in a continuation of that climate, one of falsity and evasion.
One young man I used to teach said to me: ‘You don't need to teach me when to applaud and when to shut up.
That I know already.'’
Gorbachev must be facing a similar problem in the USSR, in the taciturnity of Soviet youth.’
We paused to watch a hawk hunting above one of the islands which splits the Vltava, and I asked Ladislav about the posters I kept seeing in windows.
These were amateurish-looking election posters.
One of them was for no particular party.
It was just anti-communist.
I asked whether the unification of Germany was an issue.
He replied that the older Czechs were wary of the idea of a unified Germany but, for the young, West Germany was something of an ideal whereas they despised the DDR.
‘Germany,’ he said, ‘has been the spiritus agens of the whole development of Middle-Europe — from Hitler to the collapse of the Berlin Wall, which encouraged and prompted our own transformation.
‘I did not join the party until after the war and I was ignorant about its structure and discipline.
I thought it was just like any other party.
And as an overly individualistic sort of fellow, I was taken aback by what I found.
Vera asks me: ‘Why did you stay a Communist for so long, even after your friend was executed in 1950? ''’ The friend in question had been a schoolmate and they  had worked together in the resistance.
He had told Ladislav when the Communists came to power: ‘This is the beginnings of a police state.’
‘He was right.
Most people shut down when faced with repression.
But passive resistance doesn't work.
If you are alive, you have to fight.
It has taken me a lifetime to learn that lesson.
The real crime of the USSR is to have spoiled an opportunity for the whole world, they have so discredited socialism.’
On my visit to Wenceslas Square the evening before, I had seen no sign of the corso , that ritual evening promenade which is found all through the Mediterranean world and up into Northern Italy and Central Yugoslavia.
It does not exist in Germany and I was curious as to how far into Central Europe the corso penetrated.
Ladislav answered: ‘When I was young, the corso was called drafouš , which is actually a corruption of Trafalgar Square .
So, we would say: ‘I will meet you in drafouš '’ which, at that time, was the lower part of Wenceslas Square.
How the association with Trafalgar Square developed I don't know.
But the corso used also to exist in Austria.’
Over a glass of wine Ladislav told me the following story: ‘There was a Bohemian landowner called Prince Paar.
He owned a very large portion of Southern Bohemia, perhaps a hundred thousand hectares.
He made a deal in 1948 with the communist authorities that, if he could get passports for himself and his entire family to leave the country, he would make over his lands to the state.
I got the job of delivering the thick bundle of passports to him.
At that time I was very young and very anti-aristo.
When I arrived at the Big House, I was asked to stay to lunch.
I debated with myself whether it was right to have lunch with an aristocrat but I was also very curious to see what lunch with him would be like and accepted the invitation.
A maid was immediately summoned who took me down to the servants’ quarters.
A place had been set for one and I was given bread and a bowl of goulash.’
Ladislav grinned.
The exhibition Ladislav wanted me to see and which he had not yet seen himself, was a series of documents and photographs relating to the events of 1968, none of which had been made public before.
It was accompanied by a street exhibition on the political history of Czechoslovakia from its foundation in 1918 until the present, again using of lot of materials not seen before.
On the way we passed a very old ran, bent almost double, wearing the  uniform of one who had fought with the Czechoslovak Legion in Russia.
Theirs is an extraordinary story.
The Tsar had given permission for the formation of the Legion but, a couple of months later, the Tsarina rescinded the order.
When the Bolsheviks care to power, Trotsky insisted that the Legion be disarmed.
They resisted and defeated Red Army troops in several engagements.
Then, led by Masaryk, they retreated right across Siberia to Japan, the United States and, eventually, back home.
Na Příkopě, which is a wide street lined with shops had been closed to traffic.
The queue for the exhibition of 1968 stretched right out into the street and round a corner.
I commented to Ladislav on the coincidence of eights in Czech history: 1618 when Ferdinand's deposition led to the Thirty Years War; 1918 when Czechoslovakia was founded; 1938 and Munich; 1968 and Dubček.
We decided not to wait and to content ourselves instead with the street exhibition that day.
The street was jammed with people.
All along its length rotundas about ten feet high had been set up.
Each rotunda was devoted to a different aspect of recent Czech history.
There was one on the persecution of the Church, another on the post-war internment camps for dissidents, another on the collectivisation of the villages, still another on the show trials of the early 1950s.
There must have been a dozen rotundas, each displaying blow-ups of contemporary newspaper clippings, photographs, posters, etc.
The display windows of the shops had also been taken over and in some of them were displayed uniforms such as that of the Russian Legion which I had just seen.
People were crowding round the displays, reading the posters with great intensity and, by and large, in silence.
At a rotunda devoted to the death of Stalin people were chuckling.
The clippings said: ‘Stalin will live for ever in the hearts of mankind’ followed by the text of a funeral oration delivered by Gottwald.
Then there were the obituaries for Gottwald a few weeks later.
The heading stated: ‘Gottwald is with us.
We will transform that sorrow into strength.’
Below that there were the texts of very bad but sincere poems published in newspapers of the time by worker poets in honour of Stalin and Gottwald.
It was at these that the onlookers were chuckling.
Most of the rotundas, however, provoked a sombre reaction, though Ladislav pointed out that many of the younger people would not have recognised the faces of Novotný and Gottwald even if they knew the names.
The very existence of  the interment camps had been a state secret and virtually all the materials on display would have been ‘classified’ before the recent revolution.
One schoolchild, Ladislav said, had recently asked him if he could remember Stalin and Beneš.
And, when he said he could, went on to enquire whether he could also remember the Thirty Years War.
Halfway along Na Příkopě a set of cut-out figures of Czechoslovakia's rulers since the war had been erected along the top of a wall, with the largest figure in the centre — Stalin.
A little old woman, clearly upset, was going about tugging at people's sleeves and pointing to the figures.
I asked Ladislav what she was saying.
Having misunderstood the irony of the display, she was telling people: ‘Don't believe them.
They are all murderers.
Every one of them.’
Ladislav himself was taken aback by the rotunda devoted to the show trials of the 1950s.
The heading read: ‘Trials of the Fighters in the Prague Uprising.’
Just as we got to the rotunda, a jazz band further up the street started to play.
One enlarged photograph showed a man in the dock.
The figure was Major Jaromir Nechansky who had been a commander of a paratroop regiment, and who had played a prominent role in the anti-Nazi uprising of 1945.
He and many others were charged with being American spies.
Ladislav said, pointing: ‘He was at school with me — and him — also executed.’
This was the friend of whom Vera had spoken.
Ladislav had not seen these photographs before.
This was political education with a vengeance.
He said: ‘In 1968 I went on a visit to Mexico…
I met an old Jew there who had left Prague thirty years before and he asked me if there were still whores in Wenceslas Square?
‘Oh yes,'’ I said, ‘‘but now they all work for the Ministry of the Interior.
''’
Today is a public holiday to mark liberation day so the flags of the four powers are prominently displayed above the street.
It is strange, seeing the Union Flag there.
I wanted to take Ladislav to lunch, and he suggested a restaurant near Wenceslas Square.
As we poked away at the goulash soup with its lumps of pork and potato and which had been interestingly seasoned with caraway, Ladislav wanted to know my impressions of what I had seen and, in particular, my own attitudes to Marxism.
Within the confines of lunch, I did my best to formulate what I thought.
I remarked on the truculence, boorishness and dishonesty which I had encountered, routinely, in the hotel and in restaurants; indeed, whenever I had had dealings with anyone in a public capacity.
Attempts to excuse such a situation as ‘the price of socialism’, I said, is doing socialism no favours.
On the other hand, a high moral tone may denounce but fails to understand the problem, which is more than simply one of human weakness.
Certainly, individuals may behave badly in any system.
But a system which institutionalises bad behaviour has something deeply wrong with it.
Besides, socialism was, in my mind at least, associated with the sharing of resources and pleasures, rather than about Byzantine state bureaucracies.
What I had seen of Czechoslovakia was a society which encouraged a miserable waste of human resources.
I was reminded of the Brecht poem in which the politicians decide that they cannot trust the people and that they had better elect a new one.
To some extent, the demoralisation and poverty of spirit I had encountered could be attributed to the misfortunes of geography; to the fact that Czechoslovakia had such ruthless neighbours as Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
But that still leaves unanswered the more basic issue as to whether the whole Marxist enterprise was so wrong-headed that the economic and human failures were not, in some sense, built into the ideology.
Nor will it do to argue that state socialism is a perversion or corruption of some pure source, for the source has been so consistent in what it has given rise to, and so wrong in its predictions, that the suspicion of some intrinsic connection between theory and practice cannot be evaded.
The great strength of capitalism, I suggested, whatever its failings, is what we may call its psychology of opportunism, its offer of more.
It has behind it a powerful cluster of motivating forces, accompanied by a theory of motivation which, however inadequate, works sufficiently to keep the system going.
At its best, what it offers the individual is the possibility of personal material and/or educational improvement.
The fact that there may be others in society who do not do so well need not even occur to the individual.
In reality, the theory of wealth ‘trickling down’ does not work and the farce of a ‘representative’rather than a delegated democracy means that a high price is extracted from society for the ‘freedom’on offer, since social cohesion and environmental safeguards are no necessary part of the legislative  framework which allows capital to keep on growing.
All that admitted, you don't make omelettes by stopping people from eating steak.
The governments of Eastern Europe have deprived individuals of both motive and freedom as the price of a supposed social planning.
The West, in contrast, pretends that social planning is more central to its ideology than it really is and fails to support many of those who, for whatever reason, lose out on the benefits of the system.
My own interest in Marxism grew, I explained to Ladislav, in part at least, out of my readings of Hegel at university.
Marx started out as a Young Hegelian in the early 1840s and never threw off the underlying presuppositions of Hegelian rationalism.
He never developed a theory of individual motivation because he was not interested in the individual.
Marx believes that the individual is socially constructed but never provides or even attempts to provide the theory of knowledge which could support his claims.
Marx simply assumes that how we know things is not a problem.
He is wrong.
The Hegelian bias shows up again in the ambition of the Marxist enterprise.
Hegel believed that a substance was exhausted by the sum of its predicates, which is another way of saying that he identified the categories of the German language with those of abstract thought, and those of abstract thought, in turn with those of Mind or Geist .
Since the world was essentially Geist , the categories of language were ultimately those of reality, and reality was ultimately abstract.
For a philosophical Idealist, this is a perfectly respectable approach, whatever one thinks of it.
Marx fancied that he could simply take over the Hegelian analysis and, in Engels' famous phrase, ‘stand Hegel the right way up’ with no reference to the fact that Hegel's whole analysis is rooted in an effort to resolve quite specific problems which he inherited in the theory of knowledge.
Marx simply adopts the identity of linguistic categories with actualities as though there were no further difficulties and as though the Hegelian approach could be divorced from Absolute Idealism, which it cannot.
The upshot is that Marx never even concerns himself with questions such as the relation between individual perceptions to objects or the texture of feelings, sensations and thoughts, which might have led him towards a theory of where individuality occurs.
He forgets Aristotle's basic dictum: no thoughts but in things.
Marx writes as though the world could dispense with particularity and there  betrays the real depth of his borrowings from Hegel and, more crucially, the uncritical nature of those borrowings.
His bias is to believe that the general carries greater weight than the particular, and that uniqueness is somehow accidental or incidental to the world.
The loss to Marxist theorising of all those elements which stress human individuality and specificity as central to the nature of experienced reality, means that Marx cannot account for how we behave except as statistical averages.
Translated into political terms, the result is a profound and consistent bias away both from individuality and from the libertarian element in the radical tradition.
Marx, as a pupil of Hegel, always favours Law over uniqueness.
It is therefore a theoretical structure flawed in some of its fundamental conceptions and all too readily adaptable to the needs of hierarchical bureaucracies.
C. G. Jung points out that Christianity at least provides a powerful set of motives for the individual to conform to a social and moral code.
Marxism attempts to replace that code without providing any serious motive to induce people to behave decently and for the common good.
All of which is not to deny that, in that hugely complex tradition which is Marxism, there are profound insights which need to be kept in sight.
But, above all, the moral and radical impulse which lay behind the Marxist tradition needs to be preserved.
Ladislav absorbed all this, nodding agreement from moment to moment.
I had to leave Prague next day and was sorry to be losing his company so soon.
He declined the offer of a lift home, wished me an interesting journey, and set off through a light Prague drizzle.
I LEFT Ladislav near to the Staroměstské náměsti (Old Town Square), to the north side of which stands the statue erected in 1915 on the five-hundredth anniversary of the burning for heresy of Jan Hus, one of the founders of the European radical tradition.
Hus was rector of the University of Prague and in 1403 translated the Trialogus of the English reformer, John Wycliffe, in which he summarises his theology.
Wycliffe denounced the abuses and corruption of the clergy and Papacy and insisted that the authority of the Scriptures was self-sufficient.
English scholars  went to Prague in the wake of Anne of Bohemia, Richard II's wife, and there introduced the works of Wycliffe.
Hus quickly became a popular figure in Bohemia.
It is easier to understand the attractiveness of his doctrines for the mass of people if we bear in mind that Wycliffe had claimed that property was sinful.
Clerics in Bohemia were also landlords on a large scale and, very often, foreigners.
As most of the higher ecclesiastical posts were held by Germans, there was also a nationalist element to the movement.
By 1411 Hus had become so influential that Prague was laid under papal interdict.
In 1415, Hus was summoned to defend himself at the Council of Constance, having been assured of a safe conduct by the emperor Sigismund.
Sigismund betrayed his promise — he is supposed to have blushed when confronted with the fact — and, after a farcical trial, Hus was burned.
At the same Council it was decreed that Wycliffe's remains should be exhumed and burned, which they were.
When news of Sigismund's treachery reached Prague, a rebellion broke out.
Across the Old Town Square from the statue of Hus, the Old Town Hall still stands.
From its windows a crowd, led by John Žižka, threw the anti-Hus councillors to the crowd below, who promptly lynched them.
When the Bohemian king, Wenceslas IV, heard of the revolt, he was seized by an epileptic fit and died a few days later.
Žižka went on successfully to defend Bohemia from the crusades which were preached against the Hussites who, by this time, had acquired a thoroughly democratic and Protestant cast.
The Hussites held out successfully until, in 1436, an agreement was reached which allowed them to consolidate their achievements.
From then until the Battle of the White Hill in 1620, Bohemia was effectively Europe's first Protestant state.
Prague's second famous defenestration took place at the Hradčany Castle when Bohemian Protestants again thought themselves threatened in 1618.
On this occasion the officials thrown from the window managed to survive, since they landed in deep piles of castle refuse.
That event is usually seen as the beginning of the Thirty Years War.
It was in front of the Old Town Hall that the leaders of the revolt were executed after the defeat at The White Hill.
After completing a tour of the baroque wonders of Prague, I decided that my detour from the Danube had lasted long enough, and that it was time to head south again.
But the last word on  Czechoslovak politics should be Ladislav's: ‘The Czechs want freedom as a child wants a balloon.
But, having gained it, they do not know what to do with it — yet.’
ONCE out of Prague the road began to rise through pinewoods into the southern Bohemian uplands.
Strands of early morning mist still clung to the hollows as the sun tried to break through the patchy cloudscape.
The villages on the road for Tabor looked less dilapidated than Prague.
The road surfaces tend to be worse in the towns than in the country.
Ladislav explained that the constantly changing maze of roadworks and diversions in Prague was the result not of ambitious renewal programmes, but of bureaucracy gone mad.
The state bank which provides the cash for roadworks does not pay out money until a project or part of it, is completed.
Therefore, on any given project, a manageable chunk will be completed to secure enough cash for wages.
That project will then be abandoned in favour of some other quickly completable component elsewhere, so that even relatively minor works can take years to finish.
The result is chaotic.
More alarmingly, driving in Czechoslovakia puts one's lungs at risk, as the quantity of black fumes spewed out by cars and lorries is, on occasion, quite unbelievable.
One would find oneself driving along in a pall of black poison.
Pollution simply does not figure on the list of governmental priorities.
On the outskirts of Tabor there were long rows of multi-storey apartment blocks of an extraordinary ugliness; many flats looked empty.
Every East European town of any size seems to be disfigured by these viciously utilitarian structures and several suburbs of Prague consist of nothing else, as though the provision of other amenities were no concern of the planners.
Even when allowance is made for meagre resources, there seemed often to be a wilful and needless callousness to many of these suburban barracks.
As the Tabor primary schoolchildren were making their way to their classes, it was hard not to think of a scene from 1950s Britain, the children all in their uniforms and carrying satchels.
Tabor, named from a hill a few miles from Bethlehem, was  founded in 1420 by the Taborites, the radical wing of the Hussite movement.
It was chosen partly because it was a defendable site, raised above the surrounding landscape.
The countryside south of Tabor is mainly cereal-growing, dotted here and there with little lakes.
Much of the road is lined by beeches and limes.
Aiming to cross into Austria at Gmünd, I came on the border post sooner than I had expected and, misreading the signs, drove past the guard-post to the frontier barrier.
Waved back by a Kalashnikov-wielding, spotty boy-soldier, I was subject to a ten-minute harangue by two bad-tempered border guards.
Since I refused to acknowledge that I understood a word of Czech or German, I just shrugged my shoulders as they droned on.
They gave up in disgust and I was waved through, saluted by the spotty boy.
The Austrian officials were quite another matter; middle-aged, self-confident, well dressed and courteous, they enquired how long I intended to stay, glanced in the boot, and waved me on with the hope that I would enjoy my stay.
The immediate transformation in the road surface, its increased width, signalled my return to Western Europe.
In the space of a few moments one crossed a cultural divide now generations deep.
Even the sun, as if to mark my sudden sense of relief at being out of Czechoslovakia, chose to put in an appearance.
I had not realised until that moment how tense the past few days had made me.
From Gmünd eastwards to Horn and south to Krems was only a matter of a couple of hours through some lovely, fertile valleys, brilliantly green in their spring foliage.
Suddenly, too, I was back in wine country with terraced hillsides stretching up on both sides of the road.
KREMS, at the eastern end of the Wachau valley in Lower Austria, is a handsome little town and somehow gives the impression that it is not large enough to house its thirty-two-thousand souls.
I entered the old town on foot, having left Anastasia outside the Steiner Tor (1480) which guards Krems' western entrance.
Within a few moments I had been directed to  the Gasthof zur Alte Post and installed myself in a tiny room which was to cost about £12 for the night, including breakfast.
When the girl at the reception desk discovered that I would be leaving early in the morning, she insisted on refunding £2, since I would be on the road before she arrived to cook breakfast.
By now the day was hot and bright and my first need was for lunch and a glass of wine.
The Alte Post is old, parts of it dating from the mid-sixteenth century.
Lunch could be had in the inn's cobbled courtyard.
Lilacs had been twined about the balcony which ran round two sides of the courtyard and over the deep, ancient arches of the north and west walls.
Since it was all in bloom, the yard was a riot of colour and scent.
Pots of roses decorated the corners of the yard.
Most of the tables supported big red-and-white parasols beneath which an assortment of elderly ladies were chatting away.
I was directed to a table set under one of the deep arches and which already had one occupant.
The service was brisk but I was struggling to understand the drawn-out diphthongs of a heavy accent which gave Ja at least two syllables.
Opposite me, sat a small, thin man with yellowed teeth who ate in a great hurry.
He greeted me politely and we quickly got into conversation.
He was a bookseller who knew London slightly and Prague well.
He had, however, an appointment to keep, and a few minutes later I had the table to myself.
Looking about me, almost all the other tables seemed to be occupied by ladies of Habsburg vintage who sipped away at their camparis or white wine or, in two cases, glasses of beer.
In the meantime, a sudden cloud had appeared, and a few large drops of rain spattered the courtyard.
Something resembling panic broke out among the ladies.
At once, the waiters began to reorganise the tables so that as many as possible could sit under the parasols and to hurry away the unused cushions and linen so as not to let them be soaked.
I later witnessed exactly the same procedure carried out in a Budapest café with such leisurely incompetence, that everything was completely waterlogged before they began .
Some of the ladies were being helped indoors to the restaurant by the waiters.
It was only then I began to grasp that several of these old dears, whose daily habit to foregather here it clearly was, were as drunk as lords and were being helped not because of their age, but because otherwise they would fall down.
It was very difficult to keep a straight face.
It was as well that I did, however, for one  most distinguished-looking lady of very advanced years moved to my table from the group of her friends who had been assisted indoors.
The shower failed to materialise.
She had the translucent skin of the very ancient and I would have guessed her age at not far from ninety.
She sat bolt upright, hands folded in front of her, a shock of thin, frizzy, snow-white hair atop her high-cheekboned face.
Her eyes were a piercing, watery blue.
When my food was brought, she nodded and pronounced Mahlzeit over it.
I had ordered a consommé to begin and, by the end of my first course, she was clearly growing restless.
Crooking an index finger, she summoned a waiter and proceeded to inform him that she had been waiting fully half an hour for her pancakes and that it would not do.
The waiters, who were obviously well accustomed to their elderly clientèle moved at a brisk trot.
They could hardly have been more different from the swaggering louts of the Hotel Olympik who would chatter among themselves for ten minutes and then saunter towards one as much out of boredom as anything else.
When, a few minutes later, madam's pancakes were brought, she ate her way through a plateful of stodge with brisk fortitude which would not have disgraced a squad of Irish navvies.
I decided that I liked Krems, and suddenly understood what it was had attracted W. H. Auden to live in rural Austria — its high camp!
OLD Krems is built on the slope of the Danube's left bank just where the little river Krems joins its greater sister.
The river is broad here, about two hundred yards, and from its banks one looks up to the baroque turrets of the Benedictine monastery of Stift Göttweig, perched high on its wooded hill.
Above Krems, the slope is terraced to its summit with vines.
Upstream, through the gorge known as the Wachau, runs one of the prettiest stretches of the river and I sat for a pleasant hour on its embankment watching the swallows skim its waters.
In the Stadtpark just behind the swimming pool, the cars parked under the chestnut trees were half an inch deep in confetti-like blossom.
The main axis of the old town runs east-west along  the Landstrasse, which is also a fashionable shopping street with cafés, ice-cream shops and every kind of boutique from one selling Armani jackets to one specialising in religious accessories.
Like so much of Austria, Krems is up to its neck in churches.
The parish church (Pfarrkirche S. Veit) is one of the oldest examples of Austrian baroque, built during the first decade of the Thirty Years War, although the interior fittings and paintings are largely work of the eighteenth-century high baroque.
To someone brought up in the relative austerities of the Church of Scotland, all this gilt and marble, colourful painting and painted statuary seems rather extraordinary and, somehow, secular.
Just a few yards along the road in the Piaristenkirche, there are further reminders that Austria was the home of the Counter-Reformation with paintings and statues of Saints Francis Xavier, Ignatius de Loyola and John Nepomuk of Prague.
As you go in by the west end of the nave of the parish church, two black memorial plaques have been set into little side chapels on the north and south walls.
The one on the north wall is for the men of the cavalry regiments from the Krems area who fell in the First World War.
In front of it a number of candles were burning.
On the south wall the memorial was for the infantry regiments.
It had no candles.
I could find no memorial at all for 1939–45, though there is one elsewhere in the town.
Back at the Alte Post, I settled myself into an archway fringed with lilac blossom.
Earlier in the day, while looking for the swimming-pool, I had found myself in a park containing the largest number of fire-engines I had ever seen.
An exhibition and conference on fire-fighting involving companies and brigades from all over Austria was in full swing.
The central section of the courtyard of the Alte post had been set with a three-sided arrangement of trestle tables for a party of thirty and now they began to arrive.
Some were in business suits, others in uniforms which had clearly been designed by a Gilbert and Sullivan enthusiast.
As each couple or small group arrived, everyone was introduced to everyone else, the gentlemen bowing and shaking hands all round.
The blue and yellow uniforms lent the scene a colourfulness not to be found in Britain, save perhaps in military ceremonial, and I could not but wonder why in our churches and social life colour has become so taboo.
Only the Austrians seem able to outdo Germans in the quantities of food one is expected to eat in restaurants.
It must have something to do with the way the language heaps noun upon noun.
The title of my main course was:Alt-Wiener Tafelspitz mit Berner Rösti dazu Schnittlauchsause und Apfelkrem .
That particular mouthful amounted to thick slices of boiled sirloin accompanied by a pancake.
The pancake, so far as I could tell, was a mixture of potato, cabbage, onion and seasonings.
The two sauces on the side were apple and sour cream with chives.
When I was unable to finish the heaped plateful, the waitress expressed concern that I had not enjoyed one of their local specialties; two, I felt, would have killed me.
VIENNA is the home of grandiose monumentalism.
You can walk most of the Ringstrasse in a couple of hours but exploring this exercise in mass intimidation is a tedious business.
The front section of the vast Rathaus has been restored to its original pale sand colour.
It was flag bedecked and in front of it a brass band were parading in breeches, green-Loden jackets and cocked hats.
They, or it, looked ridiculous.
The Ringstrasse offers an architecture of desperation, of the assertion of coherence by fiat and, as such, it accurately reflects the state of the empire when it was built.
The empire was the monarchy, and the monarchy was an administrative bureaucracy of extraordinary inflexibility supported by an officer-class recruited from the same social strata.
The bourgeoisie were not admitted to the court or to the nomenklatura .
They were, therefore, the most appalling snobs, trampling on whichever subsection of the bourgeoisie or proletariat lay immediately below them.
As the nineteenth century progressed, Austro-Hungary took refuge in reaction at home and adventurism abroad in an effort to contain the centrifugal forces which eventually blew it, and much of Europe, apart.
Austria, and Vienna in particular, was the real home of Central-European anti-semitism.
Jews were bottom of the pile.
No matter how low you sank, the Jews were still below you, along with the gypsies.
At the tail end of the  nineteenth century, the Viennese politician Karl Lueger founded his power base on an anti-semitic platform.
Stories of ritual murder by evil Jewish cabals figured regularly in the Viennese gutter press.
It is no accident that Schickelgruber, the failed artist who became Hitler, should have been the son of a petty official and have spent his ambitions at the butt end of Viennese snobbery.
The peculiar cast of Austrian Catholicism must play some part in that story.
In The Thirty Years War , C. V. Wedgewood suggests that Austria was ruined as the potential leader of a German-speaking Mittel-Europa by the dynastic linkage of the Spanish and Austrian Habsburgs.
It is certainly true that for a few crucial generations in the late sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the influence of Spanish Jesuits on the never-very-alert minds of the Habsburg emperors was decisive.
The Spanish court, with its rigid protocols, religious austerity and fanaticism, planted the seeds of the Counter-Reformation in the rulers of Austro-Hungary.
The ferocity of the Counter-Reformation was the coup de grâce to a Central Europe already suffering economic recession and the loss of its outlets to the east.
But, if history is anything, it is an infinite series of ‘if onlys…’.
As Pascal observes: ‘Cleopatra's nose: had it been shorter, the whole aspect of the world would have been altered.’
In Vienna not even the Danube runs free, for it has been channelled into a neat canal.
In the town centre, in the upmarket shopping precincts near St Stephen's Cathedral, the old buildings have been elegantly restored and the new ones are all polish and price.
There is no trace of litter, despite the hundreds of affluent shoppers who ebb and flow along these consumerist highways.
The cathedral itself is a mob of tightly packed tourists.
It is impossible to see or sense anything here except tourism.
So why do most people come to the cathedral?
Certainly not because they are historians, however amateur.
They are, I suspect, fulfilling some obscure sense of obligation that this is ‘what one does’ in Vienna.
In the Middle Ages they would have gone on pilgrimages to the knee-cap of Saint Whoever, to the great profit of the Church.
What irritates me about Vienna is a certain not-quite-definable smugness, a feeling that somehow this place feels itself to be the centre .
In Scotland, by contrast, one felt oneself to be on a periphery and, in some way, helpless.
GETTING lost in Budapest is easy if you do not speak Hungarian.
For the first and only time on the journey, posters, shop signs and street names meant nothing to me.
In Romanian, Serbo-Croat or Czech, I can make a guess at meanings based on my bits and pieces of Italian, Latin, German or Russian.
But not in Hungary, where the language does not belong to the Indo-European group at all, being related to Finnish and, ultimately, to some of the languages of the Asian steppe.
I should have known I would have problems when I crossed the border of a place whose name I could hardly pronounce — Mosonmagyaróvár.
From there to Budapest via Györ (pronounced Dyir) and Tatabânya, both rather unattractive towns, was a three-hour drive across unbroken plain on a swelteringly hot morning.
On the outskirts of Budapest, however, the sign ‘Centrum’ began to appear.
So once I had passed through the obligatory outskirts of post-war, multi-storey housing estates and entered a labyrinth of blackened buildings in canyon-like streets with traffic jammed solid, I knew I had to be somewhere near the town centre.
In a fortunate moment I noticed a sign reading ‘Jardin de Paris — Restaurant Français’, and abandoning Anastasia on a pavement, a procedure to which East Europeans do not seem to take exception, I ventured in to discover whether anyone spoke French.
One young waiter did, but very (very) badly, and after several efforts asked whether I could speak English.
He suggested an hotel nearby where his wife, who could speak German, worked as a receptionist.
The Hotel Orion was only half a mile away.
Unfortunately to get there I had to negotiate an amazingly convoluted one-way system.
At the third attempt I gave up and hailed a taxi.
Taxi drivers in any East European city are likely to speak some German and, having grasped the problem, he suggested I follow along behind him.
In a few moments I was installed in a comfortable room about as near to the centre of Buda as it is possible to be.
By happy chance, I had found a private hotel only fifty yards from the Danube and which, unlike its skyscraper neighbours immediately across the river, such as the fashionable  Intercontinental, did not cost vast sums of hard currency.
The receptionist was polite, the room pleasantly furnished and clean.
Could this be Eastern Europe?
It would have been boorish not to return to the Jardin de Paris for lunch, a short walk which took me along the right bank of the Duna to the famous Széchenyi Bridge and Clark Adam tér.
Hungarians put their surname before their christian names.
Adam Clark was the Scotsman who designed the Széchenyi Bridge.
The tér is in fact a busy roundabout from behind which a cable car takes you up on to Castle Hill and the ancient fortress area of Buda.
From the tér it was only a short walk along Fö utca (Clan Chief Street) to the Jardin.
The menu was an exercise in school French, but the food was good, even if it bore no relation to anything I knew as French cuisine.
By Budapest standards, the Jardin de Paris was upmarket and expensive.
The restaurant was little more than an intelligently decorated semi-basement with space enough for a bar and a half dozen tables.
Clever lighting made it seem airy even though there was little light from the street.
The walls were hung with posters and drawings with a Parisian flavour.
At the next table a German couple were talking loudly and beyond them a middle-aged man on his own occupied a table for three.
Ten minutes later he was joined by the couple for whom he had been waiting.
He stood, and with a great sweep of his hand, bowed, said ‘servus’, and drew out a chair for his lady guest.
However over-the-top he may have seemed, it was a vignette I could not have envisaged in Prague.
If first impressions mean anything, I was getting a sense of a city more amiable and self-confident.
The drivers seemed less aggressive, even stopping to let you into a stream of traffic.
The taxi-driver, the waiters, the receptionist, had all shown a willingness to be pleasant.
I looked forward to my time in Budapest.
FOR reasons that go deep into its past, Hungary has not done well out of the twentieth century.
It was the main loser in both territory and population from the First World War.
It had suited Austria and Hungary's aristocratic rulers in the nineteenth century to keep Hungary largely rural and feudal.
Hungary was the bread-basket of the Empire.
The great pre-war estates were among the largest in Europe.
With the defeat of 1918, the traditional ‘lands of St Stephen’ were decimated.
Romania was given Transylvania, of which the north-eastern parts were mainly Magyar-speaking.
Czechoslovakia was substantially carved out of what had been Hungary, at least in its eastern and southern parts.
Yugoslavia was given the Vojvodina, that section of plain to the north of Belgrade.
In all, Hungary lost a third of its territory and two-fifths of its population.
It is not surprising then, that in the inter-war period, the principal aim of Hungarian foreign policy was to recover as much as possible of Hungaria irridenta .
Between the wars Hungary had no large industrial working class.
The people running the country were the great landowners and bureaucrats of the old empire, who were themselves a class mainly created by the large-scale bankruptcies of the lesser gentry in the first half of the nineteenth century.
There was no large, autonomous middle class apart from the state apparatus.
Social change, therefore, was unlikely to come from the top and the peasantry were badly educated and impoverished smallholders.
Joseph Rothschild points out that in the inter-war period, the whole of Eastern Europe, excluding Russia, produced only eight per cent of European industrial production and that a third of that came from Czechoslovakia.
After Bela Kun's failed attempt to establish a socialist republic on the Soviet model in 1919, an administration was established in March 1920 with Admiral Horthy as regent.
Hungary's economic dependence on grain exports, mainly wheat, meant that she was badly affected by the economic crises of the early 1930s, when the average price of agricultural produce fell sharply while that for industrial goods rose.
In 1927, in an effort to diminish her international isolation, Hungary signed a treaty of friendship with Mussolini's Italy.
Now in the economic crisis, Italy and Nazi Germany found it politic to buy Hungarian grain.
Economic difficulty and political dissatisfaction were inextricable, and from 1932 to 1936 Hungary's prime minister was the fascist Gyula Gömbös.
Gömbös supported a German-Hungarian-Italian axis and by 1938 a Hungarian Nazi party, the Arrow Cross, had been formed and was agitating for land reform and a restoration of the old frontiers.
Hitler cemented the German-Hungarian alliance  by allowing Hungary to annex Ruthenia and a strip of Southern Slovakia when he carved up Czechoslovakia in 1939.
By a strange irony of history, the prime minister in 1939, as a result of deaths and resignations, was Count Pál Teleki who had already served briefly as prime minister from 1920 to 1921.
He was one of the old, feudal aristocracy and fundamentally anti-German.
But it was too late in the day to get Hungary out of its Axis alliances and it was he who annexed Ruthenia and negotiated the Vienna Award of August 1940, by which Hitler gave back to Hungary half of Transylvania, including the old regional capital of Kolozsvár (Cluj).
Hitler's policy was clever: to keep Romania and Hungary in competition with each other to see which could make the greater territorial gains.
In 1940 Teleki signed a non-aggression pact with Yugoslavia.
In 1941 Hitler sought to use Hungarian territory for his attack on Yugoslavia.
Teleki, aristocrat as he was, felt obliged to fall on his sword.
As a reward for its co-operation, Hungary was given back to Vojvodina.
As soon as the war was over, Hungary had to revert to its 1918 frontiers.
Towards the end, Horthy tried to extricate the country from the impending shambles, but the Germans occupied it in March 1944 and, in any case, the Allies were no longer sympathetic.
Nor was Hungary's post-war history much happier.
At first, Stalin did not insist on a communist regime and in the 1945 elections, the communists only obtained seventeen per cent of the vote.
By 1949, however, as a result of Soviet pressure, the communists were able to submit a ‘government list, for national approval.
It was approved by ninety-five per cent!
The communist leader was Mátyás Rákosi.
It was he who carried out the Stalinist purges which lasted from 1949 to 1953.
The most notorious of the show trials was that of László Rajk in 1949.
Rajk was secretary-general of the party but his internationalism branded him as dangerously Titoist and he was hanged as a fascist spy and traitor.
About two thousand other veteran communists were also executed, while hundreds of thousands were imprisoned or expelled from the party.
The reality, of course, was that Rákosi intended to hang on to power.
As Rothschild says: ‘In effect, Rákosi killed more communists in five years than Horthy had in twenty-five, and the entire society was cowed into a condition of bewilderment and terror.’
Rajk was eventually rehabilitated in 1956.
My own memories of the uprising of 1956 are hazy, though  I think I remember recordings of the appeal by prime minister Imre Nagy to the Western Powers for help.
I certainly heard it in later years.
Nagy had already been prime minister from 1953 to 1955 but had fallen from favour and Rákosi returned to power.
As with Dubček in the 1960s, the Soviets endorsed the new Hungarian leaders of 1956, János Kádár and Imre Nagy, who replaced Rákosi on the latter's death.
Their reformist programme, however, quickly got out of hand when workers in Györ began to demand free elections.
Since the communists were widely seen as an anti-national party, free elections would have been a disaster.
The tanks moved in on 4th November and Kádár took over.
Nagy was hanged in June 1958.
In the following years Kádár eliminated all opposition and reinstated forced collectivisation in the villages.
In 1962, however, he began to shift his policies away from outright repression and towards a gradual reformism, summed up in the slogan,Those who are not against us are with us .
This effort at reconciliation, combined with gradual economic improvement, allowed Kádár to steer Hungary through the 1960s and 1970s towards increasingly liberal, economic and social measures.
The price was a tacit understanding that certain assumptions could not be questioned, in particular the leading role of the Communist Party and Hungary's commitment to the Warsaw Pact alliance.
By the time Kádár resigned in 1988, he had come to be thought of as a kind of benign pragmatist, who had done what he could in difficult circumstances.
Kádár was succeeded by Károlyi Grósz in May 1988.
Eight months later it was announced that Nagy and his colleagues were to be rehabilitated.
Next month the party's Central Committee announced that it would institute a multi-party democracy.
Foreign companies were to be encouraged to invest.
In June 1989 Nagy was reburied, his body being extracted from the common grave into which it had been thrown.
The occasion became one of national self-assertion and two months later the whole edifice of Eastern European solidarity was undermined when Hungary allowed East German citizens to exit to Austria via its territory.
In the following month, October 1989, a new republic was declared, but by that time Soviet troops were already committed to leaving.
The first genuinely free elections since 1945 were held in March 1990.
They were won by the Hungarian Democratic Form which went on to form a coalition government of right-of-centre parties.
MIKLÓS Vajda is literary editor of New Hungarian Quarterly .
I had been given his address by friends in Britain and now took a taxi to his flat, a couple of miles from the hotel but still in the older part of the city of Buda.
Miklós, in his middle fifties, is a tall, quietly spoken but imposing figure, very self-possessed.
The temporary flat in which I found him was littered with books.
He was hard at work on the translation of a play which had to be ready two days later.
Translation is a form of hack work among East European intellectuals.
It is usually paid for via state-funded organisations and can at least be relied on even if it can be at times both economically and spiritually unrewarding.
With the destruction of state socialism in Hungary, the old and relatively comfortable set-up in which officially approved writers could have access to funds, however limited, via the Writers' Union, will come to an end, since the Union itself will no longer have any official funding.
The arrival of a fresh-faced entrepreneurial capitalism intent on whole new empires may not be entirely comfortable for writers.
Miklós made coffee while we chatted about Prague.
My dismay at much of what I had found there disappointed him.
As with many intellectuals in Hungary and Romania, Czechoslovakia had become for Miklós a token of what East European civilisation might be.
It had been a democratic country and had ancient traditions of learning and libertarianism.
It was a beautiful and cultivated city.
But these ideas of his were of a Prague long gone, a Prague idealised out of my recognition.
It was a Prague generations old, if it had ever existed.
Miklós is a native of Budapest, as was his father.
His mother came from an aristocratic background in Transylvania and had quit Hungary in 1956 for the United States.
During the show trials at the end of the 1940s she had been imprisoned pour encourager les autres , though she had no political associations.
After serving two years of her sentence, she was released on probation.
But when the justice minister who had agreed to her release himself fell from favour, she was reimprisoned and had  to serve a further ten months before being rereleased.
Miklós spoke of these matters dispassionately, any hint of feeling only emerging as scorn for the communist establishment.
Like Ladislav, he smokes relentlessly.
‘The key problems for Hungary now,’ he said, ‘are the economic and the national questions.
Hungary owes something in the order of twenty billion dollars in international debt.
Our national tensions are, in a sense, externalised.
There are two and a half million ethnic Hungarians in Transylvania and almost one million in Slovakia, both minorities being a result of the punishment and reward system adopted in the treaties of Versailles and Trianon and substantially confirmed at Yalta.
The only possible solution to those problems is to build a Europe in which national boundaries no longer have the political and economic significance they now possess.,
Only a few weeks earlier, there had been serious disturbances in the Tirgu-Mureş area of Transylvania with fighting between rival groups of Romanian and Hungarian nationalists.
Historically, there is solid ground for the idea of a common European homeland.
That stew of Celt and Teuton, Magyar, Slav, Latin and Scandinavian which comprises contemporary Europe has a good deal of experience in common, not just of wars, but in terms of underlying social and intellectual structures.
The common experience of Christianity, of similar concepts of family, together with the more recent experience of urbanisation and industrialisation, all mark Europe out as fundamentally different from the Arab world or from India.
I commented to Miklós that I had little hope of the New World solving the problems of the Old when it could not face up to its own difficulties.
I would like to believe that Europe can develop into an association of humane societies which people can believe in.
Sadly, we agreed, such prospects lie a long way off.
The remarks which follow are extracted from our subsequent conversation:
Miklós Vajda : Here in Hungary it would be very difficult for us to be integrated quickly into a structure like that of the European Community.
The kind of industrialisation we have developed, together with the quality of the commodities we produce, would have to change with dramatic painfulness.
I daresay it can be done if you think of the kind  of economic growth rates produced by places like South Korea…
WP Yes, but South Korea started from a nil base so far as industrialisation was concerned and with labour costs not much above peasant-subsistence level.
MV We don't have any shortage of cheap labour here.
WP True, it may be cheap by European standards but not by those of the Far East.
To have to compete with Third World labour costs would produce massive unrest in a population already urbanised and used to the standards of a Western industrial society.
MV And South Korea could count on a peculiarly nasty dictatorship to help quicken the pace of its capitalist development.
WP How do you think Hungary will adapt to having a real parliamentary democracy?
MV It will, and so will Czechoslovakia.
We have been a nation state for a very long time.
That gives us a foundation and a coherence to work from.
What it is difficult for those from the West fully to grasp, is just how surreal life under state socialism has been, especially in the early fifties when the system reached a kind of apogee of dementia.
Sometimes I wonder now whether I dreamed some of it, so much was just unbelievable, so grotesque.
WP Can you give me an example of what you mean?
MV I spent four years at university, from 1949 until 1953.
Those years were the high points of the Stalinist repression in Hungary.
I began by reading English and French and, after my mother's trial, I was allowed to continue my studies by the personal intervention of Rákosi — by his special grace — because my godmother, my father's first wife, was an extremely popular actress on the national  stage, a great star.
She went to see Rákosi on my behalf.
The upshot was that I was summoned by the university authorities and told that I was to be allowed to continue my studies but only under certain stringent conditions.
First, I was never to mention these events.
Second, I had to pass all my examinations with top grades.
Last, I had to help the peasant and working-class boys who had been forced to go to university with no background education whatsoever.
Hundreds of these youngsters were hearing French or English for the first time at, for example, a lecture on the Lake Poets.
Of course, within a couple of years the standards simply plummeted because they simply could not cope.
At the end of the first year I was summoned to the Dean's office.
‘Comrade Vajda,’ he said, ‘you cannot go on studying two imperialistic languages.
One is already too many.
You must choose one or the other.’
So, I abandoned French and in its place took up Hungarian studies.
That kind of farce was just the tip of the iceberg.
If it sounds funny now, it was not so at the time.
Sometimes it would happen that during a lecture — at that time the secret police were very active — there would be a knock at the door and two men would enter.
One would say: ‘Comrade so and so,’ and their poor victim would turn white and he would have to go with them and perhaps we never saw him again.
WP Has much been written as yet about that period?
MV Yes, in memoirs but not imaginatively assimilated as it should be as, for example, in fiction.
Kádár was fairly liberal in that respect, so long as a few taboos were respected, especially the role of the Soviet Union.
But, of course, if you wanted to write seriously, then the taboos were difficult to avoid.
That kind of self-censorship is very dispiriting.
WP Have you been able to travel much?
MV Yes, first of all because my mother was in the United States and, after the early 1960s, we were relatively free to travel.
The real problem was hard currency.
I was able to visit her several times and then, in my capacity as literary editor of  New Hungarian Quarterly , I was often sent to make contact with poets in America and so on.
That in turn would generate further invitations.
WP Have you always done the kind of work you do now?
MV Yes.
I graduated in 1953.
That was still a time when serious writing was impossible, so I began to translate, mainly English, American and German novels and short story collections.
Then, at a certain moment, I just could not go on with that any longer.
It is so tedious and tame.
I felt stifled, so one day, right in the middle of a huge novel by Theodore Dreiser, I stood up and said: ‘No, I can't go on.’
I was right in the middle of a sentence.
(Miklós was chuckling to himself at this.)
I got in touch with the publishers and told them they would have to find another translator.
Since then, I have only translated for the stage.
WP Why drama?
MV Oh, because I love it, I love the theatre.
I grew up close to my godmother so as a child I was inoculated with the theatre.
WP What do you think of the notion that much of the poetry produced in Eastern Europe as ‘dissident’ poetry has had a kind of easy ride because of its political context?
In the West, poetry in translation from Eastern Europe has been widely disseminated in the past couple of decades.
East European poets have had a relatively straightforward relation to their society.
The obvious stupidities and brutalities of some East European regimes provided a soft target as well as a social role for dissident poets.
Under a capitalist system of parliamentary democracy, do you think that poets will find themselves in a more difficult and ambiguous situation in which their previous models are no longer appropriate?
MV The poet here has acquired a political status because of our peculiar history.
In the long tale of Hungarian literature, not since the sixteenth century has the poet been able to  avoid political issues; they so dominated life.
Hungary was for centuries the frontier state between the Ottomans and Europe.
Secondly, in times of censorship or foreign occupation, the only available political expression may be a cultural one and then you have to develop idioms suited to that situation.
WP And do you think that will change now?
MV Yes.
And I hope so.
Now Hungarian poetry may begin to change towards a poetry which is more autonomous, more self-subsistent with its own themes and materials, not necessarily so directly structured by our political situation.
And not only poetry but other forms of literature also.
One must too make the qualification that where a major talent is at work, even in a politically committed situation, then something more universal may result.
Dante is a political poet but he is also a great deal more than that.
WP Clearly there will be difficulties in turning the country round from state socialism to capitalism.
What do you think the transitional problems will be?
MV In the main, economic ones.
As you know, the post-election negotiations are still in progress and ministers have not yet been named.
The issue will be whether the new government will have the courage to face the problems and introduce the harsh measures which will perhaps be required, at the price, it may be, of its own popularity.
What must happen, and rather quickly, is the privatisation of the economy.
Hitherto there have been no real owners.
We already have an inflation rate of about five per cent and it is projected to go higher yet this year.
We also have some unemployment now but not yet on a significant scale.
Perhaps in two or three years we will have a convertible currency.
I worry that the necessary measures may radicalise the working class which is, of course, the sector most prone to unemployment.
WP Do you think we could see a reversion to the kind of right-wing authoritarianism which characterised Hungary between the wars?
MV That is not a problem at the moment, but this part of the world has always been unpredictable.
WP What about the sleazier aspects of capitalism?
I am thinking of prostitution, pornography, the commercialisation of cultural values.
MV Oh, pornography can already be bought at the news stands.
It is terrible.
It has recently become an issue because it is so visible and entirely unregulated.
WP When East Berlin opened up a few months ago, there were mobile porn shops visiting different quarters of the city.
They have, it seems, been doing a brisk trade.
One entrepreneur described it as: ‘The return of the pioneering days’.
Do you not agree that you writers have had an easier time of it than we in the West, in a closed society where your cultural values are protected, albeit at a price?
You have no open commercialism to compete with.
The gutter press and the entertainment industry do not yet exist here in the way they do in Britain or in the United States.
MV Well, we do have a gutter press here but, of course, it is new, and in a while these things which are, for the moment, sensational, will go back to their proper place.
WP That is very optimistic.
MV I am optimistic overall.
WP So you do not think that Hungary will become one more cog in the greedy progress of capitalism?
MV Yes, but that will still be so much better than a so-called communist or socialist society, and I don't think people here have too many illusions about capitalism.
What might be more dangerous is that forty years of so-called socialism have made people accustomed to a kind of egalitarianism, so that they will not readily tolerate great differences in income or lifestyle.
I hope they will get used to that because it is indispensable that some people should make more money.
WP Whatever else can be said about the East European regimes, they clearly failed to motivate their populations.
MV That is the and, of course, it wasn't really any kind of socialism.
It was more a sort of colonial system with the great difference that, whereas in typical colonial systems there is a highly developed mother-country and underdeveloped colonies, here we have an underdeveloped colonial power and more developed colonies.
The ideological claim was that the Soviet Union was, by definition, more advanced since it had a deeper experience of socialism, but that of course is nonsense.
Then too, there is no such thing as Soviet culture, whereas with the British Empire there was English culture, which is still a feature in many of your former colonies, together with the language.
But here people could not hate Russian more.
The language was compulsory but no one understands it, not a word, nothing.
It has left no trace.
WP Even I can confirm that.
I gave a young army captain a lift into Budapest from Györ.
He had neither French nor German nor English, as one would expect.
But after what I understand would have been several years of compulsory Russian, he could barely manage da and nyet .
Either he had genuinely repressed what he knew or he refused to acknowledge it.
I left Miklós to his translation, having arranged with him that we should meet for lunch two days later.
He came to his front door to say goodbye, which he did with a handshake and a slight bow.
I CROSS the Széchenyi (Chain) Bridge several times a day, passing the gaze of its guardian lions.
Even if not as ancient or beautiful as the Charles Bridge, it is a lovely artefact from which one commands splendid views of the Parliament Building and of the skylines of Buda and Pest.
Designed by Adam and W. T. Clark  and constructed between 1842 and 1849, it was the first bridge between Buda and Pest.
Adam Clark also designed the tunnel which runs under Buda hill connecting the western parts of Buda with the waterfront.
The bridge was the project of Count István Széchenyi, one of the most talented and unhappy of Hungarian patriots.
He should have been a character in a Balzac novel.
The young count belonged to one of the wealthiest land-owning families of Hungary.
His father founded the Hungarian National Museum.
After serving in the army during the Napoleonic wars, Széchenyi turned to the management of his estates.
He was an anglophile and an enthusiast of the works of Jeremy Bentham.
He first came to public notice in 1825.
Chancellor Metternich, the reactionary old fox who did so much to determine the shape of Europe's political advances after the downfall of Napoleon, did not like parliaments and, so far as possible, did without them.
In 1825, however, he badly needed money to finance his Italian armies and had few options left but to convene the long-neglected Hungarian parliament.
During the first half of the nineteenth century Hungary was still a feudal state.
Serfs were tied to the land and the great landowners did largely as they pleased.
They could not, however, raise money on their estates, since, under a medieval law of entailment, their lands could not be seized to recover bad debts.
No one, therefore, would lend them money and the estates went undeveloped.
The 1825 parliament became a form for the discussion of national grievances and Count István offered a year's income from his estates for the foundation of an Academy of Sciences.
In 1830 he produced a book on the state of the Hungarian economy entitled Credit , arguing for the abolition of entailment and other progressive measures.
It was his declared intention to ‘rouse Hungary from its Asiatic slumbers’.
At the same time, another young man was managing the estates of one of Hungary's other great landowners, the Countess Andrássy.
The young man was Lajos Kossuth.
In the following years Kossuth turned to journalism with a keen sense that his mission was to reawaken Hungarian nationality.
Széchenyi sponsored a great variety of projects, from the regulation of the Danube to the building of the Chain Bridge, and a general reform of the Hungarian economy.
But reform could not be separated from the rising tide of political nationalism and Kossuth's and Széchenyi's fates became entwined.
In March 1848 Europe witnessed a surge of revolutionary activity which quickly spread from France to Italy and Vienna and, of course, Pest.
By 1848 the Count had become an important figure in the administration of Hungary but the prospects of civil war and revolution led to his nervous collapse and he spent the next decade in an asylum.
In 1857 Széchenyi, now recovered, was appalled by the effects of the decade of repressive absolutism which had followed on the collapse of the national movement in 1848–49.
He published a pamphlet condemning its effects, only to be harassed by the police.
In despair, he committed suicide in April 1860.
His antagonist, Kossuth, called him ‘the greatest of the Magyars’.
Kossuth was an extreme nationalist who did much to seal the fate of the Hungarian revolution of 1848 by his refusal to allow any of the subject nations within Hungary, such as the Serbs and Croats, any degree of cultural or political autonomy.
By early 1849 Kossuth's popularity in the face of armed intervention by Croat and Austrian armies made him virtual dictator of Hungary.
As the armies of general Windischgrätz approached, parliament retired to the eastern town of Debrecen where Kossuth made the declaration of Hungarian independence, having taken with him the regalia of St Stephen, founder of the Hungarian state.
Despite early successes, the rebel armies could not withstand the intervention of Russian forces, for Francis Joseph had appealed to the Tsar for help.
Kossuth fled to the protection of Hungary's ancient enemies, the Turks.
He crossed the frontier at Orsova, now in Romania, but, before doing so, buried on the Hungarian shore of the Danube the crown, orb and sceptre of St Stephen.
Kossuth's tragedy was that the very fervour of his nationalism made him so intolerant of other ethnic groups within Hungary, that he damaged the cause he sought to promote.
SUNDAY is a working day in Hungary, for the time being at least.
Because the communist authorities tried to discourage Christian worship, Monday is a closing day.
As I cross the Elizabeth Bridge on my way to the National Museum, three optimistic fishermen are casting lines from a small sandbank.
I would be chary of anything caught in these murky waters.
A noisy crew of black-headed gulls is wheeling below the bridge, feeding on the river's detritus.
The bridge, named after Francis Joseph's empress, was blown up by the retreating Germans in 1944 and the present structure dates from the early 1960s.
The riverside section of Pest opposite Castle Hill is the city's main shopping district.
A few neon signs are beginning to appear on the larger buildings advertising the usual Western wares such as Levi jeans.
The other neon sign which surmounted the Parliament building, a huge red star, has recently been removed.
The great blocks of nineteenth-century neoclassical building which characterise this part of Pest give it a rather grand manner, though a century of knocks has rather frayed its hauteur.
The collections of the National Museum are divided into pre- and post-Magyar sections, both labelled in Hungarian.
My main objective, however, was to see the regalia of St Stephen which have played so large a part, albeit symbolic, in Hungarian history and which have gone on such varied walkabout.
It was only under President Carter's administration that they were returned to Hungary, having been removed from the potential clutches of Germans and Russians in 1945.
These objects — a crown, an orb and a sceptre — are not, for Hungarians, mere relics.
In some mystical way they actually are Hungarian nationhood, its authority, its manna.
Before you are allowed into the room in which the regalia are kept, you have to put on felt overshoes, as though the treasures were subject to being disturbed by excessive scuffling of feet.
A party of schoolchildren are shushed by their teacher before they enter what is more a sanctum than a room in a museum.
The room is dimly lit and the regalia are mounted in a centrally placed glass case.
Armed guards stand watch.
The crown consists of two circlet crowns welded together and into which has been set a cloth-covered headpiece.
Round the rim of the broader circlet, which is about a foot in diameter, are a series of Byzantine portraits worked in enamel and separated by large rubies and sapphires.
The whole object looks more Byzantine than I would have guessed, an effect heightened by the pendants which hang from each side.
It is a curious blend of delicacy and crudity and has something rough and barbarian about it.
But why should the crown possess this mystic attribute of being able to contain and confer sovereignty?
The answer goes back to the origins of the Hungarian nation and tells us something about its individuality.
The Magyars were a nomad people of the steppes, claiming  kinship with those Huns who briefly occupied the Danubian basin in the fifth century and who helped finally to bring down the edifice of Roman power in the West.
Györ was a Hunnish settlement, as was Buda, the latter, according to legend, named after a brother of Attila.
By the ninth century the Magyars had settled around the river Dnepr, north of the Crimean Peninsula, having been expelled outwards by that movement of Asian tribes which rolled peoples westwards for a thousand years.
The lands around the Dnepr proved insecure from raids by another Asian tribe, the Pechenegs, and so the Magyars, under their chieftain, Duke Árpad, set out to find fresh territories.
Árpad's father was offered as a human sacrifice before the trek began.
The relation of all this to the regalia is that, before setting out, the assembled tribes are supposed to have made a sacred ‘Blood Agreement’ by which the new lands would be governed.
The terms of the agreement were that the sovereign would be elected, initially but not necessarily, from the house of Árpad.
The nation bestows that sovereignty by conferring the princely cap, later the crown.
The Hungarian monarchy is not therefore held by divine right, but by election by the whole nation.
The further conditions were that the assembly of the people constituted that national will, and that land was held in common right by the nation.
However historically authentic (or not) this account may be, what is clear is that Hungarians adhered to it for a thousand years after their arrival in the Danubian plain at the beginning of the tenth century.
Through all the vicissitudes of history, the crown came to embody Hungarian nationality and the Kingship remained elective, so that it was still possible for Hungarians in 1860 to deny Francis Joseph sovereignty because he had not been crowned with the crown of St Stephen.
The historian Otto Zarek writes:
The golden circle and the golden cap which form the basis of Stephen's Crown became for Hungary something more than the mere symbol of royalty.
Kings and royal houses may disappear, but the crown remains; it incarnates National Power; it is the legal source and bearer of all rights, while the temporal wearer shall be its executive.
The Magyars behaved at first as Asiatic nomads are supposed to, by ravaging across Germany.
Crushed, however, at the Lechfeld  near Augsburg in 955 by Otto I, they were forced to turn inwards to the settlement of the Danubian plain.
Christian missionaries were sent at the request of Duke Géza, and his son, Prince Vajk, was christened as Stephen.
On coming to power in 997, Stephen brought the nation fully into the Catholic Church, decisively turning Hungary's face towards Rome rather than Byzantium.
In recognition of that, Pope Sylvester II sent him a crown in the year 1000 and, so it is claimed, apostolic rights over the Church in Hungary.
Stephen reorganised the state on a non-tribal basis and encouraged German knights to settle in its lands, very much as Malcolm III in Scotland invited Norman knights to settle in his country.
The waves of Asiatic invaders did not, however, end with the Magyars.
The Pechenegs were sent against Hungary at the instigation of the Byzantine Emperor Michael Dukas as a means of checking Hungary's southward expansion.
They were defeated by King Solomon of Hungary in 1073, but as a means of stirring up further trouble, Michael sent the victor, Duke Géza, Solomon's brother, a Byzantine crown.
Géza, in fact, succeeded Solomon the following year and later the two crowns, those of Rome and Byzantium, were welded together.
When the house of Árpad became extinct in 1301, the crown itself became the object of civil war which continued for a decade until Charles Robert of Anjou finally secured both throne and crown.
Nearly six hundred years later, the reforming emperor Joseph II attempted to assimilate Hungary fully into the hereditary Habsburg dominions.
As part of his attempts to Germanise and, as he thought, civilise Hungary, he had the crown brought to Vienna, having refused to be crowned, thereby avoiding the traditional oath to uphold the rights and privileges of the Hungarian nobility who, by this time, had become exclusively identified as ‘the Nation’.
Joseph's reforms led to peasant risings, which he put down with extreme brutality, and to conspiracies among the nobility.
The upshot was that Hungarian nationalism was stimulated and Joseph was forced to rescind most of his reforms in 1790.
After Joseph's death that year: ‘…the journey of the Holy Crown from Vienna to Buda in February 1790 was almost a triumphal procession.
The Crown was escorted by the Private armies of the Hungarian nobility with the soldiers arrayed in Hungarian national dress.
Entire villages turned out for the spectacle and in Györ, the  Bishop himself headed the assembled burghers.
In Pest-Buda, the cannons thundered and the whole city celebrated.’
THE collections in the National Museum are impressive: an entire Roman mosaic floor from the time of Marcus Aurelian and a beautiful stele of Orpheus playing to the animals.
The most astonishing item, however, is a piece of peasant work.
It is the base of a tree with its root projections intact.
It is rough, black, about four feet high and three feet wide, and huge iron spikes have been hammered in a ring around the top.
It takes a moment to realise that it is not some pagan idol, but a head of Christ on the cross, that the spikes represent the crown of thorns and that in the wreckage of the ancient trunk a face has been carved.
It is a savage and immensely powerful piece of sculpture, reminding one that Christianity is not a religion of sweetness and light and that much of its appeal must have lain in its very primitivism.
There are many other beautiful things there but I cannot resist quoting a caption — for once, given in English — in the room set aside for the revolution of 1848.
It is an extract from Act no. 18 of the parliament of 1848 and reads: ‘Censorship having been abolished forever, freedom of the press re-established, each may freely convey and express his thoughts through the press.’
MONDAY morning, and it had been arranged that I would meet Miklós for lunch and then have the chance to talk with some writers from Hungarian PEN.
First though I wanted a break from downtown Budapest and took a cab out to Margit-sziget (Margaret Island).
When István Széchenyi Proposed the regulation of Hungary's rivers, he probably did not realise that his suggestion  would eventually lead, later in the century, to the three little islands in the Danube, just a couple of miles upstream from central Budapest, being girdled together by a retaining wall.
The result is a beautiful leisure park, one and a half miles long and nearly a mile wide, in the middle of the Danube.
Before the war it was reserved for Budapest's more prosperous citizens.
Now it is free, and very agreeable it was on a spring morning to walk through its coppices and gardens of oak and maple, white roses and birches and every kind of shrub.
Mothers with toddlers and courting couples abounded, drawn here, as I was, by the quiet.
A number of monastic orders had churches here in the middle ages.
The island is named after a daughter of King Bela IV who pledged to build a Dominican convent for her on the island if the Mongols could be defeated.
The park is dotted with the busts of notable Hungarians such as Kodály, Bartók, Ady and Atilla Jószef and assorted ruins.
One church which has been restored in the present century, belonged to the Augustinian order of white canons.
Originally a twelfth-century building, it was destroyed during the Turkish occupation.
During its restoration, a storm blew down a huge walnut tree in the roots of which was found the church's bell, one of the oldest in Hungary.
I had taken with me my copy of Pascal's Pensées and by a nice irony came upon a passage which echoed the motto for the ‘new thinking’ of János Kádár:
So there is open war among men, in which each must take a part, and side either with dogmatism or scepticism.
For he who thinks to remain neutral is above all a sceptic.
This neutrality is the essence of the sect;he who is not against them is essentially for them …
What then shall man do in this state?
Shall he doubt whether he is awake, whether he is being pinched, or whether he is being burned?
Shall he doubt whether he doubts?
Shall he doubt whether he exists?
We cannot go so far as that; and I lay it down as fact that there never has been a real complete sceptic.
Nature sustains our feeble reason, and prevents it raving to this extent.
Pascal's target here is Descartes and, in trying to think oneself back into the overwhelming urgency of their debate, it has to be remembered that their lives were overshadowed by the struggles of the Counter-Reformation.
Descartes, indeed, was with the  armies of Maximilian of Bavaria in 1619 at the very beginning of the Thirty Years War when, at Neuberg on the Danube, he had that sequence of dreams which convinced him that his mission was to seek out truth by means of reason.
Descartes could not avoid being a product of the Counter-Reformation, having been educated at the Jesuit College of La Flèche.
In the midst of religious and political wars of startling insanity, the idea that God at least must have created a rational, knowable order must have acquired immense attraction in a world where religion and politics were still inseparable.
The mission to certain knowledge in those circumstances also gains a political weight, for undeniable truth will surely diminish the grounds for conflict.
Descartes' need for certainty was part of his religious sense.
Pascal, quarter of a century younger, was also tensed by a religious vision; in his case confirmed by a mystic experience of great emotional intensity.
But Pascal, under the influence of Jansenism, was fundamentally hostile to the Jesuits and their notorious sophistries.
What marks out Pascal is his refusal of the illusion that we can be merely rational, while yet insisting that reasoning be pushed to its limits.
With an emotional frankness almost unique in pre-twentieth century philosophy, Pascal insists on his unhappiness and anxiety: ‘We desire truth, and find within ourselves only uncertainty.
We seek happiness, and find only misery and death.
We cannot but desire truth and happiness, and are incapable of certainty or happiness.’
His sally at Descartes when he remarks that there has never been a complete sceptic goes to the heart of the issue and it was David Hume, arch sceptic, who wondered aloud why it was that his scepticism vanished whenever he left his study.
To many, scepticism has seemed a blind alley and yet, somehow, unavoidable, and much of the literature of the twentieth century has paraded its nihilism as being intellectually justified by the power of the sceptical position.
Nevertheless, as both Hume and Pascal recognised, a rigorous scepticism does not square with how we go about our daily business.
The English philosopher G. E. Moore returned to the problem in a famous paper,A Defence of Common Sense which, in its turn, forms a background for Wittgenstein's effort to demystify the issue in Über Gewissheit which, along with the Philosophical Investigations and, of course, the Tractatus , are the only texts  he ever actually prepared for publication.
The whole fantastic assortment is dealt with at length in Stanley Cavell's Claim of Reason .
If I understand him aright, it ought to be possible to show that Descartes' stripping away of the ‘accidental’ qualities of objects is illegitimate, because based on a series of elisions of meaning between one use of an expression and another where the two expressions look the same but have different meanings .
The process, however, is a subtle one and its analysis hinges on the kind of view of meaning which underlies Wittgenstein's later work.
The essence of the argument is that linguistic expressions derive their meanings and legitimate usages from the range of activities and contexts in which they have evolved — meanings, therefore, derive from what Wittgenstein calls ‘forms of life’.
Underlying such forms are the facts of the existence of other people and of their movement through time as well as space.
The presumption is not a logical postulate but is, rather, an empirical condition for the development of particular language games.
The kind of language game in which we talk about ‘the back of’ something is one in which that expression has meaning because it has evolved out of all kinds of activity in which ‘backs’exist and can be shown to exist, because verified either by our own movement through space-time or by that of other persons, or both.
The kind of testimony which makes sense of and verifies ‘backs’ is one involving its related activities.
If, however, we wish to prove the existence of ‘the back of’ something using quite different criteria of testimony and disallowing all those activities which gave rise to the concept in the first place, then perhaps our proof of the uncertainty of the existence of backs will be less powerful than has been imagined.
This, Cavell suggests, relying heavily on Wittgenstein, is what Descartes does in his famous reduction of the material world to a mass of uncertain epiphenomena.
The central point is that Descartes conducts his philosophising alone and immobile in his study, arguing as though that frozen quality characterised all language use.
In brief, the Cartesian reduction may rest on a set of difficulties which are linguistically generated by treating language as a less complicated thing than it in fact is.
And it is a sense of the forced quality of those arguments which leads Hume to worry about why his arguments lack conviction when he leaves his study.
Pascal goes some way towards this recognition when he observes: ‘I  see, in truth, that the same words are applied on the same occasions, and that every time two men see a body change its place, they both express their view of this same fact by the same word, both saying that it has moved; and from this conformity of application we derive a strong conviction of a conformity of ideas.
But this is not absolutely or finally convincing…’
The morass of such reasonings is very treacherous and many have disappeared into it, suffocating in its mud.
And yet the problems reason hopes to resolve will not go away and we are little wiser in that respect than when Pascal wrote so perceptively: ‘Man is neither angel nor brute, and the unfortunate thing is that he who would act the angel acts the brute.’
Religious faith has become largely the province of the unreflective and the anti-rational.
We say ‘everyone is entitled to his beliefs’, recognising the nastiness of a world which will not tolerate alternative beliefs, but over-looking the fact that some beliefs are nonsense and deserve to be called prejudice, bigotry or superstition rather than merely belief.
But as Pascal also knew, our prejudices do not respond to reason alone.
It is as though all the proofs and evidences of philosophy had mistaken their rationality for how people actually think.
MIKLÓS arrived just before one o'clock in an elderly red Skoda.
We lunched in Pest, ten minutes walk from the PEN and Writers' Union offices near Heroes' Square.
At the PEN office were Imre Szász of PEN, Ottó Orbán, a poet whose work I had admired in translation, László Kunos, translator and an editor with Corvina, the national publishing house, and Maria Körösy, translator and secretary of Hungarian PEN.
The conversation turned to the nature of class accents.
I suggested that people in Britain were acutely aware of the relation between accent and class.
Imre Szász, a large, solid-framed man, pointed out to me that in Hungary the Budapest accent was, for a long time, held to be inferior because it had been debased by non-Magyar and, in particular, Jewish elements, whereas the  country accents were all perfectly acceptable.
Miklós wanted to know why the Scots seemed more at ease as British than the Irish.
Scotland, I suggested, had entered into a voluntary association, whatever questions have been raised about it since.
Ireland was simply conquered.
Only with the plantation of Scottish settlers to Ulster did any profound cultural division grow up in Ireland which remained ideologically Catholic and Gaelic.
Scotland, in contrast, was already self-divided at the time of the Treaty of Union with two mutually hostile cultures in place — Gaelic and Lowland.
Irish resistance never quite died away, while Culloden and the Clearances between them broke the back of Scottish Gaelic life.
Burns became a cult figure because he was on the winning side, but appeared late enough on the scene to be able to sentimentalise the vanquished, thereby creating the illusion at least of being a national poet.
Imre Szász commented: ‘We have the same kind of cult with Petöfi.
He was killed in Transylvania at the Battle of Segesvár in 1849, fighting with Kossuth's armies under general Bem.
He was only twenty-six.
English-language poets compare him with Burns and the idealistic side of Shelley.
But you are fortunate to be writing in English.
In Hungarian PEN we have an uphill struggle to try to promote those Hungarian writers who are worth promoting, but so many of them travel badly in translation.
A few have become internationally known, but it often seems a hopeless task.
Our usual joke is that for a Hungarian novelist to get published and widely read, he has first to be sent to prison.
I think our new government may make a tremendous mistake here by not realising this and failing to send any writers to prison.
The result will be that Hungarian writers will get forgotten outside Hungary.’
I said that was a risk most East European writers were going to have to run: ‘Several have already become important figures in the political establishment, Dinescu in Romania and, most obviously, Havel.
With the loss of that easy, oppositional role, how will they survive?’
Szász laughed and said: ‘Yes, now it is a totally different situation to be writing in.
Hitherto, if you wanted to say something, you took a risk.
You tried to hide it and not to hide it.
Now you can open your big mouth as much as you want which, in many ways, is a much less interesting situation.
It certainly makes very different demands on the writer.’
I ADJOURNED with László Kunos to Gerbeaud's for coffee and buns.
In Budapest Gerbeaud's is de rigueur .
The café, which dates back to the last century, has been maintained intact, at least in its decor.
It was, and is, the haunt of fashionable intellectuals.
Gilt ceilings and old silver certainly make it different from the usual run of East European cafés and on a warm early evening it is pleasant to sit outside and watch and chatter.
Its pastries and ice-creams are excellent, though I have no taste for such things.
László is a lugubrious-looking, pale-complexioned, big-eyed, Budapest Jew with a sly sense of humour and an enormous fund of kindness.
As we sat over our coffee, László explained how one of Pest's main streets, Pest's answer to the Champs Elysées, had had five changes of name since 1948.
His parents had known it as Andrássy after the Count who had been prime minister when that part of Pest was laid out.
After the communists came to power, the name was changed to the Stalin Allee.
After Stalin's fall it became the Road of the Heroes and then was changed to the Road of Youth.
Now it is back to Andrássy, which is how László has always known it.
In return, I described my discovery of Weimar's system for naming streets when I had visited it a few years earlier.
The central section is named after Marx and just outside that is the Engels Strasse.
Next in the expanding network is Lenin Strasse with assorted communist theoreticians and luminaries awarded a street closer to or further from the centre, depending on how high their star stood at the time.
Gramsci was well into the outskirts.
I asked László about the corso : ‘Yes, it did exist here before the war and now, gradually, it is coming back, along the embankment by the international hotels.’
As we wandered across the Széchenyi Bridge towards my hotel, László pointed out that in the last days of the Nazi occupation, Admiral Horthy had protected the Budapest Jews.
The jews in the countryside had been rounded up, with the active and sometimes enthusiastic support of the Hungarian authorities, and most had been sent to Auschwitz.
The Budapest Jews, however, had been  harassed but allowed to live.
In the last days, with the Red Army approaching, groups of Budapest Jews had been rounded up, more or less at random, and taken to the embankment of the Danube where they were shot.
It was convenient simply to have the bodies fall into the river.
A few brave or lucky people had jumped and somehow survived, but very few.
Looking into the Danube here, where it flows fast, deep and immensely powerful, it was difficult to imagine anyone surviving.
NEXT day I took the advice I had been given by my friends at the Union and went to see the exhibition of the Bibliotheca Corviniana in the National Library on Castle Hill, partly because Matthias I, or Matthias Hunyadi, known as Corvinus because of the crow motif on his banners, was one of the most striking and decisive characters in East European history, straddling the histories of Transylvania, Hungary, Bohemia and Austria.
He was the Napoleon of Central Europe, though without Napoleon's greed and vindictiveness.
Partly too, because I just like looking at beautiful books.
Matthias' father, János Hunyadi was voivode of Transylvania and devoted his considerable talents to halting the Turkish advance into Europe.
He could not, however, prevent the fall of Constantinople in 1453 and, with it, the final demise of the eastern empire and the complete subjugation of Serbia.
János Hunyadi was regent of Hungary during the minority of King Ladislas V, but had to step down at the very moment of the fall of Constantinople when Ladislas came of age.
His last victory, by relieving the Turkish siege of Belgrade in 1456, held up the Turkish advance for several generations.
On his death the same year, the king had the elder of János's sons beheaded and the other, Matthias, imprisoned in Prague by the Bohemian ruler, George Podiebrad.
In 1457, however, Ladislas died and Matthias was elected king of Hungary (1458).
Matthias' aim, apart from regulating the internal affairs of Hungary by subduing the powers of chronically feuding magnates, was to create a Danubian empire strong enough to withstand the Turkish assault.
In 1476 he married Beatrice of  Aragon, a daughter of the king of Naples.
It was she who introduced renaissance culture to the Hungarian court.
Matthias did not reign long enough to consolidate his achievements for he died in 1490 at the age of fifty.
His library, the Bibliotheca Corviniana, was one of the most renowned in Europe and the exhibition had brought together some of its scattered codexes from Paris and London, Tokyo, Rome, New York.
The library had been housed in the castle at Buda and was begun in the 1460s.
Matthias was not too fussy about how he went about his book-collecting.
Mainly, of course, he bought books and arranged for others to be copied, but whenever any of the magnates fell foul of him, he would confiscate his library.
His marriage to Beatrice of Aragon gave new impetus to the collection, for she brought with her humanist scholars from Italy.
To one of those, Taddeo Ugoleto, Matthias gave the care and control of the library: ‘Ugoleto sought out Greek codexes for the library and copying was carried out on a far greater scale than ever before.
When the king died in 1490 there were 150 codexes in the copyists’ workshops.’
It was here that the corvina binding was developed.
It consisted of wooden boards covered with leather, usually elaborately gilded.
In the closing decades of the fifteenth century, Florence and Venice in particular supported a large industry of book-copying when the art was at its height.
All that vanished with the invention of the printing press a few years later, but many of the books in the Corviniana were made in Italy at that time.
The books themselves were stunningly beautiful, each one an example of several renaissance arts but, most strikingly, of painting and calligraphy.
Among them was a splendid Book VIII of Ptolemy's Geography , made in Florence from 1485–90.
The Mediterranean was accurate enough, but India was shown as an island and northern waters had been left blank.
There was a Bede,Natura Rerum , in which the blues seemed still as intense as they must have been when first painted.
But among the loveliest exhibits was a two-inch by three-inch Horae Beatae Mariae Virginis .
It had been made in Naples in the fifteenth century, presumably at the court of Beatrice's father, for it had belonged to her and she had left it behind in the castle at Esztergom when she left Hungary in 1500.
It was found there in 1595 when the castle was recaptured from the Turks.
It was easy to imagine how the tiny volume might have been overlooked, more difficult to conceive that it was half a millennium old.
However  impractical, I like the idea that books should be physically beautiful.
It encourages a proper attentiveness.
JUST along from the Corviniana was a quite different exhibition entitled Sztá-lin!
Rá-ko-si !
It was a reworking of the same materials apropos Hungary as I had already seen in Prague apropos Czechoslovakia.
The displays covered the events of the first decade after the war.
The introductory leaflet did not mince its words: ‘It was a period when words contradicted deeds, propaganda realities, and when everyday life was full of fear, hypocrisy, and people felt helpless, having been at the mercy of those in power.’
The exhibition presented in stark contrast a series of ideological pronouncements on the wonders of life in the ‘people's democracy’, together with images and reconstructions of the realities: ‘fake elections, the forced exploitation of workers in the form of ‘work competitions'’, the ruining of peasants, the servile imitation of Soviet methods, the ridiculous praises given to domestic and Soviet conditions, the unscrupulous abuse of everything in the capitalist system, the unlawfulness which had been part of the system from the very beginning, persecutions, the drabness of life, of the immediate surrounding, of the work-place, of the living quarters, of the clothing, the false and forced propaganda inundating everything…
The exhibition ends with the remnants of the statue of Stalin which was destroyed on the night of October 23, 1956, to show the collapse of a main feature of that sad era — that of the cult of personality.’
The exhibition was crowded and I felt that, really, this was for Hungarians, as though I were intruding on a private grief.
JUST a few hundred yards from the palace area of Castle Hill stands the Matthias Church.
Begun in the 1250s, it was several  times remodelled and in the 1470s King Matthias added a fine tower which still stands and for which the Church has been named since.
It was here that the kings of Hungary were presented to the people.
It was, for a time, a mosque, during the Turkish occupation.
It was damaged and partly rebuilt several times until, in the nineteenth century, it was restored in neo-Gothic style.
In 1867, nearly twenty years after coming to the throne of Austria, Francis Joseph was crowned here by that same Count Andrássy who, in the aftermath of 1848, he had sentenced to death.
A delicate building, it is so intricately decorated that it is difficult to tell which parts are original and which later modifications.
Though flanked by what ought to be a couple of monstrosities of incongruence — the Hilton Hotel and the nineteenth-century Fisherman's Bastion — all seem quite compatible.
The Hilton is absolutely undecorated, consisting of great columns and slabs of reflective glass which return images of sky and church.
The Bastion is a fake-medieval construction, designed by the architect who restored the Matthias Church, and represents a turreted chunk of city wall.
It houses an elegant restaurant from which the views across the Danube to the parliament building and much of Pest are magnificent.
None of these structures competes with the others which is perhaps why they work as a trio.
ALTHOUGH the Hungarian restaurants in which I ate did achieve a far higher standard than anything I encountered in Prague, almost all had in common a poor sense of presentation and good ingredients were often spoiled by ignorance and negligence.
A piece of venison, for example, had not been properly trimmed of its silverskin so that in cooking, the silverskin contracted, warping the meat which therefore cooked unevenly.
Where high-quality cuisine is regarded as a wicked, capitalist indulgence for the rich, it is, I suppose, inevitable, that the necessary skills should have decayed and lapsed.
The lack of opportunity for people to travel and study abroad would have hastened that decline.
But the brutalisation of culinary skills to a level where even basic techniques have been lost, seems to me not an achievement but an  indictment of a fundamentally wrong-headed approach to human values.
The symptoms may seem trivial: dirty buildings or badly prepared and unimaginatively-presented food, but Hungary or Czechoslovakia are not inherently poor countries and their peoples are merely insulted by such decay.
I was reminded of stories about some immigrant Irish who arrived in America in the aftermath of the Great Hunger, bereft of even the basic skills of domestic cookery.
Their lives had been so impoverished that even those elementary things had been taken from them.