

The Chief Justices of the Forest
In the twelfth and early thirteenth centuries the Forest administration was headed by a single official — the ‘Chief Justice of all the royal forests of England’, or, as he was sometimes called, the ‘Chief Forester of England’.
But the task proved too great for one man, and in 1236 the forests were divided under two Justices.
The river Trent was chosen as the dividing line: the two officers were styled ‘Justice of the Forest this side Trent’ and ‘Justice of the Forest beyond Trent’, according to where the king was at that particular time.
These two Forest Justiceships continued in being until they were abolished by an Act of 1817.
Such was the importance of the Forest Eyre that the Justice of the Forest almost always headed the commission of judges, and usually sat in person.
But as the intervals between successive Forest Eyres lengthened, special commissions of oyer et terminer were issued to the Justices of the Forest and others.
Such proceedings received statutory sanction by the Ordinance of the Forest in 1306: Edward I decreed that:
Our Justice of the Forest, or his Lieutenant, in the presence of our Treasurer, and by his consent, shall have authority to take Fines and Amercements of those which be indicted for trespasses committed in our forests, and not tarry for the eyre of the Justice.
The Justices of the Forest were also frequently appointed by Edward I to hear and determine pleas of trespasses in private parks and chases.
The Forest Justices were responsible for the enforcement of the Forest law throughout their Justiceships.
For this purpose they appointed to serve under them a staff of foresters, carrying bows and arrows, for whom they were personally responsible, and who maintained themselves by levying contributions from the forest inhabitants.
The Justices had power to seize for the king the bailiwicks of Forest wardens and foresters of fee who were guilty of misconduct in office, and on occasion removed unpaid Forest officers such as the verderers.
Their general responsibility for arresting vagabonds and suspected poachers in the forest sometimes involved organizing and leading an armed expedition, for the Forests were the resort of lawless and desperate characters.
In 1238 John Biset, Justice of the southern forests, reported to Henry III that there were ‘manifest evil-doers in the forests of Chippenham, Melksham and Braydon’, who had hamstrung one of the royal foresters, badly wounded another, killed the Abbot of Stanley's horses, and committed many other crimes.
The king therefore sent Nicholas de Bolevill with ten armed men to search for the malefactors, and to inquire who harboured them.
Biset was ordered to go to those parts as soon as possible, and summon before him
the foresters and verderers, and the sheriffs of Wiltshire, Gloucestershire and Northamptonshire, with the knights and free men sworn to arms, dwelling in the vicinity of the forests,…with their arms.
Under Biset's orders they were to search for the evildoers and those who harboured them, and do whatever was necessary to maintain the king's peace in those parts.
It was the responsibility of the Justices of the forest to see that the Forest rights of the Crown were not usurped, and for this purpose he made frequent use of sworn inquiries by the foresters and verderers and juries of knights and free men of the neighbourhood.
In this way he determined the extent of royal demesne lands and woods within the forest, and revoked encroachment made upon them.
He supervised the customary rights of forest inhabitants, and sometimes bore hardly upon them.
A petition to the King and Council, dated between 1297 and 1308, stated that ‘the men of  Easingwold and Huby are of the king's ancient demesne…in the forest of Galtres’.
They and their ancestors had ‘from time immemorial, been accustomed to have housebote and haybote, that is:
thirty oaks a year for housebote, without reckoning the small underwood for hedgebote; and now by the command of Robert de Clifford (the Justice of the Forest north of Trent) they are reduced to sometimes ten or fifteen oaks a year.
The Justice of the Forest was ordered to cease these oppressive measures.
When a subject sought from the king some licence or privilege within the forest, the Justice was usually ordered to make a preliminary inquiry ad quod damnum — that is, to inquire by means of a local jury as to the extent of the loss which the Crown would suffer if the grant were made.
Royal licences to quarry stones, or to cut down and sell timber in the woods of subjects, or to bring such woods into cultivation, or to pasture cattle therein, were frequently preceded by such an inquiry held by the Justice of the Forest or his deputy.
To him also was entrusted the general supervision of the economic interests of the Crown in the Forest.
He was from time to time ordered to raise money by leasing out assarts and waste lands, and by organizing and supervising sales of timber and underwood.
He was responsible for the exploitation of the mineral rights of the Crown — for example, for finding, mining and smelting iron in the forest of Chippenham and in the Forest of Dean and lead in the Forest of the Peak.
The Forest revenues were an important part of the king's income.
In the twelfth and early thirteenth centuries they were channelled through the Justice of the Forest.
In the reign of Henry II he accounted at the Exchequer for ‘the pannage of all the forests of England’.
During the reign of John, Hugh de Neville held that office.
He and his agents collected very large sums of money to supply the urgent needs of the Crown — mainly Forest amercements, fines paid for privileges in the forest, the proceeds of sales of wood and of the leasing of assarts.
He had his own exchequer at Marlborough for this purpose, and accounted at the Westminster  Exchequer for transactions there.
Between November 1201 and November 1203 de Neville and his agents paid over 8,000 marks into the king's privy purse at Caen, Rouen and elsewhere to meet the expenses of John's disastrous campaign in Normandy.
In 1206 he helped to victual the fleet in preparation for John's campaign in Gascony.
His accounts at the Exchequer in 1208 for the past six-and-a-half years showed that he had paid into the royal coffers out of the Forest revenues sums totalling £9,399. 9s. 10d., with outstanding arrears of £5,569. 17s. ½d.
De Neville had clearly demonstrated his financial ability to his royal master, who made him Treasurer before January 1209.
But by 1212 he had lost the king's confidence and favour, and had to offer an enormous fine of 6,000 marks for acquittances for himself and his staff for all arrears since his first appointment as Chief Forest Justice in 1198.
By the time of Edward I the major part of the Forest revenues was being raised and accounted for by the sheriffs.
Although by the terms of their appointment the Justices of the Forest were required to render an annual account at the Exchequer, they did not in fact do so.
Between 1270 and 1300, for example, the accounts of the Justices of the Forest north of Trent were presented only four times, and then for comparatively small sums.
From the middle of the thirteenth century they were allowed to deduct for themselves a fixed salary out of the Forest revenues they collected — 100 marks a year for the Justice of the Forest north of Trent, and £100 for his colleague south of it.
The Justices of the Forest were for the most part important men who can have devoted a limited amount of time to their Forest duties.
Henry III appointed Household officers like his Poitevin favourite Peter des Rivaux: when he became Chief Justice of the Forest for life in 1232, des Rivaux was already Keeper of the Wardrobe, the Chamber and the Treasury of the royal household, and became Treasurer of the Exchequer in the following year.
Robert Walerand, appointed Justice of the southern forests in 1256, was Steward of the Household, and was sent to France on diplomatic missions several times during the three years in which he was head of the Forest administration.
Edward I nominated magnates like Hugh Despenser the elder, who was absent from  England on the king's service during a great part of the ten years 1297–1307 when he was Justice of the Forest south of Trent.
Robert de Clifford, Despenser's colleague for the northern forests, was one of Edward I's greatest soldiers, and was mainly occupied in the Scottish campaigns.
Many of the duties of the Justices of the Forest were therefore performed by deputies.
References to them in contemporary documents increased during the second half of the thirteenth century.
In 1265, for example, Roger Leyburn, Justice of the Forest north of Trent, received royal approval of his appointment of Roger of Lancaster as his deputy, since he was unable to attend to his duties in person.
The absence of Hugh Despenser from England during his Forest Justiceship has already been mentioned.
Of the eleven general Forest inquests held during the period 1297–1305 in the forests of Rockingham, King's Cliffe, Whittlewood and Salcey, Despenser presided at only one; the remainder were held before Robert of Harrowden, his deputy.
The Forest Wardens
At the head of the administration of each royal forest, or group of forests, was the officer usually styled ‘Warden’, or, less frequently, ‘Steward’ or ‘Bailiff of his bailiwick.
He might have the custody of a single royal forest, or of a group of forests: the ‘Warden of the King's forests between Oxford and Stamford bridges’ kept the forests of Shotover, Bernwood, Whittlewood, Salcey, Rockingham and Huntingdon, in the counties of Oxford, Northampton, Buckingham and Huntingdon.
Wardens Appointed by Letters Patent Under the Great Seal
The wardens of a number of royal forests — including Windsor, Clarendon, Feckenham, Galtres, the Forest of Dean and the Forest of the Peak in Derbyshire — were appointed by royal letters patent, usually to hold office during the king's pleasure, but sometimes for a term of years, and exceptionally, as a special mark of royal favour, for life.
Their offices were lucrative, and the king often used them to make provision for those who had a claim upon his bounty.
Members of the royal family were provided for in this way.
In May 1269 Queen Eleanor, Edward and Edmund the king's sons, and Guy de Lusignan, the king's half-brother, persuaded Henry III to appoint his nephew Henry of Almain to be constable of Rockingham castle and warden of the forests between Oxford and Stamford bridges, as a return for expenses incurred by him in the king's service, and for debts owed by the king to him.
The appointment  was to be for the life of his father, Richard Earl of Cornwall, the king's brother, with reversion to the Crown.
Henry of Almain was to take the profits of the forests and castle for himself, subject only to the duty of maintaining the castle.
Some months after the murder of Henry of Almain at Viterbo on 13 March 1271, his father was appointed to the same offices for a term of three years.
Shortly before his death in the next year, Henry III granted to his queen, Eleanor, the custody ‘of the castle and forest of Windsor and the seven hundreds, and the towns of Old Windsor, Bray and Kempton, during pleasure’, provided that she accounted at the Exchequer as Nicholas de Yattendon, the previous constable and warden, had done.
In a similar manner Edward I in August 1289 granted to his Queen Eleanor the custody of the royal manor and forest of Feckenham.
Henry III and Edward I made provision in this way for a number of royal servants of different kinds.
Among the dozen or so ‘King's yeomen’ and ‘King's serjeants’appointed to Forest wardenships were Robert of Stopham, one of the king's huntsmen, who became warden of the forests of Clarendon and Groveley 1249–59, and Master Walter of Durham, ‘the King's serjeant and painter’, appointed in 1271 to keep the forest of Galtres, along with John of York, another royal serjeant.
When by 1292 John of York had become too old and infirm to perform the duties of his Forest office, Edward I granted him a pension of ‘three pence daily out of the issues of the forest, at the hands of the Justice of the Forest north of Trent, and six cartloads of firewood in the said forest by view and delivery of the foresters there’.
In 1318 Edward II appointed his cook, Richard of Cleobury, to keep the forest and park of Feckenham, ‘as a reward for good service’.
Other Forest wardens were of more exalted rank.
Geoffrey Giffard, for example, the curialist Bishop of Worcester, was in October 1270 appointed to keep the royal forest and manor of Feckenham for a term of five years, and Ebulo de Montibus, a Steward of the King's Household, held the offices of constable and warden of Windsor castle and forest from 1266 until his death in 1268.
After the Barons' War, a number of feudal magnates with great local estates were appointed as Forest wardens.
Philip Basset, the Justiciar, for example, head of a great baronial family, was constable of Devizes castle and warden of Chippenham and Melksham forests, 1263–4 and from 1265 until his death in 1271.
Even a woman might secure such an appointment if she were an influential tenant-in-chief: Isabel Countess of Arundel kept the castle and forest of Bere Porchester in Hampshire from 1268 until 1272.
The Hereditary Wardens
The Norman and Angevin kings established part of the local Forest administration on an hereditary and territorial basis; the holding of land from the Crown in return for some kind of service was of course the basis of feudal society and government.
Robert of Everingham, for example, who was hereditary warden of Sherwood Forest from 1281 until 1287, held:
ten knights' fees in chief of the lord King, from the service of which he was exonerated on account of his custody of the forest, and in return for finding his foresters at his own cost.
Henry III rewarded his servants on occasion with offices of this kind: in 1265 he granted the wardenship of Cannock Forest to his surgeon, Master Thomas of Weseham, to hold in fee.
Hereditary wardenships of royal forests were grand serjeanties, and therefore subject to the usual feudal incidents of relief, wardship and marriage.
King John exacted very large fines from the heirs to these serjeanties for confirming them in their lands and offices — £100 from Philip son of Holgot for the wardenship of Kinver Forest in 1199, a like sum in 1200 from Richard de Munfichet for the forest of Essex, and one hundred marks in 1215 from Michael de Columbars for the forest of Chute.
Such excessive fines and reliefs headed the list of grievances which the barons presented to King John in 1215, and Magna Carta made concessions in this respect.
Subsequent reliefs were smaller: in October 1241 Adam  of Purton, nephew and senior co-heir of Thomas of Sandford, paid ten marks for a grant of seisin of the wardenship of Braydon Forest, which belonged to him by right of primogeniture.
The hereditary Forest wardenship might of course be inherited by women.
In July 1221 the sisters and co-heiresses of Philip of Oldcoates, hereditary warden of the forest of Northumberland, paid the Crown a fine of eighty marks for seisin of their inheritance — the wardenship of the forest and the lands at Nafferton and Matfen which were appurtenant thereto.
Daniel son of Nicholas of Newcastle, husband of one of the co-heiresses, was appointed by them to perform the duties of Forest warden until he was succeeded in 1226 by Thomas of Stratton, husband of another co-heiress.
King John sold the marriages of such heiresses to the highest bidder.
By 1202 he had accepted from William Brewer an offer of a fine of 500 marks for the marriage of the daughter and heiress of Hugh of Morville, late hereditary warden of Inglewood forest, with his son Richard or his nephew Richard Gernon, and for having Hugh's forest wardenship on the same terms.
But in May 1204 Brewer was outbid by Richard de Lucy of Egremont, who paid the king the enormous fine of 900 marks and five palfreys for the inheritance of his wife Ada, Hugh's elder daughter and co-heiress.
The wardenship was to be held by him, his wife, and his heirs by her, of the king and his heirs for ever: Brewer handed it over to him at Midsummer 1204.
When the heir to a Forest wardenship was a minor, large fines were also paid for the profitable grant of his wardenship and marriage.
John Marshall in February 1218 paid 60 marks for having the wardship and marriage of Richard, son and heir of William of Wrotham, hereditary warden of the forests of Somerset, with the custody of the forests until Richard should be of age.
In 1282 Amaury de St Amand paid Edward I 800 marks for a similar grant in respect of the heir of Robert de Keynes, hereditary warden of Braydon Forest.
It was laid down by a judgement of the King's Court in 1205 that ‘No one ought or is able to divide up or in any way to alienate a serjeanty’.
A hereditary Forest warden had therefore to seek royal confirmation if he wished to grant away his bailiwick.
This was done  when Hugh Bigod in 1256 purchased from Osbert of Bolbeck the hereditary wardenship of Scalby Forest, with the lands and rents in Pickering appurtenant thereto.
Hugh le Despenser acquired the hereditary wardenship of Braydon Forest, with the manors of Somerford and Chelworth, from Robert de Keynes, without such royal licence: consequently in 1300 he had to pay a fine in the presence of the Treasurer in order to keep the wardenship and manors, and to convey a life interest back to Robert de Keynes.
The Deputy Wardens
Many Forest wardens could not have performed their duties in person.
Hereditary wardenships, for example, were from time to time inherited by priests: in 1207 William of Wrotham, Archdeacon of Taunton, received from King John seisin of the lands he held in chief in Somerset, and the wardenship of the forests of Somerset and Exmoor in Devon.
The archdeacon in the king's presence appointed his brother Richard to perform the duties of his Forest office in his place, and agreed to be responsible for him.
Such offices were occasionally inherited by women.
Avice de Columbars, for example, was amerced in 300 marks at the 1244 Hampshire Forest Eyre: her Forest duties were probably performed by her steward, who was adjudged at the same time to pay 100 marks.
Many of the wardens appointed by royal letters patent, too, can have devoted little personal attention to their Forest offices.
Great lay and ecclesiastical magnates, important officers of the king's court and household, busy judges, women of high rank — all appointed deputy wardens to keep the forests on their behalf.
Between 1246 and 1255, for example, the wardens of the forests between Oxford and Stamford bridges performed important duties by deputy — by William of Northampton, who was ‘bailiff of the forest’ from 1246 until 1249, and Hugh of Goldingham, who was ‘steward’from 1250 until 1255.
It was William and Hugh who led the foresters and verderers to search the houses of suspects for evidence and arrest   offenders, and who presided at special inquests on Forest offences, and at the local Forest courts.
Duties and Perquisites of the Forest Wardens
Many royal forests were ‘assigned to the maintenance’ of royal castles in or near them.
In April 1305 Edward I granted the forest of Savernake to Queen Margaret to hold in dower, as appurtenant to the castle and town of Marlborough, because the forest was ‘necessary for the frequent repairs of the castle and town’.
For this reason the constables of many royal castles were appointed at the same time to be wardens of neighbouring forests: the constable of Rockingham castle was usually warden of the forests between Oxford and Stamford bridges; the constable of Porchester kept  Bere Porchester Forest; the constable of Devizes kept Chippenham and Melksham Forests; the constable of St Briavels the Forest of Dean; the constable of Castleton the Forest of the Peak; and the constable of Windsor castle was also warden of Windsor Forest.
The constable/warden had to see to it that the castle was properly stocked with provisions and munitions of war, and to pay the garrison.
Substantial payments were made out of the Forest revenues for these and other purposes relating to the maintenance and upkeep of the castle.
Timber for building and repair was very frequently ordered to be taken from the forest.
In September 1231, for example, John le Malemort, a smith, was sent to make quarrels at St Briavels castle, and the warden of the Forest of Dean was ordered to supply him with ‘wood for making the shafts, charcoal and iron for the heads, and lard for greasing them’.
In 1255 the warden was commanded to pay the smith 25 marks a year out of the revenues of his bailiwick for 25,000 quarrels, which he was to keep safely for the king's use.
Wardens had a general responsibility for keeping the king's peace within his bailiwick, and in times of rebellion or disturbance he was naturally an important buttress of royal authority.
On occasion he took measures for the safety of the king's subjects travelling through the forest.
In July 1231 Henry III wrote to Gilbert Basset, warden of the forests of Chippenham and Melksham:
We have been given to understand that our forest of Chippenham around the place called ‘Holloway’ is so dense that malefactors are able to lie hid in those parts, and so travellers are threatened with frequent losses, and some incur peril of lives and goods there.
Therefore we command you to cause trees to be felled in that dense part, and a ride to be made to the least possible damage of the forest, so that henceforth a way through those parts may be open for travellers without danger.
It was the warden's duty to see that the deer in the forest were supplied with sufficient food in times of scarcity, and that they were not hunted by anyone without authority from the king or the Chief Justice of the Forest.
He had the right to arrest all poachers  found within his bailiwick, and to raise the hue and cry upon them.
The sheriff could be called upon to assist him with armed men when he raised the hue, and to arrest men of whose names the warden informed him.
The warden was responsible for the safe keeping in the castle gaol of ordinary prisoners and political prisoners, as well as Forest offenders, and for delivering them on bail on receipt of the appropriate writ.
The warden or his deputy presided at Forest inquests into venison trespasses, and at the attachment courts.
In some forests he took for himself the profits of the minor pleas: a thirteenth-century Cumberland jury swore that if any man ‘furtively’ felled an oak in Inglewood Forest, then the warden's duty was ‘to attach his body according to the law of the forest’to answer before the Justice of the Forest at the Forest Eyre.
The king had ‘the attachments and the amercements’, but the warden took the oak.
The prevention of purprestures was his responsibility: he threw down houses, sheepfolds and other buildings and enclosures erected without licence in his bailiwick, and attached those who made them to appear at the next Forest Eyre.
He also seized assarts together with any crop grown on them.
He supervised the exercise of common rights by the forest inhabitants, seeing to it, for example, that cattle were not pastured in the forest beyond the period allowed by the Forest law, and seizing animals illegally pastured there.
There were constant complaints by the forest landowners and inhabitants in the thirteenth century of interference with their rights.
In 1220, for example, the lepers of St Leonard at Lancaster petitioned the Crown.
King John, they said, had granted them by charter the right to pasture their animals and to take housebote and firebote in Lonsdale Forest without payment, but they had lost the charter during the disturbances at the end of his reign.
Roger Gernet, hereditary warden of the royal forests of Lancaster, had seized this opportunity to exact from them an ox for winter pasture and a cow for summer pasture, and had prevented them from taking housebote and firebote in the forest.
The sheriff of Lancaster was ordered to see that their rights were restored to them.
Before the king made a grant of new privileges in the forest, the warden was often ordered to summon a jury to hold an inquest  ad quod damnum , to ascertain the extent of the loss the Crown would incur by making the grant.
When the king commanded deer to be taken for his use in the royal forests it was usually the warden's responsibility to see that this was done in the proper manner.
Sometimes he was called upon to take the deer with his own men, hounds and equipment, while on occasion he called upon the forest inhabitants to help him.
At other times the king sent his own huntsmen and hounds to the forest.
On these occasions the warden was informed of the number and kind of game they were to take, and it was his duty to keep a check on the number of deer taken, and to inform the king.
He was at times ordered to aid and supervise the royal huntsmen by leading them to those parts of the forest where the game was most plentiful, o supplying them with trained hounds, and seeing that they did not drive the deer out of the forest or continue their hunting longer than their instructions warranted.
He often had to pay the wages and expenses of the royal huntsmen out of the issues of his bailiwick.
He then was responsible for salting the venison and packing it in barrels, and keeping it safe until required, or sending it wherever the king wanted it.
The warden had also to effect royal gifts of venison, and sometimes of live deer from the forest for the stocking of private parks.
Some of these royal gifts presented the warden with a formidable task: in December 1238 the sheriff of Essex and Richard de Munfichet, warden of the forest of Essex, were ordered to take alive in the forest 120 bucks and does for the Count of Flanders, put them in cages, and transport them in carts to the Thames, where Raymond Ruffus, a yeoman of the king, was to have a ship ready to take them to Flanders.
Sometimes the king allowed subjects to take deer for themselves in his forests; the warden's duty was to see to it that they had a proper writ of warranty when they came to his forest, that they did not take more than the specified number, and that they took them in the prescribed manner.
The warden frequently received orders from the king to take timber in the forest for building operations, for firewood and charcoal for the king's needs, and as gifts for subjects.
So on 13 December 1230 Henry III wrote to the warden of Bere Forest:
We are sending you Hurtard our serjeant, to cause oaks to be cut down in the said forest and carried to Winchester against Christmas, for our hearth.
We order you to cause the said oaks to be delivered to him in the place which is most suitable for transporting them, and to assist him to find men to cut them down and carry them, at our expense.
To keep a check on the quantities taken, tallies were cut and kept by the warden who delivered the timber and the Household official who received it.
The revenues collected and the perquisites enjoyed by the wardens of the various royal forests show a general similarity.
First, there was cheminage, a toll on carts and pack-animals passing through the forest.
The foresters used this customary toll as a pretext for extortion: the Charter of the Forest therefore conceded in 1217 that henceforth cheminage might be exacted only by foresters of fee paying the king a farm for their bailiwicks.
They might take it only from those who came into their bailiwicks from outside, with their permission, to buy underwood, timber, bark or charcoal, to carry it elsewhere to sell it, and from no others.
Two pence per half-year might be taken for each cart, and one halfpenny for each pack-horse.
Cheminage might be levied only ‘in the places where it is accustomed and ought to be taken by ancient usage’, and only for wood from the king's demesne woods.
‘Moreover, those who carry upon their backs brushwood, bark or charcoal to sell, though that be their livelihood, shall henceforth give no cheminage.’
But in fact the Forest wardens in the thirteenth century exacted cheminage from all who carried wood and charcoal through their bailiwicks.
The Franciscan friars of Reading found it necessary in 1234 to obtain from the king a letter ordering the warden of Windsor Forest not to exact cheminage in respect of the timber given them in the forest for their buildings at Reading.
In the Forest of Dean the warden levied cheminage, not only on loads of wood, but also on sea coal and iron ore carried ‘through the forest towards Gloucester’.
‘Herbage’ was often included in the warden's farm; that is, the dues collected for cattle and horses on the king's forest pastures.
In 1251 Geoffrey of Liston, warden of Windsor Forest, was granted as part of his farm the herbage of the whole forest, including ‘the herbage and hay of Kempton park, saving maintenance for the  King's deer there’.
In the same way the perquisites of the hereditary wardens of Cannock Forest included all the herbage of the king's hays of Alrewas, Hopwas and Gailey, except during the fence month and the pannage season.
In the forests of Dean, Windsor and Clarendon the wardens took the pannage dues, and in Cannock, Sherwood and Inglewood Forests they had the profits of after-pannage — that is, money paid for the agistment of pigs in the king's demesne woods after 11 November.
The warden of Galtres Forest had ‘the profits of pigs entering the forest during the fence month; to wit, one halfpenny from each pig’.
This payment was a fine for disturbing the deer when they were supposed to be fawning.
The wardens of Inglewood took ‘escapes’-or fines paid by the owners of animals which had strayed into forbidden parts of the forest.
This they took for ‘all animals except swine, and swine all the year round in the hay of Plumpton, and during the fence month…in the rest of the forest’
Many of the wardens had the right to take ‘cablish’ or windfallen wood.
In Cannock Forest the warden might take ten oaks from those blown down in the hays of Alrewas, Hopwas and Gailey, and in ‘the wood called Hockley’.
In Rutland Forest he had ‘dead and dry wood which can be collected in the demesne woods of the lord King with the hand alone, without any iron instrument.
In Inglewood Forest he took:
all dead wood standing and fallen, all dry wood and barren trees, stumps, twigs and bark (of trees cut down), wood of alders and willows, and all cablish and branches…except in the hay of Plumpton.
In the forests of Dean, Windsor, Cannock, Sherwood, Essex, Inglewood and Galtres the warden took the lop and top, and sometimes the bark, of oaks given by the king, or felled for his use.
Some Forest wardens had the right to hunt certain animals and to take certain birds of prey used in hawking.
Thomas of Milton, warden of Inglewood Forest from 1222 until 1265, had the right to hunt ‘hare, fox, wild cat, wolf, badger, otter, marten, squirrel and all woodland beasts save hart and hind, fallow buck and his doe, wild boar and sow, which are the king's.
He also had all falcons, sparrow-hawks, muskets, and eyries except hawk's, which are the king's’, and all honey and wax in the Forest.
The warden usually had under him foresters of fee, whose hereditary offices were subject to the usual feudal incidents.
In 1355 Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, claimed as warden of Clarendon Forest
to have after the death of every forester of fee of the bailiwick by way of a heriot, the said forester's best riding-horse, and a saddle with a bridle, a cloak, cap and sword, leggings with spurs, a horn, a bow and barbed arrows, and his dog called a ‘bercelet’.
In the forests of Chippenham and Melksham, Dean, Feckenham, Peak and Windsor the warden had also the custody of royal manors in the forest, and he had to see that they were properly stocked and managed.
He was often directed to see to the ploughing, tilling and sowing of assarts, waste and other lands belonging to the king in the forest, and cattle were sometimes sent to him to be fattened on the forest pastures.
From time to time he was instructed to raise money by conducting sales of wood from the king's demesne, and he carried out the king's policy regarding mining in the forest, which wavered between a desire to increase the Forest revenues and concern lest the vert be destroyed.
Some wardens accounted for the revenues of their bailiwicks directly at the Exchequer.
In such cases they were often allowed to take for themselves an annual salary out of those revenues.
Bernard of Savoy, in December 1241 appointed constable and warden of Windsor castle and forest, was granted a salary of £10 a year by the hands of the bailiffs of Windsor, and one tun of wine.
The warden of Clarendon and Groveley Forests was likewise allowed £20 a year.
More usually, however, the wardens paid a fixed annual sum into the Exchequer for the rights to collect for themselves certain forest revenues.
This arrangement naturally resulted in frequent complaints by the forest inhabitants about illegal extortion by the foresters.
Furthermore, many wardens presented their accounts very irregularly, and left office heavily in  debt.
In 1250, for example, peter de Neville, warden of Rutland Forest, owed the king the large sum of £324, which included ‘the arrears of the annual revenue of the same forest’.
He promised to pay off his debt at the rate of 20 marks a year.
Other wardens were from time to time granted leave by Henry III to postpone their accounts at the Exchequer, and he remitted the debts of others.
It seems clear therefore that the central administration was unable at this time to exercise effective financial control over the Forest wardens.
Administrative Conduct of the Forest Wardens
Complaints of irregular and oppressive conduct by local Forest officers were frequent during the thirteenth century.
At the Rutland Forest Eyre in 1269 the verderers, regarders and other jurors presented a long list of indictments of this kind.
The warden, Peter de Neville, and his foresters, bailiffs and vendors of wood were accused of having taken great quantities of timber from the king's demesne park and woods during the preceding thirteen years, for Neville's own use, for sale and for making lime and charcoal.
The damage done to branchwood and underwood could not be estimated.
Neville had defrauded the Crown by unlawfully taking for himself the dues for after-pannage, the agistment of cattle, and the escapes of beasts into forbidden enclosures in the forest.
He had also taken the profits of minor pleas of the vert, and ‘pleas of taking hares, foxes, rabbits and cats, and of having dogs and greyhounds in the forest’, which pleas rightfully belonged to the king.
Prisoners arrested for Forest trespasses ought to have been handed over to the sheriff of Rutland for imprisonment in Oakham castle, but Neville put them in his own gaol at Allexton, which was ‘full of water at the bottom’, and bound them with iron chains.
Some of these unfortunate prisoners were later found innocent at the Forest Eyre.
Others had their cattle seized by Neville's men until they paid extortionate fines, although their cases should have been heard before the king's judges.
Forest townships were compelled to pay the warden large sums of money if they did not attend Forest inquests at his summons.
He had set a forester on the road between Stamford and Casterton bridges, who exacted four pence for cheminage from every cart carrying wood or timber from Lincolnshire to Stamford, contrary to custom and the Charter of the Forest.
When Geoffrey son of Sarah of Empingham resisted this illegal demand, the forester raised the hue and cry upon him, and distrained him until he gave him two shillings and found sureties for appearing at the attachment court.
There the warden arrested him, imprisoned him in his gaol at Allexton, and afterwards released him for a fine of half a mark.
Finally, Neville had abused his power of appointing foresters by appointing an excessive number of them, with boys under them: they levied contributions from the forest inhabitants and were an intolerable burden on the countryside.
In thirteen years de Neville had misappropriated Crown revenues and wasted Crown property, besides imposing a regime of grave oppression, extortion and injustice upon the unfortunate people of Rutland.
Peter de Neville lost his wardenship, and in February 1272 both he and his son Theobald were still in prison charged with these offences.
But in 1300 Theobald recovered his father's wardenship in fee simple, presumably by paying a substantial fine.
Sometimes the sheriff, that medieval ‘maid-of-all-work’, was called in to restrain the oppressive conduct of the Forest wardens.
In 1222 it was reported to the Council of Regency that Thomas of Milton, hereditary warden of Inglewood Forest, had under him twelve riding foresters with their underforesters, who were maintained at the expense of the Crown and the men of the king's demesnes.
He had imposed heavy and illegal exactions upon the forest dwellers, prevented the men of the royal demesnes from having their customary rights of housebote and haybote, and taken for himself the dues for escapes of cattle and other animals in the forest, which rightly belonged to the king.
The Council commanded the warden to cease these unlawful practices, and to reduce his foresters to six, which he was to maintain himself.
The sheriff of Cumberland received orders to see that the Council's commands were carried out in all respects.
Many other Forest wardens were accused of peculation, oppression or neglect.
The most frequent complaint was that, although the warden ought to have maintained the ‘stewards, clerks and foresters’ who kept the forest.
under him, yet in practice he appointed an excessive number of them; he compelled them to pay for their appointments, and in some cases to make annual payments to him afterwards.
The foresters recouped themselves by illegal exactions from the forest inhabitants, and by committing waste and destruction in the forest.
The Charter of the Forest had tried to stop this abuse by enacting in 1217 that the number of foresters necessary to keep the forests should be determined ‘by the view and oath of the twelve regarders when they make the regard’— that is, every three years.
But this safeguard was ignored or was ineffective, for the complaints continued.
Wardens were also accused of levying illegal or excessive dues for the lawing of dogs and for common of pasture in the forest, and for non-attendance at Forest courts and inquests, besides illegally taking the king's deer and timber, and conniving at offences in return for bribes.
Many Forest wardens were deprived of their offices after conviction of such malpractices at the Forest Eyre.
But the principal purpose of the Forest system was by this time the raising of revenue: in most cases the wardenships were restored to the offenders or their heirs on payment of a fine to the king.
In many other cases the warden for the time being escaped indictment at the Forest Eyre; the verderers, regarders and jurymen, fearing his retribution, preferred to wait until he was out of office and harmless.
By that time it was difficult to punish the offender, and the Crown frequently abandoned the attempt to exact fines and arrears from ex-wardens.
Foresters of Fee, Foresters and Woodwards
Foresters of Fee
Many of the Forest wardens had under them Forest officers who held their office by hereditary right — the foresters of fee.
They performed their duties within wards or subdivisions of the forest.
They were subject to the warden's authority, and in some forests swore fealty to him.
There were nine of them in the Forest of Dean, five in the New Forest, and five in Savernake.
By the reign of Henry III their offices were of considerable antiquity.
A jury swore in 1266 that John son of Nigel and his ancestors had been foresters of fee of Bernwood Forest ‘from the Conquest of England’: another jury declared that the ancestors of William son of Adam had been granted the manor of Hutton-in-the Forest by Henry I, to hold by the serjeanty of keeping the bailiwick of Plumpton in Inglewood Forest.
William of Dean, one of the foresters of fee of the Forest of Dean, held in chief in Great Dean two carucates of land and 6 marks of rent, and paid to the king an annual farm of 10s.
He was bound to provide at his own cost one riding forester and two walking foresters to keep his bailiwick, and to perform the military service of ‘going in the army at the King's cost wherever the King goes’.
Foresters of fee usually paid a farm to the warden of the forest: Hugh of Stratford, forester of fee of Wakefield in Northamptonshire, paid to John de Neville, warden of the forests between Oxford and Stamford bridges, 1234–1244, as a farm for the aforesaid bailiwick, 2 ½ marks a year…and two quarters of nuts…
30 geese…
30 hens…and 200 eggs'.
Some foresters of fee, however, paid no farm: Henry son of Aucher, forester of fee of Waltham in the forest of Essex, was in 1292 bound only to make ‘wanlace’— that is, bring the quarry to bay, whenever the king came to hunt in his bailiwick.
By the terms of their appointment many foresters of fee were supposed to provide underforesters at their own expense, but in practice some took money from them for their appointment.
In the reign of Henry III Simon son of Norman, forester of fee of Kingswood in the forest of Essex, had under him five walking foresters, each guarding his own ward: they paid him annually sums ranging from 5s to 2 marks for their perquisites, which included the right to levy cheminage.
These hereditary Forest offices were subject to the usual feudal incidents of wardship, relief and marriage, which involved periodic payments of substantial fines to the Crown.
When the heir had done homage to the king, it was usual for the Justice of the Forest, on receipt of the appropriate writ, to take from him security for the payment of relief, and then to give him seisin of his Forest bailiwick; the king's escheator was ordered at the same time to hand over his lands to him, those appurtenant to his forestership, and whatever others he might hold in chief by other service.
Foresterships of fee might be inherited by women: in such cases the duties of the office were usually performed by their guardians, husbands or sons.
In March 1239 Agnes de Amundeville, a forester of fee of Feckenham Forest, gave the king an annual payment of one mark at the Exchequer for recovery of her bailiwick: it had been seized because of a venison offence by her son Ralph, committed when he was keeper of that forest.
Richard, Agnes's younger son, was to find the Justice of the Forests south of Trent twelve ‘free and law-worthy men’ who would guarantee that he would well and faithfully keep the said bailiwick on Agnes's behalf: the Forest Justice was then to admit him to the custody in Agnes's place.
Foresterships of fee, and the lands appurtenant thereto, were grand serjeanties, and therefore ought not to have been divided or alienated except by the king's licence.
But a commission appointed in June 1246 found that a number of foresters of fee had in fact disposed of all or part of the lands they held by service of keeping their forest bailiwicks.
Thomas son of Adam, who had held the manor of Hutton-in-the-Forest by the serjeanty of keeping the king's hay of Plumpton in Inglewood Forest, had by 1244 alienated the manor entirely to several tenants.
In 1250 it was discovered that the lands which Aubrey, a forester of fee of Whittlewood Forest, held by serjeanty in Northamptonshire, had been alienated in part, and that ‘the serjeanty of Peter of Minton in Shropshire, for which he ought to keep the forest of Long Mynd and the hays of Bushmoor and Haycrust’ had been ‘alienated in part by divers parcels’.
Foresters of fee who held no land of the king relied on the dues they exacted from the forest inhabitants as their recompense for guarding vert and venison: the temptation to extortion was great.
The foresters of fee usually had the right to take ‘cablish’— that is, dead and dry wood, and trees or branches blown down by the wind within their bailiwicks: in Bernwood Forest, if the wind felled ten trees ‘in one night and one day’, the king took them all, but if there were less than ten, the forester of fee took them.
In many forests they took the lop and top, and in some cases the stump, of all trees given by the king from the woods in their bailiwicks, or taken there for his use.
In the Forest of Dean they also took housebote and haybote and a tree trunk at Christmas, under the supervision of the verderers and other Forest officers: they employed men to make some of this wood into charcoal and to operate travelling forges for the smelting of iron, and were answerable to the Crown when these workmen took wood in the forest to which they were not entitled.
The foresters of fee had rights of pannage and common of pasture in the forest for themselves and their men, and some of them took the nuts gathered in the king's demesne woods.
They exacted various dues from the forest inhabitants, such as cheminage, pannage or afterpannage, and the dues for having dogs unlawed in the forest.
In the reign of Henry III Hugh of Stratford, forester of  fee of Wakefield in Northamptonshire, took from the forest townships in his bailiwick:
one quarter of wheat for every virgate of land, in return for their having housebote and paling for their corn, and for collecting dead wood for their fuel in the King's demesne wood…and from every house a goose and a hen every year.
The main duty of the foresters of fee was of course the safe keeping of vert and venison: the Forest rolls show them searching for, arresting and attaching offenders, and indicting them at the Forest Eyre.
At the Gloucester Forest Eyre of 1282 the judges ruled that every forester of fee was to have his own roll of attachments of vert and venison to present before them.
In times of civil disturbance they were also called upon to help in maintaining the king's peace, as when in June 1234 the foresters of fee of all the royal forests of England were commanded to aid the sheriffs in arresting the malefactors who were roaming over the countryside as a result of the disturbances created by the Earl Marshal and his adherents.
The warden was responsible for the conduct of the foresters of fee: on a number of occasions he seized their bailiwicks because of their misconduct.
But the Forest wardens in many cases held office during the king's pleasure and for relatively short periods: many were important and busy persons who performed many of their Forest duties by deputies.
On the other hand, foresters of fee were often landowners of some local importance, and of course held office for life.
The intervals between Forest Eyres were too long to maintain effective control over such men: nevertheless when the Forest Eyres were held they frequently resulted in the conviction of the foresters of fee of serious misconduct, and in their amercement, forfeiture of office, and even imprisonment.
The Gloucester Forest Eyre rolls of 1270 and 1282 record long lists of offences of which the foresters of fee of the Forest of Dean were convicted.
They had kept in their service underforesters who were habitual poachers, cut down trees and underwood in large quantities, and kept the proceeds of sale for themselves.
They had allowed others to commit waste and make assarts; they had embezzled fines which rightfully belonged to  the king, taken large sums for the agistment of animals in the Forest pastures so as to overburden them, and illegally kept unlawed dogs.
The regarders accused one of them, Ralph of Abinghall, of having impounded in Walmore Green the animals belonging to the men of the district, extorted sixty geese from them as an amercement, and kept the beasts for himself, although all profits of such attachments belonged to the king.
But the Crown was primarily concerned at this time with the raising of revenue, and not with the punishment of offenders, who in many cases were able to recover their forfeited offices on payment of a fine.
The Riding and Walking Foresters
The larger forests were divided into wards, each policed by a forester who kept vert and venison under the warden.
Some were appointed by letters patent under the Great Seal: in 1299, for example, Gervase of Holloway, King's yeoman, was granted for life, as a reward for long service:
the bailiwick of the custody of the forest of Brigstock and Geddington [in Rockingham Forest in Northamptonshire]…since it appears…that this is one forest kept by one man appointed by the King.
Some subordinate foresters appointed by the king were paid wages: in 1228 Hubert de Burgh, as warden of Windsor Forest, was paying 6d. a day to Osbert and Robert, King's serjeants, for keeping the forest of Odiham, and in 1233 2d. a day to each of six serjeants on foot for keeping the forest of Windsor by the king's command.
The Chief Justices of the Forest, the wardens and the foresters of fee also appointed subordinate keepers, called ‘riding foresters,, ‘walking foresters’ or ‘serjeants’.
In the forest of Essex towards the end of the thirteenth century there were six riding foresters, all appointed by the warden, and removable at his pleasure.
Each had a defined territorial bailiwick or ward.
The riding forester of Becontree paid an annual farm of 5 marks a year to the warden, and the  others 40s apiece.
Each riding forester had under him two or three walking foresters, who made annual payments to him equal to the amount of the farm which he paid to the warden.
All foresters had to take an oath in the local Forest court, in the presence of the verderers, to perform their duties conscientiously, to keep the Forest law, and not to oppress the forest landowners and the other inhabitants of the forest.
No attachment might be made except by a sworn forester.
At the Essex Forest Eyre of 1277 it was presented that Alexander Not of Havering had entered the Abbess of Barking's wood and felled an oak.
He had been discovered by the abbess's steward, Richard of Bernstead, who, when he resisted attachment, seized and bound him, took him to Barking, imprisoned him for three days and afterwards delivered him to the forester and the verderer.
The judgment of the court was that because Richard was not a sworn forester, he was liable to amercement.
In the execution of their duties the foresters often had to contend with armed bands of desperate men; in many cases they were beaten and even killed while attempting to arrest Forest offenders.
In 1351 Edward III granted John the woodward of Raskelf a pension of 3d. a day ‘for good service and especially because his eyes were torn out and his tongue and his fingers cut off by malefactors in the Forest of Galtres in the time when he was one of the King's foresters there’.
For self-defence therefore the sworn foresters were allowed to carry bows and arrows in the forest.
The statute De malefactoribus of 1293 created a statutory defence in cases of homicide by foresters:
If any forester do find any trespasser wandering within his liberty…within the forest…and after hue and cry made to him to stand unto the peace, will not yield himself, but flee or resist…if the forester do kill any such offender, he shall not be impeached for this felony.
When foresters raised the hue and cry, the men of the neighbouring townships were bound to come and help them.
Neglect of their duty involved severe penalties.
On 1 August 1245, for example, foresters discovered poachers in Rockingham Forest with bows and arrows, and raised the hue upon them, but the township of  Wadenhoe refused to come and follow the hue.
Men from Wadenhoe who were present at the next Northamptonshire Forest Eyre in 1255 were committed to prison, and the whole township was adjudged to be ‘in grievous mercy’.
Complaint was frequently made that excessive numbers of underforesters were appointed, and that they levied oppressive exactions to maintain themselves and the grooms or pages by whom they were accompanied.
The judges at the Rutland Forest Eyre in 1269 ordered that they should be reduced to the customary and reasonable number, which was five walking foresters and one riding forester with one page, and that no walking forester in that forest was in future to have pages under him.
In 1279 the ‘people of the forest of Somerset, presented to Edward I a long list of abuses, including ‘scotale’.
They complained that, contrary to the Charter of the Forest:
the foresters come with horses at harvest time, and collect every kind of corn in sheaves within the bounds of the forest, and outside near the forest.
Then they make their ale from what they have collected, and those who do not come there to drink and do not give money at the foresters' will are sorely punished at their pleas for dead wood, although the King has no demesne; nor does anyone dare to brew when the foresters brew, or to sell ale so long as the foresters have any kind of ale to sell; and this every forester does year by year to the great grievance of the country.
Besides this they collect lambs and sucking pigs, wool and flax; from every house where there is wool, a fleece, and in the fence month, from every house a penny, or a farthing for each pig.
And when they brew, they fell trees for their fuel in the woods of the good people without leave, to wit, oaks, maples, hazels and thorns, felling the best first, whereby the good people feel themselves aggrieved on account of the destruction of their woods.
The foresters attached the forest dwellers every year if their dogs were not lawed, although the Charter of the Forest had promised that this should be done only every three years.
They also made illegal exactions in the name of cheminage, and in return permitted waste of the vert.
In the forests of Mendip and Selwood they took, again contrary to the Forest Charter:
from every poor man who carries wood upon his back, six pence, and from
the rich as much as they are able to pay.
The foresters, both riding and walking, and their pages take for a cart two, three or four shillings, from some more and from others less according to their means, and for a pack-horse twelve, sixteen or eighteen pence, to raise their fine which they have made with the warden for their appointment; this to the great destruction of the King's forest and the grievance of those who have woods in the forest, for they suffer the carriers to go quit all through the year without attachment, and yet the King has no profit…
Where the people rest with their wood or timber and unload it from carts outside the close of the franchise of the Charterhouse among the towns, and afterwards take up their loads of the same wood or timber, the Foresters attach them and amerce them grievously at their will without right.
The inhabitants of Exmoor Forest also complained that:
the foresters attach likewise the good folk of their demesne woods and lands, and amerce them grievously; and the small folk they attach at their homes and in their enclosures and in their crofts among the towns.
the foresters attach to come before them men who work in their own ground, making ‘hoes’ to sow corn, although the King had no demesne there: and they say that they have made waste and purpresture if they do not their will for having peace; from each man holding land they will have the skin of a lamb or a farthing, and they say that is their fee.
Although the king from time to time forbade ‘puture’— the contributions in money and in kind exacted by the foresters — the levying of puture seems to have become a general practice at least by the fourteenth century.
In the reign of Edward III, for example, a forester of Inglewood Forest, in a suit against the Abbot of St Mary's, York, claimed to have food and drink at the table of the abbot's grooms every Friday, together with the right to carry away, whenever he pleased, a flagon of the best ale in the abbot's cellar and two tallow candles from the abbot's chamber, a bushel of oats for his horse, and a loaf of black bread for his dog.
The foresters were frequently convicted at the Forest Eyres of trespasses against vert and venison, and of oppressive conduct towards the forest inhabitants.
At the Huntingdonshire Eyre in 1255, for example, Norman Sampson, a riding forester, was convicted of having extorted money from a man in his bailiwick by making him sit upon a harrow.
At the Staffordshire Forest Eyre in  1271 Hugh of Evesham, another riding forester, was indicted because he had taken
with him a certain clerk, who he said was the clerk of the justice of the Forest, and made a view of dogs which were not lawed throughout his bailiwick.
He thus unjustly extorted a great sum of money from the men of the bailiwick, not being content with any mode of lawing, saying, if the right leg was lawed, the left leg ought to be lawed, and vice versa, and if all the feet were lawed, saying falsely that this was against the assize and the tenor of the king's Charter.
But the intervals between Forest Eyres were too long for effective control.
The conduct of the foresters made them a by-word for oppression and extortion.
Boroughs within the royal forests were prepared to pay for exemption from their hated authority.
In 1256 Henry III granted by charter to the burgesses of Scarborough that ‘no forester may enter the borough to make attachment for trespasses within the Forest [of Scalby]’ and in 1348 Edward III made a similar concession to the burgesses of Penrith for Inglewood Forest.
A case heard at the Essex Forest Eyre in 1277 illustrates the conflict between municipal privileges and Forest jurisdictions.
The foresters gave evidence that two townsmen of Colchester had been seen hunting in the forest, but had evaded attachment.
The bailiffs of the town were ordered by the court to produce them, but did not do so.
The sheriff was then ordered to arrest one offender, who had been recognized.
Subsequently two foresters had attempted to arrest a townsman in Colchester and had accidentally killed him, whereupon the bailiffs and townsmen had arrested and imprisoned the foresters.
The townsmen produced at the Forest Eyre a charter of Richard I conceding that no forester was to have power of attachment within the bounds of the borough.
The court finally decided that the Justice of the Forest should confer with the king about this dispute.
The Woodwards
All subjects who had demesne woods within the royal forest were  bound to appoint sworn woodwards to keep vert and venison in them.
The owners of the woods were bound to present their woodwards to the Justice of the Forest on their appointment, and at every subsequent Forest Eyre, to take an oath to perform their duties faithfully.
If the Justice of the Forest discovered that a wood was without a woodward, or that a woodward had not taken the oath or had not appeared at the Forest Eyre to be sworn, or neglected his duty, or committed trespasses in the forest, the wood in question was seized for the king, but the owner was usually allowed to recover it on payment of a fine.
The woods kept by the woodwards were as a general rule also subject to the authority of the king's foresters; if the latter discovered a Forest offence there which had not been reported by the woodward, the wood was seized and the woodward attached to answer for his default.
But some forest landowners were able from time to time to obtain from the Crown a grant of partial exemption from this supervision.
A royal charter granted in 1257 to Roger de Merlay for his lifetime, that his own woodwards should have exclusive custody of the vert in his woods, provided however that the king's foresters should still have custody of the venison there, and that de  Morlay 's woodwards should be answerable to the Justice of the Forest, or at the Forest Eyre for any waste of those woods.
Only sworn foresters of the king were allowed to carry bows and arrows in the forest: woodwards, according to a fourteenth-century judgement of the Court of King's Bench, ‘ought…to carry an axe…in order to make presentments regarding the vert and the venison’.
Roger de Merlay, however, interpreted his charter to mean that his woodwards might carry bows and arrows within their bailiwicks, and in September 1259 obtained judgement in his favour on appeal to the king.
The Justice of the Forest was ordered to take the oath of fealty from his woodwards,
and to permit them to carry bows and arrows for the defence of themselves and their custody, as is the custom of the King's foresters, and the foresters of others elsewhere in England.
The Court of King's Bench likewise ruled in 1338 that Henry Percy's woodward might carry a bow and arrows in the woods of his manor of Seamer, by prescriptive right.
The Unpaid Officers of the Forest: Verderers, Regardes and Agisters
A characteristic feature of the English Forest was the appointment of knights of the locality to act as unpaid officers.
Henry II decreed by the Assize of Woodstock that in every Forest county four knights should be appointed as agisters to agist his woods, and twelve knights ‘to keep his vert and venison’.
The latter were the forerunners of the verderers and the regarders.
By the thirteenth century these officers were elected in the county court from among the knights who resided in the neighbourhood of the forest and held land within it; they took an oath in the county court or in the attachment court faithfully to perform the duties of their office.
Since they were chosen by the landowners of the county, the latter were held responsible for their conduct in office.
At the Staffordshire Forest Eyre in 1286 John of Pendeford, a verderer of Cannock Forest, was convicted of a trespass against the venison.
He had, however, sold all his possessions and left the county.
The Court ruled that:
as the said John was elected verderer by the knights and others of the county
of Stafford, in full county court, faithfully to serve the King in his office of verderer, therefore judgment shall be pronounced on them on that account.
Verderers and agisters were on occasion, however, appointed directly by the king or by the Justice of the Forest; at other times the warden of the forest was ordered to see that vacancies were filled.
During the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries the verderers, regarders and agisters usually held office for life, provided that they discharged their duties faithfully and well, but in the fifteenth century the authority of the verderer, like that of the coroner, was brought to an end by the death of the king, and the sheriffs were ordered to hold new elections.
Verderers might also be removed from office on a report by the Justice of the Forest to the Chancery that they were incapacitated by old age or sickness, or occupied with other duties, or were insufficiently qualified in that they held no land within the forest and did not dwell there, or had committed or connived at trespasses of vert or venison, or had become a paid officer of the forest, or, in one case, had ‘entered the priestly order’.
It was considered too onerous for a man to serve both as coroner and verderer, and verderers were often excused from serving in the former office.
The verderers, regarders and agisters were of course unpaid, and there were no perquisites attached to their offices, apart from one or two special privileges.
These offices involved exacting duties in the enforcement of a system which was considered hateful and oppressive by the forest inhabitants; default in any particular resulted in heavy amercement at the Forest Eyre.
Therefore all landowners who were able to secured, by influence or by purchase, a royal grant of exemption from such appointments.
In June 1252, for example, Henry III granted to Alexander de Montfort exemption from
being put on assizes, juries or recognitions, and from being made sheriff, justice of gaol delivery, Steward of the Forest, forester, vendor of the King's wood, escheator, coroner, verderer, regarder, agister, or one of the knights to elect the grand assize.
The Verderers
Verderers are mentioned by that name at least as early as Richard I's Forest Assize of 1198.
Numbers in the thirteenth century varied: there were eighteen in the extensive forest of Essex, and only two in the small forest in Rutland.
They shared with the foresters a general responsibility for the safe keeping of vert and venison, the sheriff could seize their lands if they failed in their duty.
They supervised and assisted the foresters in finding, arresting, questioning and attaching Forest offenders, and in holding the attachment courts and the special inquests upon beasts of the forest.
They kept under their seals the rolls of presentments of Forest offences committed within their wards, for production at the Forest Eyre.
In 1287 William de Vescy, Justice of the Forest north of Trent, ruled at the Nottingham Forest Eyre that:
All verderers are in future to make answer before the justices in eyre by a single roll of the vert and venison, and are not to have, each one for himself, rolls of the different bailiwicks for production before the Justices.
If the verderers (or their heirs, if the verderers had died in the mean time) failed to present their rolls to the judges on the first day of the Forest Eyre, or if their rolls were deficient in any material particular, they were liable to amercement.
At the Huntingdonshire Forest Eyre of 1255 the foresters and verderers presented a clerk and his page for a trespass against the venison.
The judgment of the court was that
because the verderers…and…the Steward of the Forest made no mention in their rolls of the name of the said page, nor of his delivery, nor of his escape, and the business of the King so far as it relates to the said boy is entirely undone, therefore they are in mercy.
But the verderers were finally acquitted,
because the verderers ought not and are not able to enroll anything in their rolls except a presentment of the foresters, and the foresters presented nothing of the matters aforesaid.
The verderers were closely examined at the Forest Eyre as to the facts to which they deposed in their rolls of presentments, and even minor contradictions in their evidence might result in their committal to prison and subsequent amercement.
At the Northampton Forest Eyre of 1255 John Lovet, a verderer, had to pay the substantial fine of twelve marks ‘for mendacity and concealment’: he had contradicted his roll by saying that the deer which had been taken in the forest by the men of the parson of Eaton Maudit ‘was a certain sheep’.
At the Gloucester Forest Eyre of 1282 two of the verderers were convicted of falsifying their rolls of presentments ‘in that they took out the names of the living, and put in the names of the dead’.
The verderers also co-operated with the foresters in supervising the exercise of customary rights within the forest, such as taking wood for fuel, fencing and house-repair; in making arrangements at the swanimote for the agistment of the king's demesne woods; and in carrying out various inquiries in the forest into such matters as the rights of the Crown and the perquisites of the Forest officers.
The verderers were intended to act as a check upon the paid Forest officers in the interests of the Crown, but the numerous instances already cited of peculation and extortion on the part of the latter seem to indicate that the verderers were in many instances overawed by the authority and influence of the wardens and foresters of fee.
From the evidence of the Forest rolls, however, they seem to have discharged their duties with reasonable efficiency as far as ordinary poachers were concerned.
The Regarders
The principal duty of the knights elected as regarders was of course the making of the triennial regard.
In addition they were bound, according to the Ordinance of the forest of 1306, to attend the attachment courts, along with the foresters, verderers and agisters, to make presentments of Forest offences.
They were also employed in making various inquiries in the forest.
In 1292, for example, the  king ordered an inquiry to be made in the forest of Essex by the foresters, verderers and regarders of the three regards of Colchester, Ongar and Chelmsford, together with a jury of thirty-six knights and others, into a complaint by the Abbess of Barking that the foresters had interfered in her woods, which she claimed to be exempt from the regard and from the jurisdiction of the king's Forest officers.
The regarders, like the verderers, were frequently amerced at Forest Eyres for failure to carry out their duties to the satisfaction of the judges — for failing to appear with the other regarders to make the regard, or to take the regarders' oath, or to present their rolls of the regard on the first day of the Forest Eyre, or for losing their rolls, or for incompleteness in their returns.
In such cases the sheriff might be ordered to seize the chattels of defaulting regarders.
The Agisters
The agisters were responsible for the agistment of the king's demesne woods in the forest.
In the reign of Henry III they accounted for the agistment dues at the Exchequer, but made substantial payments into the Wardrobe from time to time, and paid out sums locally for such purposes as the maintenance of a neighbouring royal castle, building operations, the enclosure of a royal park, and the expenses incurred by the Forest officers in taking venison for the king.
In all such cases the agisters received a writ of Allocate for the purposes of their account at the Exchequer.
The Struggle for Disafforestment in the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries
Causes of Popular Hatred of the Forest System
The Forest law was universally hated because of the penalties and restrictions it imposed on all classes of the king's subjects.
Landowners within the forest regarded the restraints imposed upon them as an arbitrary intrusion upon the rights of property which was contrary to natural law and justice.
They resented the Forest law which forbade them to hunt over their own lands and woods on pain of heavy penalties.
Some landowners were from time to time able to obtain, by favour or by purchase, a royal grant of the right to hunt the lesser beasts of the forest, such as fox, wild cat and hare, but rarely the deer; the general prohibition remained.
Reference has already been made to the heavy penalties imposed for waste, assart and purpresture, and in respect of agistment, escapes and the lawing  of dogs.
Forest landowners could not even erect fences or hedges unless they were low enough to allow the deer to enter and leave, consequently crops were often destroyed by them.
In 1365 Edward III granted John of Appleby an annuity of 20 marks for good service ‘and in recompense, of the loss which he sustains year by year by the King's deer in respect of his land in Bernwood Forest, then lying uncultivated on account of the said deer’.
Lesser folk were aggrieved by the foresters' interference with their rights of common in the Forest; the Forest officers for their part reported that privileges they claimed had no warrant.
Consequently inquiries were frequently ordered by the Crown.
In 1251 the Chief Justice of the Forest was ordered to make inquiry by sworn juries into common rights in a number of royal forests, including those in Shropshire, Pickering and Galtres in Yorkshire, and Rockingham in Northamptonshire.
The returns show that the men of the royal manors in the forest generally had common of pasture in the king's demesne woods for all their animals, except goats, throughout the year.
ln the forest of Galtres, however, they had no such right for their sheep within the covert.
Pigs were excluded in all forests during the fence month.
They usually had in addition the right to gather firewood which could be collected without the use of an edged instrument, and in some cases the right to take housebote and haybote under the supervision of the foresters and verderers.
The men of the royal manors of Claverley and Warfield, for example, had from Morfe Forest in Shropshire one oak a year for each virgate of land they held.
These privileges were enjoyed by the king's grace, and not of right; various payments in money, produce or labour service were made for them.
The free and unfree tenants of the royal manors of Geddington and Barford, for example, did three ploughings each year for the king or the king's bailiff who farmed the manor of Geddington.
Each tenant had to mow three days in autumn, and gather nuts for one day; each gave a hen at Christmas and ten or twelve eggs at Easter to the warden of the forests between Oxford and Stamford Bridges, to make up his farm.
These common rights were enjoyed only by those who dwelt and held land within the forest bounds.
But constant complaints were made by the forest inhabitants that the Forest officers did not allow them to exercise  these common rights unless they paid illegal and extortionate dues.
The Forest courts themselves were a cause of general complaint.
Attendance at attachment courts and the Forest Eyre, the unpaid duties imposed upon verderers, regarders and agisters, the multifarious penalties inflicted on those who broke the Forest law, all constituted a heavy burden upon the forest inhabitants, especially when the Crown exploited the Forest system as a significant source of revenue, largely through fines and amercements.
The Forest law moreover clashed with other legal systems.
The monastic chroniclers especially recorded with high indignation the resolute enforcement of the Forest jurisdiction over clerical offenders.
Little wonder then that the Forest system was heartily detested by all classes of the king's subjects, and that from the twelfth century onward a bitter and determined struggle was carried on between Crown and people for its abolition.
Disafforestments Before the Great Charter of 1215
The royal forests of England had almost certainly reached their widest extent by the end of the reign of Henry II.
Thomas fitzBernard as Chief Justice of the Forest heard Forest pleas in twenty-nine counties between 1178 and 1180, and his successor Geoffrey fitzPeter did the same between 1184 and 1185.
Henry II's successors, however, sought to raise money for their pressing needs by granting the disafforestment of large areas in return for substantial fines.
Richard I in 1190 needed funds for his forthcoming crusade.
Consequently the knights of Surrey obtained, for a fine of 200 marks, the disafforestment of all their county from the river Wey eastward to the Kent boundary, and from the Guildford road southward ‘as far as Surrey extends’; thus only the north-western corner of the county remained within the royal forest of Windsor.
At about the same time the barons of Bedfordshire paid £200 ‘for the disafforestment of that part of Bedfordshire which Henry I first afforested’— a definition which was to be the subject of future  contention.
And £100 was paid for a like concession for the wapentake of Anstey in Yorkshire.
His successor King John sold charters to a number of his barons which freed named woods and manors from the Forest law.
In 1200, for example, Hubert fitzRalph paid 30 marks in respect of his manor and wood of Crich, and William fitzWakelin 60 marks for his manor of Stainsby, all in Derbyshire; in 1205 William of Eynesford obtained a similar charter for his manor of Stockton, and in 1209 Henry Biset owed the king £100 for the disafforestment of his wood of Borley and manor of Kidderminster, according to the metes and bounds declared under the eye of the Chief Justice of the Forest and the knights of the county of Worcestershire.
But the financial burden of the war with France compelled John to make much more sweeping concessions.
In March 1204 the men of Cornwall agreed to pay a fine of 2,000 marks and 20 palfreys worth 10 marks each for the disafforestment of the whole of the county, with the exception of two moors and two woods, and for having a sheriff chosen from their own nominees.
During the same month the men of Essex agreed to pay 500 marks and five palfreys for the disafforestment of Essex north of the ‘Stanestreet’.
Other royal charters freed from the Forest law Ryedale Forest in North Yorkshire, Brewood Forest in Shropshire, the New Forest in Staffordshire, and Wyresdale Forest in Lancashire.
In May the men of Devon agreed to pay the enormous fine of 5,000 marks for the disafforestment of their county outside the bounds of Dartmoor and Exmoor Forests, and the men of ‘Hertfordlythe’(Hartforth) in North Yorkshire owed 100 marks and two palfreys for a similar charter in respect of their forest.
Such was John's desperate need of money that substantial sums were ordered to be paid by the ‘collectors of the fine’ directly to the king's servants and into the king's Chamber.
In 1207 the ‘barons, knights, free tenants and all the men of the rape of Hastings’ agreed to pay 60 marks and one palfrey for a grant ‘that they and their heirs should be quit in perpetuity of suits, summonses and pleas of the forest’.
At the end of the reign John's desperate situation produced a further crop of charters of disafforestment in 1215 — for the remainder of Cornwall in return for a  fine of 1,200 marks and four palfreys paid by the men of that county; for Nassaburgh hundred in Northamptonshire, for which the Abbot of Peterborough paid 1,220 marks; and for the Abbot of Abbey Dore's lands in Treville Forest, for which the abbot paid 600 marks and ten palfreys.
The charters defined the rights to be enjoyed by the inhabitants of the disafforested areas.
The men of Devon were in 1204 granted the right to ‘assart, impark, take all kinds of venison, have dogs, bows and arrows and all kinds of weapons, and to make deerleaps’, except on the outskirts of the forests of Dartmoor and Exmoor, where neither deerleaps nor enclosures might be made.
They were to be punishable under the Forest laws, however, if their dogs coursed in the royal forest.
Only the barons, knights and free tenants were to enjoy these rights.
In Cornwall, only those who had contributed to the fine made in 1204 were to be allowed to hunt and take the deer within the disafforested districts.
If anyone else did so, his horses and dogs were to be forfeited to the contributaries, and he was to pay an amercement to the king.
Such a condition was obviously inserted to encourage Cornishmen to make their contributions to the royal coffers, but its enforcement against individual landowners would appear to have been impracticable once disafforestment had taken place.
3 Concessions in the Great Charter 1215 and the Charter of the Forest 1217.
The Forest Perambulations of 1218 and 1219.
The Re-issue of the Charter of the Forest and the Perambulations of 1225.
When opposition to John's misrule came to a head in 1215, the forest figured prominently among the grievances which the barons presented to him.
He sought refuge in vague and ambiguous promises.
In the Great Charter he undertook to put out of the forest ‘at once’ the districts which he himself had afforested, and the rivers he had placed ‘in defence’.
But he only promised to ‘do justice’ regarding the forests created by Henry II and Richard I. An inquiry was to be made in every county by an elected jury of twelve knights into ‘evil customs’of forests, warrens and rivers, and these customs were to be abolished within forty days, provided that the king, or, in his absence, the Justiciar, were first informed.
A ‘revolutionary committee’ of barons seemed about to take control of the central government: the forest would have had short shrift from them.
In desperation the king and his advisers persuaded the Archbishops of Canterbury and Dublin and six other bishops to subscribe to a declaration that the article of the Great Charter regarding ‘evil customs’ was not to be construed as abolishing any customary laws essential to the continued existence of the forest.
The outbreak of civil war and the death of King John saved it: when the Great Charter was re-issued on 12 November 1216, after the accession of the infant Henry III, article 48 regarding ‘evil customs, was one of the ‘difficult and doubtful’ clauses which were omitted and postponed for further consideration.
Some concessions were, however, inevitable, and on 6 November 1217 the Earl Marshal issued the Charter of the Forest in the king's name.
No one was henceforth to suffer death or mutilation for taking the king's deer: the penalties were to be limited to amercement, imprisonment or exile.
A royal pardon was granted to all men outlawed for such offences before the king's coronation in 1216, and also for all assarts, purprestures and waste in the forests before then.
All lands afforested by Henry II or his sons were to be disafforested.
Owners of lands in the forests were henceforth to be allowed to bring them into cultivation and to make mills, fishponds and other constructions outside the covert, to agist their pigs in their woods at their pleasure, and to have all the eyries and honey in them.
Forest dwellers were not to be compelled to attend the swanimotes, nor those who lived outside the forest to attend the Forest Eyre, unless they were accused of an offence, or were sureties for someone else.
The number of foresters was to be limited under the supervision of the regarders: no warden or local Forest officer was to hold pleas of the forest, which were reserved for the Forest Eyre.
The dues exacted for unlawed dogs and for cheminage were defined and limited, and the foresters were forbidden henceforth to make  scotale or to exact contributions from the forest inhabitants.
Bishops and barons were to have the right to take one or two deer when passing through the royal forest.
In pursuance of the Forest Charter, the Council of Regency on 24 July 1218 ordered twelve law-worthy knights to be chosen in each Forest county by the sheriff and four worthy knights.
They were to make perambulations, distinguishing between those districts which ought to remain in the forest, and those which ought to be put out.
The sheriff was then to send the record to the king.
But in some counties the forest dwellers had not waited for these instructions.
On 3 July the men of Huntingdonshire had made a perambulation in their county, which had until then been entirely forest, a perambulation which was declared to be ‘in accordance with the Charter of the Forest’.
The perambulators swore that Henry II had afforested the whole of Huntingdonshire, with the exception of the demesne hays of Weybridge, Sapley and Harthay; the county ought therefore to be disafforested, except those hays and the king's demesne woods of Brampton and Alconbury.
In Rutland the jurors swore on 25 July that a great part of the county had been afforested by Henry II, though there is evidence that this had been done by Henry I. Subsequent returns for Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire and Somerset also demanded extensive disafforestments.
The regents were not prepared to accept such returns.
In January 1219 the sheriff of Huntingdon was ordered to see that the Forest was kept as it was in the time of King John: the perambulating jury was summoned before the Council, amerced and imprisoned.
On 20 July another perambulation of the Huntingdonshire Forest was ordered to be made.
But the men of the county stood firm: their perambulation, made ten days later, exactly repeated the assertions made the year before.
The perambulations of the other forests were as little to the liking of the regents, and in December 1219 they ordered fresh perambulations to be made in all the forest counties.
All districts afforested by Henry 11 and John were to be disafforested after examination of the returns by the Justiciar and the Council of Regency.
Perambulations which appear to have been made pursuant to these instructions are extant for the counties of  Buckingham, Cumberland, Huntingdon, Oxford, Shropshire, Yorkshire and Wiltshire.
Once more they claimed the disafforestment of extensive areas.
The regents were still unwilling to accept verdicts of such dubious historicity.
In some instances they temporised: in May 1221 they conceded that ‘the knights and free tenants of the forest of Berkshire’ should elect ‘two law-worthy and discreet knights’of their number to keep the forest, under the Chief Justice of the Forest, until Henry III came of age, when a final decision would be made about disafforestment.
In the mean time, the Forest administration was to be carried on as usual.
But on 30 October the regents once more affirmed the rights of the Crown: they ordered Hugh de Neville, the Chief Justice of the Forest, to cause the royal forests to be kept by the same metes and bounds as they had been in the time of King John before the war between him and his barons.
The perambulating juries contended that only the ‘ancient demesne’ of the Crown should remain subject to the Forest law.
They relied on oral tradition, a doubtful guide concerning such a hated institution as the forest.
Moreover, they undoubtedly claimed the disafforestment of districts which had been put out of the forest during the reign of Stephen, and subsequently reclaimed by Henry II.
But the Angevin kings regarded Stephen as a usurper: they considered that such districts were not covered by the disafforestment clauses.
Further gestures of conciliation, however, had to be made in 1224.
Louis VIII of France overran Poitou and attacked Gascony, and money was needed to finance Richard of Cornwall's campaigns to recover and defend these possessions of the English Crown.
On 1 February of the following year, therefore, the Great Council granted the king an aid of a fifteenth of all moveables, and in return the Charter of the Forest was re-issued.
Five days later Hugh de Neville, and eight other commissioners were appointed to supervise the making of yet another series of perambulations.
They were to be made in each Forest county by an elected jury of twelve knights, two or more knights nominated by the Crown, and the foresters of fee and verderers.
But no woods were to be felled or venison taken in the districts claimed to be disafforested until the perambulations had  been notified to the Council, which would decide what was to be done.
The resulting verdicts amounted, once again, to a demand for the abolition of the Forest jurisdiction outside the king's demesnes.
On 3 April 1225 the Huntingdonshire jurors exactly repeated the earlier perambulations of 1218 and 1219.
In Surrey, Staffordshire, Sussex, Leicestershire, Rutland, Nottinghamshire, Lancashire and Dorset the jurors declared that all the forests there had been established since the accession of Henry II, and that only those lands and woods held by him in demesne — the ‘ancient demesnes of the Crown,— could, according to the Charter of the Forest, remain in the Forest.
In Wiltshire even one of these, Boreham Wood in Savernake, was put out.
In Essex there were to remain in the Forest only the half hundred of Waltham and parts of the hundreds of Ongar and Becontree, said to have been afforested before 1154, and the royal demesnes of Havering, Hatfield, Chelmsford and Kingswood near Colchester.
Such verdicts caused controversy and bitter illwill between the people and the Forest officers.
In 1226 Roger Gernet, hereditary warden of the royal forest of Lancaster, and one of his foresters were accused of causing the death of Hugh of Wyresdale.
The accusation was declared to have been made by Hugh's widow and family ‘from ill will and hatred, because Roger was reproached concerning the perambulation of the forest in those parts not properly performed’.
The regents were nevertheless compelled to accept these verdicts for the time being.
In August 1225 they ordered the disafforestment of the whole of the forest of Rutland, with the exception of the royal demesne woods of Oakham and Ridlington, and confirmed the perambulations in Surrey, Staffordshire and Sussex.
Private chases created by tenants-in-chief since 1154 outside their own demesnes were likewise abrogated, in accordance with the provisions of the Forest Charter.
Roger of Wendover says that the inhabitants of the disafforested districts made full use of their newly acquired liberties, by cutting and selling timber from their woods, making assarts and bringing suitable waste land into cultivation, and hunting the deer.
‘The very dogs’, he says, ‘who had formerly been used to have their paws cut, rejoiced in their freedom’.
But the king's advisers were merely temporizing.
In May 1225 they had written to Hugh de Neville:
You have signified to us…that the perambulators of the forest in the county of Dorset…wish to disafforest the whole of that county, except the wood of Hartley, the ‘broil’(or wood) of Watmoor, and the park of Gillingham, to our loss and injury…
You are strictly to forbid them to deprive us of anything which ought of right to belong to us.
But if they nevertheless persist in making that perambulation in the manner aforesaid, we must endure it for the present, and await an opportune time to amend it.
The king's advisers decided in 1226 that the opportunity had arrived.
On 26 October they ordered the sheriffs of Shropshire, Hampshire, Yorkshire and Huntingdonshire to make public proclamations forbidding anyone to make waste, sales or gifts of wood, assarts or purprestures in their woods within the royal forest by reason of the perambulations, until further orders.
The Revision of the Perambulations by Henry III.
The Exploitation of the Forest by Household officials During Henry III's Personal Rule: 1227–59
On 9 January 1227 Henry III declared himself to be of full age, and immediately began measures to reclaim the Forest rights of his crown.
Beginning on the very next day, orders were sent to the sheriffs of Shropshire, Rutland, Nottingham, Leicester, Hampshire, Berkshire, Oxford, Huntingdon, Surrey and Warwick.
The foresters of fee were to be summoned to appear before the king to show by what warrant they held their bailiwicks: likewise everyone who had assumed any liberty in the forest since 1217, to produce his authority.
The jurors who had made the perambulations in 1225 were summoned to explain why they had put out of the forest districts which had been forest before 1154, and also royal demesnes.
Lands disafforested during the reign of the usurper Stephen and  subsequently reclaimed by Henry II were not within the terms of the Charter of the Forest.
The jurors, having appeared before the king, were induced, probably by threats of amercement and imprisonment, to acknowledge their error and to modify their perambulations; they then received the king's pardon.
The Gloucestershire jury, for example, in 1228 re-defined the boundaries of the Forest of Dean at their widest extent — that is to say , the rivers Severn and Wye, and a northern boundary running from Goodrich castle in the west through Ross and Newent to Gloucester castle in the east.
They swore that the forest had existed by these bounds from ancient times.
In nine counties the forests were ordered to be kept by the same bounds as before the war between King John and his barons; on 27 October 1228 the juries who had made the perambulations of the Yorkshire forests of Galtres and Farndale, and the forest between Ouse and Derwent, obediently amended their verdicts.
In the counties of Nottingham, Hampshire, Essex, Northampton, Somerset and Wiltshire large areas were likewise reclaimed into the forest.
Boreham Wood in Savernake was reclaimed as a royal demesne wood by the warden, Geoffrey Esturmy, and there were similar reversals in the Dorset forests of Gillingham and Bere.
The revised perambulations did, however, make extensive concessions in Derbyshire, Northamptonshire and Wiltshire; the hundred of Tendring in Essex was disafforested, as was the whole of Sussex with the exception of two demesne woods — the ‘broils of Chichester’ and ‘Falconer's Wood’.
The men of Leicestershire gave the king £100 to have yet another perambulation: he finally conceded in 1235 that that county should be put out of the forest with the exception of the manor of Withcote, which was ancient demesne of the Crown.
To ensure freedom from the Forest law the inhabitants of the districts disafforested in Nottinghamshire paid 20 marks in 1228 for exemption from suit at the Forest courts.
During the period of his personal government, however, Henry III was compelled by shortage of money to follow the practice of Richard I and John of selling charters of disafforestment.
In May 1227 he granted such a charter for the greater part of Berkshire, and in June 1228 for most of the forest in Gloucestershire east of the  Severn; in October 1229 for Ombersley and Horewell in Worcestershire; and in April 1230 for Kesteven in Lincolnshire.
On 16 July 1232 the king confirmed a perambulation which substantially reduced the extent of Sherwood Forest, and in July 1234 he disafforested the forest ‘between Ouse and Derwent’, with the exception of the hay of Langwith.
In November 1251 Henry III granted to the men of Archenfield in Herefordshire freedom from the Forest jurisdiction, and in the next year he ordered the sheriff:
to distrain by their lands and chattels all those who shared in that liberty, and have lands within the bounds of the disafforested districts, to contribute towards the payment of the 200 marks to the King, in proportion to the lands they had in the said district, and the advantage they gained from the disafforestment.
The extent of the royal forests was also diminished by Henry III's grants to members of his family.
In 1239 he gave the Forest of Dartmoor to his brother Richard, Earl of Cornwall, and his heirs, and in 1267 Amounderness and Lonsdale Forests in Lancashire and Pickering Forest in Yorkshire to his second son Edmund, Earl of Lancaster and his heirs.
Edmund later received from Edward I the right to appoint Forest justices of his own whenever the King's judges went on eyre in the royal forests, and to receive the fines and amercements therefrom.
On the accession of Henry IV, these Lancastrian forests of course came once again into the hands of the Crown.
Henry III was also ‘lavish in grants of liberties scarcely to be distinguished from complete disafforestments’, such as the grant of right of chase in all his lands, within and without the forest, to the Bishop of Winchester.
Other districts were illegally withdrawn from the Forest jurisdiction by magnates to make their private chases — such as the Earl Marshal's chase near Chepstow, carved out of the Forest of Dean early in Henry III's reign; the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield's chase of Cannock; and the Bishop of Ely's chase of Somersham.
The king's foresters and verderers complained at the Huntingdon Forest Eyre in 1286 that they had gone to Benwick to make an inquest of the venison.
The Bishop of Ely claimed Benwick as part of his chase: they had been  met by the bishop's bailiff, leading three priests in full vestments, with Bible, cross and candle, ‘so that they could make no inquest there that day’.
Despite all these inroads into the royal forest, the hated system was enforced after 1227 over a large part of England.
Henry III's interpretation of the Charter of the Forest was rejected by his subjects, who thought him guilty of a flagrant breach of the promises made by the Charter.
The chronicler Roger of Wendover wrote that at the Council of Oxford in 1227, ‘the King caused to be cancelled and annulled all the charters of liberties of the forest, although they had already been in force in the whole realm for two years’: the earls who rebelled in July were said to have compelled the king to restore the charters by the threat of armed force.
It was the policy of Henry III, moreover, to dislodge ecclesiastical and lay magnates from the great offices of state, and to replace them by Household officials who would make the central administration a more pliant instrument of his will.
Poitevin favourites were appointed to key positions; the Household clerk, Peter des Rivaux, was in 1232 appointed for life to be Chief Justice of the Forests of England, and also warden of the Forests of Clarendon, Gillingham and Dean.
Even after the fall of the hated Poitevins in 1234, ‘Henry III in no wise gave up the policy of making his household the centre of the administration of the State’.
Foreign dependants of the Court continued to be appointed to important Forest wardenships — such as Amaury de St Amand, Steward of the Household 1233–40, who was also warden of the Forest of Dean during the greater part of that time, and Peter Chaceporc, the able Poitevin Keeper of the Wardrobe 1241–54, who was appointed to the same wardenship in May 1248.
But it was an English Household clerk who in 1244 persuaded his royal master that his financial difficulties would be solved by making rigorous inquiries into encroachments on the Forest rights of the Crown, and imposing heavy amercements on those who made them.
Robert Passelewe was a Household clerk who after 1228 had been attached to the Poitevin party, shared in their downfall in 1234, and was restored to favour in 1236; his appointment in 1246 as justice of the Forests south of Trent therefore brings the  administrative history of the forest into line with that of the Household and the great Departments of State.
The employment of clerks in the Forest administration was anathema to the leaders of the English clergy: they successfully opposed Passelewe's preferment beyond the archdeaconry of Lewes.
In April 1244 he was elected Bishop of Chichester on the king's nomination, but Boniface of Savoy, the Archbishop of Canterbury, rejected him as ignorant, and declared his election void; his rejection was confirmed by Innocent IV.
When he was presented to the church of Northampton, Robert Grosseteste, the saintly Bishop of Lincoln, refused to admit him.
The bishop declared that for a clerk in holy orders to sit as a justice in eyre for forest pleas was contrary to the canons of the Church, and rendered him ineligible for an office involving the cure of souls.
What particularly incensed the good bishop was that Passelewe as a Forest judge had ordered the arrest and imprisonment of clerks as well as laymen, and had thus flouted clerical privileges.
Passelewe's unpopularity was due in large measure to his energy and zeal in the royal service.
Between December 1244 and December 1249 he and his colleagues heard pleas of the Forest in thirteen counties south of Trent.
Concurrently two commissions were sent out to conduct a searching investigation into the condition of the southern forests; the articles of their inquiry followed the usual pattern of those of the Forest Eyre.
Passelewe seems to have used these inquiries as proceedings preliminary to the Forest Eyre itself, as when he sat at Gloucester in January 1248.
He pursued his task of raising money for the king with vigour and severity.
The chroniclers as usual were hostile.
Matthew Paris says that he convicted innumerable monks and laymen, nobles and commoners, on a multitude of indictments for breaches of the Forest law, and, in order to enrich the king, imposed such heavy penalties on the offenders that many were flung into prison, many were despoiled of all their goods and were forced to eke out a bare existence in misery, and many others became exiles and wandering beggars.
Many forest landowners were in fact heavily amerced by Passelewe: in 1264 the Abbot of Bruern paid 500 marks for acquittance of all the trespasses of which he had been convicted at the Oxford Forest Eyre  in 1245.
Passelewe rigorously investigated encroachments on the Forest rights of the Crown.
Jurors were required to restate the Forest bounds, for example in the counties of Dorset and Huntingdon, under the baleful eyes of this new team of royal servants.
Woods belonging to subjects which had been unlawfully withdrawn from the forest — such as the Abbess of Romsey's woods of Ashton Steeple and Edington in Wiltshire, and a wood belonging to Stratford Mortimer in Berkshire — were once again reclaimed into it.
Men of the king's demesnes, as in Rodley in the Forest of Dean, were required to show by what warrant they exercised their rights of common and estovers of dead and dry wood in the forest, and if they could produce none they were required to pay for them.
Many Forest officers fared ill at Passelewe's hands.
John de Neville, an important English baron and a former Chief Justice of the Forest, who held for life the wardenship of the forests between Oxford and Stamford bridges, was convicted of grave offences, amerced in the enormous sum of 2,000 marks, and deprived of his wardenship, which Passelewe in 1246 secured for himself.
Neville only escaped utter ruin by the intercession of his peers with the king.
Yet, says Matthew Paris with relish, he did not deserve to be rescued in this way, for he had shown no mercy to others when he himself had been an officer of the Forest.
Many others forfeited their bailiwicks for breaches of the Forest law: they included John of Monmouth, who lost the custody of the New Forest, Richard de Munfichet, the forest of Essex, and the wardens of the forests of Aliceholt and Woolmer, Wychwood and Braydon.
The wardens of the forests of Chute, Porchester and Dean were mulcted in large sums at Passelewe's forest Eyres.
Many foresters of fee in the forests of Clarendon, Essex, Dean and New Forest were likewise removed from office or fined.
Hugh of Stratford, for example, forester of fee in Whittlewood Forest, was ejected from his office:
by Robert Passelewe, justice of the Forest…for the destruction of underwood in the King's demesne wood by his customary tenants, and for a little assart made by him at Brede, and a purpresture at Pollesley on which he built houses.
Robert Passelewe placed a number of Household officials in charge of the forfeited wardenships.
He no doubt intended to bring the local Forest administration more closely under his control: he certainly used his opportunities to promote his own relatives.
William Passelewe, another King's clerk, Hugh Passelewe and Simon Passelewe were among those appointed as Forest wardens at this time.
Under the new regime the farms paid by the wardens and foresters of fee of the New Forest, the Forest of Dean and the forests between Oxford and Stamford bridges were substantially increased.
William Passelewe, for example, accounted directly at the Exchequer for £224.
14s.
11½d. of the revenues of the New Forest from January 1246 until Michaelmas 1247, and by then had paid most of it in.
His predecessors had farmed these revenues for less than £50 a year, and in some years failed to make any payment at all.
These new accounting procedures do not appear to have lasted long, however.
In most cases the hereditary wardens and foresters of fee, or their heirs, were able within a few years to recover their bailiwicks by payment of substantial fines to the Crown.
In 1250 Robert Passelewe was supplanted in the king's favour by Geoffrey of Langley — by sycophantic arts, according to his severe critic, Matthew Paris.
Langley was a Household official who had assisted Robert Passelewe in carrying out the great series of Forest Eyres and inquests south of the Trent between 1244 and 1249.
In March 1250 he was appointed Chief justice of ‘all the forests of England on both sides of the Trent’, so that the forest administration was once again united under a single head.
Early in 1250 he went on Eyre in some of the southern Forest counties.
He subjected the perambulations made at the beginning of the reign to searching investigation, and re-afforested the forest of Bere in Dorset.
He turned his attention mainly to the northern forests, however; he examined the local juries as to the way in which they had been kept, and held Forest Eyres in all the northern Forest counties.
Matthew Paris says that he performed his duties with cunning, shamelessness and violence, and extorted from the northern landowners an ‘incredible’ and ‘stupefying’amount of money.
His large entourage were all animated by a spirit of hostility  towards the northerners: any nobleman who murmured against them was instantly thrown into gaol.
Langley spared neither blood nor fortune — he would beggar a nobleman for taking a fawn or a hare wandering on the road.
He ‘miserably impoverished all the forest districts, without reason or pity.
The violence of the language used by the chronicler of St Albans shows his hatred of the Forest system, which was so often used to extort money from the monasteries.
But Chancery and Exchequer records provide corroboration.
The issues of Langley's Forest Eyres in Cumberland and Northumberland amounted to about five times as much as previous eyres had brought in.
Among the barons amerced were Robert de Muscamp, adjudged to pay £100 at the Northumberland sessions, Ralph de Amundeville, fined 80 marks at York, and Ralph Bigod 40 marks at Nottingham.
Other sources of Forest revenue were vigorously exploited.
On 2 September 1251 Langley was commissioned ‘to cause the king's demesne parks and hays to be agisted by the king s agisters in those parts, throughout England, wherever there is mast.’
The agisters were ordered to pay the agistment dues into the Wardrobe or into the Exchequer, and the sheriffs were commanded to compel them to do so by distraint where necessary.
These energetic measures produced unusually large sums.
At the same time, the king, at Langley's suggestion, appointed four knights in each county to sell underwood belonging to the Crown, and in March 1252 the sheriffs of nine Forest counties were ordered to distrain them to carry out their duties.
Such vigour and severity helped to relieve the financial problems created by Henry III's improvidence, but it also increased the hostility of barons and people against the Forest system, and against the personal government of Henry III himself.
At the end of 1252, however, Geoffrey of Langley was relieved of his Forest office, and was sent to Scotland to act as counsellor to Henry III's daughter Margaret, Queen of Scotland.
Two Forest Justices were once more appointed, one for the forests north of the Trent, and the other for those in the south.
For the southern forests Henry III continued to appoint Household officials as justices — men like Robert Walerand, who held office from 1256 until 1259, and who enjoyed the confidence and even the  friendship of the king.
But such men neither exercised the extreme severity, nor attracted the bitter odium, of Passelewe and Langley.
Henry III continued to be in desperate need of money, however, and resorted yet again to the expedient of ordering large-scale sales of forest timber.
He had returned from Gascony at the end of 1254, after disastrous and expensive enterprises in France and in Sicily: in the following March commissioners were appointed for the sale of timber in the royal forests ‘for the relief of the King's debts’, with the assistance of two or three knights and the local Forest officers.
In May the warden of the Forest of Dean was ordered to pay 300 marks into the Wardrobe out of the proceeds, and in September to repay a royal debt of 200 marks to Robert Walerand.
In July 1256 James Fresel, a royal clerk, was sent to this forest to raise 1,000 marks, to be paid into the Wardrobe, by the same means, and as Henry III's financial difficulties increased he appointed Adam Grenville in April 1257 to raise another 3–4,000 marks by selling wood in the royal forests of England.
Growth of Opposition to the Forest System: 1232–59; the Forest and the Baronial Plan of Reform: 1259–65
In 1232 the Waverley annalist noted that it was now eight years since the king had confirmed the Great Charter and the Charter of the Forest and the bishops had pronounced sentence of excommunication against those who violated them.
He continued sadly, ‘But alas! the yoke of slavery is now become more burdensome, and conditions worse than before, especially with regard to the forests.’
His financial difficulties, however, compelled Henry III in 1237 and yet again in 1253 to repeat his confirmation of the Charters in return for an aid from the magnates.
In 1238 he ordered the Charter of the forest to be read out in full county court, and the concessions contained therein to be observed; but he was careful to add the proviso that ‘if any dispute or doubt arise regarding the articles of the Charter’ the Chief Justice of the Forest was to ‘seek the counsel of the King and his Court before anything    be done in regard thereto’.
The Archbishop of Canterbury and the bishops renewed the sentence of excommunication against the violators of the Charters in 1239 and in 1253; in the latter year they secured its confirmation by Pope Innocent IV.
But Henry III had no intention of surrendering the Forest rights of the Crown: demands for reform made at the Councils of 1254, 1256 and 1257 were fobbed off by royal promises which were never carried out.
Grievances relating to the forests therefore figured prominently in the ‘Petitions of the Barons’ brought forward at the Parliament of Oxford in June 1258.
The barons complained that Henry III had arbitrarily re-afforested woods and lands which had been put out of the forest by the perambulations of 1225; that he claimed the wardship of heirs to assarts made within the forest, to the detriment of the overlords in whose lands such assarts had been made; and that he made frequent grants of the right of free warren in disafforested areas, thereby restricting the free rights of hunting which ought to have been enjoyed by landowners in such districts.
When they took over power from the king, the ‘magnates of the Council’ on 11 September 1259 appointed Thomas Gresley, a reformer baron, as Justice of the southern forests, and later confirmed John d'Eyville, also a reformer baron, as Justice of the northern forests.
The articles of the Provisions of Westminster, issued in October, show however that the barons were following a cautious policy regarding the forest.
Commissions of inquiry regarding the state of the forests and abuses of the Forest law were appointed, but never sat, probably owing to the disintegration of the party of reform early in the next year.
Certain administrative changes at this time appear designed to effect a stricter supervision by the Exchequer over the collection of the Forest revenues, and to lessen the temptation to extortion by the Forest officers.
In November 1259 the barons in Council raised the annual salary of the Justice of the Forests south of Trent from 100 to 200 marks a year, and his colleague for the northern forests was in August 1260 granted an annual salary of 60 marks, instead of having to pay an annual farm of the same sum as he had previously done.
Also, the  wardens of the Forest of Dean, and of the forests between Oxford and Stamford bridges, were required to account directly at the Exchequer for the revenues of their bailiwicks, instead of farming them as had been the previous practice.
During the war between Henry III and Simon de Montfort from 1263 until 1265, the central administration was of course unable to enforce the Forest law, and the forest inhabitants were able to take the deer and cut wood at their pleasure.
But after the defeat and death of de Montfort at the battle of Evesham, the king on 2 September 1266 wrote to Roger Leyburn, Justice of the Forest north of Trent:
As the Earl of Leicester is now dead, in whose keeping the King was by reason of the disturbance in the realm, and now by the favour of God the King is snatched out of his hands and raised again to his former estate, whereby with the common consent of the realm the King has caused all things attempted by the Earl for the diminution of the King's right, honour and royal dignity to be revoked; and whereas the forests north of Trent, which before the war in the time of the Earl were preserved whole and uninjured, have been disafforested and destroyed to the King's disherison, the King commands the said Roger to re-afforest all the forests in his bailiwick as they were…before the war; and if any part thereof ought of right to be disafforested, the King is prepared to do full justice.
The Justices of the Forest were once more sent out on eyre to hear pleas of the Forest,, and to re-establish the Forest system in any districts which had been lost.
To this end local juries in Dorset, Hampshire, Surrey and Rutland were required to make sworn statements of the forest bounds in the presence of the King's judges.
The policy of appointing Household officials to the highest Forest offices was however abandoned.
Henceforth the Justices of the Forest were for the most part great barons, who often held extensive estates in or near the forests they administered.
Such was Roger de Clifford the Elder, who presided over the southern forests 1265–81, and his grandson Robert de Clifford, ‘one of the greatest barons of the age’ who headed the northern Forest administration 1297–1308.
The Struggle for Disafforestment Under Edward I: 1272–1307
Edward I enforced the Forest law with great energy and severity: he himself sat in judgement upon offenders against the venison.
The intervals between successive Forest Eyres became longer, but fines and amercements grew in number and amount.
Under the menacing eyes of Edward's Forest judges, juries in Essex, Hampshire, Gloucestershire, Derby, Staffordshire, Huntingdonshire and Northamptonshire restated the bounds of the forests in their counties at their widest extent.
In 1280, for example, ‘the metes and bounds of the New Forest from the first time that it was afforested’ were said to extend from the Test westwards to the Avon, and from the Solent northwards to the Wiltshire county boundary.
These bounds included extensive districts on the east, west and south-west claimed to be disafforested by the perambulations of 1217–18, 1298 and 1300.
When Charles I's Attorney-General sought to reclaim the long-lost Forest rights of his master, Crown, this group of returns was among the documents he triumphantly dug out of the records of the Exchequer.
Searching investigations were made by Edward's judges into all liberties exercised within the forest.
At Gloucester in 1282, for instance, Roger Bigod's chase near Chepstow was ordered to be seized into the king's hand.
After the Stafford Forest Eyre of 1286 the Bishop of Coventry had to pay the enormous fine of £1,000 to recover his ‘free chase’ within the royal forest of Cannock.
Important Forest officers did not escape.
In November 1286 Robert of Everingham, hereditary warden of Sherwood Forest, and ten others were released on bail from prison in Nottingham, to which they had been committed for venison offences.
At the Forest Eyre in January the judges deprived Robert of his wardenship, which was henceforth to be at the disposal of the Crown.
Such a policy intensified opposition to the Forest system: as early as 1277 the king was compelled to offer certain concessions.
On 1 March he published his intention of inviolably observing the  Charter of the Forest in all its articles: he appointed four commissioners to supervise the making in each forest county of ‘a true perambulation, namely that which was made in the time of the lord King Henry our father, which has not yet been challenged’.
The perambulations were to be made by juries of twelve law-worthy men in each county, in the presence of the commissioners and the foresters and verderers.
But no steps were to be taken to put them into effect until they had been communicated to the king, who, when he had satisfied himself that they had been made without prejudice, would decide what was to be done.
In Essex there was no modification of the forest bounds.
The jurors at the Forest Eyre, under the watchful eye of the judges, declared that the whole county south of the ‘Stanestreet’ should remain within the forest.
2 But in other counties desire to shake off the burden of the hated Forest law had fostered the growth of traditions which sought to justify its abolition.
In Somerset a jury declared that only a corner of north-west Somerset ought to remain within Exmoor Forest: another Somerset jury made the startling statement that King John had afforested all England!
In Hampshire, Wiltshire and Dorset also the jurors demanded the disafforestment of extensive areas.
Edward made a few concessions.
The forest of Blackmoor, the largest of the Dorset forests, was disafforested in 1279, and in the next year the forest of Northumberland, in return for an annual payment of 40 marks, was apportioned among the Forest landowners.
But the perambulations made between 1277 and 1279 in most cases came to nothing.
‘Hostility to the Forest system grew rapidly in the next twenty years.’
The king sailed for Flanders on 22 August 1297 to conduct the war with France.
In his absence the regents made concessions to the magnates in return for grants of taxes in aid of the war with Scotland.
The Charters were once again confirmed.
Copies were to be sent to all sheriffs, who were to publish them to the people; others were to be kept in all cathedral churches and read twice a year.
Sentence of excommunication was once again to be pronounced against those who violated them.
Yet another series of perambulations was ordered to be made, which once again claimed disafforestment of large areas, such as the whole of the Oxfordshire portion of Bernwood Forest, and part of the Buckinghamshire portion, and many vills, hamlets, woods and heaths in the Somerset forests outside the royal demesnes.
But these perambulations were nullified by the king's determination not to surrender his Forest rights.
Upon his return to England on 14 March 1298, the battle for disafforestment was fairly joined.
The barons demanded fresh confirmation of the Charters and a revision of the Forest boundaries in accordance with their interpretation of their provisions: this as a condition of their service in the Scottish campaign.
Edward still prevaricated, but at the Parliament of March 1299 the magnates extorted further concessions by the threat of armed force.
New perambulations were promised, but Edward reserved his coronation oath, the rights of his Crown, and his right and that of all others to challenge the perambulations.
The baronial leaders were incensed by these continued tergiversations: when the king's ordinance was read at St Paul's in London, there was uproar, and the terms of Edward's proclamation issued on 25 June showed that he realized the extent and intensity of hostility to the Forest.
He was beset by difficulties; it was impossible to carry out the perambulations during the harvest season.
He asked his people not to believe those who went about saying that he was not going to keep his promises.
This proclamation was to be read out in towns and other places without delay, in the presence of some ‘good religious’ who could read and so bear witness to its authenticity.
This proclamation was in fact made in the English language in Worcester on 4 July.
During the following months five judges presided over a new series of perambulations in the counties of Northampton, Huntingdon, Rutland, Oxford and Surrey.
The returns followed the familiar pattern.
The Rutland jurors swore on 7 December 1299 that all the vills and lands outside the bounds they then set out had been afforested in the time of King John.
In the Surrey part of Windsor Forest the verdict on 5 March 1300 was that ‘the whole county of Surrey was forest in the time of Henry II, who died seized of it.’
Richard I had disafforested the southern half, but they did not know whether  Henry II had afforested any district which had not been forest in the time of Henry I.
At the Parliament on 6 March 1300 fresh concessions were obtained.
The ‘Articles concerning the Charters’ ordained that they were to be observed in full, including those regarding disafforestment, and read out in every county court four times a year.
The appointment in every county of three elected commissioners to hear and determine pleas relating to breaches of the Charters, however, was rendered illusory by Edward's reservations and exceptions.
On 1 April 1300 six groups of justices were commissioned to conduct Forest perambulations in eighteen counties not covered by the commission of 1299.
The forest bounds were to be determined by a local jury in each county, in the presence of the justices, the Justice of the Forest or his deputy, and the foresters, ‘according to the tenor of the Forest Charter of Henry III, saving always the King's oath, the right of his Crown, and the actions and claims of the King and all others’.
Once again the declarations of the jurors reflected the wishes and interests of the forest inhabitants rather than the facts of recorded history.
The Warwickshire jurors, on being asked on what authority they had returned that ten townships ‘with their woods, wastes and fields’ had been afforested by King John, and that in 1154 there had been no royal forest in their county, replied that they knew by what their ancestors had related and by the common talk of the country.
In Staffordshire the jurors said that they knew ‘by the evidence of old people, and by those who best know the truth of the matter, and by perambulations previously made’.
The reliability of such evidence is shown by the fact that jurors in other counties swore that John had afforested Hewelsfield in the Forest of Dean, and the wood of Ross in Herefordshire, both of which are recorded in Domesday Book as being then within the royal forest.
It was on ‘evidence’ such as this that a Gloucestershire jury on 22 May 1300 reduced the Forest of Dean to the king's demesne lands and woods.
Twelve manors, a vill and four hamlets held by subjects on the west side of the Severn from Newent in the north to Lydney, Alvington and Aylburton in the south were named: they were said to have been afforested by John, and so were claimed to be free of the Forest law.
These were the ‘Seventeen  Towns’ disputed by counsel at the Gloucester Forest Eyre of 1634, when Charles I s ministers attempted to re-assert the ancient bounds of the forest.
In Staffordshire Cannock Forest was reduced to seven scattered demesne hays, and in Kinver Forest twenty-three vills and parts of six others were put out, despite the evidence of Domesday that Chasepool, Enville and Kidderminster were already in the forest in 1086.
The Rutland jurors again asserted that King John, who seems to have been cast by popular tradition as the villain of the piece, had afforested the greater part of the forest in that country, whereas it seems in fact to have been a creation of Henry I. In Exmoor, the Buckinghamshire part of Bernwood, Cumberland, Worcestershire and Wiltshire the perambulations of 1300 demanded more extensive disafforestments than ever before: more than half the forest area that remained in England was declared to be outside the ancient bounds.
Edward remained unwilling to surrender the Forest rights of his Crown.
On 20 January 1301 he met his Parliament at Lincoln, which had been summoned to consider the reports of the commissioners for disafforestment, and asked from the magnates a declaration that he could ratify the perambulations without injuring the Crown or violating his coronation oath.
They refused, and by the threat of armed rebellion they extorted from him once again the confirmation of the Charters, and the ratification of the perambulations made in 1299 and 1300.
But Edward was determined to avoid honouring these concessions, made under duress; in October 1301, when he appointed commissioners to make a perambulation in the Devon forests, he once again reserved the rights of his Crown.
In 1305 he found it expedient to issue an Ordinance of the Forest recognizing the disafforestments already carried out, but he declared that the inhabitants of such districts had forfeited their rights of common within the forest, and that the royal demesne should be kept in statu quo .
On 20 December Pope Clement V was persuaded to issue a Bull, declaring that the concessions Edward had made had been unjustly extorted from him by force, were incompatible with his coronation oath to defend the honour and rights of the Crown, and were therefore null and  void.
Edward then on 27 May 1306 promulgated another Ordinance of the Forest, revoking the disafforestments.
He recognised that there was general resentment of the oppressive conduct of the Forest officers, and made provision for regular inquiries into it, and for presentment of Forest offences to be made at the attachment courts, as a procedure preliminary to the Forest Eyre.
But Edward's subjects can have had little faith in these oft-repeated promises of reform: they continued to regard disafforestment as the only effective remedy for their grievances.
They were once again disappointed in their hopes, however.
The royal demesne vills, fields and woods in Sherwood Forest, for example, which had been put out of the forest by the perambulation of 1300, were now ‘entirely put back into the forests by the said King Edward’.
The Struggle Continued Under Edward II: 1307–1327
During the early years of Edward II's extravagant and oppressive personal rule, his unpopular favourites were placed at the head of the Forest administration.
Hugh Despenser the Elder was re-appointed Justice of the Forests south of Trent in March 1308, and, shortly after the king went north in September 13 10 to escape the Lords Ordainers, he appointed Piers Gaveston to be Justice of the northern forests for life, with wide powers to enclose and arrent the forest wastes and audit the agisters' accounts, and unprecedented authority to remove verderers and appoint his own men in their places.
The forests continued to figure prominently among the grievances of the English people.
The famous Ordinances which Edward 11 was compelled to accept in October 1311 once again denounced the oppressive conduct of Forest officials who secured the conviction of innocent persons by means of irregular and unlawful procedures.
It was decreed that they were all to be suspended from their duties: commissioners were to hear complaints against them, and those found guilty were to be permanently removed from office.
The Forest Charter of 1217 and the Forest Ordinance of 1306 were to be strictly observed.
The Lords Ordainers removed Gaveston and 
Despenser from their Forest offices, and replaced them by members of the baronial opposition.
Edward II, however, had no intention of keeping the promises which had been extorted from him.
In January 1312, as soon as he felt himself to be beyond the reach of the barons, the favourites were restored.
On 3 April Gaveston was again appointed Justice of the northern forests, but in May he was captured at Scarborough by the Earl of Lancaster and hostile barons.
He was beheaded by them, and replaced by an adherent of the Lords Ordainers.
The elder Despenser, however, was re-appointed in June 1312 as Justice of the southern forests, and took part in the efforts by the king and his advisers to have the Ordinances set aside as invalid and illegal.
Humiliating defeat at Bannockburn in 1314, again placed the king in the hands of the baronial opposition.
A general parliament was held from January to March 1315: Hugh Despenser was removed from the Council, and replaced as Justice of the southern forests by Ralph de Monthermer Earl of Gloucester, one of the Ordainers.
Parliament granted taxes in return for the king's promise to grant the ‘requests of the Commons’ for the observance of the Charters and the Ordinances, and the appointment of commissioners to make perambulations of the forests.
On 20 April the sheriffs were ordered to make proclamation that the king intended to fulfil his promises, and that he had already appointed the commissioners.
o But the inhabitants of Galtres Forest did not wait.
They at once proceeded to make a perambulation without authorization, and publicly proclaimed in the city of York that any forester who entered the forest would lose his head.
On 4 May Edward ordered the Justice of the Forest to examine this perambulation, and the sheriff to arrest those who had made it.
On 10 May he himself appointed five commissions of judges to make Forest perambulations in twenty-three counties ‘pursuant to the Ordinances, so that the Charter of the Forest may be observed’.
But his subjects evidently doubted his good faith, for in June the tax collectors in Staffordshire and Shropshire were resisted on the ground that the king had not carried out his promises regarding the forest.
At the Lincoln Parliament in January 1316 the baronial opposition, led by Thomas, Earl of Lancaster, the king's cousin, seized control of the central government.
In response to a petition by the ‘prelates, earls, barons and commonalty of the realm’, Edward II was compelled to agree that the Forest perambulations made in his father's reign should be enforced in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the Forest, provided that:
if it shall appear by the record of the books, rolls and memoranda of his court, or by ancient perambulations, or by any other sufficient evidence, that any royal demesnes, or lands or woods which were in the forests before the time of Henry II, had been excluded by the late perambulations, then they shall be re-afforested.
The Treasurer and barons of the Exchequer were ordered to examine Domesday Book and other records and documents in the Exchequer and Treasury which might throw light on this question, and to report to the Council: former officers of the Forest, such as Hugh Despenser, were to deliver up to the Chancellor and Treasurer all relevant documents in their possession and custody.
The foresters of fee were to bring their rolls before the Council, and were ‘to be there in person, to propound the King's claim’.
Two knights were to be elected in each county court to appear before the Council ‘with full power to assent for the community of the county as to what shall be ordained…concerning the forests’: all landowners who wished to claim the disafforestment of their lands and woods were to be there to substantiate their claim.
The knights met the Council at Lincoln in July 1316, and the king's officers drew up for them a list of ‘divers errors’ contained in the perambulations of 1300.
In Somerset, for example, they showed by the evidence of Domesday that Dulverton and Winford were of the ‘ancient demesne’ of the Crown of England, and therefore ought to remain in Exmoor Forest, according to the provisions of the Charter.
The long list of townships claimed for disafforestment had in fact remained in the Forest since the beginning of Henry III's personal rule, and had been acknowledged and treated as such by judges and juries at successive Forest Eyres.
But these objections were swept aside.
Parliament granted a tax of a sixteenth, and in return it was promised that the perambulations  of Edward I should be confirmed, and that new perambulations should be made before Christmas in the forests where they had not been made in the previous reign.
The Justices of the Forest were to drive the deer from all disafforested districts into the remaining forests during the forty days after disafforestment: after the expiration of that time places put out of the forest were to be exempt from the operation of the Forest law.
Commissioners to make the new perambulations were appointed — for example in Somerset, Dorset, Devon and in Rutland, but it is doubtful how far they proceeded: no perambulation had been made in Devon by November 13 18, and fresh commissioners were appointed to perambulate the Devon and Nottinghamshire forests before Whitsun 1319.
During this period of weakness and confusion, in any case, the inhabitants of large districts cast off the Forest law, without scrupulous consideration of the reservations in the king's grant of disafforestment.
By June 1318 the forest of Selwood in Wiltshire had been so much reduced in size that the warden's farm of £10 a year could no longer be paid, and the Forest of Dean had been reduced by a quarter before the end of the reign.
In October 1321 the king took up arms to restore his personal authority.
On 11 February 1322 he recalled his favourites; on 14 February he called upon Aymer de Valence, Earl of Pembroke, justice of the Forest south of Trent, to arm a ‘suitable number’ of foresters and bring them to Coventry.
They must have played their part in the overthrow of Thomas of Lancaster and the Lords Ordainers at the battle of Boroughbridge on 16 March.
After his triumph Edward appointed the elder Despenser as justice of the Forest south of Trent for life, repealed the Ordinances, but republished the Ordinance of the Forest of 1306.
He soon turned his attention to the districts which had been put out of the forest earlier in the reign.
In 1323 the Justices of the Forest were ordered to recall all the royal demesne woods which had been disafforested contrary to the Charter of the Forest: Henry Scrope, appointed Justice of the Forest north of Trent on 10 September, reafforested thirty-three townships in the Forest of Galtres alone.
The king himself took a hand in the vigorous re-enforcement of the Forest law.
He was at Pickering castle from 8 to 22 August 1323: an  inquiry was held regarding venison trespasses in Pickering Forest since that forest had been forfeited to the Crown by the treason of the Earl of Lancaster'.
Over a hundred offenders, including Northern magnates like Sir John Fauconberg and Sir Robert Capon, were indicted by the sworn evidence of the Forest officers and other jurors.
The king instructed the sheriff to arrest them, and they were to be kept in prison until further orders.
Sir John Fauconberg was only released after undertaking to pay a fine of 100 marks.
This renewed severity was bitterly resented by the king's subjects.
At the parliament of November 1325 ‘the King's liege men’ complained that:
the ministers of the forest…have taken again into the forest lands and woods as entirely as they were at any time, contrary to the Charter…and cause ditches to be thrown down, and interfere with their cultivation, and take from them grievous and excessive ransoms.
Numerous disputes arose between the Forest officers and the owners of lands and woods they had re-afforested.
The Abbess of Barking complained that her wood of Alderfen, belonging to her manor of Tollesbury, had been recalled into the Forest of Essex, ‘although she says the wood is not in the forest and ought not to be’.
Humphrey of Bassingbourn's wood of Bamfield, and the dowager Countess of Pembroke's manor of Thorpe Waterville had likewise been adjudged to be part of the forest of Rockingham; the Prior of Kenilworth complained that his wood of Wolverton, pertaining to his manor of Salford Priors in Warwickshire, and Robert Burdet that his wood of Arrow had been re-afforested as part of the forest of Feckenham.
The king ordered these disputes to be heard and decided by the King's Council on 28 June 1326.
But there followed the downfall and deaths of the Despensers and of their royal master.
Queen Isabella and Mortimer sought to gain popular support by a conciliatory policy regarding the forest.
At the first Parliament of Edward III, held in February and March 1327, charges were brought against William of Claydon, the elder Despenser's deputy as Justice of the southern forests.
He was alleged to have recalled into the forest without warrant ‘vills, lands and woods’ which had been put out by Edward I's perambulations and  confirmed by Edward II: he had, in breach of the Charter of the Forest, amerced men living outside the forest for not attending the Forest Eyre.
By heavy amercements and by imprisonment he had compelled the regarders to make their regard in the ‘purlieus’— that is, in districts which had been disafforested; he had prevented the forest inhabitants from exercising their rights, even those conceded by royal charter and writs, unless they paid fines therefor before the Forest justices, and at Forest inquests he had compelled Forest officers and juries, under threat of imprisonment, to indict persons whom they knew to be innocent.
Parliament further complained that Edward II's confirmation in August 13 16 of the Forest perambulations made in the previous reign had never been carried into effect.
To remedy these grievances it was enacted that the Charter of the Forest was to be kept in all its articles, that the perambulations made in the time of Edward I were to be observed, that those perambulations which still remained to be made should be made as quickly as possible, and that the forest boundaries in each county should be confirmed by royal charters, as laid down in the perambulations.
Commissioners were accordingly appointed to make perambulations in the forests of Devon and Surrey: they were to be returned into the Chancery before Christmas, but were not to be put into effect until the officers of the central administration had had an opportunity of comparing them with the earlier perambulations of Edward I's time.
Once more the inhabitants of the northern forests showed their impatience of these delays.
In the ‘free chase’ of Knaresborough, which had been assigned to Queen Isabella for life, they made an unauthorized perambulation and acted upon it by felling trees, planting hedges, and hunting the deer without warrant.
On 10 May 1327 the steward of the castle and honour of Knaresborough was ordered to go and reclaim any encroachments made upon the chase in this way.
Pursuant to the promises made to Parliament, four commissioners were appointed on 30 March 1327, and sat at Chertsey to decide the fate of the Surrey part of Windsor Forest.
The deputy warden, John of Swynnerton, urged that consideration should be given to a perambulation made at Lambeth in 1282 before Roger Brabazon and  other judges.
But the perambulating jury dismissed these proceedings as having been made under duress of Hugh Despenser, then Edward I's Justice of the Forest.
They followed instead the verdict of 1225, and declared that all Surrey was out of the forest.
After repeated petitions by the ‘commonalty of the county’, charters confirming the disafforestment of Surrey were finally granted on 26 December 1327: they were to be proclaimed in the county court, and the warden of Windsor forest was ordered to drive out all game from the disafforested areas into the remaining forest within the next forty days.
In like manner the claim of a Staffordshire jury that a large part of Cannock Forest had been created by Henry II was proved false by earlier records; nevertheless their verdict was accepted and Cannock Forest much reduced in extent.
On 5 April 1329 Isabella and Mortimer appointed as Justice of the Forest south of Trent Sir John Maltravers, who had been one of the gaolers, and probably one of the murderers of Edward II: when Edward III assumed personal authority in the following year, Maltravers saved himself by flight to France.
The queen and Mortimer, however, persisted in their policy of concession to the end.
On 12 July 1330, during the last months of their rule, the perambulations made during the reigns of Edward I and Edward 11 were ordered to be observed in every particular, and the Forest officers in Shropshire were forbidden to take any action against the owners of lands within the disafforested districts who had taken the deer or cut timber there.
Partial Restoration of the Forest by Edward III
When Edward III grasped the reins of government in November 1330, he was as determined as any of his predecessors to vindicate the Forest rights of his Crown.
In some counties, however, he was compelled to accept the bounds of 1300.
In Wiltshire, after the declaration of the Forest bounds at the Salisbury Forest Eyre in 1330, scattered areas of demesne lands and woods alone remained in the forest: Savernake was reduced from an estimated ninety-eight  square miles to a mere thirteen, and by 1331 the forest of Chute in that county had been ‘almost disafforested’.
By 1341 the Forest of Dean had been diminished by a quarter, and the warden's farm was reduced from £160 to £120.
But many districts which had secured their freedom from the Forest law during Edward II's reign were once more made subject to it.
In August 1333 the king declared that divers woods and other places in Surrey had been unjustifiably disafforested under colour of the Statute of 1327: there was evidence in ‘divers inquisitions taken in the time of his progenitors and…other memoranda in the Exchequer’ that they ought to remain in the forest.
The Justice of the Forest was accordingly ordered to re-afforest them.
By 1347 Edward III had re-afforested also the royal forest of Bere Porchester in Hampshire.
Landowners were, however, allowed to retain the rights of pasture and of cutting wood which they had previously enjoyed, subject to the customary payment of ‘puture’ to the foresters, and ‘saving always to the king his deer and pasture for the same’.
The officers of the Forest felt the weight of a new hand.
In 1331 John Cromwell, Justice of the Forest south of Trent, William Ayet, warden of Galtres Forest, and a number of subordinate Forest officers, were convicted of trespasses of vert and venison, and were ordered by the King's Council to be dismissed.
The ponderous machinery of the Forest Eyre was once again set in motion — in Berkshire and in Surrey for Windsor Forest, and in Wiltshire, Hampshire and Somerset.
Ralph de Neville in 1334 heard pleas of Sherwood Forest in 1334, and eyres were also held in the Earl of Lancaster's forests of Amounderness, Lonsdale and Pickering in Lancashire and Yorkshire.
These counties had not seen a Forest Eyre for more than thirty years.
At these eyres hundreds of persons were convicted of Forest offences.
But long intervals had elapsed since many of these offences were committed.
Many offenders had died in the mean time, and the sheriff failed to produce others, so that the sessions were adjourned time and time again during the next few years.
Of 223 defaulters at the Pickering Forest eyre of 1334, only nineteen finally surrendered themselves at the York county court in August 1338; the remainder, who had no lands or chattels by which they could be distrained were outlawed.
By this time, therefore, the Forest Eyre was found to be a cumbersome and ineffectual engine, and was allowed to fall into desuetude: only two short eyres were held in the southern forests during the remainder of the century — in Northamptonshire and Buckinghamshire in 1348, and in Hampshire and Wiltshire in 1355.
More effective means had to be devised to enforce the Forest law to protect vert and venison, and to raise revenue.
Commissions of oyer et terminer were appointed to deal with specific Forest offences as they were reported to the king.
In November 1341, for instance, Robert Parning the Chancellor, Bartholomew Burghersh, Justice of the Forest south of Trent, and two other judges were appointed to inquire into, hear and determine and punish ‘trespasses, wastes and excesses’ committed by the officers of the Forest and other royal officials in Northamptonshire.
Subsequently the ‘community of the officials of Northamptonshire, both of the forest and elsewhere’ made fine before the judges by 4,000 marks ‘for certain trespasses committed by them’.
The other effective procedure was the general commission of inquiry into the condition of the forests.
During the last two decades of the reign the Justice of the Forest or his deputy went on circuit every year to hold such inquests.
Forest wardens, verderers, regarders, foresters and sworn jurors made presentments before them of offences against vert and venison.
The sessions were short, and the Justice completed his circuit of the forests in a single county in a matter of weeks.
In the month of May 1372 John of Foxley, the Justice of the southern forests, and his deputy held ten consecutive sessions in the counties of Hampshire, Wiltshire, Worcestershire, Staffordshire and Northamptonshire, and heard presentments regarding fifteen forests.
These commissions were more flexible and effective procedures than the ponderous engine of the Forest Eyre.
Edward III's Forest policy met with widespread opposition from his subjects, who took advantage of his absences from England to make wholesale depredations upon the deer in his forests and parks.
At times the officers of the Crown were worsted by large and desperate bands of armed malefactors.
In 1356 a commission of oyer et terminer for the counties of Gloucester and Hereford was issued  to Richard of Willoughby and five other judges, on information that John Gayner of St Briavels and a large number of others, banded together by oath, had committed many trespasses against vert and venison in the Forest of Dean, assaulted the foresters, and:
prevented the King's officers from levying his rents and the amercements incurred by the King's tenants in the Forest courts, or executing the orders of the King and of the King's justices and other ministers.
The people of the neighbourhood dared not indict these malefactors before the Justices of the Forest, ‘because of their power and malice, and the poor of those parts cannot obtain justice for injustice inflicted upon them unless they first make ransom to the same evil-doers’.
In July of the same year John Gayner and many others resisted arrest at Lydney, killed a number of the king's servants and those of the warden of the forest, and chased the others ‘as far as the forest and would not surrender to the King's peace’.
Numerous petitions concerning the forest were presented at the parliaments of this reign and the beginning of the next.
Complaint was made in 1383 that persons accused of Forest offences were being imprisoned without indictment in due legal form, and detained by the Forest officers until they paid fines for their release.
The Commons asked at various times that the perambulations should be observed, that new perambulations should be made, and that charters should be granted defining the forest limits.
The king promised redress, but did not keep his promises.
In 1347 he promised that the grievances of the Commons should be remedied by Chancery writs against Forest officers, but next year ‘the commons of the county of Surrey and of other counties’ complained that although they had sued for a writ in the Chancery, they had not been able to obtain the promised remedy.
The ‘purlieus’, or areas put out of the forest by the perambulations, were a special bone of contention.
Mounted officers called ‘rangers’ were appointed to drive back into the forest deer which had strayed into the purlieus.
The Commons wished the purlieus to be completely free from the Forest law, so that every landowner should have the right of free chase in his own lands and  woods.
But the Forest officers continued to attach and imprison men for Forest offences within these districts, and to take money from them for their deliverance from gaol, often compelling reluctant juries to make presentments against their will, and obtaining indictments in other irregular ways.
The Parliament of January 1377 asked that the common law remedies of False Imprisonment and Trespass should be granted against foresters who made attachments within the purlieus.
Complaint was also made that the deer destroyed crops and pastures within the forest, and that the foresters illegally compelled the forest dwellers to attend the swanimotes.
To all these petitions the Crown returned empty promises of redress.
Decline of the Forest: 1377–1485
During the century following the death of Edward III the power of the Crown was diminished by lavish grants to the great magnates.
Many of the royal forests were granted to them to hold in fee.
In 1391 the castle of St Briavels and the Forest of Dean were given to Thomas, Duke of Gloucester to hold in tail male, and in 1398 the forest of Rutland to Edward, Duke of Albermarle: by 1405 the Somerset forests of Neroche, Exmoor, Mendip and the park of North Petherton had been granted away to the Earl of March.
Humphrey Duke of Gloucester held the forests of Savernake and Feckenham in chief of his brother Henry V, and in 1444 Henry VI granted the reversion of Feckenham Forest to Henry, Duke of Warwick in tail male.
The principal Forest offices were held by the great barons as life appointments.
In the north the Nevilles established a strong claim to the Justiceship of the forests north of Trent.
In 1331 Ralph Neville was appointed to that office, and several of his descendants secured a like appointment, culminating in the grant in 1443 to Richard Neville, Earl of Gloucester, of the northern Forest justiceship to hold as an hereditary office for himself and ‘the heirs male of his body’, with certain Forest rents and revenues and ‘power  to appoint at will all foresters and officers in Inglewood Forest’.
In the south, Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester was Justice of the Forests south of Trent from 1416 until his death in 1447. his successors were all great barons.
During the Wars of the Roses each party appointed leading magnates to the principal Forest offices during their periods of ascendancy.
The Lancastrians appointed Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland, to be Justice of the northern forests in 1459 and again in 1471, and William FitzAlan, Earl of Arundel to be Justice of the southern forests.
Both these appointments were expressed to be rewards ‘for assistance against the rebels’.
Yorkist appointments included John Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, in 1461, and Henry Bourchier, Earl of Essex, in 1462, successively as Justices of the Forests south of Trent, and Richard, Duke of Gloucester, the future Richard III, in 1472 as Justice of the northern forests.
The weakness of the Crown and the internecine strife of the barons plunged England into anarchy.
‘Riots, robberies and forcible entries were prevalent’, and ‘the enforcement of law under such conditions was scarcely attempted.’
During this period control of the Crown over what remained of the Forest administration dwindled away.
Writs for the holding of the regard in forests such as Sherwood, Galtres, pickering, Inglewood and Rutland continued to be sent out from the Chancery during the fifteenth century, but the Forest Eyre, which would have punished offences revealed by the regard, had now almost fallen into desuetude.
The Chief justice of the Southern forests from 1462 until 1483, Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex, held only four Forest Courts — in 1464 at Marlborough for Savernake Forest, in 1465 at Headington for Shotover and Stowood, and, after an interval, in 1468 at Chelmsford for the forest of Essex.
Commissions of oyer et terminer for Forest pleas were rarely issued at this time.
The records of attachment courts held every forty days in Pickering Forest in 1407 and 1408 show that the Forest townships were still bound to send the reeve and four men to attend them.
But the frequency of fines for non-attendance indicates the declining authority of the Forest administration.
In the forest of Inglewood attachment courts continued to impose small amercements for vert  offences during the reign of Henry VI, and pannage fees and fines for agistment during the fence month were also being collected.
‘Swainmotes’ were held at Weybridge in Huntingdon Forest at Midsummer, Michaelmas and Martinmas in the middle of the fifteenth century, but only a few presentments of venison trespasses by husbandmen were presented by the foresters before the verderers between 1451 and 1455.
Moreover, at four of the sessions the foresters swore that they had no presentments to make.
The Forest administration in Huntingdonshire was patently in full decline.
On his accession in 1461 Edward IV was clearly determined to restore the Forest.
The authority of the verderers, like that of the coroners, had ended with the previous reign, so the king sent out orders to the sheriffs to make arrangements for the election of ‘as many verderers as there ought to be and used to be’ in nineteen forests south of Trent, and in Sherwood Forest north of it, ‘as no verderer is as yet elected therein by command of the King,
Nevertheless the Forest fell into the background of national history: there are infrequent glimpses of how it was affected by the general lawlessness and violence of the times.
The clerks and scholars of the University of Oxford were reported to have gathered ‘to them great numbers of evil-doers in unlawful assemblies, with no small power by night and by day’.
They were wont to enter the neighbouring royal forests of Shotover, Stowood and Bernwood, and the king's warren of Woodstock and park of Beckley, and were said to:
have hunted, slain and carried away deer, hares, coneys, pheasants and partridges…threatening the King's officers in life and limb, so that they…for a long while have not dared openly to pass and do their business there.
In 1413 and again in 1460 the Chancellor of the University was ordered, ‘under pain of the King's wrath and of forfeiting the liberties and privileges of the University’, to issue a proclamation forbidding these practices, and to ‘arrest any man under his rule offending in that behalf…and imprison them until he shall have special order of the King for their deliverance’.
As the power of the king declined, so the privileges of substantial landowners increased.
At the Parliament of 1389 the gentry complained that ‘Artificers and Labourers’ kept greyhounds and other dogs, and destroyed the game in their parks and warrens.
As a result the right of hunting and taking game was reserved by statute for the upper classes.
Laymen who did not hold land worth forty shillings a year, and clerks who did not have a benefice worth ten pounds a year, were forbidden to keep a greyhound or other dog, on pain of one year's imprisonment.
It is significant that the insurgent peasants of Essex in 1381 demanded the abolition of the hunting privileges of the landowners, and made no mention of the Forest laws of the Crown.
Tudor and Stuart Attempts to Revive the Forest System
The Forests Under the Tudors
On his accession Henry VII was faced with the task of restoring the reign of law in the forests as elsewhere.
An Act of Parliament passed in the first year of his reign recited that great numbers of persons:
som with paynted faces, som with Visors and otherwise disgised…have hunted…in divers places of this Realme…by color whereof have ensued in tymes past grete and heynous Rebellions, insurreccons, Rioutts, Robberies, murdres and other inconveniencies.
It was enacted that offenders were to be brought before a member of the King's Council or a Justice of the Peace for examination; hunting in disguise or by night, and wilful concealment of such offences were to be punished as felonies — that is, by death and forfeiture of property.
The Forest courts were accordingly revived or infused with a new spirit of severity.
‘Swainmotes’ or ‘swanimotes’were held in a number of southern forests — in Melchet, Melksham and Pewsham, Gillingham, Bernwood and Waltham, and in Windsor forest in Berkshire and in Surrey.
In Chute Forest swanimotes were held at  Conholt three times a year, namely at the beginning of February, in June, July or August, and about Martinmas (11 November).
The local gentry and others were presented for taking the deer, which they had probably been accustomed to do for generations with little interference.
Other presentments concerned the unwarranted felling of trees and cutting of branches in the forest coppices, and the overburdening of the forest pastures with unauthorized numbers of cattle, sheep and pigs.
To give judgment upon these presentments, the ancient machinery of the Forest Eyre was once more set in motion after a long period of general disuse.
Between 1488 and 1490 eyres were held in the Berkshire and Surrey divisions of Windsor Forest, in Hampshire, Wiltshire, Northamptonshire, Essex, Buckinghamshire and Huntingdonshire.
The court rolls show that the Forest law had been generally disregarded, and that the king's deer had been hunted and the forest timber felled on a large scale.
At Andover in 1489 Sir Nicholas Lisle, hereditary warden of Chute Forest, was removed from office for unlawfully killing a score of deer, and for numerous offences relating to the forest covert and pastures; he was, however, able to recover his office in 1500 on payment of a fine.
Claims by the forest landowners and inhabitants to various rights and privileges within the forest were also investigated at the Forest Eyre.
Extensive districts had secured their freedom from the Forest law since the time of Edward III.
At the Essex Forest Eyre held at Waltham Holy Cross in 1489, juries attended only from the hundreds of Becontree and Waltham Holy Cross and the half hundred of Waltham, plus four men and the reeve from only seventeen forest townships, all in the south-western corner of Essex: that is to say, the forest of Essex had been reduced, roughly speaking, to the bounds laid down by the hotly contested perambulations of 1300.
The Forest law still applied in some measure, however, to the purlieus, the outlying districts which had been put out of the forest during the fourteenth century — although in some parts of the country the authority of the Forest officers was disputed there.
In 1591 it was stated in the Duchy of Lancaster Chancery Court that the manor of Hackness was ‘within the precynct and liberties, of the forest of Pickering, and that 
tyme out of mynde, when any deere of the said forrest…have commen into the said manor of Hackness…the Rangers, and other officers of the said forrest…have always used to fetch out the same with their houndes and to rechase them into the said Forrest.
Thomas Constable and John Gilpin justified their ‘unlawfull resystance’ to the Forest officers on the ground that the right of hunting the deer in Hackness manor belonged exclusively to Sir John Constable of Burton.
The machinery of the ancient Forest courts was found at this time to be cumbrous and ineffective.
The comprehensive Forest Eyre of 1488–90 was not repeated until nearly 150 years later, as a desperate expedient of the last decade of Charles I's personal rule.
Henry VII himself supplemented the eyre with judicial proceedings of other kinds, such as the judicial inquiry in 1494 into offences in Pickering Forest, which revealed extensive destruction of vert and venison.
The Tudors also turned to the common law courts to enforce their Forest rights.
An Act of 1485 had already made hunting in disguise or by night a felony; it was re-enacted several times so that Forest offenders could be prosecuted at Quarter Sessions or at Assizes.
Even so, by the end of his reign Henry VII had decided that some at least of his remoter forests were unprofitable assets.
On 20 November 1508 he leased Exmoor and Neroche Forests to Sir Edmund Carew for life, at an annual rent of £46.
13s.
4d.,
with…all courts and profits of courts and swainmotes, fines, herbage, pannage and agistment,…with licence to hunt the deer, stags and bucks and does, with dogs, greyhounds, bows and arrows and other instruments of the chase, provided that at his death there be 100 deer left in the forest of Exmoor, and 200 in that of Neroche.
This lease was renewed for 300 years, until the final disafforestment and enclosure of those forests.
Henry VIII hunted the deer with as much enthusiasm as his Norman and Angevin predecessors.
He was the last king of England to attempt to create a new royal forest — the forest of the honour of Hampton Court, established in 1539 near his new palace of Nonsuch near Epsom.
However, it did not long survive him.
Hatfield Forest in Essex was a private chase which had escheated to the King in 1521; it too was granted away by Edward VI.
In 1537 he had made Thomas Cromwell Justice of the Forest north of Trent.
Cromwell obviously planned to bring the northern forests more closely under his control, and to ferret out encroachments upon the Forest rights of the Crown.
Between June and September 1539 Cromwell's deputies held Forest Eyres in Sherwood, Galtres, Inglewood and other royal forests.
Their coming caused consternation among the local people: Sir Thomas Wharton, who sat in Cumberland in 1539 to hear pleas of Inglewood Forest, reported to Cromwell that ‘no justice Court i.e., Forest Eyre had been held in that county within the memory of man’.
The proceedings were reported to the king himself; they included accusations of waste against forest landowners, one of whom was Sir William Parr, brother of Catherine Parr.
But by this time the Crown was assessing the royal forests, not so much as hunting preserves but as sources of timber, especially for ship-building.
As early as 1483 an Act had been passed, legalizing the enclosure of coppices in the forests where felling had taken place, until seedling beech and oak had grown again.
New officers had to be appointed for the new objective of woodland management for timber production.
So in 1547 Henry VIII decreed the appointment of two Masters and two Surveyors of the Woods, one each for either side of the Trent, as officers of the Court of Augmentations.
After the Court was absorbed in the Exchequer in 1554, that part of the Crown revenues was managed by ‘Surveyors-General of Woods, Forests, Parks and Chases’, responsible to the Exchequer.
The authority of the Justices of the Forest thereafter declined.
Crown woods were sold by Exchequer warrant, and Forest offenders were prosecuted in the Court of Exchequer Chamber, instead of at the Forest Eyre.
After Henry VIII's death and the accession of the nine-year-old Edward VI his subjects hoped for some relaxation of the Forest law.
To dispel such hopes the Council of Regency issued, on 17 June 1548, a ‘Proclamation (issued upon a false rumour that the King means to disafforest his ancient forest of Waltham, Essex, whereby ill-disposed persons have been stirred to destroy the vert and…kill…the deer).’
It was ordained that anyone hunting the deer in that forest without royal licence was to pay a fine and suffer three years imprisonment.
If after that he could not find sureties for his future good behaviour, he was to be banished.
The deer were not to be fenced out of enclosures in the forest with ‘unreasonable hedges and ditches’, unless ‘the greater part of the enclosure be sown with corn’.
During the next two reigns the decline of the Forest administration continued, despite the fact that Elizabeth I was herself an ardent follower of the chase.
In 1628 the Attorney-General said in the Court of Exchequer,
The Inhabitants (of the forest of Waltham) were restrained from commoning with sheep as contrary to the forest laws during the reign of the late King Henry VIII…and of all other preceding Kings who took delight and pleasure in hunting.
But afterward that Royall and princelie pleasure being not so much esteemed by the late King Edward the Sixt (by reason of his minoritie) and by the two succeeding Queenes (by reason of their sexe), the lesse care of the due execucon of the forest lawes consequentlie ensued, and the keeping of the Courts of Swainmote and justice Seate i.e., the Forest Eyre became almost totallie neglected and disused; whereof the inhabitants of the said fforest…taking advantage, did by degrees, especiallie towards the end of the raigne of the late Queene Elizabethe, encroach upon the said fforest lawes by commoning with sheepe.
Other counties present a similar picture.
In Staffordshire the forest of Cannock had virtually ceased to exist by the end of Elizabeth's reign, and in Kinver Forest only Iverley Hay remained in the hands of the Crown, and even there the deer had disappeared, and the woods for the most part had been cut down.
In the Forest of Dean the verderers sat with the deputy Constable of St Briavels to hold attachment courts at Kensley every six weeks; fines were imposed for hunting with long bows, and for offences against the vert such as cutting great branches, rooting up hollies, hawthorns and hazels, and collecting ‘Oke-cornes’.
But there was widespread despoliation of the woods by local landowners and by the charcoal-burners who produced the fuel necessary for the manufacture of iron — this despite Acts of 1559 and 1570 prohibiting them from using timber-trees needed to build ships.
Elizabeth followed precedents set by her ancestors in selling  Crown rights in some forests for ready money.
In 1563 a number of landowners purchased the disafforestment of their estates in the forest of Essex in return for the substantial fine of £500.
In 1592 a grandiose proposal received consideration: an unnamed individual offered to farm all the queen's woods for £20,000 a year.
The Lord Admiral, Lord Howard of Effingham, who later became Chief justice of the Forest south of Trent, was consulted, and stated his objections to the scheme.
There were, he said, 180 parks, forests and chases belonging to the queen, and the rights proposed to be leased in them were worth far more than £40,000 a year.
Leasing the herbage and pannage would disturb the deer in their lairs and deprive them of their pasture.
The lease would be used as a pretext for the wholesale felling of timber, which even then was in short supply for building and repairing ‘your Majesty's shyps, wych are the Jewells of your kingdom’.
The suggestion that disputes should be referred to the Lord Treasurer, the Chancellor and the Court of Exchequer was an unwarrantable encroachment upon the jurisdiction of the Forest Justices in Eyre,
who have always punished faults belonging to forests and parks.
If so, there will be no cause to keep a justice court [Forest Eyre], nor to have verderers or regarders, for their offices, which had continued since the law of the forest, will be needless.
Lord Howard's objections prevailed, but the mere fact that the project was entertained by the queen seems to show how low in importance the Forest had sunk.
The Forests Under the First Two Stuarts: the Last Attempt to Re-establish the Full Forest Administration
At the accession of James I the amount of land under Forest law was still considerable.
Much of it had been enclosed, and pasture-farming was the predominant mode of agriculture.
By this time it was generally considered that the forests were anachronistic and  unprofitable.
They were valued mainly as sources of timber for the Royal Navy but, in the absence of an effective forestry policy of conservation and production, the yields were small.
James I was determined to restore the Forest system as an important part of his royal prerogative, and as a source of revenue as well as of pleasure in his favourite sport of hunting.
In a proclamation made soon after his accession he declared his intention to enforce the Forest laws ‘which are as ancient and authentic as the Great Charter’.
On occasion he took a personal interest in the apprehension and punishment of poachers who took his deer, and his Attorney-General took proceedings in the Star Chamber against offenders in the Wiltshire forests.
The local Forest courts had fallen into disuse; in 1601 the regarders of Chippenham Forest had complained that there was great disorder ‘for want of a swanmote court’.
James therefore ordained that these courts should be revived.
But in Braydon Forest, for example, the free tenants and village representatives showed reluctance to attend, and in the Forest of Dean the attachment court, by now called the ‘speech court’, was ineffective in the face of large-scale destruction of the vert by the ironmasters.
James's increasing financial difficulties impelled him to desperate measures.
Timber was still required in large quantities for the Royal Navy: a warrant was issued in November 1611, for example, for felling 1,800 oaks in the New Forest and in Shotover, Stowood and Bernwood Forests for this purpose.
Crown woods in the Forest of Dean acquired new importance as a profitable source of wood and timber, especially for sale to the ironworks.
But an effective policy of conservation and timber production required enclosure of the open forest wastes after felling, to protect the young shoots from grazing deer and cattle, which aroused violent opposition from commoners and ‘free miners’.
From 1604 onwards, Otho Nicholson and other commissioners inquired into ‘assart lands’ which had been brought into cultivation within the ancient Forest bounds laid down in 1300.
These lands the king now claimed as his ‘proper soil’, and tenants were forced to compound with the commissioners by paying fines to the Crown and an annual rent thereafter.
The Attorney-General took proceedings in  the Court of Exchequer against those landowners who refused to compound: where necessary he obtained a writ of injunction sequestrating the assarted lands, which were then leased to other tenants.
By 1616 the commissioners had raised over £25,000 by the enforcement of obsolescent Crown rights within the forest.
But by 1613 even more desperate measures were in contemplation.
The Spanish ambassador was reporting to his sovereign that James was ‘five millions in debt’, and intended to ‘raise three millions by the sale of the Royal woods and of deer’.
The inquiries of Crown agents had revealed that some of the royal forests, such as Morfe, had become valueless as hunting-grounds through long neglect.
A jury declared that there was little timber left in Pickering Forest, and that ‘for every redd deare in the fforest, there are 5,000 sheepe’.
The king therefore sought to raise money by leasing the soil of the forests to ‘improvers’.
Melchet Forest in Wiltshire finally passed out of the hands of the Crown in 1614, when it was leased to Sir Lawrence Hyde, and in the same year John Waller and Thomas Purcell received a grant of Pamber Forest in Hampshire, ‘consisting of the soil only, the woods being sold away and the deer gone’.
This was followed in 1622 by a special commission to Lord Cranfield and others ‘to disforest and lease Bernwood Forest, Berkshire, Feckenham Forest, Worcestershire, and other forests and moors’.
Enclosure of the forest wastes by these ‘improvers’ deprived the forest inhabitants of their rights of common there.
In 1620 the Lord President and the Council of the North reported to the Privy Council that the enclosure of the ‘best part’ of Galtres Forest had inflicted great hardship upon the poor of Easingwold and Kirkby.
The wood required for fencing the enclosures had further reduced the forest cover, ‘and the tumults arising there from searching for cattle etc.’ had ‘frightened away most of the deer’.
By 1623 the disafforestment and sale of the woods and wastes of Chippenham and Melksham Forests had been accomplished: Bowood Park alone was reserved to the Crown in that part of Wiltshire.
Charles I's quarrels with his Parliaments and his inept foreign policy compelled him to continue the expedient of disafforesting and leasing the soil of various other forests.
On 13 June 1627 Sir Miles  Fleetwood reported to Secretary Conway that in pursuance of the ‘great service’ he had undertaken for the king ‘in the disafforestation of several forests, which have been very chargeable and without profit or pleasure’, he had completed the disafforestment of the forest of Leicestershire.
He begged the Secretary to remind the Duke of Buckingham, who was Chief Justice of the Forests south of Trent, ‘of his suit for a warrant to dispose of the bucks and deer in that forest to the gentlemen and inhabitants’.
On 27 June the Attorney-General sent to Buckingham warrants for the sale of Neroche, Selwood and Feckenham Forests, and the disafforestment of Braydon was begun at about the same time.
It was hoped to raise £20,000 by the sale of the first two forests ‘to supply a necessary service on the return of the fleet’ from the expedition against the island of Rhé.
‘The several wastes and commonable lands, within Selwood Forest were to be divided: one-third to the Crown, one-third to the forest landowners, and one-third to those who had rights of common of pasture.
In July 1627 Buckingham embarked upon his ill-fated expedition, which still further increased Charles I's financial embarrassments.
To escape them the king, at the suit of Sir Allen Apsley, Victualler of the Navy, in 1629 granted the Forest of Galtres to his creditors in fee-farm, in consideration of a fine of £20,000.
As usual, the forest wastes were to be divided and enclosed.
A proportion was to be allotted to the fifteen forest townships in lieu of their rights of common, and the remainder, as Crown lands, were to be leased to the king's creditors.
But the tenants of three of the forest townships, namely Alne, Tollerton and Newton, refused to agree to the disafforestment of Galtres Forest on the terms proposed by the royal commissioners, whereupon in March 1631 the king ordered that the lands of those townships should continue to be ‘within the jurisdiction of a forest and the forest laws’.
The dispute was still continuing in 1637: the lessees of the disafforested lands complained that ‘the people of the country adjacent will not pay any considerable rent for what they say have been their commons’, although they had been allotted a considerable share of the forest wastes in lieu of common rights.
The land itself was poor — wild and unmanured' — and the lessees were compelled to bring  Huguenot refugees ‘from Hatfield chase’, who would undertake to do what was necessary to bring it into cultivation and pay a reasonable rent.
Similar arrangements were made in 1639 for the disafforestment of the Forest of the Peak.
The wastes were to be divided into two ‘moieties’— one for the king, and the other to be partitioned between the tenants, commoners and freeholders: all parties were to enclose and ‘improve’ their portions.
The survey was completed in 1640 and the deer destroyed, but the planned disafforestment and partition was not then carried out because of the outbreak of the Civil War.
Schemes of the same kind were drawn up for the forests of Chute, Pickering and Knaresborough, and in the soke of Somersham within the forest of Huntingdon, which the Attorney-General reported ‘had not been in use for a long time past.
In the previous year the Crown had sold to Sir John Winter in the Forest of Dean ‘all His Majesty's Coppices, Wood Ground and Waste Soil of the said Forest (except the Lea Bailey), with the Wood and Timber, and all his Mines of Iron and Coal, and Quarries’, for £1,950.
12s.
8d.
Winter, who employed 500 wood-cutters, felled timber trees on a large scale, and enclosed about 4,000 acres in coppices to promote growth: by 1641 the deer were ‘almost destroyed’.
A further 4,000 acres were allotted to commoners and the poor to compensate them for their loss of common rights, but since this was the poorest — indeed it was worthless — land, violent opposition was aroused among the commoners.
In 1642 Winter's grant was rescinded by a vote of the House of Commons, because of his misappropriation of timber in the forest.
Henry Rich, Earl of Holland, who was appointed Chief Justice of the southern forests on 25 May 1631, was a pliable and ambitious servant of his royal master.
He vigorously applied Charles's policy of raising money by reviving the ancient Forest administration.
As Chief Forest Justice he put pressure upon landowners to purchase from the Crown freedom from the restrictions of long dormant Forest laws.
On 14 February 1637, for example, he granted licence to Lady Mary Crane to cut down underwood in Stoke Park in Salcey Forest ‘until she had made an agreement with His Majesty for the disafforestment thereof.
Numerous other licences were issued — to  hawk, fell and sell woods, plough up pastures, enclose small parcels of land on the forest wastes and build houses thereon, cut turf and peat, and to operate a brick kiln.
He ordered surveys to be made of royal parks such as Windsor and Grafton, and the enclosures to be repaired.
The earl also issued warrants for collecting the fines imposed at Forest Eyres: in 1638 a ‘Messenger of His Majesty's Chamber in Ordinary or his deputy’ was ordered to take into custody those who refused to pay.
Under Holland's direction the Forest courts were again revived, and once again an attempt was made to fill an empty Treasury with Forest fines and amercements.
In 1630 a jury declared that swanimotes in Essex ‘hath bin discontinued for many yeares’.
But during the next decade they were once again held in Waltham Forest: offences were presented by juries from each ward of the forest, and proved by the Forest officers.
At Chigwell in September 1632 a fine of 30s. was imposed for keeping an unexpeditated dog, £5 for killing a fawn, £20 for placing nets to take the game, and 50 marks for making a coney burrow, which was ordered to be stopped.
The offenders had to enter into recognizances and find sureties to appear at the next ‘Court of Justice Seat’, as the Forest Eyre was now called: final judgment was pronounced there.
The swanimotes were revived in the Northamptonshire forests also.
In Rockingham, Whittlewood and Salcey Forests they met regularly three times a year.
Large numbers of offenders, mainly poor people, were presented for Forest offences.
The regard was held again after long discontinuance: presentments were enrolled, as in medieval times, for production at the Forest Eyre.
In the Forest of Dean a special swanimote was held on 10 June 1634: 800 presentments of offences against vert and venison, some referring to events forty years old, were drawn up for submission at the Forest Eyre in the following month.
Swanimote courts were also held during this period in a number of other southern forests, including Chute, the New Forest, Shotover and Stowood, Wychwood and Windsor.
After a lapse of more than a century, the Forest justices were once again sent out on eyre in the southern forests, armed with articles of inquiry for local juries to answer.
The first session was opened at  Stratford Langthorne, in Waltham Forest, on 21 September 1630.
After his appointment in 1631 as Chief Justice of the southern forests, the Earl of Holland took over the direction of the Forest Eyre, and presided at subsequent justice Seats.
During the next six years he held pleas of the Forests in six counties.
Since the Earl of Holland was ‘a man of greater dignity than knowledge in the Lawes of the Forest, he was assisted at various times by judges of the common law courts who advised him on points of law.
At the Forest Eyre which opened before him at Windsor in September 1632, counsel for the Crown was Sir William Noy, the Attorney-General, a learned lawyer determined to re-establish Forest rights which had long been forgotten.
But he became gravely ill, and in April 1634 was replaced by Sir John Finch, a much more intemperate champion of the king's Forest rights.
Proceedings at these Forest Eyres followed the traditional pattern.
Landowners and others who claimed rights and privileges within the forest were summoned to attend, and to produce warrant therefor.
At the Essex Forest Eyre in October 1634, for example, the judges, after consulting with the Chief Justice of the King's Bench and the Barons of the Exchequer, decided that there was no right of common of pasture for sheep on the forest wastes.
Fines were imposed for grazing sheep there, both upon those who held land within the forest bounds, and on ‘purleymen’ who did not.
Juries were sworn to declare the bounds of the forests; they based their returns in the main on the perambulations of 1298 and 1300, which had put large areas out of the forest, and had many times been confirmed.
But Finch produced earlier perambulations which he had discovered in the Exchequer.
At the Gloucester Forest Eyre in July 1634 he produced perambulations of 1228 and 1282, ‘both agreeing that the Bounds of the Forrest [of Dean]began at Gloucester Bridge, and so went to Monmouth Bridge and Chepstow Bridge, and came round again by the Severne to Gloucester.’
Counsel for the ‘Seventeen Towns’, claimed by Finch to be within the forest bounds, produced in rebuttal the perambulations of 1298 and 1300, and their confirmation by Act of Parliament in 1336, urging  also that these towns had been out of the forest by ‘the long and constant Usage ever since.
Finch, however, denounced the 1300 perambulation as ‘false and erroneous’, and coerced the Grand Jury and Forest officers into returning a verdict ‘that the Meetes and Boundes of the Forrest of Deane ought to be according to the Perambulations made’ in 1228 and 1282.
At the adjourned session of the Essex ‘Justice Seat, on 4 October 1634, Sir John Finch produced the Forest Eyre roll of 1277, according to which the bounds of the forest of Essex were sworn to be ‘from Bow Bridge to Catway Bridge in length, and in breadth from the river of Thames to Stanstreet’— that is, the whole of the country south of ‘Stanstreet’(or Stanestreet) was declared to be Forest.
Finch asserted that ‘he would know how his master had lost every inch of it’.
The Earl of Warwick, one of the judges, protested and asked for time to produce charters and other evidence so that‘we might still enjoy with quietness the possessions of our ancestors which had bin oute of the Forrest for three hundred and thirty yeares’.
But Sir John:
threatened and awed the jurors to give a verdict for the King, and by unlawful means did surprize the county, that they might not make defence, and did use several menacing wicked speeches and actions to the jury and others, for obtaining his unjust purpose aforesaid.
On the following day the jury signed a verdict that the 1277 perambulation still set forth the true bounds.
At an adjourned sitting at Stratford on 8 April the following year, Finch, now Chief Justice of the Common pleas, himself delivered judgment that these bounds should be enforced.
In other counties also ‘an Attempt was made by Charles I again to enlarge the Forest’.
On 21 June 1639, in the forest of Salcey, ‘a new Perambulation was made, by which a considerable Extent of Country was added to it, and subjected to the Burthen of the forest Laws’; this was described by the Report of 1790 as a ‘violent and oppressive Measure’.
Even before this the six villages which had by long established custom sent representatives to the Salcey swanimotes were increased to forty-two, by an arbitrary re-imposition of  the medieval bounds.
The villagers naturally resisted: in December 1638 thirteen of them were each fined 40s. for failing to send representatives to the swanimotes, and men appointed by thirteen others were amerced for non-attendance.
Penalties imposed for breaches of the Forest law were of course designed to fill an empty Treasury.
At Gloucester in July 1634 the judges' proceedings were based partly upon the 800 presentments made at the swanimote held in the Forest of Dean in the previous month: 420 of these for unlawfully cutting and selling woods, 260 for illegal inclosures and other encroachments, 80 for taking the king's game and 10 for unauthorized operation of ironworks.
Fines for these offences ranged from 2shilling:.
for taking a few branches, and between £2 and £10 for the unauthorized building of a cottage or house, to £100 for unwarranted taking of timber on a large scale.
But Finch proceeded against the principal offenders, from whom it was hoped that substantial sums could be extracted, ‘by way of a Speciall Indictment’.
John Gibbons, a courtier, was fined £8,600 for exceeding the terms of his grant of land in the forest: between 1629 and 1634 he had, without warrant, cut down 4,000 oaks worth £1 apiece, spoiled certain coppices, and enclosed 94 acres.
Sir Basil Brooke of Madeley, an ironmaster, and George Mynne, a London merchant, who held the monopoly of the sale of wood to make iron, were sentenced to pay £59,039.
16s.
8d. for encroachments and unlawful destruction of the covert; Sir John Winter, another forest landowner and ironmaster, was fined £20,000 for taking wood without warrant.
At subsequent Forest Eyres in other counties the judges were clearly determined to raise large sums by fining the forest landowners.
At the Northampton Eyre for Rockingham Forest, which opened in September 1635, the late Earl of Salisbury was convicted of having assarted 2,300 acres of Brigstock Parks in 1604, destroying the vert and a thousand deer, and enclosing the parks.
His heir was fined £20,000, even though his father had obtained a pardon from James I. The Earl of Westmorland was fined £19,000, and Sir Christopher Hatton £12,000; Sir Giles Mompesson was adjudged to pay a total of £3,300 for felling timber even though he produced an Exchequer warrant.
The estimated totals  of fines imposed on offenders in the Northamptonshire forests — Rockingham, Whittlewood and Salcey — was over £80,000.
But the landed gentry were already heavily in debt, and collection of these huge fines was impracticable; only a small proportion was actually paid.
Of the amercements for offences in the Forest of Dean, for example, Brooke's and Wynne's penalty was reduced in 1636 to £12,000, and Sir John Winter's to £4,000.
The Earl of Salisbury in 1638 paid £3,000 for remission of his £20,000 fine, and for recovery of his parks at Brigstock.
These punitive Forest Eyres put pressure upon landowners to buy exemption from the Forest law.
In November 1637 commissioners were appointed to compound with all offenders in the Forests of Dean, Essex, Rockingham, Whittlewood and Salcey — to buy their pardon and the disafforestment of their land.
In the Forest of Dean Sir John Winter paid £1,000 for the disafforestment of his extensive estates, and lesser men paid smaller sums.
Wadham College paid £240 in March 1640 in respect of its lands in Essex.
Altogether the Crown received £38,667 from landowners who compounded for their estates within the forests of Dean, Essex and Northamptonshire.
But many of the Forest fines were never paid, and others were reduced or evaded by claims to exemption, pardons or royal warrants.
Humbler folk also felt the weight of the Forest law.
In December 1638 the Earl of Holland, as Chief Justice of the southern forests, was informed of persons who unlawfully took the game in Rockingham Forest with ‘dogs, nets, crossbows, guns and other engines’.
He therefore gave authority to one Edward Sawyer to make inquiries, and to search for evidence in all houses and places in Kettering and five miles around.
‘All mayors and other officers’ were ordered to assist him.
Similar commissions were issued to the Forest officers of Shotover and Stowood in January 1640, and of Windsor Forest in June 1642.
A number of offenders were arrested and committed to prison.
In November 1638 John Elliott was in prison, having been fined for carrying venison stolen in Windsor Forest to London, ‘contrary to the laws of the forest’.
He petitioned the Chief Justice of the Forest to ‘remit his fine and order his enlargement’ on the ground that he was ‘a very poor man with many  children…and is altogether unable to pay the said fine.’
Elliott was ordered to be released on payment of a reduced fine of 40s., and on giving a bond for his future good behaviour.
By this time the law relating to the protection of the king's deer within the ‘purlieus’ or forest outskirts had become more clearly defined.
The rangers of Waltham Forest exercised their office in the purlieus as well as within the forest itself.
It was their duty to drive back with their hounds all deer which wandered out of the forest into their purlieus, and to present all offences against the venison, whether committed in the forest or in the purlieus, at the next attachment court or swanimote.
Only those who held land in freehold within the purlieus might hunt the deer there, and even they might not hunt by night, or on Sunday.
Presentments for breaches of these purlieu laws were from time to time made at the Essex swanimotes in the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries.
Charles I's Forest policy caused indignation and alarm throughout England.
Sir Thomas Wentworth was informed in 1635 that ‘The Justice seat has been kept this Easter week and all Essex has become forest and so they say will all the counties of England but three — Kent, Surrey and Sussex’.
Gardiner's judgment was that
as a means of improving revenue the revival of forest law proved largely abortive…
Charles…allowed himself for the sake of a few thousand pounds to be regarded as a greedy and litigious landlord rather than as a just ruler or as a national king.
The all-important class of landowners especially was inflamed against the king's personal regime.
John Pym, speaking in the Short Parliament on 17 April 1640, enumerated the grievances of the king's subjects.
He referred jestingly to ‘that which somewhat sticks by me: it is the forest, and I might easily lose myself in it’ A committee of the Commons a week later complained, among many other ‘grievances in the civil government’, of ‘Forest fines, which of late have been too far enlarged’.
Agitation continued after the dissolution of the Short Parliament.
In July the Grand Jury at the Berkshire Assizes petitioned the king, complaining that:
in the eastern parts of this county Your Majesty's forests of Windsor are particularly burdened with the innumerable increase of deer, which if they shall go on so fast, in ten years more will neither leave food nor room for any other creature in the forests.
It prayed for relief in respect of‘the rigid execution of forest laws in the extremity’ and ‘the exaction of inordinate fees by some officers under the Lord Chief Justice of the Forest in Eyre,.
In the next year there was a riot at Windsor.
The rioters killed many deer, and threatened to pull down the palings of the park, so that the Earl of Holland, as Chief Justice of the Forest, obtained authority for the sheriff of Berkshire to raise the power of the county to apprehend the rioters.
In December 1640 Sir John Finch, now Lord Keeper, was impeached by the Long Parliament.
The principal charges against him related to ship money and his conduct concerning the forests; he saved himself by flight to the Continent.
Charles realized that he must abandon the attempt to re-assert the Forest rights enjoyed by his medieval predecessors.
On 16 March 1641 the Earl of Holland told the House of Lords:
That His Majesty, understanding that the Forest Laws are grievous to the Subjects of this Kingdom…out of his Grace and Goodness to his people, is willing to lay down all the new Bounds of his Forests…reduced to the same Condition as they were before the late justices Seat held.
On 5 July Charles himself declared, ‘I have bounded the Forests, not according to my right, but according to late customs’.
In the same year an Act was passed declaring that from henceforth the boundaries of all the royal forests should be taken to extend no further than those ‘commonly reputed, used or taken in the twentieth year of the reign of James I [1622–23].
No places were to be taken to be within the forest if no Forest courts had been held, verderers elected or regards made in them since 1565.
Commissioners nominated by the Lords and Commons were to ascertain the proper bounds of the forests by means of local inquiries, the perambulations returned into the Court of Chancery, and all places beyond the certified bounds were to be absolutely free from the  Forest law, with the proviso that the owners and occupiers of land left out of the forest were to retain ‘such rights of common as anciently or accustomably they had enjoyed’.
Accordingly, a perambulation of the forest of Essex was made on 16 August 1641, by a jury of twenty-four knights and an esquire, in the presence of fourteen royal commissioners and the officers of the Forest.
The boundaries laid down followed fairly closely those of the perambulation of 1300.
Some districts which had been forest in 1300 were however excluded in 1641.
These were the liberty of Havering, including Hornchurch, Romford and Havering, with Havering Park, and part of the townships of Barking and Dagenham.
The Forest was restricted to the south-western corner of the county, and these limits remained until the final disappearance of the Forest in the nineteenth century.
Similar perambulations were made in August and September 1641 for the Forests of Windsor, Wychwood, Shotover, and Stowood, Rockingham, Brigstock and King's Cliffe.
So ended a dispute between the Crown and its subjects which had gone on intermittently for more than four hundred years.
The Forests Since the Restoration
The Commissioners of Woods and Forests, Statutory Disafforestment, Partition and ‘Improvement’
Stuart schemes for felling timber and enclosing the forest wastes were interrupted by the outbreak of the Civil War.
The Forest law fell into abeyance.
Under the Commonwealth, money was desperately needed to pay the soldiers, and recourse was had once again to the forests.
In 1651 Parliament appointed commissioners to sell Exmoor Forest, which was reported to be ‘mountainous and cold ground, much beclouded with thick fogges and mists and…overgrown with heath and yielding but a poor kind of turf of little value there.’
But this measure, like a subsequent Act passed in October 1653 ‘for the Disafforestation, Sale and Improvement of Royal Forests’, 2 proved ineffective.
After the Restoration, Charles II followed the example of his predecessors by granting away some of the remaining royal forests.
In 1664 he disparked Clarendon Park, the last remnant of the royal forests in Wiltshire, and granted it to the Duke of Albermarle.
In the north the disafforestment of the Forest of the Peak, and schemes for inclosure of those portions of it which were suitable for arable or pasture, were completed by royal commissioners appointed in 1674.
The expansion of the Royal Navy and the growth of the mercantile marine, however, intensified the alarm of the Navy  Board over the shortage of timber.
The Crown made one last attempt to revive the Forest law and the Forest courts, not for the preservation of the king's hunting rights, but to promote the production of timber.
In 1667 the Marquess of Worcester, as Constable of St Briavels and Warden of the Forest of Dean, was ordered to revive the Forest courts there and to see that the Forest laws were obeyed: their discontinuance had brought about ‘great destruction of timber and retardment of its future growth’.
But the reign of Charles II saw the end of the great Forest courts.
On 15 September 1670 the Earl of Oxford, as Chief justice of the southern forests, held the last Forest Eyre in the New Forest, at Lyndhurst.
The last ‘Court of Justice Seat’ in Waltham Forest sat at Stratford Langthorne on 30 September 1670: fines were imposed for killing deer and cutting oaks, assarts were arrented and enclosures ordered to be thrown down.
A like court for the Hampshire forests, held at Winchester on 11 September 1672 by Sir Thomas Fanshawe, deputy Justice of the Forest, brought the long history of the Forest Eyre in the southern forests to an end.
North of Trent the last remaining royal forest was Sherwood: here the Marquess of Newcastle held a Forest Eyre in 1663, which was continued by his deputy by way of adjournment as late as 1676.
The ancient Forest system was in fact cumbrous and inefficient: the attempt to revive it as an instrument of Crown policy was doomed to failure.
The offices of ‘Chief Justice and justice in Eyre of His Majesty's Forests, Chases and Warrens’ north and south of the Trent were held by noblemen such as the Dukes of Monmouth, Newcastle and Devonshire.
Their emoluments were increased in accordance with their rank and dignity, but their offices were of course sinecures: the execution of Crown policy had long passed into the hands of the Surveyors-General of Woods and Forests.
There were two of these, north and south of the Trent, until Thomas Hewett was appointed in 1715 to both Surveyorships, with an annual fee of £50 for each office.
They were, in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, responsible for the general management of this category of Crown properties — for the felling of timber in the forests for the Royal Navy, for repairs to Crown property, for royal gifts to subjects, or for sale; for dealing with claims to customary  rights in the Forest, for paying the keepers' wages and for providing hay for the deer in times of scarcity.
The Surveyors-General frequently complained of depredations by local people upon the forest woods, and on one occasion at least appealed for aid to the titular head of the Forest administration.
In 1714 Edward Wilcox, as Surveyor-General of His Majesty's Woods south of Trent, complained to the Lord Treasurer that:
the neighbouring people of Salcey Forest have appeared in such great strength in the forest that the keepers are unable to oppose their cutting down many trees there, and forty of the best trees in Whittlewood have likewise been cut down.
He added a hopeful postscript:
If a messenger be sent by the Lord Chief Justice in Eyre to take into custody some of the most substantial, as was done on the return of King Charles the Second, it may prevent further destruction.
By the end of the eighteenth century the Forest was regarded as an unprofitable anachronism.
Arthur Young wrote in 1807:
The adjacent Forests of Epping and Hainault are viewed as an intolerable nuisance…the farmers uniformly declare that the privilege of commonage is by no means equal to the one-tenth part of the losses they constantly sustain from the deer in breaking down their fences, trespassing upon their fields, and destroying their crops either ripe or green.
He maintained that the forest wastes wanted ‘only inclosure to be highly productive’ of corn: a general Enclosure Act would make them ‘profitable to the Community’.
A royal Commission was appointed to inquire into the condition of Crown woods and forests, and published a series of seventeen Reports between 1787 and 1793.
The Commissioners reported that north of the Trent there survived only Sherwood Forest, while south of that river there were the New Forest, Aliceholt and Woolmer, and Bere Forests in Hampshire, Windsor Forest in Berkshire, the Forest of Dean in Gloucestershire, Waltham or  Epping Forest in Essex, Whittlewood, Salcey and Rockingham Forests in Northamptonshire, and Wychwood Forest in Oxfordshire.
The general picture was one of neglect and decline.
In 1736 the Conservator and Supervisor of the Forest of Dean had reported to the Treasury, ‘Within the last thirty years those Elections [of Forest officers]had been neglected, the Courts discontinued, and offenders left unpunished.’
The ancient Forest offices of verderer, regarder and agister had ‘become merely nominal and…bestowed rather as Marks of Favour and Distinction upon Gentlemen of Consideration in the Neighbourhood, than as Appointments of real Use or Responsibility.’
By the end of the century a similar report was made concerning the verderers of Rockingham Forest, and in 1789 the Rt.
Hon.
Frederick Montague gave evidence to the Commissioners that regarders and agisters were not appointed in Bere Porchester Forest, and that there was no supervision of rights of common there.
In some forests the local Forest courts also had fallen into abeyance.
In Rockingham and Whittlewood they appear to have been discontinued after the time of Charles I, and in 1789 the Rt.
Hon.
Frederick Montague gave evidence to the Commissioners that no Court of Attachment or Swanimote had been held in Salcey Forest since he became Ranger, ‘and I doubt whether such Courts have been held ever since the Rangership has been in my Family, which is about 120 years’.
No swanimote was held after 1769 in Bere Porchester Forest: in that year the court could not be opened because no verderers attended.
There had been an attempt, through Acts of Parliament, to revive the election of local Forest officers and the holding of local Forest courts in some forests; these measures were intended to preserve the forest woods and to increase timber production by enclosure of the forest wastes.
Such was the Dean Forest (Reafforestation) Act of 1667.
But though the forest officers, together with four men and the reeve from each forest vill, and a jury of twelve held their ‘Speech Court’ once a year at Kensley in the presence of the deputy constable of St Briavels, the proceedings were largely ineffective: the violent opposition of the commoners frustrated the attempt to enclose the forest wastes.
Similarly in the New Forest an Act of 1697 gave  statutory powers to the local ‘Verderers’ Court' to impose fines for such offences as stealing timber, burning the heath and destroying the covert.
A later Act of 1819 gave it jurisdiction over the exercise of common rights in the New Forest.
Two thousand acres of coppices were to be enclosed and planted with oak and beech, and a ‘rolling programme’ of further enclosures was projected as the trees matured.
But here too the ‘rolling programme’ aroused intense opposition from the commoners, whose rights it threatened.
In any case the statutory policy of enclosure and planting was too late.
As the Commissioners said in 1788, ‘An Oak must grow a Hundred Years, or more, before it comes to Maturity.’
Indeed, 1862 was the last year in which a considerable quantity of New Forest timber was supplied to the Royal Navy.
In Waltham Forest Attachment Courts, attended by the verderers, foresters and woodwards, continued to be held until the middle of the nineteenth century.
These courts supervised common rights on the forest wastes.
They oversaw the reeves of the forest parishes, who branded the commoners' cattle, the number depending on the size of the commoners' holdings.
Twice a year the reeves ‘drove’ the Forest, and removed and impounded all unbranded cattle.
These Attachment Courts were also responsible for preventing illegal enclosures, and for giving landowners leave to cut timber in their own woods: thousands of acres of woodland in Essex were cleared during the eighteenth century by their leave, and with the licence of the Chief Justice of the Forest.
This process continued during the nineteenth century.
The unenclosed wastes in Epping Forest were consequently reduced from 12,000 acres in 1777 to 3,500 acres in 1871, by illegal enclosures by the lords of the forest manors, and by sale of Crown rights by the Commissioners of Woods and Forests which amounted to disafforestment.
The Commissioners therefore reported on the forests as potential sources of profit to the Crown and to the local landowners.
They said of Sherwood Forest, ‘No Deer being now kept for the King in any Part of the Forest, except Thorney Woods, the Forestrial Rights are productive of no Profit or Advantage’.
Salcey Forest, although ‘a valuable Property,…the greatest part of it Wood Land, fully planted, and the Soil the most excellent for the Growth of Oak’ was  nevertheless ‘unproductive to the Proprietor’.
In the Forest of Dean, as in the other forests, there was widespread destruction of the woods, by the ‘free miners’, by wood-stealers who lived by shipping stolen timber to Bristol, by the cottagers and other forest inhabitants, and by the Forest officers themselves.
There was no effective management of the woods for profitable timber production, and regeneration was prevented because the young shoots were eaten by the deer and by commoners' cattle, which roamed the forests at will.
Yet the Crown derived little profit from the herds of deer which still remained in some forests: the Forest of Dean, for example, had in 1788 ‘supplied only Four Bucks and Four Does Annually for the last Seven Years’.
The Reports gave close attention to the vexed question of enclosures and commoners' rights in the forest.
The legal entitlement to common of pasture was defined by the ‘couchant and levant rule’— that is to say, commoners were allowed common for no more cattle than they could keep on their own land during the winter months when they were excluded from the forest.
But, as a result of the decay of the Forest organization, there was widespread disregard of these regulations.
The assistant Deputy Surveyor in the Forest of Dean reported in 1788 that:
the Number of the Cottages and Encroachments in the Forest…is nearly doubled since he had known it.
The Persons who inhabit the Cottages are chiefly poor Labouring People, who are induced to seek Habitations in the Forest for the Advantages of living Rent free, and having the Benefit of Pasturage for a Cow or a few Sheep, and of keeping Pigs in the Woods; but many Encroachments have been made by People of Substance.
The Cattle of the Cottagers are impounded when the Forest is driven by the Keepers, as all other Cattle are; and when the Owners take them from the Pound (paying the usual Fees to the Keepers) they turn them again into the Forest, having no other Means of maintaining them…the Cottagers…are detrimental to the Forest, by cutting Wood for Fuel, and for building Huts, and making Fences to the Patches which they inclose from the Forest; by keeping Pigs, Sheep etc. in the Forest all the Year; and by stealing Timber.
In the New Forest evidence was given that:
Swine and Cattle of all Kinds, commonable or not commonable, are suffered to go in the Forest at all times, without Regard to the Fence Month and
Winter Haining and without any Restriction as to Number, or Proof that they belong to those who have Right of Common.
The Commissioners therefore divided the forests into two classes.
In the Forests of Dean, New Forest and Aliceholt and Woolmer, the Crown was the principal landowner.
Their ‘Vicinity to the Dockyards’ made them a vital source of timber for the Royal Navy; therefore it was ‘a National Object to keep and to improve’them.
The deer were to be removed, because they ate young trees and crops.
These forests were to be freed from the Forest law, the commoners compensated for loss of their common rights, and lands allocated to the Crown were to be enclosed for timber production.
The second class of forests were those like Whittlewood, Salcey, Rockingham, Wychwood and Sherwood, where the soil was for the most part owned by local landowners.
The great obstacle to the efficient economic exploitation of forests such as Salcey, said the Commissioners, was that ‘the Interest in this Forest, exclusive of the Right of the Commoners, is divided between Three different Proprietors’— i.e., the Crown, to which belonged ‘the great Timber and Saplings’, the principal owner of the woodlands, in this case the Duke of Grafton, and the hereditary Warden of the Forest, who had the ‘Care of the Deer’: by exercising his right of cutting ‘Browsewood’ for them, he prevented the proper growth of ‘Timber Trees’.
‘In Rockingham Forest,’ they said, ‘where the Crown has little property left, where a considerable part of the Land is already in Tillage or pasture, and the Country pretty fully inhabited, it cannot be desirable that those (Forest) Laws should be continued’: their ‘Restraints and Burthens…by impeding its Improvement, must be a loss to the Public as well as to the Proprietors’.
The Commissioners recommended therefore that these Forests also should be disafforested.
The Forest rights of the Crown should be sold to the landowners who owned the soil, or exchanged for an apportionment of land for enclosure and economic development.
Commoners would receive an allotment of land.
The Thirteenth Report concluded:
Those who have Rights of Common would receive an Equivalent for those Rights; and even the Cottagers living on the Borders of the Forest, who, by our Information, at present waste their Time in pilfering in the Woods, would find useful Employment, from the Demand for Labour which the Inclosure and Improvement of the Wastes would create, and might perhaps be led to Habits of Industry.
In 1810 the management of the whole of the Crown's landed estates were placed by statute under three Commissioners of Woods, Forests and Land Revenues, to whom all the powers of the two Surveyors-General of Woods and Forests were transferred.
And when the offices of the Chief Justices of the Forest were finally abolished by statute in 1817, their powers and duties also were taken over by the First Commissioner.
From the end of the eighteenth century onward, the agents of the Crown acted upon the recommendations of the Commissioners of Inquiry, and actively promoted the disafforestment, enclosure and ‘improvement, of the forest wastes.
In 1795 and 1796 Acts enabled the Crown to sell to local landowners the various Walks of Rockingham Forest, ‘freed…from…the Duties and Burthens…of…the Laws and Customs of the Forest’.
The purpose of these Acts was stated to be to enable the purchasers to exclude the deer and ‘commonable cattle’, after compensation paid to the commoners, and to enclose the forest wastes and ‘use (them) as Farms’.
In 1812 the deer were removed from the forests of Aliceholt and Woolmer, and two-thirds of the area were enclosed as a ‘Nursery for Timber’.
Between 1810 and 1855 Acts were passed for the disafforestment of the forests of ‘South, otherwise East Bere’(Bere Porchester), Delamare, Windsor, Exmoor, Sherwood, Salcey, Hainault, Wychwood, Whittlewood and Woolmer.
Commissioners were appointed to ‘divide, allot and inclose’ the open forest wastes.
A proportion was allotted to the Crown ‘in severalty’, varying according to the area of the forest wastes in which the property in the soil belonged to the Crown.
In Windsor Forest, for example, the Crown's share was nine thirty-seconds, and in Exmoor twelve twenty-seconds.
These Crown lands were freed from the common rights hitherto exercised over them, in compensation for the extinguishment of royal forest rights: in  Windsor Forest the Commissioners of Woods and Forests were given powers to purchase compulsorily the cottages built on them.
The Commissioners of Woods and Forests reported in 1812 that about 100,000 acres of suitable land would need to be enclosed and planted to meet the Royal Navy's requirements of oak timber, but that neglect of the royal forests ‘had produced…an almost total despair with regard to the prospect of Naval Timber from those Plantations.’
It was hoped to use the Crown allotment in Exmoor Forest for this purpose, but after partition the Commissioners decided that it would not in fact be suitable, and in 1818 it was sold for £50,000 to a Mr Knight, who enclosed it.
The remainder of the forest wastes was in most cases divided between the lords of the manors and the commoners, in proportion to the value of their interests: the allotments were then to be fenced at the expense of the proprietors.
The loss of their common rights of course caused great hardship among the poor of the forest districts.
So in 1831 the commoners rioted in the Forest of Dean, threw down the enclosures, and drove their cattle and sheep into the coppices: they had to be suppressed by soldiers.
Some later Acts endeavoured to meet this problem by making an allotment to the ‘Rectors, Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor’ of the forest parishes, who were as trustees to apply the income for the benefit of the poor.
Poor widows in Barking and Dagenham parishes in the Forest of Hainault had formerly been allowed one load of wood yearly from the ‘King's woods’: the disafforesting Act of 1851 provided that an equivalent sum should be invested in Consols, and the income applied to a distribution of coal at Christmas to the widows.
Some later Acts, such as that of 1853 disafforesting Wychwood Forest, did not extinguish common rights: common fields were to be set and cleared in each parish in compensation for the common rights which the forest inhabitants had previously enjoyed over the whole forest waste.
The offices of Lord Warden, Ranger, and other Forest offices were in most cases abolished, and compensation allowed by the Acts to the holders.
The deer remaining at large were removed, and on completion of the work of the Commissioners the forests were  declared to be disafforested, and no one henceforth liable to pay any penalty for hunting therein, except in enclosed parks.
In the Forest of Dean poaching was rife, and there were frequent violent clashes between keepers and poachers.
In 1850 therefore the deer were officially banished, and in five years they had all been killed off.
The deer had become very numerous by this time in the New Forest, and there were numerous complaints about their depredations.
Consequently the Deer Removal Act of 1851 ordered them to be destroyed in the New Forest also.
But the attempt to remove the deer failed in both forests, because fresh stock kept coming in from adjoining woods.
It was realized furthermore that grazing by the deer was essential to the survival of the open ‘lawns’ in the New Forest, and so the 1851 Act was abandoned.
This Act was unsuccessful also in its attempt to develop the New Forest as a source of timber by a ‘rolling programme’ of inclosure.
Determined protests were made against it, not only by the commoners, but also by the environmentalists.
The agents of the Crown consequently became disillusioned about the New Forest as a Crown asset: it barely escaped the fate of the other royal forests.
A Bill was actually introduced into the Commons in 1871 to disafforest it, but was withdrawn because of the strength of the opposition.
Another Select Committee reported in 1875 that ‘the continued operation of the Deer Removal Act 1851’ would ‘render the rights of common existing over the New Forest worthless, and by so doing…extinguish a large class of small freeholders and tenants of whom the highest character has been given’; furthermore it would ‘destroy almost the only specimen left in England of a primeval forest, a priceless source of enjoyment to all classes of the nation’.
The Select Committee considered that a balance should be struck between the two conflicting interests:
while the portion of the Forest at present planted under the Acts may properly be managed with a view to producing the most profitable crop of trees, the remainder of the Forest should henceforth, in the interest of the nation at large, be managed with a view to the preservation of its natural aspect and condition as a Forest of surpassing beauty and unique character.
The New Forest Act of 1877 accordingly represented a change of policy.
The Crown's powers of inclosure were greatly limited, and statutory definition was given to the commoners' rights, which they could freely exercise under the supervision of the verderers: the Court of Verderers was reconstituted for this purpose.
Grievances arising from restrictions on commoners' rights during the fence month and the period of winter heyning were overcome.
The verderers were enabled, in return for an annual payment of £1, to secure for the commoners the right to turn out their animals during these periods from year to year.
Provision was also made for the preservation of the picturesque character and ornamental value of the New Forest.
Nevertheless controversies continued between the verderers, as protectors of the commoners' rights, and the officers of the Crown, who wished to enclose and encoppice to promote the growth and sale of timber.
Epping Forest was the last remaining portion of the forest of Essex: environmentalist objectives were achieved there by different means.
The rights of the commoners were finally championed by the Corporation of the City of London, which wished to see Epping Forest preserved as an open space.
By a suit in the Court of Chancery the Corporation vindicated commoners' rights over the whole of the waste land within the forest ‘according to the assize and custom of the Forest’.
It obtained an injunction ordering enclosures made during the previous twenty years, amounting to nearly 3,000 acres, to be thrown down, and restraining further enclosures.
In 1875 and 1876 the Corporation purchased 3,000 acres of the open waste lands of the forest manors.
Finally, by the Epping Forest Act of 1878 what remained of the forest of Essex was disafforested.
Crown rights over vert and venison, the Forest courts and offices, and the burdens and restrictions of the Forest laws and customs were abolished.
The Corporation of London was appointed Conservators of the Forest, with the duty of protecting and managing the forest as an open space for the recreation and enjoyment of the public: a duty it discharged through an Epping Forest Committee.
The rights of registered commoners were to continue unchanged.
They were to elect, as members of the Committee, four verderers, who were required to be resident in one of the forest parishes.
These verderers  were no longer to be officers of the Crown administering the forest law on its behalf.
They were instead to be guardians of the interests of the commoners and of local interests generally, but they were to have no greater powers than any other members of the Committee.
The Conservators were empowered to regulate the rights exercised by registered commoners — e.g., to depasture horses, cattle and sheep, and to agist swine, and to exclude animals for which no common rights existed.
The twelve forest parishes were to continue to nominate reeves for appointment by the Conservators, and the reeves to mark commoners' cattle, receive the fees therefor, and impound uncommonable cattle.
They were to use a scale of marking laid down by the Forest Court of Attachment in 1790 — that is, one horse or two cows for each £4 per annum rent paid by the commoner, and one horse or two cows ‘for every poor cottager having a family and right of commoning’.
Epilogue: the Forests Today
Of all the forests established in England by the Norman kings, some remnants of the ancient Forest system still survive in three.
In the Forest of Dean alone the four verderers are still elected as they were in medieval times — by the freeholders of the county called together in County Court by the sheriff.
In the New Forest their appointment is now regulated by the New Forest Act of 1949, which provides that there shall be ten verderers in that Forest: the Official Verderer appointed by the Queen, and four others by the Forestry Commissioners, the Minister of Agriculture and others, together with five elected by the Commoners.
The New Forest verderers appoint three agisters to supervise the commonable animals.
In Epping Forest also verderers are still appointed: their appointment and functions have been reconstituted by the Epping Forest Act of 1878.
The purposes and administration of these ancient forests have of course changed fundamentally.
The Forestry (Transfer of Woods) Act of 1923 transferred the property in them to the forestry  Commissioners, who were made responsible for their care and management.
Since 1923 they have been, not royal forests, but state forests.
The office of Surveyor-General of Woods and Forests, created in the eighteenth century, has been discontinued, but ‘Deputy Surveyors’ manage the New Forest and the Forest of Dean for the Forestry Commissioners.
The foresters today, unlike their medieval counterparts, are primarily responsible for felling, thinning, preparation and sale of timber, and the establishment of new plantations.
They are also concerned with recreational facilities and amenities, and the conservation of the forest flora and fauna.
Despite attempts in the middle of the nineteenth century to kill them off, the deer have returned.
In the Forest of Dean there is a small herd of fallow deer around the Speech House in the centre of the Forest, and a large one in Highmeadow.
In the New Forest there are four species — a few red deer, fallow and roe deer, and the Japanese Sika deer, introduced probably in 1904.
In each of the two Ranges of the New Forest there is a Head Keeper, with six beat keepers under him, who take censuses of the deer, cull them in due season, guard against poachers and check pests.
They also patrol camp sites and parking and picnic places.
Rights of common are still exercised in both forests.
In the New Forest the most important is common of pasture, which enables about 350 commoners to depasture some 3,000 ponies, 2,000 cattle and a few sheep on about 4,500 acres of open forest throughout the year.
Common of mast carries the right to turn pigs on to the forest.
The ‘pannage season’ was fixed by medieval custom, but since the New Forest Act of 1964 the Forestry Commissioners, after consultation with the verderers, may fix any suitable term of no less than sixty days.
Common of firewood, or estovers, is enjoyed by about eighty commoners.
Common of Turbary — the right to cut turf for fuel — and Common of Marl — to dig marl for fertilizer — are now virtually obsolete.
Verderers continue to hold their courts in the New Forest and in the Forest of Dean.
In the New Forest the duties of the Verderers' Court are now mainly administrative, and are concerned with the supervision and administration of rights of common on the open forest.
They have statutory powers to make by-laws concerning the  number, health and welfare of commoners' animals, and payments for marking such animals, and for pigs turned out in pannage time.
They can take measures for the burning of the heaths, the clearing of drains, and the repair and maintenance of the Forest pounds: these measures they carry out through the agency or with the permission of the Forestry Commissioners.
The verderers appoint three agisters whose duty it is to supervise the animals on the forest commons, brand and mark them, collect the grazing fees for the verderers, and attend the Verderers' Court.
The verderers also have powers for the preservation of the natural beauty and the flora and fauna of the forest.
Since they are primarily concerned with the rights of commoners, and the Forestry Commission with timber production, there has naturally in the past been a divergence of interest and policy in the New Forest between these two authorities.
The Official Verderer and four other verderers nominated by the Lord Chancellor retain judicial powers in the New Forest.
They sit every two months in the Verderers' Hall in the Queen's House at Lyndhurst, and deal with cases concerning common rights, unlawful enclosures, purprestures and encroachments.
Any member of the public can make a ‘presentment’ there, so continuing the medieval accusatorial procedure.
The ‘Speech Court’ in the Forest of Dean is still scheduled to be held every forty days, but the verderers' sittings are formal, and their court is usually adjourned until there is sufficient business.
Such matters as are dealt with are administrative questions, such as those concerning common rights.
It has been found more convenient to leave jurisdiction in cases concerning offences against the vert and venison to the ordinary petty sessions.
These two forests have therefore survived into the twentieth century by a remarkable process of transformation.
In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries the Forest law, courts and officers constituted a mighty system which paralleled the common law itself, and operated over a third of England.
Created for their pleasure by arbitrary decrees of tyrannical Norman kings, the Forests were exploited by their Stuart successors to support their personal government.
Then in the eighteenth century there was conflict between Crown programmes of economic development and the  interests of the commoners.
The epitaph upon the old Forest system was finally written in the Wild Creatures and Forest Laws Act of 1971, which abolished the sovereign's prerogative right to wild creatures (except royal fish and swans), and abrogated the Forest law, except in so far as it relates to the appointment and functions of verderers.
The modern concept was summed up by the Earl of Radnor, Chairman of the Forestry Commission, when he wrote in 1961:
The New Forest is at once a great national reserve of timber, a grazing ground for several thousand cattle and ponies owned by the Commoners, and a region for recreation and the enjoyment of scenery and wild life which, being open to the public, at large, has much of the character of a National park.
It nevertheless ‘remains a unique memorial of Norman England’.