

Kiosks of the future
By Christine McGourty, Technology Correspondent
INFORMATION kiosks for the electronic city of the future will be demonstrated at the Expo 92 world fair in Seville, Spain, this month.
Within a decade, similar kiosks could be as common as telephone boxes, said Mr Thomas Cofino, of IBM.
Located in shopping centres, supermarkets, offices and streets the kiosks, which use touch-sensitive screens and can understand the human voice, will provide instant access to information on almost anything from weather and travel data to goods available in shops.
The 33-kiosk Seville network allows users to scan menus, view pictures of a restaurant's interior and make and confirm reservations.
By inserting a personal identity card, users can send voice messages to anyone else on the system.
Science: Roberts raps MPs' knuckles Science Editor Roger Highfield finds the Government fighting shy over research
By ROGER HIGHFIELD
THE Government faxed a clear signal last week that it has written off the science vote.
The message went to the largest meeting yet held to discuss what the political parties have to offer research.
Instead of appearing alongside party spokesmen at a packed lunchtime meeting of scientists, the Science Minister, Alan Howarth, sent a fax from his Stratford-upon-Avon constituency.
Handed to the chairman 20 minutes into the meeting at University College London, the fax was greeted with laughter and shouts of ‘tear it up’.
‘I don't propose to read it out, if they can't take the trouble to send somebody to do it themselves,’ said chairman Dr Derek Roberts, provost of University College.
He noted that the Education Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, had also been invited to attend, adding: ‘I have been led to believe that what he lacks in understanding he makes up for in bravery.’
Howarth probably expected a lynch party: that morning, leading members of a group of 2,000 expatriate scientists wrote in a letter to The Times that it may be too late to halt the brain drain and decline in morale unless the Government shows a real commitment to research.
Roberts said it was ‘pathetic’ that for the second meeting with scientists in less than a week, the Tories had failed to send a spokesman.
He would have been able to claim credit for ‘one of the Government's export achievements’, a reference to the 30 per cent of those elected to become Fellows of the Royal Society who now live abroad.
On the day the General Election was announced, the major parties had been invited to attend the meetings by the pressure group Save British Science.
Labour put forward its science spokesman, Dr Jeremy Bray, a former Cambridge mathematician.
The Liberal Democrats were represented by Dr Margaret Sharp, a candidate and economist from the Science Policy Research Unit, who helped develop their science policies.
Though greeted with nothing like the derision that met Howarth's six-page statement, the spokesmen encountered a fair degree of scepticism.
The greatest applause went to a young researcher who highlighted the poor career opportunities she faced.
Bray said the Government had starved British science of resources and pledged that Labour would increase civil research and development ‘as quickly as possible’ from 1.8 per cent of GDP to 2.5 per cent.
‘We are seeing British scientists not only going abroad but also spending far too much time in this country chasing funds,’ Sharp said.
She added that Howarth's failure to appear prevented a full debate on science policy.
It was essential to harness science and technology not just for the economy but for the environment, she added, pledging that the Liberal Democrats would inject £400 million into the science base.
Howarth's fax stated that under the Conservatives, science funding has increased by 25 per cent above inflation.
Prof Denis Noble of Oxford University told the meeting: ‘It is a scandalous claim which he knows is incorrect.’
No one at the meeting escaped Roberts's gruff no-nonsense approach.
He upbraded Bray for his long-winded and evasive replies.
He described some of Sharp's proposals as ‘catastrophic and illogical’.
But he also reminded scientists that they could have greater influence by lobbying their local MPs.
Science: Star maps that Captain Kirk could boldly use Adrian Berry on new ways to measure distances in space
By ADRIAN BERRY
NOBODY is sure of the distance to Betelgeuse, the red giant star that shines so brilliantly in the constellation of Orion.
One authority gives it as 310 light-years, another as 1,400.
Similar uncertainties surround 100,000 other stars in the Sun's neighbourhood.
Many will soon be solved by the processing of the first data from a European space telescope called Hipparcos, which is starting to give an accurate geography of our local region of the Milky Way galaxy.
Hipparcos is named after Hipparchus, the Greek astronomer who, in about 150 bc, drew the first accurate star chart.
But star charts work in only two dimensions.
They tell us the exact positions and brightness but nothing of their distances.
To obtain this information, one measures their geometrical ‘parallax’, the tiny distance by which they appear to move against the background of the farthest stars during the six months that the Earth takes to move to the opposite side of the Sun.
The more the star has moved at the end of the Earth's journey of 186 million miles, the closer it must be to the solar system.
‘Observing parallactic movement is like watching distant objects from a moving train,’ says Dr Margaret Penston, of the Hipparcos team at the Royal Greenwich Observatory at Cambridge.
‘Trees near the train whizz past, but mountain ranges on the horizon appear to move slowly.
By observing their speed of apparent movement the traveller can calculate their distance from the train.’
Telescopes have been making parallactic distance measurements of the closest stars since 1831, when the Scottish astronomer Thomas Henderson discovered that the nearest star to the Sun, Alpha Centauri, was 4.3 light-years away, a distance of 26 million million miles, much further than people had imagined.
‘But the distances to further stars are more difficult to measure from Earth,’ Penston said.
‘Their movements can be too small to measure.
These are sometimes smaller than their stellar images because of the distorting effect of the Earth's atmosphere.’
Hipparcos was launched in 1989 to measure the distances to stars up to 300 light-years away.
It soon ran into problems.
A rocket motor failed and the spacecraft did not reach its intended orbit.
It settled into an apparently useless orbit of 22,000 by 300 miles, passing four times a day through the magnetically powerful van Allen radiation belts that surround the Earth.
Many scientists wrote off the space telescope as doomed.
But it worked perfectly, returning 3,000 pieces of information per second and even sending back useful information about the van Allen belts.
AS IT was about to send back its first results, the Science and Engineering Research Council tried to stop the northern end of its funding — the Hipparcos data is being monitored independently by two European teams to ensure accuracy.
Officials wanted to save £80,000 on a satellite which had cost £240 million to launch, which would have disrupted the project.
But scientists from the European Space Agency dissuaded them, and Hipparcos is now trouble-free and fully funded.
Parallax is not the only method of measuring stellar distances.
Certain types of pulsating stars, known as Cepheids and R R Lyrae, have the same absolute brightness — which means they would be equally bright if seen from the same distance.
This is because they are at the same stages in their evolution.
The same advantage can be taken of star clusters like the Pleiades and the Hyades: their component stars were born from the same gas clouds and must therefore be at the same distance from us.
Hipparcos complements this information and it is not only the parallactic motion of stars that it measures.
It is also their ‘proper motion’ for the stars are not ‘fixed’.
All the stars in the galaxy are slowly moving around its centre just as the planets move around the Sun, taking some 200 million years — a ‘galactic year’— to make a full circuit.
Since the stars near the edge of the galaxy orbit more slowly than those close in, observations of their galactic orbits tie in closely with measurement of their distances from Earth.
‘This spacecraft is not glamorous,’ said Dr Floor van Leeuwen, the northern team leader.
‘But it is doing the same vital work in deep space that Captain Cook and his colleagues did in the oceans when they classified longitudes and meridians.’
‘The information should still be useful in 500 or 1,000 years,’ Penston said.
‘There would be no point in setting out for a star if you didn't know how far away it was.’
Science: Scissors to clip the wings of a virus
By Peter Pockley
MOLECULAR biologists in Australia say they have designed a range of new molecules effective in the initial step of destroying the activity of viruses.
The tests, so far conducted only in test-tubes, have targeted selectively a number of molecules of the genetic material RNA (ribonucleic acid), including material from viruses.
‘We have to build a molecule for each RNA we have targeted,’ said team leader Dr Phil Jennings.
‘So far, we have been able to cleave every RNA we have wanted to.
Once its RNA is cleft, a virus becomes inactive.’
The announcement was made in a speech, televised nationally, by Dr John Stocker, chief executive of Australia's national research organisation, CSIRO.
Interest increased when he revealed that among the types of RNA successfully attacked was RNA from the HIV virus which causes Aids.
Stocker was at pains to say: ‘We have nothing which could be tested on humans…nothing yet which can help Aids patients or people infected with the Aids virus or any other virus.’
None the less, there is excitement in CSIRO that Jennings and colleagues in Sydney have made a discovery which is part of a wider trend to customise pharmaceuticals to attack specific diseases.
The commercial implications of the discovery are such that few details have been released.
The new type of molecular scissors, called a ‘minizyme’, is a refinement of the ‘gene shears’ technique announced three years ago by two scientists at another CSIRO laboratory in Canberra.
Their molecule, called a ‘ribozyme’, which has a hammerhead shape, has triggered joint investment in Australian-based research between CSIRO and two international companies (Johnson & Johnson of the USA and Groupe Limagraine of France).
They aim to develop human and agricultural applications.
A minizyme is about two-thirds the size of a ribozyme and is more stable.
Jennings said further investigation will reveal its potential.
The molecule can be delivered to a cell from outside but works on the RNA inside it.
Jennings says the minizyme is activated when it combines with its target, an advantage over other anti-viral agents in that it limits the prospect for side effects.
Business Technology: Better printing
ENGINEERS at the University of Wales, Swansea, have begun a £1.4 million project to improve the speed and efficiency of printing colour magazines and books.
They aim to improve web offset lithographic printing technology to increase productivity and reduce waste.
Business Technology: Pilot schemes
THREE centres will run pilot schemes of four-year industrially-oriented courses for engineering postgraduate students, as recommended in a report of a panel chaired by Dr John Parnaby of Lucas Applied Technology.
The centres — in Manchester, Warwick and Wales — will recruit 10 students a year, with the first intake in October.
Business Technology: Robot power
A PROJECT involving IBM and Heriot-Watt University has demonstrated how robots can help in shorter product runs and decreasing product design cycles.
Business Technology: Bank link
THE first Anglo-Scottish electronic trade payment link has been introduced by the Bank of Scotland.
The pilot scheme connects a grocery and distribution group in Dundee with a soap and toiletries manufacturer in Manchester.
Business Technology: Perfect sound to last a lifetime?
By CHRISTINE MCGOURTY
A DUTCH research project, beginning this month, hopes to resolve the debate over how long compact discs will last.
The government-backed Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific Research is to investigate the issue after it carried out a review of 50 recent reports on the longevity of CDs.
‘There have been an awful lot of investigations but there is still a lot of controversy about this,’ said Mr Ralph Tadema Wielandt, head of the project.
‘Still no one is quite clear about how long they will last.
We found that some last only 10 to 30 years and that's not enough for archives of historical material.
They need to be preserved for centuries.’
Philips, the Dutch electronics company which invented the CD, long ago dropped its original advertising slogan: ‘Perfect sounds forever’.
A spokesman said yesterday that the company promised ‘a lifetime's use’ if the CDs were manufactured correctly.
Some manufacturers guarantee CDs for only 30 years but Mr Bert Gall, general manager of optical systems at Philips, said the life of the average disc should be more than 1,000 years, though it could be reduced to 50 if manufacturing was poor and the discs were mistreated.
The main problem is that the stored sound can be lost when the thin layer of aluminium which coats a CD's plastic surface is oxidised, losing its ability to reflect laser light.
European CD manufacturers have begun a regular exchange of information on quality to help improve the discs' longevity and hope to agree on an international standard testing procedure involving exposure of the discs to heat and humidity.
No shakes and rattles as trams roll back the years Forty-three years after they left, Trevor Bates reports on today's return of trams to Manchester
By TREVOR BATES
TRAMS return to Manchester today.
The first will run between Bury and Victoria railway station as the £130 million Metrolink system opens for business this morning.
Metrolink's two-car ‘supertrams’, costing £1 million apiece, can hardly be compared with their noisy, hard-riding predecessors which departed Manchester's streets in 1949.
The Italian-built coaches, decked out in smart grey and aquamarine livery, combine with tracks embedded in shock absorbent material to give a smooth and quiet journey.
Officially the trams, which use railway lines for the most part with a quick dive into the streets as they reach the city centre, are ‘Light Rapid Transit’ vehicles, or LRTs.
But to commuters and shoppers in Manchester, already used to the avenues of poles carrying overhead power lines and the herringbone-brick trackbeds in the streets, trams they are and trams they will remain.
The Railway Inspectorate gave safety clearance for the first section of the 20-mile network just 27 months after design and construction started, although the opening was postponed several times because of engineering problems, staff training and general fine-tuning.
A city centre derailment and an apparent suicide on the track did not help, although the system is now up and running well before the June contract deadline.
Services were due to start on the Bury-Manchester Victoria line at 6am.
They will be followed at phased intervals by the rest of the network.
Peak-hour trams will run every six minutes, with off-peak services every 12 minutes.
They will travel at a maximum 50mph on the two main rail routes but at 30mph in the city centre, where they share street space with ordinary road traffic.
Trials have included 22 emergency exercises.
A recent accident in Sweden when a runaway tram killed 11 people has heightened concern over safety but Manchester's LRTs have five separate braking systems and the steepest gradient they face is a 1-in-20 up Balloon Street.
Danger is more likely to come from pedestrians and motorists moving too near the ‘swept path’ the trams will negotiate on tight bends on central streets.
Stations will be unmanned but monitored by 120 remote-control television cameras covering the whole system.
Of the 190 staff recruited to run the system, 60 are drivers.
Metrolink is seen by transport planners and environmentalists as the first serious attempt to squeeze non-essential car users out of Manchester city centre.
There has been alarm at the growing congestion and pollution caused by the rapid growth in car use.
Attempts to persuade motorists to use buses have failed.
Metrolink's operator, Greater Manchester Metro, thinks the trams will be more successful because, as Mr Don Kenny, the commercial director, says: ‘There is no stigma to using them.’
In Europe, trams were seen as ‘completely classless’, with everyone from bank managers and labourers using them.
The company hopes that between 10 million and 11 million passengers annually will be using the service within two years — 25 per cent more than used British Rail's services on the two lines.
Zoned fares have been pitched about five per cent higher than BR's, ranging from a minimum 70p standard single to a £4.90 return, with the furthest-flung commuters paying £729 for an annual season ticket.
Britain is a late runner in the modern tramway stakes, although such systems have been operating successfully for years in Continental cities.
Around the world there are 300 LRT networks.
Metrolink is the first on-street light rail system in this country and is to be followed late next year by a network in Sheffield.
About 40 towns and cities are investigating similar schemes but funding problems are likely to rule out most of them.
International interest in Manchester's system has been created not so much by the hardware as by the partnership involved between the public and private sector — the Greater Manchester Metro consortium includes GEC-Alsthom Transportation Projects, Mowlem, Amec, Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Executive and Greater Manchester Buses.
The company has an operating concession for 15 years.
Annual running costs are put at £9 million, with ‘significant profits’ starting to appear within four to five years, according to Mr Eric Black, chief executive.
He believes they will reach their 34,000 passengers a day by the end of 1993 because ‘we will be much greener, quicker and more efficient than cars and buses’.
In 1877, Manchester was the first city to introduce trams, although they were horse drawn.
Electric trams were pioneered in Blackpool in 1888 and they still run along the promenade.