

James Joyce private papers ‘censored’
By Chris Ryder, Irish Correspondent
AN ARCHIVE of James Joyce's private papers was released for public inspection at the National Library in his native Dublin yesterday, but material about his schizophrenic daughter, Lucia, had been removed.
Senator David Norris, of Trinity College, Dublin, a prominent Joyce scholar, condemned the decision as an ‘absurd act of censorship’.
It is understood that family members, who control the estate of the writer, asked for the material to be withheld.
Joyce scholars were also disappointed that the archive does not contain any of the erotic letters reputedly written in 1909 by his wife, Nora, which are thought to have inspired the character Molly Bloom in Ulysses, his most famous novel.
It is now accepted that she destroyed the correspondence herself.
The new papers, available on microfilm, were rescued from Joyce's apartment in the Rue des Vignes in Paris in September 1940, after he and his family fled before the Germans occupied the city.
Paul Leon, a Russian Jew, who was Joyce's closest confidant and business adviser, risked his own life to return and deliver the papers to an Irish diplomat.
They were then shipped to Dublin after the war and, in accordance with Leon's wishes, went to the National Library where they remained closed until last year, 50 years after Joyce died, aged 59.
Leon was captured and shot by the Gestapo in 1942, although his remains have never been discovered.
Files concerning his case and the unwillingness of the neutral Irish government to make representations are buried in the vaults of the Irish Foreign Office while Joyce scholars patiently await publication under new public record arrangements.
Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, officially released the Joyce-Leon collection at a ceremony in the library's Reading Room.
Mr Reynolds said: ‘The papers now revealed are a treasure house of new Joyce material and a priceless addition to our knowledge.’
Among the hundreds of documents are letters to Leon from various places, correspondence with solicitors, agents and publishers, including Harriet Weaver, another great patron and friend.
There are also letters to Joyce from figures such as T S Elliot, Ezra Pound, Henri Matisse, Harold Nicolson and Sean O'Faolain.
But Senator Norris says it is ‘a wonderful irony and absurd that an act of censorship should be made public in the library’.
Lucia, who died in England in December 1982, was born at Trieste in 1907.
When the family were living in Paris between the world wars, Joyce worried about her promiscuity.
Among her lovers was Samuel Beckett, who died in 1989.
But Joyce was much more concerned about her schizophrenia.
She frequently attacked her attendants and discharged herself from institutions where she had been sent for treatment.
Doctors attempted many ‘cures’, including injections of sea water, but they could not control her.
Senator Norris said: ‘There is no doubt she broke Joyce's heart.’
Fall of TV's House of Cards
By A J MCILROY
THE BBC has admitted it may not go ahead with a TV version of Michael Dobbs's sequel to his political bestseller House of Cards.
It said there were matters still to be resolved in adapting the new novel, To Play a King, which depicts a King of England in crisis with an unscrupulous Prime Minister.
The BBC ran into controversy when its screening of House of Cards, about the ousting of a fictional Prime Minister, coincided with the week Mrs Thatcher lost the Tory leadership.
The main problem is understood to be the difficulty of avoiding the impression that the principal characters are based on the real Royal family.
Mr Dobbs said yesterday that his novel dealt ‘very heavily’ with a Royal family.
But he said: ‘I have been careful to avoid modelling any of the characters on individual members of our Royal family.
‘There is a Princess Charlotte who gets into difficulties before leaving the Royal family.
But she is minor character in a story that is about a future constitutional crisis between a wicked and unscrupulous politician and a dignified, noble but politically naive monarch.’
‘As much as I have tried to avoid it, people will undoubtedly try to associate the future king with the Prince of Wales and other figures with other members of the Royal family.
Sadly, that is inevitable.’
Mr Dobbs said: ‘As far as I am aware the BBC want to do the sequel, and even as I speak they are discussing potential script writers.’
A BBC spokesman said last night: ‘We have not ruled out entirely a possible adaption, but there are a number of unresolved factors.’
Art Sales: When the bank pulls the plug
Michael Gillingham tells how he is making a comeback after the dreaded telephone call
By MICHAEL GILLINGHAM
A REGRETFUL telephone call from the bank on a September morning last year announced the end of Sparks an hour after I was told that a crane had fallen on to Wren's St James, Garlickhythe; it was a day of numbing disaster.
Sparks had been my life for only 16 years, but long before I joined I had admired its style, history and clientele — over a century of selling fine Chinese art, for the past 60 years from that great drawing-room of a shop in Mount Street.
We survived the Thirties and the war, we sold successfully up to 1987 (a flourish of porcelain animals and birds sold out 90 per cent before the opening party, immediately after Black Monday in the City); even in 1991 we had secured a collection which made the first half of the year look profitable.
Why the catastrophe?
Trading in works of art needs a deep purse and long-time backing.
Success depends on the dealer's nose for possibilities, patience to tease out why some object is unusual and important; then to find a buyer to accept — and pay fairly for — the product.
Not a neatly quantifiable commercial package: difficult to project sales and cash-flow, and impossible to guarantee results.
So old fashioned Chinese art dealers would deal across the board, with a top layer of ‘important’ pieces and less costly stock to pay the rent.
But the Seventies and Eighties brought massive change.
Intense competition from the Far East began to conjure up unheard-of sums for Imperial porcelains, jades, lacquers and bronzes; serious but collectable subjects which had passed through the books so calmly before 1960 now went out of reach.
Scholarly cataloguers colour-photographed and explored every detail.
Gone were the days when, in appraising his goods, a dealer relied mostly on his eye, experience and a tribal wisdom.
This increased professionalism was undoubtedly a benefit, but a shift away from the old ‘connoisseurship’ approach.
Chinese art became an international investment field, with the collector ousted by the super-rich.
How could an old firm cope?
One has to adapt to survive, but it was hard to change style; to specialise and risk terrifying sums on objects with a limited field for re-sale.
The pressures of rising rent and the problem of filling a large shop with goods of high quality were the final straws.
Could the bank have been more long sighted?
Given the problems, only a drastic reduction in overheads could have stopped the haemorrhage, but a massive capital investment would also have been essential.
Is a bank justified in taking the risk that the future dealing style of a firm may show a winning streak?
ANY serious backer of an art business must be prepared to commit long-term support and understand that morale is as important as money.
There must be belief in the quality of the business.
A dealer cannot sustain the approach which recommends selling in a hurry when the monthly figures look bleak.
This demands faith on the backer's part, and restraint on the dealer's.
Most good dealers are compulsive buyers, and it takes a sympathetic backer to control without stifling flair.
So the issue must be faced: has the backer faith in survival after recession?
In Spark's case the answer was no, but the story does not stop there.
Once a dealer, always a dealer; I was determined to continue.
Within minutes of the disaster, Blairman's offered me a desk and telephone, Mallett's provided porters and storage for the 60 years' accumulation which had to be out of Mount Street in two days.
Fellow dealers were spontaneously helpful.
Finally, my old friend Alistair Sampson set me up with a cheerful office over his shop in the Brompton Road, where I am gathering stock and beginning life again.
So, is Chinese art still collectable, can a dealer still set up with stock of quality?
Can the Sparks tradition be continued?
I believe there is still a market for the best decorative Chinese art.
Dealers, who need business, are approachable as never before.
If one effect of recession is to bring back collecting, rather than investing, then the market will recover.
If I can follow the essence of the Sparks tradition — the fine object, carefully chosen, properly guaranteed and well presented — I shall be a happy man.
I might even survive and prosper.
Art Sales: Winning charms
By GEORGINA ADAM
‘ANYTHING with charm is doing well.’
Jerome Fourier of the Galerie de Stael, clutching a glass of champagne, had good cause to rejoice.
At a time when the market is morose and les affaires difficiles, he had sold 12 drawings on the first day of the second Collectors' Drawings fair in Paris.
The event — held last week in the bowels of the Hotel Georges V — started with a wildly successful evening thrash attended by 3,500 people.
A particularly tight swarm hummed around Mme Andre Malraux, widow of France's first Minister of Culture, admiring a group of what could politely be called doodles by her late husband at prices between £100 and £800.
The field of Old Master and modern drawings has been much less hyped than other markets and rarely sees fireworks like the world record of £4.18 million paid for a Van Gogh drawing in December 1990.
Prices have remained relatively stable and have increased by about 10 per cent a year, according to John Morton Morris of Hazlitt Gooden and Fox.
But as the Holkham sale amply demonstrated last year, for the price of one Degas (Racehorses fetched £6.8 million in June 1991) you could buy 66 superb pieces from one of Britain's finest collections.
Two of the world's leading buyers have recently dropped out of the market.
The Getty is now buying only sporadically; Ian Woodner's wholesale spending spree ended with his death.
These collectors, plus Barbara Johnston, were in any case in the market for the stellar pieces.
The Paris show demonstrated that at a much lower level delightful drawings by well known names can still be bought at a fraction of the price of a painting by the same artist.
The 17 exhibitors at the fair had bought a mixed bag of drawings, spanning centuries and price ranges.
Blandine de Bayser, who sold nine drawings on the first night, had a delicate portrait of a woman attributed to the 17th century painter Franois Quesnel at £10,000, and a fine Tiepolo of the Holy family from the Orloff collection at £90,000.
Paul Proute was showing a chalk drawing of Saint Joseph and the Holy Child by Guercino, once owned by Sir Joshua Reynolds, at £30,000.
The price differential between Old Master and modern artists was inevitably reflected in the drawings.
The Galerie Hopkins–Thomas, which had one of the best selections, including an early Van Gogh of a Blacksmith's Apprentice at a rather hefty £100,000, a Gustave Moreau watercolour, I'Ibis Rose, at an even heftier £600,000, and a Schiele portrait of a woman at £200,000.
Nevertheless, the overall quality of the fair was poorer than last year's.
Some of the dealers clearly had their eyes cocked on the coming Biennale des Antiquaires, and were holding back their best pieces.
The problem should be solved after 1994, when the Salon will have moved to the Grand Palais, and go two-yearly — alternating with the Biennale des Antiquaires.
Art Sales: THE WEEK AHEAD
By GEORGINA ADAM
THE saleroom event of the week is in Amsterdam tomorrow and Wednesday, when Christie's auctions the contents of the Vung Tau, an Asian trading junk that sank off Vietnam in the late 17th century.
The craft was jammed with more than 28,000 pieces of Chinese porcelain, wrapped in rice husks, and destined for export — as shown by the western-style shapes and decoration.
Christie's has grouped the mass of wares into 1,000 lots and trundled out Nina Campbell and David Lindley to promote a Chinamania revival to the interior decorator market.
Most desirable are the blue-and-white pieces, particularly those with Dutch canal house decor (est. £2,500/3,500 for five vases)— and each piece will have a special Vung Tau lot label!
On Wednesday in Paris, the original first manuscript for Ravel's Bolero — probably the most played classical music in the world — goes on the block at Drouot.
The document has reappeared after a long sleep in California, and is estimated at £150,000.
Back in London, on election day Christie's fine English furniture sale offers relief from politicking with a lovely set of George II embossed bird pictures in their original frames (£40/60,000).
There is more livestock on Friday in Christie's British Pictures sale.
It features Zoffany's Cockfight (see Round-Up), estimated at £1.5 million and a herd of fat cows and bulls from a private collection (est. from £1,500–4,000).
At the dealers, Spink opens Sporting Art today with British sporting watercolours and drawings from £500 to £15,000, and tomorrow Richard Green launches Marine Paintings and Views of London from the Thames at 44 Dover Street, while Anthony Mould breaks new ground with a venture into contemporary painting.
He shows Ishbel Myerscough, who lives and works in Glasgow and specialises in raw, uncompromising portraits.
Mercury Gallery introduces Joan Eardley, a Scottish paintress of splodgy landscapes and slum children (opens Wednesday).
Tomorrow, Bernard Jacobson features lively and warm abstract plant life as seen in Nicaragua by Michael Heindorff, and Waterman Fine Art has Brian Ballard's dark glowing flower studies at gentle prices (£1/4,000).
In Birmingham, the dealers have gathered for the 11th British Antiques Fair (Thursday to the following Wednesday), while over the Border, there is still time to catch Pen Panting's second one-man show, at the Glasgow Print Studio.
Art Sales: Furniture that Houghton would not miss
By GEORGINA ADAM
NOW THAT Lord Cholmondeley has sold the Holbein to the National Gallery, he will be getting on with his film career, I am told.
But the tax-free £10 million is, apparently, not enough for his and Houghton's needs.
However, it seems that there is a lot more Kent furniture waiting in the reserves, unknown to the public: the furniture-maker had made many runs of sofas, chairs and so on.
They are additional to those on view — their loss, in the interests of Houghton, would not be evident.
The negotiations with the gallery were apparently severely threatened, however, by Lord Cholmondeley's idea that he might withdraw the Holbein from Christie's and, indeed, from the market for a year.
This, it is thought, would have given him time to renegotiate exemption and pay only 40 per cent capital gains.
A predicted upturn in the market would have put a much higher valuation on the painting.
The National Gallery must be very satisfied to have concluded as it did last week.
Meanwhile, the Tate hopefully sends out faxes explaining just why Canaletto's view of the Old Horse Guards, also in Christie's April 15 sale, is of crucial importance to the British School.
No work by the artist is, says the Tate, more suitable for its national collection.
‘Negotiations are continuing.’
ZOFFANY'S Cockfight, featured on the cover of Christie's British Pictures sale on Friday, gave rise to some confusion when the catalogue first flopped through letter-boxes.
The catalogue entry claims the picture is the second version that Zoffany painted of the same scene.
The first picture disappeared in the Indian Mutiny, but a copy by Robert Home, known as the Ashwick version, survives in Cannes.
The second version was lost at sea in about 1788, so Christie's Cockfight must be a third rendering — repainted, once Zoffany was back in England after 1788/89, for Warren Hastings, the East India Company administrator in Bengal — bearing out the later inscription ‘Cock fight at Lucknow painted by Zoffany (circa 1790)’ on the bottom of the painting.
FRENCH auctioneer Jean-Louis Picard, now happily hoeing his own row since his much-publicised split with Jacques Tajan, is breaking new ground.
He has founded Euro Auction, and with a distinguished flotilla of French specialists (Eric Turquin and Bruno de Bayser to name but two) holds his first auction in Brussels on June 15.
‘It's an adventure,’ he told me last week.
‘Brussels is the future capital of Europe, it's at the crossroads of Europe and there isn't much competition.’
He has been goaded by the obstacles to expansion and the punishing VAT rate of 18.6 per cent that is imposed on imports in his own country.
Buyers premium will be 20 per cent in Belgium, falling to 14 per cent for exported pieces.
Picard will be selling furniture, objects, primitive art — anything, in fact, except modern pictures — because of the hefty six per cent droit de suite, the highest in the world.
The Arts: Eye-popping pleasure
By RICHARD LAST
AT THE risk of sounding churlish, I still find that marvellously elegant title-piece and the pastiche l920s dance music by Elizabeth Dudley the best thing in Jeeves and Wooster (ITV).
This (promise) is the despairing final plaint of a lifelong Wodehousian who realises that the Master can never be convincingly translated to the small screen.
From now on, I'll concentrate on the virtues of Granada's resumed series which, like Jeeves, continues as far as most other viewers are concerned to give complete satisfaction.
First among them has to be Hugh Laurie's facial interpretation of Bertie, now brought to a fine pitch of eye-popping, open-mouthed imbecility.
Clive Exton's determined melding of two separate Jeeves stories per episode continues to give me trouble, but last night it achieved a climax worthy of the original as the straw-boatered burghers from Birdsburg queued to press the flesh of the plethoric Dook of Chis-wick.
Oddly, the move to New York seems to me to work better than some of the earlier stories.
Maybe this is because Wodehouse's country house settings were always a never-never land which defy visual translation, whereas his view of America, however far he sent up his adopted country, had closer links with reality.
When Jeeves is played out, someone should really have a look at the Mr Mulliner Hollywood satires.
Correction — they're better left on the page.
If two are company and three a crowd, what do four unacquainted Englishwomen thrown together by Fate and an inaccessible Italian castle add up to?
Last night's answer was Screen Two's slow, frankly rather soppy Enchanted April (BBC2).
Peter Barnes's adaptation from a republished novel by Elizabeth von Arnim opened quite promisingly.
A couple of lines of dialogue established Lotty Wilkins and Rose Arbuthnot as repressed middle-class wives, one compelled by her slob of a husband to record every penny she spent, the other characterised as having the face (and by implication the disposition) of a disappointed Madonna.
Their hare-brained scheme to join two perfect strangers in an Italian retreat for a month would, in real 1920s life, have met with incredulity.
They got round this by not telling their husbands until it was too late.
Enchanted April got round the practicalities of cross-Continental travel in post-1918 Europe by not dwelling on them.
When Lotty and Rose finally arrived, they were discomfited to find Mrs Fisher, a formidable widow, and Lady Dester, a bored society beauty trying to escape male attention, already in residence.
Thereafter the story, like others of the same romantic genre, rather foundered in lack of plot.
I strongly suspect that it was the prospect of extended filming next door to Portofino that lured Miranda Richardson, Joan Plowright, the producer Ann Scott and her director Mike Newell in the first place.
It can't have been the script, which tried unconvincingly to suggest multiple reconciliation under the spell of the Castello Brown (the castle's real-life name, believe me or not) and then petered out, as if the adaptor had given up and left the cast to improvise.
It takes real determination to pack all the country house thriller cliches you can think of into half an hour, but TVS and Ian Stuart Black managed it in House of Glass (ITV), an Appointment With Fear try-out for a post-franchise series.
After 30 minutes of shattering windscreens, faces outside the shower door, spooky ‘phone calls and ghostly voices echoing round the stately home, the fetching Lisa Orgolini ought to have been pretty shattered herself but contrived a successful fight-back against ancestral menace.
In the new TV era, it'll probably count as quality.
The Arts: On the right wavelength?
Who would want to be the head of an embattled minority station like Radio 3?
Nicholas Kenyon, the new controller, talks to Malcolm Hayes
By MALCOLM HAYES
SO, one of the poachers has turned gamekeeper.
Nicholas Kenyon's appointment as Controller of Radio 3, in succession to John Drummond, means that the BBC has picked an unlikely man to try to turn around the fortunes of its embattled network.
Until last month, Kenyon was music critic of the Observer, in which role he was as ready to be critical of his new paymaster as any other critic.
Radio 3 has a whole host of problems, not the least being its actual survival.
What role does a network dedicated to high culture have in an ever more commercialised world?
And is Kenyon, a gently-spoken 40-year-old, the right leader?
Does he have the vision and political nous to carry on the changes begun — but certainly not completed — by his predecessor?
Drummond, also an outsider, started Radio 3's rapprochement with the outside world.
Kenyon must see it through or heaven knows what will become of the station.
The trouble is that although Radio 3 may be the most successful network of its kind in the world, it appeals to a minority — estimated at just five per cent of the population, mostly white, male and over 50.
It stands accused of being elitist and inaccessible.
It is the biggest music patron in the land.
Its five orchestras consume £12 million of Radio 3's annual budget of £49 million, but a series of leaked memos has suggested that some or all may be on the hit-list when the BBC's charter comes up for renewal in 1996.
And then there's the commercial challenge from Classic FM, which is expected to be on air in the autumn.
Kenyon is pugnacious about the challenges: ‘I think the Radio 3 audience is always going to be a minority and I don't see anything wrong in that.
What I do see wrong is that it's smaller than it needs to be.’
He seemed his usual genial self as he greeted me in his new office.
But there was one obvious change: he was wearing, for the first time in my experience, a dark suit.
The new job has changed Kenyon in other ways, too.
His sense of humour was always a feature of the critics' circuit; I treasure a bulging mental file of his roguish observations on fellow critics and luminaries in the music trade.
His new responsibilities have put the lid on this.
Although it is clear that he is committed to making changes, he has taken up fluent corporation-speak surprisingly quickly.
But there can be no doubting his commitment and enthusiasm.
Born in Cheshire, he joined a church choir at the age of eight and was playing the cello and piano with youth orchestras before reading history at Oxford.
Later he became the New Yorker's music critic and went on to be music editor of the Listener.
He once swore, he said, that he would never give up his freedom and take on such a big post, but now here he is.
‘I don't think anybody will ever regard me as a BBC insider,’ he insists.
‘I'll be keeping a presence in the outside musical world.
After all, one of the reasons that I'm doing this job is that I'm plugged into what's going on out there.
I think one of the justifiable criticisms of Radio 3 — though not of my predecessor — is that it has come across as being too much about itself.
The core of the operation is that it must be universally accessible.’
This brings us to the question of those notoriously stuffy announcers.
They aren't all like that; indeed the best of the Radio 3 team, especially among the younger intake of Drummond's years at the helm, are first-rate.
But some must be driving listeners away in droves.
Kenyon chooses his words with care.
‘I think the sheer professionalism of the job as it's done at the moment is hard to beat.
There has been a loosening up, and I want to build on that.’
Playing great music will always be Radio 3's main role, he says.
Given that, will there now be less drama?
‘Not necessarily.
I see everything speech-related on the network — drama, documentaries and talks — as complementing the music.
I can't make these decisions on my own, removed from the rest of BBC Radio; but I have a clear idea of what Radio 3 is about.
It's ‘Music Plus’.’
One of Drummond's concerns was to make interval talks of concert and opera broadcasts relate to the programme itself, so that in the intervals of Carmen you might hear somebody talking about Carmen.
This was a good development; Kenyon evidently wishes to build on it.
Drummond once told me that Radio 3 broadcasts to about 30 minority tastes, each of which is characterised by its intense dislike of the other 29.
One of the most disliked is contemporary music.
Would Kenyon consider cutting it back?
Again, he won't commit himself.
‘Radio 3 is here to develop the musical culture of the country.
If we were to backtrack in the area of supporting composers, commissioning new work and putting it on as public a stage as possible, that would be close to admitting: ‘Look, a classical commercial station can do the job just as well.
Why bother with Radio 3?’‘
And what is the future for those five BBC orchestras?
With their numerous public performances, they have established a unique rapport with Radio 3's audience.‘
‘It isn't possible to generalise,’ says Kenyon.
‘The Director-General has said recently that he doesn't foresee any of the BBC orchestras being either privatised or abolished.
I am in favour of the orchestras.
I think they represent the most enlightened aspect of the BBC's relationship with its audience.’
And so to cricket.
What did Kenyon, not a keen follower of the game, make of the decision that music will have to make way for Test Matches on Radio 3's only waveband?
‘All I can say is that I recognise the incredible enthusiasm that there is for this sport among a section of the listening public — especially Daily Telegraph readers.
I hope it will bring a few people along to the network who will stay for the music afterwards.’
I left little the wiser as to what Kenyon wants to do with the network.
Drummond found Radio 3 something of a corporate minefield.
Kenyon seems, at this early stage, to wish to be seen to be treading very warily.
I hope he won't be too wary about dispensing with the services of some of those announcers — and quick.
The Arts: Encore crazy OPERA
Robert Henderson on the high and lows of a Jose Carreras spectacular and a variable Don Carlos
By ROBERT HENDERSON
AS commonly happens in concerts given by the opera world's greatest stars, it was almost as if the two official parts of the eagerly awaited Albert Hall appearance of tenor Jose Carreras (sponsored by Lloyds Private Banking) had been a huge, preparatory up-beat to the encores.
Once his obligations to the scheduled programme had been fulfilled he could then relax and enjoy himself in some of his and his audience's favourite numbers.
A packed hall had responded attentively to his intense, vocally elegant, performances of arias by Scarlatti, Stradella, Meyerbeer, Donizetti, Cilea and the Spanish composer Pablo Sorozabal, but with the opening instrumental strains of Catari in his first encore the vast audience suddenly burst into the kind of wildly enthusiastic applause that one had waited for all evening.
And from then on it steadily increased in volume as he produced those familiar songs with which he is most popularly associated, such as Granada, Cara mia mine, Sorrento and Tosti's L'ultima canzone.
Faces which earlier had seemed a little sombre were now wreathed in ecstatic smiles, and it was clear that this was what they had come to hear.
The lovely Polish mezzo Stefania Toczyska, who had three arias of her own, as well as joining Carreras in duets from Cavalleria Rusticana, Il Trovatore and Carmen, was also permitted a single encore before she quietly disappeared to leave him in sole charge.
Yet one of Carreras's most attractive features, apart from the splendour of his singing, is the way he has managed to avoid any disingenuous taint of backing modestly into the limelight.
He may be able to command as large an audience as anyone, yet he remains one of the least showy of performers, preserving a musical integrity and discrimination that deserved a better conductor than Elio Boncompagni, and certainly one who might have persuaded more sophisticated playing from a dispirited Royal Philharmonic.
The Arts: Grand sweep of history
By ROBERT GORE-LANGTON
THE Stratford opening of Henry IV, Parts 1 and 2 was a theatrical event warmly greeted by my colleague Charles Spencer.
Part 1 now arrives at the Barbican with Bob Crowley's minimalist design concept of single-colour screens, drapes and heraldic banners intact.
Director Adrian Noble shows us more of what has become his history-play trademark established with his Plantagenets trilogy: a sense of stylish organisation, a feel for the period, and a cinematic sweep of events.
There are some great stage effects.
The actors in the Shrewsbury battle scene, for instance, are huddled in a knot on a raised platform, locked in slow-motion combat as if in some seething tapestry.
Not the least of the memorable impressions of the evening is Robert Stephens's fascinating Falstaff, a guiltily grinning fellow who brings to bear those wonderfully lugubrious vowels of his, swigging sack, emitting little laughs and sly asides.
When he says, ‘I must give over this life’, you know he won't.
There is also a good deal of bottled-up passion in him, as witnessed in a brilliant mock-rejection scene with Hal.
This is not the usual portrait of self-delighting joie de vivre, more a boozy relic seen from the perspective of the morning after.
Other principals are also striking.
Michael Maloney's appealing, rather elfin Hal finds in Falstaff at least some of the humanity lacking in Patrick Glover's Victorian father of a king.
Hal's development makes one eager to see just how he will change in Part 2.
Owen Teale's comic and original Hotspur brings much more to the part than the usual hellcat warrior.
Sylvestra le Touzel, his forbidding English wife, is in stark contrast to the Celtic sexiness of Lady Mortimer (Jane Gurnett), who gabbles away in Welsh under the paternal gaze of Bernard Kaye's Glendower, the crashing bore.
With a shrine suspended from the ceiling and with Jerusalem evoked in Henry's opening speech, the guilty spiritual stain of Henry's usurpation certainly makes itself felt amid the play's comic carry-ons and pisspot humour.
It is the sense of an England bloodily engaged in bashing out a national destiny from the tribal chaos which is best conveyed in this rich, poetic panorama.
It leaves you eager for the sequel.
The Arts: Sublime but gaudy
By ROBERT HENDERSON
THE English National Opera's latest staging at the Coliseum of the full, five-act version of Verdi's Don Carlos is a long (roughly four-and-a-half hours with two modest intervals), musically engrossing, but broken-backed evening.
In a design-led production, David Pountney and designer David Fielding remain fairly faithful to the company's established Verdi style.
But it is full of frustrating inconsistencies, with the central auto-da-fe scene standing out in almost shocking relief from everything else.
Instantly familiar (and, some would claim, too much soin opera these days) is the white box set perched on a floor steeply raked from left to right, under which coffins are piled in increasing numbers as the work unfolds.
Not only does it look handsome, but its gleaming white walls provide ideal opportunities for Paul Pyant's brilliant lighting to mirror the drama's changing moods.
However, the set is too dour for the great outdoor scenes of the forest near Fontainebleau, the courtyard of the Yuste Monastery or the Queen's garden.
Nor does it accommodate the traditional costumes or a tired, very conventional acting style.
Where it begins to work superbly is in the more private, indoor scenes of the opera's later acts, from the great confrontation between the King and Inquisitor onwards.
Yet nothing can quite make up for the gaudy excesses of the auto-da-fe.
Even if such gruesome events really were seized upon, in medieval and Renaissance times, as an excuse for uproarious carnival, Verdi's music makes it abundantly clear that that is not at all what he intended.
Even before the 1867 premiere of his most sublime opera, Verdi made extensive cuts which were rediscovered in the early 1970s and restored by Andrew Porter, whose English translation is being used here.
Not all are of the finest quality, but most have been reinstated by the conductor Mark Elder, alongside some of the composer's 1883 revisions.
Indeed virtually the only thing now missing is the short ballet sequence.
Although Elder is a distinguished Verdian, his conducting on the opening night lacked the flair that marked his performances of ENO's previous production of Don Carlos back in the Seventies.
Much of the singing has also still to settle.
Missing from Linda Finnie's highly charged Eboli was the vein of capricious elegance that is an integral part of her character, and Jonathan Summers's powerful, dignified Rodrigo has coarsened in tone since I last heard him in the role.
Rosalind Plowright, singing at ENO for the first time in eight years, is an Elisabeth de Valois of aptly regal appearance, though her initially expressive line showed increasing signs of strain.
Most consistently imposing were the sombre King Philip of Gwynne Howell and Grand Inquisitor of Richard Van Allan.
Indeed, the vocal unevenness in the casting as a whole was neatly summed up by Edmund Barham's account of the title role.
Sometimes crucially flawed in terms of pure singing and not the most plausible of actors, his gestures mostly restricted to a desperate clutching of his temples, he nevertheless sustained a bold intensity of phrasing in his response to both words and music.
But what held the audience's rapt attention from beginning to end was above all the genius of Verdi himself and the superlative grandeur of his music.
Letter to the Editor: Lost voices
SIR — Surely it is not now the turn of Radio 3 to fall into the hands of crazed ‘controllers’(letter, April 3)?
When will the BBC do-gooders leave us alone?
The comforting thing about the wireless is its sameness, its recognised voices, knowing a programme is ‘always there’.
One used to be able to listen to light classical music on Radio 2 on a Sunday morning, but that has disappeared, and Radio 4's topsy-turvy ‘streamlining’ has wrecked the listening habits of years.
Have we no say?
Ah me, the Home, Light and Third had a lot going for them.
ROD HULL Rochester, Kent
Letter to the Editor: Unfair loss of composers' fees
SIR — In all the election brouhaha that has commanded so much unenthusiastic attention this year, a fundamental change in the way composers are paid when their works are performed in public has been strangely neglected.
The Performing Right Society is currently circulating all orchestras and bands in the country with a directive instructing them no longer to submit notification of all live performances.
Instead, it has drawn up a list of 500 venues where notification is still necessary.
In the rest, at least some 6,000 other places, no charge will be made.
When explaining the change, the society says that administrative costs must be balanced against receipts — a fair comment perhaps in the case of a small charity.
But this is hardly a convincing argument when produced by an organisation that collects some £130 million, even if it also proposes to give those of its members whose works are performed outside ‘significant venues’ a flat fee of £75 a year.
As a writer of military music, with some 45 marches, songs and orchestral works to my name, I collect sums that have topped £80 but are more usually £2.50.
I will still benefit whenever my works are played on television or the wireless as well as in the 500 chosen venues, which include the Albert Hall, Wembley Stadium and Pizza Express.
However, not a penny will come from those places that I regard as the heart of military music — the forecourt of Buckingham Palace, Horse Guards Parade and the bandstands of towns and villages throughout the land.
It may well be that some accountant has shown the society a loophole through which it can escape the obligations laid upon it at its foundation in 1914.
But if this policy is acted upon I have no doubt that a similar assault will be mounted from some quarter on the position of music in broadcasting.
The proposed flat fee might seem sufficient to some by today's standards; but can even the most naive believe that it will be raised regularly in line with inflation?
In truth, the society's decision will cause irreparable damage to the cause of music.
Future generations of composers will damn our spinelessness if we do not do something about this proposal, and they will be right.
LOUISE DENNY St Leonards-on-Sea, Sussex 
Peterborough:
THE INDEFATIGABLE Derek Jacobi (above left) returns to the West End next month after a holiday in France spent recovering from playing the lead role in Jean Anouilh's Becket.
Jacobi is to star with Isla Blair (above right) in a romp about Lord Byron, titled Mad, Bad and Dangerous to Know, at the Ambassadors Theatre.
The play, which is based on Byron's poetry, arrives in London after being staged in Russia, Israel and Los Angeles.
Jane McCulloch, director, says Jacobi and Miss Blair will be on stage throughout.
‘Isla plays eight different women,’ explains Miss McCulloch, ‘and Derek plays Byron right through his life.
He doesn't wear a curly black wig — by the end Byron was rather fat and balding.
Mind you,’ she adds, ‘some Americans were bewildered.
I think they were expecting roller skates and waterfalls.’
Jacobi has had some confusing moments.
‘On one occasion he was playing Byron at the same time as Richard III,’ says Miss McCulloch.
‘Poor old Byron's limp got mixed up with Richard's hump.
Derek said he didn't know whether he was humping or limping.’
Obituary of Roberto Ridolfi
ROBERTO RIDOLFI, the Italian gentleman-scholar who has died aged 92, represented the continuity of Florence as an historian of the Florentine Renaissance.
He wrote erudite and lucid biographies of Machiavelli, Savonarola and of the Renaissance historian Francesco Guicciardini, and also published collections of his cultural journalism.
He wrote, too, his own epitaph: ‘Here, where he was baptised, lies the Florentine writer Roberto Ridolfi, born 12 September 1899 who died…with as his only hope the Lord's mercy.’
A marquis, Ridolfi was related to the Medici family through the marriage of one of his ancestors to a daughter of Lorenzo the Magnificent; another member of the family, Cosimo Rodolfi, was a leading figure of the 19th century Risorgimento and the founder of Florence's first savings bank.
Young Roberto's mother died when he was eight and thereafter the boy rarely left the family villa of Baronta near Florence.
He educated himself in its extensive library, and, though always solitary, he was curious about everything, a fascinating conversationalist and a lover of practical jokes.
He collected butterflies, manuscripts and incunabula.
A master of archival research, he discovered such important manuscripts as those of Lorenzo the Magnificent and Guicciardini.
He received an honorary degree from Oxford, and the historian Cecil Roth wanted to propose to the Universities of London and Jerusalem that they too confer degrees on Ridolfi.
But the Florentine asked Roth to desist, because ‘I have a sense of measure and of the ridiculous.’
Although he gradually lost his sight in his last decade, Ridolfi continued to write.
He is survived by his wife, Maria, a son and a daughter.
Obituary of Milton Rackmil
Milton Rackmil.
In New York aged 86.
Former vice-chairman, MCA.
In 1934 co-founded Decca Records, whose artistes eventually included Ella Fitzgerald, Glenn Miller and Duke Ellington.
In the 1950s he bought the major share of Universal Pictures, which he steered to good fortune during a difficult period, with movies featuring such stars as Cary Grant, James Stewart and Doris Day.
When MCA bought Decca and Universal in 1962, Rackmil became vice-chairman of the board and remained head of both the film and record companies until he retired in 1972.
Obituary of David Carroll
David Carroll.
In New York aged 41.
American singer who appeared in Broadway musicals, including Grand Hotel, Chess, Seven Brides For Seven Brothers and Wind In The Willows.
Obituary of Manolis Andronikos
Prof MANOLIS ANDRONIKOS, the Greek archaeologist who has died at Salonika aged 72, made one of the great archaeological discoveries of the century when in 1977 he found the tomb of King Philip II of Macedon, the warrior father of Alexander the Great.
Andronikos had been digging in northern Greece for some 25 years when he discovered a vault in one of the narrow streets in the village of Virghina, west of Salonika.
In the centre of the vault, which dated back to 382–336BC, was the king's sarcophagus, apparently untouched for 23 centuries.
His bones lay in an engraved gold casket, with his armour, sceptre and shield close by.
Andronikos also found a diadem, a corselet, helmet and spears, a tripod and metal bowls.
On the floor of the tomb there were five tiny, inch-high ivory heads, including one in the image of the one-eyed Philip and another of Alexander the Great.
After discovering three further tombs, Andronikos concluded that he had lighted on the burial-place of the Macedon royal family.
The finds supported his claim that Virghina was the site of Aegae, the ancient capital of the Macedonian Greeks.
The treasures are now contained in Salonika Museum.
Manolis Andronikos was born at Bursa, Asia Minor, in 1919.
Three years later, during an exchange of populations with Turkey, the family moved to Salonika.
He studied classical archaeology at Thessaloniki University, and then, during the Second World War, went to the Middle East.
In 1949 he joined the Greek Archaeological Service; he gained his doctorate in 1952, and two years later went to complete his education at Trinity College, Oxford.
In 1957 Andronikos was appointed a lecturer in classical archaeology at Thessaloniki University, and in 1961 promoted Professor; he retired in 1983.
In 1952 in northern Greece he began making his own systematic digs, which a quarter of a century later would lead him to the royal treasures.
In 1978 he delivered a lecture at the London University Institute of Education, accompanied by his photographs of the magnificent finds in the tombs, which brought gasps from the audience.
Four years later Andronikos unearthed the theatre in which Philip was assassinated in 336BC; and five years later the tomb of Queen Eurydice, the grandmother of Alexander.
Andronikos was a leading member of the Archaeological Association of Athens and a member of the Society for the Promotion of Hellenic Studies in London and the Society for Macedonian Studies in Thessalonika.
He was also a past president of the National Hellenic Research Foundation.
He is survived by his wife, Olympia Kakoulidou.