

Champagne corks pop for Party Politics
By Tim Butcher
CHAMPAGNE corks popped and flags and ribbons festooned roadside hedges around Upper Lambourn, Berkshire, yesterday as villagers celebrated the return of Grand National winner, Party Politics.
The huge eight-year-old gelding, whose appetite is so big that he is nicknamed Monster Munch, was led through a crowd of 500 well-wishers to his box at the Saxon House stables of his trainer, Nick Gaselee.
At more than 18 hands, Party Politics, who was the tallest of Saturday's 40 runners, had been criticised for being ungainly.
‘They said he is a great big boney giraffe of a horse but we were determined to prove them wrong,’ said Mrs Mary Stoddart, whose husband, David, bred the horse.
Mr Stoddart sold Party Politics 48 hours before the race to Mr David Thompson, millionaire, of the Cheveley Park Stud, near Newmarket, for £80,000.
Judy Gaselee, wife of Nick, chairman of the village Conservative Association, invited Newbury candidate Judith Chaplin to the celebration.
‘It sounds a pretty good double: Party Politics wins the National and the Tories win the election,’ said Mrs Chaplin.
Rare Bugatti motor boat rises out of the mud
By Michael Fleet
A BUGATTI motor boat found resting in mud in France is to be flown to its wealthy owner in California next month, 10 years after work began on restoring it at a Thames boatyard.
The nine-foot-long Bugatti, built in 1944 of mahogany and ash and having an engine one-sixth the size of a Bugatti car, is believed to be one of only two in the world.
It is one of a limited number of boats designed by the car maker and has cost more than £20,000 to restore.
‘Its actual value is impossible to know,’ said Mr Peter Freebody, whose yard at Hurley, near Henley, has carried out the project.
The boat has received regular visits from its lawyer owner, as well as from other collectors of the cars who have called at the yard over the years.
‘It is the rarest boat we have worked on and has created a lot of interest,’ said Mr Freebody.
The boat has its original engine and mahogany hull but has had new decks and covering boards.
Original plans found in a Bugatti sales brochure have been used to help with the restoration.
‘It is a beautiful boat and was designed to have a lady and gentleman in the stern and the chauffeur at the wheel,’ Mr Freebody added.
Fashion: Modesty blaze The new swimwear looks like a cover-up — but Nilgin Yusuf says it still provides plenty of opportunity to show off
By NILGIN YUSUF
IN OUR fantasies, swimwear is inextricably linked with glamour.
In reality it is, according to a survey conducted by swimwear company Slix, the garment women like buying least.
Swimwear gives rise to vulnerability.
On the beach or in the changing room it forces us to confront and compare size, shape and sexual attractiveness.
Revealing one's body brings into conflict a wish to show off with the desire to cover up.
Spring's new swimwear is a finely tuned balance between modesty and brazenness.
Forties' Hollywood provides the inspiration for a mood that's pure Betty Grable or smouldering Ava Gardner.
All those witty war-time pin-up girls catching beachballs or bathing beneath parasols hold the clues.
Ruching is popular; halterneck and sweetheart necklines accentuate and cradle the bust, often supported by soft, flexible boning or underwiring.
A wide range of nautical looks sport navy and white-striped deep V or cross-over backs.
Proportions are substantial.
Bikini bottoms look more like high-waisted hot pants, while swimsuits are squared off across the thighs or skirted.
It's the kind of swimwear that flatters a voluptuous body.
It is kind to curves, highlighting hips, bust and bottom.
This is good news for Western women, who have been steadily growing larger.
Designer Liza Bruce welcomes the revival.
‘I remember the Sixties as a drag.
Twiggy was a major influence and women went around trying to look flat as boards.
Women should feel comfortable with their shape.
It's not a question of having the perfect body, but finding the right garment to suit you.’
The trend for covering up on the beach may also be influenced by the fear of sun-related skin cancers.
Leathery tans long since fell from favour, but a healthy glow is still considered the picture of vitality.
Margaret Howell, British fashion's great classicist, recently launched her first capsule collection of swimwear, based on Forties' shapes.
In black, white or navy cotton Lycra, prices start at £40.
‘It's certainly wiser to be more covered up in the sun,’ she says.
‘On the other hand, people have less qualms about sunbathing nude.’
A new protective swimwear fabric is being developed which allows wearers to tan safely through the cloth.
Sue Spiller, design director of Slix, feels this would blast open the creative possibilities: ‘We could have swimsuits with long sleeves, polo-necks, even legs.’
The sexual mores of the Forties and Fifties were to look but not touch and, in contrast to the topless swimsuits, string bikinis and thongs of the recent past, tomorrow's styles wrap the female form in a more precious way.
‘I like mystique; women shouldn't reveal all,’ Liza Bruce says.
Whatever the reasons, the nostalgia should be good for business.
Women who are most sensitive about thigh and hip areas will embrace the new proportions.
Alexis Prann, director of Slix, says that, psychologically, women will find the cover up reassuring.
‘Crudely speaking, the higher cut the swimsuit, the lower the sales.’
Fashion: SHOPPING DIARY
By ELIZABETH WILLIAMSON
Ethnic store
FORMERLY French owned, the fledgling Pier chain is now controlled by Alison Richards, ex-board member and buying director of Habitat.
London's latest ethnic shop opens on April 15 in Tottenham Court Road with two more branches due this year.
The Pier home style is rustic and affordable, Richards aiming at a holiday feel with wicker, scented candles, ceramics, glass and handmade cushions.
The Pier is at 200 Tottenham Court Road, London W1.
Fashion: Compact quality
THE April issue of Which? suggests there is little point paying more than £200 for CD players — it tested several — although £400 players from specialist companies can sound better.
Fashioon: Light years ahead
LEADING light Shiu-kay Kan will be showing his latest designs at the Euroluce lighting exhibition which opens in Milan on Friday.
Taking an alternative approach, he stresses concern for the environment and lower prices.
Kan's Prehistoric range can be seen at Liberty's and The Conran Shop later this month.
He also has a shop, at 24 Lexington Street, London W1R 3HR.
Tel: 071–434 4095.
Japanese guide at Wordsworth's home
By GERALD BARTLETT
YOSHIKO TAKEDA, 25-year-old wife of a British businessman, has been appointed the first full-time Japanese tour guide at Dove Cottage, Grasmere, the Lake District home of William Wordsworth, writes Gerald Bartlett.
She has been appointed this season after the Wordsworth Trust staged a six-day exhibition in Osaka last year.
As a result, thousands of Japanese tourists are expected to flock to the house in which Wordsworth wrote some of his best work.
One in 10 of last year's 72,000 visitors was Japanese, so the trust has introduced information leaflets written in their native language in the expectation that among 87,000 visitors this year, at least 14 per cent will be from Japan.
‘It would be wrong to say we are over-run with Japanese visitors — there's plenty of room and welcome for visitors from every country — but their numbers do seem to be increasing,’ said Dr Robert Woof, 60, director of the Wordsworth Trust.
‘We had 23,000 people seeing our exhibition in Osaka in six days, and of course Wordsworth is taught at Japanese universities.’
Wordsworth lived in Dove Cottage, a white-washed former inn called The Dove and Olive, during his most creative period from 1799 until 1808.
In this ‘little unsuspected paradise’ he wrote The Prelude, the ode Intimations of Immortality, Michael, many of the Lucy poems and Resolution of Independence among many others.
The cottage has three downstairs rooms, including a kitchen built into the hillside.
Obituary of Rixi Markus
RIXI MARKUS, who has died aged 81, was the first woman in the world to become a bridge grandmaster, and with the late Fritzi Gordon made up the most formidable women's bridge partnership in the world.
A native of Austria, Rixi Markus emigrated to London before the Second World War, and in 1950 became naturalised, eligible to represent her adopted country.
The next year she was selected with Doris Rhodes for the European women's team championships, held in Venice.
At half-time in the final match, when Britain was trailing Denmark in the lead, Sidney Lee, the non-playing captain, decided to pair Rixi and another member of the team, Fritzi Gordon.
Britain won the title, and within a couple of years Fritzi and Rixi had become an internationally celebrated bridge double-act.
In all, they captured seven European and four world titles for Britain: the women's pairs in 1962 and 1974, the mixed teams in 1962 and the women's teams in 1964.
Their success at the game did not make for an easy relationship, though.
They were an excitable, argumentative pair, and their habit of venting their frustrations in public earned them the sobriquet ‘Frisky and Bitchy’.
Rixi certainly had a voluminous ego, and thought nothing of confiding that a team mate was ‘a selfish bitch’.
At the same time, away from the competitive baize, she was a loyal and warm-hearted personality.
She always regretted the aggressive image she gained in the game.
‘At the bridge table I had to be a killer,’ she would recall with a sigh.
‘Well, no, a tiger.’
She was born Erika Scharfstein on June 27 1910, into a prosperous Jewish family in Gura Humora, a part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire that is now Romania.
The family was forced to flee ahead of the Russian advance in 1916, and eventually settled in Vienna, where Erika learned her first card game, Preference, common in central Europe at the time.
By the age of 10 she was playing whist, and two years later, while holidaying with an uncle in the Netherlands, she picked up bridge.
On her return to Austria, she was careful to keep her new hobby a secret from her parents, who ‘would not have considered it at all a proper pastime for a young girl’.
She remained a vehemently protected child, and after private education was sent to a finishing school at Dresden, Miss Wallerstein's Pensionat for Jewish Daughters of Good Families.
In 1928 Erika met and married Salomon Markus, a shoemaker twice her age, who also played bridge.
It proved a disastrous union —‘Salo’, the inferior player, became brutally jealous of his wife's game, and accused her of flirting with whomever she happened to be playing.
Mrs Markus increasingly took refuge from her unhappy domestic life at the Vienna Bridge Club.
After the third European Bridge Championships were held there in 1934 she turned professional.
Paul Stern, the vice-president of the Vienna Bridge Club, soon invited her to join the Austrian Ladies' Team, which was preparing for the first European Women's Teams Championship to be held in Brussels in 1935.
Rixi, as she was now known, proved an invaluable asset: Austria won the Europeans that year and the next, then gained a stunning victory at the first Women's World Championship in Budapest in 1937.
On March 11 1938, when Hitler's troops entered Austria, Rixi Markus was at the bridge table as usual.
Within a few days she had resolved to flee the country — her husband would not leave his business — and to join her parents, who had settled in London in 1936.
Clutching her young daughter (born in 1929), her bridge trophies and 200 schillings, she boarded a train in Vienna and fooled the authorities by going via Germany and then Belgium to Britain.
Her husband joined her some months later, but the marriage was by then irrevocably damaged, and they separated soon after the outbreak of war.
In London Rixi worked as a translator for the Red Cross, supplementing her income with her winnings at rubber bridge.
It was then the custom for women's teams to be captained by a man, which caused a degree of tension.
‘The captain was only a human being,’ she recalled, ‘and it was inevitable that he would choose one woman rather than another.’
Nonetheless Mrs Markus quickly learned the value of discretion.
‘I preferred to choose my romantic affairs outside bridge,’ she declared.
‘I don't have too much respect for the bridge male.’
Meanwhile she suffered her fair share of tragedy.
Her elder sister perished in a concentration camp; her father was killed in a motor-car crash; and a love affair with Walter Carr, a member of the newspaper family, ended with his death from a brain haemorrhage.
In her memoirs, A Vulnerable Game (1989)— which contained no hands — Markus also told of her 13-year romance with Harold Lever (now Lord Lever), a minister in the Wilson Government.
It was during that affair that she persuaded politicians to start an annual bridge match between the two Houses of Parliament.
She was organising the next bout, to take place soon after the election, shortly before she died.
Rixi Markus was the author of a dozen books, and was bridge correspondent of the Guardian for more than three decades.
In 1975 she was appointed MBE.
Her daughter predeceased her.
Walsall Kipping catch leaders Bushbury napping
By Malcolm Pein, Chess Correspondent
WALSALL KIPPING have won the Birmingham League in their jubilee year.
They lead Bushbury, who have led for most of the season, 5–1 in their eight-game match after the first session of play.
The result gives Walsall Kipping an unassailable lead with one round of matches left.
Walsall Kipping turned out their strongest team for the decisive match of the season: IM Robert Bellin, WGM Jana Bellin (England's number two woman player), Darren and Mark Wheeler, David Anderton OBE (a member of the FIDE executive), Michael Gough, Maurice Johnstone and Graham Smith.
The club's success owes a lot to the chess tradition of Queen Mary School, Walsall, which has supplied three of their first team.
To celebrate its jubilee, the club is holding a top quality weekend tournament at the Walsall Polytechnic Campus on April 18–20.
Sponsored by Leigh Interests PLC and Heart of England Building Society, the tournament boasts a prize fund of over £5,000 and has already attracted 18 of England's top 38 players including seven grandmasters and nine international masters.
There are sections for all strengths of player.
More details are available by calling 0922 20569.
The untitled Australian Ben Martin leads a 12-player field, including English GM Tony Miles, at the Netway Masters in Auckland, New Zealand.
Martin has scored four straight wins, while Miles has conceded a draw to the other grandmaster in the tournament, Ian Rogers of Australia.
Netway Masters Round 3 results: Garbett 1–0 Wallace; Dreyer 0–1 Metge; Martin 1–0 Sarfati; Rogers draw Miles; Noble draw Sarapu, Levi 0–1 Sarapu.
Round 4 results: Wallace 0–1 Martin; Metge 0–1 Garbett; Sarfati 0–1 Levi; Small draw Noble; Rogers 1–0 Dreyer; Miles 1–0 Sarapu; round one delayed game Rogers 1–0 Wallace.
Leading Scores: Martin 4/4; Miles & Rogers 3.5; Garbett 3; Small 2.
BUSINESS TRAVEL
By ALEX MCWHIRTER
SAS extends savings SCANDINAVIAN-bound travellers can continue to save hundreds of pounds on accommodation costs.
Flag-carrier SAS has extended its ‘Fly SAS-Stay SAS’ scheme to provide business class passengers with free and subsidised hotel rooms at Scandinavian gateways.
Business Travel: Swissair role
SAVE time and temper at Heathrow.
Swissair offers a telephone check-in facility for first and business class passengers with hand baggage.
Business Travel: Jersey jump
AIR UK is offering a cut-price £87 day return fare between Jersey and London Stansted.
Passengers must book five days ahead.
Business Travel: Alamo charge
ALAMO (0800 272200) will rent out a Mercedes 190 at Heathrow for little more than its rivals charge for a Ford Fiesta.
The firm's daily rate is £69 with a larger Mercedes 230 priced at £110.
Business Travel: Eastern nights
FAR Eastern hotel group Mandarin Oriental has a corporate rate scheme for small companies.
Discounts and privileges are offered to firms producing more than 50 room nights annually.
Business Travel: Leipzig deal
BRITISH Airways has a £129 introductory fare for its new Heathrow-Leipzig service.
Book 14 days ahead and stay over a Saturday night.
Business Travel: Off to Athens
DAN-Air has a cut-price £199 ‘seat sale’ fare for passengers flying Gatwick-Athens.
It is available until May 31.
Business Travel: BA bargains
DOMESTIC ‘Bargain Fares’ are extended until May 15.
British Airways is charging £79 for round-trip flights ex-Heathrow to Belfast, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Newcastle.
Booking conditions apply.
Business Travel: Chelsea score
AVOID food and drink bills when staying in London.
The four-star Sarova Chelsea hotel (071–589 6000) has a special £141 room rate per night, which includes breakfast, lunch and dinner, plus bar bills and all local phone calls.
European Business: Aeroflot looks to the West
THE former Soviet Union's Aeroflot is by far the world's largest airline-it has up to 1,500 aircraft and provides about a tenth of all air travel.
But last week the Russians admitted what aircraft experts have long claimed-that at least seven in 10 of its fleet have reached the end of their ‘useful life’.
Some Westerners believe that that could still be an underestimate.
Aside from any safety implications of continuing to fly elderly aircraft, Soviet aeroplanes are desperately inefficient.
A TU154 weighs a third more and consumes half as much fuel again as its Western equivalent, the Boeing 727.
Aeroflot's transatlantic flights still need to land at Shannon airport in Ireland to refuel because they cannot not carry enough fuel to complete the journey between New York and London.
When Russia and the other republics begin to charge realistic fares-rather than the handful of dollars charged at the moment-efficiency will become crucial.
No one knows what effect the introduction of commercial fares will have on air travel in the former Soviet Union.
But Aeroflot, its successor or its 20 constituent parts-each of which may form the nucleus of a national carrier in the republics-are likely to need 500 new or newish Western aircraft to continue services.
The Lithuanian government has already leased one 10-year-old Boeing 737 from GPA, and many western airlines are exploring the opportunities for setting up joint ventures using Western aircraft.
They will have to be patient for returns.
British Airways' proposed joint venture with a Russian division of Aeroflot is advancing slowly (leading some observers to question whether it still lives) but, according to the airline, steadily.
Based at Domodeovo, Moscow's main internal airport, Air Russia will buy or lease brand new Boeing 767s and hopes to start flying them by 1994.
BA has invested £20m of its own money in the venture, of which it owns 31 p.c., but says that further finance will come from Air Russia's own resources, such as state loans and leasing.
It expects a non-Russian contractor to be commissioned soon to construct an international terminal at Domodeovo.
BA's biggest competition so far seems to come from the Germans, who are already at work refurbishing Moscow's existing international airport, Sheremtyero.
The chairman of Lufthansa recently visited Moscow where he made a speech referring pointedly to the close relationship the German airline enjoyed with the Russians in the 1920s and 1930s.
He also launched negotiations with Aeroflot about possible joint ventures.
Motor Racing: Mansell completes hat-trick in the heat Timothy Collings sees the Williams team stamp their superiority over McLaren in the Brazilian Grand Prix 
By TIMOTHY COLLINGS
NIGEL MANSELL completed a season-opening hat-trick of victories for himself and the Canon Williams Renault team yesterday, by winning the Brazilian Grand Prix at the Interlagos circuit.
The 24th grand prix win of his career gives him a commanding lead in the world championship.
But Mansell, still bruised and shaken after his accident on Saturday, had to overcome a poor start, which had resulted in him being passed by team-mate Riccardo Patrese on the opening lap.
‘That was one of the worst starts of my career,’ said Mansell.
‘And then Riccardo drove a perfect race to keep me behind him until I pitted after 29 laps.’
‘After that, I didn't have so many problems once I was in the lead.’
Mansell, 38, clearly delighted at completing his second hat-trick, refused to discuss his prospects of claiming his first championship, despite the retirements of both Ayrton Senna and Gerhard Berger in the two new Marlboro McLaren Honda MP4/7As.
‘I remember last year — and I know what McLaren are capable of doing,’ he said.
‘At the moment, I am struggling to take in what it all means to me.’
The Englishman finished 29 seconds clear of Patrese, in a winning time of one hour, 36 minutes and 51.856 seconds, at an average speed of 118.191 mph.
He and the Italian had completed their third successive one-two for the Didcot-based team.
Michael Schumacher, of Germany, was third in his Camel Benetton Ford, ahead of Frenchman Jean Alesi and Italy's Ivan Capelli in the Ferraris.
Michele Alboreto, of Italy, claimed a welcome and rare point for sixth place in the Footwork Mugen Honda.
Mansell had proved his recovery from his accident on Saturday during the morning warm-up, when he once again outstripped the field, clocking a quickest time of 1 min 18.551 sec.
Afterwards, however, he admitted to still feeling ‘used up’ after a poor night's sleep.
His race chassis had required new right front and rear suspension and bodywork — tasks which had kept the Williams mechanics at the track until after 2 am.
It was a measure of McLaren's problems that they were still working long after that.
Patrese was again second-fastest behind Mansell in the warm-up, ahead of Schumacher.
The German once again posed the most serious threat to the Williams pair on a day of hot sunshine and humidity.
Senna was back in ninth place in the warm-up on his home circuit, after clocking 1–21.146, while Berger, of Austria, was 16th.
MCLAREN's problems appeared to intensify as the race approached, with the Austrian swapping cars 30 minutes before the start and then being forced to start from the pit-lane when he failed to make the parade lap.
None of this had any effect on the two Williams drivers, and they made their customary start.
Mansell led Patrese off the grid towards the Curva do Senna, and Senna fought his way ahead of Schumacher.
Patrese, perhaps stung by Mansell's superiority in previous races, showed no sign of accepting a comfortable second this time and swept into the lead at the Curva do Sol on the opening lap, leaving Mansell in close pursuit ahead of Senna, Schumacher, Alesi and Brundle.
This order remained unchanged — except for one brief incident when Schumacher and Senna traded places on the straight after eight laps — until lap 13, when the German flew past the Brazilian again.
Senna, clearly struggling, was then passed also by Alesi and Brundle and fell back to sixth before retiring after 17 laps.
With Berger having retired after only four laps, the double retirement with electrical problems of the McLarens represented their worst result since the Canadian Grand Prix last year.
None of this could detract from the supremacy of Williams, as Mansell and Patrese dominated the field and scrapped fiercely for the lead.
By lap 10 they were 20 sec ahead of the rest, and by lap 20 they had stretched that gap to 40 sec, before a rash of pit-stops for tyre changes interfered with the order.
All the leaders came in for new rubber between laps 24 and 31, when Patrese pitted.
Mansell regained the lead as a result, initially by only three seconds once the order had re-settled.
Patrese was second, ahead of Schumacher, Alesi, Capelli and Alboreto.
Brundle, who had risen briefly to third place during the tyre stops, was again completely out of luck and, like Johnny Herbert, was forced to retire by a collision in which he seemed to be the innocent party.
Brundle, running sixth on lap 29, attempted to pass Alesi, but the Frenchman sharply ‘closed the door’ on the downward spiral from the first corner, and both cars span off.
Alesi rejoined, but Brundle was finished.
At this stage, Herbert, who had started in 26th place at the back of the grid, was up to seventh place following a superb drive.
But his race ended after 37 laps when the Ligier Renaults of Thierry Boutsen and Erik Comas collided, taking the Englishman's Lotus Ford out with them.
Soccer: Whelan hits late goal to frustrate Portsmouth Liverpool force FA Cup semi-final replay as John Byrne scores the winner that takes Second Division Sunderland to Wembley
By Colin Gibson
Liverpool1
Portsmouth1 GRAEME SOUNESS sprinted from the dugout, sank to his knees and offered a silent prayer of thanks to the heavens at Highbury yesterday afternoon.
His celebration after Ronnie Whelan had scored a simple equaliser was the perfect demonstration of how close his Liverpool team had come to elimination from the FA Cup.
That goal, three minutes from the end of extra-time in an absorbing semi-final, gives Liverpool another chance against Second Division Portsmouth in a replay at Villa Park a week today.
The bookmakers, at least, believe Liverpool will take it.
After Sunderland, the other Second Division team in the last four, had beaten Norwich 1–0 at Hillsborough in yesterday's second semi-final, Liverpool were made odds-on favourites to lift the Cup, with Portsmouth 6–1 outsiders.
But for Whelan's late goal, Wembley would have staged the first all-Second Division FA Cup Final on May 9.
Portsmouth, leading through a goal from Anderton, were contemplating their first visit to Wembley since the Spring of 1939.
The Pompey chimes were echoing around north London as the 20,000 supporters who had travelled from the south coast prepared to celebrate.
But Liverpool launched yet another Cup recovery to keep alive their Wembley dream.
After a bright and purposeful start, Liverpool lost their way and almost paid a heavy price.
They had needed the eccentric goalkeeping of Grobbelaar to keep them in the match up to the 111th minute, when Anderton suddenly revealed why so many scouts have been beating a path to Fratton Park.
Neill, the only Portsmouth player to have experienced the atmosphere of an FA Cup Final — he was a Queens Park Rangers substitute 10 years ago — played a long pass behind a tired defence that had been forced to cope with extra pressure following Liverpool's reduction to 10 men, when McManaman departed on a stretcher.
For once, Jones was unable to catch Anderton and Grobbelaar could not prevent the shot creeping into the Liverpool net.
The Clock End at Highbury, populated by Portsmouth supporters armed with blue and white balloons and shredded newspaper, erupted.
Jim Smith, a manager whose tactical knowledge is sometimes overlooked in appreciation of his bonhomie, had devised a strategy aimed at frustrating Liverpool's passing game — and it worked.
He employed five in midfield, where Burns was a prodigious worker.
The two wide men, Anderton and, initially, Chamberlain, who limped off after 11 minutes, locked in the Liverpool full-backs.
Further forward, Clarke ensured that Wright's return after injury was not to be a gentle reintroduction, and the England central defender had to be at his very best.
Had Portsmouth shown, in front of goal, the composure they had produced elsewhere, they might have been two up before half-time.
Grobbelaar had much to do with the fact that they were not.
His save from McLoughlin four minutes from the break was as acrobatic as it was unbelievable.
He also reacted quickly to save after both McLoughlin and Clarke had seen efforts cleared off the line by Houghton.
But for every moment of inspiration from Grobbelaar there is also likely to be a lapse of concentration, and that came when he lost a cross from Burns in the 101st minute.
Clarke headed towards the net but Nicol cleared.
It was that sort of uncertain afternoon for Liverpool, who relied so heavily on the impetus provided by McManaman.
He gave Beresford a torrid afternoon, and the full-back was booked when he ended McManaman's first run with a crude challenge.
McManaman was responsible for regaining the advantage for Liverpool late in the game and one or two of Beresford's late tackles indicated just how much Portsmouth feared him.
The tackle that ended McManaman's threat came in the 104th minute.
Beresford was probably fortunate to stay on the field.
There was no question of McManaman staying.
He left by stretcher with cartilage damage.
After being reduced to 10 men and then going behind, Liverpool seemed to be staring defeat squarely in the face.
But then came the only error of the afternoon from the impressive Awford, when his mistimed challenge sent Nicol sprawling.
Awford was booked and Barnes set his sights 20 yards from goal.
A curling free-kick was good enough to beat the diving Knight.
The ball came back off the post and Whelan touched it in.
Liverpool were saved and Mr Souness was mightily relieved.
Soccer: Blow for McManaman as Liverpool lick wounds
By Christopher Davies
LIVERPOOL'S Steve McManaman will have a cartilage operation today on the knee injury sustained in a challenge with John Beresford during extra time at Highbury yesterday.
It will rule him out of next Monday's FA Cup semi-final replay with Portsmouth and may even end the season for the promising Liverpool winger.
To add to Liverpool's injury worries, John Barnes and Ray Houghton, both suffering from hamstring strains, are likely to miss the League games against Wimbledon and Aston Villa, although Graeme Souness hopes both will be fit for the Villa Park replay.
Dean Saunders, suspended yesterday, will also be available for the replay.
The match could become the victim of the possible PFA strike and Bruce Grobbelaar, the Liverpool goalkeeper, pledged his team's support to the cause to ‘protect the players of the future, especially those from the lower divisions’.
Both Mr Souness and Jim Smith, the Portsmouth manager, emphasised how delighted they were with the overall quality of yesterday's tie.
Mr Souness said: ‘I'm pleased we're still in the FA Cup.
To go one down with nine minutes remaining and with only 10 men, we were up against it.’
Mr Smith's problems are not so much physical, apart from Chamberlain's injured knee, but how to prepare his players for tomorrow's important Second Division promotion game at Tranmere.
He said: ‘It was so near yet so far.
The players are very down and upset and it will be difficult to lift them for Tranmere.
If we'd had the confidence and belief in our finishing that we had in our general play, we would have been 2–0 up at half-time.’
‘We did magnificently but had one mad moment — the one thing you shouldn't do against Liverpool is to give John Barnes a free-kick in that position.’
Malcolm Crosby, the Sunderland caretaker manager, expects to stay in that position despite guiding his club to the final with a 1–0 defeat of Norwich at Hillsborough.
He said: ‘I still expect to be caretaker manager at Wembley on May 9.
I'm fed up with all the talk about my job.
We'll leave that until we get some good League results together.’
Mr Crosby toasted Sunderland's arrival at Wembley with an orange, but added: ‘I'll be celebrating properly later on.
This is the greatest day of my life in football.
We brought a smile back to Wearside.’
Goalscorer John Byrne, who broke a leg while playing for French club Le Havre three years ago which threatened to end his career, said: ‘At that time, days like this seemed a million miles away.
I am so happy it's unbelievable.
This is the proudest moment of my career — they don't come much bigger than reaching an FA Cup final.’
Norwich manager Dave Stringer said: ‘This is the second time I've lost a semi-final and it doesn't get any easier to accept.
We didn't make enough chances.
We toiled away and worked hard but didn't get our game going.’
Soccer: Byrne applies final touch FA CUP
Sunderland subdue Norwich to clinch Wembley return after 19 years
By William Johnson
Norwich City0 Sunderland1 THE John Byrne and Malcolm Crosby FA Cup roadshow has rolled all the way to Wembley after Sunderland overcame First Division opposition at Hillsborough yesterday to squeeze through to their first final in 19 years.
Byrne, the Republic of Ireland striker who considered retiring from the game less than two years ago because his career had stagnated in France, maintained his record of scoring in every round of what has become a romantic Wearside success story.
Mr Crosby has been at the centre of that romance, reviving the club's fortunes almost immediately after taking over from Denis Smith at Christmas and then inspiring the sort of Cup run last enjoyed by the passionate Roker supporters in the days of Bob Stokoe.
Mr Stokoe, who was at Hillsborough to witness one of the finest hours in the declining club's recent history, used his position as a television analyst to canvas on behalf of Mr Crosby's permanent promotion to the manager's chair.
‘Whoever heard of a caretaker manager at Wembley?’ said Mr Stokoe, who has noticed uncanny similarities between Mr Crosby's glorious adventure and his own in 1973.
The Stokoe triumph, coming at the end of an indifferent season in the Second Division, culminated with a surprise Wembley victory over a mighty Leeds United side.
To continue the parallel, Mr Crosby will probably ask for Liverpool to take their appointed place at Wembley next month.
If he does, he will be at odds for the first time with the hordes of admiring supporters who could not conceal their disappointment when news of Ronnie Whelan's late equaliser at Highbury was announced just before the kick-off.
The Sunderland contingent in a 40,000 crowd stayed in their places long after the finish demanding to see their heroes.
Mr Crosby wanted to take them back on the pitch but was prevented from doing so by police, who had acted quickly to prevent a pitch invasion when Byrne headed Sunderland into a 35th-minute lead.
Several ecstatic Sunderland followers, who had not appreciated the sensitivity of the occasion, were ejected from the Kop end of the stadium.
Byrne, 31, whose goals have contributed to victories over Port Vale, Oxford, West Ham and Chelsea along the Wembley road, enjoyed his biggest celebration so far when he stooped to head home from close range at the end of the most incisive move of a tight match.
Rush's beautiful pass down the right flank sent Atkinson racing behind the Norwich defence.
An equally fine cross eluded two covering defenders and Byrne, timing his advance to perfection to avoid a linesman's offside flag, finished with what is becoming customary aplomb.
It is never too early to score, but Sunderland faced a nerve-racking 55 minutes after that breakthrough.
They coped with the pressure admirably, with central defenders Rogan and Ball, who was carried off with knee ligament damage early in the second half, outstanding.
Norwich will feel they should have scored as early as the second minute.
A Bowen chip into the danger area found Sutton unmarked on the six-yard line.
Perhaps the Norwich striker had not adjusted to the importance of the occasion, but Norman was able to make a crucial save.
Sutton, who missed with another header shortly afterwards, went on to squander two more excellent opportunities which could have kept alive Norwich's hopes of going to the final for the first time in their history.
Seconds before the interval, he misdirected a shot which could have had huge psychological value when Fleck crossed invitingly after exploiting Culverhouse's through ball.
Sutton missed an even better chance early in the second half when Norwich's pressure was at its most intense.
Bowen delivered the ideal ball into the penalty area and Sutton reached it before the advancing Norman only to flick it a yard or so over the top.
Sunderland made no attempt to sit on their lead, however, and looked just as likely as Norwich to score in a second half which comfortably surpassed the first in entertainment value.
The nearest they came to securing the cushion of a two-goal lead came when Rush lobbed the ball into the path of Davenport, who failed to get sufficient power into a shot to beat Walton, who was still deputising for the injured Gunn.
A free-kick by Bracewell, their inspirational captain, could also have produced rich dividends for Sunderland.
Davenport's low cross was almost turned in by Rush and Byrne in turn before falling to Bennett, a substitute, who blazed the ball wildly off target.
A delighted Mr Crosby refused to capitalise on his strong position to make a public appeal for a job which Notts County's Neil Warnock remains favourite to fill in the summer.
He said: ‘There has been too much talk about the job and not enough about our position in the League.
We have now got to concentrate on staying up, and we've got some important matches before we can start thinking about the final.’
He received further backing, however, from Dave Stringer, his Norwich counterpart.
Mr Stringer, a most gracious loser despite experiencing the disappointment of missing out at the penultimate stage for the second time in three years, asked: ‘What more do you have to do to prove yourself.’
Soccer: Hillsborough bereaved condemn FA's timing
By Colin Malam
FA CUP semi-final football returned to Hillsborough yesterday with a smile on its face and without a hint of serious crowd trouble.
To that extent the Football Association were justified in taking this fixture back to the Sheffield stadium only three years after 95 Liverpool supporters died there.
Apart from one brief pitch invasion when Sunderland scored, the supporters of both clubs behaved impeccably.
They even offered, in unison, a moving rendering of Liverpool's theme song, ‘You'll Never Walk Alone’, which was one of the afternoon's few attempts at remembrance.
It was always a safe bet, of course, that Hillsborough would be just about the least dangerous place in Britain yesterday.
After what happened here on April 15, 1989, the authorities were going to make sure there was no repetition.
That, though, is not really the point.
The question was not so much one of safety as of timing.
In other words, should the Football Association have allowed more than three years before bringing a semi-final back to the scene of English football's most terrible tragedy?
Most of those from Liverpool who were here on that fateful spring day believe the return should have been delayed longer.
Trevor Hicks, whose two daughters were among those who died, and Peter Jackson, the Liverpool solicitor who acted for the Football Supporters' Association at the Hillsborough Inquiry, both condemn the FA for acting in haste.
They make a variety of points in laying the charge, but what their complaints come down to, in Mr Jackson's succint phrase, is: ‘It's just too damned soon.’
As a member of the legal profession, he points out that the three-year limitation period on claims for injury or death does not run out until a week tomorrow.
Mr Hicks, who speaks for the bereaved and injured as chairman of the Hillsborough Families' Association, was also unhappy to see the stadium host a semi-final again while the business from 1989 remained uncompleted.
‘We have only just finished the legal disputes,’ he says, ‘and we're still fighting compensation battles.
Very few have had any compensation yet.’
The FA defended the decision to return to Hillsborough largely in terms of practicality.
Life must go on, they intimated, while stressing that the stadium would never have been considered for a semi-final involving Liverpool or Nottingham Forest.
It all sounded pretty thin, though, alongside the moving accusations from Merseyside.
So thin, in fact, that it was difficult not to share the view of Rogan Taylor, former chairman of the FSA, that the FA's real motive was to restore Hillsborough's status in support of their bid for the finals of the 1996 European Championship.
Mr Taylor's claim came vividly to mind when the revolving advertising boards around the perimeter of the Hillsborough yesterday flashed up the legend: ‘UEFA ‘96 The Pitch Is England's.’
SOCCER COMMENTARY ‘Postmen’ seek PFA's stamp of approval
By Jimmy Hill
NOSTALGIA is a strange sensation.
I cannot vouch for its accuracy, but I am aware of its intensity.
As a member of the ‘shadow board’ of the Football League, with whom the Professional Footballers' Association have no quarrel, propriety demands that I do not take sides in the dispute between the Premier League and the PFA.
Yet I would be insensitive indeed if I did not recognise the smell of battle and the weapons with which such wars are fought.
Barely over the age of 30, I used some of them in 1961 against the Establishment.
The most powerful, I found, was public opinion.
Retrospectively, the last of the mill-owners, as I then described them, had no chance in the argument over the abolition of the maximum wage and easing players' contracts.
With hindsight, the two points of principle were indisputable.
First, that a player should be free to earn whatever his employer wished to pay him; secondly, that having fulfilled a contract, a player had the right to leave his employer and go elswhere, at the same time accepting the club's right to a transfer fee.
On January 18, 1961, those two principles were agreed at a meeting at the Ministry of Labour four days before an all-out strike was to take place.
Despite having peanuts for a strike fund, the public had understood the principles and, as a result, the Football League were defeated.
Well, nearly — it appeared game, set and match to the PFA but either the memory, or the shorthand, of the Football League's negotiators was faulty because in their letter to clubs, describing what had been agreed, they led them to believe that the second principle had not been conceded.
As a consequence the PFA continued to support George Eastham's legal battle and it was not until 1964 that the case came to court and Sir Justice Wilberforce established the players' legal right to the second freedom that had already been negotiated in 1961.
The similarity between then and now is that powerful and established club chairmen have never been able to trust individuals to negotiate on their behalf.
Although the PFA have 4,000 members, Gordon Taylor knows that he can deal for them.
The Premier League have already demonstrated that the almost regal Sir John Quinton and the most pleasant man in the street, Rick Parry, are postmen — and nothing more — for the 22 clubs.
The nature of the Premier League club chairmen, most of whom are highly successful businsessmen, not without confidence in their own judgement, makes it almost impossible for them to give others carte blanche.
If they were to appoint a knowledgeable, experienced, well-briefed David to oppose the players' Goliath, they might not gain total victory but at least there would be a result and we could all get on with the game.
Very few people believe that a solution is impossible to find and the public will lose patience with a dispute that seems to be about money.
I do not need to tell you the potential problems and chaos that the delay is causing to the reorganisation of the leagues next season.
I am still firmly of the belief that both leagues need to spend more time in improving their product.
To let television income magnetise minds away from the needs and demands of spectators would be foolish.
AGAINST my finer feelings, I succumbed to a BskyB satellite dish for the finals of the cricket World Cup.
Those feelings are another subject for another day, but as well as the cricket final, I have absorbed a mass of European and world football.
It has been a superb opportunity to compare the varied football cultures.
The good news is that the phlegmatic, orderly and systematic British attitude to defending the goal still makes us a match for the best.
The bad news is that, when it comes to confidence on the ball, we are way behind.
So many of our players are highly skilled, spontaneous passers.
As space has diminished, our capacity to think ahead has expanded; but it is when we are given time on the ball, and space to move, that our limitations are exposed.
That is why Paul Gascoigne was, and I trust will be, so exciting and so different.
He can break up the rhythm with the deceptive powers of a confidence trickster and made something happen from seemingly stagnant positions.
It is quality that our system has tended to submerge.
When Ian St John and Jimmy Greaves become serious it must be time for action not talk.
Their observations concerning the insatiable appetite for immediate team success from the age of eight are so relevant.
We must teach our children to play, not necessarily to win; to express themselves; to make the ball a friend, relish its closeness and use their imagination.
I never forget the first morsel of professional advice I received: ‘Play your own game, son, but keep the ball moving.’
It seems that the professional game, in contrast to our European and world rivals, has revered the second tenet but stifled the first.
Without doubt, at the moment, the quality most needed, both on and off the field, is innovation.
May it soon replace confrontation.
Soccer: Bonds spells out stark message
By Colin Malam
Chelsea2 West Ham1 WEST HAM's seventh defeat in their last nine League matches marked a turning point of sorts.
For the first time this season, manager Billy Bonds locked the dressing room door after the game and gave the players a piece of his mind.
But neither shock treatment of that kind, nor a rallying cry from captain Julian Dicks is likely to save the East London club from relegation to the Second Division.
Mr Bonds was supported by Dicks in his view that West Ham's play at Stamford Bridge lacked both confidence and passion.
‘I was running around geeing people up,’ said the captain.
‘I shouldn't need to do that, but the situation we are in called for it.’
Admitting ‘We had words’ in the dressing room afterwards, Dicks added: ‘The boss spelled out a few home truths.
He's made a few of the lads sit up, and now they've got to take a good, hard look at themselves.’
‘It's not the end of the world if we go into the Second Division.
But if we do go down, it's important that we build in it.
I'm prepared to stay with West Ham and play in the Second Division.’
These rubber Hammers failed to respond even when Allen marked his transfer from one club to the other with a spectacular, 27th minute shot that cancelled out Wise's rather streaky opening goal for Chelsea only a minute earlier.
Cascarino, who had scored only once in nine appearances for Chelsea and was being barracked by a section of the crowd, admitted Allen's goal put him under pressure.
He was delighted, therefore, to be allowed a free and decisive header from Clarke's centre three minutes into the second half.
Mr Bonds still refuses to talk about relegation until it is a certainty.
‘We've got seven games to play, and five of them are at Upton Park,’ he said.
‘So we've a duty to our fans to get as many points as we can.’
Soccer: Wednesday aim for second spot
By Don Hardisty
Nottingham Forest0 Sheffield Wednesday2 THE OLD boys reunion was far from memorable for Brian Clough, whose team are finding the fortnight between their cup finals tough going.
Three matches in six days since winning the ZDS Cup have proved too much and former Forest favourite Trevor Francis' lively Wednesday were rarely troubled while two more Forest old boys, Wilson and Sheridan, ran the midfield.
Suddenly, after battling all season with Manchester City for third place in the First Division, the Wednesday player-manager finds that finishing second is now more than just a pipe dream.
‘When you start the season hoping to make sure of a place in the Premier League you have to be satisfied with our present position,’ he said, ‘but I didn't realise we were only six points behind Leeds with a game in hand.’
Wednesday's main hope of a place in Europe still rests on Forest losing against Manchester United in Sunday's Rumbelows Cup final.
‘We could get in as third-placed team if United win the Rumbelows Cup and the League.
There are so many permutations,’ he added.
He knows one thing is certain — Forest will be much more difficult to beat at Wembley than they were against Wednesday, who joined Sheffield United as the only teams to have achieved a double over Forest this season.
With five Forest regulars missing, Walker, the only survivor from the usual back four, tried hard to keep his defence in shape, but Wednesday kept streaming through midfield.
Sheridan was the architect of the first goal.
Taking a clearance from Nilsson, he found Palmer with space on the right wing and Williams tucked away Palmer's centre with brisk efficiency.
Shirtliff nodded down Wilson's corner for Hirst to score the second and the Wednesday striker would have collected his 20th of the season but for a fine one-handed save by Marriott.
Soccer: Jobson takes defiant stand
VIC JOBSON, the Southend chairman, has vowed to stand firm against the growing protests of supporters who want David Webb, currently serving out his notice, to stay as manager.
Southend fans staged a lengthy demonstration against the chairman after the 2–1 defeat by Ipswich at Roots Hall on Saturday.
Mr Jobson said that if any supporters would have a say in his future, it would be the club's shareholders.
And, he added: ‘I own 70 per cent of the club.’
Soccer: Leeds waste main chance DIVISION ONE
City's four-goal spree places Manchester rivals on course for the title
By William Johnson
Manchester City4 Leeds United0 A FAR from vintage championship battle has fluctuated between the Uniteds of Manchester and Leeds for months, so it would be folly to believe this dramatic twist in fortunes will be the last before the coveted honour goes to either Old Trafford or Elland Road.
Nevertheless, both aspiring champions will regard the startling events at Maine Road on Saturday as potentially decisive.
Leeds need no telling that they were not as bad as the scoreline suggests but that matters little with only five games to play.
The damage done to their morale could be irreparable.
Howard Wilkinson, the manager who has revived a slumbering Yorkshire giant, offered a brave if predictable public stance —‘We're not throwing in the towel…if we win our last five matches it could be interesting’— but privately he must realise that an outstanding opportunity has been lost.
With time running out, it was crucial that Leeds at least regained the leadership by taking a minimum of one point from a Manchester City team who had not scored in any of their previous four outings.
On another day, Leeds' performance might have been good enough to claim some reward.
They created more scoring opportunities than the average away team and they were not exactly negligent in defence.
It was just that City enjoyed one of those rare days when everything went right, even though some of the Maine Road faithful will have mixed feelings about whether it was an occasion for celebration.
Many of those City supporters have indicated that, given the choice, they would rather have handed out a thrashing to their neighbours and arch-rivals tomorrow night and done their bit to extend Old Trafford's embarrassing 25-year wait for the championship.
They may, indeed, deliver another painful lesson in what promises to be a fascinating derby match but Alex Ferguson's team go into that encounter with pressure eased in the knowledge that they can drop a minimum of six points on a seven-match run-in.
Steve McMahon, who figured in three title triumphs at Liverpool, admitted to being unsure of what role he was supposed to play in determining the destiny of this season's major prize.
He said: ‘The word from Manchester United fans was that we could do them a big favour, and we've undoubtedly done them one, but I got the impression that our own fans would not have been too bothered if we'd lost today.’
McMahon, like his player-manager, Peter Reid, is a born winner, however, and the recent £900,000 signing from Anfield turned in probably his best performance for his new club.
McMahon was involved in the build-up to three of the four goals and also came out a clear winner in what was, at times, a bad-tempered midfield confrontation with Batty and McAllister.
After City had taken an early lead with a powerful header from full-back Hill, McMahon split open the Leeds defence with a precise ball from which Sheron turned the course of the match with a 34th-minute strike.
McMahon then robbed Speed deep in City territory to begin the counter-attack from which Quinn scored a thrilling third, and the busy midfielder saved his best pass for the dying minutes when Brennan was on hand to profit from a piercing chip.
Leeds had given up by then but it is not hard to present a case from which they, rather than City, might have ended up celebrating.
Coton, the City goalkeeper voted the League's No 1 by his fellow professionals, thwarted Speed and Fairclough with exceptional saves, while Wallace twice squandered the kind of opportunities which earlier this season he was accepting without a second thought.
SCOTTISH SOCCER
Thin line between ecstasy and tedium for Robertson
NONE of the 27,310 who paid to see the Tennents Scottish Cup semi-final between Airdrie and Hearts at Hampden Park will wish to see a repeat of such numbing mediocrity in the replay tomorrow week.
The controversy which surrounded Robertson's goal attempt for Hearts three minutes from the end provided the only genuine excitement.
The little striker lunged towards a header from Levein and hooked the ball to the left of Martin and it appeared to cross the line before the goalkeeper palmed it out, only for referee Jim McCluskey to rule it out.
Robertson, not unexpectedly, claimed afterwards that his strike should have been recognised.
‘I thought it was six or seven inches over the line,’ he said.
‘Even some Airdrie players admitted they thought it was a goal, but the referee didn't seem to see it.’
Martin, of course, was just as adamant that he had kept it out: ‘I admit that part of the ball was over the line, but that's not enough.’
Hearts' bad day was made worse with the news that Celtic had moved past them into second place in the Premier Division after beating Falkirk 3–1.
Soccer: Wycombe join front runners
WYCOMBE took advantage of Colchester's involvement in the Trophy to draw level with the Conference leaders on 75 points, thanks to a 3–1 victory in front of a 2,236 crowd at Farnborough.
Goals in the first five minutes by Dennis Greene and Keith Scott set the Buckinghamshire side on the path to victory, but they had to wait until the 68th minute before Simon Stapleton settled the issue.
Farnborough's Simon Read took his season's tally to 16 in the 19th minute.
Soccer: Home comforts desert Coventry
By David Horridge
Coventry City0
Arsenal1 THERE IS no place like home for Coventry City when it comes to failing to win football matches.
A home win is a treat yet to be enjoyed by manager Don Howe and is endangering the club's proud record of 25 years in the First Division, a tenure bettered only by Arsenal, Everton and Liverpool.
Most of those seasons have involved a struggle against relegation and, while they have been lucky to survive some, this team are good enough to stay up.
They will do that if they win two of their remaining three fixtures at Highfield Road, but current form suggests that will not be easy.
Since beating Southampton in November, Coventry have failed to win any of their subsequent 10 games at home.
Mr Howe, appointed three months ago, refuses to offer the defiant cliche about being too good to go down.
Instead, he says: ‘The team is good enough to stay up but whether we will I don't know.
It is up to the players.
They must have the desire to play in the Premier League.’
Both managers agreed that Coventry enjoyed 80 per cent of this match and could have had it won by half-time.
Seaman made good saves from Ndlovu and Robson, Winterburn blocked a shot on the line while Smith blasted a good opportunity over the bar.
Campbell revealed what Coventry are lacking when, in the 29th minute, he collected a pass from Limpar, swept between two defenders and placed his shot out of the reach of Sealey.
Mr Howe said: ‘It was the only chance Arsenal had and it won them the match.’
It means the League champions have gone 11 games unbeaten, a run that offers them a final placing that would erase much of the disappointment of a frustrating season that includes two defeats by Coventry.
As their manager, George Graham, said: ‘Against Nottingham Forest in midweek we played well and only drew.
This time we looked a couple of yards short and won.’
Mr Graham also had words for Seaman, who made a crucial second-half save from Flynn: ‘He is still the best goalkeeper in the League.
He had one bad game for England but that doesn't make him a bad player.’
Soccer: Woking clinch Diadora title
WOKING'S 3–0 win at Windsor on Saturday secured the Diadora League title and promotion to the GM Vauxhall Conference with seven games to spare.
George Friel took his goal tally for the season to 35, the others coming from Francis Vines and Steve Milton in front of a crowd of 1,184 — an estimated 800 of them Woking supporters.
Woking manager Geoff Chapple said the club expected a gate of up to 3,000 for tomorrow's home fixture with Kingstonian.
Soccer: Feeble Spurs give Villa a field day
By Christopher Davies
Tottenham2 Aston Villa5 THE most disappointing aspect of Tottenham's 13th home defeat of the season was not their naive defending or individual errors that made Aston Villa think some of their opponents were practising for the PFA strike.
It was the lack of physical strength and heart shown by certain Spurs defenders as Villa swept past them like a claret and blue tidal wave.
Things are difficult enough for manager Peter Shreeves without players failing because of lack of heart.
He made his feelings known to his team who threw away a 2–0 lead to crash to their heaviest home defeat of a troubled season.
‘We're not paid to defend like that.
It was a very indifferent defensive performance,’ said Mr Shreeves.
There seemed little chance of an away win when Lineker and a Teale own goal gave Spurs a 2–0 cushion after only 13 minutes.
Richardson reduced the arrears before a mistake by Walker allowed Olney to equalise.
Yorke ran free to make it 3–2 before Daley beat Mabbutt and Cundy — a catchweight competition there — to score Villa's fourth.
Regis dismissed Bergsson's almost non-existent challenge to complete Tottenham's humiliation.
Lineker missed a penalty with the score 3–2 but Mr Shreeves understandably refused to criticise the 30-goal striker —‘he has no arrears on his subs.’
The scoreline was all the more remarkable considering Villa recently went 578 competitive minutes without scoring a goal.
At White Hart Lane they scored from virtually every chance.
Tottenham travel to Notts County tomorrow seeking one of the two wins Mr Shreeves thinks will be needed to be absolutely safe from relegation.
They will be without Durie, who has a twisted ankle and Bergsson, who will be on international duty with Iceland in Israel.
Soccer: Shearer prolongs Southampton rise
By Sue Thearle
Southampton2 QPR1 SOUTHAMPTON took a further tentative step away from the relegation zone courtesy of another crucial intervention from the emerging Alan Shearer.
The England striker's 20 goals have brightened his club's otherwise moderate campaign which at one stage threatened to end in relegation to the Second Division.
But Shearer's 69th minute penalty, which he had earned through his own persistence, enabled Southampton to record their sixth successive league win.
‘We're not there yet, because it's not mathematically certain we can stay up,’ insisted manager Ian Branfoot, whose team have now crept up to 17th place.
‘We're looking to win every game now and there's even talk of us getting into Europe,’ he said jokingly.
After Dowie had given Southampton a 13th-minute lead, the whole course of the match hinged on a startling 10-minute spell in the second half.
Rangers equalised when Ferdinand burst through the Southampton defence to score a fine individual goal in the 62nd minute.
Four minutes later, Ferdinand was floored in the area by Moore and referee Durkin had no hesitation in pointing to the penalty spot.
Wilson, however, could only muster a weak shot which Flowers saved by diving to his left.
Shortly afterwards, the home side broke away for Shearer to be sent sprawling by Stejskal, before picking himself up and converting the spot kick.
Rangers manager Gerry Francis, the Barclays First Division manager of the month for March, could not hide his disappointment.
‘We lacked urgency,’ he admitted.
‘I felt we played a little bit like an end of season game and didn't work for each other.’
Mr Francis' only consolation after witnessing his side's second defeat in 20 games was the news that he had backed the winner of the Grand National.
Soccer: Colchester take comfortable lead in Trophy semi-finals
By PETER ERNEST
COLCHESTER confirmed their position as favourites to win the Vauxhall FA Trophy when they took a 3–0 lead in the first leg of their semi-final with Conference rivals Macclesfield, at Layer Road on Saturday, writes Peter Ernest.
Goals in the first half by Ian Stewart, the former Northern Ireland international, and captain Tony English, with a 70th-minute penalty by player-manager Roy McDonough, gave the Essex club a comfortable cushion for the second leg at the Moss Rose Stadium next Friday.
The Conference leaders were by far the more accomplished side in front of a crowd of 5,443 — their best of the season.
In the other semi-final, Marine, of the HFS Loans League, will be confident of reaching Wembley after pulling back a 2–0 deficit at Witton Albion.
Two goals in four minutes by Carl Alford had given the Conference team a first-half advantage before they were cancelled out by Brendan Grant and Brian Ross.
Soccer: Luton prepare stage for annual escape act
By JOHN LEY
LUTON could, once again, avoid relegation to Division Two if they improve their ‘horrific’ away form, according to manager David Pleat, writes John Ley.
They beat Wimbledon 2–1 at Kenilworth Road with goals from Varadi and Preece after Fashanu put the visitors ahead.
Luton have lost only four League games at home this season and, though they remain in the bottom three, they are only five points behind Coventry.
However, Luton last won an away League game at Aston Villa 13 months ago.
Said Mr Pleat: ‘Since Christmas we have come so close — at Liverpool, Sheffield Wednesday and Southampton.’
‘But the win over Wimbledon means that our hopes have been extended for another week and we are still in the ball game.
We are used to this, to the extent that we become blase about it.’
Soccer: Deal may head off PFA strike
THE result of the ballot regarding possible strike action by First Division players will be known today but a solution to the dispute between the Professional Footballers' Association and the Premier League over payments for televised matches is expected to be announced shortly.
A deal may be struck between Gordon Taylor, chief executive of the PFA, and his Premier League counterpart, Rick Parry, after meetings between the two this weekend.
GOLF
Beck recovers to head Norman off
By Michael Williams in New Orleans
NICK FALDO and Severiano Ballesteros both signed off in good heart from the Freeport-McMoran Classic at English Turn yesterday, each having final rounds of 69 to ensure top 10 finishes as they head for Augusta and the Masters.
But neither was ever in contention, as Chip Beck, one of last year's American Ryder Cup team, regained the lead he had lost on Saturday to win by a stroke from Greg Norman and Mike Standly.
Beck had a final round of 70 for a 12-under par total of 276, but it was a tight finish, particularly when he bunkered his second shot behind the 18th green.
However, just as Norman had got up and down from another bunker for his last round of 69, so did Beck, firmly sinking a putt of six feet as the Australian looked on and reflected on what might have been.
The long birdie putt Beck had earlier holed for an eagle three at the 13th had been a turning point, but for Norman, who does not normally play the week before the Masters, this must have also given him encouragement.
By contrast to the moods of Faldo and Ballesteros, Ian Woosnam, who was defending the title in New Orleans just as he will at Augusta, was close to despair after his final round of 74.
It left him with a two-over par total of 290, ahead only of the equally out-of-form Jose-Maria Olazabal (292) of the five Europeans who had survived the 36-hole cut.
On Saturday, Woosnam had talked of sending an SOS to his coach, Bob Torrance, for remedial advice.
But yesterday he had dismissed the thought.
‘It would be too expensive and a waste of time,’ he said.
‘I am not in the groove at all,’ he muttered.
‘Nothing feels right and all I can do is try and work it out for myself.
But at the moment the Masters looks like being a very short tournament for me.
I feel like a 24 handicapper.’
The pill was all the more bitter for Woosnam because he had begun so well.
Five birdies in his first seven holes, before a flood of bogeys.
Much more encouraging is the form of Faldo, second last week in the Players' championship and now well into the frame once again.
Having been four-over par after his first three holes on Thursday, that was quite a recovery.
Yesterday he described as easily the toughest day, both because of a blustery wind and what he called some ‘very serious pin positions, many on downslopes’.
Everything he hits seems to be right out of the middle and he also has a much better routine with his putting now that caddy Fanny Sunesson has stopped her ‘wicketkeeper’ pose behind his stance.
His inward half of 33 was fine golf and contained only one lucky break when he missed the 16th green but scrambled down in two when it would have been much easier to take three.
Ballesteros's 69 was more of a scramble, particularly over the closing holes, but he got away with it thanks to a short game which has been very consistent both this week and last.
Steve Richardson was also pleased with his 71, which lifted him above both Woosnam and Olazabal, who was in no mood to discuss a game that for the moment is off.
Snooker: Masterly Hendry destroys Doherty
By Bob Holmes
STEPHEN HENDRY displayed a regal touch to dismiss a determined challenge by local favourite, Ken Doherty, 9–6 and capture his seventh title of the season at the Benson and Hedges Irish Masters in Goff's, County Kildare, last night.
After being pegged at 4–4 following the first frame of the evening session, Hendry raised his game to collect the £40,000 first prize — and become Masters champion for the first time.
With one eye on an even bigger prize that is looming, Hendry claimed: ‘I could not be happier with the way things are going.
It's the perfect build-up to the World Championship.’
But Doherty, 22, of Dublin, did not go down without a fight and doggedly pursued Hendry all afternoon.
When he led 3–1 at the mid-session interval, Hendry looked likely to run away with it, but found himself tied at 3–3 before restoring his lead in the seventh.
Hendry included two superb breaks of 89 to take command, but Doherty, lifted by a 6–1 drubbing of Mike Hallett in his semi-final, hit back with runs of 71, 60 and 36.
The world No 51 came out fighting in the evening.
A 49 after a safety exchange took him to 4–4, but Hendry reeled off three successive breaks of the highest quality to put daylight between them.
EUROPEAN SOCCER
Marseille striving for power
By Graham Turner
THE strings of sport and politics are becoming ever more closely entwined at Olympique Marseille following the appointment of club president Bernard Tapie as minister for urban affairs in a French cabinet reshuffle.
Mr Tapie is the driving force at Marseille, who have dominated the French league for the last three years.
But with Jean-Pierre Papin bound for Italy, and a major shake-up promised for next season, there are fears that Mr Tapie's political career may signify the end of an era at the Stade Velodrome.
French law has forced him to hand over the helms of Adidas and Bernard Tapie Finance, but he said: ‘My new post is not incompatible with the presidency of Marseille.
I think a minister has the right to take his pleasure once a week in a football stadium.’
Marseille maintained their title challenge with a 3–1 win at struggling Nancy but Monaco, who beat fourth-placed Auxerre 2–0, are just two points behind them.
AC Milan are within sight of the Italian title after crushing outgoing champions Sampdoria 5–1, while nearest rivals Juventus lost to local rivals Torino.
Milan lead Juventus by six points.
Rijkaard, Evani, van Basten, Massaro and Albertini scored against Sampdoria, while Casagrande hit both Torino's goals in the 2–0 defeat of Juventus.
Borussia Dortmund saw their narrow lead in the German league disappear when they lost 2–1 in Nuremberg.
Second-placed Eintracht Frankfurt drew 1–1 with Stuttgart, the side immediately behind them.
All three have 41 points.
In Portugal, Sporting Lisbon gave Bobby Robson a glimpse of the task facing him when he takes over as manager in the summer by losing 1–0 at home to Guimaraes.
The former England manager, who was in Lisbon over the weekend to finalise his two-year contract, saw both teams have a man sent off either side of Hamed Ziad's 79th-minute winner.
Sporting now share third place with Boavista on 36 points.
Benfica are second with Porto out in front on 47 points.
A Croatian League match was abandoned when Rijeka players attacked the referee after he awarded a penalty to Inker Zapresic.
Rijeka, who led 1–0, may now lose their place in the First Division.
ICE HOCKEY
Pirates on course
By Howard Bass
NORWICH and Peterborough Pirates came within a point of booking a place in the Heineken Championship semi-finals at Wembley when drawing 6–6 with the Seahawks last night at Humberside.
At Peterborough the previous day Murrayfield Racers lost 8–5 to the still-unbeaten Pirates.
Racers also lost 5–4 to the holders Wasps yesterday at Durham when Rick Brebant scoring the winning goal.
The Edinburgh team, missing Tony Hand with an injured wrist, could now fail to reach Wembley for only the second time in nine years.
Heineken Ch'ship — Qtr-finals: Cardiff 9, Whitley 2-Norwich & Peterborough 8, Murrayfield 5-Nottingham 9, Billingham 6-Billingham 2, Cardiff 13-Durham 5, Murrayfield 4-Humberside 6, Norwich & Peterborough 6.
Promotion play-offs: Ayr 7, Romford 2-Swindon 11, Slough 6-Telford 13, Fife 10-Bracknell 6, Basingstoke 2-Romford 6, Fife 12.
Heineken Lge, entry play-offs: Livingston 7, Blackburn 10-Sheffield 6, Chelmsford 2-Trafford 11, Medway 5-Chelmsford 15, Livingston 4-Medway 7, Oxford 2-Sheffield 16, Blackburn 3-Streatham 10, Trafford 6.
LACROSSE
Cheadle beat familiar path
CHEADLE, flags holders, league champions and unbeaten for more than two years, did not allow their proud record to slip away as they beat Heaton Mersey 15–12 in the final of the Daily Telegraph Senior Flags final at Didsbury yesterday.
For the third time this season Cheadle were put on the rack but they mustered their strength in the final quarter to open up a 14–10 lead.
Heaton pulled back to 14–12 but man-of-the-match John McDermott scored his fourth goal in the closing moments to put the outcome beyond doubt.
AMERICAN FOOTBALL
Monarchs fumble to an unwanted record
THE London Monarchs made the sort of World League history they could do without when they gave up a record eight turnovers in Saturday's 13–7 defeat at Barcelona Dragons.
Fumbles and interceptions cost the Monarchs dearly.
And when jittery quarterback Stan Gelbaugh did get his offense moving, too often big plays were called back because of Monarchs holding penalties.
It was sweet revenge for Barcelona, who lost 21–0 to the Monarchs in last June's World Bowl.
This was by far London's worst display and it leaves them rooted at the foot of the European Division with a 1–2 record.
Bernard Ford scored their only touchdown in the fourth quarter.
To add to the Monarchs' misery, Danny Lockett, their outstanding linebacker, was ejected from the game shortly before half-time for striking an opponent.
NETBALL
Surrey retain league title
SURREY rallied in the final quarter to beat Essex Metropolitan 59–55 and retain the English Counties League title on Saturday.
Surrey, with the shooting of Barbara Taylor and Sheila Edwards outstanding, had started the last quarter 44–38 in front but Essex Met fought back to take a three-point lead.
Cheshire lost their battle to stay in Division One when they lost 38–27 to Middlesex.
Humberside join them in Division Two next season, with Hertfordshire and Kent replacing them.
Surrey 59 (B Taylor 36 goals, 40 atts, S Edwards 23/26), Essex Met 55 (Y Foster 29/38, M Stewart 13/16, L Law 13/16 last quarter).
Golf: Page pips Maguire in trophy play-off
By Bill Meredith
PAUL PAGE, a former English boys' strokeplay champion and boy and youth international, won the Berkhamsted Trophy on Saturday after a sudden-death play-off with Matt Maguire.
Page only needed a par four on the ninth green, his final hole, to prevent a play-off and win by a stroke from the 20-year-old from Drayton Park, Staffordshire.
But the Dartford player, who had started at the 10th in his second round, failed to reach the green and dropped a shot.
It all came good for Page at the second extra hole, though.
Maguire's tee shot at the 161-yard second clattered into the trees behind the green.
He was left with a difficult shot from behind a bush and, although he made a brave effort, par was beyond him and Page's three was enough for victory.
Page had a quiet year in 1991; now he is ready to challenge for honours again after winning a trophy which bears names such as Sandy Lyle and Peter McEvoy.
The 141 totals achieved by Page and Maguire were one under par for the 36 holes, Page managing a 69 before lunch and Maguire following with a 69.
Other 69s were achieved by England international Matthew Stanford, of Saltford, and Gordon Hotson, of Sleaford.
BERKHAMSTED TROPHY (Berkhamsted).
— 141 — P Page (Dartford) 69, 72; M Maguire (Drayton Park) 72, 69 (Page won sudden-death play-off).
142 — G Hotson (Sleaford) 73, 69; J Good (Shirley Park) 72, 70. 143 — M Stanford (Saltford) 69, 74; S Graham (Ham Manor) 72, 71; T Trodd (Langley Park) 71, 72. 144 — D Lee (Wanstead) 71, 73; C Tingey (Mid Herts) 72, 72. 145 — D Bradley (St Mellion) 73, 72; M Pullan (Sandmoor) 73, 72.
Robert Watts, of Stoke Poges, the Berks, Bucks and Oxon county player, won the King George V Coronation Challenge Cup at Porters Park yesterday with a two-round total of 141 (70, 71).
This gave him a one-stroke advantage over two players -Bill Nicolson, of Coventry, who had 73, 69, and Richard Latham, a local player, who managed 70, 72.
Nicolson took second place by virtue of that second-round 69.
KING GEORGE V CORONATION CHALLENGE CUP (Porters Pk).
— 141 — R Watts (Stoke Poges) 70, 71. 142 — B Nicolson (Coventry) 73, 69; R Latham (Porters Pk) 70, 72. 143 — D Watson (Shortlands) 72, 71; M Foster (Worksop) 69, 74. 144 — L Watcham (S Beds) 75, 69; R Bennett (Abbeydale) 74, 70; J Warne (Porters Pk) 69, 75.
EQUESTRIANISM
Major Wager pays off for Skelton
By Alan Smith in Gothenburg
NICK SKELTON and John Whitaker took the top two places respectively in the Regnbagen Grand Prix in Gothenburg, Sweden, yesterday, after German riders had monopolised the show's World Cup competitions.
Skelton and Everest Major Wager, who had been unlucky not to reach the jump-off of the Volvo showjumping World Cup round, went flat out to overtake Whitaker on Henderson Grannusch in the Grand Prix.
In a five-horse second jump-off, Sweden's Maria Gretzer delighted the huge crowds by finishing third with the only other clear, on Marcoville.
Ludger Beerbaum won the final showjumping World Cup qualifier, and with it the European League, in a two-horse jump-off on Saturday.
Only Beerbaum, a member of the winning German team at the Seoul Olympics on Almox Classic Touch, his Horse of the Year Show Grand Prix winner, and Holland's Piet Raymakers with Optiebeurs Ratina were clear first time.
In the jump-off Ratina went first and faultlessly again, but Beerbaum, without needing to ask the eight-year-old Classic Touch any desperate questions, won by more than three seconds.
Skelton, on Major Wager, and Geoff Billington, with Rhapsody, were among 10 who finished equal third with one mistake.
Both made their error at the treble which was by far the most troublesome obstacle.
Only four horses cleared it, including Tina Cassan with Genesis, but this was the horse's first show since December and he went on to lower three other fences.
Michael Whitaker brought Henderson Curtis here to test his potential for the World Cup final on April 15–19 and after the grey had four fences down, decided against going.
John Whitaker, who will defend the title on Milton in Delmar, California, was disappointed by Dollar Girl who hit several fences and had a refusal before he retired her.
He said: ‘I don't know what was wrong, she just wasn't going forward.’
Isabell Werth on Fabienne just beat her German compatriot Sven Rothenberger with Ideaal in a battle of European champions to take the Volvo Dressage World Cup.
Last year for the first time there were European dressage titles in two categories: Werth won the conventional Special, while Rothenberger took the freestyle.
Werth triumphed in the Grand Prix, the first part of the World Cup final on Friday, and yesterday edged home in the freestyle.
She and Rothenberger had the same technical mark, but her artistic impression, ridden to Beatles' music, was 0.08 higher.
BOXING
Late switch for Eubank
CHRIS EUBANK will have a new challenger when he defends his World Boxing Organisation super-middleweight title at the G-Mex centre in Manchester on April 25.
Juan Carlos Gimenez, his original opponent, has withdrawn from the contest and promoter Barry Hearn is expected to name the new challenger today.
It could be the experienced Ronnie Essett, 29, from Florida.
Derek Angol, the undefeated Gravesend cruiserweight, has ended a six-year association with Terry Lawless and will now be promoted by Frank Warren.
Golf: Lane ties it up, then Canizares gets a grip
By Richard James in Rome
BARRY LANE produced a best-of-the-week 66 to come from eight behind to force a tie with Jose-Maria Canizares (74) in the Rome Masters at windswept Castelgandolfo yesterday, only to lose out at the fourth play-off hole.
Lane, 31, who opened with a 20ft birdie and went within four inches of an albatross two with a one iron at the eighth, matched the two-under par 286 of Canizares, who led by five overnight but three-putted the final green for a 74.
Berkshire's Lane instantly missed a four-foot winning chance in the play-off and 45-year-old Canizares, after halving from seven feet on the previous green, sank a 20ft birdie winner at the fourth extra hole to become the fourth Spanish winner of the season after Severiano Ballesteros, Jose-Maria Olazabal and Jose Rivero.
Canizaris's £37,500 prize pushed his European career earnings to £1,020,545 and his victory followed second and fourth places on his two previous outings in the Catalan and Portuguese Opens.
Lane, whose two European victories came in the 1987 Equity & Law Challenge and 1988 Scottish Open, earned £25,000 plus a special £5,000-a-year-for-five years award from the host club.
As well, he won a £4,500 wristwatch for his 66, which will not count as a course record because lifting and placing was permitted on the rain soaked fairways.
Jim Payne, 21, who turned professional after last year's Walker Cup, took third prize of £14,000 after a 69 for 289 with Essex's Paul Curry (73), Derbyshire's Mark Roe (72) and Argentina's Eduardo Romero (73) joint fourth on 291 for £9,533 prizes.
Payne's was a splendid effort, for he three-putted the first from 12ft.
The man who so impressed Jack Nicklaus in last year's Open struck a four iron to eight feet for a two at the next and added three more birdies.
It was an important result for the Lincolnshire man, who has missed the cut four times and finished no better than 55th on his eight tour starts to date.
Soccer: Pratt inspires Oxford to fine win over Cambridge
OXFORD recovered from a shaky start to beat Cambridge 2–1 in the 108th university match at Craven Cottage.
The Dark Blues were indebted to Jason Pratt, 21, who was named man of the match.
Cambridge took only three minutes to take the lead through Matts Decker, a German engineering student.
Mid-way through the first half the Light Blues failed to clear Pratt's corner and Matt Mellor headed the equaliser.
Four minutes after the interval, Pratt curled a corner into the goalmouth and Kevin Knibbs headed the winner.
Two goals by Richard Tapper and another from Fenton Davies enabled Old Chigwellians to beat Old Etonians 3–1 in the final of the Arthur Dunn Cup at Motspur Park.
Tapper put the Chigwellians ahead after 30 minutes, before the Etonians equalised through Julian Giles early in the second half.
Davies restored Chigwellians' lead before Tapper clinched the match with the third goal.
CYCLING
Durand's great escape
From Phil Liggett in Meerbeke
JACKY Durand, 25, one of the lesser known French professionals, produced the longest escape in the history of the Tour of Flanders yesterday to win the 164 miles Belgian classic at Meerbeke.
Durand, only the third Frenchman to win the event, came home alone after he and three others had broken clear of the field with 134 miles to go.
At one point they had a lead of 22 minutes.
Long escapes are not unusual in seven hour races, but this time the field misjudged the strength of the leading four who, apart from better-known second-placed Swiss Thomas Wegmuller, have little to show for their professional careers.
Tour of Flanders (Saint-Nicolas to Meerbeke) Leading final positions.
-1, J Durand (France, Castorama) 6–37–19; 2, T Wegmuller (Switzerland, Festina) at 48sec; 3, E Van Hooydonck (Belgium, Buckler) at 1–4; 4, M Fondriest (Italy Panasonic); 5, F Maassen (Holland, Buckler); 6, J Nijdam (Holland, Buckler) all same time as third.
BASEBALL
Toronto look a good bet
By David Mankelow
THE 1992 major league season begins today with ‘America's National Pastime’ closer than ever to becoming an interna-tional pastime.
Last year's sales of baseball merchandise outside the United States exceeded $3.5m (£2m) and worldwide interest is sure to grow when the sport makes its debut in this year's Olympics.
And, in a year when cricket's World Cup has gone outside the British Commonwealth, baseball's World Series could well be won by a team from within it.
The roof literally fell in on Montreal last year when storms ripped off their Olympic Stadium's retractable top, and they finished last in the National League East.
But team and stadium have been refurbished, and Larry Walker, a Canadian with the ability to become the next superstar outfielder, could lead them to a pennant.
But if the World Series really is to become a little more global, Toronto are the best bet.
Last year's best pitching staff in the American League should be even stronger following the close-season signing of Jack Morris, Most Valuable Player in Minnesota's seven-game 1991 World Series success against Atlanta.
PREDICTIONS.
— AL East: Toronto.
AL West: Chicago White Sox.
Play-offs: Toronto over White Sox.
NL East: NY Mets.
NL West: LA Dodgers.
Play-offs: Mets over Dodgers.
World Series: Toronto over Mets.
YACHTING
Conner makes the most of Koch changes
By Tim Jeffery in San Diego
DENNIS CONNER, the defending America's Cup skipper, shrugged off a poor start to claim his fifth win in six races against Bill Koch's America Foundation in San Diego yesterday and needs only one more win to assure no worse than a sail-off for a place in the defenders' final.
In the light and shifty winds which Conner enjoys, because they give him ‘leverage on the opposition’, Stars & Stripes came from behind on the third leg to gain 65 seconds on Koch's America to take the lead which Conner clung to tenaciously for a 1min 56sec victory.
‘We got lifted, we got ahead and were in control,’ Conner said.
‘They made a nice comeback but tactically we were in fine shape and that's what turned out to be the winning move.’
Stars & Stripes now shares a first-place tie with Kanza, America's sister ship, with four victories apiece in the defenders' semi-final, and Connor said: ‘We have to beat America once more to assure that destiny's in our own hands, but we're going to keep our feet on the ground.’
The America Foundation, who have two yachts to Conner's one, chose Saturday to make a line-up change.
A closed-doors meeting of the America supporters urged Koch to stop playing around with his crews and let Buddy Melges and the pros get on with the job of beating Conner.
‘I went to the afterguard and said our boats are not optimised or going as fast as I would like and asked for recommendations,’ said Koch.
Melges's answer was to pin up two crew lists, with him staying with the new Kanza.
So instead of a settled afterguard quartet sailing both of Koch's boats, mainsail trimmer Andreas Josenhans has been moved off Kanza, Melges split from Koch, navigator By Baldridge rotated with Bill Campbell and tune-up helmsman Kimo Worthington, brought in to race Conner for the first time.
In the challengers' section Japan's odds of making their finals plunged when her boom snapped six minutes before the start against Il Moro di Venezia.
Il Moro's skipper Paul Cayard sportingly left the Japanese boat unmolested, not seeking to engineer a protest, while Nippon's crew struggled to make jury repairs.
The Japanese unzipped the foot of the mainsail so that the boom was loaded only at the inboard and outboard ends.
Skipper Chris Dickson feathered the mainsail up the first weather leg so that navigator Erle could jury rig a new mainsheet arrangement before the load came back on the boom as the boat bore away around the first mark.
In a smart piece of improvisation, worthy of his Whitbread Round the World Race background, Williams sheeted the mainsail on to the leeward running backstay so that the mainsheet could be unloaded.
Then Williams, swinging wildly from the backstay, kicked the boom forward and out through the webbing strops attaching the mainshet to it.
They discarded the broken spar over the side where it was picked up by the Nippon tender.
Throughout, Makoto Namba kept the mainsail setting beautifully but the odds were insurmountable and Nippon must now win her last three races while there is a three way tie for second place.
In the other match, New Zealand's skipper Rod Davis herded France's Ville de Paris to the wrong end of the start line and stretched out to win.
DEFENDERS' RD 4. — Semi-final, Race 5: Stars & Stripes (D Conner) bt America 3 (W Koch/K Worthington) 1m 56s.
Race 6.
America (H Melges) bt Kanza (W Koch) 34s.
Pts: 4, Kanza, Stars & Stripes; 1, America.
CHALLENGERS' LOUIS VUITTON CUP.
— Semi-final, Race 5: Ville de Paris (M Pajot) bt Il Moro di Venezia (P Cayard) 1m 56s; New Zealand (R Davis) bt Nippon (C Dickson) 2–49.
Race 6: New Zealand (R Davis) bt Ville de Paris (M Pajot) 3–11s; Il Moro di Venezia (P Cayard) bt Nippon (C Dickson) 1–53s.
Pts: 4, Il Moro di Venezia, New Zealand, Ville de Paris; 1, Nippon.
BOWLS
Bell and Baxter on way
By Donald Newby
ENGLAND skip John Bell and his Cumbria partner Andrew Baxter, who won both indoor and outdoor national triples championships last year, kept on course for another title yesterday at the Manchester Unity National Indoor Championships at Melton Mowbray.
In company with Ian Carruthers and Stephen Farish, they reached the fours final after a mature performance against a formidable young East Dorset rink comprising Dean Morgan, Nick Jones, Peter Pull and Russell Norman.
In today's final Cumbria will meet Ely who, like East Dorset, have younger players to the fore.
After victories on Saturday over Cotswold and Victoria (Street), the Ely team of Stewart Seymour, Kevin King, David Bell and Greg Harlow had a quarter-final success yesterday against Victory (Portsmouth) and were always in control in their semi-final against Moonfleet Weymouth, who had been in sharp form earlier against Torbay, Preston (Brighton) and County Arts Norwich.
In earlier rounds there were two notable casualties.
Skipping an Ipswich rink, Roy Cutts, who had achieved a rare distinction of qualifying for all four championships — singles, pairs, triples and fours — went out in the first round of the fours to Egham of Surrey.
On the eighth end Ipswich, trailing 13–4, dropped a maximum eight to fall 21–4 behind and could never catch up.
Nottingham, the holders, outbowled by Cumbria in the quarter-finals, had been fortunate to survive to that stage.
Only a brilliant last end by their skip, Jamie Mills, saved them in the second round.
Losing to Avon Valley 24–21 Mills engineered a four, first by moving the jack and then threading through a congested head to take out an opposing bowl.
Scotland's Sarah Gourlay, from Prestwick, gave Scotland their first victory in the women's world indoor singles championship in Guernsey last night with a 3–1 final win over defending champion England's Mary Price.
This completes a successful nine months for Gourlay which has seen her become the Scottish indoor and outdoor singles champion and now the world champion.
She now turns her attention to the women's world outdoor championships, which will held in Ayr in June.
Gourlay came through from her semi-final clash against Margaret Johnston, the twice previous winner, when she clinched the deciding set 7–0 and Mary Price, from Desborough, had a straight sets semi-final victory over Welsh representative Sylvia Froud.
HOCKEY
Redfern rescues Kingstonians
By Chris Moore
OLD Kingstonians and Brooklands became the final qualifiers for next year's Pizza Express National League, winning their play-off matches yesterday to earn places in the Second Division.
But Oxford Hawks, beaten 2–0 in extra time at Thames Ditton, might have won through but for Mike Redfern, the Kingstonians' goalkeeper.
He saved a penalty stroke from Simon Dawson six minutes from the end of normal time.
Kingstonians won 2–0 thanks to a extra-time goals from Matt Cox and Paul Cootes.
Taunton Vale, the Sun Life West League champions, made the long journey north to meet Brooklands with high hopes of regaining the National League place they lost last season.
They started well, with Lee Connolly putting them ahead after only four minutes.
By half-time, though, the Ernst and Young North Premier League champions were 2–1 ahead with short corner goals from Peter Skates and Carl Bennett.
Skates went on to score three more after the interval, all from open play, with Gary Brown contributing two and Dominic Maguire converting a penalty stroke as Brooklands romped home 8-1.
Spain showed that they could present a serious challenge in the Olympics when they beat England twice in two training matches in Terrassa at the weekend, writes Cathy Harris.
England's young and experienced squad lost 1–0 on Friday and yesterday, lost 4–0 to Spain.
England were hampered by injuries to the Hightown pair, goalkeeper Carolyn Reid and striker Tina Cullen, which prevented both from playing.
In the NatWest County Championship, a 50th-minute goal by Tammy Pascoe helped Devon to a narrow 1–0 win against Dorset.
Jane Swinnerton, the former England and Great Britain forward, continued her good form for Staffordshire in the Midlands when she cracked four past Shropshire in her side's 5–1 win.
The cream eventually came to the surface yesterday in the Four Nations under-16 and under-18 men's youth tournament at Aberdeen when England produced their best form to crush Ireland 4–0 in both matches and win the sections.
RALLYING
McRae at the double
By Steve Fellows
COLIN McRAE of Scotland recorded his second runaway victory of the year when he won the Carlisle-based Pirelli International by over four minutes in his Subaru at the weekend.
Kenny McKinstry was runner-up in another Subaru, after surviving over 75 miles of slippery stages in the notorious Kielder Forests in the second round of the Mobil 1-Top Gear British Rally Championship.
McRae's younger brother, Alister, finished in third.
Pirelli International Rally.
— Leading final positions: 1, C McRae (Scotland) Subaru 1hr 11min 14sec; 2, K McKinstry (N Ireland) Subaru 1–16.6; 3, A McRae (Scotland) Ford 1–16.31; 4, R Munro (Scotland) Ford 1.18.27; 5, L Aitken-Walker (Scotland) Ford 1–18.51.
Ch'ship positions: 1, C McRae 15pts; 2, T Smith, K McKinstry, A McRae 39; 5, L Aitken-Walker 34; 6, R Munro 33.
CRICKET
S Africa get warm welcome
By Geoffrey Dean in Kingston, Jamaica
THE excitement was almost tangible on the tarmac at Kingston Airport on Saturday prior to the opening of the doors of the first South African Airways plane to land in the Caribbean.
The welcoming party for Ali Bacher, first off the plane, and the 94-strong South African party was only a small one, comprising Jamaican and West Indian Board officials and assorted media, but all present knew they had witnessed a piece of history that only recently seemed destined for the next century.
Dr Bacher, who confessed to feeling ‘incredibly emotional,’ said he was ‘really happy we could take two teams on tour — the senior side which demonstrates where we are coming from, and the youth team where we are going.’
Ten of the 15 members of the under-19 party are black or coloured.
Managed by former Test captain Jackie McGlew, they play the first of seven matches on tour today.
‘Some 20 million South Africans, black and white,’ continued Dr Bacher, ‘will be able to see the cricket on this tour live on TV, and will see how cricket has brought people together in the West Indies.
That alone will make this tour a success for us.’
The South Africans were escorted through red traffic lights to their hotel by police motorcyclists and vehicles, but there was not a demonstrator in sight.
At an ensuing press conference, they were met by the African National Congress representative to the United Nations, Tebogo Mafole, who had flown from New York to welcome them.
When he concluded by saying that: ‘We at the ANC are convinced that cricket can assist us in achieving the new South Africa to which we all aspire,’ he was warmly applauded by the tourists management and captain Kepler Wessels.
Despite his players being visibly jetlagged after the 16-hour flight from Johannesburg, Wessels ordered a full net practice on Saturday, following it with another yesterday.
The first one-day international takes place tomorrow at Sabina Park.
Warwickshire completed their five-match tour of South Africa with their second victory, by 57 runs, over the Boland President's XI in a 40 overs game at Stellenbosch.
Tour match (Stellenbosch, 40 overs): Warwickshire 189–8 (A Din 38), Boland President's XI 132–7.
Boat Race: Oxford have rhythm of the Blues THE BOAT RACE
Cambridge fight hard before suffering sixth successive defeat in classic encounter
By Geoffrey Page
THE 138th Boat Race will go down as one of the classic encounters in the long history of the event.
The bare facts are that Oxford won by 1¼ lengths in 17min 44sec to take the Beefeater Gin Trophy for the sixth successive time and register their 16th win in 17 years.
Cambridge, with 69 wins in all, are still one ahead of Oxford.
Cambridge put up a tremendous fight and there was no more than half a length between the crews for 14 minutes.
The physical demands were enormous and it says much for the exceptional fitness of both crews that neither wilted.
It was occasional raggedness in technique that let Cambridge down.
The toss went in Oxford's favour, Jo Michels taking Middlesex for the tactical advantage of the first bend, since Cambridge were known to have a fast start.
‘We thought that they would throw everything at us from the start,’ said Andy Probert, 38, the Cambridge cox — and so it proved.
After an even start Oxford led by quarter of a length at the mile but Cambridge were ahead by the same distance at Hammersmith Bridge.
Oxford fought tenaciously all round the outside of the long Surrey bend and by Chiswick Steps had drawn level again.
Cambridge's fate was now sealed.
On mill pond water, Oxford mounted their major attack to lead by over three quarters of a length at Barnes Bridge and despite heroic efforts from Bangert, striking 37 to Gardiner's 36, Oxford went clear with 1½ minutes to go.
It was heartbreaking for Cambridge, who put up a tremendous fight all the way, but Oxford always had the better rhythm.
Their technique held out better than Cambridge's and their power won the day.
The Ridley Report: Unique event back on calmer waters Ian Ridley on a triumph for tradition after last year's acrimony between two old heavyweights
By IAN RIDLEY
BORIS MAVRA was lifted from the Oxford University boat, consumed by exhaustion.
Then he dragged himself through the crowds to a quiet cranny of the Ibis Boat Club at Chiswick.
It was an act familiar to anyone, that is almost everyone, who has suffered from those self-inflicted illnesses that inspire only a feeling of wanting to curl up in a ball and be alone.
And he was a winner.
Usually they find new energy to surge to the plaudits at the Ibis club just beyond the finish; it is the defeated who drift around deflated for what seems an age.
Mavra, the first Yugoslavian to row the race, had scarcely been able to contribute a stroke to Oxford's last few.
It was an example of how physically the unique, 4¼-mile race gets to people.
Andy Probert was an example of how emotionally it does.
‘I was really close to tears at the end,’ said the Cambridge cox, at 38 the oldest person to have taken part in the race.
This from a man who had little interest in the event when he went up to Magdalene College last autumn to study transport and marketing — and the Boat Race is a triumph of both these days.
‘I thought, ‘well, it's the Boat Race, not very high-powered crews considering they mostly do other things’.
Then I just got involved and you realise the guys are working so hard, getting up so early.
You really begin to get an affinity for your university and a dislike for the other one.’
In the disappointment of defeat, he was wavering about trying again for the blue boat next year, because of academic work.
But you suspect he knows he will.
‘I looked at the walls in the Goldie boathouse and saw the names of all the crews and couldn't see a cox with three wins on the trot.
I wanted to be the one who did it,’ he said.
‘I'm not going to now but I might get two.’
The Boat Race is an easy event to denigrate, firstly as spectator-unfriendly.
As youngsters up to London for the day, for example, we once took it in on the basis that bona fide sports followers should try everything once.
We were left bewildered at Putney Bridge, 30 seconds after the beginning of the race, the boats having disappeared round the bend.
An evening paper was the only way of discovering the result.
Also, it is considered by many as an anachronism, mere prelude to a party on the river for Hooray Henrys.
A tedious procession, given Oxford's modern-year record of victories, 16 in the last 17.
Yet as Mavra's and Probert's efforts demonstrated, it is a genuine sporting contest.
The Cambridge coach John Wilson estimates, for example, that 25 per cent of the Great Britain squad for the Olympic Games this year will be ex-Oxbridge.
The race, the breeding ground, might be missed, both in sporting and traditional terms, should it cease.
And Probert's crew's efforts in making it such a close, intriguing race helped to restore its credibility.
No finger was raised, no insult cast across the water.
The closeness of the oars on occasions in this strictly non-contact sport was merely an example of tactical exuberance.
‘This has done much to put the vitality back in the Boat Race tradition,’ said the somewhat surly victor, the Oxford president Jo Michels.
‘The two schools have worked extremely closely together.
It was a classic race, anything but a procession.’
‘It was everything that attracts so many people.
This year there was some substance in it.
There wasn't a need to make a story.’
As last year, though, it was the crews who made the story, in the most wholesome of ways this time.
‘A slugging contest,’ was how the Cambridge president Max Justicz described the race.
‘One great slog.
Like two heavyweights all the way down the course,’ said Probert.
Cambridge's inability to shake off Oxford, who poignantly named their boat the John Hebbes after one of their oarsmen who died recently, by the end of the Surrey bend was the crucial factor.
‘We attacked them, attacked them, attacked them all the way up that straight and round that bend but they kept pounding more and more on and they held us,’ said Probert.
Did he sense any demoralisation in the crew at that point?
‘I did in myself.’
Cambridge, he was convinced, were the better technicians; Oxford had more horse power.
‘Perhaps they are just better suited to this sort of race and these headwinds,’ added the man with a house 50 yards from the Thames at Putney.
‘This river just changes all the time.
It's a river to respect.
If you ever fall in it you suddenly realise just how big it is.’
Letter to the Sports Editor: Islander's story
SIR — I was dismayed to read of the theft of Harry Vardon's statue from South Herts Golf Club; let us hope it may soon be recovered.
While putting pen to paper, I notice that, though everybody is well aware of his British Open, his record in the US Open is seldom reported.
Vardon won the US Open in 1900 at Wheaton, Illinois, the first overseas player to do so.
Thirteen years later he and Ted Ray, also from Jersey, lost a play-off to Francis Ouimet at Brookline, Massachusetts.
In 1920 at Inverness, Ohio, when Ray won the US Open, Harry Vardon was runner-up.
Ray won the British Open at Muirfield in 1912.
It is interesting to note that, of the three Britons to have won the Open and US Open championships, these two both learnt their golf on the Royal Jersey links at Grouville.
The Harry Vardon Trust — of which I am a trustee — was founded in 1988 on the occasion of the visit of Jack Nicklaus and Hale Irwin, who played an exhibition match at the Royal Jersey against Tony Horton and Brian Barnes.
All the players gave this exhibition free of charge and, with the resulting revenue, the trust was able to set up a fund with which to promote junior golf on Jersey.
The only other Briton to win both Opens is Tony Jacklin who, incidentally, came to Jersey to live and play golf for a few years after his retirement from the professional circuit.
C SUTTON Harry Vardon Trust, Jersey
Letter to the Sports Editor: Unjust reward
SIR — What other sport penalises one side for competence and simultaneously rewards the other side for incompetence?
I refer, of course, to cricket, with its readiness to award runs for leg-byes.
Why should the batting side profit, when usually the batsman is beaten by a delivery, has no idea where it rebounds to, yet is rewarded by undeserved runs?
I suggest this iniquity be removed as soon as possible.
This would serve also to reduce the increasingly high percentage of extras in innings totals.
A BISHOP Southsea, Hants
Letter to the Sports Editor: Poor service
SIR — There has been a simple remedy, mooted by many people for many years, concerning the service in tennis.
Only one serve per point should be allowed.
This would surely stop so many utterly boring aces being served.
In what other sports is a participant allowed a second chance because of failure?
D H TUCKEY Willersey, Worcs
Letter to the Sports Editor: Not cricket
SIR — The England cricket squad contesting the World Cup in Australia included players who would have been eligible for three other nations — West Indies, South Africa and Zimbabwe.
England have encouraged these players to hold mercenary attitudes and many feel, as I do, this is outside the spirit in which the game should be played.
This country already has many more players available to them than other competing nations without reverting to ‘poaching’ and it would be nice if they could find 11 indigenous Englishmen to represent the country.
C MURRAY Maidstone
PERSONAL VIEW A fitness guide for the most dedicated slob
By Peter FitzSimons
FITNESS, the scientists' way and slobs' way:
Ever since the days of Noah's swimming regattas, the common feature of all sports has been the requirement for physical fitness and the general rule that the fitter you are the better you will perform.
All that has changed is the prevailing theory on how best to achieve this fitness.
While Noah used to make his animals do dog-paddles behind the boat for as long as two hours to build up their stamina, modern-day swimming coaches apparently believe in relatively short intensive sessions.
The question begs: is there, after all these centuries, an absolute best exercise for general fitness?
Are you likely to find the most copious quantities of conditioning in the swimming pool?
Or on the athletic track?
The road?
The gym?
And how frequently and how long should you exercise for optimum effect?
It is a particularly relevant question for those of us who, each season, must find fitness to pursue our sports.
It can leave one hopelessly confused as new fitness fashions go in and out of vogue and you come into the orbit of different coaches.
And notwithstanding the invariable belief of these coaches that their own programme-of-the-moment is writ large on a tablet just descended from Heaven, there are no absolutes about which kind of exercises are best to get you fit over a short period of time.
There are, however, at least some parameters between which the training should fall.
That repository of all sports science wisdom, the American College of Sports Medicine, recently re-released its position paper on how to achieve optimum physical fitness — making several changes from its 1978 study.
As reported, the basic recommendations, suitable for everyone from Carl Lewis down to Fred McGhurkin-Squirter, were:
Training should be carried out three to five days a week.
Optimum efficiency is gained by an intensity level of 60 to 90 per cent of maximum heart rate, or 50 to 80 per cent of maximum oxygen use.
Top athletes, but not the general public, should exercise at their maximum heart rate level for at least 20 to 60 minutes each session.
Where a programme calls for aerobic work, weight training should not be considered an aerobic exercise.
The paper also noted, using the 1978 study as a base, that training at 60 to 90 per cent of maximum heart rate for 20 to 60 minutes was increased from a minimum of 15 minutes, and intensity levels were raised by 15 to 30 per cent.
This information seems to fit in well with the growing body of sporting opinion that good physical fitness training is intense, punctuated by good amounts of rest in preparation for the next effort.
All of which is terrific if you are a totally dedicated athlete with untold time and self-motivation to play with.
But what if you're just an average Joe?
What if, just like me, you generally desire to be fitter and thinner but are certainly not going to do anything as ludicrous as measure your pulse or rate of oxygen depletion?
Well, what you need, Joe, is to follow my fitness regime — the one designed for people who, in their heart of hearts, with their cigarettes already lit, wish they had more than just two hands to eat with, but because they are also cursed with a love for sport have to get fit the best they can.
Is that you?
Then follow me.
Raise your right hand and say: ‘I'm a slob, I'm mad as hell at myself and I'm not going to take it anymore.’
Now, FitzSimons's Fitness for Slobs revolves around three numbers: your weight, your time for swimming a kilometre, and your time for a five-kilometre run.
No matter how badly it offends your self-image, weigh yourself, even if you have to take yourself off to the abattoir to do it.
Go for the swim and the run and come back with precise time.
The heart of Fitness for Slobs is to quantify your progress so that your improvement can be seen and measured.
This will bolster your naturally thin motivation and lift your self-esteem.
(Trust me, I've been there).
Once you have the three numbers, your goal is to reduce at least one of them every day.
Now for the really crucial thing — when you're reducing your time, all you care about is improving upon your last effort for the same distance.
If you push yourself to your absolute limits and suffer terribly, the chances that you will be able to motivate yourself to suffer equally in two or three days' time are practically zilch.
But by leaving yourself a bit of slack it will not be so difficult to get out there and do it because you know you can reduce the numbers without phenomenal pain.
And on days when you feel altogether too slobby either to run or swim, you can weigh yourself, confident in the knowledge that because you have cut out all alcohol and fat and have been doing the running and swimming, your weight will have fallen.
Of course if your first name is Sebastian and your last name is Coe, then the scientists' method is a good one to follow, but if you're just an average slob like me, then my method is not a bad alternative.
Seriously.
(And if none of these works, take two aspirins and call me in the morning.)
Despite his avowed slobdom, Peter FitzSimons has somehow managed to play seven rugby union Tests for Australia.
Golf: Half-pint of best quality Michael Williams profiles Ian Woosnam, the down-to-earth Welshman
who begins the defence of his Masters title at Augusta on Thursday
By MICHAEL WILLIAMS
IF THE truth be known, Ian Woosnam would probably just as soon be down at the Golden Lion in Oswestry tomorrow night, having a pint or two with the lads.
Instead he will, in best bib and tucker, be performing his last official act as the Masters champion.
It is the tradition each year for the reigning champion to host a dinner at the Augusta National Grill Room for all the other champions, each in the green jacket they are entitled to wear as honorary members of the club.
Woosnam will not sit at the head of the table but, as the newest member, at the end of a sprig.
A small presentation will be made to him.
The only infiltrator will be Jackson Stephens, the club's new chairman in succession to Hord Hardin.
Woosnam has chosen the sort of meal which he would probably plump for at the Golden Lion: leek and potato soup, Welsh lamb with mint sauce, Eve's (apple) pudding, cheese and biscuits, coffee.
The choice of wine he is, wisely, leaving to the club, for its cellar carries the reputation of being no less impressive than its golf course, which is probably the most photographed in the world.
Woosnam enjoys his wine and is beginning to take an interest in it, but he will probably opt for a pint of ale before the night is out.
Twelve months ago, when he arrived at the Courtyard Marriott on the night of his triumph, following the small dinner the club always gives the new champion, he was happy with a can or two of beer while everyone else drank champagne.
By then Woosnam's tie was loosened and the top button of his shirt undone, as he underwent a late-night press conference just as Sandy Lyle and Nick Faldo had done in previous years.
It has become part of the ritual in the American eclipse.
It was not really Woosnam's scene.
He remains at heart a boy who grew up on a busy farm at St Martin's, 14 miles from Llanymynech, the course on which as a seven-year-old he first took a golf club in his hands.
He had to be careful not to hit the sheep.
The course is bisected by the border between England and Wales and though, technically, Woosnam was born in Shropshire, he is a Welshman down to the tips of the spikes on his golf shoes.
Not for him, then, the vogue of so many of today's tournament players who have moved into the fashionable Sunningdale area so they can be close to Heathrow.
His roots are firmly in Oswestry, though he did last year buy a small aeroplane to make travelling easier.
Naively he regarded it as ‘no big deal’ and at times he became quite testy at the attention it commanded.
On occasions, when things are not going well for him, he is not appreciative of the attention he draws.
His other concession to fame is that he has turned one room of his house in Oswestry into his office where his sister-in-law is his full-time secretary, though she also helps Woosnam's wife, Glyndreth, with their young family.
Being the world's No 1 in the Sony rankings did not sit easily on Woosnam's shoulders.
He is more comfortable at knocking others off perches than being there to be knocked off himself.
In the nicest sense of the word, Woosnam is a fighter, perhaps because of his size.
Together with Gene Sarazen, who was 90 in February, they are the smallest men ever to have won the Masters.
As a youngster Woosnam boxed, mostly against boys bigger than him, though he still beat them.
He also had a love for soccer but his father, Harold, steered him away from that as well, fearing that his son's competitiveness, allied to his lack of inches, might lead to him getting hurt.
At golf he was a natural, though conversely his struggles to become a tournament player were such that he nearly gave up to take a club job.
He played for Shropshire and Herefordshire boys and was in the same team as Sandy Lyle; many years later they met in the final of the 1987 Suntory World Matchplay Championship and Woosnam became the first British winner.
He has, with more than 30 victories worldwide, come a long way.
Even so, he remains very loyal to his old friends.
His closest companions on the European Tour are D J Russell and Martin Poxon, neither of whom could be called ‘category one’ players.
Both, with their wives, were present last year at a dinner held in honour of Woosnam's Masters victory, as were the Lyles, the Jameses and the Torrances, senior and junior, since Bob Torrance is his swing consultant.
Eight of his friends from Oswestry are flying to Augusta this week to watch his defence.
In the winter he plays with some of them most weeks, either at Oswestry or Aberdovey, where he has a mobile home close to the first tee.
Woosnam has a high regard for Aberdovey, not only because of its peaceful setting beside the high dunes flanking the Dovey, but also because the greens there are always so good.
His other relaxations are snooker, at which he has a highest break of 55, and occasionally he also goes pheasant shooting.
In his cellar he has a workshop where he enjoys ‘messing around’ with clubs, mostly putters and drivers.
When at his best, which has been quite often in recent years, Woosnam is a wonderful player to watch, with the sort of swing that is a model for any youngster.
He really launches himself into and through the ball.
By any standards he is long, but he does have spasms when his putting becomes suspect, particularly from eight feet and closer.
It is not obviously the twitch but he does admit to a ‘fear of missing.’
It is on such black days that Woosnam's public relations front is clouded by a red mist.
He was recently fined £500 by the European Tour when, after a first round of 74 in his defence of the Mediterranean Open, he refused to come in for the requested press interview.
He said afterwards he had not read the newly-written rule in this year's tournament regulations.
It had, nevertheless, happened before.
Marginally quick-tempered, he sees little sense in having to field a barrage of questions when he might feel that his score tells its own story.
Conversely, when Woosnam was taken ill so badly during the Johnnie Walker tournament in Bangkok earlier this year that on completion of his round he had to be rushed to hospital suffering from dehydration, he did not leave until he had first dealt with the hovering group of reporters.
Following last year's Masters, I received a letter from a reader who suggested that ‘no-one in Britain before had been so generally popular through winning a sporting trophy than Woosnam’.
It was further suggested that, in the fullness of time, Woosnam had it in him to be rated among the all-time greats.
To achieve that status, a player needs — besides a natural talent — a burning inner ambition.
There were those who doubted that he would win even one major title.
They were wrong.
But whether there are more in the locker, they may still wonder.
Letter to the Sports Editor: Top players should think of lesser lights
SIR — Gordon Taylor's pleadings for his pampered First Division pets make me very angry.
When clubs in the lower divisions are fighting bankruptcy, living from day to day on a shoestring budget for want of funds that, to most First Division players, would be petty cash, it seems rather arrogant of Mr Taylor to be threatening strike action over sums of money and perquisites most footballers can only dream of.
While it is true that the game is about players and playing, it is also about supporters and watching.
What will the regular supporters of Manchester United and Leeds United think if either club are denied victory in the Championship because of the greed of some players who could probably have saved Aldershot from their creditors with money from their back pockets?
The majority of footballers in the so-called ‘glamour’ clubs have been overpaid and underworked for years, and if some of them were paid what they were worth, they would owe something.
Come on Mr Taylor.
Show some compassion for your members from the lower divisions and prove to the fans that you do care for the game itself, otherwise, after Wigan's performance recently, rugby league will get some extra support.
D HERDSON Radcliffe, Lancs
Letter to the Sports Editor: Disabled deserve greater reward
SIR — Being 18, able-bodied and a keen sportswoman, I understand the satisfaction and pleasure that sport can bring, and consequently feel empathy for those with physical disabilities who wish to gain the same satisfaction and recognition from their chosen sports.
It was, therefore, with sadness that I read of the British Olympic Association's petty, bigoted decision to withhold recognition of the Paralympics team.
The excuse quoted by Mr Dick Palmer strikes me as being narrow-minded and insensitive, and to compare Manchester United and Arsenal football strips with the international logo for the Olympics is contemptible.
The achievements of these athletes, typically men such as Graham Nugent, are an example to all of us.
The BOA's humiliating decision is poor reward for their outstanding achievements and something, I believe, few of us wish to be associated with.
R GOSLING Ashburton, Devon
Letter to the Sports Editor: Bad attitude
SIR — I would like to congratulate Michael Calvin on his excellent article ‘Olympians in all but name’(March 30).
The British Olympic Association's attitude is typical of that of the British people towards the disabled.
In this country only lip-service is paid to the handicapped: A few concrete ramps and most councils think they have given the earth.
I have been listening for hours as our politicians tell us what they intend to do if elected, yet I have not heard one mention of the disabled.
Graham Nugent, Mike Hammond, Peter Yound, and Matthew Stockford are the true Olympians, not the money-grabbing lot represented by Dick Palmer and the five rings.
J PALMER (no relation) Kingstanding, Birmingham
Letter to the Sports Editor: Cheap trick
SIR — After watching the England soccer team's drab display in Prague, I am tempted to say that if the FA send them out in a nondescript kit, their performance will mirror their appearance.
How sad that the FA should so unashamedly cheapen the wearing of an England shirt in the blatant pursuit of commercial gain, thus following the examples of teams like Arsenal and Manchester United who, on occasions, manage to achieve the appearance of circus clowns.
With a bit of imagination, the FA and their kit suppliers could conceivably produce any number of kits.
We could have an October home and away kit, a November home and away kit, a December home and away kit etc, etc.
Alternative kits are an insult to the true supporters of the game and to those who have worn the white shirt in the past with pride.
MARTIN WILKES Oughtibridge, Sheffield
Letter to the Sports Editor: Keep in area
SIR — More and more goalkeepers are emulating Beasant and Grobbelaar by coming out of their area to act as sweepers.
Grobbelaar may have learnt his lesson from the match with Sheffield United, but is it not time goalkeepers were penalised whenever they leave their area?
I also wish something could be done about persistent passing back of the ball.
Sometimes I think players need arrows to show them the direction their efforts should take.
J RIDGEWAY Ranmoor, Sheffield
Letter to the Sports Editor: A ‘yes’ vote for the minister
SIR — Regarding Michael Calvin's article titled ‘Atkins playing for home advantage’(March 23), I feel it is only fair to make comment on what, in some respects, was a rather slanted view of the role played by Mr Robert Atkins, Minister for Sport, in support of sporting activities in the local community.
Lostock Hall High School, which is in the heart of the South Ribble constituency of Mr Atkins, is celebrating its 25th anniversary and many activities and events have been held to commemorate the event.
One of the school's main aims is to raise enough money for a second indoor sports base, which would be of benefit to both the school and the local community.
Far from Mr Atkins being considered the distant, unsympathetic figure depicted in the article, he has been a frequent visitor to the school over the past two years, giving support and advice to help us achieve our aims.
While agreeing that all the recent educational initiatives have made tremendous demands on teachers, the staff at Lostock Hall have shown that the commitment to extra-curricular activities is still in evidence.
From the comments in the article it would seem that sporting activities are at an all time low at this school this is far from the truth.
Over the past year the school has boasted many achievements both team and individual.
Earlier this month the under-16 soccer team reached the last 32 of the All England and Wales Schoolboys competition, playing on the same Bamber Bridge pitch visited by Mr Calvin.
The article mentions rugby union.
The other code, rugby league, flourishes here in a somewhat different aspect.
The school can boast of the first secondary school girls' rugby league team.
The rugby squad has over 80 members who regularly participate in competitive matches against clubs from the more ‘recognised’ rugby areas of Lancashire and Yorkshire.
The under-16 team recently picked up an award as the most sporting girls' rugby team and have completed a very successful season; eight girls have been selected for the Lancashire under-18 team and three for the under-13 team.
The girls have been featured on national and local television and received regular coaching sessions from Wigan rugby league players and have been sponsored by a building firm.
All sporting activities receive wide recognition; cricket, far from becoming a game of the past, is flourishing, highlighted by coaching from ex-Lancashire captain John Abrahams.
The captain of the under-16s was selected to tour Argentina with the Northern Schools Cricket Association at Christmas.
On a somewhat less physically demanding side, the school last weekend acted as host to an event being held in connection with the Preston Guild ‘92.
The competition involved pupils from schools throughout the area competing in darts, dominoes, draughts, chess and table tennis.
The event also required school teachers giving up their own time for youngsters.
My letter has no political motivation.
I just wish to point out that, in spite of the problems of cash shortages and extra pressures on school teachers, this school is providing extra-curricular activities for the pupils.
Mr Atkins has, on his visits to the school, expressed his admiration for the involvement of the school in the community and the school is grateful for his co-operation, advice and support.
R LORD Lostock Hall High School, Preston 
Golf: Democratic king Cotton Peter Dobereiner on the debt owed by professional
golfers to maestro who took on the establishmentOpen victory put an end to system of subjugation
By PETER DOBEREINER
AS THE plutocrats of world golf prepare to fly to Augusta for the first major championship of the season,— in some cases in their personal executive jets — it is a safe bet none of them sit back and reflect on the origins of their good fortune.
Most of them believe the golf cornucopia just grew, like Topsy.
Those with a sense of the game's history, such as Ben Crenshaw, might cite Arnold Palmer as the man who opened the throttle of the gravy train.
It is surely true that the combination of the television set's growth into an essential item of domestic furniture in the 1950s and the winning personality and buccaneer play of Palmer gave the game an enormous stimulus.
But by then the revolution was won; Palmer's contribution was to up the ante.
The family history illustrates the point.
Deacon Palmer was a golf professional-cum-greenkeeper at Latrobe, near Pittsburgh, and he would never presume to set foot inside the clubhouse unless specifically invited by a member.
He was, as golf professionals had been for a hundred years, a serf.
Arnold bought the club out of loose change.
He was a demi-god.
The status of the golf pro was elevated from serfdom to secular divinity in 20 years.
Due credit for this transformation must be given to the brash and charming American champion, Walter Hagen, who lived like a millionaire and ignored the social conventions of the day.
He liked to introduce himself by saying: ‘My name's Walter Hagen.
I'm the man who put the ‘go’ into golf,’prompting the swift retort on one occasion from the distinguished birth control pioneer: ‘My name's Marie Stopes.
I'm the woman who put the ‘OK’ into poke.’
Hagen's iconoclasm was for his own benefit; he never saw himself as a social campaigner on behalf of his fellow professionals.
The true crusader who stormed and demolished the barriers of snobbery and prejudice was Henry Cotton.
From the age of 16, when he left Alleynes School in a fit of pique after refusing to submit to a prefect's caning, he resolutely bucked the system.
As the dogsbody sixth assistant to George Oke at Fulwell, he performed his chores with a furious zeal, not because he wanted the members to have the shiniest shoes and the best sand-papered hickory shafts but because these jobs were good exercises to strengthen his hands and arms.
He refused professional tuition because he felt there must be a better way to play golf and he must find it for himself.
His dedication brought him swift advancement at the cost of alienating his contemporaries, who regarded him as an arrogant, stand-offish prig.
Curiously, the older players such as J H Taylor and Harry Vardon well understood his motives and were very supportive.
Cotton knew that his campaigning could not be effective unless he was successful; until then unpopularity would be his lot.
He redoubled his punishing regime of practice and ignored the shouts of ‘miss it’ when he lined up his putts.
He was constantly at odds with the Professional Golfers' Association, once declining to play in the Ryder Cup match because of petty restrictions put on the players.
He also refused to play in the England versus Scotland match on the ground that it immediately preceded the Open Championship and to make the abrupt switch from matchplay to strokeplay would impair his chances.
Cotton took an appointment as golf director at Royal Waterloo Golf Club, telling his friends that he was testing the theory that absence really did make the heart grow fonder.
The fact was that his own heart had grown irresistibly fond of the love of his life, Senora Isabel-Maria Estanguet de Moss, whose husband had just been posted to the Argentinian Embassy in Brussels.
She joined him, was known thereafter as Toots, and became a formidable and ruthless ally in Cotton's obsessive quest to become the best player in the world and to emancipate his chosen profession.
They travelled Europe in the style of royalty in exile, plundering the Continental cham-pionships.
On their forays to Britain they employed ridicule against the snobbery of golf clubs which insisted that the golfing untouchables must change their boots in the pro's shop.
BETWEEN rounds, two a day at that period, Cotton and Toots would stroll to the car park where the chauffeur unpacked the Fortnum and Mason hamper from the back of the hired Rolls and set up folding chairs and table for an al fresco repast of caviar and champagne.
As they surveyed their steak and kidney pud and overcooked cabbage in the clubhouse the members began to get the message.
Victory in the Open in 1934 changed everything, as Cotton knew it would.
His win ended 11 years of American domination of the championship.
He was a national hero and now he had the leverage to change golf.
These days golf managers parcel up their clients rather like those butchers' pictures of carcases with dotted lines showing the different joints.
Cotton marketed himself and his talents in the same way.
He invested the endorsement industry and his shoe contract was spoken of with awe.
There were Cotton clubs, Cotton gloves, even vitamin pills endorsed by Cotton.
Best-selling books, magazine articles and newspaper columns publicised his ideas.
The only difference from the literary effusions of today's superstars were that he wrote without benefit of a ‘ghost’.
Ian Botham is sometimes represented as breaking new ground for his appearances in pantomime.
Cotton topped the bill at the London Coliseum in 1939 and was such a hit that he was offered a 16-week provincial tour, never realised because of the Second World War.
That war robbed him of the prime of his career, when he was the best player in the world.
But the war also completed his task for him by sweeping away the remains of the system under which golf professionals had been subjugated as decent, working-class chaps.
Cotton's greatest interest for the rest of his life was to help young professionals follow and benefit from the high standards he had set for himself.
His own father had given him his creed for life —‘the best is only just good enough for you’— and he himself preached that doctrine until the day he died, in 1987.
Cotton wrote of Walter Hagen: ‘He lived like a prince and people treated him like one.
Pros today should go down on their knees and say a prayer of thanks for what he did for our profession.’
Today's multi-millionaire golfers at the Masters might well add to such a prayer: ‘And that goes double for Henry Cotton.’
Peter Dobereiner's biography of Henry Cotton, Maestro, was published last month by Hodder & Stoughton.
Price £14.99.
Sport Around The World: Chilean champion goes hungry in ban dispute
By BRIAN OLIVER
A CHILEAN boxing champion is on a hunger strike and an Argentinian doctor is being taken to court as a result of an attempt by doctors to put an end to professional boxing in Chile.
The medical association of Chile want to ban the sport and have effectively done so by prohibiting doctors from assisting at ringside.
According to law, a doctor must be present at the ringside.
When the association, backed by the Chilean Health Ministry, requested the prohibition last week, the Chilean Boxing Federation immediately went to court to try to protect the world title fight between Chile's Bernardo Mendoza and Luis Sosa of the Dominican Republic, reports El Cronista.
The court deferred their decision but the fight went ahead — Mendoza won — with an Argentinian doctor at the ringside.
Now the medical association are taking the Argentinian, Miguel Pereira, to court because he is not authorised to practise in Chile, and the country's flyweight champion and former world title challenger, Alli Galvez, has begun a hunger strike to defend his right to work.
MAJOR League baseball passes a million-dollar milestone when the new season opens today.
The average salary for the nearly 700 players on the 26 teams tops $1 million a year for the first time.
A survey by USA Today shows that 270 players will earn $1 million or more this summer.
Only 47 will earn the minimum Major League salary of $109,000 (a mere £62,000).
Sixty-one players, compared with 32 a year ago, will earn at least $3 million and 22 will get $4 million or more.
Topping the list is New York Mets' outfielder Bobby Bonilla at $6.1 million, with New York Yankees' Danny Tartabull and the Texas Rangers' Ruben Sierra runners-up on $5 million.
And the cost of a day at the ball park?
On average, a family of four will pay $82.72.
KRISTI YAMAGUCHI, a fourth generation American-Japanese, is losing sponsorship cash because of her name, according to speculation in the US media.
Last week Yamaguchi, 20, added the women's ice skating world title to the Olympic gold she won in France a few weeks earlier.
But, going into last week's championships in her home state of California, she had signed no new commercial deals since the Olympics and her advertising endorsements were restricted to an appearance on a cereal box.
The absence of deals has led to speculation that advertisers, wary of getting caught in a US-Japan economic crossfire, are ‘frightened’ of Yamaguchi because of her Japanese name and heritage.
Her agent says advertisers have expressed interest and that he has a ‘substantial number’ of offers he plans to present later this month.
But talent brokers are sceptical of those claims.
David Burns, who heads a service in Chicago that matches athletes and advertisers, told Associated Press he had not had a single inquiry about Yamaguchi since her Olympic win, watched by one of the biggest television audiences for the Winter Games.
‘Right now there is a negative connected with anything Japanese,’ says Burns.
‘It's wrong, wrong, wrong, but that is the way it is.
Her endorsement potential is definitely suffering because of her Japanese face and her Japanese name.’
WALTER DA SILVA, coach of a South African first division soccer team, was forced to leave town at gunpoint after his team had lost 6–0 at home.
An armed gang of fans of Umtata Bucks surrounded Da Silva's house in Umtata, ordered him and his family to pack their bags, drove them to the local airport, gave them tickets and cash and forced them aboard a Johannesburg-bound flight.
Da Silva said he had tried to reason with the fans but they had drawn guns.
‘I was left with no option but to help my wife pack seven bags,’ he tells the Daily Dispatch.
An inquiry will be held by the National Soccer League.
Sports Commentary: Halt Premier League gold rush
By Donald Saunders
ONE OF the most discouraging aspects of the prolonged dispute between the Premier League and the Professional Footballers' Association has been the Football Association's failure to intervene, although this argument is bringing English football into disrepute.
When the idea of a Premier League was floated at Lancaster Gate a year ago, many of us welcomed what we were led to believe was a plan to revitalise the game, at club and international levels, with the replacement of the First Division by an 18-member competition under the direct control of the FA.
Unfortunately, this proposal has been so remodelled that, in reality, the old First Division has simply been given a new name.
The only real difference is that it now seems to have been taken over by the 22 clubs who, having escaped Football League control, no longer find their pursuit of commercial success frustrated by the decisive voting power of their poor relations.
This might be in the long-term interests of English football, if the FA exercised their authority to discourage greedy club chairmen from out-shouting moderate colleagues, and so prevent acceptable reform from deteriorating into a reckless gold rush.
This restraining influence has yet to be applied.
Having instigated the new lead, the FA have turned away and allowed it to develop into an organisation in which the voice of reason struggles for a hearing.
Despite the cloak of respectability official backing has given it, the Premier League seems unable to reach consensus or take corporate decisions.
This has prompted Gordon Taylor, the PFA chief executive, to warn us of a ‘22-headed monster’ emerging from the confusion.
True, Mr Taylor does now appear to have safeguarded the contractual rights of players who soon will be working in the new League for their old employers.
His more difficult task is to persuade the Premier League to honour a Football League agreement to pay the union 10 per cent of television earnings.
The PFA have a good case.
Although the Premier League's television income will probably be much greater than the old League's has been, the union also will be obliged to meet increased demand, by players from the lower divisions, for re-training, pensions, insurance and other welfare benefits, following the break-up of the Football League.
Mr Taylor must ensure a sceptical public understand that it is to obtain these securities for their less fortunate brethren that the highly-paid Premier League players have been asked to express a willingness to strike.
WHATEVER the colour, or colours, of our next Government, sport will not figure prominently on their agenda.
Though a useful vote-catcher before an election, it becomes a costly business thereafter.
This attitude is unfortunate, but entirely understandable.
Sport does tend to thrust the begging bowl at politicians, when it would be better employed preparing an unanswerable case for substantial state aid.
Money is needed, for playing fields, swimming pools, tennis courts, sports halls, coaching and international competition, to name just a few of the calls on far too limited resources.
But even more urgently required is sound national organisation.
As the Duke of Edinburgh emphasised last week, the structure of British sport is ‘confused and unsatisfactory’.
He believes ‘some form of integrated federation of the whole spectrum of voluntary sports bodies’ is required if an efficient system is to be established for the injection of public money.
Other voices, too, are now being raised in support of a national body to pull together a multitude of organisations, currently pursuing, often blindly, their selfish individual goals.
Alas, there is little reason to be optimistic that this will develop into an influential enough movement to provoke radical change.
After all, the Central Council of Physical Recreation — of which the Duke is president — and the Sports Council, the two most powerful bodies in British sport, have been sniping at each other for years.
A ceasefire, let alone lasting peace, will take long negotiation.
Nationalism, too, has long hampered progress.
Piecing together a British team is often a headache for those who have to overcome local pride and prejudice in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
Delegates trying to act on behalf of the whole, without upsetting its parts, experience similar difficulties.
With demands for devolution resurfacing, this problem is unlikely to go away in the foreseeable future.
I cannot see Britain following the example of so many European countries, where multi-sports clubs are the norm.
Yet, this may well be the most efficient method of obtaining and channeling the Government and municipal support British sport badly needs.
IT IS encouraging to note that, in an era when so much of sport is packaged, marketed, and subjected to outrageous hype, before being offered to the public, the Grand National and the Boat Race continue to attract nationwide attention.
I can still remember the intense excitement of ‘listening in’ to pre-war Nationals on Friday afternoons that, many years later, seem always to have been bathed in bright spring sunshine.
Switching on the television set to watch a modern Boat Race, I recall the heated passions aroused among small boys in the early 1930s as we waited to learn whether we had picked the right shade of blue.
Some of that magic obviously is still present, at Aintree and on the banks of the Thames, between Putney and Mortlake.
It is a quality that cannot be manufactured.
The National and the Boat Race draw heavily on tradition.
Though clothing and equipment may be more streamlined, courage, nerve, fitness, skill, determination and a touch of good or bad luck remain unchanged, as essential ingredients of great sporting spectacles.
There is a moral here for some of the older spectator sports, wondering how best to sell themselves in a gimmicky TV age.
Stick to your traditional strengths.
Forget the hype.
Rugby Union: Waterloo provide Bedford lifeline
By Doug Ibbotson
Bedford25pts Waterloo4 BEDFORD, bailing furiously below the Second Division Plimsoll line, were in deep trouble at Goldstone Road on Saturday until, in the 35th minute, Paul Hackett, the Waterloo hooker, was sent off for stamping.
There was no score at this point, but the Waterloo forwards had achieved such fast territorial advantage that a landslide defeat for the home side seemed inevitable.
To the dismay of a large and loyal crowd, Bedford had simply allowed things to happen, and counter-attacked only twice when Tim Young's pace in pursuit of the high ball briefly unsettled the Waterloo defence.
Meanwhile, relations in the scrum were not always cordial.
Bedford's Howe was an early probationer and just before Hackett was sent down, Beckett, his prop, was admonished for riotous behaviour.
The subsequently disorganised Waterloo ranks, with flanker Ashcroft in the front row, immediately conceded a penalty and the first of Finnie's six successful kicks at goal.
The outside-half thereby became only the second player, after Neil Bennett in the 1970s, to score 300 points in a season for Bedford.
Waterloo, having been worn down in the trench warfare, were left with little option but to run the ball and were still in the match when, from 30 yards range, Buckton fashioned a fine try for the lively Saverimutto.
Thereafter, however, Bedford — with points differential potentially a decisive factor at the end of the season — moved remorselessly ahead.
A couple of determined tries from Gabriel, a solidly-built scrum-half, put them 10 points clear, before Finnie, with one conversion and three late penalties moved on to a personal total of 17.
Rugby Union: Bath plunge on Campese ploy PILKINGTON CUP
Australian World Cup tactics help set up May 2 showdown at Twickenham
Extra-time tries silence Gloucester followers
By John Reason
Gloucester18pts Bath27 THE sight of David Campese drifting across field from the far wing and cutting even the New Zealand defence to shreds in the World Cup persuaded Bath that this was an attacking move worth investigating.
The beauty of it was that Campese could cause such a fearful commotion even when he was running on to nothing more appetising than set piece possession, either from the scrum or the line-out.
Bath had a good long look at the videos and soon saw that little variations of this move could break opposition defences just as easily as the blasting back-row scrum moves with which Australia had devastated England when they so mistakenly toured Australia last year.
England came away from Australia shaking their heads and saying that it was impossible to defend against those moves.
Gloucester after Saturday's match at Kingsholm were left feeling just as impotent and just as confounded after Bath had stormed away in the last five minutes of extra time to win this semi-final.
Bath do not have a Willie Ofahengaue to launch those killer moves from the back row, but with Barnes, Guscott and Swift they do have a midfield and a right wing fully capable of cashing in on the Campese option.
They did it twice and each time they scored in the left corner, and each time Barnes converted from the touchline.
Those 12 points broke the deadlock of one of the dourest dog fights even Gloucester has seen.
They also broke Gloucester's hearts, because with rather less than five minutes of extra time to go, the home side were leading 18–15.
The delight of the Gloucester supporters was in no way diminished by the fact that Barnes had missed three easy kicks at goal, any one of which would have wrapped up the game for Bath.
With David Sims off injured, Gloucester's supply of ball dried up late in the game and they were also playing into the cold wind.
However, they then defied most of the laws of position and possession to come back from 15–9 down, draw level and force the match into extra time.
Even more remarkably Gloucester then took the lead when Bath knocked on in attack, lost 50 yards in a kick and chase, went quite ludicrously offside, and Gloucester full-back Smith kicked his fifth goal.
Gloucester's problem was that they still could not win enough of the ball.
They were also tired and when Bath turned again to the Campese option an important part of the Gloucester defence lost concentration.
When Bath won an attacking scrum on the right and Swift began to drift across his marker did not follow him.
Guscott took Barnes's pass, Fallon put Swift clear to score and Barnes converted.
Bath had used a variation of this move to score their first try.
That time Swift came across from the right and appeared outside Guscott.
That gave Fallon the overlap and he scored in the corner.
The second try was the mortal thrust.
It was the end of the contest, but not the end of the game because almost at once a poor kick out of defence by Gloucester outside-half Matthews gave Webb and Guscott the chance to give Fallon his second sight of the corner flag.
Again he made it and again Barnes converted.
The fruitfulness of Guscott's passing may give pause to the justified chuntering about his failure to make tries for unmarked wingers in internationals this season.
An even more interesting development is the astonishing advance made by Guscott's kicking.
Four of the relieving kicks he launched in this match had to be seen to be believed, particularly as he varied his kicking foot.
The word is that Bath are being helped by a man who has been a kicking coach in the National League of American Football.
If that is true, he is waving a magic wand with a sledgehammer on the end.
The astonishing goal that Guscott dropped for England against Scotland was something to behold.
Perhaps he will be taking up where Naas Botha, the South African outside-half, left off in American football next.
Guscott would not exactly be a slouch as a running back, either.
What a talent.
By contrast Gloucester could only kick goals.
Gloucester: T Smith; J Perrins, D Caskie, D Cummins (M Hamlin 28), S Morris; N Matthews, M Hannaford; P Jones, K Dunn, R Phillips, N Scrivens, D Sims (P Miles 80), P Ashmead, I Smith (capt), S Masters.
Penalty goals: T Smith (4).
Dropped Goals: T Smith, Matthews.
, Bath: J Webb; A Swift, P de Glanville, J Guscott, J Fallon; S Barnes, R Hill; G Chilcott, G Dawe, V Ubogu, M Haag, N Redman, D Egerton, A Robinson, B Clarke.
Tries: Fallon (2), Swift.
Conversions: Barnes (3).
Penalty goals: Barnes (3).
Referee: C Rees (RFU).
RUGBY COMMENTARY Time to send Scots, Irish into exile
By Jamie Salmon
ANOTHER capacity crowd is assured at Twickenham on May 2 for the Pilkington Cup final when Bath and Harlequins meet for an almighty battle.
With both teams littered with international players, it will be the best-looking final for some time.
Both clubs are used to Twickenham cup finals and a fine encounter is in prospect.
While the semi-finals took pride of place on Saturday, Nottingham and Rosslyn Park were having a League One relegation tussle, with the Midlanders comfortable winners.
Rosslyn Park now look doomed, while London Scottish have already clinched promotion from League Two.
I suppose I should congratulate them, but sadly I can't because, as you may recall, I have always believed that the exile clubs should have no place in the English club championships.
They deprive English-qualified players of the opportunity at top level, and next season — when two exile clubs will be in the top league — more than 30 players will suffer because of it.
I am sure London Scottish and Irish will say they cannot afford to play in their national competitions, but that should not make it England's problem.
I hope the RFU competitions committee make an urgent review of proceedings, especially as the First Division will be reduced to 10 teams for the 1993–94 season.
If the exile clubs survive in the top flight next year, only eight English clubs will be joining them.
It would be ridiculous if 20 per cent of our top division came from Ireland and Scotland.
It is a far more important issue than the discussions over qualification periods for overseas players.
The 180 days being mooted is absurd and will not do any favours to clubs, players or, indeed, spectators.
Despite voices to the contrary, our standard of play at club level is not that high, and anything we can do to improve it or make it more appealing should be done.
The influence of overseas coaches and players in rugby league has raised the standard of individual players enormously, and added quite a few numbers through the turnstiles.
I certainly would not advocate as many in rugby union, but a maximum of one per team seems perfectly reasonable, and they should not have to go through a qualifying period.
WE must appreciate that we can learn from overseas players, and I believe that the paying spectator should be kept interested and that new support should be chased.
What better way to achieve that than having a top overseas player?
The rules relating to English players changing clubs in mid-season are, however, an area of concern and should be tightened up.
In Australasia, for instance, the club you play your first game of the season for is your only club for that year and you are not allowed to transfer.
The only way to move is by proving beyond all reasonable doubt that your home address has moved over a certain distance, and that the club you wish to join is considerably closer to your new address.
I WAS interested to see the All Blacks trial teams that were announced last week.
The name that caught my eye was the Probables' outside-half, Stephen Bachop.
You may recall that Bachop was outstanding during the World Cup, but it should be noted that he was playing for Western Samoa, not New Zealand.
Now, six months later, he is on the verge of being capped for New Zealand.
I am hardly anyone to criticise or perhaps comment, having played for two countries, but at least mine were separated by 12,000 miles and four years.
I think six months is rather too quick, to say the least, and as most of the Western Samoan players live in New Zealand, I am sure that Bachop is not the only candidate.
It is something the International Board will have to look into very seriously.
They have the opportunity to do so when they meet next week, ironically in New Zealand.
Rugby Union: Whirlwind Rasari revels in mud HONG KONG SEVENS
New Zealand swamped by huge Fijian tidal wave
By Charles Randall in Hong Kong
FIJI, disappointing failures in the World Cup last October, continued their stranglehold on sevens rugby by easily winning the Cathay Pacific Hong Kong Bank sevens tournament in ludicrously wet conditions yesterday.
They demolished New Zealand 22–6 in the final for their third win in successive years and they effectively became the second underwater sevens champions since Australia in 1983, the previous ‘monsoon’ tournament.
Seven hours of torrential rain during the second day's play reduced the pitch to a lake which in places had the players running calf deep in muddy water.
After the final whistle hundreds of spectators from the crowd of about 16,000 in the 28,000-seat Government Stadium at Causeway Bay invaded the pitch for a mass mud-bath.
Fiji's scintillating performance was a long way from their fumbling 15-aside showing in France during the World Cup and one of their newcomers, Mesake Rasari, ensured the player of the tournament award by scoring three tries against New Zealand.
Rasari, a soldier with the United Nations peacekeeping force in Lebanon, had already scored two tries with his huge lopping stride in a one-sided 28–4 victory over Australia in the semi-final and one in a 22–6 win against a French side containing Sella, Viars and Cabannes.
Bob Dwyer, Australia's coach, watched his side being demolished and tried to explain why Fiji were so much better than the world champions at sevens in contrast to their 15-a-side form.
He said: ‘There are certain characteristics of the Fijian people that are ideally suited to sevens — their amazing ball skills and tremendous explosive pace.
Rasari is a massive man but Tim Horan, who is really quick, didn't gain half-a-metre on him.
The Fijian is about 6ft 4in and weighs 16½ stone and leaving Horan like that is unheard of.‘
‘When he played in the second row there is no space for him to run into.
In 15-a-side the quality of ball control and close quarter interaction is very important and they don't have that capacity.’
He added: ‘The odds were stacked against Fiji in the World Cup, having to play in France, in the mountains at night, in the freezing cold of Grenoble in the Alps.’
With the first official sevens world cup in Edinburgh a year away, it is clear that the Fijians, who have played together in 14 tournaments already this season, will be the team to beat.
The Barbarians, led by Scotland's Gavin Hastings, failed to cope with the surface water and were beaten 16–8 by South Korea, who became the first Asian side to reach the semi-finals.
Their reward was an encounter against New Zealand, but the All Blacks' strength and experience proved too much for the Koreans as they went down 14–0.
Fiji: M Rasari, Vesito Raulini (capt), R Sakeasi, S Rabaka, W Serevi, Vili Raulini, F Seru.
New Zealand: G Bachop, P Lam, G Osborne, S Pierce, E Rush, D Seymour, T Wright (capt).
Rugby Union: Newport pack in front
By David Green
Newport9pts
Bridgend4 BRIDGEND simply could not win enough quality possession in their Schweppes Welsh Cup quarter-final at Rodney Parade on Saturday, and though Newport did not make the most of their chances they still won fairly comfortably.
Newport's forwards, among whom Moseley dominated the front of the line-out, while George and Withey had excellent games in the loose, were markedly superior, despite the tireless efforts of Bridgend No 8 Williams, and blind-side flanker Simon Bryant.
However, with their playmaker Turner injured, and his replacement Yendle not really hitting it off with scrum-half Llewellyn, Newport rarely threatened behind the scrum.
When Withey, George and Waters did release Harries, he was felled by Apsee's consuming tackle.
Harries, already unsuccessful with two very kickable penalties, and replaced by Jones, who had landed an angled one from 28 yards, might have done rather more with the opportunity, but Newport scored straight afterwards.
From the line-out 10 yards from the line, Withey stole Bridgend's throw-in, and his colleagues drove him over, Jones converting from the touchline.
Newport looked poised to run away with it, but Bridgend refused to cave in.
Winning some ball at last from the tail of the line-out, through Williams, Bridgend's backs managed to pressurise their opponents, but erratic goal-kicking — Gareth Thomas, David Thomas and Howley missed six between them — let them down.
Bridgend did score a good try through Gareth Thomas from a tapped penalty, while at the other end Jones should really have kicked a second penalty after Jenkins had been penalised for treading heavily on Yendle.
Newport managed to cover late thrusts from Gareth Thomas and Webbe.
Swansea, the Heineken League leaders, were restricted to only two tries in their 14–6 win over Dunvant to reach the semi-finals for the third successive season.
Richard Webster, a former Dunvant player, and Anthony Clement were Swansea's try scorers.
Neil Jenkins, the Wales and Pontypridd outside-half, contributed 19 points as his team's 35–15 win ended Cardiff HSOB's hopes of becoming the first junior club to reach the semi-finals.
Pontypridd led 19–3 at half-time, but the visitors were rewarded for their enterprise with two second-half tries.
Rugby Union: Stephens kick-starts Llanelli
By Edward Bevan
Pontypool3pts
Llanelli27 LLANELLI, the Schweppes Cup holders, ended any hopes Pontypool had of reaching the semi-final by capitalising on the opposition's errors to score 24 points in 17 minutes during the second half.
Colin Stephens also punished the home side's indiscretions by kicking three penalties as Llanelli followed up their Heineken League performance against Pontypool the previous week with another emphatic victory.
A scrappy and try-less first half left the scores level at 3-3, but Llanelli took the lead eight minutes into the second half after Arwel Parry, the Pontypool full-back, made a complete hash of a restart from the 22.
Instead of aiming to the left, where his forwards were lined up, Parry attempted to deceive the Llanelli defence by taking a quick drop-out.
The ploy used to succeed for Jonathan Davies but it went horribly wrong for Parry, whose kick rebounded off Boobyer, leaving Proctor, the Llanelli left wing, to collect and score in the corner.
Stephens converted the try with a booming kick from the touchline and when he landed two further penalties within five minutes Pontypool were 15–3 adrift and on their way out.
Llanelli struggled initially in the scrums but Evans, on the loose head, eventually countered Mustoe's awkward scrummaging technique.
Scott Quinnell, 19, was the game's outstanding forward, and a 50-yard run down the touchline with the ball in one hand and handing off tacklers with the other would have impressed Alan Davies, the Wales coach, who was watching from the stands.
The Llanelli back row successfully countered the threat of Dean Oswald, the New Zealand No 8 who, returning to the Pontypool side after a 10-week absence, made an attractive contribution but rarely crossed the gain line.
Llanelli's second try was set up by Boobyer after Copsey won a line-out on the right.
The young centre cut inside where Lyn Jones was at his elbow and the open-side flanker galloped 30 yards to score near the posts, Stephens converting.
Parry, having got Llanelli off the mark, gifted them their final try five minutes later as Pontypool attacked near the opposition's 10-metre line.
The Pontypool full-back joined the threequarter line and lobbed an intended pass to a colleague.
It was intercepted by Nigel Davies, who raced 65 metres to score under the post.
Stephens converted to complete a 15-point haul.
Rugby Union: Moseley pick up bargains in Sale
By David Turner
Moseley47pts Sale15 FOR THE second successive Courage League Two game Sale's fragile defence conceded 40 points or more as Moseley gave a superb second-half display when they ran in seven tries.
Initially, it seemed that Sale might prove victorious.
They dominated the first quarter of the match with Raducanu plundering some tidy line-out ball.
Despite this, they never made their pressure tell.
Perhaps the fact that all they had to show for their early efforts was a couple of Alexander penalties spoke volumes for their attacking frailties.
Indeed, the South African's boot eventually accounted for all of their points.
This inability to translate pressure into points seemed to erode their tenacity and the forwards, in particular, lost concentration.
Moseley, for once, did not hesitate to take advantage of this.
Up until then, they had given Sale an object lesson in the art of taking limited chances with a couple of tries from the ubiquitous Morris, who seems a genuine open side.
With their pack showing a voracious appetite for running into and beyond the heart of the visitors' defence, Moseley were able to set up positions from which Hardcastle, who invariably took the correct options throughout, and Harknett were both able to score.
Purdy took full advantage of the visitors' continued obsession with touch rugby and tormented them with his pace and timely incursions into the line.
He set up a hat-trick of tries for Spiller, one a beauty which originated with his devastating break from deep within his own half.
Sherriffe, a raw bustling wing, also showed that he knew his way to the line, but perhaps it was fitting that the elusive Purdy should be credited with his side's final try.
LAWN TENNIS
Victorious Krickstein spurns doctors' advice
AARON KRICKSTEIN, advised by doctors to withdraw because of a foot injury, won the South African Open at Ellis Park, Johannesburg, by beating top-seeded Russian Alexander Volkov 6–4, 6–4 yesterday.
The American's 77-minute final victory kept intact his record of not dropping a set throughout the tournament, the first South African Open since 1985 to have the backing of the Association of Tennis Professionals.
Gabriela Sabatini, of Argentina, retained her Family Circle Cup at Hilton Head, South Carolina, with a 6–1, 6–4 victory over Spain's Conchita Martinez.
Earlier Sabatini, the top seed, moved into her fourth final of the year with a 6–3, 6–2 victory against Brenda Schultz, of Holland, while Martinez, the fifth seed, beat compatriot Arantxa Sanchez Vicario 6–4, 7–5.
Bryan Shelton hit 24 aces to overpower top-seed MaliVai Washington 7–5, 7–6 in the semi-finals of the River Oaks International tournament in Houston.
Shelton plays Jeff Tarango, who beat Jared Palmer 4–6, 7–5, 6–3, in the final.
Rugby Union: England's pack turn the tables
By Richard Bright
Wales Youth 18pts England Colts 29
ENGLAND COLTS shook off the lethargy which had enabled the Welsh Youth to win their last two encounters at Wrexham and Fylde to thoroughly outplay their hosts at Brecon on Saturday.
The foundation of victory was laid on a solid base from the pack which outweighed, outreached and outwitted the Welsh eight.
Locks Webster and Yendell dominated the line-out while No 8 Hill was invariably first in loose play.
Behind them, Burke, the outside-half, controlled matters with the expertise of a Rob Andrew, thanks to the excellence of his scrum-half partner, Becconsall.
The Welsh lacked flair as well as physique, though there were exceptions in the determination of winger Allnut, the belligerence of hooker Williams, who was winning a record seventh cap for his country, and No 8 Wainwright who scored two second-half tries.
England Colts led 14–10 at the interval through tries by wingers O'Leary and Smith and centre Keyter, one of which Burke converted.
In response Wales scored two penalty goals by full-back Ian Jones and a try by Allnut.
WELSH YOUTH: I Jones (Carmarthen Quins); M Allnut (Llandovery), L Davies (Senghenydd, capt), S Prendiville (Llangennech), W Leech (Llandybie), C Ryan (Trimsaran); J Churcher (St Peters), A Lewis (Cardiff); B Williams (Llandovery), R Young (Trefil), L Jones (Porthcawl), C Wyatt (Newport), G Howells (Ebbw Vale), H Edwards (Cwmavon), A Wainwright (Llandaff).
Replacement: H Davies (Lampeter) for Churcher 79.
Tries: Wainwright (2), Allnut.
Penalty Goals: I Jones (2).
ENGLAND COLTS: T Handley (De la Salle); N Smith (Northampton), J Keyter (Harlequins), D Edwards (Loughborough Univ), D O'Leary (West London Inst); P Burke (Loughborough Univ, capt), G Becconsall (Bristol); A Spry (Sidcup), C Johnson (Leicester), T Donbavand (Sedgley Pk), G Webster (Northampton), C Yandell (Bath), J Wright (Northampton), I McNerlin (Bristol & RAF), R Hill (Salisbury).
Tries: O'Leary, Smith, Keyter, McNerlin, Webster.
Conversions: Burke (3).
Penalty goal: Burke.
ATHLETICS
Britain choose Allison as overall team manager
JOAN ALLISON has been named Britain's overall manager following the death last month of Les Jones.
Allison, who as manager of the women's squad worked closely with Jones, will be in charge for the Olympics in Barcelona and World Cup in Havana this season.
Tony Ward, spokesman for the British Athletic Federation, said: ‘Joan has been to two world and two European Championships and one Olympics.
No-one else has that sort of management experience.’
Mexican Salvador Garcia came from behind to win the Rotterdam marathon in 2hr 9min 16sec yesterday.
Compatriot Isidoro Rico was 13 seconds behind with German Jorg Peter third, 46 seconds behind the winner.
Portugal's Aurora Cunha won the women's race in a course record 2–29–15, almost six minutes ahead of Yugoslavian Suzana Ciric in 2–35–11.
Rugby League: Wigan on verge of hat-trick
By Michael Fisher
Featherstone 13pts Wigan 34
SHAUN EDWARDS ensured yesterday that only freak results can prevent majestic Wigan completing an unprecedented hat-trick of triumphs in the Stones Bitter Championship.
Edwards, switched to scrum-half for the injured Andy Gregory, was the catalyst of a well-disciplined performance by Wigan who now need one point from three matches to be mathematically assured of the first leg of their league and cup double objective.
Miles and Casey needed stitches in facial gashes in a bruising contest and Lucas suffered a suspected broken arm.
Wigan's tries came from Botica, Offiah, Myers, Skerrett, Bell and Edwards with his 31st try of the season.
Bradford Northern beat Wakefield Trinity 9–8 yesterday as Hull were dragged into the relegation battle with a 27–18 defeat at Swinton, writes John Whalley.
Northern went behind when Wilson scored the first of two tries, but led 8–4 at the interval after a fine try from Fairbank and two goals from Hobbs.
After Trinity equalised, Hobbs edged Northern in front with a dropped goal in the 51st minute.
Swinton recorded their first victory for 16 games against Hull.
Wilkinson landed five kicks from as many attempts and kicked a drop to supplement tries from Whitfield, Garner, Ratu and Kerr.
Leeds struggled to overcome Hull KR 13–4 despite a try from Hanley and two goals from Gallagher in the first 13 minutes.
Warrington maintained their revival with a convincing 30–18 victory over St Helens on Saturday even though Kevin Ellis was sent off for an alleged trip.
RUGBY LEAGUE
Salford attack to defend
By John Whalley
Widnes 20pts Salford 24
WITH the relegation issue in an unpredictable state, Salford's victory at Widnes proved no more than par for the course yesterday, but they will need radical adjustments in their attacking philosophy if they are to collect further points.
Their desire to play an expansive game is often dangerous, verging on the suicidal.
Even in the later stages of this game they continued to move the ball around despite circumstances requiring more solid one-man drives backed by dependable kicking.
They have the players to adapt in Young, Hansen, Bradshaw and Evans, but consistently chose the more spectacular alternatives — not the option for a team in their position.
Widnes, without eight squad members, had the territory and the possession to have won the game but, after five successive defeats, they lacked confidence and penetration.
While the splendid John Devereux improved his chances of being named in today's Great Britain touring squad to Australia, with a fine display from his old rugby union position of centre, they were without too many of their creative players to open a hard-tackling defence which absorbed the pressure and were always on the lookout for the counter-attack.
Salford, however, deserve credit for coming back after Widnes had recoved a 10-point deficit early in the second half.
Wingers Evans and Hadley scored tries in a four-minute spell inside the last 15 minutes, while a late Paul Hulme try set up a thrilling finish in a generally untidy game.
After taking heavy Widnes pressure in the early stages, Salford replied with two penalties from Birkett and a try from Fox on his First Division debut in the 19th minute, which Birkett converted.
Widnes came back with a Devereux try in the 34th minute, but when Lee sent Reid over four minutes later Salford had a big enough lead to have relaxed and concentrated on the basics.
Devereux had other ideas and forced his side level.
The Welshman sent Critchley over within three minutes of the second half and was in support to take Tait's pass and touch down in the 56th minute, with Holliday's goal setting up an aborbing final quarter.
The result severely dents Widnes's chance of qualifying for the Premiership, in which they have reached the final for the last three years, but could prove a turning point in Salford's survival battle, provided they are a little more circumspect.
Widnes: Tait; Critchley, Devereux, Wright, Sarsfield; Dowd, Spruce; Grima (Smith 28), P Hulme, Howard (McCurrie 65), Koloto (Grima 74), Eyres, Holliday.
Referee P Volante (Batley).
SPEED SKATING
O'Reilly loses world title to unbeaten South Korean
WILF O'REILLY, Britain's 1991 world champion, lost his title to Olympic 1,000 metres gold medallist Ki Hoon Kim, who won the 500m, 1,000m, 1,500m and 3,000m finals to collect a maximum 20 points in the 12th World Short-Track Speed Skating Championships in Denver, Colorado.
Kim, of South Korea, won all his races, from the preliminary heats to the semi-finals over the three days of competition.
O'Reilly finished joint fourth overall, tying with Canada's Frederic Blackburn, New Zealand's Michael McMillen and Japan's Tatsuyoshi Ishihara.
He picked up two silver medals, in the 500m and as part of the Great Britain team in the 5,000m relay.
South Korea's Ji Soo Mo and Joon Ho Lee also finished second and third overall in the men's event and their Korean team-mate, So Hee Kim, was crowned the new women's world champion, collecting 13 points, with China's Li Yan second and Japan's Nobuku Yamada placed third overall.
SWIMMING
Two records for Perkins
KIEREN Perkins achieved his second world record in 48 hours when he clocked 14min 48.40sec in the men's 1,500 metre freestyle at the Australian Open championships in Canberra last night.
Perkins, 18, took nearly two seconds off the previous best of 14min 50.36sec recorded by Germany's Joerg Hoffman at the 1991 world championships in Perth.
On Friday night Perkins's 400m time of 3–46.47 had shaved 0.48 seconds off the old mark set by Uwe Dassler, of East Germany, at the 1988 Olympics.
BASKETBALL
Giants denied play-off place
LEICESTER City Riders ended Manchester Giants' hopes of reaching the Carlsberg First Division play-off quarter-finals by beating them 112–99 on Saturday night.
Birmingham Bullets claimed eighth place with a 105–77 win over Cheshire.
Birmingham face First Division champions Kingston in the quarter-finals, which begin next weekend.
Oldham Celtics clinched the Men's Division Two title on the final weekend of the regular season by beating Greenwich 97–57.
CARLSBERG DIV 1 PLAY-OFF QTR-FINALS (best of three): Kingston v Birmingham; Thames Valley v Hemel Hempstead; Worthing v Leicester; London v Derby.
SPEEDWAY
England call for Standing
DEAN STANDING, 22, celebrated his second England call-up with an impressive nine points but could not save Swindon from a last-heat Gold Cup defeat at King's Lynn on Saturday.
He has been promoted from stand-by reserve for Friday's first Test against Australia at Oxford after Belle Vue captain Joe Screen withdrew because of club commitments.
Swedish international Henrik Gustafsson won two of the last three heats to give King's Lynn a 47–43 success over Swindon, who had struck with maximum points in the first race from Mitch Shirra and Standing.
MOTOR RACING
De Ferran in winning start
THE Brazilian driver, Gil de Ferran, exploited a small gap at the start, swooped into the lead, and from then on was never headed in the second race of the British Formula Three Championship at Silverstone yesterday.
His task was made easier when Marcel Albers, the second-placed Dutchman, after setting the fastest lap, was forced to go into the pit with electrical problems.
Though he rejoined the race a few minutes later, Albers, who won the opening round of the series at Donington, was forced to call it a day four laps later.
Rugby Union: Quins rally best troops for another big effort
By John Mason
Harlequins 15pts Leicester 9
HARLEQUINS, who will be defending the Pilkington Cup against mighty Bath at Twickenham on May 2, hope to be at strength for the postponed Courage League One match with Orrell at the Stoop on Easter Monday.
Having held off a prolonged second-half challenge from Leicester in Saturday's cup semi-final, the Quins later learned the Rugby Football Union had rejected Orrell's appeal for the league game to be switched to Easter Saturday, when Lancashire meet Cornwall in the ADT county final at Twickenham.
Orrell, whose county contingent have decided the club have prior claim on their services, are favourites for the league title, though Bath and Northampton, who play Leicester tomorrow evening, are pushing them hard.
The original intention had been for the Quins players, seven of whom were in England's Grand Slam squad, to have Easter off.
Now a group of senior players have asked colleagues who have Easter holiday plans to return for the Orrell game.
While well pleased to have won the privilege of confronting Bath in the cup final, mid-table Quins are mindful of overall responsibilities to other clubs.
Saturday's scrappy victory over Leicester was Pears-shaped.
Not a diamond, perhaps, but a flinty, 18-carat performance from a competitive lad whose patient willingness to do as he is bid by club and country as either No 10 or 15 is a lasting credit.
Pears, in only his second match as the club's outside-half this season, collected all 15 points — try, conversion and three penalty goals — to state vastly improved credentials.
His try was a beauty as, unusually for English outside-halves, he weaved a delicate and rapid path of dummy, swerve and shuffle through well-guarded spaces.
Liley, on Leicester's behalf, also scored all their points, the try being a six-man effort which owed much to the common sense of Boyle and the alertness of Rory Underwood, whose final Twickenham appearance, after all, will be this Saturday when the RAF meet the Army.
The rigours of the most demanding season the game has known were etched on Moore's face.
Tired, drawn and bruised that he was, even the hard-earned pint by his right hand was scarcely touched.
Nor does it seem that Moore, England's first-choice hooker for five seasons, will play again before the final.
He has been advised that rest is the only remedy for a recurring groin strain.
There was a point during a fraught semi-final when Harlequins, the holders, were fading fast and Moore was debating whether he should complete the course.
By then Richards, his England colleague and the opposition No 8, had retired, reluctantly conceding that a troublesome right Achilles' tendon was not helping him or the Tigers.
Moore stayed put but was uneasy about the cost.
Harlequin captain Winterbottom was on the ball when he said that the cup suited them best in so many ways.
Assuming Moore is fit and Wallaby Coker, the king of the long-distance commuters, is not required again in Australia, Bath might discover painfully what Winterbottom has in mind.
Harlequins: S Thresher; M Wedderburn, W Carling, S Halliday, G Thompson; D Pears, R Glenister; M Hobley, B Moore, A Mullins, N Edwards, T Coker, M Skinner, P Winterbottom (capt), R Langhorn.
Try: Pears.
Conversion.
Pears.
Penalty goals: Pears (3).
Leicester: J Liley; T Underwood, I Bates, L Boyle, R Underwood; G Ainscough, D Grewcock; S Redfern, C Tressler, D Garforth, M Johnson, M Poole, J Wells (capt), N Back, D Richards (S Povoas 58).
Try: Liley.
Conversion.
Liley.
Penalty goal: Liley.
Rugby Union: Pepper strengthens Nottingham belief
By Mark Salter
Nottingham 34pts Rosslyn Park9
NOTTINGHAM condemned Rosslyn Park to almost certain relegation while giving themselves a glimmer of hope of survival in League One with their first victory of the season, based on three tries by flanker Martin Pepper and 18 points from outside-half Guy Gregory.
Their place in the top flight depends on their remaining games, against title-chasing Orrell and Northampton, and the fortunes of Rugby, who are a point above them with Harlequins and Leicester to play.
Park face Bath and Northampton.
Inspiration and confidence are the keys for Nottingham, and both were boosted at Beeston on Saturday.
‘We just have to believe we can do it,’ said Nottingham's captain Chris Gray, ‘otherwise there is not much point in carrying on.’
Self-belief has been a problem this season and has not been helped by narrow defeats against Wasps (11–7), Saracens (13–12) and London Irish (12–9) and a 9–9 draw with Rugby.
‘We've always tried to keep the game open and in this respect for many of the younger players it has been a learning experience,’ said Gray.
‘We try to encourage them to do something original; every now and again they succeed and it all helps to build them up.’
Gregory's first dropped goals of the season on Saturday were an example.
‘We rarely have been in a position where he has had the confidence to go for it,’ said Gray.
Inspired by his effort in the 10th minute, he kicked a second in the closing stages to add to his three conversions and two penalties.
The inspiration and drive has emanated from the pack, where Gray can assert most forcefully his authority and experience as a Scottish international.
Bath had felt it the week before but they had the experience and strength to overcome it.
Park did not have the manpower to resist and were driven back by forward rushes, rolling mauls from which Pepper was able to launch his attacks.
Though Park spent most of the first half pinned in their own territory, Nottingham had only two penalty goals and a Gregory dropped goal to show for their efforts.
The visitors were again struck by injury; a problem which has plagued them all season.
The departure of flanker Hill with a groin injury shortly after the restart brought on Foulds, a second-row forward, which forced Park to shuffle their pack.
Foulds went off 15 minutes later with a neck injury and No 8 Brooks was helped off with a leg injury shortly afterwards.
Rosslyn Park have now used 32 players this season.
However, Nottingham showed little sympathy and Pepper rubbed salt in their wounds.
He broke clear from the 22-metre line five minutes into the second half and 10 minutes later repeated the effort.
He was on hand to take the pass after Kilford had broken through and ended a fine performance by setting up wing Byrom for a try.
Racing: Powerful ‘Politics’ takes it in his stride RACING
John Oaksey relates the happy story of a hugely-topical Aintree success for a giant among National Hunt horses
By JOHN OAKSEY
WHEN Mrs Patricia Thompson's newly-acquired Party Politics ran out a supremely topical winner of the Martell Grand National at Aintree on Saturday, no horse or man was seriously injured and only five of the 40 runners actually fell.
But before you write that happy bulletin off as a well-timed election omen for the ‘Greens’ or as confirmation that jumping in general and Aintree in particular have ‘gone soft’just pause and take another look at the background to last week's events.
You might, for example, inquire after Richard Dunwoody, whose Becher's Brook fall on the much-fancied Brown Windsor was just one of the six times he hit the ground during the three-day meeting.
Admittedly Richard rode four winners too, but after poor Thetford Forest's fatal fall had given Grand National Day a tragic finale in the Janneau Mersey Novice Hurdle, his battered rider was advised by the Jockey Club's doctor, Rodney O'Donnell, to rest up for a week.
Yesterday, though, the resilient Dunwoody said that he hopes to be back in action at Ascot on Wednesday.
At least Dunwoody made the National field.
Besides Andy Adams, robbed by a broken leg of the winning ride on Party Politics, three other jockeys Anthony Tory (Docklands Express), Adrian Maguire (Cool Ground) and Mark Perrett (Rubika) were painfully put out of action on the first two days.
Standing at more than 18 hands, Party Politics is almost certainly the tallest horse in training.
He is also a much-operated-on ex-invalid who owes his success, if not his life, to the patient care of trainer Nick Gaselee and his staff — and to the precise surgical skill of the Irish vet Charlie McCartan.
The first time Party Politics' breeder David Stoddart sold him, the horse was ‘spun’ for a breathing defect and returned under a cloud from the Doncaster Sales.
So McCartan — whose understandably well-celebrated 40th birthday coincided with the Grand National, performed the conventional Hobday operation.
It succeeded at first, but Party Politics' breathing was still impaired and a second, much more difficult ‘tie-back’ operation had to be attempted.
A piece of elastic, it seems, is attached to the side of the horse's throat and minutely adjusted to provide a sufficient opening.
‘If you get it exactly right they are fine,’ says McCartan, whose other patients have included Barnbrook Again, ‘but if you don't, it is apt to be curtains.’
This time his measurements were precise.
So on Saturday, Party Politics, dwarfing his 39 opponents, set off in new colours with new jockey Carl Llewellyn to see how many strides it would take him to cover the most famous four and a half miles in sport.
I would like to bet that not many horses have taken fewer.
Just watch your video and count.
Golden Minstrel, Forest Ranger, Willsford and Ghofar disputed the early lead and Brown Windsor was with them when, jumping left and colliding with Forest Ranger at Becher's, he became the race's most expensive casualty.
Soon lobbing along behind the leaders, Llewellyn was always finding plenty of room for Party Politics and by the second Canal Turn, when Romany King moved up to join Hotplate, the race had begun to take it's final shape.
With five fences left, Party Politics jumped past Romany King and was never headed again.
The Gold Cup winner Cool Ground was struggling by now and Ghofar had begun to tire.
Passing Anchor Bridge, Peter Scudamore — who had taken Anthony Tory's place on Docklands Express — and the National's most regular ‘bridesmaid’ Chris Grant, on Stay on Tracks, were both plenty close enough.
But that last half-mile is the one that counts and of the front half-dozen, only Party Politics, Romany King and the Irish-trained Laura's Beau had anything in reserve.
For just a moment before the Elbow, it seemed possible that Llewellyn and Party Politics might join the sad company of might-have-beens, for whom the 494 yards of the Aintree run-in have turned dreams into nightmares.
But this time, all was well.
Trainer Toby Balding blamed Richard Guest for making too much use of Romany King and this hugely promising eight-year-old did probably start racing a bit too far from home for comfort.
Unusually, all the first three were eight-year-olds and for all of them, with reasonable luck, there will be other days round Aintree.
Nick Gaselee, for whom this famous victory was such a welcome change of luck, rode 90 winners as an amateur before learning his trade in five years as assistant to the great Fulke Walwyn.
Racing: Spare a thought for Adams the Monster-maker
By J A McGrath
THE hard luck story to emerge from this year's Martell Grand National surely cannot come from David Stoddart, the man who sold Party Politics 48 hours before the big race and now looks forward to an agreed bonus of £15,000 on top of the original £80,000 price tag.
No, the true hard luck tale can be related by jockey Andrew Adams, 27, who missed the winning ride after smashing his left knee in a fall at Doncaster in February and remains on the sidelines for the rest of the season.
He ‘made’ this year's Grand National winner, according to trainer Nick Gaselee, teaching the equine giant, nicknamed the Monster Muncher, how to jump and handle himself in a race.
But the ever-smiling Adams, who has been dogged by a catalogue of injuries over the past two years, was in no mood to feel sorry for himself at Party Politics' home-coming, attended by more than 500 people in Upper Lambourn yesterday.
‘It is just one of those things,’ said Adams, attempting to shrug off the ultimate disappointment for a jump jockey.
‘But it is great for the yard that the horse has won the National, and it is great for the lads.’
It seemed that most villagers had turned out to welcome their hero as more than 100 cars filled the field adjacent to Gaselee's Saxon Lodge Stables.
Even Judith Chaplin, the Conservative candidate for Newbury in Thursday's General Election, accepted an invitation to attend, and commented: ‘It sounds like a pretty good double to me — Party Politics wins the National and the Conservatives win the election.’
While Party Politics was a topical tip seized by thousands of once-a-year punters only five days before the General Election, Adams had been talking of the gelding winning a National for nearly two years.
‘I felt after he won the Mandarin Chase at Newbury in 1990 that he would be a Gold Cup horse, but after he was beaten in the Gold Cup then I thought that the Grand National was his race,’ Adams said.
Adams was aboard when Party Politics scored his first victory in a two-and-a-half mile novice chase at Warwick in Feb 1990.
In that race, he defeated Romany King, runner-up to him again on Saturday at Aintree.
On his next outing, the gelding defeated the subsequent Gold Cup winner Garrison Savannah by seven lengths.
But despite this promising start to his career, there were complications to come, as Adams recalls.
‘He made a serious noise in the Gold Cup and was operated on.
He has been hobdayed and had a tie-back but his wind is not that good, even now.
He is very coarse-winded,’ the jockey pointed out.
Over the past two years, Adams has suffered compressed vertebrae, a broken right leg, fractured two ribs and punctured a lung, received two black eyes, a disclocated shoulder, and more recently he smashed his left knee.
‘But I have no intention of quitting now, I have considered the alternatives,’ he says with a grin.
‘No, I hope that I can come back next season to ride Party Politics again and that he could go on to become the type who will run in the Grand National another two or three times.
Corbiere and West Tip did, and I think this horse has a realistic chance of doing the same.’
Carl Llewellyn, 26, the winning substitute, says he owes Adams a few big drinks after the advice he received on how to ride Party Politics.
But those drinks won't be served in Llewellyn's pub, The Star, at Sparsholt, near Wantage, as the place was closed down recently.
Referring to Adams's advice, Llewellyn said: ‘I listened closely and I also learned a lot schooling the horse over nine fences and while watching videos of Andrew riding him.
You just have to sit still and squeeze.’
Party Politics now carries the colours of Mrs Patricia Thompson, who took delivery of the gift horse only two days before the National, a surprise from her husband, David, who owns Cheveley Park Stud, Newmarket.
The new owner and Gaselee must now decide whether to send Party Politics to Fairyhouse for the Irish Grand National.
Morley Street carried off the Aintree Hurdle for the third successive year but was far from convincing in holding off Minorettes Girl.
Being left in front, Morley Street looked a sitting duck approaching the line but scrambled home.
A far more impressive performance was turned in by Katabatic, who defeated three rivals in the Aintree Chase and may be seen out again before the season ends.
Richard Dunwoody, who suffered six falls over the three days at Aintree but ended as champion jockey, hopes to be back for Ascot on Wednesday, while Mark Pitman reportedly suffered no breaks in his final-race fall and has been allowed home.
Adrian Maguire will be out for three weeks.
The Grand National day attendance of 55,383 was nearly 1,000 down on last year and the total attendance over the three days, 87,859, was also marginally down on 1991.
Pistolet Blue, the 1991 Arc de Triomphe third, was surprisingly beaten into second place by Fortune's Wheel in the Prix d'Harcourt at Longchamp yesterday.
WINDSURFING
Calm Birt victorious
MIKE BIRT kept his head in the choppy conditions at Hove to win round one of the British Funboard Cup.
Julian Anderson, last year's British winner and the fastest man on the water, finished in second place after tangling with a submerged rope with former world champion Mark Wood third.
All three sailors will be pleased with their results because only the top five British competitors will qualify for the world championships in Greece.
BRITISH FUNBOARD CUP.
— Premier fleet, men: 1, M Birt; 2, J Anderson.
Women: 1, K Hoffaker; 2, A Claydon.
Racing: Powell shares the pain and ecstasy of fickle job Michael Calvin joins an injured jockey to experience the highs and lows of the business on its big day before a world audience
By MICHAEL CALVIN
BRENDAN POWELL'S pinched face came alive.
His broken body, linked to an electronic muscle stimulator, twitched involuntarily.
He knew his friend was about to win the National.
Excitement reduced Powell's commentary to a stream of consciousness as he sprawled across a sofa in the living room of his Oxfordshire home.
‘Cool Ground is beat,’ he announced, with three fences left.
‘Llewellyn wins it.’
‘Llewellyn is cruising.
Go on Carl.
Yes, Carl.
Now, look at the crowds.
What you've done won't sink in for ages, but you won't want to get off that horse.’
Powell was reliving the afternoon of April 9, 1988, when he won the world's greatest steeplechase on Rhyme ‘N’ Reason.
Suddenly, television captured the gap-toothed, moist-eyed smile of Andy Adams, and reality overwhelmed romance.
‘Oh My God,’ exclaimed Powell, reaching for a cigarette.
‘Poor Lad.
Carl is experiencing the greatest feeling racing can give you.
We are experiencing the worst.’
On Feb 24 Powell's portable telephone rang in the weighing room at Doncaster.
It was trainer Nick Gaselee, enquiring if, as Adams had broken his leg, he was available to ride Party Politics in the National.
‘I'll get back to you,’ Powell promised, mindful of his booking on Ghofar which was to finish a satisfactory 11th.
But within the hour of Gaselee's telephone call Powell was on his way to hospital, his season over.
Catapulted from Sir Noddy in a novice chase, the jockey was in mid-air when he was kicked by the passing Ceva Park.
He knew he had broken his left thigh before he hit the ground.
It was the 15th bone he had broken in his career and it is now held together by two bolts and an 18-inch steel pin.
At 31, he already suffers from arthritis in the mis-shapen left arm that is the legacy of his first National ride, which ended at the third fence.
The understated courage that characterises National Hunt jockeys is not limitless.
‘There are times,’ Powell admitted wearily, ‘when you sit in the ambulance and think to yourself ‘is this all worth it?’‘
Powell drives 72,000 miles a year, has an annual telephone bill of £3,000, and finds £5.75 for his valet from the £77 he earns for every ride.
With prize money declining, he laments that most of the time jump jockeys risk their necks for £150.
He was unconscious throughout Grand National Day in 1991, having ruptured his stomach 48 hours earlier, during a novice hurdle at Aintree.
His injuries were so serious he could have died without prompt treatment.
His career, literally, hung by a thread of tissue which, if it had broken, would have forced him to wear a colostomy bag for life.
‘There's no point in worrying,’ Powell rationalised.
‘If you do it's time to pack up.’
Pain becomes relative.
Powell has never felt worse than the year after he won, when he fell on Stearsby.
‘I just lay on the ground and cried,’ he recalled.
‘I wasn't hurt.
It was just such an anticlimax.’
Together with Richard Dunwoody, another friend and neighbour, he welcomed Llewelyn into the brotherhood of National winners over dinner on Saturday night.
They were united as much by adversity as triumph.
Powell has earned, the hard way, the respect that prompted a dozen jockeys to telephone him in the week before the race.
He had ridden eight of their horses, and studied videos with anyone who asked.
He advised his flatmate Simon Earle, who was to take 200–1 outsider Golden Fox to the 20th fence on his National debut, on the practicalities of Aintree.
‘As soon as you get out there, you're on your own.
Watch where everyone else is, but rely on your instincts.’
Adrian Maguire, his fellow Irishman, called on Friday night.
He was still struggling to come to terms with the disappointment of missing the ride on Cool Ground.
‘You're 20,’ Powell counselled the emerging star.
‘You'll have another 12 to 15 rides in the National.
Remember, you've still had a great season.’
Anthony Tory, prevented from partnering Docklands Express by injury, was next on, seeking solace.
‘I know you're sick, but there's nothing you can do.
If you're injured, you're injured.
That's it,’ he said.
He played the role of gnarled old pro rather well.
‘It's a fickle game, a very fickle game.’
It was when he attempted to argue, ‘I wouldn't be bothered if I never had another ride in the National,’ that he began to give himself away.
He might have insisted, ‘You can never recreate the feeling of winning for the first time,’ but his palms were sweating with anticipation as the tapes went up.
He discovered he missed the 7am canter, the midday ritual of handing in his medical book in the weighing room.
He missed Aintree's colour and clamour, the release of easing his mount to the first fence after the parade.
‘That's when you turn to your mate and say ‘what the hell are we doing here?’
‘Powell said.
He missed, above all, the split-second thrill of soaring over Liverpool's matchless fences.
That is what he dreamed of, as a nine-year-old boy, on Ruby, his first pony.
Brendan Powell envied Carl Llewellyn, at around 4.15pm on Saturday, make no mistake.
Racing: ‘Hasset’ is Best
By Course Correspondent
PENNY HASSET*, who showed marked improvement when encountering heavy ground for the first time at Wolverhampton recently, should make the most of similar conditions on her return to the course for today's Daffodil Handicap (5.0).
The unraced Rockawhile, Henry Cecil's first runner of the 1992 Flat season, can get the Newmarket trainer off to a flying start in the Bluebell Fillies' Stakes (4.30).
Saint Ciel, who is fit from hurdling, is fancied for the Hyacinth Handciap (3.30) and Have A Nightcap is reportedly in good shape for the Crocus Claiming Stakes (4.0).
Racing: Maamur fancied
By Tony Stafford
THE most interesting race on the Wolverhampton programme today is the Hyacinth Handicap, in which recent acquisition One For The Pot makes his debut for the Mick Naughton stable.
Naughton, who paid 15,000gns for the gelding last month, plans a campaign over fences for him next winter and he may find that Dai Burchell's four-year-old Maamur will prove too good for him.
Burchell bought Maamur last year for 8,500gns, following three runs in decent maiden company which yielded two second places.
Maamur showed, when winning a maiden race at Southwell last month by 10 lengths, that he has the potential to develop into a useful stayer and he is napped this afternoon.
Racing: WHAT THE JOCKEYS SAID
CARL LLEWELLYN (Party Politics): ‘As soon as he jumped the first fence I gained in confidence.
For most horses it's a big fence, but to him it was no more than a hurdle.
I had a marvellous ride all the way round and he just took me into the lead.
In fact, it was earlier than I wanted to be in front, but then he galloped on in his stride all the way to the line.
You have to feel sorry, though, for Andy Adams.
RICHARD GUEST (Romany King): ‘I've had a bit of a rollicking [For not riding with more restraint].
I don't see what else I could have done.
He was going so well I didn't want to disappoint him.
For a young horse he's run a tremendous race.
He hasn't made a semblance of a mistake.
He's just a little immature at present, but I don't think you'll see a better Aintree horse.’
CONOR O'DWYER (Laura's Beau): ‘He had plenty to do coming onto the racecourse, but finished in great style.
Had the ground been softer, I think I'd have won.’
PETER SCUDAMORE (Docklands Express): ‘I got a wonderful ride off him.
It was a great thrill to ride Docklands Express and he jumped superbly.
From Becher's second-time I was always just struggling, though jumping the third-last I was in the right position and had every chance.
But in the end he was not quite good enough.’
NEALE DOUGHTY (Twin Oaks): ‘The delay at the start didn't affect him at all, but he had too much weight and the ground was probably too fast.’
ANDY ORKNEY (Old Applejack): ‘He jumped really well and gave me a tremendous ride.
For a moment, crossing the Melling Road, I thought we might nearly be placed but that's when he started to tie up.
He jumped from fence to fence and never put a foot wrong.’
CHRIS GRANT (Stay On Tracks): ‘He tired at the Melling Road second-time after being poised to challenge for the lead.
They were going a good gallop all the way and it found him out.’
MARTIN LYNCH (Cool Ground): ‘Basically he gave me a great ride.
He jumped tremendously considering it was his first time over those fences.
I knew at Becher's second-time that we would not really get involved.
I suppose his busy season probably took its toll.
If it were not for the fact that he was one of the favourites you'd have been delighted but as a Gold Cup winner I had to feel a bit disappointed.
If he were aimed specifically at the race another time he would probably go very close.
HYWEL DAVIES (Ghofar): ‘He gave me a super ride but didn't quite get the trip.
He was rather braver than I expected and jumped the fences very well.
I daren't drop him in, just in case he became a little less enthusiastic.
He's the type of horse to win the ‘John Hughes’ but if you could ever get him settled nicely and bring him through later, he'd run a great race in the National again.’
PETER NIVEN (Rubika): ‘Mine just wasn't fast enough to stay with the leaders but he still gave me a wonderful ride.’
CHARLIE SWAN (Roc de Prince): ‘The ground was a bit fast for him.
He still jumped well, but if it had been a bit softer he would have been up there.’
MICHAEL BOWLBY (Willsford): ‘He jumped great and ran a super race.
I was slightly surprised that he should get to the front so early, in his other races he's usually slow to get going.
As the ground had dried out it was also a surprise that he should go so quickly on it and he just tired at Valentine's second-time.
A great ride.’
RICHARD DUNWOODY (Brown Windsor): ‘Jumping Becher's he went left and collided in the air with Forest Ranger and came off worse.
He'd changed his legs three strides off the fence to put himself right and always goes left at his fences.
Up to that point I was very happy.
I wanted to just pop away over the first few for him to get his confidence.
Until the mishap he was giving me a great feel and I was delighted how he was going in the blinkers.’
Sport: APRIL 6–13, 1956THIS WAS THE WEEK WHEN…
By BRIAN STATER
KEN VENTURI became one of the unluckiest men in golf when he missed the chance to take the Masters as an amateur.
A Walker Cup player from San Francisco, Venturi (pictured) had rounds of 66, 69 and 75 at Augusta, to lead the Masters by four strokes going into the final round.
But the last day was wrecked by fierce, gusting winds, and Venturi limped round in 80, while Jack Burke, a veteran pro, made up eight shots with a 71 to win.
Venturi turned professional and met with considerable success.
In the Masters of 1960 he finished with 70 for a total of 283 and celebrated ‘victory’.
But Arnold Palmer, needing a birdie at each of the last two holes, sank a 30ft putt at the 17th and hit an approach shot to within 6ft at the last.
IN THE SAME WEEK: Micky Stewart, now England's cricket manager, was on tour with an E W Swanton XI, in the West Indies.
Stewart was also a fine footballer and his club, Corinthian Casuals, reached the Amateur Cup final, against Bishop Auckland.
The final was drawn, and club officials requested that Stewart be released to take part in the replay.
The American Consul-General in Port of Spain granted Stewart an emergency visa for his dash through Caracas and on to New York, and Stewart set off at dawn on the Tuesday, hoping to reach Ayresome Park in time for the replay on Saturday.
All went to plan, until he was delayed by a revolution in Venezuela, the consequences of which were that Stewart missed the replay which Casuals lost 4–1.
Earlier that season Stewart had turned down the chance of an amateur international cap for England against Wales in order to play for Casuals against Wimbledon.
Later the same year, he was to be denied a place in the British Olympic football team on the grounds that he was a professional cricketer.
FINALLY: Those who feel there is too much cricket would have winced at the suggestion made by the Australian authorities, who proposed that series against England be expanded from five Tests to seven to assist the finances of their domestic game.
The Australian captain also suggested that the number of umpires be increased from two to three, though only two would be on the pitch at one time.
He argued: ‘Three men, each standing for two two-hour sessions in a six-hour day would give better service than two men sharing the burden uninterrupted throughout the day.’
Athletics: Krabbe four-year ban lifted by commission
By Iain Macleod in Darmstadt
GERMANY'S double world sprint champion, Katrin Krabbe, and her colleagues, Grit Breuer and Silke Moller, who had been accused of tampering with a urine sample, had a four-year suspension lifted here yesterday, clearing the way for the three athletes to participate in this summer's Olympic Games in Barcelona.
The ruling by the German athletic federation (DLV) came after a 14-hour hearing stretching over two days which had firstly proposed a reduction of the ban from four years to three months, before further deliberations resulted in the adjudication lifting the suspensions because of anomalies in the testing procedure.
The decision of the DLV's legal commission was greeted with incredulity.
Tony Ward, spokesman for the British Athletics Federation, said after yesterday's decision: ‘I understand the testing procedures were incorrect.
They botched it.
Of course, it's a tragedy when the testing system doesn't work.
You can't right doping if you've not got everything right.
‘It's actually bad news in the war against drugs.
Ben Johnson was a step forward; this whole thing is step back.’
As the credibility of the DLV lay in shreds, the greater consequences for world sport were being considered by, among others, Norbert Laurens, the lawyer for the DLV.
‘This is going to make dope-testing very difficult,’ he said.
‘We are surprised at the decision and we fear the effect it could have on the battle against doping.
‘This is a most important case and we must know all the aspects and circumstances.
The IAAF do have the authority to rule.’
Istvan Gyulai, the secretary-general of the International Amateur Athletics Federation said that an official report was expected soon from the DLV and did not want to comment until then.
The IAAF are expected to ratify the DLV decision.
The DLV had recently banned the athletes after irregularities appeared when they underwent an out-of-competition test in South Africa on Jan 24.
All three provided identical urine samples.
Guenter Emig, the head of the commission, said the athletes were free to compete again, as the case against them had not been proved to the extent necessary for the suspension to be upheld.
Mr Emig said there were gaps in the evidence and that, in the commission's view, the South African track and field federation could not conduct a doping control as their membership of the International Amateur Athletic Federation was still under suspension.
The DLV, who were not involved in the testing, should not have ‘given away all rights to the South African federation,’ he added.
He claimed the South African federation were not legitimately entitled to conduct the testing, and they had not been conducted according to DLV rules.
Reinhard Rauball, the athletes' lawyer, had said on Saturday: ‘The control system of the DLV has many gaps; more than the DLV might ever have thought.’
Doubts were also cast on the procedural elements of the case.
Mr Emig questioned whether the urine samples examined were those actually given; whether certain people present at the doping test had the right to be there and why the transportation of the samples had taken so long — five days, including three days at Cologne airport.
There was also a suggestion that the seals used on the samples may have been out-of-date.
‘The bottles in which the samples were placed were not sealed properly according to IAAF rules,’ said Mr Emig.
‘And the large amount of time that the journey took also cast doubt.
It was proved that the secure transport of the samples was not guaranteed.’
Jos Hermens, agent and manager to Krabbe and Breuer, said later: ‘The pack [containing the samples]that was used was not meant for doping control.
It means that anyone can get into the urine samples and do whatever they want.
Mr Hermens added: ‘Anyone can order the seals in the same number range and it would be easy for anyone who has the seals to open them.
You have to code the numbers of the athletes and they are supposed to be on the inside so you can't read them, but they were outside so you could — you could see which one was from Krabbe, Breuer and Moller.
‘They could break the seal and get the urine from the person they wanted and put on a seal that anyone can order.
I cannot be 100 per cent sure the girls did not manipulate them but you have to be 100 per cent sure that they did it before you can ban a person for four years.
But they have told me they did not do it,’ Mr Hermens added.
For the athletes, the decision was a vindication of the the innocence they had protested all along.
‘I am very happy,’ said Krabbe.
‘It's a weight off my shoulders.
We always knew we were innocent.
Now we are going to get back into training.’
The verdict of the commission is now legally binding.
Although the IAAF do have a three-month ban for minor offences like using ephedrine, manipulation of a test is equivalent to a fully-fledged steroid offence — a point Mr Emig twice missed during the proceedings.
He also said that part of the deal would be that the IAAF would not be informed that a doping offence had taken place which, given that the athletes were suspended by the IAAF, suggested that Mr Emig was not fully conversant with international regulations.