

Souness in hospital for heart bypass operation
By Nigel Bunyan
MR GRAEME Souness, the 38-year-old manager of Liverpool football club, was admitted to a private hospital yesterday to undergo major open heart surgery.
Mr Souness is expected to have a triple bypass operation later today to relieve the narrowing or blocking of his arteries.
His admission to the Alexandra Hospital in Cheadle, Cheshire, under the assumed name of Graham Ferguson, came 24 hours after he saw his team draw 1-1 draw against Portsmouth in the FA Cup semi-final at Highbury.
He will still be in hospital when the replay is held next Monday at Villa Park.
Although it is not known when he will be able to return to his £350,000-a-year job, he is expected to lead a normal life within three months.
Mr Souness, a father of three who is separated from his wife Danielle, has continued to train daily even though his playing career ended two years ago, running for 20 minutes and spending 40 minutes on exercises.
He also plays five-a-side soccer three times a week.
His exercise regime is supported by strict adherence to a diet, and together they have enabled him to retain a muscular frame with what he claims is zero body fat.
He does not smoke, but despite his diet, he has a penchant for champagne and his favourite food is said to be lobster.
Always concerned as a player about fitness, the former Liverpool and Scotland captain's dedication to it was heightened by his spell with the Italian club, Sampdoria, which he joined in June 1984.
When he returned to Liverpool as manager, he introduced a more rigorous fitness regime.
Yesterday Mr David Moores, the club's chairman and a close friend, said: ‘He is such a fitness fanatic that last year, when he was supposed to be on five days’ holiday at my house, he was on my front lawn every morning doing exercises’.
Mr Souness, who will be 39 in May, drove himself to the hospital just after midday in his £73,000 Mercedes 500 SL coupe, accompanied by his girlfriend, Karen Levy, 32, a former actress and television show hostess.
Asked about the four-hour operation, he smiled and replied: ‘I can't say I'm looking forward to it, but it's essential, so it has to be done.
It has to be the biggest shock I've ever experienced.’
He said of his team: ‘I want them to win the FA Cup for a start.
Anything else would be a bonus.’
Club officials disclosed that Mr Souness had kept news of the operation secret from the players so they could concentrate on the match against Portsmouth.
He finally told them when they stopped at a restaurant on their return from London on Sunday afternoon.
Mr Moores said although he knew Mr Souness was ill, he did not know the extent of his condition until after the game.
He added: ‘I am sure, knowing his character, he will be back all guns firing.
The club are thinking about him and rooting for him.’
He hoped Mr Souness would be well enough to resume training with the Liverpool squad in July.
In the meantime, his assistant, Mr Ronnie Moran, would act as caretaker manager.
Mr Moores said the manager had been worried for some time that he was not feeling as well as he thought he should.
‘He saw the club doctor, who said he should have some tests.
That is when they decided to get him in.’
Mr Souness was appointed manager last April, succeeding Mr Kenny Dalglish, his former team-mate at Liverpool, who had walked out after finding the pressures of the job too much.
Ironically, he is now back in soccer management with Second Division Blackburn Rovers.
The Alexandra Hospital, run by American Medical Internation, is one of the largest independent acute care hospitals in Britain and is only eight miles away from Mr Souness's Cheshire home.
He is expected to spend up to 10 days in a £215-a-night suite which includes a single room equipped with private bath, shower, toilet, telephone and colour television.
The operation will cost between £10,000 and £12,000.
Mrs Levy, the estranged wife of a Manchester businessman, said: ‘Graeme's very brave.
He is feeling OK and I am confident he will pull through.’
CORRECTION
In yesterday's Daily Telegraph we incorrectly identified the former England cricket player as Sir Denis Compton.
He is Mr Denis Compton CBE.
Letter to the Editor: Jungle fever
IT IS as well that the Princess Royal has a salty sense of humour.
Last night she bowled along to the Royal Geographical Society to attend a lecture by Edward Whitley, a young writer recently returned from Madagascar with Gerald Durrell.
Whitley, a willowy former City banker, peppered his talk with literary bon mots and some distinctly fast verse.
He recalled an evening's carousing in the jungle when he challenged Durrell to compose some verse in honour of the ‘unrhymable’ Mrs Araminta Whitley.
Durrell took a slug of whisky and broke into an immediate ‘I'm not able to begin ‘ta /praise the wondrous Araminta /I would like to say with flourish /what kind thoughts of her I nourish /A tangle though my thoughts get inta /describing love as Araminta’.
As Whitley describes in Gerald Durrell's Army (John Murray), the following day Durrell awoke with a raging fever and had to be airlifted to hospital.
Whitley was left to escort their 14 lemurs back to civilisation by train.
‘Lemurs are a delicacy in Madagascar and it was all I could do to stop my fellow passengers eating them,’ he says.
WINDOW sign in Martock, Somerset: ‘No political canvassing please.
Do know, not telling.’
RACING
Spotlight on Arazi in Saint-Cloud test
By HOTSPUR (J A McGrath)
CRITICAL eyes will be focusing on Arazi at Saint-Cloud today when the French-trained colt will be out to prove he is still worthy of holding favouritism for the premier Classics on both sides of the Atlantic.
Being favourite for the Kentucky Derby, run on dirt at Churchill Downs on May 2, as well as the Ever Ready Derby, on turf at Epsom on June 3, is a rarity in itself; perhaps more a comment on jet-age attitudes to travelling horses than Arazi's versatility.
But Coral's offers of 6-4 about the colt winning in Kentucky; 5-1 about his tasting success at Epsom, and 6-1 the double will be revised dramatically should Arazi not cruise home in today's one-mile Prix Omnium II.
Trainer Francois Boutin says not to expect too much.
‘Arazi is 60 to 70 per cent wound up for this race,’ he points out, ‘but we have had no interruptions in preparing him.’
Against eight opponents — two of them, Akiko and Carson Bay, are his pacemakers — Arazi should have little trouble in confirming his booking to Louisville if reproducing the brilliance that saw him top the International Classification and America's Experimental Handicap.
It would be surprising to those who witnessed Arazi's incredible run through the field to win the Breeders' Cup Juvenile in November to learn of any decline.
But if this colt was beaten today, he would certainly not be the first winter favourite for a Classic to flop first time out as a three-year-old.
Arazi underwent an operation for an arthritic knee in the United States, shortly after winning at Churchill Downs, a precautionary move by vets which Boutin considered unnecessary.
The trainer now reports: ‘Arazi is an intelligent horse, much more mature, and in his work he has been doing just what he has to do.’
The colt's main opposition today should come from Criquette Head's Voleris, who won his only start by three lengths at Saint-Cloud in November when he also beat Supermec, who renews rivalry today.
Steve Cauthen will be having his first race-ride on Arazi, but Pat Valenzuela, who rode Arazi in the Breeders' Cup Juvenile, is scheduled to be reunited with the colt in the Kentucky Derby next month.
Willie Carson looks likely to continue his association with Robert Sangster's Rodrigo de Triano in Saturday's Greenham Stakes at Newbury as Badie, who belongs to Carson's retaining owner Sheikh Hamdan Al-Maktoum, looks certain to miss the race and run instead in the European Free Handicap at Newmarket on April 15.
The French-trained Lion Cavern, who was beaten a length by Rodrigo de Triano in the Middle Park Stakes, has been confirmed a definite starter for the Newbury race, which has attracted 13 acceptors.
The Paul Cole-trained Magic Ring, another Greenham entry, has been backed to 12-1 from 16-1 for the 2,000 Guineas with Ladbrokes in anticipation of a good showing at the weekend.
Muhtarram, entered for the Tetley Bitter Classic Trial at Thirsk on Saturday, is more likely to run in the Craven Stakes at Newmarket on April 16.
Combermere is the 8-1 favourite with Ladbrokes for the Scottish National at Ayr on Saturday, but with expected soft ground, Martin Pipe's Riverside Boy (10-1) might prove the value.
Racing: Record odds
HISTORY was made at Kelso yesterday when Countess Crossett was backed at 5,000-1, the biggest price ever laid on a British racecourse.
The mare, who finished ninth in the Sprouston Claiming Hurdle, was laid at the four-figure price by two Tattersalls bookmakers before being returned at 500-1.
Kelso also holds the record for the highest-priced winner, Equinoctial, at 250-1 in a handicap hurdle in November, 1990.
ICE HOCKEY
Leading four have Wembley in sight
By Howard Bass
FOUR front-runners have emerged as likely Wembley qualifiers half-way through the Heineken Championship quarter-final series — Norwich & Peterborough Pirates, Nottingham Panthers, Cardiff Devils and champions Durham Wasps.
The Pirates were three down at Humberside before rallying to take the lead but the Seahawks salvaged a 6-6 draw with a late goal by Grant Slater.
Murrayfield Racers, with just a point from three games, appear destined to miss Wembley for only the second time in nine years, but were unlucky to lose 5-4 at Durham.
Cardiff recorded two emphatic victories in 24 hours, winning 9-2 against Whitley Warriors and 13-2 at Billingham.
Bracknell Bees look set to stay in the Heineken Premier Division and Fife Flyers are likely to be relegated.
A Darin Fridgen hat-trick inspired Bracknell to a6-2 win over Basingstoke Beavers whileFife won 12-6 at Romford, Richard Laplante scoring five.
Sheffield Steelers are sweeping the opposition aside in their bid to gain league entry, while Trafford Metros, Medway Bears and Streatham Redskins are competing for the other vacancy.
Streatham beat previously undefeated Trafford 10-6 in a game which saw seven players receive match penalties.
HEINEKEN CH'SHIP. — Qtr-final Series: Billingham 2, Cardiff 13; Durham 5, Murrayfield 4; Humberside 6, Norwich & Peterborough 6.
HEINEKEN LGE. — Promotion play-offs: Bracknell 6, Basingstoke 2; Romford 6, Fife 12.
Entry play-offs: Chelmsford 15, Livingston 4; Medway 7, Oxford 2; Sheffield 16, Blackburn 3; Streatham 10, Trafford 6.
ANGLING
Britons go to aid of Czechoslovakia
By Colin Dyson
PAYING rivals to compete against you is not exactly commonplace in sport, but it is effectively what some of Britain's top fly fishermen were doing at Rutland Water at the weekend.
Because the Czechoslovakian team could not afford to take part in the British leg of the European Grand Slam event next June, a competition was arranged to raise the necessary £600 to cover their expenses.
Bob Church, England's Home International team manager who organised the event, said: ‘I talked myself into it last year at the world championships in New Zealand.
I asked the Czech manager if they would be at Rutland Water in June and he said they would not be able to afford it.
I said we would pay for them, and thanks to some of our leading fly fishermen that promise has been fulfilled.’
English anglers have dominated the Gland Slam in recent years but the Eastern Europeans are highly regarded with both Poland and Czechoslovakia former winners of the world championship.
Sixty fishermen turned out for the competition on Rutland Water, which had opened for the new season only four days earlier, after an initial stocking with 40,000 trout.
Early returns were showing an unusually high catch average of 5.75 fish per rod.
The anglers were not expected to match that catch rate, as the most effective early season methods were not permitted by the rules, but the winners more than doubled it.
Tony Curtis, from Peterborough, landed 12 Rainbow trout to score a narrow win over Simon Hodges, from Bath, who managed to land 12 smaller fish.
Racing: Stamina test to suit Dari Sound
By Tony Stafford
DARI SOUND and Peak District, winners over two miles at Beverley last month, clash in today's Levy Board Handicap, a 20-runner affair over an extra furlong at Pontefract.
It is always interesting to note how handicappers assess maiden race form in comparison with sellers, and in allotting Peak District a 17lb higher rating than Dari Sound, the official may have been over-harsh on the former.
Admittedly, Peak District was following in the wake of Star Player, who had won the same Beverley event last season, but it is most unlikely that this fully-exposed six-year-old — hard fit from two wins in all-weather hurdles — will ever aspire to the achievements of Star Player, who went on to win three other races, including the Chester Cup.
Dari Sound was also occupied over hurdles but had been out of action since running slightly disappointingly in a two-and-a-half-mile race at Uttoxeter early in December.
The four-year-old won a juvenile hurdle before that and it seems trainer Jimmy FitzGerald has brought about considerable improvement by asking his four-year-old to tackle much longer distances on the Flat than last year.
Dari Sound overcame interference before getting up inside the final furlong at Beverley and today's extra distance may suit him even better.
Typically at this stage of the season, there is a rag-bag of assorted hurdlers opposing this pair, and Cabochon, the top-weight, while perhaps disappointing of late, remains the class horse.
The mud-loving Cabochon, won last year's Ascot Stakes, and a reproduction of that form would make him hard to beat here.
Yorkshire Holly is on a down path over hurdles, but on his best Flat form remains on a workable mark, while good jump winners Bonanza and Marlin Dancer would need only to show a glimpse of that ability to be dangerous off bottom weight.
Supertop ran well for a long way in the season's opener at Doncaster.
His trainer Peter Harris won a race at Folkestone the following week and Supertop, with the rain-softened ground he probably needs, can hold off the likely challenge from winning hurdler Sunset Reins Free in the Barbican Handicap.
POINT-TO-POINT
Farthing soon bounces back
By Hugh Condry
JUSTIN FARTHING wasted no time picking up the winning thread following his disappointment at Aintree with the Martell Fox Hunters' favourite, Rushing Wild.
He won with his next ride, Archie's Nephew, in the Blackmore and Sparkford Vale Members race on Saturday.
Archie's Nephew, a stable-companion of Rushing Wild, was scoring for the first time this season, having acted as a schoolmaster for novice riders in several earlier runs.
Farthing made full use of his stamina, taking the lead early.
Though Archie's Nephew could find nothing extra over the final fences —‘He's only got one gear,’ said his rider — he held off the challenge of market leader Spring Fun by a neck.
Robert Alner, Spring Fun's rider, was also second when Elver Season, 7-2 on for the Open, offered surprisingly little resistance when tackled by Timlyn.
Andrew Kelway, confident of Timlyn's acceleration, tracked Elver Season before pouncing on the run to the final fence.
Though Alner also failed to win with his other three rides, he stays in the lead for the Daily Telegraph Men's Championship with a tally of 16 — four ahead of Philip Scholfield.
Alison Dare paid her first visit to the course and extended her advantage in the Women's Championship when winning the Ladies race on Mendip Express.
This took her seasonal score to 10 — three ahead of Jill Dawson.
Mendip Express, who was winning his 37th race, started at slight odds against, thanks to strong local support for Burannpour, who could never get in a blow at the leader once Miss Dare decided to go.
Moor Scope battled on gamely to retake the lead from Impy Condor on the flat in the Confined and Farmer Tom was always going like a winner in the Restricted race, in which Alner and even-money favourite Baron Bob crashed at the second fence.
David Pipe was helping his father at Aintree so the ride on Martin Pipe's Ring The Pipeline in the Maiden (Div 2) went to Nick Moore, 19, an assistant at the Nicholashayne yard.
He made good use of the opportunity, bringing his horse round the outside of two leaders on the final bends to hit the front before the last.
Alison Dare will be in action at today's Heythrop meeting.
She rides Le Kingdom in the Ladies race.
Racing: Riviera Rainbow is Best
By Course Correspondent
RIVIERA RAINBOW*, who opened his account with a facile victory in an apprentices' event on the all-weather track at Lingfield Park last month, does not appear harshly treated in today's Barbican Handicap (2.45) at Pontefract.
This Rainbow Quest gelding seemed to lose his way after earning a rating of 82 in his first three races last season, but his 10-length victory over Smiling Chief at Lingfield showed he retains plenty of ability.
Riviera Rainbow's success was achieved off a mark of 52 and a 5lb rise by the handicapper may not be sufficient to foil a follow-up here.
Nominator was no match for the Barry Hills-trained Touch Silver in Doncaster's Brocklesby Stakes, but Reg Hollinshead's juvenile will know more about what is required today and can put that experience to good use when tackling the Beast Fair Maiden Stakes (4.15).
Bonanza, twice successful over jumps, can make full use of a light weight in the Levy Board Handicap (4.45) and Mossy Rose, who came off worst in a four-way photo-finish at Lingfield last month, is fancied for the Hardwick Handicap (5.45).
Rugby League: Wigan set record with 13 tourists
By John Whalley
WIGAN'S dominance of the domestic game was further underlined yesterday, with 13 of the squad named in Great Britain's party for the summer tour to Australia, New Zealand and Papua New Guinea.
The Wigan contingent is a record by a considerable margin, with David Myers, recently transfer-listed at £125,000 because of the lack of first-team opportunities, the only English player from their regular 18-man squad missing out.
Wigan held the previous record of eight players for the 1950 tour and there can be no argument about their representation in a 32-man squad which is ‘stronger and better equipped’ than any sent previously, according to Malcolm Reilly, the British coach.
Joe Lydon's impressive form at full-back, combined with an ability to play anywhere in the three-quarters, sees him make his third tour, while the man for whom he has deputised in recent weeks, Steve Hampson, goes on his first tour.
Martin Offiah, another with two tours behind him, Shaun Edwards, Andy Gregory, Andy Platt, Denis Betts, Phil Clarke, Neil Cowie, Billy McGinty, Kelvin Skerrett, Martin Dermott and Ian Lucas, all with varying degrees of international experience, complete the Wigan contingent.
McGinty and Cowie, both bargain buys this season, are uncapped, joining St Helens forward Sonny Nickle and Hull KR centre Graeme Hallas as the squad's newcomers.
Hallas, 21, missed an entire season two years ago with glandular fever and has started only 60 games for Hull KR, though he has been one of their mainstays.
Nickle moved to St Helens from Sheffield in the close season and, despite injuries, has managed to establish himself in the side.
Not surprisingly, Reilly has gone for tried and tested players, with few surprises, as he prepares for the most important assignment in his five-year international coaching reign.
Reilly is confident that rest will cure Jonathan Davies's persistent groin problem but must be concerned about Lucas's broken wrist which threatens to keep him out of next month's Cup final.
With six weeks of the season left, Reilly illustrated his concern about further injuries with 13 unnamed players on standby.
As expected, Ellery Hanley, who toured four years ago, is captain, with Garry Schofield, making a record fourth tour, his deputy.
Scrum-half Peter Sterling, 32, one of Australia's finest players, announced his retirement yesterday after suffering a severe shoulder injury.
RACKETS
Boone and Prenn on top
JOHN PRENN and Willie Boone, both former world champions, lived up to their second-place seedings in this year's Lacoste British Open doubles rackets championships at Queen's Club, with a 15-1, 15-9, 15-7, 5-15, 15-0 victory over Terry Whatley and Giles Palmer, writes Dudley Macdonald.
Whatley and Palmer were only able to trouble Prenn and Boone in the penultimate game, when they both served effectively.
Otherwise Boone's pace and Prenn's good-length serving proved too much for them.
SHOOTING
Olympic place is the target
By LESLIE HOWCROFT
JOHN ROLFE and Adrian Breton will be competing for a British Olympic place at the weekend when the rapid fire pistol match in the World Cup Tournament in Los Angeles will be the decider for Barcelona, writes Leslie Howcroft.
The British party of seven, who start shooting today, also includes the Seoul silver medal winner, Alister Allan, and David Chapman, who won a gold for running target at the last Commonwealth Games.
Both are likely to go to Barcelona.
BRITISH SQUAD: M Gault (pre pistol & air pistol); N Wallace (air rifle); A Allan (prone rifle & 3 × 4); P Scanlan (prone rifle); D Chapman (running target); A Breton & J Rolfe (rapid fire pistol).
POLO
Hine inspires England win
By Eric Weil
ENGLAND beat Guatemela 14-8 on the second day of the third Limited Handicap World Championship at the San Cristobal Polo Club in Santiago yesterday, writes Eric Weil.
England, with Andrew Hine and James Lucas playing well in midfield, never looked back after taking a 3-1 lead in the first chukka.
The championship continues today when Argentina, the other team in England's group, play Guatemela.
ENGLAND: H Brett 1 (1 goal), A Hine 5 (6 goals), J Lucas 5 (6 goals), J Dixon 3 (1 goal).
Chukka scores (Guatemela received one-goal handicap): 3-1, 6-1, 8-2, 10-4, 12-5, 14-8.
TABLE TENNIS
Douglas scales the ranking heights
By JOHN WOODFORD
DESMOND DOUGLAS, 36, a legend in British table tennis over the past decade has moved up a place to No 3 on the new England men's ranking list, writes John Woodford.
Douglas, who has retired from the England squad, has lost only twice this season — to the No 1 Carl Prean at the English National's final and nine days ago in the final of the Essex Open to Alan Cooke, who also moves up a place to No 4.
Chen Xinhua, the English champion retains his No 2 spot behind Prean, but the gap has narrowed to 44 points.
Div 1 Nth: Wellingborough 7, Norwich 1 — NFD Grove 8, Liverpool 0 — West Warwicks 8, Lincoln 0.
Div 1 Sth: Cardiff 6, Larkhall 2 — Horsham Dolphin 6, Ellenborough 2 — NFD Grove 5, Pontypool 3 — Bath 2, Launceston 6.
AUSTRALIAN RULES
Madden row flares as Essendon break duck
FOUR goals from David Flood helped Essendon to record their first win of the season in the Australian Football League as they beat Footscray 91-69 at the Western Oval, writes John Jelley.
However, the result was overshadowed by a row between the club's longest-serving player, Simon Madden, 34, and coach Kevin Sheedy.
Madden has been used in short bursts during the Bombers' opening games and the ruckman has complained that he has not been given enough playing time and that this is affecting his play.
Sheedy may think that Madden, after a club record 375 games and with more than 570 goals during his career, is perhaps coming towards the end of his tether.
However, the public row will do little to build confidence at Essendon.
RUGBY IN WALES
Cup favourites to meet Pontypridd
By Edward Bevan
LLANELLI, the Schweppes Cup holders, have been drawn against Pontypridd in the first of the back-to-back semi-finals of the competition, to be played at the National Stadium on May 4.
Llanelli, who are favourites to retain the trophy, have won the competition seven times since 1972 while Pontypridd were beaten finalists in 1979.
In the other game Swansea, the Heineken League Division One leaders, will be involved in their third successive semi-final against Newport, the team they beat 13-9 in the 1979 final.
The Welsh Rugby Union, meanwhile, have announced the setting up of a new National Development Player Committee (NDPC) which will assist senior players of international potential, and also monitor and evaluate more technical and administrative elements associated with the performance of national senior squads.
This development coincides with the recent long-term appointment of Robert Norster, the Welsh team manager, and Alan Davies, the national coach, who will shortly be moving home from Nottingham to Wales.
The NDPC will consist of two permanent members -Denis Evans, the secretary of the Welsh Rugby Union, and Jeff Young, their technical director — and three other appointments to be made on an annual basis.
The three members who have been chosen this year are Ron Waldron and John Ryan, two former national coaches, and John Maclean, one of the union's national representatives who is also chairman of Llanelli.
By next month the committee will have created three separate national squads consisting of two senior (A and B), an over-21 development squad and a national under-21 squad, each consisting of more than 50 players.
SCHWEPPES CUP.
— Semi-final draw: Llanelli v Pontypridd, Newport v Swansea.
Ties to be played at the National Stadium on May 4.
Wales Under-15s eventually ran out easy winners by 28-12 against their Scottish counterparts in Edinburgh for their ninth consecutive success at this level.
The visitors gained far more possession than Scotland with Welsh fly-half Lee Jarvis's boot dominating the game with 16 points — including one penalty kick from the halfway line.
CYCLING
Longbottom outwits rivals
PETER LONGBOTTOM, at 32, Britain's most experienced amateur international, outwitted a 100-strong pro-am field to win the Archer Grand Prix, second round of the Star Trophy national road race series, over a 107-mile Chilterns course.
The GS Strada rider escaped with two miles remaining and, after being joined by Mark Lovatt (Congleton CC), ‘jumped’ his rival at the yellow flag with 200 metres to go.
The first 16 riders were credited with the same time — 4hr 6min 49sec — almost 14 minutes faster than last year.
Rugby Union: Coker keeps Harlequins guessing
By John Mason
WHILE Harlequins were yesterday contemplating the Mystery of the Missing Lock, Leicester, the club they beat in Saturday's Pilkington Cup semi-finals, were gearing themselves for another wearing match tonight.
The Quins were embarrassed to discover yesterday that Troy Coker, the wandering Wallaby, had already left England in readiness to play for Queensland against Fiji in Suva this weekend.
Would Coker, Australia's World Cup No 8, be back for the Pilkington final on May 2 or would selection requirements 12,000 miles away take precedence?
No-one in London knew for sure yesterday, though on Saturday evening Coker said he would be available, jet-lag permitting.
While Quins are in danger of attracting even more coconuts for continuing to select a player who plainly is no longer fully resident in England, Leicester have to pick themselves up after a cup defeat that, effectively, ended the hunt for any of the season's trophies.
Yet tonight's re-arranged Courage League match against title-chasing Northampton at Welford Road has all the trappings of a top representative occasion.
The match is all-ticket.
All records for attendance, which will be around 12,500, at a mid-week club match in England will be beaten.
Northampton have sold their 3,500 allocation and Leicester advise those without tickets to stay away.
None will be available on the gate.
Twelve of the Leicester side who lost to Quins are back on duty, led by the doughty John Wells.
Dean Richards has taken a well-earned holiday in Cyprus — and is unfit, anyway.
Rory Underwood is on duty with the RAF and Gerry Ainscough, who lives in Lancashire, cannot travel.
Tony Underwood moves from the right wing to deputise for his brother.
Simon Povoas, the replacement on Saturday, stands in for Richards again and Jez Harris, a bench reserve of late, gets a run at outside-half instead of Ainscough.
Northampton, who must win to maintain a league challenge to Orrell and Bath, the front-runners, are without Ian Hunter, who damaged a hamstring on Hong Kong Sevens duty, and Tim Rodber, the England and Army forward, who, like Underwood, has to give Service duties priority.
Frank Packman tries his running skills at full-back in place of Hunter with Ben Ward succeeding him on the right.
Rodber is replaced by Simon Foale.
Outside-half John Steele starts the match needing five more points to reach 400 for the season.
The milestone, though, interests him less than victory.
Alex Wyllie, the former New Zealand coach who retired after the World Cup last year, was due in South Africa yesterday to begin a six-month coaching stint.
Wyllie, who played during New Zealand's 1970 tour of the Republic, will help to prepare Eastern Province for their Currie Cup challenge.
BASKETBALL
Kingston caught out again
By Richard Taylor
LONDON TOWERS caught Carlsberg League champions Roland Kingston with their guard down for the second time this season by defeating them 103-97 at the Michael Sobell Centre, Islington, on Sunday night.
Kingston, assured of the First Division title after beating runners-up Thames Valley 91-69 last Wednesday, trailed London 65-40 at the interval.
In December, London inflicted Kingston's first domestic defeat of the season with a one-point win in the second leg of the NatWest Trophy semi-finals, though Kingston went on to retain the title.
The best-of-three series in the Division One play-offs open on Friday night with Leicester City Riders at home to Worthing.
Birmingham Bullets are at home to Kingston on Saturday while Hemel play Thames Valley.
The following day Derby entertain London.
The four winners play in the semi-finals at Wembley Arena on Saturday May 2 with the final the following day.
Division Two men's club Ware and Third Division North London have each been fined £150 for failing to fulfil fixtures at the weekend.
North London's status is now under threat after failing to travel to Leicester, as they have to reapply for League membership after finishing in the bottom four places of the division.
LAWN TENNIS
Javer pounces on errors
By Barry Martin in Tokyo
BRITAIN'S Monique Javer took advantage of an erratic performance by Dominique Monami, of Belgium, to reach the second round of the Suntory Japan Open yesterday, while Mark Petchey qualified for the top-class men's event, in which Stefan Edberg is defending his title, by defeating South Africa's Byron Talbot 6-7, 6-1, 6-4.
Monami, 22 next month, has shown great promise over the past year and strikes the ball with an unbridled enthusiasm.
It is refreshing to witness, but on this occasion many of her efforts were wildly inaccurate.
Far too often she lacked the precision and patience of Javer, who was quite content to enter into baseline rallies and await the errors.
Still, it was Monami's six double-faults, three on game point, that really swung the match Javer's way.
Clare Wood has found herself restricted to doubles this week after injuring her right ankle in a basketball accident 10 days ago.
Gabriela Sabatini had to battle through a tough second set against a determined Conchita Martinez on Sunday to win her second consecutive Family Circle Magazine Cup at Hilton Head, South Carolina.
Sabatini, the top seed, won 6-1, 6-4.
Although beaten in the semi-finals in the Masters of the French satellite, Britain's Chris Bailey collected enough points to climb 70 places to 226 in the new ATP/IBM world rankings.
That lifts him above Mark Petchey into fourth place among British players behind Jeremy Bates 140, Chris Wilkinson's career-best 160 and Andrew Castle 182.
Stefan Edberg stays ahead of Jim Courier as world No 1, followed by Boris Becker, Pete Sampras and Michael Stich.
Sarah Bentley beat Siobhan Nicholson from Ireland 6-2, 6-3 to win the Namibia women's tournament in Windhoek.
Two British players are in the second round of the junior international in Prato, Italy.
Andrew Richardson beat Stefana Bullaasi 6-1, 6-2 and Oxford's Tim Henman beat another Italian, Aldo Pagini, 6-4, 5-7, 6-4.
SEVENS RUGBY
Samoans lodge protest
By Charles Randall in Hong Kong
TONY SPREADBURY, the English international referee, travelled back from Hong Kong yesterday with a mild controversy from the annual sevens tournament still ringing in his ears.
Spreadbury, on his first trip to the Cathay Pacific Hong Kong Bank-sponsored tournament, was the subject of an official protest after he inadvertently allowed the first half of a quarter-final match to overrun by 1½ minutes — a long way beyond the regulation seven minutes.
The extra time allowed Pat Lam to score an important try for New Zealand against his former Western Samoa teammates, prompting unsuccessful demands for a replay.
Spreadbury, who had an otherwise impressive debut, had no explanation, though the ankle-deep water — 78 millimetres of rain fell on the pitch in about seven hours — must have been a distraction.
CUP COMP. — Qtr-finals: Fiji 22, France 6-Australia 28, Argentina 0-S Korea 16, Barbarians 8-New Zealand 18, W Samoa 12.
Semi-finals: Fiji 28, Australia 4-NZ 14, S Korea 0.
Final: Fiji 22, NZ 6.
BOWL COMP. — Final: Romania 18, Papua New Guinea 12.
PLATE COMP. — Final: Hong Kong 12, Tonga 8 (after sudden death).
VOLLEYBALL
Bond sees Brixton to title
By Clive Ellis
JULIE BOND enjoyed an extraordinary run of serving success to guide Woolwich Brixton to the Royal Bank National League title for the second time in three years.
Bond enabled Brixton to retrieve a 7-0 deficit in the opening set against Britannia Music on Sunday, and a total of 24 points were won on her service in a surprisingly easy 15-13, 15-10, 15-4 win.
Brixton finished the season undefeated, though they had gone into the match knowing that defeat would give Britannia the title on sets won.
Brixton will be joined in the weekend's Supercup, the National League play-offs, by Trafford, Ashcombe Dorking and Dynamo.
Britannia have chosen to miss the tournament at Reading University.
Team Mizuno Malory's delight at completing their successful defence of the men's Division One title with a 9-15, 15-9, 15-6, 15-6 victory over Polonia Ealing was tempered by a serious ankle injury to Stuart Dunn.
It was confirmed on Sunday that the Great Britain international had suffered a break.
Despite the defeat Polonia will contest the play-offs with Malory, Reebok Liverpool City and Hilton Leeds.
Liverpool wound up their programme with a 13th successive league victory, beating Speedwell Rucanor 16-14, 15-13, 15-10.
ROYAL BANK NAT LGE. — Women, Div 1: Trafford 3, Birmingham 0.
DISABLED SPORT
Manchester to stage Games
By Jeremy Bacon
MANCHESTER has been chosen to stage the 1995 World Transplant Games, which are expected to attract more than 2,000 athletes from 40 countries.
Organisers are seeking a Royal patron for the event and have formed a charity to raise £100,000, which they hope will be increased by grants from the Sports Council and private business.
They are to visit the 1993 Games in Vancouver to help to plan the five-day event, which will be open to athletes who have received organ transplants.
Competitors are expected to take part in athletics, swimming, badminton, tennis, squash, cyclng and golf.
The decision to hold the event is another fillip for disabled sport in this country following last month's announcement that the World Dressage Championships will be staged at Hartpury College, near Gloucester, in July 1994.
A major breakthrough in the continuing campaign for full integration between the able-bodied and the disabled will take place today with the first Special Olympics unified sports meeting in Britain.
Teams made up equally of mentally handicapped and able-bodied athletes will compete in a soccer and netball tournament which will be held at St Peter's RC High School in Gloucester.
The event has been arranged by Gloucester City Council's Leisure Services Department under the auspices of the American-based Special Olympics organisation.
Regional Rugby: Bridgwater are transformed
By Rob Wildman
RITCHIE TAYLOR, a junior All Blacks centre, has helped to transform Bridgwater and Albion this season from strugglers to winners of a promotion and cup double.
Bridgwater were runners-up in Courage Western Counties League and during the last week have beaten Weston-super-Mare 18-7 in the final of the Bass Somerset Cup, and Nuneaton, in a friendly, 38-12.
The pace of Taylor has been complemented by the kicking form of captain Nick Edmonds, who has contributed 342 points so far.
Bridgwater, who dropped two leagues in consecutive seasons, hope Taylor will return for a further season after a short trip to New Zealand in the summer.
Alan Hill, the Basingstoke No 8, is also enjoying a fine season and he scored his 22nd try of the campaign in the 16-6 victory over Havant in the final of the Hampshire Cup.
It is the second time Basingstoke have won this competition, which has been dominated by Havant.
The losers, with an eye on two league games they need to win to secure promotion from Four South, rested five players who represented Hampshire in the country championship semi-final against Lancashire last month.
Sudbury took their record in the Spicers Eastern Counties Cup to six triumphs in the last seven seasons when they beat North Walsham 10-6.
The only try came from Sudbury scrum-half Steve Glen.
A try by flanker Kevin Clark, converted by Neil Sarratt, brought Ruislip their second successive success over Ealing in the Middlesex final, 6-4.
The losers were disrupted by a head injury to prop Seamus Foley, who was forced off in the first half.
Old Alleynian, from Dulwich, also dominated the opening half in their 19-10 Surrey Cup final win over Old Blues.
They led 15-0 at the interval, through a try by Robin Tombs and 11 points from Peter Ashworth.
E MIDLANDS CUP.
— Semi-final: Ampthill 3, Towcestrians 29-Wellingborough 16, Leighton Buzzard 13.
Final: at Towcestrians, April 30.
NOTTS, LINCS & DERBYS. — Semi-finals: Moderns 6, Amber Valley 7-Chesterfield 10, Spalding 7.
Final: Beeston, April 26.
COUNTY FINALS.
— Hants: Basingstoke 16, Havant 6.
Kent: O Colfeians 13, Westcombe Pk 10.
Middlesex: Ruislip 6, Ealing 4.
Surrey: O Alleynians 19, O Blues 10.
Sussex: Horsham 22, Worthing 0.
E Counties: Sudbury 10, N Walsham 6.
Cricket: Richardson seeks solace in revenge
By Geoffrey Dean in Kingston, Jamaica
WHEREAS West Indies will be favourites for the inaugural Test against South Africa on Easter Saturday, the outcome of the first of three one-day internationals, which takes place today at Sabina Park, is totally unpredictable.
It will not be the first match involving a South African representative side on West Indian soil; symbolically that honour befell the Jamaican and South African under-19 teams who met in a 50-over contest yesterday just outside Kingston.
What is certain is that the West Indies enter today's match under considerable pressure after their disappointing World Cup campaign, while the South Africans have little to lose.
Richie Richardson, who is not the most popular figure in Jamaica at present, may well receive some barracking from an expected full house, for there is still bitterness here over the omission of Jeff ujon and Courtney Walsh from the World Cup party.
With the crowd being the most volatile in the Caribbean — rioting held up play for 25 minutes during the Test against India in 1989 -there might be some trouble but only if the West Indies are faring badly, rather than as a result of any anti-South African sentiment.
Richardson, however, said yesterday that he was confident of his team's chances.
‘We know the conditions here and we want to avenge that World Cup defeat,’ he said, referring to South Africa's 64-run win in New Zealand.
The pitch should be ideal for batting, in contrast to the one at Christchurch for that match.
West Indies are certainly a formidable one-day force in the Caribbean.
Their 4-1 defeat by Australia here last year was the first time they had lost a one-day series at home.
Indeed, of their previous 18 home one-day internationals, they had won 17.
The batting, though, is nothing like the force of old, with a lack of runs undermining the West Indies' World Cup challenge.
The key is whether Richardson can rediscover his form after averaging only 18 in the World Cup.
David Holford, the West Indies team manager, said: ‘It seems that the strain of at last proving himself on English wickets last year has had an adverse effect on his form.’
Mr Holford hinted that, given the current fallibility of the top order, his side would probably include seven batsmen.
This would mean Hooper and Simmons having to bowl 10 overs each.
The South Africans are likely to employ an all-seam attack, with Peter Kirsten's occasional off-breaks in reserve.
Corrie Van Zyl, who bats at No 5 for Orange Free State, will take over the all-rounder's spot from Brian McMillan, whose absence through injury after a good World Cup could well be felt.
Injury could also rule David Richardson out of today's match after he bruised his foot in the nets yesterday.
Richardson, the only recognised wicketkeeper in the tour party, was struck by a ball from Allan Donald while batting and will be replaced by Kirsten or Mark Rushmere if he fails to recover in time.
Kepler Wessels, the South African captain, has said, somewhat surprisingly, that he considers the one-day series and the Test to be of equal importance.
‘We'll pick our strongest side for the one-days, although it's unlikely we'll bring someone in cold for the Test,’ he revealed.
The majority of players on both sides have had no competitive cricket since the World Cup.
Five of the South Africans played last Wednesday in the final of the Benson and Hedges night series in Johannesburg while a similar number of the West Indians played in the Geddes Grant final on Saturday in Port of Spain.
West Indies (probable): *R B Richardson, D L Haynes, B C Lara, P V Simmons, C L Hooper, K L T Arthurton, J C Adams, D Williams, W K M Benjamin, C E L Ambrose, B P Patterson.
South Africa (probable): *K C Wessels, A C Hudson, P N Kirsten, W J Cronje, A P Kuiper, J N Rhodes, C J P G van Zyl, D J Richardson, R P Snell, M W Pringle, A A Donald.
Graham Gooch, the England captain, has provisionally agreed to take a group of professional cricketers to compete in an international six-a-side tournament which is planned in Hong Kong for Oct 3-4, writes Charles Randall.
The organisers hope the unofficial event will emulate last weekend's annual rugby sevens tournament.
MOTOR RACING
Williams eclipse Senna
By Timothy Collings
NOTHING summed up the supremacy of the Canon Williams Renault team this season more completely on Sunday than Ayrton Senna's early and silent exit from Interlagos as Nigel Mansell and Riccardo Patrese lapped the field on their way to a third successive one-two triumph in the Brazilian Grand Prix.
Senna, forced to retire after 17 laps with electrical problems which caused his engine to cut out, had nothing to say.
It had all been said on the track where both McLaren's new MP4/7As, driven by Senna and team-mate Gerhard Berger, were non-finishers.
Berger's race was ruined by electrically-related gearbox problems, which caused him to start from the pit lane, and then a resultant overheating engine, which caused his retirement after four laps.
Ron Dennis, McLaren's managing director, said: ‘It was a disappointment not to finish.
We know that both cars suffered from electrical faults but as yet we have not identified them.
We had not experienced these faults during the the weekend.’
Mr Dennis and the Honda Marlborough McLaren team face a massive task to resurrect their fortunes after scoring only nine points in the opening three races and enduring such a miserable weekend debut with the long-awaited MP4/7A.
The weeks leading up to the start of the European section of the championship at the Spanish Grand Prix on May 3 will see intensive work at their Woking headquarters.
Williams are hardly about to relax.
Mansell flies back to Britain from his Florida home this week for intensive testing of the new Renault V10 engine, which the team hope will be adding impetus to their championship drive by the time they reach Barcelona.
Senna, however, will have plenty to occupy his mind once he recovers from the bitter experience of such a comprehensive defeat in front of his home city supporters on Sunday.
The world champion, who trails in fifth place in the driver's championship with only four points, incurred the wrath on Sunday of German newcomer Michael Schumacher, who finished third behind the two Williams drivers for the second successive race.
The Camel Benetton Ford driver was outraged at the tactics used by Senna to keep him at bay for several laps.
‘I was quicker than him and he was quite slow.
After about 10 laps, he seemed to play a game with me.
He braked in the slow corners, where I could not overtake, then on the straight, he accelerated and drove away,’ he said.
‘When he let me pass, he then slipstreamed and overtook me again.
He gave others the opportunity to pass me and I was really upset.
I don't know what his game was but I didn't like it.
I didn't expect this sort of driving from a three-times world champion.’
Schumacher, with 11 points, is now third in the championship behind Mansell, on 30, and Patrese on 18.
With a new car from Benetton due to be shaken down by Martin Brundle at Silverstone today, he may have a chance of holding his position longer than many expect.
Brundle was out of luck for the second race running.
After driving strongly in the top six, he fell victim to what he later described as ‘Formula Ford driving’ by Jean Alesi in the Ferrari F92A.
Brundle said: ‘I started well, the car felt good and we made a fantastic pit stop.
I feel very angry and disappointed about the incident.’
His attempt to pass Alesi resulted in the pair colliding and the right front wheel of his Benetton broke in suspicious circumstances.
Cricket: Hooper at the centre of calculated risk COUNTY PROSPECTS
Doug Ibbotson examines Kent's cunning formula for success
By DOUG IBBOTSON
KENT's formula for attractive and successful cricket this season is based on the decision to jettison a front-line bowler in favour of a batsman/off-spinner.
It has two interesting components: calculated risk and cunning.
On the basis of last summer's balance sheet, the departure of Tony Merrick presupposes a deficit of some 60 wickets and leaves Kent with a strike-force of only two, Igglesden and Penn, with Ellison and McCague in reserve.
Injuries could put this seam bowling squad under severe pressure.
That is the calculated risk.
On the other hand, in Carl Hooper Kent have signed a batsman capable of 1,500 runs and a bowler who, in favourable conditions, could take 40-odd wickets.
Here is the source of the cunning factor and Kent are unashamed — indeed almost gleeful — in their avowed intention to take full advantage of the Lord's dispensation that, in order to encourage slow bowling, the same pitch may be used for a one-day and a championship match.
Visitors to Canterbury this season will not be surprised, then, to find a pitch which ultimately favours the likes of Hooper, Davis and Patel, when he is down from Manchester Polytechnic.
By the same token, away from home Kent may find themselves batting on a missile launching pad, but that is another matter.
So, too, is the risk that an overcooked spinners' pitch may be ruled out of order and points deducted at umpires' question time.
Indeed, because of unsatisfactory conditions and a close call last season, Kent have forsaken Dartford this summer and, for economic reasons, will not play at Folkestone.
Accordingly, Canterbury will absorb four extra championship matches.
Incidentally, proposals for the establishment of a major Kent ground at Crystal Palace which could give the county a profitable metropolitan base are being enthusisastically pursued, though they are unlikely to be realised before the end of the century.
Meanwhile, Kent, sixth in the championship last year, are intent on consolidation as an efficient and economic enterprise, to which end they have pruned their playing personnel by five.
Wells, a talented all-rounder, was offered terms but joined Leicestershire in anticipation of greater first-team opportunity.
Batsman Hinks went to Gloucestershire, and Chris Cowdrey as a part-timer to Glamorgan, while Kelleher, Dobson and Merrick were ‘resting between engagements’.
That still leaves a healthy blend of seasoned hands and determined younger players, many of whom are happy to be regarded as all-rounders rather than specialists.
Notable exceptions are the captain, Benson, Taylor, Ward and Graham Cowdrey, who bring substance and style to the top of the batting order.
All comfortably exceeded 1,000 first-class runs last summer and Taylor, with 1,806 at an average of 56.4, was outstandingly consistent.
Of the all-rounders, wicketkeeper Marsh, who claimed 70 victims, weighed in with 910 runs at 33.7 and Ellison 415 plus 47 wickets, while Fleming averaged 31.62 with the bat and showed a remarkable flair for bagging high-class, if not always low-cost, wickets.
The prospect of Hooper interposing his exciting talents among that assembly undoubtedly gives the Kent batting formidable potential, but what of the bowling?
Merrick was Kent's most prolific wicket-taker last summer with 61 and Penn, who took 52, the most economical with an average of 25.44.
Igglesden, too, bowled well for 50 wickets and is reported to have wintered prosperously and without injury in South Africa.
Whether the reduced strike-force can prevail this summer may be a source of anxiety, but there will be no lack of self-belief and guidance from Australian coach/manager/guru Darryl Foster.
Fitness, or lack of it, could present a serious problem.
Ellison's role with swing and seam may be crucial and it must be earnestly hoped that his back, the source of trouble in the past, holds up to increased demands.
Much also depends on McCague, who, after a modest first season with Kent and an unremarkable winter with Western Australia, has shed 1½ stones in an effort to sharpen up his pace.
Given the grand stratagem, however, Kent will be looking forward with high expectations to the spin of Davis and his slow left-arm bowling and Hooper's off-breaks.
Whatever else, this should provide a wealth of entertainment.
Pace bowling apart, Kent have adequate cover among their emerging talents.
All-rounder Ealham, a highly competent wicketkeeper in Kersey; left-handed bat and off-break bowler Llong, right-handed bat Longley and Patel, the highly promising spinner and brilliant fielder.
Add to these an increasingly large posse of match-by-match prospects and the influx of youngsters attracted to the expanded indoor school and Kent are understandably optimistic about their immediate and long-term future.
Over the past year or so they have appointed a new captain, coach, and secretary.
Recently, Tina Benson, the captain's sister, has taken on the role of marketing manager.
Stuart Anderson, their secretary, says: ‘The general message is that Kent have put their house in order, turned the corner and are confident that improvements on the field will be matched by overall prosperity.’
Westminster faces tough state of play A significant contributor to the Government purse, sport is looking hard at what it gets in return.
Telegraph writers report Peter Deeley on a pressing need for more resources
By PETER DEELEY
SPORT'S role as a major employer and contributor to government coffers has helped it to discover a latent power and a voice of its own, discarding its traditionally apolitical posture in the process.
It employs 370,000, more than the car industry, and its annual turnover is in the region of £3 billion.
In an age of greater leisure, it meets the needs of a society with an increasing amount of time on its hands.
At moments of international success, it serves both as a morale-booster and an exemplar.
It attends to the health of the workforce.
Not least important is the constructive alternative it offers for alienated youth.
By the testimonies of such as rugby's Gareth Chilcott and boxing's Frank Bruno, to name but two of many who have acknowledged how sport saved them from going off the rails as youngsters, it can claim an increasingly influential niche in society.
It is nearly 20 years since a government White Paper, Sport and Recreation, acknowledged that by ‘reducing boredom and urban frustration, participation in active recreation contributes to the reduction of hooliganism and delinquency among young people’.
While our sports leaders recognise the contribution they can make to providing a ‘healthy outlet’, they are concerned that, although government looks to them to play this role, it is often not prepared to assist them.
The feeling persists that sport is still of peripheral concern when the parties make their manifesto pledges; that in the struggle with the arts for the hearts, minds (and pockets) of politicians, it comes a poor second, but that government is more than happy to accept the millions of pounds in various forms of tax generated by this ‘art of the masses’.
Peter Lawson, general secretary of the Central Council of Physical Recreation, says Britain is the ‘most under-resourced and over-taxed’ sporting country in Europe.
‘We are so far behind I fear we shall never catch up,’ he says, gloomily.
Swimming illustrates the overlap between sport and social need.
More than just a pastime or a pursuit of Olympic excellence performed by an elite few, the worthy aim of teaching every child to swim 25 metres by the age of 11 will soon be a part of the national curriculum.
But David Reeves, secretary of the Amateur Swimming Association, fears the cost of providing pools, transport and tuition will be so excessive that politicians may have second thoughts when they see the bill.
As a way of reducing the cost, the Department of Education and Science, where the Minister for Sport presently resides, have been looking at such extreme measures as the feasibility of turning primary classrooms into temporary swimming pools.
This would be done by bringing in metal tanks, flooding them and adding filtration and ventilation.
All apparently at a cost of as little as £11,000.
Mr Reeves thinks little of such an idea and would rather see conventional pools built.
The cost of a fully-equipped 25-metre solid structure for all the community, however, could reach £20 million.
The idea of ‘flooded classrooms’ might be taken as the product of bureaucratic desperation.
But it illustrates the challenge facing sport generally: where do the resources come from?
There was a time when sport benefited from hidden subsidies.
Teachers gave up their time, unpaid; prime acres of sports fields stood underused and education authorities did not bother to count the cost of bussing children half-way across a city for an afternoon's soccer.
Probably nothing politicised sport more than the decline in state school activity.
If it is upsetting to think that the education system now denies many children that voyage of discovery which begins on the muddy playing field, it is encouraging to learn that sport at club level is taking up the strain.
Tennis, rugby, golf, hockey and cricket are just five sports that have begun to offer an alternative to the role traditionally played by schools.
Self-interest plays a part but the clubs have a strong case when they argue that if they are to be the mentors to the young, society must help to foot the bill.
Yet clubs are faced with court summonses, and threatened by closure because they cannot afford to pay their rates and local councils refuse to waive part of the bill.
Leisure centres close their doors because of a lack of sufficient funds to operate them.
Facilities decay because money is not spent on refurbishment.
There is a very real danger that the slogan ‘Sport for All’ is becoming no more than an idle cliche.
It is a fundamental statement of intent, however, and one on which, over the coming days, will be testing the sincerity of the political parties.
Cricket: Fletcher's ‘job for life’ offer by Essex
By Paul Newman
ESSEX are prepared to offer former England captain Keith Fletcher ‘a job for life’ in an attempt to persuade him not to become the next England team manager.
Fletcher, who, as captain, guided Essex to their first eight trophies between 1979 and 1985, is widely expected to replace Micky Stewart at the end of this season when he retires, probably to take up a role with the TCCB.
The probability is viewed with both pleasure and sadness at Essex, who appreciate the job Fletcher still does as second team captain, and first team adviser.
Peter Edwards, the Essex secretary-general manager, said: ‘For me, Keith Fletcher is Essex cricket.
He is synonymous with the success we have achieved and we would be very sad to see him go if he is offered the England post.
‘He has his roots here, however, and has a job for life with us.
He is particularly good with young players and will have to weigh up that security against taking arguably the best job in English cricket.’
Fletcher said: ‘If the offer comes I will be faced with a very tough decision.
I enjoy my role with Essex.’
Golf: Faldo aims to recapture world mastery Michael Williams in Augusta on the big English hope
By MICHAEL WILLIAMS
NICK FALDO, world No 1 last week and with a highly creditable share of sixth place in the Freeport-McMoran Classic in New Orleans at the weekend, found his halo had slipped when he arrived at Augusta for the US Masters yesterday.
Such are the complexities of the three-year allocation of points in the Sony world rankings that Faldo lost everything he had gained from his Masters victory of 1989 and has consequently dropped to fourth.
Fred Couples, the Americans' man of the season so far but who did not play last week, has gone back to the top amid a wholesale reshuffle.
Jose-Maria Olazabal, one of five players who finished equal 72nd in a field of 78 at New Orleans, has jumped into second place.
Ian Woosnam, whose share of 57th on Sunday was 51 places behind Faldo, moves up to third.
Not that Faldo will lose any sleep.
He is delighted to have run into form at just the right moment, leaving him in his most confident frame of mind since the days leading up to his triumphant 1990 Open at St Andrews.
Considering he was four over par after the first three holes of the New Orleans tournament, Faldo's 11 under for the remaining 69 on a course he found demanding looks a useful dress rehearsal for the first of the year's majors.
As he was never in contention, he will not have used up the sort of nervous energy expended by Chip Beck, who recovered the lead he had lost on Saturday to edge out Greg Norman and Mike Standly with a final round of 70.
Beck's first tournament win since 1990 — and only the fourth of his career — was achieved in the hardest of circumstances.
He needed a four at English Turn's 18th, rated America's toughest tournament hole.
Bunkered behind the green, he then got up and down in two with one of the firmest six-foot putts for a title I can recall.
Round in 70, Beck had a 12-under-par total of 276.
Norman also got up and down from another bunker for a 69 and 277, spending the next 30 minutes waiting, watching and keeping himself loose with a few twists and turns for the play-off that never happened.
It was, however, an encouraging week for Norman, golf's fallen idol, who a month ago had surgery on a knee injury suffered when playing football many years ago.
He has returned to the Players' Championship and the New Orleans tournament after a six-week lay-off with eight rounds in which he has not been over par and has been under five times.
Norman has the adrenalin flowing for the Masters, and is confident he will improve on his last two visits, when he missed the cut both times.
He was lucky to be invited back, but there was no reprieve for Tom Kite, who misses his first Masters since 1974 despite 10 top finishes in that time.
He was twice runner-up and missed only two cuts, one of them last year.
Kite had to win in New Orleans to be invited but could only manage joint 12th with Severiano Ballesteros, whose last round of 69 has also put him in good heart.
Woosnam and Olazabal have been in more contemplative mood after further moderate performances in New Orleans.
Woosnam yesterday appeared on the Augusta practice ground with a brace on his arm to correct a swing.
Golf: Graduation time for pupils from school of hard knocks MASTERS
Dick Taylor expects one of a cast of hungry Australians to triumph
By DICK TAYLOR
SEVEN of the past 12 Masters Tournaments have been won by European players and this stopped being a big surprise three Ryder Cups ago.
Larry Mize, Ben Crenshaw, Craig Stadler, Tom Watson and Jack Nicklaus have interrupted the domination.
Watson and Stadler have risen from a moribund state recently but it becomes Fred Couples's lot to hold back the invasion.
Don't look for a local to win this year but yes, another foreigner — from Australia.
Unless his swing-plane changes become comfortable to him by Thursday it won't be beleaguered Greg Norman.
But the Augusta National club's invitational committee saw fit to also send out its Christmas-time invitations to Australians Wayne Grady, Steve Elkington, Ian Baker-Finch, Rodger Davis and Craig Parry.
Augusta National went for major winners from a burgeoning cast of Aussies who just may be hungrier than any of their contemporaries.
Noone would have been surprised if they had added Mike Harwood or Mike Ferguson.
And there are others lurking in the wings: Woodland, Mackay, Senior, Fowler, Tracy, Foley, McWhinney, Ogle, Riley, O'Malley, Ratcliffe and Moore.
They all are from the school of hard knocks save for The Elk, as his pals call Elkington.
He attended the University of Houston, Texas, in an honest pursuit for a diploma in recreation.
All others are graduates of the Gold Coast Pro-Am Circuit, a summertime proving ground for aspiring tour players.
The American scene should be a piece of cake for these lads after several years of sharing a camper and traversing huge chunks of arid land to play in one-day pro-ams that may net them a couple of hundred pounds.
Baker-Finch started his basic training at 15 and reported the experience ‘not unlike college.
We all drank a lot of beer and chased girls’.
The result: Grady, past PGA of America champion; Baker-Finch, holder of The Open vase; Elkington, defender in the recent Players' Championship and holder of the Tournament of Champions title.
Norman has been an unknown quantity since injuring his right shoulder prior to last year's Masters, then reinjuring it at the US Open in Minneapolis.
A stoic quality keeps him from talking about the problem, which is silly; even Nicklaus discusses his back, made ancient by millions of swings and uneven leg lengths.
TV viewers, astute ones, will notice when Norman first hoves on to the screen that his swing is very upright, which is how he started playing this game.
He began moving away from the ball when he began hitting those dreaded laterals with short irons.
COMING over the top, tutors might explain.
But Elkington convinced Norman to try his guru (is there any player out there without a swing nanny?),
Butch Harmon, the son of the late Claude Harmon, who runs a school of golf in Houston.
The senior Harmon was the best-playing club pro in golf, having won a Masters, then he returned to his golf shop.
Norman's invitation to this year's Masters was looked at with raised eyebrows by many, especially since, at this writing, the ever-steady Tom Kite needed to win New Orleans to get in on the Georgia garden party.
Norman came in under the wild-card foreign invitee blanket with nary a victory to his name in the past year.
He celebrated by embarking on a fishing trip to the Bahamas where he reinjured a knee and was subjected to micro-surgery to remove a floating hunk of cartilage.
AS to others who must be taken seriously in the springtime ritual, it has been good to see Sandy Lyle regain form, Nick Faldo lose unneeded bulk, Severiano Ballesteros come all the way back and Ian Woosnam ending his celebration of winning last year's Masters.
Jose-Maria Olazabal, along with Ballesteros, joins Couples as those with the hottest hands over the past 12 months.
Davis Love III has muscled his way into the inner-circle with his rock-steady prformance in winning The Players Championship.
Love reports he improved his putting immeasurably by simply using one ball on the putting green and putting around the clock, rather than stroke six balls at one hole.
‘My routine in practice is just as it is on course.’
His Players victory was mental as well.
‘It was past time for me to win a big one like this and play an aggressive final round.’
What about Raymond Floyd?
Yes, his victory at Doral was awesome, but he admits he did it with a suspect putter, wielded by a 49-year-old puttee, and a mind that focussed on golf to block out the loss in a fire of his $2,000,000 Florida mansion.
Unless a freak freeze is experienced, an unusually warm late winter-early springtime will have Augusta National in lush heavily-grassed condition.
This will be the first Masters for the new chairman, Jack Stephens, Arkanas billionaire.
He is a heavy backer and advisor to Governor Bill Clinton, front-runner for the Democrats' presidential nomination.
Augusta National has been a Republican bastion, but Arkanas is borderline Southern, where every son followed daddy and granddaddy as avowed Democrats only to vote the other way when election day arrived.
Closet Republicans they are called by some, boll weevils by others.
If by some aberration…as was Jimmy Carter…the sitting President is upset, Augusta National would again be host to the chief executive.
President Eisenhower was a regular.
There has been a strong hint that this will be the last competitive Masters for Arnold Palmer, 63, and it could be the last time we see the jaunty 90-year-old Gene Sarazen, and Sam Snead, 80 in May, lead off the event with a ceremonial nine holes.
However, Byron Nelson, 79, has a new hip and may be called on for duty.
Paul Azinger, Payne Stewart, Mark O'Meara, Steve Pate, and Chip Beck can be counted upon to pick up yet again the gauntlet flung down by the Mother Country.
But don't take your eyes off those Australians.
The acceptance speech this year just may be started with ‘G'day, mates’.
Dick Taylor is a leading American golf writer
COUNTY GOLF
Booth's double on debut
By Bill Meredith
WITH their top five players absent, Hampshire gave a first-team chance to Lee Booth, 18, a finalist in last year's Daily Telegraph Junior Golfer of the Year competition.
He responded in style by winning both his matches against Wiltshire, including a 7 and 5 triumph in the singles.
Peter Defty, of Stoneham, scored a remarkable win for Hampshire after being five down in six holes.
His opponent, John Brien, 19, was pulled back to all-square by the 15th, but won the 16th to go ahead again.
Then Defty hit back to take the last two holes and the match.
WILTS 8, HANTS 4 FOURSOMES: A Mutch & P Bicknell bt D Harris & R Bland 2 & 1; S Amor & J J Tomlinson bt S Skeldon & B Winteridge 3 & 2; J Brien & D Howell lost to K Saunders & L Booth 3 & 2; S Hodges & K Phillips bt P Defty & A Bow 3 & 2.
SINGLES: Amor bt Harris 2 & 1; Mutch lost to Skeldon 3 & 1; Tomlinson bt Saunders 4 & 3; Bicknell bt Bland 2 & 1; Hodges bt Winteridge 1 hole; Brien lost to Defty 1 hole; Howell bt Bow 5 & 4; Phillips lost to Booth 7 & 5.
Gloucestershire already have their sights on this year's Daily Telegraph Channel League title after beating Dorset, last summer's champions, 8-7 in an exciting encounter.
‘They stole it from us,’ said Dorset captain Doug Pratt, who added generously: ‘but they deserved it.’
The match hinged on the morning foursomes, which Gloucester edged 3-2 when Dorset had looked set to lunch in the lead.
Steve Edgley and Lee James went to the 18th all square with Mark Saunders and David Hares and it looked as if Gloucester's tee shot was out of bounds — until the ball hit a tree and stayed in play.
Then Edgley found an unplayable lie off the tee; James could only hack out on to the fairway and Dorset lost the hole to a five.
DORSET 7, GLOUCS 8 FOURSOMES: T Lawrence & M Thompson bt R Broad & D Wood 3 & 2; I Donnelly & J Olsen lost to Thomas & O Layton 3 & 2; J Pounder & R Hearn bt M Stanford & D Young 3 & 2; S Edgley & L James lost to M Saunders & D Hares 1 hole; W Raymond & P McMullen lost to J Webber & M Smith 2 holes.
SINGLES: Lawrence bt Stanford 3 & 2; Edgley lost to Wood 4 & 3; Thompson halved with Broad; G Archer bt Young 2 & 1; Olsen lost to Thomas 3 & 2; James lost to Layton 1 hole; McMullen halved with Saunders; Hearn bt Hares 6 & 5; Pounder lost to Smith 3 & 2; Donnelly bt Webber 1 hole.
Cornwall, after their friendly win over Gloucester last weekend, emphasied their potential with a 9½-5½ win over Glamorgan at St Enodoc.
CORNWALL 9½, GLAMORGAN 5½ FOURSOMES: ½SRickard & R Simmons bt C O'Carroll & I Taylor 1 hole; I Veale & P Simmons bt N Baldwin & H Roberts 3 & 1; C Willis & N Bush lost to P Sykes & N Stimson 5 & 4; M Edmunds & P Darlington bt M Peet & A Cooper 3 & 2; P Clayton & C Phillips halved with M Heames & R Maliphant.
SINGLES: Veale bt Peet 4 & 3; R Simmons lost to Cooper 4 & 3; Rickard lost to O'Carroll 2 & 1; Willis bt Heames 3 & 2; Phillips halved with Roberts; P Simmons halved with Stimson; Darlington bt Taylor 5 & 4; Bush bt Sykes 3 & 2; Clayton lost to Maliphant 3 & 2; M Eichstedt bt Baldwin 1 hole.
Paul Page, of Dartford, had a weekend to remember.
After winning the Berkhamsted he went back to his home club and picked up the Watson Trophy with a 69.
It was the best winning total in the competition and the first victory by a local player.
Bedfordshire, without a South-East League win since August 1989, proved they will be no pushover this summer with a 9½ — 5½ win over Northamptonshire at Kettering.
Yachting: Peters revives Olympic hopes
By David Pelly in Hyeres
SOME shock results on the first day of the French Olympic classes regatta at Hyeres yesterday showed that there could still be plenty of surprises to come in the race for British team selection.
Russell Peters, who has hardly been in contention at all so far, won the Soling race, and although he is well behind Lawrie Smith on points, needs only finish in the top six to gain a match racing play-off for the team spot.
Sailing in a pleasant six to eight knots breeze, Peters went the right way on the first beat and managed to stay ahead throughout the race.
BOWLS
Cumbria in by a whisker
By Donald Newby
ENGLAND skip John Bell and his Cumbria partners Ian Carruthers, Stephen Farish and Andrew Baxter, beat off a spirited recovery from a young Ely team to scramble to the fours title by a single shot at the Manchester Unity National Indoor Championships at Melton Mowbray.
The Ely four, Stewart Seymour, Kevin King and David Bell and skipped by Greg Harlow, trailed 12-1 after five ends, bounced back with a five and spent the next two hours in an effort to catch up.
This rather lethargic spell by both teams was characterised by accurate drawing which produced tight heads but very little fire.
Neither side were keen to take chances, but Harlow brought the game to life by killing a naked jack.
On the replay, Ely scored a two to go into the lead for the first time.
On the final end the Ely lead, Seymour, who bowled accurately to the jack throughout, held shot and King, the Ely No 2, added another.
Then after Farish had displaced these shots and Baxter had moved the jack for Cumbria to hold three, Harlow trailed it again to leave Cumbria still holding one.
With the last delivery Bell drew another shot to win 21-20.
Cumbria's success produced a remarkable run for Bell.
He holds four national titles, three with Baxter.
Last year they won both outdoor and indoor national triples.
In 1976 Bell won the outdoor triples with Baxter's father and grandfather.
SQUASH
Lord stays calm to spring upset
By D J Rutnagur
IT IS a measure of the strength of the entry for the Hi-Tec British Open Championships that the world No 28, Brett Newton, of Australia, found himself eliminated in the first round of the qualifying competition yesterday.
Also beaten was Glen Wilson, second string for New Zealand at the last World Team Championship.
He lost in four games to Craig Wapnick, a South African based in Switzerland.
Newton was beaten by England's No 19, Paul Lord, from Cheshire, a newcomer to the professional circuit.
Lord's fitness had a lot to do with his rally from a 2-0 deficit in games but Newton did not help his cause by incurring numerous conduct penalty points.
The Australian has a poor disciplinary record.
Last season, he served a six-month suspension for misdemeanours in the Hong Kong Open and referee John Robinson, an ex-policeman, seemed determined to keep him in line.
Lord said he was at a loss to find room to play his shots in the first two games.
But he took a more positive stance in the third and at the first hint of resistance Newton's temper began to rise.
It was at 4-4 in the third game that referee Robinson issued a warning that every instance of dissent or racket abuse would be penalised with a point.
The first penalty was not long in coming.
YACHTING
Nippon broken but unbowed
By Tim Jeffery in San Diego
BROKEN mast, broken rudder and broken boom — everything seems to have snapped in Japan's maiden America's Cup challenge during the past 11 months except the team's spirit.
A broken boom in Sunday's match against Il Moro di Venezia leaves Nippon with only a one-in-64 chance of making the challenger finals.
In skipper Chris Dickson's words: ‘We've dug ourselves a pretty big hole and it's getting dark down there.’
Unbeaten in the last round, Nippon has discovered the reverse side of fortune, losing all but one of six races in the semi-finals.
After a broken rudder, an unlucky windshift, a dubious umpires' penalty and meeting rivals New Zealand and Il Moro di Venezia on the top of their form, the luckless Nippon's 150lb carbon-fibre boom crumpled six minutes before the start of her second clash with Il Moro.
‘For one fleeting moment I considered pulling out,’ admitted Dickson.
The Kiwi-led Japanese crew, however, were quick to repair the damage.
Navigator Erle Williams, tutored in the harsh school of Whitbread Round the World racing, trimmed the mainsail to the backstay while the broken boom was taken off.
With dangerous jagged edges, like broken glass, Dickson jettisoned the boom illegally into the ocean.
‘Some of our guys considered raising a protest flag,’ said Il Moro's skipper Paul Cayard.
‘But I told them if we couldn't beat them without a boom, we didn't deserve to be in the finals.’
Il Moro sailed conservatively to win by 1 min 53 sec, a smaller margin that the 3 min 11 sec New Zealand scored easily over France's Ville de Paris, the Kiwi boat gaining the advantage at the start and looking sharp right round the track.
On the defenders' course Bill Koch kept his dream alive of an all-America syndicate final when his best pair of helmsmen, Buddy Melges and Kimo Worthington aboard America, defeated Koch on Kanza in the fresher breezes that should have suited Kanza.
Kanza lost the lead on the second leg run when her spinnaker pole broke allowing America to turn a 23-second deficit into a 56-secon lead.
But Koch's vacillating views on his own afterguard line-up, seemingly decided at the last minute with minimal consultation among his senior crew, is bemusing observers.
Melges tried to make light of the issue: ‘If the question is ‘Is it difficult for us to make a decision’, the answer is ‘Sometimes yes, sometimes no’.’
AMERICA'S CUP.
— Defenders' rd 4, semi-final, race 6: America (H Melges) bt Kanza (W Koch) 0m 34s.
Pts: 4, Kanza, Stars & Stripes; 1, America.
CHALLENGERS' LOUIS VUITTON CUP.
— Semi-final, race 6: New Zealand (R Davis) bt Ville de Paris (M Pajot) 3m 11s; Il Moro di Venezia (P Cayard) bt Nippon (C Dickson) 1m 53s.
Pts: 4, Il Moro di Venezia, New Zealand; 3, Ville de Paris; 1, Nippon.
MOTO-CROSS
Bayle's US ties take top billing
By Paul Stevens
JEAN-MICHEL Bayle, riding a works Honda, dominated Sunday's opening round of the world 500cc championship at Glen Helen, California, winning all three 30-minute heats with ease.
It was a perfect day for Bayle to celebrate his 23rd birthday, though he is not expected to contest any of the remaining 11 ties, except perhaps his native French round in July.
Instead, Bayle will remain in the US where he has lived since winning the world 250cc crown in 1989, to concentrate on retaining his American supercross Masters' title, which clashes with the world tournament.
Bayle was chased throughout by Kawasaki's Jeff Matiasevich and American Billy Liles, who rides a Honda for the English-based Action Workshop team.
Liles's team-mates, Warren Edwards and Jeremy Whatley, were among five British riders in the top dozen.
Kurt Nicoll ignored medical advice not to ride after a practice crash on the factory KTM had left him with a rib injury.
Another fall put him out of the reckoning in the first heat, but an eighth and a sixth were good enough to earn seventh overall.
Athletics: New strategy needed in war against drugs Iain Macleod on the credibility problem facing athletics' anti-doping campaign following the lifting of Krabbe's suspension
By IAIN MACLEOD
ALTHOUGH it was not apparent at the time, the legal commission of the German athletic federation (DLV) may have, in the long-term, bestowed a huge favour on world sport by quashing the four-year suspension imposed on Katrin Krabbe, Grit Breuer and Silke Moller.
The perversity of the decision should not detract from the flaws it appeared to expose in sport's crusade to eradicate drug abuse, nor the manner in which it showed that financial considerations were as responsible for the debacle as the gross ineptitude of the DLV.
There should be no complacency about who seems to be winning the battle.
The three athletes, who had been accused of tampering with a urine test in South Africa in January, were restored to competition after the three-man commission, who held a 14-hour hearing stretching over two days in Darmstadt, declared there had been ‘holes in the chain of evidence’ during and after testing by South African anti-doping control officials.
But a case which is of enormous embarrassment to sport may not yet be over and the International Amateur Athletic Federation might not regard the matter as closed.
Even in the event that no further action is taken, the IAAF will still need to seriously reassess their entire drug testing procedures.
Tony Ward, British Athletics Federation spokesman, said: ‘If the DLV, who are one of the leading four or five federations in the world, say they're running out of funds, it should be a warning bell for the IAAF.
‘It should be a warning to them that if they're really serious about fighting drug abuse, they need to step in and take a leading role.
‘If Germany can't afford to carry out testing, what about smaller countries, say in Eastern Europe?
What about Russia?
‘Random tests are an expensive business and as the IAAF are awash with money they need to look at how they are spending it.
If they're serious, they should put more money in and do something about it.’
The sense of shock at the decision in Germany yesterday had not dissipated.
Walter Troger, a German member of the International Olympic Committee, felt the matter had ‘left a bitter aftertaste’.
Resignations are expected when the DLV meet in Frankfurt today to discuss the aftermath of the Krabbe affair.
Ruediger Nickel, the anti-doping chief, who defended the ban at the appeal, said he would be making an announcement about his position.
German newspapers questioned the decision, the Berliner Morgenpost reflecting the views of many by stating in an editorial that ‘anti-doping measures obviously are ineffective’.
The Berlin Kurier went further and queried: ‘What is this acquittal worth?
It's a nice invitation to dope.’
SID, the German news agency, said: ‘At a end of a hearing of which the DLV's legal commission was out of its depth with the case and from the start seemed to be on the side of Krabbe, Breuer and Moller, there was a scandalous ruling.’
So where does the buck stop?
Why not with Dr Primo Nebiolo, president of the IAAF, who never ceases to eulogise about the greatness of the sport while around him, those attuned to what is really going on are in no doubt that cheating remains rife.
Mr Ward said: ‘Something has to be done here as we have taken a step backwards.
You have to have a series of watertight rules and regulations.
It's like anything else in law if procedures are not carried out properly.
‘The IAAF must urgently review the situation, for when you make your rules you have to carry them out to the letter of the law.
I think people are worried about whether we can carry them out efficiently.’
Jan Kern, secretary-general of the DLV, echoed those sentiments when he said: ‘After what we have heard, there are no more faultless doping tests in the world.’
Norbert Laurens, a DLV anti-doping official, added: ‘This is going to make testing difficult in financial and practical terms.
You are going to need one person with the tests on all trips, perhaps two, since if one person falls asleep, athletes could claim that manipulation could have taken place.’
So while Dr Nebiolo is content to spend in excess of $300,000 (£172,000) on an annual gala awards night in Monte Carlo, the sport is lacking credibility and facing ruin if the shoddy attitudes continue.
The posturing must stop, concerted steps taken and some of the money being channelled into development should be redirected into more stringent enforcement of anti-doping measures.
Whether an inquiry by the IAAF would alter the findings of the legal commission is uncertain, but it is a consideration that needs further investigation.
Few in Germany and elsewhere have any great conviction about the verdict.
Dr Arne Ljungqvist, chairman of the IAAF Medical Commission, suggested in Stockholm yesterday that he was confused by the decision.
He said: ‘What is, of course, confusing is that the decision had already been taken.
Then, all of a sudden, the German federation change their minds.
‘I have read between the lines of the German decision, but I cannot see any new facts to support this change of heart.
To my knowledge, no new facts have come to light since the original decision.’
A senior sports administrator made the point yesterday that Krabbe's coach, Thomas Springstein, had been ‘notorious for his involvement in the past’ in East Germany's drugs-ridden sports culture.
He added: ‘He has a reputation for being very skilled in this business.’
The implication needs no further explanation and there was a widespread belief that if Krabbe does run at the Olympic Games in Barcelona and wins, it would tarnish one of the greatest titles.
When a leading international sports lawyer asserts that the procedural elements in this case were similar to those carried out in thousands of others, the manner in which the legal commission poured scorn on their reliability suggests that a major revamp is required.
Otherwise the doyen of all sports may not have much of a future.
Soccer: Shreeves keeps faith in Walker
By John Ley
TOTTENHAM keep faith with England youth international goalkeeper Ian Walker when they travel to Notts County tonight in search of the first of two wins which Peter Shreeves, their manager, believes will confirm their First Division status.
Walker, occupying the goalkeeper's jersey in place of the injured Erik Thorstvedt, suffered at the hands of Aston Villa when Spurs were beaten 5-2 at White Hart Lane.
Mr Shreeves said: ‘Ray Clemence, our goalkeeping specialist, worked with Ian in training this morning to straighten him up and get his head up again.
‘Ian took a bit of a battering on Saturday and I have studied the video of the game which shows the second goal was down to him.
Notts County will be fighting for their lives, the same as us, but we need six more points.’
Defenders Pat van den Hauwe and Terry Fenwick return from injury, while Paul Stewart is back after suspension.
Gordon Durie is out after injuring an ankle and Gudni Bergsson is on international duty with Iceland.
Tottenham's rivals at the bottom of the table are Luton, Coventry, Notts County and West Ham.
Kevin Gallacher, Coventry's leading scorer, could return after a four match absence through injury and it is that department which, according to manager Don Howe, has dragged Coventry into the relegation fray.
Mr Howe said: ‘Our general performances have been fine but we cannot score goals.
If we had somebody to play alongside Gallacher who could pop one in regularly we would not be in our position.
‘I would rather be in my situation than the one that David Pleat, Neil Warnock [Notts Co]and Billy Bonds [West Ham]find themselves in.
But I have to be realistic and if Coventry are to stay up we have to win matches.’
Meanwhile, Gillingham's £500,000-rated teenage striker, Peter Beadle, is set to join Tottenham at the end of the season.
Bobby Robson, the former England manager in charge of PSV Eindhoven, has a agreed a two-year contract with Portuguese club Sporting Lisbon.
Marseille last night paid the £2.5 m they owed Rangers for World Cup player Trevor Steven.
And that means the England midfielder will stay with last year's European Cup finalists.
Multi-millionaire president, Bernard Tapie, guaranteed the cash after talks with Ibrox chairman David Murray.
Soccer: United masters of their own destiny
By William Johnson
THERE would be no better way for Manchester United to stamp their authority on a Championship race which swung their way at the weekend than to beat arch-rivals Manchester City in their 116th Football League derby at what will be a pulsating Old Trafford tonight.
City, to the embarrassment of many Maine Road supporters, brought a first title in 25 years tantalisingly within reach of their neighbours by thrashing Leeds United on Saturday.
They now face the enormous task of reproducing that sparkling form in the hope of prolonging the fight for the major domestic honour.
Peter Reid's City team — who will be unchanged if neither Niall Quinn nor Keith Curle show reactions to the hamstring problems they defied to play against Leeds — need little motivating, though.
A derby match is sufficient in itself to bring the best out of all concerned.
A place in Europe is now also a possibility again for City, given an end-of-season flourish.
Mr Reid, who is prevented from taking part in one of the highlights of his season by the excellent displays on Saturday of Steve McMahon and Fitzroy Simpson in central midfield, knows that victories over the top three teams in the space of eight days — City travel to Hillsborough on Saturday — will raise hopes of his men claiming third place.
That would be good enough to earn a UEFA Cup spot, provided that United win the Rumbelows Cup at Wembley on Sunday.
‘We don't want to get too bogged in permutations,’ said Mr Reid, a likely substitute again tonight.
‘We just have to keep winning and we'll be in with a shout.’
His United counterpart, Alex Ferguson, was also reluctant to look too far ahead, despite the obvious temptations after his side returned to scoring form with their victory over Norwich last week.
‘City did us a good turn by beating Leeds on Saturday and we don't want to waste it,’ said Mr Ferguson.
‘We have our noses in front now and the goals column has also transferred itself to us.
‘But all I'm concerned about at the moment is that we do enough against City to make sure we can go to Wembley at the weekend knowing we can't be overtaken again by Leeds on Saturday.’
That is another way of saying he wants his team to win, because they remain only a point clear, although after tonight they will still have a match in hand.
Mr Ferguson will give his influential captain, Bryan Robson, until the last minute to prove his fitness from a niggling calf complaint.
‘Mike Phelan is fit again and could come into the reckoning, but I have plenty of options,’ said the United manager.
Paul Parker is not one of them, however.
He is scheduled for a reserve outing later this week.
Mr Ferguson added: ‘I'm not in the slightest bit worried about going into a derby match just before Wembley.
Our priority all along has been to win the League and nothing has altered that.’
The priority for Leeds at the start of the season was a place in Europe and despite leading the table for much of the season that now looks to be their only target — although it is far from guaranteed.
Sheffield Wednesday head a list of four clubs who can overtake them and snatch second place.
Trevor Francis's team, impressive winners at Nottingham Forest on Saturday, have moved to within six points with a game in hand.
David Batty, the combative Leeds and England midfielder, is anxious not to see all the hard work put in this term go unrewarded.
‘Unless Manchester United slip up badly, the title is beyond us,’ was his surprisingly negative appraisal.
He followed it up, however, with a more positive view: ‘Four wins out of our last five matches would guarantee us the runners-up spot and a place in the UEFA Cup — and that's not a bad second prize.’
BOXING
Bruno leapfrogs up the ladder
By Ken Mays
FRANK BRUNO is almost certain to jump the heavyweight queue on the way to his third world title attempt which is being planned for London early next year.
The former European champion has to beat Cuban Jose Ribalta at Wembley Arena on April 22 to gain a final eliminator against South African Pierre Coetzer in a £2 million contest next autumn.
Manager Mickey Duff has had talks with Coetzer's management who are prepared to set up a deal.
‘You can call it jumping the queue,’ said Mr Duff.
‘It is my job to grab the chances and then it is up to Frank to take them.’
Coetzer, who is ranked No 1 by the World Boxing Association and No 2 in the International Boxing Federation list, would probably fight at Wembley.
‘I hope it will be my third time lucky,’ said Bruno in a reference to his unsuccessful world title challenges against Tim Witherspoon and Mike Tyson.
‘Ribalta is hard to hit, but if I can catch him I will knock him out.’
Coetzer would not be the first South African Bruno has faced.
His contest with former World Boxing Association champion Gerry Coetzee in 1986 went ahead, despite the political situation.
‘The atmosphere is now different, what with the cricketers playing internationally and several fighters going to South Africa,’ said Bruno who is spurred by the knowledge that Ribalta was outpointed by Coetzer 11 months ago.
Chris Eubank is refusing to defend his World Boxing Organisation super-middleweight title against Nigel Benn unless he is paid £2 million, writes Peter Keeling.
Eubank, who is preparing for his defence against American Ron Essett at Manchester's G-Mex Centre on April 25, said: ‘Two million pounds is my price and I am not open to negotiation.’
The Brighton-based fighter, who stopped Benn in their WBO middleweight title fight in November 1990, added: I've nothing to prove by fighting Benn again, so if we do meet I've got to be given my passport to retirement.’
But co-promoter Jack Trickett said: ‘A Benn-Eubank fight is not possible at that price.’
Glasgow's Joe Kelly, the British bantamweight champion, will fight Dane Johnny Bredahl for the European title after making the first defence of his crown against Drew Docherty of Croy on April 27.
Hockey: FIH's rules to change
By CATHY HARRIS
THE International Hockey Federation (FIH) have announced that rolling substitutes will be included in the Rules Book after the Barcelona Olympics, writes Cathy Harris.
The unrestricted interchange of 16 players — with 11 on the field at one time — has been experimental this season and will apply to all age groups, men and women.
The FIH have also made important changes to the penalty corner, which will also come in to effect on Sept 1.
The player pushing out the ball must have one foot at least behind the back-line, and the ball must be stopped outside the circle before a shot at goal is taken.
There is to be a clamp down on ‘manufactured fouls’ with the unintentional ‘feet’in the circle in mind, while in indoor hockey, only the goalkeeper may use his/her hand to stop the ball.
HOCKEY
Britain shown up by Tohou
By Cathy Harris
GREAT BRITAIN women paid the price for failing to capitalise on scoring chances when they slumped to a 2-1 defeat against the United States at Old Dominian, Virginia, on Sunday.
Liz Tohou, a member of the American team who finished ninth in the Olympic qualifying tournament in Auckland last October, struck a penalty corner goal in each half to help her side to an unexpected victory.
The British, who play the Americans in three more Tests as part of their extensive preparations for Barcelona, dominated for much of the match, but their poor shooting form, combined with a great display by the home goalkeeper, denied them.
Tohou opened the scoring in the 11th minute when she beat goalkeeper Jo Thompson and after Mary Nevill had levelled with a penalty stroke within a minute, Tohou made the game safe with her second goal two minutes from time.
It was an unfortunate British debut for Thompson, who has been overlooked several times by coach, Dennis Hay.
Mr Hay left out the experienced campaigners Karen Brown, Vickey Dixon and Jane Sixsmith from the starting line-up, though Sixsmith came on as a late substitute for Joanne Menown.
Marita Williams, the Welsh midfield player, scored the only goal of the game for Cardiff Athletic against Swansea to help her side end Swansea's six year unbeaten run in the Welsh Cup final.
Williams converted a 58th minute penalty stroke after she was illegally tackled following a fine individual run from a counter attack.
The win gives Cardiff a place in the European Clubs' Championships next year, with Swansea gaining a place in the Cup-Winners' Cup.
In the Welsh Plate competition, Haverfordwest beat St Fagan's 3-1.
Swindon have gained promotion to the Premier Division of the West Clubs League after winning all 16 of their matches, scoring 60 goals and conceding just three.
NON-LEAGUE SOCCER
Third boss of season at Chesham
By Tony Jefferies
CHESHAM United have appointed their third manager this season and their fourth in just over a year, following the resignation of Dave Brown.
Brown — formerly on the coaching staff at Chesham — took over at the Diadora League Premier Division club in December, when George Borg resigned after a disagreement over playing policy.
Borg had only been at Meadow Park since late last season, when he was appointed following the dismissal of John Clements.
Chesham's new manager is Gerald Aplin, brother of the club chairman Tony Aplin.
He has had no previous managerial experience, but will have the support of former Hendon manager Alan Randall as his assistant, as well as coaches Mike Gilchrist and Keith Power.
Chesham secretary Tony Greeham said Brown resigned for personal reasons, and that there was no animosity involved.
Eric Howard, manager of Diadora Division Three Bracknell Town, has resigned to move to Division Two Egham Town as general manager.
Bracknell reserve team manager Martin Benford has taken over first-team duties until the end of the season.
Soccer: Moran plans Wembley trip for Souness SOCCER
Liverpool players determined to secure a place in the Cup Final as peace moves save the big games
By William Johnson
GRAEME SOUNESS may yet realise his lifelong ambition of leading out an FA Cup Final team despite entering hospital yesterday for a triple by-pass heart operation which will keep him away from Anfield until the start of next season.
Liverpool players, stunned by their manager's dramatic disclosures, are more determined than ever to win next Monday's semi-final replay against Portsmouth, and club officials are already considering the prospect of Mr Souness interrupting his recuperation to be present at Wembley.
Ronnie Moran, who resumes the role of caretaker manager he relinquished just over a year ago when Mr Souness arrived from Glasgow Rangers to fill the vacancy created by Kenny Dalglish's shock resignation, said: ‘We must try to give Graeme something special to come back to in the form of the FA Cup itself.
‘We want him to be returning to a club which is guaranteed European football next season and, who knows, should we win the semi-final he might be able to lead out the team for the final.’
During his highly successful playing days at Liverpool — five Championships, three European Cups and four League Cups — Mr Souness never managed to appear in an FA Cup Final, and in five years as Rangers manager he was unable to add the Scottish Cup to the seven other domestic trophies he secured.
But at a sombre press conference Anfield chairman and close friend David Moores stressed that the main concern was Souness's quick and safe return to his high profile and highly stressful position.
‘Of course it is serious,’ said Mr Moores, responding to suggestions that Mr Souness's career is at risk.
‘A triple by-pass operation is bad in any form but knowing Graeme's character I feel sure that he will be back.
‘The whole of this club is rooting for him and wishing him well,’ added the comparatively young Liverpool chairman, who admitted to finding his first year in office ‘a difficult baptism’.
The good wishes emanating from all parts of Anfield were echoed throughout the game as news that an apparently superfit former Scotland international was in hospital requiring major surgery.
Coventry manager Don Howe, who underwent a similar operation nearly four years ago, said there was no reason why Mr Souness, 38, should not be back at his desk well before the start of next season.
‘Don't worry, you'll feel on top of the world afterwards and believe that you can do anything,’ was the message from Mr Howe, 56, who developed heart trouble while coaching England through their ill-fated 1988 European Championship campaign.
Tony Barton, who guided Aston Villa to European Cup glory in 1982, is another who can identify with Mr Souness's problem.
While at Northampton, he suffered a massive heart attack under the pressure of League management and yesterday recalled: ‘I never had a hint that anything was wrong with me.’
Mr Barton, whose last job, ironically, was caretaker manager of Portsmouth, added: ‘I can understand the pressure Graeme is under after the season he has had.
The fact that you are physically fit, like I was in 1984 and Graeme is now, has no bearing on things.’
Mr Souness, who arrived at a Manchester hospital offering the comment: ‘I can't say I'm looking forward to it but it is essential so it has to be done,’ broke the news to his players on the way back from Sunday's semi-final which Liverpool rescued late in extra time through Ronnie Whelan.
Soccer Comment: Dark and deadly side of intense life at the top
By Colin Gibson
GRAEME SOUNESS was one week short of his first anniversary in charge of Liverpool when the stresses and strains of football management took their heavy toll.
Mr Souness, 39 next month, was yesterday admitted to a Cheshire hospital for triple heart by-pass surgery which will keep him away from work until next season.
He had felt no pain, nor had any indication that, even though he appeared fit enough to play in the First Division, he was about to become a victim of coronary problems.
While there is a history of heart conditions in the Souness family — his father had a by-pass operation three years ago — there is no doubt that the added pressures of managing one of England's top clubs has accentuated the problem.
Modern medical technology suggests that Mr Souness's operation should not be life threatening but his predicament indicates he has become the latest to succumb to the strain of football management.
It could be the perfect explanation for why Kenny Dalglish, a close friend of Mr Souness, decided to walk away from Anfield 14 months ago.
There was great scepticism at the time over Mr Dalglish's explanation for his departure.
There have been those burrowing away for the last year seeking a more sinister reasons.
They have failed.
Like Mr Dalglish, Mr Souness has lived most of his footballing life in the pressure-cooker environment of Liverpool and Glasgow.
There have only been brief respites.
After five years as player-manager at Glasgow Rangers, Mr Souness has talked this season of mellowing.
But while his aggression may be receding, his passion is not.
Ray Wilkins, a former Rangers midfield player, believed that Mr Souness thrived on the pressures of the game but also had a knowledge of the darker side of management.
When he was offered the Rangers job, he told his estranged wife that there was no way he would become a sterotypical manager ‘working all hours and driving myself crazy’.
But that was precisely what he did.
He is not alone.
Others have survived similar heart complaints and are still working, both in the First Division and at the highest level on the Continent.
Don Howe is mounting a battle against relegation at Coventry after undergoing a by-pass operation following the European Championship in 1988, when he was England's coach.
Johan Cruyff is challenging for the European Cup with Barcelona after he had the operation last year.
He was back at work within 49 days.
But there are differences between Mr Cruyff and Mr Souness.
Medical tests have proved that the Barcelona manager feels little emotion during a game.
He can watch his Spanish league champions in the same dispassionate way that he would watch a Bulgarian second division match.
Mr Souness, as his celebrations after Ronnie Whelan's late equaliser in Sunday's FA Cup semi-final with Portsmouth at Highbury on Sunday showed, is gripped by every moment of a Liverpool performance.
As a member of the Scottish side that qualified for the 1986 World Cup, he would also have been aware that it was a heart attack that claimed Jock Stein's life at Cardiff in September 1985.
Mr Stein paid the ultimate price for his relentless involvement and love with the game.
Others pay a heavy toll in different ways.
Dedication to the job was one of the factors in the break up of Mr Souness's marriage.
He is not alone.
Several First Division managers have broken relationships as a legacy of their work.
There are those who have tried to uncork some of the mounting frustrations and pressures of the job by turning to the bottle.
They may have an extra glass — or in some cases bottle — to steady the nerves tonight.
It is certain that the news of Mr Souness's impending operation will have created a few more worry lines of the face of First Division management.
If this sort of thing can happen to him, especially a year after Mr Dalglish gave in to the pressure, then everyone is vulnerable.
Soccer: New formula lifts threat of player strike
By Colin Gibson
THE Premier League yesterday came up with a peace formula that seemed likely to avert the first strike by English footballers.
The Professional Footballers' Association were offered an improved percentage of television revenue after a 3½-hour meeting in London.
That was good enough to prompt Gordon Taylor, the PFA chief executive, to suspend the threat of industrial action.
He guaranteed that Sunday's Rumbelows Cup final between Manchester United and Nottingham Forest at Wembley and the FA Cup semi-final replay between Liverpool and Portsmouth next Monday would not be affected.
Mr Taylor said: ‘We have an improved offer from the Premier League and that is now under serious consideration.’
Mr Taylor and Rick Parry, the Premier League chief executive, who spent much of the weekend trying to thrash out an agreement on the telephone, are likely to meet again in the next 48 hours.
Although Mr Taylor refused to reveal whether or not the Premier League deal is acceptable to him or his members, who yesterday gave him overwhelming support for necessary action, it would be foolish to embark on a strike now.
Premier League chairmen struck a note of compromise rather than confrontation in London yesterday and they expect Mr Taylor to respond.
Details of the proposals remain secret, but Mr Taylor and the PFA were probably promised a larger minimum guarantee than the £1 million on the table last week.
It is also likely that the percentages will be on the sliding scale that seemed so attractive to the PFA a fortnight ago when peace was at hand.
In return, the chairmen will want the PFA to drop their demands for 10 per cent of the TV revenue.
Mr Taylor said: ‘What is clear is that we have come closer together.
We are now in the business of clearing the air, not spoiling it.’
The PFA announced the results of the strike ballot just after receiving the new offer from the Premier League by fax.
Mr Taylor gained more than 91 per cent of his members' support on all three questions of strike action in an act of predictable solidarity.
Mr Parry said after the meeting of clubs at the Football Association's Lancaster Gate headquarters yesterday that the chairmen had been determined to produce a settlement.
‘The overall mood was to produce a settlement without a hint of deliberate confrontation in the air,’ he said.
PFA BALLOT RESULT 1: Would you be prepared to take part in industrial action consisting of a refusal to play in all live televised matches after April 7?
Yes: 548.
No: 37.
Spoiled or blank: 2. 2: Would you refuse to take part in all televised matches after April 7?
Yes: 549.
No: 38 3: Would you be prepared to take part in industrial action with a strike starting on April 18?
Yes: 534.
No: 52.
Spoiled or blank: 1.