

The Arts: Tales out of school
By GILLIAN REYNOLDS
‘THERE are few more important jobs,’ said Kenneth Clarke, the Secretary of State for Education, on Election Call last Friday, talking about teachers.
At this point I could no longer contain my curiosity and rushed through to see what he looked like as he said it, thinking of all the teachers I know who would cherish these rare kind words.
It's a curious thing, having a radio programme on television, but this Radio 4 joint production with BBC1 has shown how neatly it can work in the right hands.
The thing that sustains it so well, if you don't mind my saying, is its radio sense of priorities: clear questions; answers to the point; any space between probed briskly.
All the television flummery — lights, sets, graphics, music and the rest — doesn't matter a jot if the questions are feeble and the answers are, as in a cookery demonstration, clearly prepared earlier.
On King Street Junior (Radio 4, Thursday) things were not going quite as swimmingly as the Secretary of State might wish.
The school secretary was looking for other jobs to supplement her pay packet, there wasn't enough money in the budget to pay for the books to teach the new curriculum, tests for seven-year-olds were bringing their own problems.
But this, as we all know, is fiction.
Jim Eldridge, the writer, used to be a teacher.
Now he writes full-time, for television as well as radio, and this will be his last season of King Street Junior.
I shall miss it.
It has always been one of those comedies built on character and situation.
It has no baying studio audience so that, if you laugh, you do so as if you were part of the scene.
The direction, by John Fawcett Wilson, is meticulous.
Were you gripped in wonderment at the April Foolery abroad on the airwaves last week?
Hints that merry muses were at work on Woman's Hour that day made me re-tune the tranny to FM to catch the results.
This was not a good idea.
If you are expecting jokes, they are seldom as good in fact as in prospect.
Here we had a feature on isolating the gene which causes nagging, another on the gender politics of public lavatories, and a report from Paris on giveaway days at the great houses of couture before coming to a ‘just discovered’ fragment of early Jane Austen.
Why was I reminded of Parent-Teacher Association concerts, where mums dress up as Madonna?
It was even worse on Kaleidoscope.
Mark Steyn, whose confidence in his wit is so great no amount of evidence to the contrary seems ever likely to shake it, took us on a tour of the National Humour Archive, complete with the Dawson Bequest, and a person at work on the wider socio-economic effects of Essex Girl jokes.
Wot larx.
Carry On Up the Zeitgeist (Radio 4, FM, Friday mornings) is gentle, intelligent, connective.
The subjects are things which have caught a national mood exactly, like ITMA, The Goons and, last Friday, Look Back in Anger.
Edward Blishen, the presenter, has an enviable gift for sketching in background and perspective, drawing up different strands of what was happening at the same time to make his argument, all with ease.
My only problem so far has been keeping track of who, exactly, in the Archives quotations is saying what.
Amanda Mares, the producer, might bear in mind that listeners hearing things for the first time need a second or two to focus.
This Friday: Beyond the Fringe.
After all those politicians, I'll be ready for it.
Health: The best care is at home Christine Doyle examines a pioneering scheme which cuts patients' time in hospital — and also saves money
By CHRISTINE DOYLE
HAD SHE been born 10 years ago, baby Jessica Kelly would by now have spent most of her life in hospital.
She was born with a blockage in her nose which hindered breathing, so an airway is being kept open by a small tube.
Soon the airway will stay open of its own accord, but until the tube can be removed mucus must be sucked out every few hours.
Thanks to Peterborough's Hospital at Home (HAH) system, Jessica has spent only a few days in the local district hospital.
Much of her care is carried out by her parents, Mary and Shaun, who have been shown how to use a suction machine and to spot trouble.
Every day a district nurse visits and every night a sister looks in.
Three nights a week a night nurse stays to give the Kellys some unbroken sleep.
Once every three weeks an enrolled nurse visits for four hours to give Jessica's mother a morning break.
Mary ‘could not be more grateful’ for this reassuring blanket of care.
‘At first I planned to stay in hospital with Jessica, but this has been so much better.
There is always someone to ask if we are worried and getting some sleep has helped us to stay sane.’
At any one time, Peterborough's HAH has about 24 child or adult patients.
You must be ‘admitted’ and ‘discharged’in the normal way, and consent and timing is carefully co-ordinated between patients, hospital doctors and with the patient's GP and district nurse.
Peterborough's HAH was set up more than 10 years ago, adapted from a system in Bayonne, France.
Now other health authorities are beating a path to Peterborough's door as this and other community health nursing schemes become a focus of national interest.
Mrs Elizabeth Allen, manager of Peterborough Community Service, insists the first principle is ‘to improve care for patients, not cut costs’, though the potential for the latter is also important.
Two recent reports by the King's Fund, an independent health policy group, focus on the revolution in biotechnology, which means thousands of patients are being discharged sooner from hospital.
Advances in keyhole surgery and laser treatment mean much speedier recovery.
For example, the day-case potential for removing cataracts grows almost daily and, according to the Audit Commission, an estimated 186,000 more such operations a year are possible within present resources.
More GPs are carrying out minor ‘lumps and bumps’ surgery and some are exploring community surgical centres where surgeons hold clinics and carry out day-case operations, and patients are bringing biotechnology into the home with self-monitoring for diabetes.
Barbara Stocking, author of the King's Fund report The Future Shape of Acute Services, points out that pumps which deliver measured doses of cancer therapy, antibiotics, drugs for pain relief and clotting factors for haemophilia could now be used at home.
In Japan and America, some doctors are trying out remote control telemonitoring of pregnant women or heart patients at risk of raised blood pressure.
But, despite the potential, Britain has been tentative in expanding hospital services into the home, although the distress caused to children who spend long periods in hospital has led to some developments in acute paediatric care at home.
Moreover, hospital early discharge schemes have been slow to develop, yet are immensely popular where they have taken root.
Linda Marks, in her King's Fund report Home and Hospital Care, singles out Peterborough HAH early discharge scheme for patients with hip fractures.
Mrs Megan Quaile, 79, who tripped and fractured her hip, came home after eight days and is ‘feeling fine’.
She says: ‘My husband John took me to the hairdresser yesterday.
There is no reason to be sitting in bed, but I never thought I'd be on the go so quickly.
Isn't it wonderful?’
Every morning and afternoon, a patient aide — who has had some nursing training — visits for two hours and helps her bathe, carry out exercises and walk.
An occupational therapist makes sure she has such things as a walking frame, special lavatory seat and correctly shaped chair, and a district nurse visits each day.
Patients leave the local hospital on average eight days after the fracture and spend nine days in the ‘hospital at home’.
Hip fracture patients who do not come home early tend to spend 30 days in hospital, at much greater cost to the taxpayer.
When one in five orthopaedic beds is occupied with hip fracture patients, the benefits of such schemes are obvious.
Another scheme developed in Peterborough with local gynaecologists sees Cherylynne Churchill arriving home by ambulance after three nights in hospital for her hysterectomy — the usual time is between seven to 11 days — to be greeted by the district nurse, a patient aide, and Mrs Elizabeth Allen.
Although feeling weak, Churchill said she was glad to be home.
‘I could not sleep in hospital…
I talked it all over with a liaison sister before the operation.’
She was due to receive several hours help from a patient aide each day.
Allen stresses that HAH, which takes about 400 patients a year and has received some help from Sainsbury Family Charitable Trusts, enables some people to by-pass the local hospital altogether.
‘Which would you prefer if you needed traction for three weeks?
I think home comforts and convenience might win the day.’
District nurses are crucial to the success of the scheme, Allen said.
‘The district nurse decides the quantity and quality of care required each day to nurse the patient at home.
This can range from 24 hours a day to as little as four to six hours.
‘I believe the only way for community nursing to develop is to extend the district nursing service.
District nurses have always had the skills to treat acutely ill patients, but have not had nurses or aides under them.
‘Peterborough HAH now has a large bank of qualified nurses and trained patient aides.
As well as being cost-effective there is a genuinely happy working relationship.’
Health: Bridging the dental divide With more dentists moving out of the NHS, private insurance can ease the expense, finds Ann Steele
By ANN STEELE
WHEN my NHS three-tooth bridge had to be replaced, I found to my horror that what had cost £150 three years ago would now set me back some £650 if supplied privately.
The dentist I had been going to for years no longer took NHS patients.
So I decided to look into private insurance schemes.
More people are taking out dental insurance against the painfully high expense of private dental treatment as more dentists move out of the NHS.
At the latest count, just over 26 million dental patients were treated under the NHS; 26,320 dentists are registered with the General Dental Council.
It is not clear how many still are NHS dentists.
In London and the South-East, it is getting harder to find an NHS dentist.
If you do have difficulty you can always contact the local Family Health Service Authority.
I discovered that my local dental hospital has a list of recommended NHS dentists in the area.
The one I chose from the list also belongs to a private insurance scheme.
About 10 per cent of his patients have joined the Denplan Care scheme.
For my insurance assessment, he charted all the work that had been done — each filling (type and size), every capped tooth, the bridge and the state of my gums, etc.
He totted up the number of points according to guidelines worked out by Denplan with categories from A to E. In my case, the extent of dental work meant I scored 158 points, putting me in the most expensive category, E.
My monthly insurance payment worked out at £18.20, but I couldn't qualify for the Denplan scheme until the necessary work had been carried out to make my mouth dentally fit.
Dentists are required to issue patients with a ‘dentally fit’ certificate before they are eligible.
After root canal treatment, my three-tooth bridge has to be replaced by two new crowns, plus a plate with one false tooth at a charge of £200 — the maximum under the NHS for one course of treatment.
Once completed, the dentist can reassess my mouth for insurance purposes.
Mouths can be upgraded or downgraded.
His Denplan subscriptions range from a monthly £5.90 for category A (mostly young children) rising on a scale of £7.50, £9.90, £14.80 to the top category.
The monthly fee covers continuous ordinary dental care.
The dentist explained: ‘It includes a minimum of two check-ups and a minimum of two courses of treatment a year.
It also covers you for anything that might need to be done in between.
You are covered for emergency treatment at home and abroad and accidental damage.’
(Cover of up to £125 per claim is paid for emergency treatment worldwide).
Those who spend time as a hospital in-patient for dental or maxilla-facial treatment get £50 a day.
There is cover of up to £3,000 against the cost of treatment for ‘external dental injury’— car accidents, for example.
Another advantage is that your dentist can spend unlimited time on your mouth and use whatever materials or techniques are needed without being bound by NHS limits.
There is a drawback.
Denplan does not cover the fitting of crowns or laboratory charges.
Patients are charged 35 per cent off the dentist's normal private fee for dentures, crowns, bridges or other treatment involving a dental laboratory or they are charged the laboratory costs.
Denplan Care was set up five years ago by two dentists and now has 200,000 patients and 3,000 dentists.
‘One thousand new patients join every week,’ says a spokesman, describing the scheme as ‘a maintenance programme for teeth’supported by insurance to cover unforeseen risks.
Other schemes include DenTOPlan offered by Domestic Insurance Services.
Health: THE CASE FOR NOT MEDDLING WITH THE NHS Whoever wins on Thursday, the only hope for the future of the health service lies in a period of stability, says Christine Doyle
By CHRISTINE DOYLE
CRISIS has become an uncomfortable way of life for the National Health Service…racked by a row which is dominating all the others.’
That might have been written a week ago following the extraordinary dispute over a young girl's ear.
In fact, it was written, by myself, in 1975 when the NHS was torn with strife as Mrs Barbara Castle, Labour's Social Services Secretary, determined to get rid of private ‘pay beds’ from the NHS.
The row, which inflamed doctors, was immortalised by the pictures of ‘battling Granny Esther Brookstone’, the leader of Charing Cross Hospital's branch of the National Union of Public Employees, demanding that the new hospital's ‘penthouse floor’ of private beds be turned over to the NHS.
While Mrs Castle's separatist moves led, ironically, to a massive growth of private hospitals, they did little to reduce lengthy waiting lists or upgrade dowdy hospitals.
Then, as now, the NHS was in the throes of reorganisation and the cry was that extra millions were being wasted on bureaucracy.
Now, as then, cynics ask if the present NHS furore is a phoney war.
Given the finite resources with which to balance theoretically infinite demands, it would be a miracle if any government produced NHS reforms with no downside.
The question now facing voters is which approach is likely to achieve the best balancing act.
Whatever the government, the NHS has always been seen as underfunded and that is unlikely to change so long as children and old people wait months for operations.
In fact, following cuts in the Seventies, NHS resources have grown by 50 per cent, even allowing for inflation.
Spending on health has risen from 4.7 per cent of the gross national product in 1979 to 5.7.
Public expectations have risen as people have watched the impact of medical technology in America.
It was no wonder that in the late Seventies, when Americans were beginning to query whether they were carrying out too many coronary by-passes, Britain's health correspondents were reporting that many people did not even know such life savers existed.
Despite a rising demand for operations, the latest analysis of the waiting list shows that more people are being treated and at a faster rate than ever before.
In 1991, 7.5 million people were treated as in-patients, a million more than in 1979.
Extra money for waiting lists has virtually abolished waits for two years — though this has meant more people waiting under one — and targets are being reset to reduce most waits below 18 months.
How would the NHS change under a Labour government?
The party promises an extra £1 billion over 22 months, which will provide a welcome 7,000 extra nurses and useful extras such as intensive care beds and 500 fully equipped ambulances.
But critics believe that, on top of a £36 billion NHS budget, Labour's bonus will have little effect.
It allows no commitment to freezing prescription charges, although these would be reduced by 30p.
And despite complaining about charges for dental checks, it would not consider removing them for years.
What could be far more critical is the devastating effect of another major reorganisation within the NHS so soon after the present Government's introduction of the more business-like internal market.
Labour proposes to get rid of Trust status hospitals, returning them to local authority control and substituting for the internal market a series of performance agreements boosted by incentives.
Fund holding by GPs would be abolished with new community health authorities bringing doctors and hospitals closer together.
Many doctors and managers, who have spent months setting up new pricing systems and methods of accountability, believe the stress involved in another complete turnabout would be demoralising.
With no evidence that it would improve standards, it is difficult to see the advantage of turning the system upside down once more.
Many of the BMA leaders have said that hospital is being set against hospital and doctor against doctor in the competitive process, yet they have produced few concrete examples, and a growing number of GPs are applying to become fundholders.
How are the Trust hospitals and GP fundholders working?
Many GPs see, as one put it, ‘a general improvement in services, swifter treatment and generally more alacrity in their approach’.
Like others, he would be dismayed to find a good service submerged in yet another change, after the election, just as many Trust hospitals appear to be making a go of it.
Early evidence of GP fundholding shows ‘clear evidence of benefits’, according to A Foothold for Funding, a research report by Professor Howard Glennerster and colleagues at the London School of Economics.
These include shorter waiting times for hospital treatment, and faster delivery of pathology test results.
Fears of a two-tier system of treatment between patients of fundholders and non-fundholders ‘are largely confused’: Glennerster sees no reason why, with careful management, the benefits could not be extended to all patients.
Doctors have never found it easy to go along with reform and were dragged, kicking and screaming, into the Bevan-style NHS in the first place.
On this occasion, their leaders have dragged their heels at every stage, without giving any of the ideas a chance.
One of the main arguments for giving GPs and hospitals freer rein is that they will pioneer the innovations that lead to swifter change.
It would be a shame if those doctors opposed to the reforms had once again got it wrong.
Another change of direction — rather than building and extending what has been been achieved during the past few years — could lead to yet another thoroughly dispiriting time for patients, and for those who work in the NHS.