

Laser offers hope to short-sighted
By David Fletcher, Health Services Correspondent
PATIENTS so short-sighted they could scarcely see their car from 25 yards can now see well enough without glasses or contact lenses to read its number plate.
The transformation follows a 15-minute laser operation which shaves microscopic amounts of tissue from the front of the eye.
The success of the treatment emerged yesterday as doctors gave details of the first 79 patients.
They said 78 per cent could now read the bottom line of an optician's sight test card without glasses and 97 per cent could see well enough without glasses to pass the driving test sight standard.
The results are to be presented to the annual congress of the College of Ophthalmologists tomorrow by Mr Miles Tutton, consultant ophthalmologist at Clatterbridge Hospital, Chester, where the treatment is provided.
Describing the results as ‘very encouraging’ he said: ‘It is possible that glasses will become a thing of the past.’
The treatment, known as photorefractive keratectomy, is performed on an out-patient basis and takes an average of 20 seconds of laser time.
Patients receive an eye drop anaesthetic for the procedure which is only available privately at a cost of £1,300 per eye.
The second eye is treated six months later.
More than 450 eyes have so far been treated but the study is based on 79 patients with the longest experience of the treatment.
Mr Tutton said the treatment was suitable for about six out of 10 short-sighted people.
Astigmatism, distorted vision caused by an irregularly shaped cornea, is currently a limiting factor.
He said developments are expected within a year which will not only enable severe astigmatism to be corrected but also long-sightedness.
Recovery of normal sight — without glasses — takes an average of three months after treatment, and he said side-effects were negligible.
More than 12,000 people have been treated in America and elsewhere and some have complained of glare, especially from car headlights when driving at night.
Mr Tutton blamed it on a type of narrow laser beam used in early operations and said it had not been a problem for the British patients.
Computers can improve your image
By Christine McGourty Technology Correspondent
PEOPLE think they are more attractive than they really are, researchers were told yesterday.
Using a computer technique called automated caricaturing, Dr Phil Benson, of St Andrew's University, Scotland, altered photographs of students to enhance their most and least attractive facial features.
When the students were asked to pick out the photograph that most resembled them, they usually selected the most flattering one.
‘People do believe they are more attractive than they actually are,’ said Dr Benson at a Science and Engineering Research Council conference at King's College, London.
‘It's partly to do with experience.
You see your image in the mirror every day and you fall in love with it.’
He predicted that in future the technique would be used to make subtle change to politicians' facial features in print and on television to make them appear more attractive.
For example, slightly upturning the corners of the female mouth gave a ‘sexy sweet smile’ that made the face more attractive.
He said the computer technique had important forensic applications.
‘We could caricature the face of a criminal and help jog people's memories.’
The researchers are about to start work on a project to use the technique to show how a person's face would change with age — a technique which could help find people missing for years.