

Mengele died in 1979, says pioneer of DNA testing
By Robin Gedye in Frankfurt
TESTS on the remains of Josef Mengele show the Auschwitz concentration camp doctor died in 1979, British scientists said yesterday.
Professor Alec Jeffreys, who pioneered genetic fingerprinting, said tests on a leg bone from a grave in Brazil had ‘proved not absolutely, but beyond reasonable doubt and with a high level of certainty’ that the remains were those of Mengele.
‘The results show that we can be 99 per cent certain that these are the remains of Josef Mengele rather than the remains of someone who coincidentally had precisely the same genetic makeup.’
Prof Jeffreys said he had not been asked to consider the possibility, suggested by sceptics, that the samples might have belonged to Mengele's brother Karl, who died in Germany in 1949.
In the tests, Prof Jeffreys had to match a minuscule fragment of DNA from Mengele's leg bone with blood samples from his son Rolf.
The announcement concludes a 33-year worldwide hunt for Mengele, who stood on the unloading ramp at Auschwitz sending Jews left to the gas chambers or right to the camp with a flick of his thumb.
Herr Hans-Eberhard Klein, the Frankfurt prosecutor who led the search, said: ‘I am glad it is over, but I would rather have had a live Mengele than a dead one so that some of the thousands who suffered under him could have gained some little satisfaction from a trial.’
Herr Klein said Mengele's first wife Irene and their son Rolf, the only family member publicly to condemn Josef Mengele for his crimes, had initially refused to give samples of their blood for the DNA tests.
They relented when it was explained that the alternative was to exhume the bodies of other relatives.
Josef Mengele died of a heart attack aged 68 while bathing in the sea off Bertioga, south of Sao Paolo, Brazil, on Feb 7, 1979.
He was buried the following day under the name of Wolfgang Gerhard, an Austrian Nazi who befriended him in Brazil and gave him his identity papers before returning to Vienna.
Herr Klein said he could not confirm that Mengele had returned twice to Germany during his years in South American exile — once for the funeral of his mother — but he knew that he had escaped to Argentina immediately after the war.
In 1959, three years after he applied for German papers under his own name at the German embassy, he fled to Paraguay as the Frankfurt authorities issued the first warrant for his arrest.
In 1961 he travelled to Brazil where he lived first under the name Peter Hochbichler until taking the name Gerhard in 1976.
During his time in Brazil he was sheltered by Wolfram and Liselotte Bossert, an Austrian couple introduced to him by Gerhard, who were with him on the day he died.
Mengele's family, who still run a machine factory in his home town of Gunzburg, kept in regular touch with him through letters.
His son Rolf, who disowned him after failing to extract any signs of remorse from him, visited him in 1977.
Israel's Justice Ministry said yesterday it accepted evidence that Mengele is dead.