

Inflation rate set to fall
BY ANNE SEGALL
THE rate of inflation is expected to fall from 4.1 per cent down to a possible 3.8 per cent when official figures are published tomorrow, writes Anne Segall.
This would put British inflation decisively below German levels, which reached 4.7 per cent last month.
The half-point cut in British mortgage rates will be the main factor behind the March decline in inflation.
Analysts believe it will pave the way for further cuts if the Conservatives retain power but fear a victory for Labour or a hung parliament could lead to higher interest rates.
The Financial Times 100 index showed a loss of 11 points to 2,393.2 on the day.
Share prices in Tokyo fell to a six-year low yesterday, weakening the Japanese banking system and threatening world economic recovery.
The Nikkei average has lost more than half its value since its 1989 peak.
The value of several banks fell by more than 10 per cent yesterday, and this will reduce the amount of money available to lend to British companies.
[City Report — P24; City Comment — P25]
‘It's going to be a sunny day — a sunny day in every way’ says Major as Tories narrow gap
By George Jones Political Editor
Polling Day Weather: Dry, sunny and warm THE RESULT of the general election was thrown wide open last night, with three polls suggesting a last-minute rallying of support for the embattled Conservatives.
As the political leaders completed their campaigns, three out of four eve-of-poll surveys put Labour and the Tories neck and neck, pointing to the closest result for nearly 20 years.
Gallup for The Daily Telegraph gave the Conservatives a hair's breadth half-point lead over Labour, with the Liberal Democrats in danger of being squeezed as the two main parties battle to emerge as the largest party in a possible hung parliament.
According to Gallup, the Tories are on 38½ per cent, Labour 38 and the Liberal Democrats 20.
In the same poll last week, the Tories also had a half-point lead.
Two other surveys that gave Labour a significant lead last week — fuelling Labour hopes that Mr Kinnock was on course for an outright majority — indicated that the gap had narrowed sharply.
Mori for the Times put Labour one point ahead on 39 per cent, with 38 for the Tories and 20 for the Liberal Democrats.
Last week, Mori put Labour seven points ahead.
ICM for the Guardian put the Tories and Labour on 38 per cent apiece, with the Liberal Democrats on 20.
All three polls put the Tory support up by between half a point and three points since last week.
However, NOP for the Independent and Newsnight gave Labour a three-point lead.
It put Labour on 42 per cent, the Conservatives on 39 and the Liberal Democrats on 17.
Both Labour and the Tories have strengthened their position since last week.
The polls indicated that the result was too close to call and that Mr Major and Mr Kinnock may have to wait well into tomorrow morning to know who will form the next Government.
They also point to a hung parliament.
Before hearing the poll results, Mr Major and Mr Kinnock voiced their confidence that they would win with an overall majority.
The Prime Minister rounded off his campaign by visiting two Tory marginal seats in south London.
He said he was ‘absolutely stone cold certain’ of winning a clear majority — though later on Channel 4 News he declined to follow Mr Kinnock in predicting the size of his majority.
Referring to the polling day weather forecast, he said: ‘It's going to be a sunny day — a sunny day in every way.’
Mr Kinnock said his forecast of a 20-seat majority for Labour had been confirmed ‘on the doorsteps’.
There was a buoyant mood among his advisers, who were confident that their surveys in critical marginals showed Labour on course to make significant gains at the expense of the Tories, particularly in the West Midlands and the North.
Labour needs an eight-point swing to take power — something not achieved by any Opposition since 1945.
Although the polls show the Liberal Democrats have gained support during the campaign, 20 per cent is well short of the breakthrough Mr Ashdown has been seeking.
It is down on the 22.6 per cent the Liberal-SDP Alliance secured in the 1987 election.
Mr Ashdown must now pin his hopes on efforts to target vulnerable Tory seats, such as Bath, which is held by the Tory chairman, Mr Patten.
At an eve-of-poll rally in Taunton, Somerset, the Liberal Democrat leader urged voters to reject division and decline under the main parties and grasp an ‘historic opportunity for change’.
‘If this country doesn't stop arguing about the past, re-fighting the battles of previous generations, we will continue to go downhill,’ he said.
The poll results provided a morale boost for the Conservatives, who have been campaigning against the background of a fierce economic recession.
They suggest that warnings by Mr Major that a vote for the Liberal Democrats could let Labour into Downing Street by the ‘back door’ may have frightened some waverers back into the Tory fold.
According to Gallup, Tory support is the firmest of all three parties.
When those surveyed were asked if they would definitely vote, the Conservatives were two points ahead, with 40 per cent compared to 38 for Labour and 19½ for the Liberal Democrats.
A notable feature of the campaign has been a large number of ‘don't knows’, with many people waiting until the last minute before deciding how to vote.
If the polls accurately reflect voting intentions across the country, then a hung Parliament is the most likely outcome.
A computer analysis of Gallup's figures gives the Tories 314 seats (12 short of an overall majority), Labour 297, the Liberal Democrats 16 and others 24.
Even if the Tories lose their overall majority, Mr Major is almost certain to seek to form a minority Government if he has the largest number of seats.
An inconclusive result could lead to several days of uncertainty, with either Mr Major or Mr Kinnock seeking to put together a government.
Mr Major was pressed on the BBC's Election Call programme yesterday on how the Tories might vote on a Queen's Speech put forward by a minority Labour government.
He replied: ‘In such an unlikely event, if the Labour Party produced anything remotely like the policies they have set out, we would vote against it.’
His remarks were seen as a hint that the Conservatives might let a minority Government led by Mr Kinnock stay in office if it toned down its programme, rather than force an immediate second election.
Addressing the final Tory news conference later, Mr Major reaffirmed he was confident of winning a majority sufficient to keep him in power for another five years.
The Tory campaign concluded with Mr Major, flanked by senior ministers, declaring that Conservative policies would accelerate economic recovery.
‘Our re-election will make that recovery certain.
Businessmen are in no doubt of the choice.
Labour's policies would hurt investment, undermine the pound, drive up mortgage rates and send the recovery into a nosedive.’
However, Mr Major made his frankest admission so far that the Tory campaign had been dogged by the recession.
‘If it had not been for the difficulties and bruises caused by the recession, I have no doubt there would be an increased majority for the Conservative Party,’ he said.
Interviewed last night on Channel 4 News, Mr Major also conceded that the Conservatives might not have been ‘sensitive enough’ to some of the concerns in Scotland.
But he added: ‘There must be a better way of meeting those concerns than taking action that could lead to the break-up of the United Kingdom.’
Mr Kinnock concentrated on Labour's theme that it was ‘time for change’ after 13 Tory years.
He said Labour was seeking a mandate for the action needed to pull Britain out of recession.
An average of last night's polls puts Labour on 39.3 per cent, the Tories on 38.4 and the Liberal Democrats on 19.3.
On a uniform national swing, these figures would give the Conservatives 306 seats in the new Parliament, Labour 305, the Liberal Democrats 16 and others 24.
The Tories would be 20 seats short of an overall majority.
SmithKline duo share £3.5m
By Roland Gribben Business Editor
THE DRUG company SmithKline Beecham fuelled the debate over top salaries on the eve of the election by disclosing that its two senior executive directors collected more than £3.5 million last year, up 35 per cent on 1990.
Mr Henry Wendt, 58, chairman, received £1.8 million in salary, bonus and income from share options, up 93 per cent, while Mr Bob Bauman, 60, chief executive, picked up £1.7 million, a rise of 3.5 per cent .
Both men are American and have been among the best-paid executives of a British quoted company since the merger three years ago of SmithKline, an American drug company, and Beecham.
The latest figures show they are comfortably the best-paid duo at the head of a company quoted on the London stock market.
Both would face steep tax rises under a Labour government.
Mr Wendt's take-home pay could be down to £828,345 against £1.1 million under the Tories.
Mr Bauman would collect £754,777 under Labour and £1,040,822 from the Tory tax regime.
Share option pay-outs accounted for £1.2 million of their joint income.
The group's report and accounts also show that the six executive directors are in line to pick up £1.46 million in share option gains by July.
SmithKline is Britain's fifth biggest company and one of the most profitable.
A spokesman said the top salaries had to be seen in the context of the company's performance last year and its importance as a global business.
Profits and earnings per share rose 17 per cent and dividends to shareholders were up 10 per cent.
City Report — P24 
City: Delay in BCCI deal
AN AGREEMENT offering creditors of Bank of Credit & Commerce International returns of up to 40 p.c. suffered a major setback yesterday when the High Court granted a four-week adjournment before considering whether to authorise the deal.
Vice-chancellor Sir Donald Nicholls agreed to demands from a majority of the informal BCCI creditors' committee for more time to consider the deal, under which the bank's majority shareholders in Abu Dhabi will inject nearly £1 billion.
In return, Abu Dhabi is seeking an undertaking from at least 70 p.c. of creditors with claims of more than $7 billion (£4.1 billion) not to pursue any legal action against the majority shareholders.
The vice-chancellor said the creditors' committee had been given insufficient time and information to judge the proposals, which were negotiated by BCCI liquidator Touche Ross, particularly whether accepting Abu Dhabi's package would recover more money for creditors than suing the majority shareholders.
Touche Ross, which opposed the adjournment, said it would cause difficulties for further hearings in other jurisdictions.
City: Hong Kong slumps 98 points
SHARE prices slumped in Hong Kong yesterday when investors took fright at the continued plunge in Tokyo.
At one time, the Hang Seng Index was down 116 points, but it recovered to close 98 points lower at 4,827.
All the ‘Hongs’ were weaker.
Cheung Kong, controlled by tycoon Li Ka-shing, dropped 10 cents to HK$20.60 (£1.34) and Swire (owner of Cathay Pacific Airways) tumbled 60 cents to HK$28 (£2.09).
The Hang Seng's 2 p.c. decline prompted traders to expect further falls unless there is some good news.
They suggest the new trading range is between 4,850 and 4,750.
The volume, at HK$2.12 billion (£160m), was marginally higher than it was in trading on the market on Tuesday, but it did not suggest a rush of sellers.
City: Losses at Costain hit £69m
COSTAIN, the engineering, construction and mining group, reported losses of £69m — the biggest in its 127-year history-after write-downs on property and housing land and other provisions totalling £95m.
Peter Costain, chief executive, admitted that the company had followed the wrong strategy when it continued to buy into commercial property at the peak of the market.
‘We will not be returning to commercial property as an investment,’ said Mr Costain yesterday, outlining the group's strategy to build up its engineering, construction and mining interests and reduce debt.
Costain is not paying a final dividend, making the interim 43/4p the total for the year.
The shares were up 1 at 66p.
City: VAT cut as France tackles economy
By Tim Witcher in Paris
FRANCE'S new prime minister, Pierre Beregovoy, yesterday ordered a cut in value-added tax on luxury goods and cars and a new job-creating initiative as he attempted to relaunch the country's economy.
The reduction in VAT from 22 p.c. to 18.6 p.c. from next Monday will bring car prices down by about 2.8 p.c.
Mr Beregovoy said the tax cut would inject about Fr5 billion (£500m) into the French car market.
But he added that he was determined to support the franc on international markets.
He said: ‘That is defending the buying power of France and the French people and defending jobs.’
Mr Beregovoy also insisted that the country's social security system must also be brought back into balance.
‘You must not confuse economic rigour and social rigour,’ he said.
As part of the fight against unemployment, now nudging 3m, he said 900,000 long-term jobless would be offered work, training, or a ‘general interest’ post by the end of October.
The ‘general interest’ post would be in environmental sectors or helping the poor, old and disabled.
Tax and social security incentives are to be given to encourage part-time working and early retirement.
Proposed reforms to the French port system, which have led to one-day strikes by dockers almost every week, are to be continued, the prime minister said.
Measures to make deputies reveal more personal financial details, to avoid scandals that have dogged the Socialist Party for several years, brought jeers from the opposition.
They briefly walked out of the National Assembly during the speech.
City: Rough ride for Euro Disney
By Mary Brasier
IN A sudden descent resembling the hurtle down Big Thunder Mountain, the price of shares in Euro Disney, the Mickey Mouse Paris theme park, plunged on the stock exchange yesterday.
Three days before Disney is due to throw open the thrills of its £2.3 billion theme park to the public, shareholders had their own taste of a roller coaster ride as Euro Disney shares fell Ff85 to Ff1465, dragging down the Paris stock market index.
The plunge was partly the revenge of a group of investors invited to sample the Disney rides in a pre-opening visit on Tuesday.
Some of the 37,000 guests among investors, financial analysts and Disney employees found themselves temporarily stranded on Big Thunder Mountain as the power failed twice and a traffic jam caused by too many trains on the track meant the ride had to be reprogrammed.
At least the stereophonic crickets to provide atmosphere chirped to order.
Disney has been plagued by difficulties ranging from rows with contractors over construction costs to grumblings by members of the Disney ‘cast’ over employment conditions.
Out of 12,000 mostly unskilled workers taken on to staff the park, of which two thirds have been French and the rest from abroad, as many as 4,000 are thought to have quit in the last few months, prompting worries about mounting costs on the operators' training and employment budgets.
Drivers on the French express railway, the RER, which is expected to bring visitors to the site from central Paris are also threatening to strike on Sunday, when the park opens, because of the demands on them to cope with extra passenger traffic.
City: Hard day's night in the City
By Karen Cooper
PARTS of the City will stay open throughout election night tonight to look after clients while others will start earlier than usual tomorrow.
Among stockbrokers, Smith New Court and UBS Phillips & Drew — which will also trade foreign exchange, gilts and bonds — will keep phone lines open all night but only for institutional clients.
Other brokers have made smaller scale arrangements with clients.
Private investors will be able to use ShareLink, the execution-only broker, which is offering all-night dealing in FT-SE 100 Index and privatised utility shares.
Fidelity, another execution-only broker, will open at 6am on Friday.
Bets are also being taken until ‘at least 2am’ at IG Index, both on the number of seats the parties will win and on what the FT-SE Index might be.
City Index will keep the same hours but its seats betting has already closed.
Friday trading on the Stock Exchange will open half an hour early at 7.30am, although market-makers are not obliged to quote prices until 8am.
Closing time is the normal 4.30pm.
Trading in individual equity options contracts on the London International Financial Futures & Options Exchange also begins 30 minutes early at 8.05am while Footsie futures and options trading starts at 7.25am.
But at London Fox and the London Metal Exchange it will be business as usual.
City: Chairman's pay up 93pc to £1.8m at Beecham
By Roland Gribben
THE top two executives at pharmaceuticals group SmithKline Beecham yesterday emerged as the highest paid duo in a major British quoted company.
They collected £3.5m in salary, bonus and share option payments between them last year, an increase of 35 p.c. on the 1990 levels.
Henry Wendt, 58, chairman, picked up £1.8m, an increase of 93 p.c. while Bob Bauman, 60, chief executive, collected £1.7m, representing a more modest 3½ p.c. increase in his total package.
Mr Wendt's income puts him on a par with Peter Wood, founder of the Royal Bank of Scotland's Direct Line insurance company who was paid £1.84m last year, but leaves him well ahead of other leading company chairmen.
Lord Hanson, head of the industrial conglomerate that bears his name, earned £1.38m and Sir Paul Girolami, head of Glaxo, the rival drugs group, £1m.
The American duo at the head of SmithKline would lose heavily under Labour's tax plans.
Mr Wendt's take home pay, according to accountant Grant Thornton, could drop from £1.1m under the Tories to £828,000 under Labour.
The comparable figures for Mr Bauman are £1m and £754,000.
Executive directors are also in line to pick up share option gains totalling £1.4m from schemes operated before SmithKline and Beecham merged three years ago, according to details in the company's report and accounts, released yesterday.
The options have to be exercised before July 26.
The remuneration packages will add fuel to the debate about top-level rewards but the group claimed yesterday that with pre-tax profits and earnings per share up 17 p.c. last year and the dividend to shareholders 10 p.c. higher the increases were justified.
A spokesman said: ‘We have to attract people on a global basis and we want the best.
You have to pay global salaries in this context.’
Top-level salaries in the group have traditionally been considerably higher than the British norm because of the American influence in the group.
The latest set of accounts show the remuneration packages for the two executives included £1.2m in gains from share options operating in the pre-merged companies.
Mr Wendt, who has a SmithKline background, was paid £696,000 in salary and benefits against £673,000 in 1990, a bonus of £282,000 (£267,000) and a pre-merger option payment of £835,000.
For Mr Bauman, there was a basic salary of £904,000 (£831,000), a bonus of £422,000 (£393,000) and share option income of £402,000 (£444,000).
Overall, six executive directors were paid almost £7.4m between them, including £1.8m in share options, compared with £7.8m (£946,000 in options) in 1990 when the board was bigger.
The accounts also provide details of the gains so far on executive share options in the merged company.
They totalled almost £5.7m (£3m in 1990), including £1.46m from the pre-merger schemes, at the end of last year because the share price soared from 633 to 896p last year.
The shares closed 22 down at 830p last night on the back of the Wall Street slide.
City: Dow plunges another 32
By Jonathan Confino in New York
WALL Street plunged for the second straight session yesterday on fears that shares are overpriced as well as jitters about the continuing haemorrhaging on the Tokyo stock market.
After plummeting more than 60 points on Tuesday, the Dow Jones index fell another 50 points in early trading yesterday before recovering its poise in the afternoon and closing 32.20 lower at 3181.35.
Some of the more broadly-based share indices have suffered sharper losses in the past few weeks and analysts believe the Dow could soon match these declines.
Shares rose sharply at the beginning of the year in anticipation of an economic rebound, but the recovery has so far been very sluggish.
Chung Lew, chief equities trader at Kleinwort Benson in New York, said: ‘The market has become very high on a valuation basis and investors seem to be switching out of stocks into other areas such as bonds.’
Concern is also focused on Tokyo where the 225-share Nikkei average fell a further 3½ p.c. to 17,175.53.
It has now lost more than half its value since the 1989 peak.
Analysts worry that Japanese investors, who have substantial holdings of American equities, may be forced to sell some of their shares to raise cash.
City: Whitbread in pub lease deals
By Karen Cooper
BREWER and retailer Whitbread has begun advising more than 1,000 of its tenants that it has arranged deals to lease their pubs to a string of brewers and pub groups as part of a move to comply with the Government's beer orders.
The first of an estimated 10 deals, which Whitbread says do not include beer supply agreements, emerged yesterday.
Kent brewer Shepherd Neame said it had leased 60 Whitbread pubs in the south-east of England.
Devenish, based in the south-west, is also among the lessees.
Two other deals of similar size to Shepherd Neame's have already been completed.
The aim of the three-to-seven-year leasing programme is to free 1,250 pubs from the brewers' tie before the November deadline, rather than try to sell them into a depressed market.
Whitbread says the freeholds could be sold when the property market picks up.
The brewer is required to release 2,250 pubs in total and has already sold 950.
City: NatWest arm $30m in black
By JONATHAN CONFINO
NATIONAL Westminster's American banking subsidiary yesterday announced it has returned to the black after two years of heavy losses, writes Jonathan Confino in New York.
National Westminster Bancorp reported after-tax profits of $30m (£17m) in the first quarter, compared with a $191m loss during the same period last year.
John Tugwell, the bank's respected executive who was drafted in last year to help reorganise the troubled subsidiary, said the turn-around performance is expected to continue.
Natwest Bancorp said there had been a further reduction of charge-offs with its allowance for loan losses standing at $568m, or 4.68 p.c. of total lending.
Total outstanding loans have fallen from $15.8 billion to $14 billion.
City: Float put back as ICL slumps
By Roland Gribben
ICL, the computer company 80 p.c. -owned by Fujitsu of Japan, is pushing back its re-flotation timetable because profits are under pressure in a tougher market.
Pre-tax profits dropped almost 44 p.c. last year to £62m after provisions of £10m for rationalisation costs and the benefits of a £7m a year contribution from a pensions holiday.
But the company outstripped competitors by remaining in the black.
Fujitsu bought its majority stake from STC in 1990 and promised to seek a market quotation for the business again by 1995.
But hopes of an early offer were dashed yesterday when Peter Bonfield, chairman and chief executive, said the flotation was likely to be later rather than sooner because ICL could not meet the Fujitsu criterion of sustaining a market price of 225p a share.
Mr Bonfield also disclosed that, following initial hostility, ICL had been given a role in the European Community's advanced communications programme after reassuring critics that the technology flow with Fujitsu would be two-way.
A 5 p.c. reduction in gross margins on lower-margin desk-top computer products and the weakness in the market were blamed for last year's downturn but ICL says its share of the British computer market rose by one point to 19 p.c.
Turnover was up 16 p.c. to £1.87 billion and Nokia Data, the Finnish company bought for £230m in September, made a modest contribution to profits.
Mr Bonfield said business would ‘remain tough’ this year.
City: Queens Moat £9m buy
By Marc Popiolek
THE CHESTER International Hotel is set to become part of Queens Moat Houses after the former Business Expansion Scheme company agreed to accept an offer valuing it at £9½m.
Queens Moat has managed the 152-room, four-star hotel in Chester for three years, owning a 28 p.c. shareholding, and so has only another £6.9m to find.
The Queens Moat results for 1991, also announced yesterday, showed profits kept largely intact by the group's presence in Germany, Benelux and France.
Before tax, it made £90.4m, down only 4 p.c., although the slide in earnings per share was steeper at 12 p.c., to 7.58p fully diluted.
Europe provided 42 p.c. of the profits last year.
In Germany and the Benelux countries, profits rose a fifth, but in Britain recession caused a fall of a tenth.
Higher interest rates on the Continent pushed finance charges up from £43.1m to £56.8m, covered two-and-a-half times by operating profits.
Dividends rise from 2.62p to 2.88p, with the final of 1.54p payable on May 28.
The shares fell 5 to a new low of 71p, a 38 p.c. discount to reported net assets of 114p.
City: Imro takes blame on Maxwell fraud
By Sonia Purnell
THE Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (Imro) has admitted it was partly to blame for allowing the Maxwell pension fraud to happen and that it was ‘thumped’ for its supervision of the Maxwell fund managers by the parliamentary select committee on social security.
In a special note about the committee's findings sent to its 1,250 members last week, Imro wrote: ‘We cannot claim to have come out of this very well: to an extent, Imro was thumped and that is not an agreeable experience.
‘We still believe that, in the circumstances, we had no sustainable reason for refusing membership to two companies.
The committee is critical of our subsequent supervision, once having decided we should admit those companies.
‘Clearly the whole system failed and we have no wish to deny that part of the responsibility that is properly ours.
We accept we must re-examine our supervisory arrangements — and our priorities — in the light of this history.’
Imro added: ‘We do not seek to defend our regulatory performance in the present case as beyond criticism; but against deliberate, calculated theft, only general vigilance by all offers protection.
In the Maxwell case such vigilance was notably absent; not one of those with a professional or personal interest — or duty-made any effort to alert the regulator.’
The note said Imro was concerned there might be ‘similar undetected shenanigans’ in other occupational pension schemes.
‘We think it unlikely — at least, we have no evidence to suggest it; but we are already well launched on a comprehensive review of that sector of the membership.’
Imro also plans to demand explanations from members with complex ownership structures.
City: Brierley quiz on accounts
By Karen Cooper
SIR Ron Brierley yesterday reassured shareholders in GPG, the investment vehicle where he is chairman, that ‘we are doing everything in our power’ to solve the impasse which has frozen London trading in the shares for 15 months.
He also foreshadowed a limited life for the company, possibly of up to five years.
‘There is an optimum point in the life of any company and most companies go beyond that,’ he said.
‘Let's not keep on going just because we think we have to.’
The New Zealand-born but peripatetic investor was speaking at GPG's annual meeting in London, where he faced tough questioning from a disgruntled shareholder about accounting practices and future strategy
The shareholder, International Pacific Investments, belongs to the Australian merchant bank currently defending Australian Consolidated Investments against a £56m takeover bid by GPG and its biggest shareholder Brierley Investments.
It claims GPG's adoption in its last set of accounts of the British Financial Reporting Exposure Draft 1 has inflated earnings, overvaluing the company by more than 50 p.c.
City: Spurs aims to restore dividends
TOTTENHAM Hotspur shareholders are to be asked to cancel £7m of the company's £8.2m share premium account to eliminate the £6.8m estimated deficit on revenue account which is preventing the payment of dividends.
Chairman Alan Sugar says that while there will be a trading loss in the year to May, the group is now trading profitably.
City: Cadbury bites
CADBURY Schweppes stepped up its efforts to strengthen its position in the continental chocolate market with the purchase of a 70 p.c. stake and an option to buy the balance in privately owned Piasten, one of the biggest companies in the German boxed chocolate market.
Piasten had sales of Dm126.1m in the year to June 30, 1991.
City: Power profits
FRENCH telecommunications and power group Alcatel-Alsthom increased profits by 20 p.c. to £618m last year on an 11 p.c. rise in sales to £16 billion.
The dividend goes up to Fr13.5 from Fr12.5.
City: Railway target
GERMANY'S railway system will need £140 billion of investment over the next eight years and should be privatised to avoid a budgetary ‘disaster’ for taxpayers, the head of the rail network Heinz Durr told the government.
City: Sale to Safeway
HALL Engineering is selling 7.2 acres of its 35-acre site formerly occupied by its RBC subsidiary in Stafford, to Safeway for £6.06m.
The deal is conditional on the supermarket group obtaining planning consent to build a store on the site.
City: Pacific offer
MARTIN Currie Pacific Trust is to acquire the issued ordinary share capital of Pacific Horizon Investment Trust in an agreed takeover.
Pacific shareholders are to be offered new Martin Currie shares at 92 p.c. of the underlying asset value of the Pacific trust.
City: Two wound up
MICROBETTER and Airflow Communications have been compulsorily wound up by court order under the Insolvency Act at the request of the Department of Trade and Industry.
City: Lloyd's losses
LLOYD'S is still doing better than the corporate insurers said David Coleridge, chairman of Lloyd's.
The British composite insurers reported losses of about £5 billion in 1990, and more than £6 billion in 1991, he added.
American insurers in 1990 lost $21½ billion and between 1988 and 1990 106 United States insurance companies became insolvent, Mr Coleridge said.
Lloyd's is expected to announce this year losses for 1989 of between £1 billion and £1.6 billion though some market men fear the loss could rise to £2 billion.
City: Turnover ahead
DAILY equities turnover in London rose 1½ p.c. last month to total an average £2.7 billion.
Average overseas turnover was up 3.3 p.c. to £1.2 billion after a surge of trading in American shares.
Trading in European shares rose 3 p.c. to £16.4 billion.
City: Unilever deal
UNILEVER is to sell its Irish animal feeds business, Paul & Vincent, to Southern Milling, a Cork-based feeds group, for an undisclosed sum.
The sale is part of Unilever's withdrawal from many of its agribusiness operations.
City: Cowie brighter
SIR Tom Cowie, chairman of motor retailer and financier T Cowie, told shareholders at the company's annual meeting that trading in its first quarter was ‘comfortably ahead’ of last year.
City: Funds for MTM
MTM's bankers have agreed to continue to provide funds for the deeply troubled chemicals group until the end of the month.
The ‘standstill’ agreement means the company will be able to meet immediate commitments from existing facilities.
City Comment: Cash dries up as Japan packs its money bags
THE unquestioning awe with which the West once gazed on Japanese financial markets has gone: the natural laws which apply in New York and London have finally been seen to apply to Tokyo too.
Asset values there are falling from the gravity-defying levels of the 1980s in a manner which threatens the whole financial system.
Land and building prices are tumbling — far faster even than in the West.
The Nikkei index of share prices plunged by 3½ p.c. on both Tuesday and Wednesday, and whatever happened in the early hours of this morning, the index has lost nearly a quarter of its value this year and more than halved from its peak.
Recession has finally reached Japan but because its investments were so overvalued, it has hit the financial markets far harder.
Blue chip shares now sell on a phenomenal 37 times their earnings — but that is half as phenomenal as the ratio of three years ago.
But with profits falling too, share prices still have further to fall to come back into line.
It would be nice to dismiss this as a problem concerning a far-off country paying the price of its excess, if it was not for the West's dependency on Japan's past boom.
It is not only that a significant part of most people's pensions are invested in these falling Japanese shares but also that a significant part of Japan's wealth is invested in the West.
Europe and America sold properties and companies from Hollywood to Sunderland to Japanese investors and turned increasingly to Tokyo's bottomless pit to fund projects which could not be financed here.
That cash is already drying up as Japan concentrates its resources at home.
But as past foreign investment turns sour, including loans to projects such as London's Canary Wharf, and domestic investment values fall, Japan's banks — the largest in the world and once financiers to it — are feeling the pinch.
Although the standards will not come into force until next year, most Japanese banks are either in breach of the Bank for International Settlements' capital-adequecy ratios, or about to be.
Not surprisingly, bank shares have led the stock market down.
The Bank of Japan will eventually be forced to renegotiate — and probably to postpone — the imposition of the BIS standards.
But as confidence evaporates, the better part of the whole financial sector could face rescuing and re-regulating.
City Comment: Smith's pyramid a crushing burden
VOTERS should ask one question before they cross today's ballot-paper: Can the Labour party fund its shopping spree without raiding the pay packets of ‘ordinary’ people?
Would-be Chancellor John Smith thinks that better roads, schools, hospitals and the welfare of grannies can be satisfied simply by plugging into the surplus cash of ‘the rich’.
But the pot of gold simply does not exist as he has already discovered in trying to pay for Labour's initial promises.
To raise funds for higher pensions and child benefit, he is having to turn to 4½m people on middling incomes with his higher tax affecting those earning just 28 p.c. above the national average — and 18 p.c. above the South East's average.
But Mr Smith has merely scratched the surface of Labour's election promises.
Accountants Coopers & Lybrand cost Labour's promises at £26 billion, even if the more far-fetched ones are dropped or postponed.
Yet his higher taxes will finance only the £6½ billion of additional spending in his ‘shadow’ Budget.
Financing just the first instalment of Labour's spending plans would raise basic-rate income tax by 3½p in the pound if the entire burden was not to be loaded on to the better-off.
The next £9 billion instalment would require a 4½p tax rise and the final £10 billion of pledges — the ‘possible’ expenditure — another 5p.
But after his first shot, Mr Smith will find it virtually impossible to raise much additional revenue from the better-off.
Four million people, most on incomes just above the average, cannot possibly pay for the benefits and increased services for 56m.
The top 20 p.c. of earners who Mr Smith says it is fair to tax more heavily — middle-managers, professionals and skilled workers-provide 40 p.c. of all income tax and the top 5 p.c. contribute 35 p.c.
However broad their shoulders, they cannot support the pyramid that the Labour party wishes to build on top of them.
City Comment: Looking abroad for our funds
WHOEVER wins the election, we know that planned government borrowing will be high.
To raise its money, the Treasury will thus re-activate that forgotten corner of the Civil Service, the Department of National Savings.
In recent years this department has been busier repaying savings to the public than attracting them.
In 1989–90 it took in £5 billion and paid out £9 billion, the following year's net outflow was £1 billion but for the year just ended there was a £1 billion inflow and now that the government really needs cash, it is probably looking for about £5 billion this year.
It will take generous terms to attract such sums from recession-hit Britons.
If we like them enough to invest, we will either cut our spending (bad for the high street and the recovery) or switch savings from other institutions (notably the building societies) putting pressure on them to match those terms.
Ironically, a Labour government would not have to be so generous as the Tories.
Because National Savings offers tax-free returns, even current rates will be more attractive to top-rate taxpayers when the top rates are raised.
Building societies' own retail inflows are already modest — a mere £145m in the latest reported month — but luckily, so is demand for mortgages.
But enhanced National Savings rates will be a threat to societies' cashflows and any upturn in the housing market will exacerbate it.
If the new government — whoever heads it — wants to avoid an embarrassing, inflationary and recession-reinforcing rise in mortgage rates, it must allow societies to turn increasingly to the international money markets.
Societies can already take up to 40 p.c. of their funds from such wholesale markets: lifting the limit to 50 p.c. seems sensible, but it will require legislation.
Any new government which does not want to be caught out should draft the necessary statute changes as a priority.
City: LME aided American watchdog
By JONATHAN CONFINO
THE London Metal Exchange has played an important role in the exposure of an alleged scam by an American company with a virtually identical name, writes Jonathan Confino in New York.
The Washington-based Commodity Futures Trading Commission yesterday announced it has won an injunction against London Metal Exchange (USA) and its two owners.
The court decision prohibits the destruction of books and records, and freezes the defendants' assets.
The CFTC claims the Delaware-based firm was involved in the illegal sale to the public of off-exchange futures contracts for precious metals.
David King, chief executive of the LME, said the American firm had no connection with the London exchange.
‘We are proud of the part we played.’
City: IoD's last night of the polls
By ROLAND GRIBBEN
THE Institute of Directors last night attempted to provide an election eve boost for the Government with preliminary results from a business survey showing a significant improvement in company performance.
But with the business community apprehensive about the election outcome and worried at the prospect of a Labour government there is no comparable improvement in business confidence.
Financial markets will suffer sharp setbacks if Labour is victorious, according to a poll of 43 dealers by Reuters, the financial information and news agency company.
Seven out of 10 expect Labour to be the biggest party and on average they predict the FT-SE 100 index will be almost 80 points lower than last night's close of 2393.2 if Neil Kinnock is in Downing Street tomorrow.
Provisional indicators from the institute's latest bi-monthly survey based on the first batch of replies from 170 out of the 300 normally canvassed were rushed out after being swiftly analysed yesterday morning by consultants Taylor Nelson.
They showed the proportion of directors reporting improved order books has risen from 28 p.c. in February to 43 p.c. this month, while 37 p.c. say profits are higher compared with 30 p.c. two months ago.
Business volume is up, according to 47 p.c. of the sample against 31 p.c. in February.
There is also a slight improvement on the jobs front with 30 p.c. of directors saying they expect to recruit more compared with 25 p.c. in the earlier survey.
But the survey has failed to detect any improvement in confidence and the institute is blaming political uncertainties.
There is no change in the proportion of directors claiming to be more optimistic.
The number of those less optimistic has fallen from 30 p.c. to 24 p.c., while a significant 9 p.c. say they are uncertain about the outlook and four in 10 are uncertain about their own company's prospects.
The Reuters poll shows only 5 p.c. of dealers expect an outright Tory victory, while a similar proportion are looking for a clear Labour majority.
They expect the pound to drop two pfennigs from last night's close of Dm2.84 if Labour is in power.
City: Brammer tumbles to £9.16m
BRAMMER, the industrial services group, saw pre-tax profits tumble 19 p.c. to £9.16m last year, but with £3.4m of net cash under its belt the company is maintaining its dividend total at 13p, with payment of an 8½p final on July 1.
Despite the downturn, Hugh Lang, chairman, said, the company produced a creditable performance, particularly when compared with the results of many of its competitors, and that firm managment of cash resources had resulted in an excellent balance sheet position.
With trading in the first quarter similar to that of the second half of last year, the company is continuing to exercise tight control of the business.
City: Stylo payout cut after £9m loss
STYLO, the Bradford-based shoe retailer, headed by Arnold Ziff, is slashing the payout to shareholders from 9p to 2½p on October 1, after plunging from a £1.67m profit to a £9.06m pre-tax loss in 1991.
Mr Ziff, who launched an attack on the Government's decision to increase value added tax in his annual report last year, yesterday blamed the rise as one of the main reasons for the company's loss.
He said that because of competitive pressures the company, which had already purchased its summer shoe stock and most of those for the autumn season, was unable to pass the increase on to the customer and gross margins suffered as a result.
Other factors included wages, rents and the uniform business rate, which all added to the company's overheads, and the recession in the retail trade, which forced the company to slash prices to generate demand.
But he also admitted over-buying and inadequate cost controls affected the company's margins.
Over-stocked in the United States and in its sports wholesaling division, the company was forced to make ‘ruthless’ write-downs to clear the stock.
Mr Ziff said: ‘A number of management changes have been made, and I trust that most of the mistakes of our own making will now be eliminated.’
He also noted that sales in the first two months of the year are ahead of company budgets, but this failed to help the shares, which closed 30p lower at 143p, having been down 38p at one stage.
City: Clayform out of dividend list
CLAYFORM, the property company and owner of the Stead & Simpson shoe shop chain, is dropping from the dividend list after further substantial losses in 1991.
The company made a trading profit of £1.31m against £9.11m, but ended with a pre-tax deficit of £20.6m against £39.1m, after interest and providing a further £9.08m (£31.6m) against the fall in property values.
Michael Wigley, chairman, said: ‘Hopes existed at the start of the year for a modest recovery in both the property and retail sectors, but this did not materialise.’
Despite the conditions, the company halved debt from £109m at the end of 1990 to £52½m today.
This helped lower its intertest bill by 37 p.c. last year to £10.6m.
Mr Wigley said the company's banking facilties are sufficient to support activities for the forseeable future while it strives to reduce debt further until rental and retail income covers interest costs and overheads.
Net assets are down from 201p to 137p a share.
City: Bodycote up by 9pc
BODYCOTE International, the Manchester metals treatment group, pushed profits on by 9 p.c. to £11.5m last year, despite a 12 p.c. fall in turnover to £66½m.
The company has made a series of acquisitions in recent years but sold its Skelmersdale Packaging subsidiary, which contributed profits of £1.7m on sales of £12m in 1990, in a deal worth £11½m in December 1990.
The proceeds contributed to the reduction in interest charges — down from £1.11m to £36,000 — and the financing of the £4m acquisition in March last year of HIP, a metal treatment company, and Infutec, a metal bonding specialist.
Joe Dwek said the enlarged metal technology side had another record year, with profits 12 p.c. higher on sales up 18 p.c.
The EHCO-KLM Kleding industrial clothing arm also set a record with profits topping £2.5m for the first time.
Elsewhere, in the industrial and general division, Stockpak, the contract food and blending subsidiary, enjoyed a good year.
A 53/4p final dividend on July 1 takes the total from 83/4p to 9¼p.
City: Independent falls to I£7.9m
THE Dublin-based group Independent Newspapers, headed by Tony O'Reilly, saw its profits fall 20 p.c. to I£7.97m last year, after I£3.37m (I£2.55m) of exceptional charges including I£950,000 costs from an attempted takeover of Australia's John Fairfax Group.
At the trading level, profits slipped from I£17.7m to I£16.2m.
Interest charges where halved at I£2.53m, following a reduction in bank debt from I£47.6m to I£8.8m.
A 9p final dividend takes the total on from 13p to 14p.
City: Slipping oil prices send Cairn £27m into the red
By Ra Tickel
THE shares of Cairn Energy fell 4p to a low of 28p yesterday after the Edinburgh-based oil and gas exploration and production company reported a £27.6m plunge into the red.
Increased production helped lift turnover 24 p.c. to £12.3m.
But with oil prices tumbling — North Sea prices fell 38 p.c. to $17.75 a barrel over the year — and production costs up 80 p.c., the company incurred a £2.09m trading loss, against a £659,000 profit, after depletion costs of £7.81m (£5.22m).
The price of North Sea oil has recovered by $1 a barrel since the end of 1991.
But in view of the outlook for prices of both oil and gas, the company decided to write down the carrying value of its production, development and exploration assets in an exceptional depletion charge totalling £24½m.
While reducing shareholders' funds to £19m, the move will reduce depletion charges in future years.
But with oil prices at their current levels, the company is delaying growth plans and looking at ways of achieving a better balance between cash flow and capital commitments.
Bill Gammell, the chief executive of the group, said this could lead to farming-out in the North Sea.
Cairn is also considering merging its interests in the United States with Omni Exploration, a quoted American company, where Cairn acquired a 64 p.c. stake in December.
The Market: Equities display a semi-detached air
By Paul Murphy
THE camp beds are in place, the beer is on ice and market makers at the City's big integrated houses are ready for tonight's unofficial over-night trading session.
Many of those not working will be attending a benefit do for cricketer Derek Pringle at London's Chiswell Brewery.
How much Mr Pringle receives (tax free) will doubtless depend on the Tories' progress through the early hours.
In truth, little business is expected while the results flow in.
Most analysts reckon some sort of reflex reaction is inevitable, although fund managers are expected to remain on the sidelines, perhaps even until the new government's Budget is unveiled in two or three weeks time.
However, Nicholas Knight, Nomura's equity strategist, is forecasting a near-200 point drop in the FT-SE 100 index to 2200 by the weekend if and when Neil Kinnock's premiership is confirmed.
Yesterday, on the eve of the big poll day, there was a semi-detached feel to London shares.
Tokyo is threatening a meltdown, New York followed Tuesday's precipitous decline with another 50 points early yesterday, yet the FT-SE 100, despite an initial 30-point mark down, managed to close just 11 lower at 2393.2.
A good portion of yesterday's volumes reflected activity by market makers, getting their trading books just as flat as possible.
Yet sterling's stable performance, another slight easing of money market rates, rampant rumours of a favourable opinion poll and a firm performance among government issues all converged to tempt in the odd overseas bargain hunter, helping dealers convince themselves that the world is not about to come to an abrupt halt after all.
Features were few and far between, although Reuters came under pressure from the outset.
With plenty of stock said to be on offer, the market price quickly dropped back 36 to £11.05 in the wake of Wall Street's decline.
An announcement that its Globex system for the Chicago futures pits will begin trading on July 25 did nothing to help sentiment, with UBS Phillips & Drew advising clients to sell into any price strength.
Having fallen back from about 360p to 320p over the last few days, Fisons' top management was busy round at Hoare Govett yesterday, trying to reassure nervous institutions investors.
About 15 funds attended to hear the new chief executive Cedric Scroggs talk frankly about past problems and promise a more open approach to joint development and marketing deals in the future.
The first such deal could involve an American partner for its Tilade remedy.
With the shares firming 4 to 325p before settling at 323p, the big date in the company's calender is April 20, when American regulators will be traipsing around Fisons' Opticrom (eye drops) production facilities to check standards of cleanliness.
Punters who bought ‘put’ warrants on Salomon Brothers water basket, giving the right to sell one share in each of Anglian Water, North West Water, Severn Trent and Thames Water, launched in mid-February, are now formally ‘in the money’.
Those who bought the ‘calls’(the right to buy the shares) are nursing a 65 p.c. loss.
With the basket of stocks trading at a combined price of £12.70 yesterday, the puts, exercisable at a strike price of £14.09 and initially costing 117p apiece, carried a mid-price of 203p.
Exercising would reap a net gain of 22p per warrant.
The calls, on the other hand, issued at 145p and carrying a strike price of £15.57, have fallen to just 50p.
Dealers in Tesco were busy, with trading volumes topping 9m in the aftermath of Tuesday's profits announcement.
The shares ended 2 lower at 254p.
After its own profits news, Next sat unchanged at 71p, although there was fresh demand for some of the other stores, with Kingfisher rising 9 to 472p and Marks & Spencer adding 7 to 291p.
Sears put on 2 to 92p, helped along by a couple of brokers' recommendations.
BET continued to suffer worries over its dividend, the stock ending the session 7 lower at 107p in quite heavy trading.
BHH Group, the property company, sprang to life after announcing it has received a bid approach.
The stock rose 8 to 29p.
A further announcement is promised as soon as possible.
Dalepak Foods, on the other hand, reversed 24 to 299p after revealing that possible takeover talks, announced at the beginning of last month, have been terminated.
The damage to the share price could have been greater but for news that Dalepak's final figures will appear on schedule in mid-July and should be in line with current market expectations of about £33/4m.
Shares in City Centre Restaurants, the Deep Pan Pizza and Garfunkels group which on Tuesday reported a 15 p.c. drop in profits to £9.1m, fell 2½ to 57½p.
It emerged that chief executive Phillip Kaye has reduced his stake from 8m shares to 6m (3.2 p.c.), selling out at 59½p.
In thin conditions, a few second and third line stocks came under sudden and unexplained selling pressure.
With market makers unwilling to take on stock, Watts Blake shed 23 to 345p, Johnston Group ran back 17 to 177p and Bentalls lost 7 to 98p.
RPS Group sank from 24p to 16½p at one stage, before steadying at 21p.
Tarmac lost 1½ to 116½ after two big lines of stock — one of 2.7m, the other 3m — went through the market at 114½p.
Wall Street's decline had the usual effect on the drug sector, with Glaxo falling 9 to 747p and SmithKline Beecham ‘A’ off 22 at 830p.
Gilts registered gains of up to £½ at the longer end, in what were described as ‘squeezy’ conditions.
There was talk of demand from German investors and some switching out of shorts, although the conditions remained nervous.
Bowater has had a miserable time since joining the Footsie last week, the share price falling a good 10 p.c.
Dealers have reported some very heavy selling of the nil-paid stock over the last fortnight and yesterday's rise, with the ordinary shares up 16 at 693p and the rights stock up 16 at 85p, was dismissed as a technical bounce.
The company is raising £335m (one-for-three at 605p) to help pay for the acquisition of two packaging companies, DRG and Cope Allman.
City: Heron in new bond defaults
THREE more bonds issued by Heron International, the troubled property group, on the international markets were called into default yesterday.
Deutsche Bank, which arranged a Dm100m issue, and Geneva-based Warburg Soditic, which led two Swiss franc bonds, followed an example set by Credit Suisse which on Tuesday called the four issues it had arranged in Switzerland into default.
Technically, the banks can demand immediate repayment on the bonds.
In practice, they are likely to be much more concerned with negotiating the best terms for bondholders in Heron's proposed financial restructuring.
The lead managers of all Heron's bonds are to meet at the offices of Credit Suisse in Zurich on Monday to plan a concerted response after hearing outline proposals from the company in London last Friday.
Questor Column: Ocean making slow headway
Edited by Marc Popiolek
THE former shipping company Ocean Group still owns tug boats and oil rig supply vessels, but these days the thrust of its expansion is in environmental services and distribution.
Ocean has lodged planning applications for a waste-to-energy facility in south London and a toxic waste incinerator near Middlesbrough.
On the distribution side, it has been building greenfield warehouses on the Continent and recently paid £10m to buy a facility in Warrington out of receivership.
The steady flow of investment and acquisitions, supported by an £88m rights issue 12 months ago, have not been without hiccups, however.
In 1991 the problems were at National Environmental Testing, the United States pollution testing arm, which fell into the red in the second half and broke even over the year as a whole.
NET's troubles blunted the overall performance by Ocean last year.
Group profits rose £3m to £51m before tax owing to the interest savings from the rights cash.
But the extra shares in issue knocked earnings down from 27p to 24.6p.
Dividends are nudged up from 13.7p to 14.3p, with the final of 9.62p payable on June 1.
The outlook for Ocean turns on the United States.
The group is pressing on with the expansion and development of NET but really needs the embryonic United States economic recovery to develop swiftly if short term returns are to improve.
It is likely that 1992 will be ‘a difficult year’ thinks chief executive Nicholas Barber.
The market was relieved that the figures were not worse, marking the shares up 7 to 309p yesterday.
They yield 6.2 p.c. and stand on a historic multiple of 12½.
Ocean needs to keep plugging away, expanding its environmental and distribution interests to really get the City to sit up and take notice.
But at current levels the shares are a firm hold.
Questor Column: Costain's house still in disarray
COSTAIN'S profits were never less than £55m during the second half of the booming 1980s and they peaked at nearly £90m.
But in the first two years of the 1990s the slump in housebuilding and property plunged the group into a hole which has turned into a chasm, as yesterday's record £69m losses reveal.
The worse-than-expected deficit was due to £74m of write-downs on investment property and housing land and the cost of rationalising the engineering and construction operations.
Costain shed nearly a third of its 7,500 employees last year at a cost of £6m.
There was also a £12m provision against possible losses from its participation in the Channel tunnel construction consortium.
The figures were no more attractive at the operating level, where profits before exceptional items were down more than half at £31m and the combined contributions of the profitable elements-engineering, construction and mining-were a quarter lower at £58m.
As widely predicted in the City, which has marked Costain shares down nearly 75 p.c. over the last year, there is no final dividend, leaving the interim of 43/4p the sole payout, compared with a total of 12¼p last time.
Nevertheless, following the exit from commercial property, which realised £100m, borrowings have been reduced to £168m, leaving gearing at 50 p.c.
The poor overall results also concealed a creditable performance in the American and Australian mining operations, which have become the main cash-generating centres.
But with the best guesses indicating that the domestic housing market may take years to return to former levels of activity, Costain faces an extremely tough struggle.
On County NatWest's 1992 forecast of £15m profits and 4½p of earnings, the shares are on a forward multiple of 14 at yesterday's 66p.
They are best avoided.
Questor Column: Proudfoot makes proud exception
LIKE other companies that presume to tell others their business — banks, advertising agencies and so on— management consultants have a poor reputation for running their own affairs.
Alexander Proudfoot, chaired by Lord Stevens, however, has so far proved a glowing exception to that rule.
Yesterday's annual results showed that it kept up the good work in 1991.
Proudfoot achieved pre-tax profits of £48m, up from £46m, and edged up the final dividend, payable on July 6, by ½p to 13½p, for a total of 19½p, against 19p.
The profits advance was thanks to strong cash generation, which boosted cash balances over the year by £10m, even after the purchase of Indevo, the Swedish consultancy, for £12m.
Interest receivable rose from £858,000 to £3.78m.
However, gross profit was down only £2m to £94m.
North America, Proudfoot's country of origin before its reverse takeover of a London listed company in 1987, suffered an £8m fall in sales to £58m, while Europe rose by £6m to £76m.
The secret of Proudfoot's success is hard to encapsulate but it owes something to its leadership in productivity consultancy, advice which is likely to have enduring appeal when times are hard.
It is also good at containing costs and farming out its staff to work on site rather than keeping them in expensive offices of its own.
The company sounded a note of caution yesterday when it said it was seeing margin pressure in some other areas of the business.
However, analysts still expect it to manage a small improvement on 1991's profits and dividend.
The shares, at 369p, stand on a forward multiple of 8 and yield more than 7 p.c.
The market distrusts people businesses almost as much as it distrusts American companies with their main share listings in London.
So it may be asking too much to expect a re-rating.
City: EC chiefs fend off cheap bananas
By Boris Johnson in Strasbourg
TRADITIONAL Commonwealth growers of bananas in the Caribbean and their importers, such as Fyffes and Geest, will breathe at least a temporary sigh of relief after the European Commission finally made up its mind to extend the present quota-based system in the single market next year.
The decision will, however, postpone what might have been an era of cheap fruit for British consumers.
The 17 commissioners decided that both EC and Caribbean bananas will be guaranteed their present 40 p.c. share of the Community market against competition from cheaper ‘dollar’ bananas from central and south America.
The proposal will now have to be agreed by the council of EC trade ministers.
The EC market is nationally segmented, with Britons eating fruit from Jamaica and the Windward Islands and the Spanish the Canaries crop.
In the single market of next year, these neat divisions would have been impossible to maintain.
The move to EC-wide quotas will be seen as a fresh obstacle to the Gatt world trade talks.
Arthur Dunkel, secretary-general, had proposed abolishing all quotas in favour of setting tariffs.
This would at least have allowed the dollar banana firms, such as Chiquita, to import as much as they want, and it is not clear how the dollar banana quota is to cope with a possible increase in demand.
City Diary: Unwanted splash for Goldsmith
THOSE keen environmentalists, Richard Branson and Sir James Goldsmith, are no longer seeing eye to eye.
My man in the sombrero tells me of an incident at Goldsmith's Mexican estate two weeks ago which has severed relations for the foreseeable future.
At an ecologists' conference chez Goldsmith, one guest persuaded Branson to push Sir Jimmy into his own swimming pool to help him let down what remains of his hair.
Despite the absence of press photographers, Branson agreed and even jumped in after the floundering financier.
Branson was warned by another member of the party that this would not go down well and, sure enough, was told by the butler the following morning that he was no longer welcome.
Branson is on holiday and a Virgin spokesman refused to comment.
City Diary: Algy calls in his friend BATman
SIR Patrick Sheehy's decision to join Cluff Resources as non-executive director may seem unusual but his links with Algy Cluff stem from their mutual directorship of The Spectator.
Impressed by Sheehy's ‘very forceful personality,’ Cluff's attraction to the BAT boss was enhanced by his links with the Dark Continent.
‘Sir Patrick has spent a large part of his life living in Africa and we are an African company, so to speak,’ says Cluff.
‘But it is not just that,’ he adds.
‘Sir Patrick also has a wide experience of business and is a financial heavyweight — and we need more of those on our board.’
City Diary: Busy line for BT rumours
BRITISH Telecom complains it has been plagued in recent weeks with claims that chairman Iain Vallance is resigning.
‘It's absolute nonsense,’ wails an exasperated spokesman.
‘We don't know who is spreading these rumours but the reason seems to change with each caller.’
Speculation started after the recent announcement of another 25,000 job cuts.
One report had Vallance ordered out because the pay-offs were too generous.
By yesterday the story had changed, and Vallance was leaving after a row with Michael Hepher, the managing director recruited from Lloyds Bank.
‘That's a new one,’ says a BT man.
City Diary: Man who backed Drexel goes
JOSE Tavares Moreira, governor of the Bank of Portugal, is on his way out and leaves this month.
He has never recovered from lending £120m of his bank's gold to the busted flush of Wall Street, Drexel Burnham.
(One bullion dealer whines: ‘It is as if the Bank of England had let Robert Maxwell loose in the vaults.’)
Offered a settlement that would have retrieved half the gold, Moreira sternly refused — and has not had any of it back.
Undeterred, this week he committed his currency to the European exchange-rate mechanism, where despite the lack of gold reserves it appears to be managing bravely.
City Diary: Red health service goes true blue
MOVES are afoot to privatise the Russian health service.
I expect to hear this morning from Yuli Voronpsov, the country's deputy prime minister, that private contractors are moving into the Kremlin Hospital in Moscow.
Hospital Corporation International, the British health company formerly known as Bioplan, has won the contract to manage the hospital in a joint-venture with a group of American companies.
City Diary: All creatures great and expectant
SOFT drinks giant PepsiCo has adorned the front cover of its annual report with pictures of cute white bunnies.
The caption reads:’ Some creatures show a strong inclination to multiply…
’ This rather risque observation coincides with PepsiCo's current adverts, which bear the slogan: ‘Gotta have it.’
Chairman Wayne Calloway tells investors: ‘Our pink-eyed friends on the cover are the best way we know to symbolise rapid growth — something as natural to us as it is to them.’
City Diary: Boom or bustmdash; it's for the pew
RECESSION does not affect religion — official.
A survey by Princeton Religion Research Centre, an affiliate of Gallup, says: ‘The historical record shows very minor swings, if any, in both church attendance and membership when the economy either goes boom or bust.’
The Princeton researchers went back 40 years for their statistics, covering nine recessions.
They discovered that the difference in attendance between any recession and the year before it started has never exceeded 2 p.c.