

BR's bacon and egg special is the toast of Europe
By Elisa Kitson on the Paris-Brussels Express
PASSENGERS on the 7.00 am Paris-Brussels express experienced something of a gastronomic shock yesterday when they were confronted with the Great British Breakfast.
The surprise for well-fed French bureaucrats heading for a busy day paper shuffling at the European Commission was lightened only by the inclusion of croissants as a side course.
Once, the thought of an Inter-City meal would have struck fear into the hearts of any Continental traveller with experience of British Rail.
But now BR chefs are winning friends in Europe by proving that our cuisine does travel well.
They are serving breakfasts all week on the Paris-Brussels express and dinner on the return evening train as part of an exchange with the French SNCF rail company.
Mr Brian Challis, Inter-City chef of the year, and his team of eight are packing in converts to bacon and eggs.
Of 150 breakfasts he prepared yesterday, 75 were British-style.
The others were die-hard Continentals.
For the equivalent of £8.20 there was fruit juice, grapefruit, croissant or pastries followed by as many rashers of British bacon and British eggs as customers could manage.
‘It is excellent value,’ said M Jean Gros, a French civil servant.
‘And now I don't need lunch,’ he added with consideration for the French taxpayer.
There were no stray leaves on the line to hold up the train and service in the first class was near-faultless.
The stewards all spoke French and the only person to get grease spilled on him was a British journalist who, perhaps, should have known better.
The main problem for Mr Challis and his team, who promised Noisette of (British) Lamb with Red Rosemary Sauce to relax the bureaucrats on the return journey, came from the French staff.
The dishwasher broke down and they could not keep pace with the washing up.
Mr Challis also said he preferred the air conditioned Inter-City kitchens.
This is a delight that the creme-de-la-creme of the SNCF catering staff will find out about when they take over the London-Leeds line kitchens in October.
Pheasant plucker gets a rail roasting
By Nigel Bunyan
A COMMUTER train was delayed while the driver plucked a pheasant on the platform, it was claimed last night.
Passengers stared in amazement as feathers drifted past the windows of the 5.42pm from Manchester Piccadilly.
‘I was totally gobsmacked,’ said Mrs Liz Shaw, of Romiley, Cheshire.
‘As I got to the platform, there was the driver surrounded by three other BR staff watching him pluck the bird.
‘I sat on the train and could see other commuters walking past looking at the man in horror.
‘At first I thought it was a pigeon, but as the feathers went past the window I realised it was something else.’
Mrs Shaw, 30, claimed the train, with more than 100 passengers on board, was delayed for over five minutes.
She added: ‘When he eventually got on to the train he left the bird on a seat next to his cabin.
I went to inspect and could see it was a half-plucked pheasant.
‘Presumably, an earlier train coming into the station had hit the bird and lodged it on its bumpers.
‘I think it's disgusting.
He was being paid to drive trains not pluck pheasants.’
A British Rail spokeswoman said that Mrs Shaw's complaint was being investigated.
She added: ‘If her journey was delayed as a result of the plucking, the person involved will be given a roasting.
However, we feel his ingenuity should be admired.’
Police hurt in St Trinians riot battle
By Neil Darbyshire, Crime Correspondent
A POLICEMAN was kneed in the groin and another punched in the face as they tried to break up brawling schoolgirls at a railway station.
They were mobbed by 150 children from three schools as a clash between a handful of pupils turned into a near riot.
Reinforcements were called and 25 police officers had to wade into the crowd to calm the situation.
Mr Richard Russell, 54, a taxi driver who witnessed the incident, said: ‘St Trinians girls are angels compared with this lot.’
Trouble flared when two boys grabbed a can of soft drink from a fellow male pupil at Wimbledon station, south London.
A girl from a neighbouring school came to the victim's aid by throwing a bucket of water from a flower stall over his assailants.
Pupils from three local schools, almost all girls, exchanged blows and police were called.
The flower seller, Ms Sue Thompson, said: ‘I did not dare say anything.
There were so many of them.’
Five girls and one boy were arrested as police struggled to control the brawl.
They were later released pending reports to the youth and community service.
A police spokesman said: ‘It was quite simply a rampage.’
Some of the girls later claimed they were victimised by the police.
‘They went right over the top.
We are just a bunch of girls,’ said one 15-year-old from the Ursuline convent.
‘A policeman in plain clothes jumped on my friend, so another one of my friends jumped on his back and then another policeman came up and smashed a radio into her head.
I got hold of him and got a punch in the face as well.
‘We were told if we didn't leave the station we would be arrested.
I went outside and was arrested anyway.’
The atmosphere at the station was calm last night as police and teachers patrolled the platforms to avert a repeat of Tuesday night's clashes.
One teacher said: ‘We come down here often, but we weren't here yesterday.’
A spokesman for Merton education authority, which is responsible for the three schools — the Ursuline, Ricards Lodge Girl's School and the mixed Raynes Park High School — said disciplinary action was unlikely.
‘The incident occurred after school hours, but we are helping police with their investigations,’ he said.
Tragedy of twin too weak to survive alone Three-year-old girl dies after 15-hour surgery to separate her from Siamese sister
By Wendy Holden and Peter Pallot
A THREE-YEAR-OLD Siamese twin, separated from her sister in one of the most complicated operations yet attempted, died because she could no longer survive on her own, Great Ormond Street Hospital said yesterday.
Catherine Holton, joined to her sister Eilish from the shoulder to the hip, suffered heart failure four days after the 15-hour operation.
Her death shocked her parents, Mary and Liam, and the surgeons whose meticulous planning at the London Hospital for Sick Children was based on the expectation that both twins would survive.
Catherine, who had been more reliant on her sister than doctors realised, died of heart failure while under sedation on a life support machine.
She was buried after a requiem mass in the Irish Republic yesterday.
Prof Lewis Spitz, who headed the 25-strong team of specialists during the operation, said he believed Catherine had simply been unable to live without her sister.
‘There is nothing else to explain her demise other than she couldn't cope on her own,’ he said.
‘It appears that the baby who did survive was doing maybe two-thirds of the work.
She was eating more and was more active while the other one was getting fatter.’
Eilish remains on a life support machine.
Doctors say her chances of survival are good.
She will remain on a ventilator for several days and will then require months of surgery and post-operative care.
The twins, from Donadea, Co Kildare, were born by Caesarian section in Dublin's Coombe Hospital in August 1988, weighing 10lb.
They grew up loved and cherished in a large family with three older sisters.
In 1989 their parents asked for the twins' photograph to be published in a Sunday newspaper and vowed that they would never be locked away in an institution.
Mrs Holton had been protected from the news of her babies' defect until just before the birth.
She and her husband were shocked and appalled and wondered if they would become prisoners in their own home.
Acceptance came when their eldest daughter, Claire, then aged five, expressed her delight at seeing the twins for the first time and said simply: ‘Oh look Mammy, they're stuck together.’
From that moment, the Holtons decided that the twins would never be kept hidden away.
‘People are always nervous and afraid about confronting them,’ Mrs Holton said a year after the birth.
‘But when they do see them, their reaction is always the same.
Everyone thinks they are beautiful.’
The blonde-haired, blue-eyed girls grew up as bright, chatty children with individual characters, whose minds and spirits were developing like any other child.
Their parents spent three years contemplating whether or not to go through with the separation, which was at first thought impossible because of the degree to which the girls were joined.
Their daughters were connected at the chest, abdomen, pelvis and along one pair of arms.
They had a single pair of legs — the surviving twin will require an artificial leg — but most of the major organs, including the heart and spinal cord, were separate.
After long discussions with Prof Spitz and his team, who had performed two similar operations before, the Holtons agreed only on the basis that each child would have an equal chance and organs would be shared equally.
The twins were admitted in January for assessment and preparation.
Therapists used separating Cabbage Patch Dolls, joined by Velcro, to accustom the twins to the idea of being parted.
Prof Spitz said: ‘Everything had gone exactly to plan.
There were no unexpected occurrences during the operation — that's why we were so upset.’
Prof Spitz, Nuffield professor of paediatric surgery, added: ‘We would never have started the operation if we thought one wasn't going to survive, and the parents would never have wanted it.’
The operation, involving seven surgeons and five anaesthetists, began at 8am last Wednesday and ended at midnight.
For the last six hours, the girls were operated on in separate theatres.
Prof Spitz said he believed that the twins could not have long survived together.
The parents, he said, had been devastated by the loss of one child but accepted the operation was necessary to ensure survival in any form.
He still believed the operation was worthwhile.
‘I think the quality of the surviving child's life will be immeasurably better,’ he said.
The cost of the operation, which was not disclosed, is being met by the Irish Government.
Chapel blast pair jailed
By Paul Stokes
A QUARRY worker who blew up a 19th century listed Methodist chapel was jailed yesterday with the property developer who hired him.
Steven Mann, 23, was offered £7,000 to ‘put a crack’ in the Grade Two listed chapel in Dartmouth, Devon, on a site being developed by Peter Denega, 42.
But the explosive charge was too large and the chapel was so badly damaged that it had to be pulled down.
Mann, of Ilsington, Devon, admitted demolishing the chapel and was given a four-month sentence at Plymouth Crown Court.
He will serve 28 days in custody with the rest suspended.
Denega, of Walnut Road, Torquay, was jailed for four months after admitting causing work to be done which resulted in changing or demolishing a listed building.
Judge William Taylor said: ‘Developers cannot circumvent regulations designed to protect our heritage.’
No order was made on a claim for £52,000 compensation.
Election ‘92: Home town crowd rises to orator free from shackles
By Jon Hibbs, Political Staff
MR KINNOCK returned to his Islwyn constituency last night to give his most electrifying performance of the election campaign, claiming that, after years in the political wilderness, Labour's values were about to join forces with the popular vote in an historic victory.
He cast aside the shackles of statesmanship imposed by his minders throughout the campaign to denounce the arrogance of the Press and political establishment who had condemned him as cocky and inadequate to be prime minister.
‘I have to tell you I can bear such insults,’ Mr Kinnock told a 500-strong crowd that spilled out of the Pontllanfraith Leisure Centre into a field outside.
He accused the Tories of transforming the country through the lacerations of unemployment, the disfiguration of poverty and the grievous bodily harm of record bankruptcies and repossessions.
As it had in 1945, 1964 and 1974, Labour would inherit the mess the Tories had left behind, he said, but, this time, with an historic mission to clean it up for good.
‘We shall break the historic habit because we shall not just get elected tomorrow to clear up the mess, we are going to get re-elected at the next general election as well,’ he said.
At home, amongst his people, Mr Kinnock's speech provoked the most spontaneous and enthusiastic standing ovation he had received in the last three weeks on the campaign trail.
He scorned claims that Labour's modest and prudent programme lacked a radical edge and scoffed at suggestions that the election was run for the entertainment of the media, rather than gaining power to serve the people.
He said: ‘I am not making promises of a vague future, a never-never land that exists only in dreams; these are the tangible developments that will take place, things that will happen in this coming year in which we will build the foundations of economic success that will endure and the foundations of social justice that will prevail.’
Earlier Mr Kinnock embarked on Labour's self-appointed task of rebuilding Britain with a symbolic eve-of-poll visit to a brickworks.
His final campaign photo-opportunity took him to the North-West and the Accrington Brick and Tile Company.
Mr Kinnock arrived in the Tory-held marginal seat of Hyndburn to be greeted by the Labour candidate, Mr Greg Pope, and a local joke at the expense of the former MP, Mr Ken Hargreaves, who courted the headlines last year after claiming to have seen a vision during a visit to the religious shrine at Medugorje in Yugoslavia.
In a blatant appeal to the constituency's Roman Catholic vote, the Labour candidate appears on the ballot paper as ‘Pope, Gregory’— though rumours he had tried to change his middle name to ‘the Second’ were discounted.
Intervention from on high briefly disrupted Labour's campaigning in the form of a chartered plane circling overhead, trailing a banner proclaiming ‘Get Stuffed Boyo’.
But on Mr Kinnock's own aircraft, Red Rose One, there was champagne to toast a successful campaign.
The end-of-term atmosphere was maintained when Mrs Kinnock dressed up as an air hostess and handed out sweets to the accompanying press corps.
Election ‘92: Party aides hunt for their leader's lost mobile phone
By Jonathan Petre, Political Staff
FOR a potential kingmaker, yesterday began inauspiciously for Mr Ashdown: he mislaid his mobile telephone.
As he fielded questions at a press conference in his Yeovil constituency about his terms for a coalition in the event of a hung Parliament or whether Downing Street had been given his telephone number, the instrument that could receive the crucial call was being hunted down by aides.
After the 1974 general election, Liberal Democrats have been nervously recalling, Mr Heath urgently tried to contact the then Liberal leader Jeremy Thorpe to negotiate a pact, only to be informed by Liberal Party headquarters that no one could find Mr Thorpe's telephone number.
But with a day still to go before voters determine whether Mr Ashdown's phone could play a part in the future of British democracy, the Liberal Democrat leader could afford to take a sanguine view as he accompanied his wife Jane on what was a gentle stroll through his constituency.
‘I'm as fresh as a daisy,’ he declared brightly.
But having travelled thousands of miles in the last three weeks, he experienced a rougher ride on his own doorstep than he had encountered in many a photo opportunity en route.
As he entered a hall in Chard, disrupting a tea dance, he was greeted with the cry: ‘Clear off.’
Outside, he was confronted by a young man who tackled him over why Yeovil's Liberal Democrat council had ‘wasted’ £3 million on a new public swimming pool.
‘That swimming pool will run more efficiently under the Liberal Democrats than under anyone else,’ responded Mr Ashdown, his eye clearly on the national implications of the ‘swimming pool’issue.
Even theatre barracking came from Mr Reginald Simmerson, who is standing in the constituency as the anti-Europe candidate.
‘What Hitler failed to do, Ashdown wants to do — bring Britain under the rule of the Germans and the French,’ he yelled in an attempt to disrupt Mr Ashdown's walkabout.
But most came to cheer.
Supporters carried lighted torches to welcome him to his 15th and final rally in Taunton last night, giving some credence to his claim that ‘beacons are being lit all across the West Country’.
He used his final speech to appeal to voters to give the Liberal Democrats a mandate to ‘unleash the power of the British people’.
He added: ‘Of course, there will always be parties which want to bribe and out-bribe the voters.
‘They will be concerned only with short-term policies.
If that is what you want, then maybe you should vote for one of them — the two old parties.
‘But this election is about something more.
It is about your children, your community, your country.
It is about our long-term success as well as short-term difficulties.’
Election ‘92: Turnout may favour the Tories
By Anthony King
IT IS IMPOSSIBLE to say which major party will win today's election.
The latest Gallup survey suggests that neither the Conservatives nor Labour will have an outright majority in the new Parliament but that the Conservatives will be the largest single party.
Gallup's survey was conducted on Tuesday and yesterday among a sample of 2,478 voters.
A majority of the interviews — 1,478 — were conducted across Great Britain in the usual way but an additional 1,000 were conducted in the Conservatives’ 50 most marginal constituencies.
The data shown in the tables have been weighted to allow for the 50 Tory marginals' over-representation in the total sample.
In fact, Gallup's findings indicate the swing in the marginals since 1987 differs little from that in the rest of the country.
The survey gives the Conservatives the support of 38½ per cent of voters and Labour the support of 38 per cent.
The gap — only half a point — is well within the range of normal sampling error.
The Liberal Democrats on 20 per cent remain in third place.
The findings are actually somewhat more encouraging from the Tories' point of view than they appear on the surface.
Turnout at general elections is seldom more than about 75 per cent so Gallup asked voters: How likely is it that you will go out and vote in the General Election?
Those saying they would ‘definitely’ vote number 82 per cent of the total sample and probably account for most of those who will actually go to the polls during today.
Among the 82 per cent who say they will definitely vote, the Conservative lead increases to two full points, with the Tories on 40 per cent and Labour on 38 per cent.
The Liberal Democrats fall slightly to 19½ per cent.
The survey suggests the Conservatives have benefited from a slight squeeze on the Liberal Democrats since the weekend.
It may be that some wavering ex-Tory voters, worried by the imminent prospect of a Labour government, have responded to the Tory Party's warnings that a vote for Paddy Ashdown would be ‘a vote to let Labour in’.
The Daily Telegraph's computer indicates that, if Gallup's figures are reproduced in the polling booths today, the Tories on a uniform national swing would hold 314 seats in the Commons.
Labour would have 297.
The Liberal Democrats' total would fall from 22 (including by-elections) to 16 in the new Parliament.
Other parties would have 24 seats.
The Tories therefore would fall 12 seats short of an overall majority.
Adjusting the computer program's results to allow for the possibilities of differential turnout, additional SNP strength in Scotland and local variations in Liberal Democrat strength suggests the Parliament elected today may be composed as follows: Conservatives 319, Labour 282, Liberal Democrats 22, SNP seven, Plaid Cymru three and others 18.
The Tories would be seven seats short.
However, the election will be desperately close and the final result may not be known until the last constituencies' counts are declared tomorrow.
As might be expected in a close election, the personal impact of the party leaders has been very important.
It may have been crucial.
Five years ago, Mrs Thatcher had a commanding lead over Mr Kinnock as the person who ‘would make the best Prime Minister’.
Forty-one per cent preferred her and only 19 per cent Mr Kinnock.
The gap between the two party leaders is far closer today.
Mr Major's standing has fallen slightly compared with Mrs Thatcher's — 41 to 39 per cent— but Mr Kinnock's rating has risen sharply.
The 19 per cent who thought in 1987 he would make the best Prime Minister compares with 28 per cent today.
Nevertheless, Mr Major's margin of 11 points over his Labour rival is considerable and Labour and Liberal Democrat supporters are more likely to prefer Mr Major to their own leader as Prime Minister than Tories are to prefer Mr Kinnock or Mr Ashdown.
The fact that voters think Mr Major has not campaigned impressively has apparently made little difference to their view of him as Prime Minister and party leader.
Despite Mr Kinnock's vigorous campaign and the improvement since 1987 in his personal standing, Gallup's findings suggest he remains a serious handicap to Labour.
He appears to put off large numbers of potential Labour supporters.
Gallup asked: Suppose Mr John Smith rather than Mr Kinnock were leader of the Labour Party and alternative Prime Minister, which party would you vote for then?
Fully 10 per cent of Tory supporters and 22 per cent of Liberal Democrats would vote Labour under those circumstances.
Labour led by Mr Smith would apparently be on course for victory.
AllConLabLib Labour47109522 Conservative3589 13 Lib Dem16 1 375 Other 2 0 1 0
The Tories still enjoy narrow leads over Labour on most of the central economic questions.
If they did not, they would almost certainly be heavily defeated today.
Gallup has asked ever since 1964 which party voters think could handle Britain's economic difficulties best.
The latest findings give an indication of how narrow the Tories' lead has become.
The Conservatives' position has improved considerably since Mr Major became Prime Minister but they were actually better placed relative to Labour when they lost to Harold Wilson in 1964. 1964AprilNow 1990 Conservatives best 45 35 45 Labour best 34 46 38 Tory advantage+1111 +7
As the chart shows, the four weeks of the campaign have had almost no effect on voters' opinions about which party could best handle the country's non-economic as well as economic problems.
In the event of a hung Parliament, roughly half the electorate, 48 per cent, want another general election to be held so that one party could obtain an overall majority.
A somewhat smaller proportion, 43 per cent, would prefer some kind of arrangement between the parties so there would not have to be another election for a number of years.
However, as the chart indicates, Tory supporters are considerably more likely than Labour supporters to favour a second election, and Liberal Democrats — by a margin of three to one — favour some kind of arrangement.
It seems clear that today's will be the closest election since February, 1974.
In a curious way, Gallup's findings for the nation as a whole probably reflect the thinking of many individual voters.
They are as evenly divided in their own minds as the nation appears to be in its ultimate decision.
Anthony King is Professor of Government at Essex University.
Election ‘92: Scargill plea on laws
BY KEVIN MAGUIRE
MR ARTHUR Scargill, NUM president, demanded yesterday that, if Labour won, it should repeal all anti-union legislation, dismiss the British Coal board and reinstate all miners sacked during his year-long pit strike, writes Kevin Maguire, Labour Correspondent.
He said unions had to be ready to ‘pressurise’ any incoming administration headed by Mr Kinnock as hard as they would a Conservative Government.
Mr Scargill, in an editorial in a special election edition of his union journal The Miner, became the first union leader to issue a series of specific demands during a campaign in which most TUC figures have adopted a low profile.
Mr Scargill said miners and their supporters should vote Labour to ‘dump’ the Tories.
But he warned: ‘Remember the experience of the Labour government elected in 1964.
Overnight, after the election, it changed its policy on coal.
It tried to introduce laws against the trades unions.
We must start campaigning now.
We must let future Labour ministers know exactly what we expect.’
Election ‘92: Going back to where the journey began
By Robert Hardman
ON THE eve of the most important day of his life, John Major went back to his political beginnings, addressing a street crowd in south London.
His 10,000-mile electoral odyssey, which started in Mrs Thatcher's birthplace of Grantham and took him to more than 60 constituencies, finally brought him to Dulwich, just up the road from his predecessor's Prime Ministerial bolthole.
Leaving his soapbox in the boot of the battlebus, he delivered his last public address of the campaign through a megaphone on the Conservative Association office steps.
He was in London's most marginal seat, where the Tories’ Gerry Bowden scraped in with 180 votes last time.
But Mr Major's parting message was blissfully confident.
‘I'll tell you what I'm finding round the country day after day,’ he shouted above the traffic.
‘People slipping back into our column, back into our camp and our sort of Britain which will manifest itself on Thursday.’
South London's hard nuts had failed to turn up, though.
There were no omelette episodes, no Socialist Workers and almost none of what the Prime Minister likes to call ‘badinage’.
The most vociferous hecklers were a pneumatic drill at some nearby roadworks and a passing car.
‘Britain is a respected voice in the world,’ Mr Major was saying.
A prolonged ‘Parp!’ came blaring forth.
He went on: ‘Whatever anyone may hoot.
You see, I knew there was one Labour supporter left in Dulwich.’
A lone Labour supporter piped up: ‘Two!’
Mr Major, grateful for any opposition, said: ‘I think he deserves a round of applause.’
There had been a noticeable spring in Mr Major's step in the previous two days and he reiterated his optimism to rapturous flag-waving.
He would have a majority.
‘It's not conjecture,’ he declared.
‘I'm absolutely stone cold certain of it.’
Earlier, he had been reunited with someone with a substantial claim to fame.
Derek Stone, 53, a builder from Catford, was the man who signed up Mr Major to the Tory Party when he was chairman of the Brixton Young Conservatives in the early 60s.
Together, they had set up the famous soap box.
The two men met yesterday at Tory command in another nearby marginal, Lewisham West, and enjoyed a chat.
Afterwards, Mr Stone recalled the days when he and the teenage John Major would hit the hustings.
‘We set up the stand outside the Prince of Wales at ten to three on Saturday afternoons when the pub used to chuck them out,’ he said.
‘John and I would trundle up and wind them up.’
He was pleased to see the soapbox return, adding: ‘It should have come out earlier.’
He remembered playing a practical joke on Mr Major's mother after a day's orating.
‘Once, we made a recording of John and hid it behind the radio while his mum was making us some tea,’ he chuckled.
‘When she came in, we told her it was John on the radio.’
Outside, in another crush of party faithful, Mr Major restricted himself to a standabout.
Time was pressing and, as Lewisham East MP Colin Moynihan observed: ‘The Left in Lewisham don't use eggs, they use boots.’
Eventually, Mr Major returned to Central Office for a final Thank You to staff.
Their mood was a good deal happier than of late.
Maybe it was the sunshine.
For the first time in this entire campaign, the weather resembled the balmy days of Mrs Thatcher's victory trails.
And then, his 10,000 miles done, Mr Major travelled a final 70 — back to Huntingdon.
Election ‘92: After Babel: an absorbing study of the mysteries of leaderspeak
BY NOEL MALCOLM
ONE OF THE BEST political programmes of the campaign, World in Action's triple interrogation of the party leaders on ITV, coincided with one of the best non-political programmes of the week.
This was BBC2's Before Babel, a study of the mysteries of human language.
Why has language diversified from its ancient origins into more than 5,000 mutually unintelligible varieties?
It's an absorbing question.
If you wanted to know the answer, and if you also wanted to listen to Messrs Major, Kinnock and Ashdown, you had to keep zapping from channel to channel.
After a while, the two programmes became strangely blurred into one.
Dealing with Latin, Hittite and Basque is child's play compared with understanding Majorese, Kinnockic and High Ashdonian.
And yet these three languages, spoken almost exclusively in television studios (despite claims by some scholars that proto-Majorese was once spoken in the streets of Brixton), are all somehow distantly related to English.
High Ashdonian is the simplest of the three.
Before he acquired this language, we know that Paddy Ashdown spoke Dyak, one of the native languages of Borneo.
In simple languages such as Dyak, plural forms are replaced by repetition: instead of saying ‘eggs’, you just say ‘egg egg’.
High Ashdonian merely extends the principle: here, the way to form any sentence is to repeat terms such as‘proportional representation’, ‘partnership’, ‘yes, my friend’, and ‘I tell you this’ as often as possible.
But the simplicity can be deceptive.
Some of these terms have the opposite of their English meaning.
His phrase ‘stable government’ is an example: the English for this would be ‘unstable government’.
The gulf between High Ashdonian and English became obvious when Sue Lawley commented on the Liberals' election campaign.
‘We haven't seen much of the rest of your team on your election broadcasts,’ she said.
‘Oh, I don't know how you can say that,’ Mr Ashdown replied.
But anyone who could understand English and had watched the last Liberal broadcast, an exercise in pure Paddiography, would know perfectly well how she could say that.
Mr Ashdown, who loves to tell us that his campaign alone concentrates on ‘the real issues’, had filled the entire broadcast with pictures of himself.
There was even a clip from his commando days in Borneo — although the Liberal Democrats' policy on Dyaks has hardly been at the forefront of the campaign.
Majorese can sometimes be almost equally hard to follow; but this is not because it is deceptive.
The problem is that the meaning of a sentence tends to drift off into what linguists would call the Indeterminate Adverbial Phrase.
Here are just a few examples culled from his interview with Jonathan Dimbleby on Panorama:
‘Opinion polls may or may not turn out to be right at a later stage’; ‘Local authorities exceeded projected expenditure by quite a margin’; ‘When this campaign started some weeks ago’; ‘I concede the point, for I have stated it many times in the past.’
As for Kinnockic (or, to give it its scholarly name, Kinnockabout), its complexities defy analysis.
But the idea that this is all to do with long-windedness is quite wrong.
On World in Action, Mr Kinnock showed that he can be pithy and incomprehensible at one and the same time.
Asked to say yes or no to proportional representation, he replied: ‘Yes, sure, well, fine, eh, no, it isn't quite as simple as that.’
At a deep level, of course, Kinnockabout does not communicate by words at all .
It is a body language.
The one abiding image of this campaign will surely be Neil Kinnock on the pop concert stage at Sheffield, when he clutched the sides of the lectern with both hands.
Suddenly, he was crouching down behind it, still hanging on, but weaving from side to side.
This was obscure, but it seems to have something to do with going downhill with an out-of-control supermarket trolley.
What was the significance of that?
The British people may give themselves five years in which to work it out.
Election ‘92: The vital constituencies
These are some of the milestone constituencies to watch out for tonight — early declarations, marginals that may indicate a trend, ministers whose seats are at risk and well-known candidates.
The times are only an indication of when results are due.
11.01 pm, Torbay: This south Devon holiday resort last time won the race to declare first, completing the count in only 62 minutes.
It should be first again.
The sitting Tory MP is Rupert Allason, better known as spy writer Nigel West.
If the Conservative vote falls much below 25,000, the Tories are in trouble.
11.14 pm, Guildford: In 1970 the big swing to the Conservatives in Guildford heralded Edward Heath's historic victory.
Guildford has counted almost as fast as Torbay — but not quite.
As in Torbay, the principal challengers to the Tories are the Liberal Democrats.
A big swing to Paddy Ashdown's party would probably signal significant Liberal Democrat gains across the South.
11.15 pm, Hyndburn: Labour needs to gain 17 seats in the North West to have an outright majority and this Lancashire marginal — based on the town of Accrington and sandwiched between Burnley and Blackburn — will be the first to declare.
As in the case of Basildon, only a small swing to Labour is required to take the seat.
Hyndburn is one the Tories can afford to lose.
Ken Hargreaves, the sitting member, was probably helped last time by having the controversial Liverpool councillor Keva Coombes as his opponent.
11.20 pm, Basildon: The Labour loser's face at the count last time said it all.
He had lost and Labour had no hope of winning nationally.
Essex Man had once again returned Mrs Thatcher.
Basildon is likely to be the first Tory-held marginal to declare.
A swing to Labour of only 2.6 per cent is needed and the sitting Tory MP, David Amess, could lose his seat without the Conservatives losing the country.
12.01 am, Richmond and Barnes: For the Liberal Democrats the story in Richmond and Barnes has so far been ‘so near but yet so far’.
In 1983 they missed capturing the seat by only 74 votes but the sitting Tory MP, Jeremy Hanley, has since increased his majority.
The seat straddles the Thames in west London and is No 11 on the Liberal Democrat target list.
A swing of only 1.9 per cent is needed to take it but there are few Labour votes left in this affluent suburb for the Liberal Democrats to squeeze.
12.30 am, Battersea: The Tories' gain in Battersea in 1987 was one of the most surprising of that election.
A swing of less than one per cent would return the seat to the Labour column.
John Bowis probably owed his 1987 victory to the gradual ‘yuppification’ of the constituency.
With an 857 majority he needs luck this time.
12.37 am, Plymouth Devonport: David Owen held the seat for Labour until defecting to the SDP in 1981 and he held on in 1983 and 1987.
His decision to stand down throws the contest open.
The Liberal Democrats desperately want to inherit most of the old SDP vote.
But much of that was a personal following for Dr Owen.
Labour, now in control of Plymouth council, has high hopes.
12.45 am, Kingswood: A mixed residential and industrial constituency on the outskirts of Bristol, Kingswood has been Tory since it was created in 1983.
The sitting MP, Robert Hayward, is the Tories' leading psephologist.
The recession has hit nearby Rolls Royce badly.
If Labour gains Kingswood, it will be well on its way to depriving the Tories of their overall majority.
12.58 am, Lewisham West: John Maples, a junior Treasury minister, could be election night's first ministerial victim if Labour achieves the swing the polls are predicting in London.
The signs from local elections are ominous.
Labour took 11 seats from the Tories in the 1990 local elections.
If Mr Maples goes down, Colin Moynihan is also likely to lose Lewisham East.
12.58 am, Peterborough: The crucial seat: if Peterborough goes, Mr Kinnock will probably have an overall majority.
Labour needs to gain 97 seats and Peterborough is 97th on its target list.
An old East Anglian market town with London overspill development, Peterborough has Northern Ireland Minister Brian Mawhinney as its MP.
The Tories won in 1966 by a margin of three votes.
1 am, Bath: As in Richmond and Barnes, there are few Labour voters left in Bath for the Liberal Democrats to squeeze and Chris Patten, clinging to a majority of only 1,412, hopes Labour's vote will go up at the Liberal Democrats' expense.
But he could be the victim of tactical voting, especially in a constituency where there were many complaints about the poll tax.
Bath, beautiful as ever, is less prosperous than it was.
Tourism has declined during the recession and numerous small businesses protest that they have been hit hard by the uniform business rate.
1 am, Warwickshire North: Despite its rustic-sounding name, Warwickshire North is an industrial seat with substantial pockets of Labour strength.
Francis Maude, now in charge of the Citizen's Charter, first fought it in 1983, mainly to gain experience.
But he won and has held on.
This time he is likely to fall victim to the above-average swing to Labour expected throughout the West Midlands.
Labour needs a swing of only 2.5 per cent.
He may have to wait a few years to enter a Tory Cabinet.
1 am, Ribble Valley: The area is sometimes described as Lancashire's answer to the Yorkshire Dales and, like the Dales, has plenty of farming stock.
Ribble Valley achieved brief fame at the 1991 by-election when the Liberal Democrats' Mike Carr captured one of the Tories' safest seats.
Mr Major had cause to regret sending David Waddington to the House of Lords but the Tories hope Ribble Valley will return to ‘normal’— in the manner of so many seats won by centre candidates in by-elections.
1 am, Cannock and Burntwood: One of Mrs Thatcher's staunchest supporters, Gerald Howarth, is in danger in Staffordshire's southernmost constituency.
Labour gained the next-door seat of Mid Staffs in the 1990 by-election and needs a swing of only 2.5 per cent.
1.10 am, Bury South: The seat includes Prestwich, a somewhat declining though still desirable Manchester suburb immediately north of the city.
More urban than its northern neighbour, Bury South has a greater proportion of council tenants.
To take Bury South, No 32 on Labour's list of target seats, it needs a swing of just over 2.5 per cent.
The party achieved four per cent at last year's local elections.
1.10 am, Birmingham Selly Oak: Anthony Beaumont-Dark is one of the Tories' most voluble MPs and if he loses the country will be a quieter place.
He will do well to hang on.
The Longbridge car plant in the constituency has suffered in the recession and Labour needs a swing of only 2.5 per cent.
Selly Oak is the Tories' most marginal Birmingham seat.
1.30 am, Conwy: Home of the famous castle in North Wales, Conwy (its Welsh name) has been mainly Tory since the war.
It is 51st on the Conservative defence list.
If they lose it, they will probably lose their majority.
The Liberal Democrats, strong locally, have steadily eroded junior Welsh Minister Sir Wyn Roberts' majority but need a swing of 3.7 per cent to take the seat — 13th on their target list.
2 am, Caithness and Sutherland: Agricultural home of the Dounreay reactor, Caithness and Sutherland has had six MPs since the war — from as many different parties.
Liberal Democrat Robert Maclennan formerly Labour and briefly SDP leader in 1987–88, looks unassailable with more than 50 per cent of the vote.
3.22 am, Galloway and Upper Nithsdale: Tactical voting in the historic counties of Kirkcudbrightshire and Wigtown could cost the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang his seat.
The SNP needs a swing of nearly 9 per cent but the polls show the Nationalists gaining ground in Scotland and Labour and the Liberals — who accounted for more than a quarter of the vote in Galloway last time — are likely to be squeezed.
4.15 am, Belfast West: The only question in this overwhelmingly Catholic constituency is whether the anti-IRA SDLP candidate, Dr Joe Hendron, can defeat Sinn Fein 's Gerry Adams.
The constituency suffers from high unemployment.
The Royal Victoria Hospital treats many of the casualties of Belfast violence.
Next day: Of the 30 and 40 constituencies that count tomorrow, five are marginal and could determine the outcome.
Labour needs to capture Kensington to have a majority.
If the Tories have done badly overnight in the rest of the West Country, they will be worried about North Cornwall and Devon West and Torridge.
Election ‘92: Long night of party politics
BY DAN CONAGHAN
WHEN the polls close at 10pm, the serious business of celebrating the winning, or losing, will get under way.
It could take all night, writes Dan Conaghan.
MPs — retiring, elected or re-elected — will be the most sought-after guests.
Lord Rees-Mogg, chairman of the Broadcasting Standards Council, intends to take in five parties — one at the Savoy, one at the Independent Television Commission in Brompton Road, and three private affairs.
Mr Simon Parker Bowles, who runs Green's restaurant in Westminster, usually stuffed with MPs and ministers, will hold his party there.
‘I shall be taking along my wife and her step-mother, Lady Potter, who is flying in from Australia,’ says Parker Bowles.
‘My friends tend to be on the right hand side, as it were, but we shall be impartial.’
Jeffrey Archer, having spent the afternoon with John Major in the Tory leader's Huntingdon constituency, will head for London with his wife Mary.
‘We're having dinner in a restaurant with John Wakeham.
Then we're going to The Daily Telegraph's party at the Savoy, followed by the BBC's at Television Centre.
About midnight we shall head off to Central Office.’
Festivities will not be confined to SW1.
Publisher Naim Attallah's Academy Club — a cellar in London's Soho — will hum with literary types.
In Hampstead, author Margaret Drabble will be mixing it with Michael Foot and Labour supporters at a private party, waiting for news of their candidate Glenda Jackson.
London hotels are likely to be full.
Mr Rorha Arora, manager of the Ritz, is expecting a full restaurant.
‘I think dinner will dissolve into a party,’ he says.
‘There will be a swingometer operated by the barman and we'll be up throughout the night.’
Election ‘92: FT backing for Labour Party
By George Jones, Political Editor
LABOUR received the unexpected endorsement of the Financial Times today in an editorial which criticised the Conservatives for having ‘run out of steam’ after 13 years in power.
It was the first time since 1966 that the FT, the paper serving businessmen and the City, had failed to endorse the Conservatives.
Although making clear it preferred Mr Major to Mr Kinnock, it concluded by giving its backing — just — to a vote for the Labour Party.
‘If this election were solely a choice between party leaders, Mr Major would be preferable.
But it is not.
The dangers of perpetuating in power a weakened and uncertain Conservative Party, set alongside the progress Labour has made in modernising itself, justify by a fine margin the risks of a change.’
On Wednesday, the Financial Times published a survey of business leaders which showed that 94 per cent intended to vote for the Conservatives, although it showed only about one per cent thought the Tories had fought the most effective election campaign.
The paper's polling day editorial acknowledged that its values were closer to a modern Conservative Party than to any other.
But there were three serious reservations about the present Government being offered an unprecedented fourth term of office.
Despite the Tories' achievements in the 1980s of trade union reform, privatisation and disciplined public finances, serious economic mistakes had been made since 1987, and there had been ‘fatal signs of hubris’, most notably the poll tax disaster.
The shortcomings of the Tory campaign reflected a real weakness at the heart of Tory policymaking.
The party had not yet come to terms with the departure of Mrs Thatcher and was suffering an identity crisis.
It had nothing to say about the need to reform the way the country was governed and its manifesto was a ‘job lot of ideas’ with little sense of direction.
A healthy democracy required change and choice in the character of its government.
The Tories looked as if they had run out of steam and needed to rethink their priorities away from the cares of office.
Election ‘92: MPs cut ruled out
By George Jones
MR KINNOCK, the Labour leader, ruled out yesterday any reduction in the 72 Scots MPs at Westminster after establishing a separate Scottish parliament.
They would continue to participate in Commons decisions affecting the whole of Britain.
‘There is no argument for the reduction of Scots MPs,’ he said at his final press conference in London.
Labour is committed to introducing during its first year in power a Bill to set up a Scottish parliament to be elected by proportional representation.
A devolved assembly for Wales will follow.
Critics of Scottish devolution have argued that it will inevitably lead to demands for the number of Scottish MPs to be cut by between 15 and 20.
Demands for a cutback in Scottish MP numbers are fuelled by criticism of the fact that they would be able to vote on English and Welsh matters while MPs from England and Wales would not be able to vote on such matters in Scotland.
The difficulty of resolving this issue contributed to the failure of proposals in the 1970s for a Scottish assembly when Labour was last in power.
Mr Major has said that setting up a Scottish parliament would lead to Scottish MPs becoming ‘second class’, speeding the break-up of the United Kingdom.
Election ‘92: Union row goes on
By Robert Reid, Scottish Correspondent
PARTY leaders in Scotland were all claiming yesterday to be on target for victory.
Mr Rifkind, Transport Secretary and former Scottish Secretary, wound up the campaign in Edinburgh on the same topic the Tories had used to open it — Scotland's constitutional future and safeguarding the Union.
‘Conservatives alone have a vision of a modern Scotland in a confident Britain.
We have a vision of a country that will ensure prosperity, low taxation, home ownership and a modern, competitive economy,’ he said.
Mr Alex Salmond, Scottish National Party leader, said: ‘The choice is between Scotland's future and Scotland's past.
A Unionist past of failure and frustration from the doom and gloom merchants who denigrate their own country and tell us we could not survive without London; or an independent future of hope, vision and self respect, as Scots regain our rightful place as equal partners in the European family of nations.’
For the Liberal Democrats, Sir David Steel, former leader and party spokesman on foreign affairs, said that, while the mood for change was strong, there was no wish for separatism and no desire to walk away from the Union.
That was why this election offered his party its best opportunity for years.
Mr Donald Dewar, Shadow Scottish Secretary, said Labour had fought an ‘outstanding campaign’ which would see it winning more than its present 48 of Scotland's 72 seats at Westminster; more, even, than the 50 it held at the last election.
Election ‘92: Whitehall ready for nightmare scenario
By David Millward
LIFE has been deceptively quiet in Whitehall during the election campaign.
Important decisions have been put on hold and departmental press offices, including the normally hard-pressed unit at Downing Street, have had few calls to field.
But the appearance of stately progress masks frenetic activity below the surface as officials try to ensure business as usual once the votes are counted.
In theory, Government should be a seamless web where an incoming administration of whatever persuasion is presented with a smoothly-running machine ready to obey its command.
But it is not easy to achieve.
If Labour wins, there will be a whole new set of ministers; if the Tories retain power, there will be a substantial ministerial reshuffle.
Over the past few months, the ground has has been prepared with meetings between senior Labour and Whitehall figures.
They have been carried out under the ‘Douglas-Home Rules’, established by the former Prime Minister in the 1960s.
Their purpose is to allow any new administration to ‘hit the ground running’, as one senior source put it.
But, with the polls pointing to a hung Parliament, the Whitehall village of permanent civil servants is preparing itself for what one source described as the ‘nightmare scenario’ of neither Mr Kinnock nor Mr Major having enough MPs to form a Government or to push a Queen's Speech through the Commons on May 6.
Should the voters' verdict prove inconclusive, Whitehall will find itself in a state of unwelcome limbo while politicians sort themselves out.
Sir Robin Butler, the Cabinet Secretary, has first-hand experience of the uncertainty created when a government loses power and the opposition fails to win it.
He was at Downing Street in February, 1974, when Mr Heath tried in vain to reach a deal with the Liberals.
Should there be a re-run, the Queen would have to decide whether to grant Mr Major a second dissolution or allow Mr Kinnock his chance.
Whitehall mandarins have discreetly voiced hopes that the party leaders will cobble together an agreement rather than face a second election.
About 20 senior officials, largely drawn from the Cabinet Office and 10 Downing Street, will be on hand to act as go-betweens.
Not surprisingly, Whitehall has been hedging its bets with officials preparing briefs to cover a variety of eventualities.
Not only are departments prepared for a Tory or Labour minister but also a Liberal Democrat one as well.
Sir Robin has prepared several drafts of the Queen's Speech, which will be given to ministers once a Government is formed.
Ministers arriving at their desks next week will find detailed briefs waiting for them and officials asking for decisions to be taken quickly.
Should Labour win, newly-appointed ministers would find their pre-election discussions have enabled their civil servants to prepare briefs on implementing manifesto pledges.
Mr Kinnock would enter Downing Street to find his in-tray bursting with papers covering pressing issues requiring swift decisions, ranging from Iraq and Lockerbie to setting up Cabinet committees to handle the minutiae of day-to-day business.
Whitehall has also had to find office space and officials to staff the new ministries promised by both parties.
Mr Major intends to wind up the Department of Energy, establish a Department of Arts, Broadcasting and Sport and appoint a minister to imp lement the Citizen's Charter.
Labour's Whitehall plans are more drastic.
Cabinet seats will be created for ministers with responsibility for Europe, environmental protection, overseas development and for women.
It is likely ministers will also be appointed for science, community care and children.
Runners and riders have been selected for the new Permanent Secretarial jobs and buildings earmarked to house them, their masters and the unsung legions of civil servants doing new jobs almost overnight.
Election ‘92: Old-style Corinthian destined to be a key player
BY DAVID MILLWARD
SIR ROBIN BUTLER has collected a fair number of accolades during his academic and Civil Service career, but none stranger than the stag's head that decorates his Whitehall office, writes David Millward.
The prized antlers were awarded to Sir Robin after a victory in the Treasury's golf tournament.
Unable to leave it in his old department because some objected on animal rights grounds, the head followed Sir Robin to his new home in the Cabinet Office.
It is another reminder of the sporting prowess of the man, who as Cabinet Secretary could prove a key player in the political drama which unfolds over the next few days.
An Oxford rugby blue in 1959 and 1960 and a keen sailor, Sir Robin, 54, is remembered by many Whitehall contemporaries as the shrewd captain of the Mandarins cricket team which he led for many years.
According to one team-mate, Mr Michael Pattison, Secretary General of the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors, ‘he is an old style classical Corinthian style sportsman on the cricket and rugby field.
He is a very correct public school sort of player’.
The biography pushed out by Whitehall when he was appointed Cabinet Secretary in January, 1988, makes his rise to the top seem almost inevitable.
Educated at Harrow, Sir Robin completed a double first in Mods and Greats at Oxford.
Armed with the classic mandarin's pedigree, he joined the Treasury in 1961 and over the next 27 years he bounced between his first department and Downing Street, with the pattern being broken only by a spell with the Bank of England and City institutions in 1969.
The first hint of future stardom came when he was picked by Lord Rothschild to become a founder member of the Think Tank in 1971.
‘I think from then on it was fairly clear that he was going to make it to the very top,’ one retired civil servant recalled.
He left the Think Tank to become Private Secretary to Mr Heath and Mr Wilson after the February 1974 election.
After another spell at the Treasury he returned to Downing Street in 1982, spending three years as Mrs Thatcher's Principal Private Secretary, where his ‘Rolls-Royce mind’ impressed many.
Colleagues described Sir Robin — a tall, athletic man who often uses a battered bicycle to speed around Whitehall — as well organised, rather than a workaholic.
‘He is not one of those who is at his desk at dawn and leaves late clutching another three files to work on at home,’ one said.
Over the next few days Sir Robin could need all the native cunning and tact he once showed as a cricket captain to deal with the political uncertainty many expect after the election.
But, trusted by politicians on all sides, few doubt the ability of the old Harrovian to form a sound working relationship with whichever grammar school boy becomes his political master.
Couple's £30,000 secret
By Michael Fleet
AN ELDERLY couple rarely seen outside their home in recent years have been found dead with more than £30,000 in cupboards and under floorboards.
Police called to their bungalow in Basingstoke, Hants, think Mrs Elsie Soper, 73, died about three days before her husband Edward, 81.
Officers alerted by neighbours searched the house and discovered the cash, mostly in £10 and £20 notes.
It has been banked to await settlement of the couple's estate.
The couple had lived at the bungalow since 1938, but were rarely seen in later years.
‘They were a nice pair, but kept themselves very much to themselves,’ said a neighbour.
A spokesman for Hampshire police said: ‘It seems Mrs Soper died and then her husband passed away a short time later.
There are no suspicious circumstances.’
Suspended police chief can seek new case review
By Nigel Bunyan
A High Court judge yesterday granted Alison Halford, the assistant chief constable involved in a long-running battle with her police authority, leave to seek another judicial review of her case.
She can challenge both the decision by members of Merseyside Police Authority to re-suspend her three months ago, and the subsequent introduction of fresh disciplinary charges against her, said Mr Justice Schiemann.
Miss Halford, 51, one of only four women assistant chief constables, was suspended on full pay in December, 1990, over allegations of neglect of duty, discreditable conduct and falsehood.
She had earlier launched a claim that sex discrimination by senior officers and the Home Office had led to her being passed over for promotion nine times.
Last December her suspension was briefly lifted when she won her first judicial review of her case in the High Court.
At the time Mr Justice Macpherson said the decision of the Merseyside police authority chairman, Mr George Brundred, and his deputy, Mr Harry Rimmer, leader of Liverpool City Council, to delegate her case to a committee they set up expressly for the purpose ‘had the smell of unfairness about it’.
However, the court did not rule that the suspension had been wrong in principle, and on Jan 9 members voted to both re-invoke it and to begin a new investigation into Miss Halford's behaviour.
At the same time they disclosed details of some of the charges facing her.
These include allegations that she was unfit through drink while acting as duty officer in charge of the force on July 24, 1990; that she swam in a pool with a male officer while dressed only in her underwear; and that she later shared a jacuzzi with the same officer.
The authority also claims she told falsehoods to her Chief Constable, Mr James Sharples, when questioned about her alleged conduct.
A week after Miss Halford was re-suspended the police authority announced that it was bringing further disciplinary charges against her, following allegations that she made abusive late-night telephone calls to Mr Sharples, another senior officer and two members of the authority.
The granting of the judicial review will not affect Miss Halford's industrial tribunal, due to begin on May 1.
ITV deadlock denied
By Jane Thynne, Media Correspondent
THE ITV companies have publicly denied that they are at loggerheads after missing the deadline to agree on a new system for commissioning programmes for the ITV network from next year.
Arrangements to introduce the new system of central scheduling were to be announced this week, but were called off at the last minute.
‘There is no bust-up,’ said Mr Greg Dyke, managing director of LWT, and chairman of the ITV Association.
He dismissed suggestions of disarray over the arrangements to supply £500 million worth of programmes for next year's schedule.
The central figures of network director and commissioner of all the programmes for the ITV network have still not been chosen.
But Mr Dyke said the formula for the first two years of the new 10-year system had been agreed.
Woman juror forces rape case retrial
By John Steele, Courts Correspondent
A RAPE trial was halted yesterday after a female juror complained there were not enough women on the panel.
She spoke to a woman police officer outside the Old Bailey after the court had adjourned on Tuesday evening.
The officer then reported her remarks to the court.
Judge Lawrence Verney, the Recorder of London, who had earlier issued a routine warning to jurors not to discuss the case with outsiders, discharged the eight men and four women.
The alleged victim, a 14-year-old schoolgirl, had spent several hours giving evidence, claiming she was attacked by a trusted family friend.
She will now have to repeat her allegations when the 52-year-old Surrey man is re-tried on two rape charges.
Discharging the jury after a plea from defence lawyers, judge Verney reminded them of his earlier warning.
‘Unfortunately, one of your number disregarded that direction and did speak to someone who is a witness in the trial.
That is irregular conduct,’ he said.
‘I know that no harm was intended and it may be that no harm was done.
But the defendant is left with a grievance and, in those circumstances, what I feel obliged to do is to accept the application that has been made on his behalf and to discharge you from returning a verdict in this case.’
The girl claimed she was raped in her bedroom during Christmas 1990 and again in the man's home on New Year's Day 1991 while her brother slept only feet away.
The girl, a virgin at the time, became pregnant as a result, the jury heard.
Mr Alan Williams, prosecuting, told the jury the girl was so ashamed she did not tell her parents until April and a ‘hurried termination’ was arranged.
The trial is expected to be heard before another jury in the near future.
Jurors are called at random to sit on cases from a pool summoned to courts.
All-male or all-female juries are rare, but an 8–4 split in favour of either sex is common.
Lawyers do not believe that women jurors are necessarily more likely than men to believe the evidence of alleged rape victims.
Miner tells of joy at rescue
By Colin Wright
THE LEADER of the eight miners trapped for 15 hours half a mile underground told yesterday of their joy at seeing the first rescuer.
Mr John Friend, 37, a deputy at Stillingfleet, North Yorks, said: ‘The first moment you see that fellow, it's a great feeling.’
All eight were rescued unharmed on Tuesday morning after an operation in which Mr Friend's experience as rescue team captain helped to keep morale high.
As the men resumed work, Mr Friend said he told his colleagues to make themselves comfortable and to strip to their underwear to dig.
‘There was no panic and nobody got upset,’ he said.
‘We kept ourselves together and our spirits were extremely high.
I just talked to the lads and told them what would happen.’
Mr Friend added: ‘We were getting no ventilation at first.
It was getting very warm, but when the rescuers had established air we wanted to do something and started to dig ourselves out.’
The only lighting as they worked to clear the 15ft wall of debris was their helmet lanterns.
One man dug using full beam while another stood by the internal telephone system with a dimmed light.
The others rested in darkness.
‘We talked about anything and everything and we were joking with the men working to rescue us,’ Mr Friend said.
‘When they first broke through, and we had physical contact, it was marvellous.
I have been in rescue for 15 years, but I just cannot explain that feeling.’
The eight were trapped by a roof collapse at 4.30pm on Monday as they worked on a roadway leading to a new face.
They were freed after 30 rescuers had clawed away rubble with bare hands in temperatures of 100F.
Mr Paul Lewis, the colliery manager in charge of the rescue, said: ‘I would rather this had not happened.
But if it had to be anyone, I am glad it was John.
He was the best man we could possibly have had in the circumstances.’
The men were ‘joking over the Tannoy all the time’, he said.
‘I can't pay John any bigger compliment — to be underground for that length of time.
I have never seen men in such high spirits.’
Mother jailed for drug smuggling goes free
By A J Mcilroy
A MOTHER who waited two and a half years in a Spanish jail before being convicted on drug charges was freed yesterday after receiving remission on her sentence for being ‘a model prisoner’.
Mrs Eve Robinson, 43, a yachting writer, was jailed for five years last October for smuggling hashish at Fuengirola, Costa del Sol.
She left the jail with members of a British religious organisation for a secret address in Seville.
She is due to fly to London today, where she will be met by her children Dominic, 22, Tammy, 19, and Cathy, nine, of Chichester, Hants.
Divorcee Mrs Robinson was arrested in April, 1989, and while awaiting trial, she said she had only the vaguest idea of what she was being accused.
Mrs Robinson, who became a Christian in jail, refused to speak in her defence at her trial in Malaga.
Jailed with her were Jeremy Hoskins, 32, from Wells, Somerset, the man police said they saw unload nearly 300lb of hashish from her yacht, and George Helaine, a Belgian, accused of organising the shipment from Morocco.
They are still in jail.
Homage to ‘yomping’ Marines
By R Barry O'Brien
A PHOTOGRAPH of a Royal Marine advancing into Port Stanley after yomping across the Falklands has provided the inspiration for a 12ft high bronze statue symbolising the spirit and achievements of the Royal Marines.
The picture of Cpl Peter Robinson, taken by a Royal Navy photographer, Peter Holgate, with 45 Commando, Royal Marines, in the Falklands in 1982, is the logo of the Royal Marines Museum at Eastney Barracks in Southsea, Hants.
The statue, by Philip Jackson, vice-president of the Royal Society of British Sculptors, is to stand at the museum's entrance gates.
The picture showed a Union Flag flying from the antenna of Cpl Robinson's radio.
The bronze antenna in the statue, 6ft higher than the twice-lifesize figure, is to be a flagpole on which a real flag will be raised and lowered daily.
Mr Andy Lane, museum curator, said: ‘In every war there is a picture that seems to capture the moment and the spirit.
This picture sums up the Falklands campaign.’
The statue has been named The Yomper, but the photograph was taken after the Battles of Mount Harriet and Two Sisters which followed the yomp across the island.
During the yomp, each man carried 100lb of bedding, ammunition and food.
The Marine in the statue is lightly loaded, carrying only his SLR rifle, radio and pouches.
International: Britain in warning to Iraq
By Peter Almond Defence Correspondent
BRITISH, American and French officials prepared to warn Baghdad yesterday that their aircraft will shoot down any Iraqi plane or bomb any Iraqi anti-aircraft missile site that point radars at allied planes patrolling northern Iraq.
The officials were conferring with allies at the United Nations before issuing a formal reaction to the new Iraqi military moves, which were revealed yesterday to include anti-aircraft missiles being taken into allied-protected territory in northern Iraq.
On Sunday, for the first time since the Gulf war, Iraq flew combat aircraft up to the 36th parallel in violation of UN resolutions.
Iraq claims the moves have been prompted by Iranian raids into Iraq.
But the radars used by the Iraqi missile batteries and aircraft have threatened allied patrols.
International: Arafat found safe after crash-landing in Sahara PLO seeks American assistance in hunt for lost leader, as 6,000 troops scour sandstorm-swept Libyan desert for missing plane
By Alan Philps, Diplomatic Correspondent and Ian Brodie in Washington
YASSER ARAFAT, the Palestine Liberation Organisation leader, emerged bruised but with his popularity enhanced yesterday from a crash landing of his aircraft in a Libyan desert sandstorm.
His reappearance after a long night of uncertainty prompted scenes of rejoicing among Palestinians around the Middle East.
It seemed certain to boost his reputation as a survivor and to stifle growing discontent with his autocratic leadership.
The ordeal began when Mr Arafat was returning from the Sudanese capital, Khartoum, to his headquarters in Tunis.
After a stop-over for refuelling at Al-Khufra, in southern Libya, he was due to inspect a PLO training camp at Al-Sarah.
Because of a sandstorm, the pilot failed to find the landing lights and belly-flopped the Algerian Antonov-26 in the desert.
The three-man crew was killed, but the PLO chairman and his 10-member entourage were merely jolted.
Libyan authorities raised the alarm and Mr Arafat's senior adviser at PLO headquarters, Mr Bassam Abu Sharif, immediately asked the US to use its spy satellites to find the missing plane.
Mr Abu Sharif called former President Jimmy Carter, who has contacts with the PLO from his time as a Third World mediator.
Mr Carter rang the White House to ask if a reconnaissance satellite could be repositioned.
The US government, which has no relations with the PLO and has sought consistently to keep it out of the Middle East peace process, said the request was still being discussed five hours later when news arrived that the 62-year-old chairman had been found.
By that time, the mood in Washington was tending towards offering some assistance, according to officials yesterday.
Any offer of help, even if presented as a humanitarian gesture, would have been controversial in the US and Israel, which still sees the PLO as a terrorist organisation.
By the time Mr Arafat was found, no satellite had been repositioned, the officials said.
But Mr Abu Sharif said on US television that Mr Bush had already agreed to use a satellite in the search, and thanked both the President and Mr Carter.
Some 6,000 Libyan soldiers, 850 Palestinian militiamen and five Egyptian military aircraft joined in the search for the missing plane at first light.
Mr Said Kamal, the PLO's representative in Cairo, said Mr Arafat's plane had ditched its fuel, turned off its lights and gone down.
The visibility was so bad even after dawn that ‘you could not see your fingers in front of your face’.
The plane was said to be intact, though the cockpit was smashed.
As word of what seemed like a miraculous survival spread, the gloom within Palestinian communities throughout the Middle East turned to joy.
Mr Arafat quickly sent a message to all PLO offices saying: ‘Thank you all — I am well, thank God.’
In Arab East Jerusalem and other parts of the Israeli-occupied territories, Palestinians took to the streets in celebration.
There were similar jubilant scenes in refugee camps in Lebanon.
Mr Khaled Al-Hassan, a PLO founder member, said the demonstrations showed that Mr Arafat had passed ‘an important psychological test’.
He said: ‘The West and the Americans keep telling us to be realistic.
But it is time they recognised the PLO as the real representative of the Palestinian people.’
Some Palestinians, however, leapt to the conclusion that the crash was staged in order to boost sympathy for the PLO leader ahead of a crucial meeting of the 90-member PLO central council which was due to open in Tunis today.
Mr Arafat is seeking to reunite the organisation in the face of criticism that his associates are corrupt and inefficient and that his decision to join the US-brokered Middle East peace talks has led the Palestinian cause into an impasse.
International: Iran's clerical combatants claim legacy of Khomeini
By Anton La Guardia in Teheran
THE NAME of the late Ayatollah Khomeini has been invoked at every turn this week during the campaign for tomorrow's Iranian general election, which could determine the pace at which the country emerges from its international isolation.
Khomeini is reputed to have told his followers: ‘The revolution is not about the price of watermelons.’
Yet three years after his death the heirs of his Islamic regime are engaged in a debate on food prices, economic policy and relations with the West.
Two groupings, with barely distinguishable names, have covered Teheran with photographs of bearded men and a few fully veiled women.
The Association of Combatant Clergymen, associated with Islamic radicals, denounces tentative moves towards the West as a betrayal of Khomeini.
Its posters claim to ‘defend Islam, Islamic rule, constitutional rule, support the deprived and to prevent the dominance of capitalism and those who have never suffered poverty’.
Its rival, the Association of Combatant Clergy, supports President Rafsanjani and his cautious policy of liberalising the economy and links with the West, so gaining finance and technology to rebuild Iran's economy, still suffering from the war against Iraq which ended in 1988.
Its slogan says: ‘Following the Imam's [Khomeini's]line means following the leadership and supporting Hashami [Rafsanjani]’.
Iran's Islamic system, despite a bloody history, restrictions imposed on its citizens and its aggressive attempts to export its brand of Shi'ite fundamentalism, allows a remarkable degree of political liberty.
As long as it does not question the Islamic system, parliament can engage in genuine debate.
It even reserves seats for minorities: Jews, Christians and Zoroastrians.
President Rafsanjani's faction has ensured that a committee set up to vet candidates' Islamic credentials has eliminated many hardliners, such as Ayatollah Khalkhali, who sentenced thousands to death early in the revolution.
International: UN-Libya showdown near
BY ALAN PHILPS
THE United Nations appeared to have exhausted the options last night for avoiding a showdown with Libya over its refusal to extradite two Lockerbie bombing suspects, writes Alan Philps, Diplomatic Correspondent.
Barring a change of heart by Col Gaddafi, there seems no chance of avoiding the imposition next Wednesday of sanctions that would cut all air links and ban arms sales.
Mr Valdimir Petrovsky, a UN envoy, said he had had ‘frank, serious and businesslike’ talks with the Libyan leader, but he held out no hope of a breakthrough.
His is the fourth UN mission which has failed to find a way out of the crisis.
He said the colonel had assured him that attacks on embassies would not be repeated and difficulties over foreigners obtaining exit visas had been ended.
Britain has been concerned at Libyan attempts to put pressure on foreign governments by refusing exit visas.
International: When time stood still for the Palestinian cause
By Gerald Butt in Nicosia
FOR 15 hours on Tuesday Palestinians worldwide were faced with a prospect which few can seriously have thought about before — that of the PLO without Yasser Arafat as leader.
Mr Arafat's advisers in Tunis could scarcely choke back their emotion as they answered reporters' questions while his fate was uncertain.
But even his detractors and enemies within the Palestinian movement confessed to having feelings of unease.
‘No matter what you think of Yasser Arafat,’ one opponent commented, ‘his departure would leave an enormous and dangerous vacuum.’
The extent of the vacuum would have reflected Mr Arafat's giant presence in the Palestinian movement.
He was a founder of the PLO, and since becoming chairman in 1969 he has involved himself tirelessly in every aspect of Palestinian affairs.
His supporters say his energy has enabled him to succeed to a large extent in holding the Palestinian movement together during a series of splits and crises.
Many Palestinians doubt whether anyone else would be able to do this.
But Mr Arafat's critics accuse him of acting like a dictator by forcing his wishes on the Palestinian movement.
Such is his domination of Palestinian affairs that the grooming of a successor has been impossible.
Two of Mr Arafat's closest aides, Salah Khalaf (known as Abu Iyad) and Khalil al-Wazir (Abu Jihad), might have been obvious candidates.
But both were killed — Abu Jihad by an Israeli hit squad in 1988, Abu Iyad by a supporter of the breakaway Abu Nidal faction three years later.
The mechanics of the succession would have seen the convening of the Palestinian parliament-in-exile, the Palestine National Council.
This would have appointed a new executive committee which, in turn, would have chosen a new chairman.
But this would have been a long and painful process.
Critics of the PLO's decision to back the participation of a Palestinian delegation in the current Middle East peace process would most likely have taken the opportunity of Mr Arafat's demise to make a bid for power.
At the same time prominent Palestinians from the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip would probably have emerged with their status greatly enhanced.
The effect would have been to distance even more those living in the territories from the decision-making machinery of the PLO outside.
Since the start of the Middle East peace process, figures from the occupied territories such as Mrs Hanan Ashrawi and Mr Feisel Husseini have done much to enhance the image of the Palestinians in the West.
Their suave and eloquent appearances on television contrast sharply with the tough-speaking militaristic image of the current PLO leadership.
Given the inevitable fact that the next PLO chairman could not hope to match the stature and international acclaim which Mr Arafat has acquired over the years, many Palestinians believe that the influence of the organisation would wane accordingly.
Such changes would involve a major upheaval within the Palestinian movement.
Those 15 hours of waiting on Tuesday made Palestinians inside and outside the occupied territories realise the extent to which Yasser Arafat alone holds the whole movement together.
International: Colony rejects Peking claims of favouritism
By Our Hong Kong Correspondent
ALLEGATIONS that British companies are milking Hong Kong with covert aid from the territory's government were denied yesterday by Mr Peter Heap, Britain's Trade Commissioner in the colony.
British firms or consortia have won two-thirds of the consultancy contracts for the territory's £8.5 billion port and airport project.
Last month Lu Ping, head of China's Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Office, questioned the award of a £40 million design contract for the airport to the most expensive bidder, a consortium led by Sir Norman Foster.
A government spokesman said yesterday: ‘Tenders are looked at individually and taken on merit.’
International: Soweto murder inquiry re-opens
By Our Johannesburg Correspondent
South African police said yesterday they would re-open the inquiry into the death of Dr Abu-Baker Asvat, a Soweto doctor whose murder has been linked to Mrs Winnie Mandela.
A senior police officer has been appointed to ‘examine very thoroughly’ every aspect of the killing of Dr Asvat, who was shot dead in 1988.
International: Peru President promises polls
By Our Lima Correspondent
Elections will be held in Peru within 18 months, despite the power takeover by President Alberto Fujimori, said the Foreign Minister, Senor Augusto Blacker Miller.
The administration will also hold a plebiscite within the next six months for the approval of constitutional reforms.
International: Troops shot 34 at mosque, say Burma refugees
By Our Dhaka Correspondent
At least 34 Rohingya Muslims were killed and scores more injured when Burmese troops opened fire on a congregation in Arakan province, according to refugees arriving in neighbouring Bangladesh in the last two days.
They said the massacre occurred on Sunday in the village of Sikdarpara, near Muangdaw, as the Rohingyas offered prayers at the end of the holy month of Ramadan.
Moulvi Ali Zoha, a Rohingya Muslim who arrived in Bangladesh on Monday, told United News, a Bangladeshi news agency, that the soldiers were angered when the Muslims broke open the doors of the mosque, which had been locked for months since the Burmese authorities clamped down on the Rohingyas.
Thousands of acres of rice paddy in north and west Bangladesh will be ruined if drought persists, agriculture officials have said.
International: The Comeback Kid lives up to his name again
By Ian Brodie in Washington
BILL CLINTON calls himself the Comeback Kid and has again lived up to the name.
Victories in three primaries, including the battle of New York, were a turning point that have given the Arkansas governor an unassailable lead in delegates needed for the Democrats' presidential nomination.
But he failed to allay fears that he will be a fatally flawed candidate when pitted against President Bush next autumn.
Despite persistent rumours in Washington of further infidelities, Mr Clinton says there will be no more surprises about him.
Dispirited Democrats appear to be stuck with a limping front-runner.
He is not doing badly enough to find another nominee through a brokered convention, but he is not doing well enough to please a majority even within his own party.
Anti-Clinton sentiments were manifest among voters in New York, where six out of 10 supported either former Senator Paul Tsongas, who came in second even though he is no longer running, or the fiery populism of third-placed Jerry Brown.
Two out of three voters said they wished other candidates were available.
Nearly half said Mr Clinton lacked the honesty and integrity to be President, and just over half said they were backing him with reservations.
Mr Tsongas has been thinking of reviving his campaign.
He has promised to make a decision before the end of this week, but most party leaders predict he will be persuaded by the Clinton sweep to stay on the sidelines.
Mr Brown, former governor of California, promised to fight on, but his lustre faded under the intense spotlight of New York.
His 13 per cent flat tax fell flat, and his irrational idea of the Rev Jesse Jackson as Vice-President alienated Jewish voters while failing to attract enough blacks.
Mr Clinton seemed eager to heal wounds and to overcome dissatisfaction within his own party.
In his victory speech he was gracious towards Brown and Tsongas voters, saying they were united with his supporters in wanting to oust Mr Bush.
Mr Clinton compared the raucous New York campaign to a Coney Island roller-coaster with its ups and downs and twists and turns.
Then, stretching a point, he declared: ‘Now I've been through it all, I have to admit I had a ball.’
He is the first Southerner to succeed in New York, and his aides were happily parodying the Sinatra song about the Big Apple: ‘If we can make it here, we'll make it anywhere.’
The hectic campaign schedule now takes a three-week breather until a big primary in Pennsylvania, followed in May and June by Ohio, several states in the South, and the West Coast states led by California.
The remaining delegates to be chosen in these races will not give Mr Clinton a firm lock on the nomination but, barring some unfathomable collapse on his part, he will be mathematically impossible to overtake.
In the Republican primaries, Mr Bush had predictable landslides over Patrick Buchanan, who did not campaign and mustered only 15 to 25 per cent of the vote.
International: ‘34 shot dead’ at mosque in Burma
By Roushan Zaman in Dhaka
AT LEAST 34 Rohingya Muslims were killed and scores more injured when Burmese troops opened fire on a Muslim religious congregation in Arakan province, according to Burmese refugees arriving in neighbouring Bangladesh in the last two days.
They said this latest massacre occured on Sunday at a mosque in the village of Sikdarpara, near Muangdaw, as the Rohingyas offer their eid prayers, marking the end of the holy month of Ramadan.
Moulvi ali Zoha, a Rohingya Muslim who arrived in Bangladesh on Monday, told United News, a Bangladeshi news agency, that the soldiers were angered by the Muslims' breaking open the doors of the mosque, which had been kept locked for the last few months since the Burmese authorities clamped down on the Rohingyas.
Mohammad Issa, another refugee, was quoted by Dhaka newspapers on Wednesday as saying that the troops also opened fire on another congregation at Sademsa.
Reports of the massacre could not be verified, as Burma remains a closed country since the military junta in Rangoon intensified its campaigns against the Arakanese Muslims who are known as Rohingyas, who have fled in their thousands into south-east Bangladesh.
To date more than 200,000 refugees have taken shelter in Bangladesh, putting further strain on its economy as well as on its relations with Burma.
The latest massacre coincided with the ending of a four-day visit to Burma by Mr Jan K Eliasson, Secretary General of the United Nations, who is seeking a solution to the refugee problem.
The spectre of drought looms over Bangladesh's northern districts, with farmers and agriculture officials giving warning that thousands of acres of rice paddy in about eight north and western districts — the granary of the country — will be ruined.
International: Million facing famine death in Ethiopia
By Michael Smith, Foreign Staff
MORE than a million people in southern Ethiopia are at risk of starvation in a famine that has killed 5,000 in five months, according to the country's Relief and Rehabilitation Commission.
The effects of the famine, which follows two years of drought, have been exacerbated by the non-arrival of foreign aid and fighting between clans for control of the southern provinces.
Each day 25 refugees are dying at a camp housing about 190,000 in Dollo on the Somali border, officials said, adding that, on March 17 alone, 55 people died there.
At another camp on the Kenyan border the deaths had reached 10 a day.
Reporters who visited the Dollo camp, about 425 miles south-west of Addis Ababa, said three babies had died within two hours.
The area was littered with the carcases of livestock in scenes reminiscent of the 1984–85 famine that left up to a million dead and prompted Bob Geldof's Band Aid campaign.
‘If a co-ordinated effort is not made as quickly as possible, the death toll could increase dramatically to become a major catastrophe,’ said Mr Demoze Kebebu, regional representative of Ethiopia's Bureau of Refugee Affairs.
International donors have delivered only about a quarter of the 200,000 tons of promised food aid — a fraction of the million tons the country needs.
The commission appealed for 200,000 tons of food immediately and said that, if if there were any delay, many thousands more people would die.
Save the Children is sending emergency medical supplies to the region, said Mr Mark Bowden, area director for Africa.
‘The situation there is very grim.’
The shortage of aid to the country was largely due to a lack of interest and changing priorities among donor countries, he said.
‘The food pipeline is extremely poor this year.
Even if all the aid needed is pledged, it will arrive too late.
It is a matter of extreme concern.’
Decades of civil war in Ethiopia ended last May when the Marxist regime of President Menguistu Haile Mariam collapsed, but another phase of civil strife has followed as rival clans jockey for power.
International: Serbs shell Sarajevo as defenders unite
By Michael Montgomery in Sarajevo
AN artillery and mortar bombardment of Sarajevo was launched by Serbian guerrillas last night as the Bosnian government ordered a consolidation of local militias into a fledgling army.
The government of the new republic declared a state of emergency as Yugoslav army howitzers in surrounding hills shelled homes and shops in Sarajevo's Muslim quarter.
Dust and smoke could be seen rising from several points.
The shelling started despite promises by Yugoslav army generals not to attack.
The defenders said they had no weapons to counter artillery.
Mr Radovan Karadzic, the main Serbian leader in Bosnia, had threatened to attack unless Bosnian officials freed an associate held after sniping incidents, police said.
Twenty-six people, including two girls, have been killed by sniper fire and shelling.
Elsewhere in Bosnia, 41 deaths were reported amid further clashes with Serbs backed by the Yugoslav army.
Diplomats in Belgrade said Western governments which recognised Bosnia were exerting pressure on the federal army, Serbia and Croatia to co-operate with efforts to end the violence.
However, the federal army yesterday launched air raids and armoured attacks in western Bosnia, which has seen some of the heaviest fighting.
Bosnia's second city, Mostar, was the scene of street fighting and artillery battles between the Yugoslav army and the Croatian and Muslim defenders.
Yugoslav troops opened fire in the city centre after mortar attacks on a garrison and airfield, according to Sarajevo radio.
The mayor appealed to both sides to spare the city's Turkish-era centre as terrified residents prepared for a long night in cellar shelters.
For the second day Yugoslav jets attacked Croat villages to the east of Mostar, which the Yugoslav army claimed were being used to launch raids on its garrisons.
Serbian paramilitary groups, with Yugoslav tanks based in Knin, claimed to have recaptured the predominantly Serbian town of Kupres.
The bodies of at least 30 people were found in the streets, an army officer said.
Fighting was reported for the first time in the east Bosnian towns of Visegrad and Foca, near the Serbian border.
Both have sizeable Muslim populations, and Sarajevo radio said shooting started when Serbs tried to seize police and radio stations.
The Bosnian government yesterday ordered all armed formations to submit to the Interior Ministry, which is to oversee the reorganisation of security forces into a multi-ethnic defence force, said Mr Mirsad Srebrenikovic, assistant Interior Minister.
‘By Thursday the main militias will all be united,’ he said.
‘Those units that will not join will be treated as enemies.
It will be the same for any renegade units, be they Croat, Muslim or Serb.’
Many Yugoslav army officers had asked how they could put themselves at the disposal of the government, he said.
The government had assured them it would guarantee rank and privileges.
Gen Zivota Panic, acting Yugoslav chief-of-staff, said: ‘With the help of the German-led EC, aggressive support from the Vatican and the backing of the United States, nationalist forces have managed to create states through secession.
We are closer now to war than to peace.’
International: Clash closer in rival claims to Black Sea Fleet
By John Kampfner in Moscow and Stephen Mulvey in Simferopol
UKRAINE and Russia established parallel command structures over the Black Sea Fleet yesterday as the confrontation between the two nuclear powers worsened.
President Yeltsin was also facing trouble from Russia's supreme legislature, which was reported to be tabling a motion that would strip him of his emergency powers.
The Interfax news agency quoted Mr Sergei Filatov, deputy Speaker, as saying the Congress of People's Deputies was ready to debate revoking Mr Yeltsin's right to choose his own government, to remove him as Prime Minister and to choose the Cabinet itself.
Recent estimates have suggested that up to 40 per cent of the deputies favour such an option, with 30 per cent undecided.
A series of speakers during the debate on economic reform attacked the shock therapy programme of Mr Yegor Gaidar, First Deputy Prime Minister.
Mr Gaidar stressed that, if Congress succeeded in forcing Mr Yeltsin to give up his additional post of Prime Minister, the entire government would resign in protest.
Mr Yeltsin's team was preparing to counter-attack today with a draft of a new constitution that would extend the presidential term from five years to six and give him a right of veto over parliamentary Bills and to pick a small team of state ministers.
Most of the attention, however, was focused on Sevastopol, the headquarters in the Crimea of the Black Sea Fleet.
Adml Vladimir Chernavin, commander of CIS naval forces, arrived in the city to conduct the formal transfer of the fleet to Russia.
As heated talks began, both sides established their own chains of command.
Ukraine appointed Rear-Adml Boris Kozhin, previously commander of the Crimean naval base, as head of all naval forces in the republic, even though he had just been sacked by Adml Igor Kasatonov, the CIS's Commander of the Black Sea Fleet, for ‘inflaming national strife’.
Adml Kasatonov was said last night to be in hospital with high blood pressure.
Col Alexander Skipalsky, head of Ukrainian military counter-intelligence, said he was taking measures to prevent ‘outside’ subversion and attempts to ‘hijack’equipment to Russia.
Addressing an emergency parliamentary debate in Kiev, President Leonid Kravchuk declared: ‘Only one state is responsible for the conflict over the Black Sea Fleet; and it is called Russia.’
Mr Yeltsin's chief military aide, Mr Dmitry Volkgonov, said: ‘We have to find a compromise because the worst negotiations are better than the best war.’
The local parliament in Sevastopol called for a political settlement and said the row strengthened its resolve to seek complete autonomy for Crimea.
Police at checkpoints were ordered by the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry to prevent Western correspondents from entering Sevastopol, one of the few remaining closed cities of the former Soviet Union.
Capt Yaroslav Knyazev, a Ukrainian nationalist in Sevastopol, said: ‘People here are feeling good.
At last Ukraine has started looking after its own citizens.’
He said CIS officers were preventing lawyers from going aboard ships at the harbour to explain the situation to the Servicemen.
A protest outside fleet headquarters had been whipped up, he said, by deliberately spread rumours that two planeloads of Ukrainian National Guard were arriving to arrest Adml Kasatanov.
Western defence experts said the wording of Mr Kravchuk's decree on Monday taking over the fleet and Mr Yeltsin's the next day countermanding the order left room for a political solution.
But they expressed fears that a grassroots crisis could occur.
‘It's when questions of loyalty will be up to individual captains of ships that confusion and misunderstandings could happen,’ said one.
International: France to suspend N-tests in Pacific
By Tim Witcher in Paris
FRANCE is to suspend nuclear tests at its South Pacific atoll site, Mururoa, this year, M Pierre Beregovoy, Prime Minister, said in his inaugural speech to parliament yesterday.
It would give impetus to strategic disarmament negotiations, he said.
However, financial and political considerations are also thought to have strongly influenced the decision.
In addition to pressure for defence cuts, the Mitterrand administration has been wooing the two Green parties.
An end to tests has been one of their main demands.
M Beregovoy said: ‘This morning the President sent letters to the heads of state of all the nuclear powers calling for a rapid conclusion to negotiations on strategic disarmament and proposing the suspension of nuclear tests.’
Mururoa has been used for nuclear tests since 1966, at first in the air but, since 1981, underground.
They have brought France into conflict with South Pacific countries from as far afield as Chile and Peru.
New Zealand and Australia have led the protests.
The issue went to the International Court at The Hague in 1973, but France said it did not recognise the court's jurisdiction in the matter.
In 1985 French agents killed a photographer when they blew up the Greenpeace flagship Rainbow Warrior in Auckland harbour.
Last month Rainbow Warrior II was seized by the French navy as it led another protest to the atoll.
International: Guerrillas joust for supremacy
By Philip Sherwell in Zvornik
THE UNEASY stand-off in the strategic Bosnian-Serbian border town of Zvornik collapsed yesterday as paramilitary factions fought for control of its deserted streets.
Beneath a giant red star and the name ‘Tito’ painted on a hillside, Muslim and Serbian guerrillas jousted for supremacy in the latest phase of the bloody disintegration of the Communist patrician's Yugoslav federation.
With heavily armed gangs roaming the streets, the mixed Serb-Muslim population either hid behind locked doors or fled across the iron bridge over the River Drina, which forms the border.
Yesterday's clashes cut the main route from Belgrade to Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, and scruffy gun-toting irregulars refused to allow traffic through the town.
Zvornik, where Muslims and Serbs have lived and worked alongside each other for decades, is a microcosm of towns across the crumbling ethnic mosaic of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
As bus driver Mirsad Nevsetovic, a Muslim married to a Serb, expressed the apparently forlorn hope that ‘both sides see sense’, it all became too much for his wife's Serbian mother.
The old woman, despair in her eyes, broke down in tears, seeking solace on her son-in-law's shoulder and unable to comprehend the ethnic divisions which are pitting neighbour against neighbour, family against family.
Mr Jose-Maria Mendiluce, special envoy of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, was one of the few permitted to pass through Zvornik in a white Jeep bearing the organisation's flag.
‘It is very tense in there.
The only people moving around are carrying weapons and there has been a lot of shooting,’ he said.
Fifteen minutes later, a team of EC monitors sped out of the town without stopping.
For the Serbian refugees listening to the crackle of gunfire from the other side of the Drina, this week's transformation of the river into a new international border was barely credible.
‘I am a Serb.
I have lived in Yugoslavia all my life.
Suddenly Europe tells me I am living in a new country called Bosnia-Hercegovina.
I am not very impressed,’ said Mrs Mirijana Vuic.
She had not heard from her husband, a policeman in Bosnia, for two days.
The police force has split on ethnic lines, with Muslims guarding one end of the bridge and Serbs the other.
The outbreak of fighting followed several days of heightening tension during which both sides erected road blocks and checkpoints.
Education: Selective lessons in survival
By PAUL MARSTON
IF HEAD teachers of opted-out schools were typical voters, the Conservatives could count on a landslide election result.
Few in the education world have more to lose from a Labour victory today, with the probable exception of the 150,000 children in their charge.
Unless the pollsters are confounded, the 217 grant-maintained schools that have come into being since 1989 will be returned to former local authority masters.
The 45 grammar schools among them face the additional threat of comprehensive reorganisation, or closure.
Labour would abolish grant-maintained (GM) status by the end of 1993, and remove selection by 1996.
A minority administration should face little difficulty winning Liberal Democrat support for similar objectives.
Even without a Commons majority, Labour's Jack Straw could make a considerable mark.
He would reject the 100 outstanding applications for GM status (including the nine unfortunate schools given preliminary approval to go ahead in September), and could reduce the existing schools' funding and capital for building improvements.
Equally, he could invite politically sympathetic authorities to volunteer plans for comprehensive reorganisation, thus numbering the days of the 11 surviving grammar schools in Labour-run areas.
It is scarcely surprising that opt-out schools are apprehensive.
As Robert Balchin, chairman of the GM Schools Foundation, says: ‘Many schools faced bitter hostility in opting out of the LEAs to which Labour will forcibly return them.
By and large, the same people are still in positions of power in those authorities.
They are hardly likely to behave as if nothing had happened.’
Straw acknowledges that such anxieties are real, and promises measures to protect former GM schools and their teachers from ‘discrimination’ by vengeful town halls.
His pledge was derided as ‘a grievance procedure for Christians thrown to the lions’ when opt-out heads met for a somewhat valedictory national conference last week.
Selective schools have most to fear, especially those in Labour LEAs.
Martin Tweedle, head of Heckmondwike Grammar, Kirklees, is under no illusions: ‘If Labour's manifesto is to be believed, we don't really have a future.
We faced 25 years of reorganisation schemes until we became GM and started to plan ahead with confidence.
Now we will be plunged back into uncertainty.’
For grammars restored to Tory councils (and the 80-odd that have stayed with Tory authorities), the outlook is not quite so bleak.
Counties such as Lincolnshire, Kent and Buckinghamshire can be expected to drag their feet over comprehensive reforms, as they did 20 years ago.
Stand by for interminable consultation exercises, formulation and revision of elaborate (and strangely unworkable) schemes, and a torrent of litigation.
John Haden, head of Lincolnshire's King Edward VI School, Louth, sees no reason to panic: ‘The county ducked and dived throughout the Sixties and Seventies, and got away with it.
We've provided a grammar school education for the people of this area for 700 years and intend to go on doing so.’
Some GM grammars, particularly those backed by ancient charities, would undoubtedly consider going independent, though LEA opposition may force them to seek new premises.
Roger Peach, of the National Grammar Schools Association, says charging fees would be preferable to oblivion.
‘It would be another tragedy for the able child from the non-affluent home, but there are several places where parents will favour abandoning the state sector and setting up as economical day schools.’
Many comprehensives are also nervous about returning to the council embrace, notably the 40 previously earmarked for closure or where their high-profile success has got up important noses.
Roger Perks, head of Baverstock, one of the first inner-city schools to opt out, received the OBE in the New Year Honours.
Now he is fearful for his job should Labour-run Birmingham resume control.
‘People associated with the council have called me all sorts of things.
My future would be uncertain.’
Yet his real concern is that Labour has failed to grasp how the financial and managerial freedom of GM status, bypassing the LEA and channelling extra funds to schools, has improved opportunities for ordinary pupils.
‘Under the LEA, my budget would drop 20 per cent.
I would have to lose 10 teaching posts, and several ancillary appointments we've made to allow teachers to concentrate on teaching.
‘We have smaller classes and we buy in individual music tuition for 100 children.
That couldn't possibly go on.
We had 24 computers when we opted out; now we have 150.
Applications from parents have more than doubled in three years.
That's a massive endorsement of GM status.’
Almost every GM head tells a similar tale.
‘If we go back to the LEA, there will be less money for pupils because the central bureaucracy will gobble it up,’ says Graham Locke, head of Audenshaw, in the Manchester borough of Tameside.’
Jack Straw talks about raising spending on books by £10 a year per child.
That would be £8,000 at my school, which is peanuts.
This year, we're spending £100,000 on books — over three times more than when we opted out.’
Another northern head, requesting anonymity, voiced his outrage at Labour's prejudice: ‘I've worked in comprehensives for 18 years and I know as well as anyone that you cannot get good education for working-class children without quality teachers and adequate resources.
GM status makes that much more achievable.
Labour should be promoting it, not destroying it.’
There are substantial grounds for regarding opting out as the most radical and successful experiment in state schooling for 30 years.
It is curious that its political champions have barely touched on its merits in the election that may well herald its demise.
Letter to the Editor: Don't put clock back 13 years
SIR — What irony that the Iron Curtain of communo-socialism has collapsed throughout Eastern Europe, but we in Britain are on the verge of possibly turning back the clock 13 years to renew our disastrous affair with socialism.
As one who was in the vanguard of the battle to halt and then reverse the ratchet of socialism, I appeal to all who really care for their country and their children's future: do not give history an opportunity to repeat itself.
Learn and remember about the bloodshed at Grunwick, the abuse of power by union barons with their iron control over the last Labour government, the continual disruption of industry by strikes, flying and mass pickets, the uncollected rubbish and unburied dead, inflation at 27 per cent.
Today Labour talks of investment to pull Britain out of recession, but its investment is merely a euphemism for public spending on an unprecedented scale.
Denis Healey's slogan about squeezing the rich until the pips squeak has been rewritten to include practically everyone.
Labour may have stolen England's emblem, but its policies don't smell of roses.
Surface socialism may seem more acceptable, but old ideologies lurk close behind the cheerful smiles.
Whatever the Tories' shortcomings, life under Labour would almost certainly be worse.
I personally know of a foreign company planning to establish a factory and recruit a thousand staff in Britain.
It may not come at all if Labour wins.
JOHN GOURIET Andover, Hants
Letter to the Editor: Sounds successful
SIR — I admire Philip Gwinnell's careful aural scrutiny of the Labour Party broadcast (letter, April 8), but I feel I should point out, in the interest of accuracy, that ‘All Together Now’ was recorded by The Farm rather than Tears For Fears.
Should any political party wish to select a TFF track for a broadcast, might I suggest that ‘Everybody wants to rule the world’ might be quite apt.
P. J. MOLLOY Manchester
Letter to the Editor: BBC still showing marked bias
SIR — For the past two years, the BBC appears to have increasingly forgotten its obligation to provide entertainment and has substituted news and current affairs programmes with a strong political bias.
At a time when the BBC has declared its object of cutting its staff from 25,000, it has added an extra thousand to the people employed in the department concerned.
It has very strict rules, both in its Charter and in its own Guide to Producers, but these have been increasingly flouted.
It seems clear that several million voters have still not made up their minds, and there is therefore an added incentive in the last few days to influence them.
We shall be told that the time has been equally shared between the three parties, but there are many ways of belling the cat, and the timing of the viewpoints and the batting order can achieve the results they intend.
I give two examples.
On Monday, the Today programme, which has been the most heavily anti-Tory one for many years, decided that Michael Heseltine should be allowed to appear.
Its prime time is shortly before the 8 am news, but it decided to put him on at 8.20 am, when many listeners will be on their way to work.
On Tuesday evening, the Nine O'Clock News provided another example.
On the portion devoted to the South East news where, incidentally, there are many marginal seats, first we had Neil Kinnock, then there was Gordon Brown giving what amounted to a party political broadcast.
Third came a Liberal Democrat item, but no one was allowed to put the Tory case.
Since the BBC is judge and jury in its own interest, it will inevitably find itself not guilty.
It may even claim that it has had more complaints of bias from the Labour Party.
Fortunately, the electorate is far more observant and astute than it thinks.
Lord ORR-EWING London, SW1
Letter to the Editor: George has duty to others
SIR — Christopher Fildes's advice (article, April 7) to his unfortunate nephew, unwanted by his accountancy firm, is far from ideal.
As a student about to graduate, I am saddened by the number of my colleagues who can see their future only in high-salaried financial management.
They do not need advice on how to gain similar wealth abroad, or to be told that the prospect of working on charities' accounts for lower fees is not so abhorrent.
What many need is to be told that they can achieve something more constructive than a profit from others' financial predicament.
Might I suggest that young George should use his opportunity to put his expensive university education towards a greater purpose than the expansion of his wallet.
BENEDICT KELLEHER London SW20
Letter to the Editor: Tyson practice
SIR — In your report on Mike Tyson being in trouble for giving autographs in prison (April 1), Charles Laurence said that the boxer's reply was: ‘Yeah, that's what I always do.’
I can vouch for the truth of this.
Some years ago, when my husband and he discovered they were flying on the same Concorde, they exchanged autographed dinner menus.
(Mrs) EILEEN TYSON Poole, Dorset
An opportunity today which may not come again The campaign has appealed to our baser instincts, argues W. F. DEEDES, but with our democracy and economy in the balance, the choice before voters has never been starker
By W F DEEDES
THROUGHOUT this campaign, two maddeningly contradictory questions have occupied my mind.
Do the Tories deserve to win?
Why is it so serious if they lose?
As to the first, looking at the record since 1987, I cannot bring myself to say that the Conservatives have earned victory.
Does it matter therefore if Labour wins?
Yes, it matters far more than most people have grasped in this trivialised campaign.
My view may well be a little out of focus.
Travelling in Africa, as this campaign began, I saw the depths of human suffering in Mozambique.
It left me cool to lamentations here about underfunding of our National Health Service or the shortcomings of our colossal welfariat.
Then to South Africa, to witness a vote which will form a page in the world's history.
In such terms, this is not a fateful election.
We are, after all, a democracy.
As Winston Churchill once said, parliamentary democracy is a very bad system — but no one has found a better one.
Nor have they.
We deride our democracy and itch to find ways of improving it, such as proportional representation or abolishing the House of Lords.
Yet it has proved more stable than any other 20th-century system in Europe.
Voters of conservative inclination should be on guard against demolition squads from other parties which want to knock it about in order to prove their radicalism.
While in this frame of mind, let me say that it would not be a calamity for parliamentary democracy if electors today decided to return the Labour Party under Mr Kinnock.
Indeed, it might be argued that a fourth Conservative victory, unprecedented in this century, would throw the Labour Party into self-destruction and our democracy into imbalance.
And it is fatuous for Mr Paddy Ashdown to claim that he stands in readiness to preserve our democracy with a more moderate alternative to Labour.
Government is a serious business, and his Liberal Democrats are in no way ready for it.
Some of their policies — notably on taxation — are less moderate than Labour's.
They have too many bees in their bonnets to be dependable.
True, this has been a disappointing campaign.
With recollections of every general election since 1931, I remember none which has left my emotions so untouched.
The appeal has been shamelessly to the pocket calculator, not the heart; to the purse, not to pride.
Europe has not widened our horizon but on the contrary removed a huge dimension from our affairs, so that we are in effect left fighting a local election.
Big sentences about Britain's place in the world have been laid aside.
Yet we must be careful before blaming politicians for this mundane campaign, since in many respects it has been a reflection of ourselves.
The public is not thirsting for reassurances about our place in the world.
We have persuaded ourselves that militarily there is not much against which we have to defend ourselves.
Led by some bishops, we have replaced spirituality with an amorphous concern for the material needs of others.
No one I canvassed had any personal complaint against the National Health Service.
It was criticised as apparently unequal to all the needs of chronically sick children and helpless geriatrics.
Costs were irrelevant.
Which brings me to what may turn out to be the tragedy of this election.
Mr Kinnock has drawn Labour some way from its old follies, but he has manifestly not cured its obsession with the distribution of wealth, as opposed to its creation.
This accursed recession has blinded us to the fact that we are well placed, vis-a-vis our competitors in Europe, to create wealth.
Our productivity growth outstrips that of Germany and France — and why the Tory Party has concealed that from electors during this campaign passes my comprehension.
YET everything I read on Labour's slate seems calculated to cast this precious opportunity away.
I can think of no more deadly combination than the disciplines imposed on us by ERM and Labour's taste for economic debauchery.
That, coupled with its taxation proposals, form a lethal mixture.
Higher taxation on the scale proposed by Labour — and it will probably have to go higher still — is a depressant, the last thing that is needed.
A narrow win for Labour would add a further dose of poison.
Faced with the prospect of another election soon, it would strive to show that, with four-wheel drive, it could haul us out of this recession.
But Labour's prospectus is simply not designed to haul us out of any recession.
On the contrary, much of it — the taxation proposals in particular— is calculated to sacrifice our competitive edge.
It espouses the ill-conceived European Social Charter.
It proposes a job-destructive minimum wage.
It seeks to restore certain advantages to the trade unions.
It would swiftly encounter, as it has done before, a wages explosion, and lose us our edge over Europe on labour costs.
Industry in this country will find itself called upon to serve two masters, the EC and a Labour government, both with markedly dirigiste tendencies.
I do not rule out a Labour government, pinned down by a narrow majority, seeking to enact at least some of its social legislation through a supportive EC.
This would do nothing to restore confidence to industry at home or investors overseas.
There is no sign whatever that Labour has learnt from errors of the past.
It craves for planning as the alcoholic craves for drink.
It has dropped much of its collective thinking, which did such damage in the post-war years; but it still lacks fundamental confidence in the entrepreneur.
In its heart of hearts, it desires a market economy attached to a dog lead.
Experience shows this does not work.
Long ago, Keith (now Lord) Joseph convinced me that those who aspire to succour the poor, help the helpless, support the weakest, must keep the horse before the cart.
In other words, creation of wealth must precede its distribution.
Labour's promissory notes cannot be met by a scale of personal taxation which will become increasingly regressive.
It is Labour's insistence on putting the cart before the horse which fills me with gloom.
Labour retains a fatal mistrust in the only assured source of wealth which, warts and all, is the market economy.
To re-phrase Churchill on our democracy, the market economy is a very bad system — yes: Guinness, Maxwell, BCCI, Blue Arrow underline its frailties — but no one has yet found a better one.
It is Labour's denial of that proposition which I regard as fatal to our future.
Leading Article: Democrat dilemma
ACROSS the Atlantic, the Democratic primaries have degenerated into near farce.
Governor Bill Clinton appears to have sewn up the presidential nomination by winning a plurality in New York on Tuesday, but only after suffering further humiliation.
Tormented by allegations of adultery, draft evasion, and venality, he has limped through to victory with an empty campaign, crafted to avoid giving offence to anybody.
Over a quarter of the votes went in protest to Mr Paul Tsongas, who had already suspended his campaign.
Sixty per cent of Democrats still hope that a more substantial figure will be drafted to replace Mr Clinton at a brokered convention.
But that is wishful thinking.
Under the selection procedure the party bosses no longer have the power to carry out such a coup.
They are stuck with Mr Clinton.
Once again the Democratic party may have thrown away a historic opportunity to retake the White House.
Leading Article: The right choice
AT THE general election five years ago, the British people experienced a surge of renewed self-confidence.
It seemed that decades of national decline had been reversed by Conservative government since 1979.
Under Mrs Thatcher, it at last appeared that our chronic industrial and economic difficulties were being surmounted.
Britain held its head high in the world again.
The Tories' overwhelming victory in 1987 appeared to set the seal upon the triumph of bourgeois capitalism.
The real danger of Conservative defeat in today's election reflects the scale of the disillusionment which has intervened.
In the past five years, in the eyes of many voters, the glittering promises of the Thatcher years have crumbled into ashes.
They are left gazing upon a vista of ruined businesses, crippling borrowings and inadequate public services.
Even many voters who dislike and fear the Labour Party are tempted to register their disgust at the Tories' failures by voting Liberal Democrat.
There is a morning-after mood in the country, which feels embarrassed by the exuberance and optimism of the night before, and is minded to show its determination to punish those who threw the party.
The first important truth for voters in such spirits is that, in their dismay about recent economic and political errors, they are forgetting the immense Tory achievements which preceded them, and are now at risk again.
Today's gloom and despondency are exaggerated.
In the 1980s, this country was set on a course towards industrial efficiency and competitiveness from which the whole of British business will profit once more, when the recession ends.
If the Government's record of managing the public services has been indifferent, the Tories and the Tories alone have acted bravely and imaginatively to achieve better public services by the only credible means — managing resources through private sector standards and disciplines.
Labour and the Liberal Democrats are committed to seeking improvement in public services solely, and disastrously, by spending more money, and by restoring power to their clients, the public sector workers.
Throughout industry this election day, a host of trade unionists are waiting with acute anxiety, nursing their hopes: a Labour victory will enable them to reassert their influence on factories throughout the land, in a manner that has been impossible for a decade.
Education and health are alleged to be Labour's strongest suits.
They are actually their weakest.
Labour proposes a return to bureaucracy and profligacy.
Only the Conservatives are thinking radically in these areas, extending efficiency and choice.
An honest vote for Labour — or an evasive one for the Liberal Democrats, which will also help Mr Kinnock to Downing Street — signals a return to Britain's long, tragic, doomed pursuit of a soft option.
Labour's economic policies are wrong, not chiefly because they are still preoccupied with redistributing wealth (although they are), but because they reflect Labour's conviction that public rather than private spending offers a route to national prosperity.
For all John Smith's fluent fibs about ‘fairness’ and ‘investment’, during this election campaign, his policies promise higher taxation, higher interest rates and a corresponding brake upon consumer spending which will delay recovery by months, perhaps years.
There are those who suppose that ‘giving the other side a turn’ for a few years will invigorate democracy and somehow advance the cause of moderation.
It will do nothing of the kind.
The British people may be astonished how quickly all the ground so painfully won over 13 years is lost again, and how speedily we slide back towards collectivism and dependency, becoming a society in which the only competition is between rival rows of begging bowls at the knees of the state.
The country has not been well governed in the past four years.
Only the most foolish Tory would fail to make apologies to the electorate for his party's errors.
But, surely, we cannot have advanced so far from the socialist follies and delusions of the 1960s and 1970s, which all the world now rejects, to embrace them again under the banners of Mr Kinnock and Miss Glenda Jackson, Nupe and the apostles of Political Correctness, Mr Roy Hattersley and the heroes of a hundred town halls from Lambeth to Liverpool?
A vote for Labour or the Liberal Democrats will take Mr Kinnock to Downing Street tomorrow.
The Tories have much for which they should seek forgiveness.
But we are in no doubt that, if the electorate fails to pardon the Conservatives at the polls today, it will pay a price at the hands of a Labour government, perhaps sustained by the Liberal Democrats, which will set back this country a generation.
Where are the bogey men?
Paul Boateng
THE former chairman of the GLC's Police Committee and member of Ken Livingstone's municipal revolutionary guard, Boateng, 40, has risen rapidly since gaining his seat at the last election.
As party spokesman on Treasury and Economic Affairs he recently showed his political maturity by asserting that the Lloyd's crisis ‘gave anxiety for the national interest’— a view not shared by many of his colleagues.
An ambitious politician who is still well left of centre, the recession and the BCCI scandal have exercised his constituency skills in an area with many Asian businesmen.
His majority in 1987 was 7,931.
Where are the bogey men?
John Hughes
IN 1987 Labour's local selection committee in this working class constituency had to choose between a rock and a hard place — either Hughes, a local Transport Union convenor with strong left-wing views, or the outsider, ‘Red Ted’ Knight from Lambeth.
They selected Hughes, who was duly elected with an 11,867 majority, but two years ago changed their mind and de-selected him.
Hughes, 66, alleges ballot-rigging and is defiantly standing as an independent against the Kinnockite Bob Ainsworth, a Jaguar shop steward and local councillor.
His is a forlorn campaign, however, and he has little hope of success.
Peterborough: Jet lags
THERE were skittish scenes on the tarmac at Heathrow shortly before midnight on Tuesday, when Neil Kinnock and Paddy Ashdown's campaign planes touched down within minutes of each other, parking in adjacent bays.
The mood on Kinnock's ‘Red Rose’ jet was subdued after a tiring day, most of his entourage and press contingent longing for bed.
But a different spirit prevailed on Ashdown's plane, whose occupants were celebrating the close of the campaign.
Refreshed by a nimble in-flight claret, they serenaded him with a special song and behaved, generally, like the lower fourth on a trip to Whipsnade.
On landing, the Ashdown mob spilled on to the apron and surrounded Kinnock's plane, still singing and trying to persuade the party leaders to shake hands like opposing troops on the Western Front at Christmas.
Their efforts were in vain.
BETRAYING big night nerves, perhaps, all three party leaders have refused to allow television cameras or microphones into their cars.
This follows protracted negotiations with broadcasters, who wanted to install the ‘fly on the windscreen’ cameras which filmed the Thatchers in 1983 and 1987.
‘We were expecting the go-ahead,’ says the BBC, ‘but suddenly they all said no, without a reason.’
Where are the bogey men?
Diane Abbott
THE first black woman MP represents a poor area in which a third are non-whites and health and housing are big issues.
According to agent Bill Hamilton, the decision to keep the campaign low key was taken locally.
He says she is still the MP she was; in 1986 she told a hard left conference that ‘if they come for Militant in the morning, they'll come for the rest of us in the afternoon’.
In this year's campaign, there have been heated discussions about the state of housing under the Labour council — but apart from that, Hamilton says it has been easier than expected.
Her majority is 7,676.
Where are the bogey men?
Dennis Skinner (Bolsover):
DUBBED ‘The Beast of Bolsover’, the member for a gritty coalfield constituency is a constant irritant to his party's front bench, frequently voting according to leftist principles rather than the party line.
He is also the self-appointed heckler-in-chief to the Tories.
Nothing is sacred; when the Princess of Wales bought a Mercedes in February he accused the Royals of ‘showing contempt for British workers while living off the fat of the land’.
He says he would leave Labour if its link with the unions is broken.
Skinner, 60, had a 14,120 majority last time and seems unassailable.
Where are the bogey men?
Terry Fields (Ind Soc, Liverpool Broadgreen):
JAILED last year for not paying his poll tax, Fields was expelled by Labour for his Militant links.
His decision to defend his seat against the party's official candidate, Jane Kennedy, brought fears of a Lib Dem breakthrough but these are now receding.
A recent survey gave Ms Kennedy 43 per cent, Lib Dems 28 per cent and Fields a humiliating 16 per cent .
The area's MP since 1983 (maj. 6,047 last time), he has fought a vigorous campaign at doorstep and taproom level, even circulating his own campaign video.
But anti-Tory feeling in a recession-battered area has polarised the Labour vote to his disadvantage.
Where are the bogey men?
Bernie Grant (Tottenham):
GRANT took Tottenham in 1987 with a 4,141 majority; he was already notorious for his comments made after the Broadwater Farm riots in 1985 —‘the youths around here believe the police were to blame for what happened on Sunday and what they got was a bloody good hiding’.
Yesterday, Grant was out in a van with a loudspeaker on the roof; the issues he has encountered have marched well with Labour's national campaign, health in particular.
Policing has faded from his agenda.
‘With the Tottenham Three being acquitted, people feel the problem has been ameliorated to some extent,’ said a campaigner.
Where are the bogey men?
Ken Livingstone (Brent East):
LABOUR'S front bench has stayed away from Livingstone's constituency, where he has a slender majority of 1,653.
‘They have been concentrating on the targetted London seats,’ said his agent Anne Harradine.
He has, however, had celebrity support, notably from Clive ‘Grandad’ Dunn.
There have been few set pieces.
Livingstone has conducted a weekly surgery and dealt with some 20,000 constituents' queries while an MP.
The doorstep talk has been mostly of the economy; Willesden County Court, has dealt with the second highest number of repossessions in the country.
Where are the bogey men?
Tony Benn (Chesterfield):
BENN'S campaign in Chesterfield, where he is defending an 8,700 majority, has been fought face-to-face on the grimy doorsteps and in smoky rooms; a factory meeting has been a big event.
He has been helped by Labour's manifesto commitment to electrify the line to London, and has made much emphasis of his local record.
Unemployment, housing, education, and the future of mining have been the issues.
Last night the old campaigner Benn was at an end of election meeting at a local community hall; tonight there is a post-count tea with sandwiches.
Where are the bogey men?
Jeremy Corbyn (Islington North):
THE rebellious MP for this multi-ethnic inner-London seat since 1983 was a prominent poll tax protester who went to court before paying up.
Keith Veness, his agent, says the issue still causes ‘resentment’ but so do rent rises imposed by the local Labour authority: Corbyn is campaigning against them.
He has been supported by members of the Birmingham Six and Guildford Four, whose cases he fought.
He nurtures the ethnic vote and yesterday gave the lunch address at the local Greek Cypriot Club.
With a majority of 9,657 last time Corbyn's main challenge has been ‘complacency’.
Where are the bogey men?
Dave Nellist (Ind Soc, Coventry SE):
DROPPED by Labour for his extremist views, Nellist, 39, stands a good chance of embarrassing the party by securing re-election in his own right.
A recent poll gave Jim Cunningham, the official Labour candidate, 32 per cent, Nellist 30 per cent and Martine Hyams (Con) 28 per cent .
Nellist has fought an aggressive campaign on his Parliamentary record and flooded the area with leaflets — 20,000 distributed yesterday alone.
He argues that Labour's policies are ‘too modest’ and Coventry's economic problems undoubtedly make people more receptive.
He says he will seek the party Whip if victorious.
Peterborough:
WHOEVER wins tonight, one London artisan cannot lose.
John Thorn, who makes red boxes for ministers, is standing by for a rash of orders.
Thorn works for Barrow & Hepburn, which supplies the Government at £400 a case.
‘No matter what happens electorally, dozens will be ordered,’ says Her Majesty's Stationery Office.
Thorn is a floating voter, but a Labour victory would be better for business, as replacements would be needed for the boxes which Tories wished to keep for old times' sake.
Outgoing ministers may buy them for about £75, but the boxes must be fitted with new locks to preserve the secret of their mechanisms.
There would be no excuse for a large order from Neil Kinnock: John Major took delivery of 10 boxes last December.
Covered in sheep's hide, and carrying the minister's title in gold leaf, they open the opposite way to ordinary briefcases (for presentation to ministers by minions).
‘They need frequent renovation,’ says Brian Miller, Barrow & Hepburn's managing director.
‘They sometimes look as if they've fallen off the back of a lorry.’
Where are the bogeymen?
They were stars of the hard left, but we have heard little about them during the election struggle.
Maurice Weaver and Eric Bailey track their progress
By MAURICE WEAVER and ERIC BAILEY
IF YOU drive through south Coventry the name Nellist assaults you from every angle — daubed in graffiti on walls and bridges and flagged on hundreds of homes.
Go to a pub in Liverpool Broadgreen and you might get a Militant video with your pint, courtesy of Terry Field.
The Guildford Four have been canvassing for Jeremy Corbyn in Islington.
The Left is still out there, street-wise and committed as ever it was.
Voters living in leafier suburbs might have thought differently.
This has been an election fought mainly on the middle ground and the Labour Party has avoided any links that might taint their respectable new image of smart suits and red roses.
But Labour's ranks still embrace Bernie Grant, of Tottenham, who called the party ‘white fascists’, and Paul Boateng, once the GLC's notorious anti-police campaigner, now a Treasury spokesman.
And those like Dave Nellist and Terry Field, who were dropped for their Militant views, are standing as Independent Socialists, sensing that in a hung Parliament re-recruitment is on the cards.
Candidates from Labour's Left still within the party have been careful not to rock the boat.
Len Snow, Boateng's agent says: ‘His principles haven't changed — he has just adapted them to the '90s.’
Tony Benn's agent, Tom Vallins, says Benn has fought on the party manifesto ‘though it may not represent all his own individual opinions’.
He adds: ‘The important thing is to get a Labour government elected.’
Diane Abbott (Hackney North and Stoke Newington) has raised no hackles on moderate doorsteps.
‘We had a bit of that in 1987,’ admits Bill Hamilton, her agent, ‘but that was when she was a high-profile hard-left candidate.
This time the campaign has been run differently.
I don't mean we have been devious, just more structured, choosing the issues she is fighting on.
But she is still the same MP; I don't think she has moved an inch.’
Even more caution has been exercised by the trade union leaders, apart from the NUM's Arthur Scargill, who only raised his head above the parapet yesterday to demand the repeal of all ‘anti-union’ legislation under a Labour government.
Little has been heard from Rodney Bickerstaffe of NUPE and Jimmy Knapp of the rail union.
Those who are outside the party machine, jettisoned in the interests of moderation, have taken the fight on to the streets to capture grassroots support.
Just because they have been disowned by Labour has not stopped them hitching their star to its bandwagon.
‘Vote Terry Fields,’ say the sly posters, ‘for a Labour government.’
For none of the above has it been a lonely battle.
When it comes to mobilising support, the left wing has few lessons to learn.
Commentary: One ministry at a time will do
By CLAUDIA FITZHERBERT
AS THE pundits murmur darkly of political instability and the balance of power resting in the hands of flying hippies and shaven fascists, my own greatest fear of a hung parliament is that Labour's promise of a cabinet post for a Minister for Women will be sacrificed to make way for some sober-suited Liberal chap with a less threatening, more boyish, portfolio tucked under his arm.
Although I can understand why some of my sisters are somewhat depressed by the prospect of a Ministry for Women (we constitute, after all, more than half the population, a figure which raises the question: is one ministry quite enough?),
I think, like all moderate people, that one step at a time is no bad thing.
And so, despite the undeniably galling aspect of being asked to rejoice in so meagre a victory after decades of hammering on the hallowed portals of power, I believe it would be foolish to look this particular gift-horse in the mouth.
There can be little doubt that a Labour Minister for Women would be hard put to right all our wrongs; none the less, it is likely that she will save a few battered women's refuge centres from closure, open the odd nursery school, and raise the tax status of child-minders to that of company cars.
Not that the other parties aren't full of the sweetest intentions — Mr Major's determination to preserve the right of women to earn £2 an hour cannot be doubted, nor can the sincerity of Mr Ashdown's belief that women's concerns should permeate every government department.
It is just that politicians in power do show a tendency to become rather bogged down by the business in hand, and battered women, ill-educated toddlers and the tax status of child-minders have, for perfectly understandable reasons, so far not succeeded in exercising their imaginations.
And who knows what may come of Labour's long-overdue admission that we need someone in the cabinet specifically to fight our corner?
It may be that by the end of the century, when we are carrying all before us, some fair-minded matron will survey her predominantly female team and announce that the time has come for a Ministry for Men.
The Minister's brief would be to ensure that rapists are given a fair trial, to remove the by then punitive tax on shaving brushes, and generally to encourage his sex to emerge from their hiding-places and contribute to the running of the nation.
I HAVE long been impressed by the number of careless references in the Scriptures to the faithful blithely taking it upon themselves to raise houses to the Lord.
For we have long since ceased to regard the raising of houses in such an offhand fashion, even when they are to the glory only of the home-owning democracy.
These days the only thing the notoriously fickle C2s seem capable of raising is the 10 per cent capital required by building societies before they hand over nine times as much money, which is in turn entrusted to the builders.
In the distant past, when the genetic material was being accumulated that makes mankind what it is, nobody but a warlord lived in a dwelling he could not make himself.
That pleasing equilibrium between man, raffia, mud or whatever, does of course still prevail in various parts of the world.
The homes of those who live in the marshes of the lower Euphrates, or the barrios of Mexico City, for example, are testament to this elemental connection.
So, too, are the homes of our non-human brethren, creatures of every kind, from bashful badgers through gallant bowerbirds to humble termites — all of which have escaped the scourge of the professional brickie.
But we weaklings of the Western world would appear to have abandoned our instincts to this terrifying tribe.
The symptoms of our modern thraldom can be alarming.
A slavish, at the same time expectant and fearful, look is apparent on the face of anybody talking things over with their builder.
Hostages are said to develop similarly complex attachments to their captors.
It was therefore with a quickening of the blood that I read of a builder in Birmingham who has torn down his house in order to erect something bigger, and inadvertently left his neighbour's previously attached semi teetering sideways.
Protean-like kings, these people raise and they may likewise level.
If further proof be needed of the man's mythical status, it is amply provided by his wife who testifies that he ‘took the house down with his hands — we only used the JCB to move the rubble’.
Personal View: The first dead hedgehog of spring
By NIGEL BURKE
I SUPPOSE a lot of people are waiting to greet the first cuckoo of spring, but I was looking forward to the first hedgehog of spring.
In particular, I was waiting for the hedgehog that made its nest at the end of our garden last autumn to come back to life.
We had a nagging anxiety about this hedgehog because its nest was quite exposed, visible from the house, and a bit of a cowboy job, being nothing more than a loose, untethered football of leaves.
I wanted to wire the hedgehog up to some kind of heartbeat monitor so we could run out to resuscitate it if the machine stopped beeping regularly and pronounced the continuous monotone bleep of death that we all know from hospital drama.
I meant at least to insulate the nest with some polystyrene ceiling tiles, but I was afraid of trapping the animal inside.
In the end, I decided to let nature sort it out, which was a mistake.
We found the nest derelict after the last bad weather, the hedgehog dead and deflated, looking rather like a cheap toupee among the leaves.
Of course, nature is bound to punish the professionally incompetent hedgehog.
It did not deserve to live, but we wanted it to live.
Seeing its nest every day, we had invested all our hopes of spring in the creature's re-emergence.
People half-hibernate after all.
We may not sleep through winter, but we huddle, and stiffen, and hoard the warmth of fires and hot food, until spring unbunches our shoulder muscles, and thaws our movements into fluency.
So we identified with the hedgehog, and felt responsible for it.
There are people who go about liberating tame animals into the wild, stealing koi carp from ornamental ponds, for example, and releasing them in lakes, where the pike will quickly re-initiate them into the rhythms of nature.
There is more of a case for liberating animals from the wild when it seems that they will not meet the pitiless test of nature.
I wish I had saved the hedgehog now, and not stood aside, and I have been wondering what stopped me from performing a natural act of sentimental kindness.
I believe I have unconsciously been picking up modern reformed attitudes to nature from television wildlife programmes.
Twenty years ago a film concerning bears would use playful music for bears at play, and portray the animals as living teddy bears.
Today a film about bears would be made from inside a bathysphere of reverential earnestness about nature.
The modern films are scientifically more respectable and probably better films, but every word of commentary trembles with piety and no chance is ever missed to remind us that man is the intruder, the destroyer, the only sinful animal in the biosphere.
We are being trained to stand back in humble awe from the work of nature, and not to interpose our alien human values.
In fact, there is a lot in nature that is hideous.
It was clever of humankind to invent science and art to supply the deficiencies of nature, and we ought to be proud.
Instead, the New Age establishment is seeking to make everyone feel embarrassed about humanity, and to revere the perfection and innocence of nature.
Euro-American society is already suffering from a bad self-esteem problem, and I expect that an uncritical belief in the moral supremacy of nature will make it worse.
The idea that mankind is too profane to interfere in natural processes has already gained enough acceptance to affect global policy making.
There is strong lobbying pressure for the governments that control portions of the polar ice caps not to build settlements there.
The poles are supposed to be a wilderness too majestic and innocent to be contaminated with human interests.
It also happens that they are ugly, deadly places, far more hostile to life than any part of a nuclear power station.
This greener-than-thou attitude to nature is neither the traditional ethic of countryside husbandry, nor is it grounded in scientific ecology.
It is an idolatrous, guilt-sodden cringe.
Fledgling industries in the developing world are very vulnerable to such New Age colonialism.
If a new factory creates a pollutant which is about as poisonous as, say, privet leaves, it may be heckled out of business.
If a factory in the developing world releases traces of carcinogens into the sea it may face immediate credit problems, even if the carcinogenic substances are swamped by natural carcinogens such as methyl iodide, that come from seaweed in quite disturbing quantities.
Dams will not be built, and roads will not be laid in case they wipe out a rare plant species that could yield a new organic hair conditioner for Westerners to enjoy.
Seeing how nature treats an inept hedgehog made me very glad that we have won the long counter-insurgency war with nature in the western world: but too weak-minded a reverence for nature is going to allow us to treat fellow humans as if they were hedgehogs in the shrubbery.
Obituary of Antonis Tritsis
ANTONIS TRITSIS, the Mayor of Athens who has died aged 55, was an extravagant figure even by the colourful standards of contemporary Greek politics.
He was a founder member of the PASOK socialist movement, but his maverick style earned him enemies on the Left as well as the Right.
He was sacked by Andreas Papandreou from two Socialist cabinets and was only elected Mayor of Athens last year with the support of the Right-wing New Democracy party.
Tritsis believed passionately in the importance of conservation and responsible development.
As mayor, he launched a campaign to clean up Athens, and was often to be seen — much to the irritation of the government — riding refuse lorries through the city in the early morning.
Tritsis was intensely proud of his Ionian origins and from 1981 to 1989 he sat for Cephalonia and Ithaca, the constituency of Odysseus, in the Athens parliament.
With his wild dashing looks — aquiline nose, sweeping moustaches and a mop of shining hair — Tritsis looked the very image of the ‘clepht’, the mountain warlords who carried the torch of Greek independence in the last century.
He developed a political style to match.
His peregrinations of the islands at election time were always diverting public entertainments.
In the 1985 campaign Tritsis traversed Cephalonia, followed by convoys of adoring supporters in trucks, tractors and motor-cars, indeed anything that could move on wheels.
He strode into cafes, schools and churches to meet and greet by name — all with the relentless energy of a former Balkans decathlon champion.
Even the elements failed to subdue him — on one occasion he persisted in declaiming from the balcony overlooking the square at Samis for more than an hour, in the course of which a downpour cut the loudspeaker system dozens of times.
By the end of his speech most of the crowd had fled to shelter in doorways and bars, while forks of lightning lit the peaks of Ithaca in the distance.
These heroic bouts of campaigning would be followed by discussions on aspects of international politics which would last well into the early hours.
An ardent Anglophile, Tritsis used frequently to astonish British journalists with the breadth of his knowledge about Westminster, asking them if they thought Enoch Powell or Tony Benn the more radical figure.
Tritsis regarded Greece as a historical and geographical paradox: ‘Balkan but Western, close to the Middle East but Christian, Christian but Orthodox’ was a favourite refrain.
He believed that the PASOK movement could make a real contribution to European as well as Greek politics, but after serving as education minister in Papandreou's second administration (when he tried to reintroduce classical Greek into the school curriculum), he left to found his own ill-starred party, the Greek Radical Movement.
Antonis Tritsis was born at Agostoli on the island of Cephalonia in 1937.
During the Second World War the island was invaded by the Axis powers and, after Marshal Badoglio's armistice with the Allies in September 1943, thousands of Italians were killed and captured by the Germans.
But Tritsis always claimed that his politics were shaped more by memories of the horrors of the Greek Civil War from 1946 to 1949.
He used vividly to recall government militia descending on horseback from the hills to the town squares, the heads of partisans dangling from their saddles.
He trained as an architect and town planner before helping to found the Panhellenic Socialist Resistance, the forerunner of PASOK, while in exile from the Colonels' dictatorship from 1967 to 1974.
After Papandreou's electoral victory in 1981, Tritsis was appointed environment minister.
He succeeded in producing the first development plan for Athens since it was liberated from the Turks, but in 1984 he was forced to resign over his proposal for establishing a green belt by bulldozing illegal slums in the suburbs.
One of his reforms, that houses should be completed, has had lasting influence on the Greek landscape.
Half-built houses had hitherto been exempt from local taxes and the country was full of new ‘housing developments’, which amounted to little more than forests of concrete stumps and rusty struts and braces.
Tritsis's career as a stormy petrel continued when he was given the education portfolio in 1987 — he was unshipped the next year by a protracted teachers' strike.
In 1991 Tritsis defeated Melina Mercouri, the former culture minister and actress, to become Mayor of Athens.
Besides cleaning up the city's litter, he was determined to cure its chronic pollution problem, and duly went to war on public and private traffic, proposing a total ban from some areas.
He also planned an archaeological park to embrace most of the classical monuments inside the city.
Tritsis was less than halfway through his mandate when he was felled by a stroke at the end of last month.
Athenian politics will be the poorer without this charming and peculiarly idealistic buccaneer.
He had two daughters.
Obituary of Anthony Gardner
Aged 42.
Head of the department of Indian and South-East Asian art at Spink & Son from 1984.
Obituary of Roger Chapelain-Midy
In Paris aged 87.
French painter whose works adorned the French National Theatre and the ocean liner, France.
He also designed sets and costumes for the Paris Opera.
Professor, National School of Fine Arts, Paris, 1955–75.
Obituary of A M ‘Mac’ Kirkham
Aged 78.
Colonial Police; served 1936–46 in Palestine, where one of his operations against the Stern Gang resulted in his name appearing on ‘Wanted’ posters issued by the Irgun; posted to Bahamas, then Nyasaland and Malawi.
Obituary of John Orde
Aged 92.
Chairman, Northern Province of Conservative Associations, 1960–63; president, Gateshead East and West Conservative Association, from 1963.
CBE 1963.
Obituary of Martinho da Assuncao
In Lisbon aged 78.
Leading fado guitar-player.
Obituary of Brig Jack Winchester
BRIG JACK WINCHESTER, who has died aged 80, had an active military career, which ranged from battles on the North West Frontier and campaigns in the Middle East to Arnhem in 1944, when he won a Military Cross.
He subsequently served as Chief Royal Engineer of 1st Airborne Division in Normandy, and after the Second World War took up a string of staff appointments.
In 1964, although widely expected to reach the higher echelons of the Army, Winchester retired at his own request and settled in Kenya, where he kept dairy cattle on a farm outside Nairobi.
A doctor's son, John Chisholm Winchester was born into a naval family on Jan 3, 1912.
He was educated at Wellington, where he was in the rugby, hockey and boxing teams, and at Woolwich, where he captained the Rugby XV.
He completed his studies at St Catharine's College, Cambridge, which he also represented at various games.
Commissioned into the Royal Engineers in 1932, Winchester joined the Bengal Sappers and Miners in India.
He then served on the Frontier in the Mohmand Campaign with 5 Field Company.
In 1937 he fought in the Waziristan Campaign with 3 Field Company, and two years later was in charge of building the Wana Garrison in Waziristan with military labour.
In May 1940 Winchester became adjutant, RE, in 5 Indian Division, with which he went to the Sudan a few months later on active service.
After a period on the staff in the Sudan, he commanded 20 Field Company at the Battle of Keren in Eritrea.
Keren is on a plateau inside a wall of hills, which stand about 2,000 feet high.
All the possible approaches were guarded by the best Italian troops, and fighting a way inwards entailed a series of attacks and counter-attacks.
The Italian air force was also particularly active and effective until reduced by the RAF.
Casualties were high on both sides.
In a battle of endurance against the enemy and the ground, 5th Division edged forward.
‘Though under constant shell and mortar fire,’ as the official history recorded, ‘the sappers blasted their way through critical roadblocks, and were also engaged in making roads passable for tracked vehicles.’
After that arduous battle, which succeeded in breaking Italian resistance in Eritrea, Winchester went on to serve in Abyssinia and the Western Desert.
Before long he was ordered to drive overland from Egypt to Iraq to help crush Rashid Ali, who had decided to join Germany.
Ali had attacked the British bases in Iraq, and so created a threat to pipelines and oilfields vital to the Allied cause.
Winchester's next posting was to Cyprus to build defences, but he soon returned to the Western Desert, where, between May and September, he was involved in desperate rearguard actions — the battle of Gazala, followed by Alamein in July, when Auchinleck checked Rommel, who was then within striking distance of Alexandria.
Winchester helped defend the Ruweisat Ridge in the battle of Alam Halfa, Rommel's last thrust before the third battle of Alamein, where he was finally made to retreat.
After a short period back in Baghdad, Winchester returned to Britain to command 241 Field Company, which was then in Scotland on mountain training.
In the summer of 1944 he attended the Staff College, Camberley, before being posted as OC 9 Field Company in 1 Airborne, with which he parachuted into Arnhem in September.
Having narrowly escaped capture, Winchester became CRE 1 Airborne in Norway, and in 1946 was appointed an instructor at the Staff College at Haifa.
From there he moved to a similar post at Camberley, before becoming deputy commander RE at Mackinnon Road, Kenya.
In 1950 Winchester left Kenya to attend a Joint Services Staff College at Latimer, and became a GSO1 at the War Office the next year.
He was a much-respected college commander at Sandhurst from 1953 to 1955, when he was appointed British instructor at the US Command and General Staff College.
By 1958 he was back in London to command 27 Engineer Group, TA, and the next year became a student at the Imperial Defence College.
He then had a two-year stint as secretary to the Army Council.
In 1962 Winchester became Brigadier I/C Administration in Cyprus, and in 1963 was appointed military author of doctrine in insurgency in the War Office.
A born leader, and a man of great charm and modesty, ‘Jack’ Winchester was essentially an outdoor sportsman.
In his youth in India he had ridden, played polo and shot big game.
He also had a flair for languages, and was fluent in German, Urdu, Pashtu, Arabic and Swahili.
Winchester was appointed CBE in 1962.
He married, in 1944, Lorna Bell; they had a son and a daughter.