

Meditation: Weep for the world
By BISHOP GEORGE APPLETON
TOMORROW, the day of the London Marathon, Christians will think also of another crowded journey into the capital city, the last time that Jesus went up to Jerusalem with pilgrims from Galilee to take part in the Passover festival, which commemorated the escape of their ancestors from slavery in building the pyramids of Egypt.
It seems that Jesus himself organised this last journey, from the borrowing of a donkey and its foal to the challenging protest against what was going on in the Temple courts.
Riding the donkey, a humble domestic animal, rather than a horse, the symbol of importance and power, the meaning was made even more obvious by the little foal trotting happily beside its mother.
Preceding were the 12 apostles, to signify the 12 tribes.
The approach to the city with the scriptural shouts evidently attracted the attention of the Passover crowds already in the city, as well as the disapproval of the religious leaders of the nation, to whose critical remarks Jesus retorted: ‘If these should be silent even the huge stones of the Temple walls would cry out.’
The route taken into the city was not the shortest way from Bethany, but over the shoulder of the Mount of Olives.
When they reached the first sight of the city, it is recorded, Jesus wept, exclaiming: ‘O, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children, as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, and ye would not.’
Jesus in his Risen Being will still be grieved by all the tragedies, injustices and selfish motivations of the world.
Cardinal Basil Hume is untiring in his reminder that 12 million children under five die every year from hunger and disease.
We are told that the global military expenditure every year amounts to £235,000 million, twice as much as the nations spend on health, and half as much again as they spend on education.
One is dismayed to learn that 3,000 million do not get pure drinking water and so are too weak to undertake the work necessary to grow more food.
One last shattering figure is that 700 million adults cannot read or write and 250 million children under 14 do not attend school.
To remedy these distressing conditions, UNO has calculated that if every country, rich and poor, gave 0.7 per cent of its gross national product, world poverty could be banished in a generation.
Having lived for 20 years in a country in which the dominant religion was Buddhism, I thank God for the Buddha's inspiration: ‘Now may every living being, young or old, weak or strong, living near or far, known or unknown, living or departed or yet unborn, may every living thing be full of bliss.’
Way of the World: Keep them moving
By AUBERON WAUGH
A DESPATCH from Rome in Thursday's newspaper seemed to tell us that the Pope has been urging sex education for priests.
We can only hope that the message was garbled in transmission, or possibly in translation from the Italian — a much more difficult language than many seem prepared to believe.
The message is apparently contained in a 220-page apostolic exhortation to the clergy, most of which is uncontentious: priests must be ascetic and chaste as well as celibate, taking a keen and benevolent interest in the poor and in sinners, who are the poor in spirit.
But is it really a good idea that students should be taught about sex in seminaries?
The idea seems to be that if priests are given a ‘properly informed sexual education’ this will prevent their ‘love of chastity’being displaced by the temptations of the flesh, but I see no reason why it should have this effect.
The Pope's theory is that priests should be specially educated to arm themselves with ‘more than supernatural means’ against possible temptation.
What can he mean?
Many doctors in the post-Freudian age believe that nothing but harm can come from sex education.
One has only to look at the United States, where they take sex education very seriously but seem to have got everything wrong, with the most appalling results to the nation's health.
It can be argued that American children are not always very intelligent or easy to teach, with catastrophically short attention spans, but one can see the beginnings of a sad muddle even in England, with the publication of a homosexual prayer book giving instructions for a ‘coming out’ liturgy next door to prayers for those who already suffer from the American disease.
I feel the Pope should draw his clergy's attention instead to these new things called Buzzboards — motorised two-wheel scooters on which the driver travels upright at a dignified speed of 20 mph.
There can be no question of indulging in sexual impropriety while driving a Buzzboard.
An enthusiast points out that its real attraction is that it is fun: ‘When you ride it you have a permanent smile on your face.’
Exactly what a celibate clergy needs.