

Recovery in house market predicted
By Tom Rowland, Property Correspondent
HOUSE prices will stabilise and then pick up towards the end of the year, say estate agents and property analysts.
They all believe the Tory victory will provide the missing confidence that has held the housing market back for the past 12 months.
Some predict up to a five per cent average rise by the end of the year.
Up to one million purchases are estimated to have been delayed during the last three years because of the sluggish market.
As these plans are unfrozen they will create enormous demand.
But the upward pressure on prices will be dampened by the 70,000 repossessed properties and the large stock of inherited houses that will now come on to the market.
‘Prices may drift down a little over the next two months, but the losses in the first quarter should be wiped out with similar gains over the next few months,’ said Mr John Wriglesworth, property analyst at stockbrokers UBS Phillips & Drew.
He predicted a five per cent rise in the second half of the year with further gains of six per cent in 1993.
‘People will slowly discover they can put down a five per cent deposit on a house without losing it in six months,’ he said.
Most estate agents were overjoyed at the election result.
‘Whatever an estate agent's political leanings, professionally each and every one must be expressing surprise, delight and relief,’ said Sir Glen Hickman, marketing director of Humberts.
First-time buyers would now start to reappear in significant numbers, said other analysts.
Those stuck with middle-range properties would be the last to feel the benefits, but with movement above and below the effects would filter through.
There would be a dramatic increase in the volume of good quality country houses coming on to the market in May, June and July, predicted Mr Andrew Hay of Knight Frank and Rutley.
Vendors who have been holding off would have to sell because of their financial commitments.
Forced sales from Lloyd's members would be a significant element, he said.
‘Confidence should now return with more house sales and a gradual recovery in prices,’ said Mr Jim Birrell, Halifax chief executive.
City: BT £4bn stake expected to open privatisation sales
ANALYSTS and advisers were yesterday lining up the next series of state asset sales and trying to see how the Government could increase the projected £19 billion over the next three years to reduce borrowing and fund tax cuts.
About £8 billion, including debenture repayments, is pencilled in for 1992–93, largely from outstanding payments on already privatised assets.
The biggest is the 22 p.c. stake in British Telecom, worth about £4 billion, although there is a commitment to avoid flooding the market with more shares before March 3.
The remaining 40 p.c. shareholdings in generators National Power and PowerGen, which also have a 1993 sale embargo, could bring in £3 billion.
The distribution side of Northern Ireland Electricity will also be sold off.
Privatisation of a truncated British Coal could raise £1 billion to £11/2 billion depending on the final shape of new coal contracts with the generators.
British Rail will be a staged, hybrid privatisation if the hotly-debated pre-election programme holds.
But the sale of the freight business and the franchising of passengers services to bring in outsiders are likely to be at distress prices.
There is a clutch of smaller operations-London Transport bus companies, Docklands Light Railway, up to 50 bus companies in local authority ownership and more trust ports.
The 12 electricity distribution companies are likely to test the market by seeking buyers for 20 p.c. of their holding in National Grid.
City: Businessmen go for lower rates
By Roland Gribben
BUSINESS leaders set out their priorities for John Major yesterday, with lower interest rates at the top.
But there were calls for a shift to a more supportive role for industry from more sympathetic ministers.
Many companies hoped that the end to uncertainty would result in the release of orders held back because of the election.
But while a number of senior executives said the outcome would provide a boost for confidence, they felt the climb out of recession would still be long and slow.
Lord Prior, former Tory minister and chairman of the General Electric Company, said: ‘The Government should have a proper look at its policy towards industry.
I am not suggesting an industry policy but a more active policy for manufacturing industry.
The Government should not be particularly bothered about competition but [should]realise that in the modern world you are going to have a number of standard-bearer companies.
The Treasury hasn't understood the role of manufacturing industry.
We need a standard bearer there as well.’
The CBI is hoping that Michael Heseltine will become industrial overlord.
Sir John Banham, CBI director-general, said the election outcome was the ‘best possible result for British business’ because it removed uncertainty.
Sir Allen Sheppard, chairman and chief executive of Grand Metropolitan said: ‘There is no reason why we can't get the UK going.’
City: Finance Bill to be updated
A NEW Finance Bill will be put before the House of Commons shortly after the Queen's Speech on May 6 to include the parts of the Budget which were dropped when the election was called the day after Budget Day, including increases in inheritance tax allowances, backdated to the start of the current financial year.
Some clauses including measures relating to the European single market, which have not yet been revealed, will also be included.
City: Bank raises £3bn in gilts
By Clare Pearson
THE Bank of England took immediate advantage of surging demand for gilt-edged securities yesterday by raising £3 billion in an unprecedented exercise that started at 2.30 am.
During the afternoon, it announced that it would auction a new stock later in the month, providing an expected further £2 billion to £3 billion, to start funding the public sector borrowing requirement, which is forecast at £28 billion for this year.
A similarly-sized issue was announced at 8.30 am, while the Bank was also making unofficial sales during the early hours.
Turnover in the gilt futures market surpassed all previous records, with more than 120,000 contracts traded.
Some long-dated stocks closed nearly four full points higher with yields falling to just over 9 p.c.
Issues which are due to be redeemed within the next five years registered price gains of around two points.
The Bank will announce on Tuesday the terms for its new gilt, to be auctioned on April 29.
Yesterday it said the issue would mature in 23 to 28 years' time, which will make it the longest-dated gilt available in the market.
The stocks it sold yesterday were additions to seven existing issues.
It chose issues across the maturity spectrum.
John Kendall, economist at Baring Brothers, said he expected the market to continue to be firm next week.
There should be further demand from overseas institutions as they rebuilt positions in sterling bonds which were run down amid the election uncertainty, he said.
City: Dealers' keep eye on the ball as the new day dawns
By ANTONIA FEUCHTWANGER
‘KINNOCK'S dead,’ was the dazed reaction of one dealer at National Westminster Bank's global trading centre at about 4am on Friday, as the implications of the election results seeped through.
But most of the foreign exchange, gilts and swaps dealers still had their eyes on the ball, rather than their heads in the clouds of political speculation.
Gary Tritton, chief interest rate swap trader, had been watching the Bank of England's £800m tap issue, the first ever in the middle of the night.
Announced at 2.10 am, it was sold out by 3.30 am.
But Gary was keeping his predictions for the gilt market restrained.
‘The market will probably get overdone,’ he said, shrewdly.
Ken de la Salle, head of foreign exchange, also stayed cool, predicting a top rate of no more than Dm2.88 for the pound the following day.
The equities outlook was more exciting.
By 3.30 am, Bob Semple, head of equity research, was already predicting a FT-SE 100 share index up by 150 points the following day.
(He was nearly right.
The market did indeed peak at 150.6 points up at one point.)
Money market rates, at below 101/2 p.c., were reflecting sterling's strength and ‘pure bull sentiment for the Conservatives’ a dealer said.
‘Don't mention Labour here, you'll get lynched,’ another added.
But the dealing room was not exclusively Tory.
Among the plastic rats, fluffy animals and copies of the Sun decorating the desks was at least one Labour red rose.
Sportingly, international economist Keith Edmonds shouted: ‘Come on Glenda!’ as Hampstead declared.
But Pauline Woolgrove, chief sterling trader, looked up from the dealing tickets for the several hundred million pound deals her desk had successfully completed during the night.
‘Do you know, before this I went out and bought Tesco's own-brand baked beans to live on for the next month,’ she remarked, rather unconvincingly.
A Tory win was clearly bad for Essex Tescos but good news for the restaurateur of Teresa Gorman country.
‘Good old Maggie,’ said one young trader, padding around in those Argyll socks popular in the 1980s, as Mrs Thatcher appeared on the screens.
City: Tory victory spurs shares
By Paul Murphy and Anne Segall
THE surprise return of a Tory government sparked a wave of euphoria across the City, adding more than 5 p.c. to share prices.
With the volume of trading at its highest recorded level, the leading FT-SE 100 index of top British companies jumped 150 points at one stage before settling 136.2 points ahead at 2572.6 — almost exactly the level at which the stock market stood when Chancellor Norman Lamont began his Budget address one month ago.
The rise was the second largest on record, after a 142 point bounce in October 1987 when the market recovered from the Black Monday crash.
‘We were caught on one foot with our fingers in our mouths,’ said one dealer, referring to widespread expectations of a hung Parliament.
There were reports of strong demand from institutional fund managers and private clients, together with interest from overseas investors.
Paul Walton, equity strategist at stockbrokers James Capel, said given the recent falls on Tokyo and New York, Britain is suddenly again a safe haven for investment.
‘Share prices simply look cheap,’ he said, adding that fund managers were convinced that the economy as a whole is set to grow by 11/2 p.c. this year, with corporate earnings rising by around 5 p.c.
Shares in the privatised water and electricity companies, having suffered from Labour party threats to tighten price controls or even renationalise produced the most dramatic gains yesterday.
London Electricity, for example, jumped 53p to 306p, while Anglian Water shot up from 331p to 411p.
The rising tide of confidence was also reflected in a swing from expectations of a rise in interest rates to anticipation of the next cut, with the cost of wholesale funds dipping swiftly by 3/4 point to 101/4 p.c.
But the Bank of England signalled it wants to keep base rates held at 101/2 p.c.
Inflation in March falling from 4.1 p.c. to 4.0 p.c., instead of to the expected 3.8 p.c., could also make for caution, analysts believe.
Roger Bootle, chief economist at stockbrokers Greenwell Montagu, said yesterday: ‘I think the recovery has been waiting to happen for the last couple of months.
It was held up by election uncertainties.’
But he warned the surge could run out of steam as high levels of debt, rising unemployment and international uncertainty resurface.
Peter Spencer of stockbroker Shearson Lehman said the prospects for a pick-up were so improved the Government should be careful on interest rates.
A ‘token’ cut in interest rates of half a point to 10 p.c. was nevertheless likely to happen before the end of the month.
City: Deals ‘put on ice’ set to appear
By Karen Cooper
MERCHANT bankers expect to see deals which were put on ice before the election begin to trickle out in coming months.
‘There is still a lot of activity under the surface,’ said a corporate finance director at an American bank.
There are a lot of people looking at potential deals and analysing them but not necessarily announcing them.’
He said clients keen to move into Britain have had deals ‘in the pipeline’ but were delaying them out of concern about a Labour government's competition policies or in the hope of further interest rate cuts.
‘The dam is not going to go bust tomorrow,’ warned Bob Dowsett, corporate finance director at Morgan Grenfell.
In the first quarter of 1992, there were 23 public takeovers worth £1.1 billion, against 19, worth £979m, last year, according to Acquisitions Monthly.
The impending deals, advisers believe, are most likely to focus on sales of peripheral businesses and expansion of core operations.
City: Air France takes 25pc of troubled Sabena
By Boris Johnson in Brussels
AIR FRANCE last night signed a deal with Sabena, giving it about a 25 p.c. stake of the troubled Belgian national carrier.
It follows the collapse of attempts by British Airways to buy a large shareholding last September, and the ill-fated effort to link Sabena with KLM to create a carrier called Sabena World Airlines.
The move has caused immediate suspicion among Belgium's Flemish-speaking majority that Pierre Godefroid, the chairman of Sabena, has favoured a deal with France in deference to the wishes of the largely Francophone Belgian establishment.
The state-owned French airline has paid £66m for its shares, with a simultaneous £150m cash injection from the Belgian state.
EC commission sources said that Sir Leon Brittan, competition commissioner, would be looking at the deal to see if Air France was breaking EC rules, in so tightening its grip on short-haul air services within mainland Europe.
Though Belgium has been pouring money into Sabena to keep it upright, officials said there was no question of illegal state aids.
The deal, which involves sharing the costs of catering and maintenance at both Zaventem airport in Brussels and Paris, is attractive because it gives access to slots at Brussels airport, seen as a future hub for travel to 70 cities around Europe.
Several airlines are trying to build up their position in advance of the single European market of next year, when the third airline liberalisation package should allow them to operate abroad as though in their home country.
City: Chalker substitute at Euro bank summit
By Mary Brasier in Budapest
THE new government had to draft in a hasty replacement to lead its delegation to the first annual meeting of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development following the election defeat of overseas development minister Lynda Chalker.
Mrs Chalker, who was Britain's governor at the 55-nation bank, was replaced by senior civil servant Timothy Lankester, but her sudden departure left Britain with one of the few non-political delegations at this meeting which starts here on Monday.
Finance ministers attending include United States Treasury secretary Nicholas Brady, and the new French finance minister, Michel Sapin.
Fourteen finance ministers from former Soviet republics also here are expected to mount a strong claim on bank funds in 1992.
Jacques Attali, the bank's president, will tell shareholders how it has spent 621 million Ecus on 20 projects in its first year ranging from a stake in a Czechoslovak chocolate maker to Polish telephones.
The meeting will be asked to approve increased funds this year and will tackle the restructuring of military industries in Eastern Europe.
City: RR-Tupolev deal takes off
AN Anglo-Russian company got off the ground yesterday to run production and sales of a Rolls-Royce-powered Tupolev airliner.
Half the shares in British Russian Aviation are held by Flemings Russian Investment, managed by merchant banker Robert Fleming, and the remainder by Russian interests.
Flemings will arrange financing for the new venture, and Rolls-Royce will have a director on the board.
City:
MANGANESE Bronze, the black-cab maker, fell from a £287,000 profit to a £492,000 pre-tax loss in the six months to end-January, due largely to losses at its Darlington iron foundry, which is closing at a cost of £1.7m.
With demand hit by the recession, production of its London taxis hit a low of 35 a week at the turn of the year.
But Jamie Borwick, managing director, said after the launch of the Fairway Driver (pictured above) the production rate has recovered to 40 a week.
There is no interim dividend.
City: GPA backs Europa rescue
GPG, Sir Ron Brierley's new fund management-to-minerals company, is backing a rescue package proposed by Europa Minerals, a mining finance house, where 141/2 p.c.
Australian stakeholder AustMin Gold has requisitioned an extraordinary general meeting for next month in an attempt to replace four non-executive directors with its two nominees.
GPG, through its 86 p.c. -owned Australian associate Mid-East Minerals, is effectively underwriting a placing and open offer by Europa to raise £3.1m to help reduce debt, put at £5.8m.
Europa, whose interests include a stake in an Australian gold mine and oil royalties in the North Sea and Indonesia, saw pre-tax losses rise by a third to £3.9m last year.
City: Investors' protection bill soars
FINANCIAL advisers and fund management companies authorised by the Financial Services Act could have to find more than £37m to compensate investor losses — a threefold rise in 12 months.
The payments of up to £48,000 are to investors with companies declared by the Investors Compensation Scheme to be in default as a result of fraud or negligence.
But Denis Child, chairman of the scheme, warned the total could rise as a result of claims made by losses from home income plans.
About £4m has so far been paid out to about 964 investors during 1991–92 for the default of 35 companies.
Members of Fimbra could be responsible for claims of more than £32m if its payments had not been capped at £5m, with the remainders' being paid by other self-regulatory organisations.
City: Nikkei rebounds after 10pc slide
By Robert Whymant in Tokyo
TOKYO share prices soared yesterday, reversing a slide that had wiped more than 10 p.c. off the Nikkei stock average since the start of the week.
The Nikkei index rose 1,252.51 points, to close at 17,850.66, recording the fifth largest single-day gain on record.
Brokers attributed the dramatic rebound to the overnight surge in New York stocks, the easing in United Stocks monetary policy that strengthened the yen against the dollar, and higher bond prices.
Another explanation was that the market has declined to a reasonable level.
Some market participants, worried by the market's volatility, questioned whether the rebound could be sustained.
‘The obituaries were written a bit quickly,’ said Paul Heaton, senior analyst at Smith New Court in Tokyo.
‘Really it was a collapse in the bank sector and bubble economy-related industries like insurance and real estate.
It wasn't a market collapse.’
Shares of Japanese banks, which have taken the worst beating in the plunge in share prices, rebounded strongly, along with the rest of the market.
Doubts about banks' capital reserves, which include stock in clients' companies, and property-related bad debts may continue to undermine confidence in the market as a whole.
The result, analysts say, will be a slowing of credit for Japanese companies that could prevent capital investment and block an economic recovery.
Japanese banks will also lend less money overseas.
‘My own view is there will be no sudden withdrawal from overseas because of the downturn,’ said Geoffrey Barker, Baring Securities' economist in Tokyo.
‘Rather, I think there will be Japanese buying of European bonds.’
One foreign broker said this week's plunge in share prices, had knocked the last breath out of the speculative binge of the second half of the eighties, which inflated asset values, and laid the basis for a proper recovery.
THE Japanese government is expected to introduce further measures to prop up Tokyo's fragile stock market next week, following a meeting between the ‘big four’ stockbroking companies and the Ministry of Finance yesterday.
Investors have criticised last week's fiscal package and interest rate cut as too little too late and voted with their feet for most of the week by selling out of the market.
City: O & Y pays up at the last minute
By Jonathan Confino in New York
TROUBLED property giant Olympia & York waited until just hours before the loan would have gone into default before making a $51/2m interest payment on a $930m Eurobond secured by three Manhattan office blocks.
The payment had originally been due on April 1 but the Toronto-based company had a grace period which expired on Thursday.
O&Y, which is meeting its 91 bankers on Monday in Toronto to restructure its debts of about £10 billion, is already in its grace period on a $62m payment due on an $800m Eurobond secured by an office block in New York's World Financial Centre.
The company must raise the necessary funds by next week if it is to avoid going into default.
Separately, O&Y is continuing negotiations for the sale of its prestige Exchange Tower, which houses the Toronto Stock Exchange.
An agreement in principle to sell the building to its bankers has been reached, but disagreements among the banks have yet to be sorted out as well as finalising a support package from the Canadian government.
Under the proposed deal, O&Y would be able to buy back the building if it recovers.
City: BAe seeks corporate jet partner
BRITISH Aerospace is seeking a partner for its profitable corporate jet business and is offering a majority stake to tempt bidders.
Analysts believe Japanese companies are likely to be among the frontrunners and estimate the deal could raise between £50m and £100m.
The group's merchant banking adviser, Kleinwort Benson, is searching for suitable partners.
The move is the latest in a series of cost-cutting measures and will reduce the group's investment exposure for the next generation of business jets.
BAe could end up with only 25 p.c. in the operation, which is being hived off into a new company, Corporate Jets.
The jets, costing $10m to $12m (£5.6m to £6.7m) a time, are built at Chester and Hatfield and provide employment for around 1,200 at the two sites.
City: Winding-up warning to Chelsea
CABRA Estates has told Chelsea Football Club it will issue a winding-up petition because the club failed to buy its Stamford Bridge ground for £22.8m by the deadline on Thursday.
Ken Bates, Chelsea's chairman but with 27 p.c of Cabra shares, wants to strike an alternative deal.
Yesterday, Cabra said Chelsea's proposals were ‘inadequate and unacceptable’.
The winding-up petition comes after the Court of Appeal last week gave Chelsea a deadline of seven days in which to come up with the money.
Mr Bates' proposals involve Chelsea offering to buy the Cabra subsidiary which owns Stamford Bridge and Fulham's Craven Cottage ground.
After deductions for loans from the subsidiary to Cabra, and for the stake in the Fulham ground, the net cost to Chelsea would be about £10m.
City: Treasury boost
THE Treasury could receive a substantial boost to tax revenues next month because of attempts to take income before April 5 so that it would not be taxed at the Labour party's threatened high rates.
Income tax will be payable on bonuses and pay taken early and on interest crystalised in bank accounts.
City: US inflation
CONSUMER inflation in America jumped an unexpected 1/2 p.c. last month, but economists said the figure was an aberration and did not shake their belief that inflation is moderating.
City: Production cut
AIRBUS Industrie, the European venture in which British Aerospace has a stake, is cutting production of its 150-seat A320 airliner by 27 in 1993 and 1994 because customers have asked for delivery delays.
City: Harland slump
PROFITS at Harland & Wolff, the privatised Belfast shipbuilder where the majority shareholder is the Norwegian Fred Olsen group, slumped to £2.1m during 1991 compared with £11.7m in the 18 months previously, after provisions of £4m for redundancies and for its Trassey Shipping associate.
City: Southern out
SOUTHERN Water is pulling out of Stalwart, its joint venture with French-owned Saur (UK) in the refuse collection and cleansing service business.
Saur has agreed in principle to buy out its partner to produce closer ties with its other operation, Cambrian Environmental Services.
City: Avonmore buy
AVONMORE Foods, the Irish food group, is buying Barretts & Baird, the West Bromwich meat company, in a profits related deal worth up to £101/2m.
Barretts & Baird made a profit of £180,000 in the year to end-March on a turnover of £117m.
City: Majestic stake
ITALIAN-owned RCS Video has bought a majority stake in London-based Majestic Films International, which has been involved in the financing and marketing of a series of successful films including Dances with Wolves and Henry V. Guy East, who founded the company in 1988, will retain a significant shareholding and takes over as chief executive.
City: Ferries threat
SEALINK Stena and P&O may be forced to scrap ferries as a result of more stringent safety regulations adopted by the International Maritime Organisation.
P&O, with 25 roll-on roll-off vessels, said the regulations would cost millions of pounds to meet — 21 would have to be modified or scrapped.
Sealink said it faced modification costs on its fleet of 12 vessels.
City: Classic talks off
CLASSIC Thoroughbred shares fell 1 to 21/2p as the company announced that talks, which might have led to takeover offer, have been ended.
City: Renault jobs go
RENAULT is to cut the workforce at its Renault Vehicules Industriels subsidiary by 1,000.
City Comment: Celebrations due — but beware the hangover
THE stock market felt entitled to celebrate yesterday and did so in style.
But what happens when the champagne has lost its sparkle?
Can the hangover be far behind?
All too often a Friday buying binge has been followed by a weekend of sober reflection and regrets in the cold light of Monday morning.
The obvious parallel is with the reaction to Britain's entry into the exchange rate mechanism 18 months ago.
The jump in share prices was comparable to yesterday's but the euphoria quickly ebbed away as it dawned on investors that — in terms of the immediate prospects — not much had changed and what had changed was not entirely for the better.
Yet even the City's killjoys believe yesterday's excitement was quite justified.
After all, though the gains were impressive, the market is back only to where it was before the Budget exactly a month earlier.
At that stage there appeared a good chance that the election would lead to a hung parliament with Labour in charge — and that was judged the worst possible outcome for shares.
Instead, the voters have presented the best possible result — one which eliminates uncertainty.
Uncertainty over the outcome of the election and the possibility of a replay in the autumn has undoubtedly delayed recovery.
There are signs that an upturn in consumer spending might already have been appearing; keeping Mr Major in Downing Street ensures that that recovery is under way.
But progress may nevertheless be very slow and unemployment will persist for some long time.
What fired the stock market, however, is a belief that corporate profits should start to improve before consumer spending rises, thanks to the reduction in stocks and costs over the past year.
That will provide the firm evidence that the British economy is turning up — just when most others are turning down.
What the bulls like is Britain's new political certainty — a rare commodity around the world at the moment with so many major powers facing elections or new leaders — and the belief that London shares are cheap by international standards.
It is not obvious that shares are a bargain, though.
London now trades on about 16 times historic earnings — cheaper than in New York certainly but less so when better earnings forecasts are taken into account.
And though the yield of about 5 p.c. is historically high, British companies' earnings cover is unusually thin and the growth prospects commensurately modest.
So while many City analysts are now predicting that the FT-SE index could rise another 20 p.c. by the end of the year, such forecasts carry caveats: not least the anticipation of more than a token cut in interest rates.
And the Bank of England's ease in selling so many gilt stocks early yesterday is a reminder of just how great the budget deficit remains and how much more public borrowing must follow — taking cash that might otherwise have bought shares.
However enjoyable it was, it would be dangerous to assume that yesterday's party can continue.
City Comment: Genuinely free gift for housing
JOHN Major's income tax cut which Labour described as a bribe should be in the people's pockets in mid-May, but he should be able to provide an even greater post-election thank you for the majority of voters in the form of a stabilised housing market.
It will cost him nothing but will greatly benefit him, as well as homeowners.
House purchase is the biggest decision that most people make and the easiest one to postpone.
Only about 11/4m people bought homes last year — 40 p.c. down on 1987 and the lowest figure since the Tories took office in 1979 — and this year' sales looked set to be lower still.
First-time buyers' purchases have halved since the last general election — which means that the existing owners who would have sold to them cannot move either.
Neither the possibility of higher mortgage rates nor the prospect of a Labour Budget increasing taxes encouraged anyone to take on an increased mortgage.
Now both of those threats are removed, with the added probability of interest rates falling and the promise of still lower tax rates.
Until August there remains no stamp duty on homes costing less than £250,000 either.
The election has come just in time to boost the Easter start of the housing market's buying season.
It is in no one 's interest to repeat the galloping inflation of the late 1980s, but it is essential to stop the current slide in house prices and to allow a modest rise.
It is not only that homeowners need the increase to allow them to move and to restore the equity which they invested; lenders need an appreciation to restore the security on their fragile loan books.
Mr Major has already discovered that repossessions and defaults cost the government money as well as damaging consumer confidence and financial institutions.
His mere re-election can be relied on to revive the market and solve those problems — without costing the public purse one penny.
City Comment: Plenty of time to cut rates
IF THE inflation figures had been published a couple of days earlier, the Labour party would no doubt have made the most of a fall which was far short of expectations.
The headline figure was trimmed only from 4.1 to 4.0 p.c. but a full two points higher than the City anticipated.
Easing inflation is proving to be a painfully slow process and yesterday's small fall must make any thinking Chancellor wonder whether it is safe to cut interest rates further.
There has not been a reduction since last September and the Government is no longer in a hurry to cut again.
It has taken five years to get this one right and the Government will not want to repeat the mistakes of the mid-1980s when Nigel Lawson thought he had beaten inflation, only to discover that it was just sleeping.
If Norman Lamont keeps the job of Chancellor (and he might do so only because of the shortlist of alternative candidates is embarrassingly short) he may decide to delay the next cut in interest rates for long enough to convince the markets that he is serious about wanting to move sterling into narrow bands in the European exchange rate mechanism at its middle rate of Dm2.95.
That would put a ‘floor’ of Dm2.88 under the currency.
The opportunity may be some way away, despite yesterday's rise in sterling.
Anyway, why put a new straitjacket around the economy until recovery is more than a twinkle in the market's eye?
City: Profit rise at Percy Bilton
PERCY Bilton, the property, building and civil engineering group, lifted pre-tax profits by £1.08m to £17.4m last year, despite a 45 p.c. tumble in turnover in its housebuilding and civil engineering activities to £16.9m.
Trading and investment profits marked time at £21.6m, but the group's interest bill fell almost 20 p.c. to £41/4m.
Ronnie Rosenblatt, finance director, said the fall in turnover in the trading activities reflected the difficult conditions and that housebuilding and civil engineering contributed to profits.
The pre-tax figures were in line with City expectations, but estimated net assets, which had been expected to dip from 720p to nearer 700p a share, rose to 731p, following a partial valuation by directors.
The dividend total is being lifted from 17.44p to 18p, with a 12.33p final on July 24.
The shares rose 15 to 415p.
City: F&C trust net assets up £50m
FOREIGN & Colonial Pacific Investment Trust reduced its equity weighting in Japan to its lowest level ever and avoided bank and insurance shares altogether to lift its net assets from £188m to £238m last year.
Net assets per share grew from 169p to 212p and the dividend is being raised from 1.55p to 1.75p, with a 1p final payable on May 29.
Although total revenue was steady at £6.4m, interest on borrowings taken on to switch into American, Japanese and Australian bonds cut pre-tax earnings from £4.23m to £3.2m and earnings per share from 2.57p to 1.95p.
Chairman Anthony Foucar said the trust had used Japan's recent weakness to ‘make selective purchases’.
While cautious about the Tokyo market in the short term, he said the ‘underlying strengths of the economy will eventually reassert themselves’ and boost share prices.
The Week: Sunshine and sea of blue bring euphoria
By Matthew Doull
SPRING sprang on the City yesterday and, in the euphoria of the surprise Tory majority in the General Election, the rains of earlier in the week were forgotten.
Money poured into the market after the thin pre-election trading, and the FT-SE 100 share index shot up 136.2 points to end the week 189.9 up at 2572.6.
The market even proved it was more canny than the pollsters by climbing 43 points on polling day itself.
Apart from blue-iced muffin sales at a Manchester bakery, the jump was the only accurate early indicator of the Tory victory that emerged.
Coincident with, but unrelated to the Conservative tide in the wee hours of Friday morning, Tokyo's beleaguered stock market bounced dramatically to erase some of its recent losses.
The Nikkei index of 225 leading shares regained 1,252 of the nearly 2,000 points it had lost in the week, and ended at 17,850.
But after three days this week of 500-plus point drops in the Nikkei, most observers called the bounce yesterday technical and temporary, especially with scandals and bad debts breathing down the financial sector's neck.
Until the pound perked up yesterday, the Exchange rate mechanism had asserted itself yet again as an Evil Restrictive Morass after Portugal's escudo leapt in with both feet on Monday.
Because that country has high interest rates to combat inflation, the escudo shot like a scud missile to the top of its variation bands in the mechanism, putting further pressure on sterling until yesterday.
Not surprisingly, business news was thin on the ground.
Supermarket giant Tesco unveiled profits up 31 p.c. at £545m on turnover of £7.6 billion for last year and chairman Sir Ian MacLaurin declared: ‘It is a recovery.’
EuroDisney had a bumpy ride ahead of the parc d'amusement's grand opening today.
After convincing contractors, with whom it was fighting over cost overruns, not to disrupt the fete, its shares were knocked when anaylsts given a preview were reportedly unamused.
To add to its headaches, 500,000 people are expected to arrive today and four fifths of them will have to be turned away amid massive traffic jams precipitated by a railway strike in the area.
The Market: Footsie soars 136 points
By Paul Murphy
MORE than a billion shares changed hands on the London stock market yesterday in the wake of the Tory election victory.
A wave of frenzied buying pushed the FT-SE 100 index up 136.2 to 2572.6 — the biggest one-day rise since the 142-point bounce after the October 1987 market crash.
With the singular exception of property stocks, all sectors benefited from heavy demand, almost all leading shares sporting double-figure gains.
The Footsie was sporting a 150-point rise at one stage early afternoon before the appearance of the odd profit-taker pushed prices back slightly.
In truth, not much has changed.
The market now stands at almost exactly the same level as when Chancellor Norman Lamont stood up and delivered his Budget speech one month ago.
Many fund managers are still said to be considering their next move.
Futures dealers were carried away a little first thing, bidding the contract for June settlement up to 2680 — a 110-point premium to the cash market.
The contract was quickly sold down to a more sustainable 2600 level.
Some big bids were said to be arriving late in the day, pointing towards further gains on Monday if Wall Street continued to hold steady.
In the gilts market the only seller was the Bank of England, which officially off-loaded £1.6 billion of paper.
Unofficially, the Bank is believed to have sold much more.
With demand strong from both domestic and overseas investors, the long end Treasury 113/4p.c. 2003–07s jumped from £1121532 to £1162132, the yield tumbling from 9.8 p.c. to 9.24 p.c.
A few index-linked issues eased slightly over the session.
Hopes that political stability will encourage a bout of takeover activity, directed attention at all the old bid chestnuts.
Fisons was up 28 at 366p, Smith & Nephew rose 41/2 to 158p, Racal Electronics stood 62p before settling 21/2 better at 601/2p, Grand Metropolitan was up 56p at 943p, while Tarmac, which reports year-end figures next week, jumped from 117p to 137p.
Market specialists are convinced that at least three major deals, having been on ice for months, are now all set to roll, helping S G Warburg rise 64 to 538p, Hambros add 22 to 238p and Kleinwort Benson gain 19 to 238p.
Smith New Court jumped from 85p to 97p.
Hanson was the market's most heavily traded stock, up 10 at 227p in volume of 55m.
British Telecom partly-paid came a close second, volumes hitting 53m as the shares firmed 19 to 1191/2 (after touching 126p).
The electricity package powered on from £2453 to £3040, a 24 p.c. rise.
East Midlands Electricity jumped from 237p to 305p before settling at 276p, while London Electricity held on to a 53-point rise to 306p.
Among the water companies Northumbrian Water spurted 68p to 419p and Yorkshire Water put on 77 to 430p.
Hopes of a mini-boom and perhaps another cut in interest rates ensured plenty of support for the stores.
Kingfisher shot up from 487p to 570p before settling back at a more realistic 530p, while Marks & Spencer rose 24 to 325p and Dixons put on 26 to 236p.
Even bear raid victim Amber Day was back on the move, up 5 at 73p by the close.
Eurotunnel, where fears of another refinancing continued to eat away at the share price, and MEPC stood out as the only Footsie stocks to fall, off 1 at 402p and 2 at 286p respectively.
Specialists in the property sector said there were a couple of aggressive attempts to sell large lines of both MEPC and also Hammerson ‘A’(down 25 at 330p) first thing yesterday.
‘If you are putting money in to the stock market, there are other, rather more attractive, areas in which to invest,’ one dealer added.
Expectations that holiday makers will now feel secure enough to go and book a week in the sun put a shine on Airtours, up 33 at 274p.
Owners Abroad — stung recently by criticism of its accounting policies — rose 71/2 to 971/2p.
Having walked into work in the spring sunshine, dealers were happy to mark Clarke Foods higher, the shares ending the session 15 ahead at 133p.
The company recently bought the Lyons Maid ice cream business from Allied Lyons.
There may be one or two embarrassing questions on Monday at Sunleigh's special shareholders' meeting, called to approve the acquisition of unquoted Laser racing dingy specialist Gavel Securities.
The £1.6m deal, accompanied by a placing, is costing a heady £400,000 in professional fees.
What is more, Gavel's largest shareholder, investment group Stratagem with 31 p.c., is still refusing to sell out and is rumoured to have been buying Gavel's convertible shares in an attempt to block any capital reconstruction.
Chief executive Alan Hancock claims the high fees simply reflect the need for top quality advice and the costs of fullfilling Stock Exchange requirements.
The shares held at 8p.
Family Money-Go-Round: ‘Better off but very saddened’
A LOWER tax bill will not mean that the Mukasa family will change personal financial arrangements, or their political preferences.
The Tory victory means that the family will pay £46 less in tax and national insurance contributions.
But Maggie Mukasa, 39 and a schoolteacher, said: ‘Although I will be better off, I am very disappointed by the outcome.
This will not have any real effect on our finances.’
Paul Mukasa, 34, who works as an electrician, added: ‘I personally think the economy is in a worse state then the Government has been letting on.’
The Mukasas have a £45,000 endowment mortgage and savings of about £7,000.
One of their biggest costs is the £85 a week they pay for their four-year-old son Adam's nursery school.
The nursery is £35 a week cheaper then paying for a nanny.
Mr Mukasa earns between £15,000 and £19,000 a year and his wife earns about £17,000.
Under Mr Lamont's Budget changes, the Mukasas will be £357 a year better off.
A Labour victory would have boosted their disposable income by £311, mainly because of the increase in child benefit.
Family Money-Go-Round: Just the lift housing market needs
By IAN COWIE
WHILE pundits and pollsters floundered yesterday, householders breathed a great sigh of relief after the election was won and lost on that most emotive of personal finance issues — taxation.
Despite Labour's dogged insistence that anyone earning more than £21,060 per annum was ‘rich’, millions looked at their family budget and saw it was not so.
High mortgage costs often offset high nominal salaries, as Money-Go-Round illustrated most recently on the day before the poll.
So, however disillusioned many were with the Tories and however much that swayed what they told the pollsters, they simply could not afford the extra tax burdens promised by Labour and the Liberal Democrats.
Now the housing market is ‘set for recovery’ the largest building society said yesterday.
The Halifax predicted a base rate cut ‘within the next few weeks’, pledged it would pass lower costs on to borrowers without delay and forecast a surge in sales, with some return of house price inflation before the end of the year.
Housing market analyst John Wriglesworth of stockbrokers Phillips & Drew forecast prices would rise 5 p.c. during the second half of this year — cancelling the 5 p.c. fall during the last 12 months.
But Ian Darby, director of mortgage brokers John Charcol, cautioned: ‘We should not get carried away with euphoria; borrowers are still very highly geared and suffering high real rates of interest — nominal rates are still 6.5 percentage points above inflation.
‘On top of that, we are still in the middle of a recession which brings the fear of unemployment and unwillingness to take on commitments like mortgages.
That said, we have seen so many people in recent months who wanted to move but could not do so until they knew what was going to happen to their take-home income.’
The Halifax said: ‘The end of uncertainty is very good news for the housing market.
The fundamentals are now in place for a recovery in activity and prices.
Affordability is back to levels last seen in the early 1980s.
There was a 50 p.c. increase in mortgage offers last time we cut our rates — in December — but that levelled off because of uncertainty about the election.
‘The way is clear now for a base rate cut within the next few weeks, possibly within the next few days.
We expect prices to start rising in the late summer or autumn.’
Halifax chief economist Gary Marsh said: ‘The national average house price is now 3.8 times the national average wage.
Mortgage costs are now about 30 p.c. of gross earnings, compared with a peak of 52 p.c. in the South East in 1989.’
Most analysts identify the South East as the area most likely to lead the way into any recovery.
Mr Darby said: ‘We calculated that, for a not untypical borrower in the region with a £100,000 mortgage and £40,000 income, Labour's proposals would have had an effect equivalent to raising the mortgage rate by 2.5 percentage points.
That would have clobbered the market.’
Mr Wriglesworth added: ‘I have no doubt that this election will come to be seen as the key to the recovery from the worst recession in the housing market since the Second World War.
‘June or July would be the ideal time for first-time buyers to exchange contracts.’
Family Money-Go-Round: ‘Tory win saved us £7,645’
By DUNCAN HUGHES
AN INCREASE of £7,645 in National Insurance contributions and income tax for Tony Murrell, 34, and his wife, Michelle, 30, has been averted by the Conservative victory.
Two weeks ago the couple, whose income is £73,000 a year, planned to restructure their finances because of fear of a hung Parliament or a Labour win.
Mr Murrell said: ‘I had been planning to switch a lot of my British equity holdings in unit linked endowment policies and unit linked pension plans into either cash or deposit funds or with profit funds.
‘I was concerned the stock market would continue to fall and that recovery would be sometime away.
I'm so pleased I did nothing.’
Mr Murrell, a managing director, earns about £70,000; Michelle works as a part-time secretary.
They pay school fees of £2,500 a year for their daughter Sarah, 5, and kindergarten fees of £1,000 for Lauren, 3.
Mr Murrell, who has a £70,000 mortgage, has savings of about £10,000 and each month pays £340 into endowment policies which on maturity will help pay school fees.
He said: ‘I think the election result will have a very positive effect because it will restore people's confidence.
This will help speed up the recovery.’
Mrs Murrell said she felt ‘relieved’.
The couple plan to celebrate the victory and their seventh wedding anniversary by taking their children to Disneyworld in Florida.
Family Money-Go-Round: Barclays to sting non-customers
BARCLAYS Bank is to increase its counter charge to non-customers from £2 to £5 per transaction, to reduce queues at branches.
John Cheese, director of Barclays personal sector marketing, said: ‘We found 36 p.c. of customers interviewed said they had to wait between five and 10 minutes to be served.
This is not acceptable and we believe that increasing the charge to non-Barclays customers will discourage them from using Barclays branches and leave our counters available from our own customers.’
Family Money-Go-Round: Savers on move in small hours
By CHARLOTTE BEUGGE
LIKE nearly everyone else, the savings institutions were wrongfooted by the election result.
But private investors reacted quickly by buying equities in the small hours of yesterday morning.
The guaranteed income bond market was thrown into confusion.
Insurance companies that issue these fixed rate bonds were expecting a Labour victory and were planning to increase rates today.
Instead, most of the companies have withdrawn from the market to reassess their rates.
According to Anna Bowes, of independent financial advisers Chase de Vere's Moneyline, most companies have halted sales at their present rates and are in discussions about dropping rates.
Already, General Portfolio has dropped the rate on its one-year bond from 9 p.c. to 8.4 p.c.
Prosperity has also announced rate decreases.
Miss Bowes said: ‘There has been an upward trend in rates in the last few weeks because it looked like Labour were going to win.
‘Now that the Conservatives have got in it is more than likely that we will get a base rate cut and so all investment rates will fall.’
Only one company is known to be still selling bonds at pre-election rates.
Consolidated Life expects to hold its rates until the middle of next week.
It is paying 8.9 p.c. on £2,000 for one year.
The surprise result also scuppered Scarborough Building Society's plans for a rate rise.
It announced this week that it was adding a top rate of 12.5 p.c. to its new Premier Fix account.
Yesterday, it pulled this higher rate tier.
The small hours of Friday morning were busy ones for stockbrokers who remained open in case investors were shocked by the result into selling stocks.
Execution-only stockbrokers ShareLink was open all night.
Its office in the middle of the Labour stronghold of Birmingham Ladywood, took a large volume of orders to buy shares from those celebrating a Tory victory.
Trading reached a peak at midnight after the key marginal of Basildon was retained by the Tories.
The momentum carried on until 4am and then tapered off before starting again at a more reasonable hour on Friday morning.
Nigel Bartram, marketing director, said: ‘We were very busy.
There were a lot of purchases of utility stocks — especially BT partly-paid.’
Money-Go-Round: Unit trusts market matures
CHOOSING an investment or unit trust was a much simpler exercise in 1979.
Then there were only 92 unit trusts on offer, compared with 1,423 today.
The number of account holders has also grown, but less dramatically, from 1.82m to more than 4.4m.
More insurance companies and brokers started offering trusts and more specialised funds covering every possible market were launched.
Unit trust savings schemes had been running for 20 years, but investment trust savings schemes did not start until 1984.
There are no overall figures for the amount of holders of unit trust savings schemes now, but Invesco MIM, one of the biggest providers, has about 28,000 savings scheme accounts.
Save & Prosper has 20,000 regular savers — out of 300,000 unit holders.
There are 131,000 investment trust savings scheme accounts.
Money-Go-Round: Safety in numbers for the cautious depositor
SAVERS have a wider choice of safe havens for their funds now, but sceptics may question whether the multiplication of accounts has really improved terms available to depositors.
In 1979, the Halifax Building Society only offered three types: ordinary share account, a monthly interest account and term accounts.
There were no cheque accounts, no building society cash machines and the 90-day account and Tessas were still some years off.
The share account was paying up to 8.75 p.c. net in 1979, the monthly savings account paid a top rate of 9.5 p.c. net and up to 12.5 p.c. net was paid on term accounts.
Now savers can get up to 7.76 p.c. on monthly interest with the Halifax.
Term accounts are no longer offered by the society, but the share account is now paying only 1.88 p.c. net.
These rates should, of course, be viewed on the basis that the mortgage rate reached 15 p.c. in 1979 compared with 10.95 p.c. now.
But what it does show was that, in 1979, small savers were treated the same as larger savers.
Now better interest rates are paid for higher deposits and only savers with a minimum of £50 get the measly 1.88 p.c. share account interest rate.
In 1979, National Savings was on the 18th issue of fixed interest certificates.
This issue paid 8.45 p.c. tax free if held for five years and the maximum holding was £1,500.
The present issue is the 36th and the rate is 8.5 p.c. tax free with a maximum holding of £10,000.
The original Retirement Issue of index-linked certificates were on sale and were paying indexation plus 4 p.c. of the original investment if held for five years.
Up to £700 could be invested in these certificates.
Now, £10,000 can be invested in the 5th issue index-linked certificates, which are paying indexation plus 4.5 p.c if held for five years.
Money-Go-Round: Rude awakening for the sleepy pensions world
THE one-time sleepy world of pensions has been woken up with a series of rude shocks.
There has been a revolution in the way people can provide for their retirement with the introduction of personal pensions and greater flexibility in preparing for retirement.
More than 4.6m people have contracted out of the state scheme into personal pension plans since their introduction in 1986.
Ron Spill, pension controller with Legal & General, said: ‘This has made a big difference in people's behaviour.
It gives them greater job mobility but also a large number of people aged in their 20s who would not have had a pension now have them.
It is something embedded in their conscience.’
But with increased choice has also come rising concern among Britain's 10m occupational pension scheme members.
The fight by members of the Imperial Tobacco scheme against Hanson to improve their benefits presaged a growing demand for greater protection following Robert Maxwell's plundering of the MCC scheme.
The Government is also expected to make its long-awaited decision on equality of pension payments by the end of the year.
The Confederation of British Industry estimates that the move could add more than £40 billion to employers' pension costs.
Money-Go-Round: Never has so much been owed by so many
PERSONAL debt has more than doubled under the party of thrift and fiscal discipline.
According to the Policy Studies Institute, in 1979 the average adult owed the equivalent of £4,500 in today's money, including mortgage debts.
Today, he or she owes more than £12,000 — an increase of 167 p.c.
Excluding mortgage debts, the average adult owed £1,000 in 1979 — today, he owes more like £2,250.
Conspicuous consumption has become more expensive.
In 1979, the largest holiday operator, Thomsons, charged up to £145 for a week's high season full board in Majorca — the most popular foreign holiday destination now and then.
Today, the same holiday would cost £364 — an increase of 137 p.c.
At the beginning of 1979, a Ford Escort Ghia 1.3 cost £3,732.
A similar model today would cost £11,750 — an increase of 215 p.c.
When Margaret Thatcher's first government came to power there were 14.3m vehicles on the road — there are now more than 19.7m.
For private motorists, the number of households with one car remains 44 p.c.
But in 1979, only 13 p.c. of households had two or more cars — now it is approximately 22 p.c.
Money-Go-Round: Cash turning into plastic
By CHARLOTTE BEUGGE
THE use of cheques and payment cards has more than doubled in the last 13 years.
In 1979, cash was king, with only 10 p.c. of payments being made by cheque or credit card.
Now it is 23 p.c.
There were only 30m plastic cards in circulation in 1979 — including cheque, credit and cash withdrawal cards — whereas now there are 100m cards in use.
In 1979, there were only 1,200 automatic teller machines in Britain, compared with 17,500 now.
Only £700m was withdrawn from cash machines in 1979 — it is now about £50 billion a year.
The number of credit cards has shot up from 9.8m in 1979 to 28.4m now.
The average outstanding debt on a credit card in 1979 was £95, compared with £292 today — but, at 1979 rates, this would be worth about £124.
Money-Go-Round: More have own front door
By DUNCAN HUGHES
HOME ownership increased by a fifth and average prices trebled between 1979 and now but the story has turned sour for many homebuyers in recent years as mortgage arrears and repossessions soared.
In 1979 a homebuyer would have only had a choice of repayment or the newly-popular endowment mortgages.
Now the average buyer can choose between more than 10 ways of buying their house, ranging from foreign current mortgages and pension mortgages through to unit linked plans and endowments.
They would have been paying an interest rate of 11.75 p.c. — which increased to 15 p.c. in January 1980 — compared with the current rate of about 10.95 p.c.
Total loans for house buying has more than quadrupled from about £9.1 billion to £43 billion, with the number of mortgages increasing by 62 p.c. from 6.5m to about 10m.
This includes more than 1m council tenants in England who have exercised their right to buy.
But the economic boom, coupled with rising income and freely available credit, led to an explosion in house prices from the mid to late 1980s.
John Hutchinson, retail operations director of Nationwide, Britain's second largest building mortgage lender, said: ‘The good growth in home ownership and steady growth in house prices pushed the market into a boom situation which has caused the bust.’
The government's efforts to reign in inflation led to interest rates reaching about 15.4 p.c. in early 1990 before being cut six times to the current level of 10.95 p.c
But Mr Hutchinson said: ‘I think we are through the cure and into a situation where it could be very good but only if confidence returns and uncertainty holds that.’
Dick Spelman, general manager of marketing for the Halifax, Britain's biggest mortgage lender, said the current recession has resulted in the first post-war collapse of house prices.
Mr Spelman said: ‘During the previous recessions of the 1970s and 1980s there was only a slow down in prices.’
Last December the government attempted to boost the housing market by scrapping stamp duty from most house purchases for the first eight months of this year.
But until April, lower interest rates failed to offset the impact of the recession and house prices continued to fall.
The level of repossessions has increased 25-times to more than 75,000 with the level of mortgages between six and 12 months in arrears rising by 18 times to 183,000.
Money-Go-Round: CORRECTION
ACCIDENT & General has confirmed that the rate it quoted for last week's travel insurance table which appeared on page 23 of the Money-Go-Round section of the newspaper should have been £17.90 for a two-week holiday in Europe rather than £14.70.
Money-Go-Round: Societies prove better bet
By IAN COWIE
AMERICAN funds provide the few bright features in The Daily Telegraph/Micropal Personal Equity Plan Guide which otherwise shows continued underperformance by share-based investments this month.
Building society higher-rate deposit accounts yielded better returns over the one, three and five year periods measured than most of the 150-odd unit and investment trust Peps.
For example, only three funds — Newton Income, Touche Remnant City of London and Britannia Life American Growth — achieved higher returns over five years than the £162 that could have been obtained without risk by placing £100 in the building society.
Only seven Peps beat the deposit return of £137 over three years while nine Peps beat the £109 deposit return over the year to the beginning of this month.
However, historians and contra-cyclical investors may argue that there have been few five year periods since the Second World War when deposits have outperformed equities — and stock markets should revive over the next five years.
Certainly, those who aim to buy when prices are low and sell when they are high can find plenty of Peps where the unit or share price now stands below its former peak.
The top 10 Peps last year were, in descending order: Britannia Life American Growth; Fleming American; Fleming Fledgling; Murray International; Murray Smaller Markets; Capability Special Situations; Fleming Mercantile; Eagle Star Environmental Opportunities; Providence Capitol United Kingdom Money Markets and Eagle Star United Kingdom Growth.
The bottom 10 over the same period were, in descending order: Save & Prosper Scotyields; Henderson High Income; Scottish Mutual Managed Income; Fleming European Fledgling; Save & Prosper High Return; Prosperity Income & Growth; Britannia Life Income Growth; Fidelity Income Plus; Guardian Royal Exchange Income; and Scottish National Capital shares.
The top 10 over three years were: Fleming American; Britannia Life American Growth; Scottish Widows European; Baring European Growth; Murray Smaller Markets; Fleming Universal; Touche Remnant City of London; Providence Capitol Emerging Asia; Murray International; and Gartmore British Growth.
The bottom 10 over three years were: Fidelity Income Plus; Fidelity Special Situations; Mercury Recovery; Prosperity United Kingdom Smaller Companies; Mercury United Kingdom Smaller Companies; Schroder Smaller Companies; Save & Prosper Smaller Companies Growth; Prosperity Income & Growth; Framlington Smaller Companies; and Scottish National Capital shares.
The top 10 over five years were: Newton Income; Touche Remnant City of London; Britannia Life American Growth; Murray International; Baring European Growth; Fleming Enterprise; Eagle Star United Kingdom High Income; Gartmore British Growth; Dunedin Income Growth; and Murray Income.
Margaret McLaren, Britannia Life's American investments manager responsible for their top-performing £15m fund, said: ‘We still look favourably on the American market which generally rises in an election year but is down so far this year.
We are looking for it to have a reasonable rally this summer and we are positive about the dollar so we expect to make money out of currency as well.’
Money-Go-Round: Facing the risks of Down's syndrome
By CHARLOTTE BEUGGE
EXPECTANT parents have many worries on their mind aside from the naming of the child.
The possibility of a child being born with a handicap is not only an emotional worry but caring for the child in the future will be expensive.
With this in mind, Lloyd's of London underwriters have launched Babycover, which will pay on the diagnosis of a child being borne with one of five medical conditions.
Down's syndrome, spina bifida, cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and mental handicap including cerebral palsy are covered.
The minimum cost is a one off payment of £85, giving £25,000 of cover.
For this, if a child is born with one of these conditions, the mother receives an immediate payment of 10 p.c. of the amount of cover — in this case, £2,500, followed by monthly payments of £250 for 90 months.
The policy can be taken out by or on behalf of any expectant mother aged between 18 and 42.
However, there are drawbacks.
Although Down's syndrome children are born to mothers of all ages, a spokeswoman for the Down's Syndrome Association said that the risk of having a Down's syndrome child greatly increases when the mother is over 42.
Also, the policy covers children born with trisomy 21, which is the most common form of Down's syndrome.
But about 4 p.c. of Down's syndrome children are born with either mosaic Down's syndrome or inherited Downs and these conditions do not appear to be covered on the policy.
Obvious other exclusions include blindness and deafness as well as rare birth defects.
Medical mistakes which result in the child having a measured low mental capacity will be covered, and claims will not prejudice any medical negligence cases.
Claims must be made within two years of the child's birth, or four in the case of muscular dystrophy.
If twins are borne, both with a disability, then the sum insured will be divided equally between them.
Money-Go-Round: Protection but at a price
By CHARLOTTE BEUGGE
OUT of the 2.7m people unemployed, 60 p.c. are aged between 20 and 34 — the age when many people buy their first home.
Next week's unemployment figures are not expected to show any significant reversal in the recent upward trend.
Many lenders report that borrowers are showing more interest in mortgage protection insurance in conjunction with new loans.
Some have gone even further and are offering free mortgage protection insurance for new borrowers.
This week, two new lenders — the Nationwide and Laurentian, the financial services side of insurance company Laurentian Life — are plugging the advantages of mortgage protection insurance.
Nationwide is giving new borrowers 12 months' free unemployment, accident and sickness insurance as part of a mortgage package that also offers up to a two percentage point discount off the variable mortgage rate.
To get the free insurance and the discount, borrowers must take out Nationwide's buildings and contents insurance.
If borrowers want to keep on the insurance after the free 12 months, the cost is 43p a month per £1,000 of mortgage so the cost would be £12.90 a month for a £30,000 mortgage.
Laurentian's Mortgage Protection Plan costs £2.50 a month for each £100 of benefit for redundancy cover and 2 p.c. of the cost of monthly repayments for illness cover.
These two policies are offered in conjunction with Laurentian's 9.99 p.c. (11.4 p.c. annual percentage rate) three year fixed rate mortgage.
It is difficult for existing borrowers to get mortgage protection insurance.
Eleven days ago, the second largest lender, the Abbey National, stopped selling mortgage protection insurance to its existing borrowers.
A spokesman said: ‘Because of the rising incidence of claims we withdrew it from sale for all existing customers from the end of March.
Existing customers are a worse risk because if they know redundancy is in the offing they are more likely to take out redundancy protection while new borrowers are not going to commit themselves to a mortgage if they are worried about losing their jobs.’
Money-Go-Round: Cash outgoings enjoy star role on screen
By DUNCAN HUGHES
BARCLAYS Bank has spent more than £5m equipping its 1,500 sales staff with laptop computers it claims will limit the likelihood of clients being given unsuitable advice.
The computers, called Supercasp, provide ‘fact finds’ which use details about the client's financial circumstances to produce immediate forecasts and calculate illustrations.
The bank mainly sells its financial services products — including life insurance and pensions — to its 6.5m banking clients.
Barclays Life, its financial services division, manages around £11.6 billion for some 906,000 policyholders.
Since the introduction of the Financial Services Act in 1988 it has been compulsory for financial advisers and salesmen to base their advice upon a clients' current ability to pay future as well as present requirements.
A spokesman for the bank said the computers will ensure that clients are not sold unsuitable products.
He said: ‘Everything happens in front of the customer's eyes and solutions to their needs are clearly described in an easy to follow format.
This ensures that customers fully understand what they are saying ‘Yes’ to, before taking on long term commitments like life insurance, investments and pensions.’
In January, Barclays followed National Westminster's sharedealing Touchscreen service by introducing machines that sell insurance.
Called Touchbank, the system looks and operates like an automatic telling machine with a menu listing household and travel insurance policies on a screen upon the insertion of a Connect, Barclaybank or BarclayPlus card held by 6m customers.
It has been on trial at nine branches and no decision has been made about whether to extend the service.
For independent advice where the adviser is making a selection from all the products on offer, the investor may prefer to seek an adviser authorised by the Financial Intermediaries Managers and Brokers Regulatory Association.
Meanwhile, the bank said it will more than double the cost of counter charges for providing services for those who do not have an account or investment with the bank or financial services division.
From June 1, the cost of the range of services including cashing or paying in cheques will rise from £2 to £5.
A spokesman for the bank said it is to cut down on queues forming in branches and delaying service to its customers.
Money-Go-Round: Time's up for the secret savers
By IAN COWIE
SAVERS who spread their funds over a range of accounts to keep interest paid below the level at which banks and building societies had to inform the taxman should be warned that the game is up.
From the start of this week the savings institutions have been handing over magnetic tapes to the Inland Revenue giving details of all interest-earning accounts, however small.
The old system — by which banks only reported accounts which received more than £500 per annum interest — was scrapped in return for the abolition of composite rate tax, enabling gross interest payments for savers on low incomes.
Prior to the tax year which began on Monday, building societies only had to report accounts which paid more than £1,400 with the threshold for National Savings being £250 on investment accounts and £500 on its ordinary account.
A Revenue spokesman said: ‘These limits were largely historical and grew up because composite rate tax was applied to different institutions at different times.
Since last April, instead of having tax deducted at source from all accounts, we now have about 12.5m accounts which have registered for interest to be paid gross.
So we need to have some check that it is being done in the right circumstances.
‘It is easier for the institutions to give us records of all accounts rather than trying to strip out just those accounts which paid above a certain level of interest.
‘We will not examine all of them but we will take random samples and check to see if anyone who has registered for gross interest also has a file at one of our tax offices — which they should not normally have as only non-taxpayers should be registered for gross interest.
Where there does appear to be a discrepancy, we will be asking those concerned for an explanation.’
The maximum penalty for dishonestly registering for gross payment of interest is £3,000 plus payment of the tax evaded.
Only people whose total income is less than their personal allowances are allowed to register for gross interest payments.
So, for example, in the current tax year, individuals aged less than 65 may receive £3,445 before paying any tax while those over that age threshold may receive £4,200, rising to £4,370 for those aged 75 or more.
‘Married couples receive an additional allowance of £1,720, which rises to £2,465 for those aged 65 or more and £2,505 for those aged 75 or more.
Halifax, the largest building society, is preparing to transfer its tapes to the Revenue but points out that — rather than taking advantage of the tax rules — many savers are failing to claim their rights.
A spokesman said: ‘Less than half of our 1.35m junior accounts — that is, for savers aged less than 16 — have been registered for gross payment of interest.
And yet the vast majority of these savers will probably be entitled to gross payments.
‘Looking at those over 16, we guess that about 3m of these savers are entitled to gross interest but little more than a third — 1.2m — have registered.’
Those entitled to gross interest should ask for the single-sheet form, R85, which is available from most bank and building society branches.
Money-Go-Round: Tax advice tailored for women
A FREE booklet on the taxation system is available to damsels distressed by completion of tax returns and the payment and reclamation of tax.
The guide is available from the Financial Services for Women (FSW), telephone 0800 590682.
The organisation is the free information arm of the National & Provincial Building Society, which provides advice and guidance on personal finance.
Mary Mitchell, manager of FSW said: ‘In spite of the recent campaign by the Inland Revenue, there still appears to be a lot of confusion in people's minds about the tax system.
‘With this guide, we hope to allay some of the concerns expressed by the public about completing tax returns and reclaiming interest from banks and from building societies.’
Money-Go-Round: One European parliament that speaks for the elderly
By PAUL LEWIS
WHILE most British eyes have been on the election of a new Westminster parliament, a 500-member pensioner's parliament from all 12 countries of the European Community has called for better pensions throughout the EC.
The parliament met in Luxembourg to establish a European pressure group for the rights of pensioners and to set a common standard pensioners could use to lobby their own governments.
Following the efforts of the 80-strong British delegation, the charter it has approved is very specific in its demands on pensions.
In particular, it called for a pension equal to ‘a substantial percentage of the national average wage’ and which should be increased annually in line with earnings or prices, whichever is the higher.
Although the percentage was not specified, French delegate George Debunne called for a pension of at least 40 p.c. of national average earnings or 100 p.c. of the national minimum wage in the countries where one applies.
That level has not been achieved anywhere in the community.
In Britain, it would imply a pension of more than twice the current £54.15.
The concern of British pensioners about the level of pension arises from a belief that the British retirement pension is one of the lowest in Europe.
Comparisons of pension provision between European countries are notoriously difficult.
But the last time such an exercise was undertaken in 1985, Britain's pension was found to be the lowest, apart from that paid in Ireland (Spain, Portugal and Greece were excluded).
New figures presented to the pensioner's parliament confirmed that Britain's state pension provision is among the worst in the community.
Pensions are usually compared by converting the annual pension paid to an average earner into ecu, using ‘purchasing power parity’ to accommodate for the various costs of living in each country.
A study done for the pensioner's parliament found that the basic pension paid in Britain in 1988 was lower than that paid in every country except Portugal — but Germany, which has a high pension, and Ireland, which has a low one, were omitted for technical reasons.
Annual state pensions in 1988 ranged from 8,441 ecus (£6,072) in Luxembourg to 2,175 ecus (£1,565) in Portugal with Britain's pension being 4,394 ecus (£3,161).
Britain's pension was also low as a percentage of national average earnings.
Pensions ranged from 30 p.c. in Luxembourg to 18 p.c. in Portugal.
Britain's was at 20 p.c.
However, some delegates thought the figures were too generous.
The tables in the study appeared to show that the pension paid in Greece was 381 ecus (£274) per month, placing Greek pensions above those for Portugal, Britain, Italy, and Spain.
But Anastassios Ammallos from Greece said: ‘We have very low pensions.
The average pension for farmers is 50 ecu (£36) per month, and so we have huge problems.
Pensioners are committing suicide on some of the islands.’
The parliament's call for pensions to be uprated in line with wages is one which has been fully achieved in only four of the 12 countries; Britain is not one of them.
Here, pensions have been uprated with prices since 1980.
Uprating in line with wages would raise British pensions considerably.
Currently wages are rising by about 7.5 p.c. per annum compared to price rises of about 4 p.c.
But a delegate from Portugal, where there is no indexation at all, illustrated the distance some countries have to catch up.
Maria de Lourdes Sequeira Dias from Portugal told the parliament of the problems of Portuguese pensioners: ‘The slice of the national cake available to pensioners in Portugal is decreasing.
In real terms, pensions are declining.
‘Some people can end up with a pension of 30,000 escudos (£122) a month.
And pensions have not been going up at the same rate as the cost of living.
There should be some indexation.’
Money-Go-Round: In a pickle on pension transfer
By STEPHEN EILLIS
ALAN Hickman from Derbyshire became worried about the advice he was receiving over his pension transfer when he realised that each expert he consulted recommended a different course of action.
After 27 years at BTR's electrical wholesaling subsidiary Newey & Eyre, 46-year-old Alan knew he had a worthwhile asset in his preserved pension and he wanted to be sure he got the best value.
So he asked a variety of advisers about his options.
‘I went to a couple of big pension experts, local advisers, company reps and one of the top four banks to ask what I should do,’ says Alan.
All agreed he should transfer his money but none agreed on which company would be best to look after his future pension needs.
‘One of the people I talked to was a salesman for Allied Dunbar and said they'd do a great job.
Then he left them and joined a small local firm of advisers, contacted me again and recommended another insurance company — Scottish Amicable.
‘Not long after he contacted me again, said he'd moved to yet another firm and made a completely different recommendation.
That's when I really began to wonder.
What I needed was totally impartial advice.
What I was getting was just what the salesman adviser had in his bag that would earn him commission.’
Alan's case is not unusual according to watchdog Lautro.
It has reported a 77 p.c. increase in complaints and cited pension transfer advice as one of the biggest problem areas.
Because Alan was so worried about the pull of commissions he turned to Norex Pensions Communications who run the transfer desk, a specialist fee-based service for advising ontransfer options.
Any commission they receive is added to the money being put in the scheme or plan so benefiting the client.
Alan says:’ I was amazed at the advice I received because their Mitchell Philpott told me not to transfer at least for the time being.
Mitchell explains: ‘BTR's is a final salary scheme with a pension starting at 65 based on the number of years’ service and the salary on leaving the company.
In Mr Hickman's case that meant a pension of £20,408 a year.
‘But under the Social Security Act of 1986 the trustees of the scheme have to inflation proof benefits earned between January 1985 and the end of 1989 when Mr Hickman left the company.
Assuming 5 p.c. inflation that boosted the pension to £29,867 a year.’
On top of that, no other adviser had told Alan about the provision in the 1990 Social Security Act for schemes with sufficient surpluses to use them to increase member benefits.
It turned out there were large surpluses in the BTR pension fund and so a good chance that the transfer value, as well as the potential pension, would be increased in the not too distant future.
As a result, Mitchell has told Alan to stay put, at least until the BTR pension trustees have made their decision about the surpluses.
Property: Solve this Van Gogh mystery
This drawing, on show in the Barbican exhibition, shows some semi-detached early-Victorian villas, said to be in Isleworth, where the future artist lived in the school where he taught.
Nobody has been able to identify the houses, partly because they are of a very common design that appears all over London.
Does anyone recognise them?
If you think you do, write to Van Gogh Mystery, Property, Weekend, 1 Canada Square, Canary Wharf, London E14 5DT.
Property: Not quite as pretty as a picture A house committed to canvas is a house that's easy to sell.
But life may be a poor imitation of art.
Chris Partridge reports
By CHRIS PARTRIDGE
ESTATE agents are not noted art lovers, but they love houses that appear in famous paintings.
It is a great selling point for a house to be hanging in the National Gallery.
Almost any house in East Anglia is likely to be advertised as being located in Constable country.
Fenn Wright Spurlings, for example, has just sold (for about £380,000) the Old Vicarage in Stoke-by-Nayland, saying that the area is ‘a favourite subject of the painter John Constable and appears in a number of well-known paintings and in many of his sketches, some of which show the house itself’.
At least Stoke-by-Nayland is still almost as it appeared to Constable's eye.
Unfortunately, being recorded by a great artist is no safeguard for a landscape, and many places that glow in the gallery are sadly decayed in reality.
Norwood, for example.
Norwood is now a fairly grubby inner London area, but when Camille Pissarro lived there in 1870 it was the very edge of the city, combining townscape and country in a way that Pissarro found particularly attractive (he lived and worked on the outskirts of Paris for most of his career).
He had fled the invading Germans, only to find himself in a society he hated for its philistinism and prudery.
‘Here there is no such thing as art, only business,’ he wrote to a friend.
Then he went on to complain that even business was bad, as he had sold only two small paintings.
Despite his unhappy relationship with the suburban English, Pissarro produced some of his best-known landscapes in Norwood.
But the lush, leisured spaces he portrays, a happy marriage of town and country, have gone.
Pissarro's vision of a snow-covered Fox Hill, Upper Norwood, shows a place on the very edge of the country.
To the left, wooded slopes indicate the beginnings of the country, although the street itself is lined with 19th century suburban villas.
The slalom shape of the street survives, and most of the small houses Pissarro painted.
But he can barely have packed up his easel when terraces of undistinguished late-Victorian houses began to creep up the hill and the border of London shot south.
However, the worst outrage on Fox Hill came only after the Second World War, when horrid concrete housing was plonked on the top.
Nevertheless, Fox Hill remains one of the most desirable streets in the neighbourhood.
According to Penny Jordan of the local agent Cooper Giles, houses featuring in the Pissarro picture are in strong demand.
‘People see the Pissarro print and say ‘Oh! that's Fox Hill’ and it adds interest,’she says.
Two of the late-Georgian or early-Victorian villas halfway up the hill are on the market.
No 21, with four bedrooms, is priced at £205,000 through Wates, and No 24, with six bedrooms, is on offer at £209,000 with Cornerstone.
The Avenue, Sydenham is one of Pissarro's larger canvases.
It is a spacious drive, clearly an upper-class area, with a coach passing pedestrians dressed for a crisp spring day.
The tower of the recently-built church brings the road to a full stop.
Lawrie Park Avenue today does not live up to expectations.
‘Thirties detached houses line one side of the road, '60s terraces the other.
Burnage Court, the big house in the picture hidden in trees at the end, has at some time been cruelly treated, with badly applied half-timbering on the ground floor and tile-hanging on the first.
The road remains sought-after, however.
A small lodge house that used to be some sort of appendage of Burnage Court is currently for sale through Hamptons.
It is called Shilling Green and dates from about 1800, but much of its charm has been removed by over-large extensions.
It is priced at £199,000.
Just after Pissarro left Norwood, heartily glad to be going back to France, a young Dutchman arrived in London with a very different attitude.
He was besotted with English culture — not the painting, which he thought third-rate, but the novels of Dickens and George Eliot.
His name was Vincent Van Gogh.
At Van Gogh in England, an exhibition at the Barbican Gallery (until May 4), we see the young art dealer drinking in the culture Pissarro had rejected and falling in love with the black-and-white prints of the Social Realists and with his landlady's daughter, the stern young Eugenie Loyer.
Apparently in an effort to impress his beloved, Van Gogh made a tiny drawing of the house, 87 Hackford Street, Brixton, which still survives.
The centre of the composition is a London terrace of three houses, but No 87 is the last house on the next terrace to the left of it.
Why did Van Gogh not make that the centre?
Has the numbering changed?
Or was the drawing unrelated to his feelings for Eugenie?
Time has not been kind to this view either.
The bigger houses have disappeared, to be replaced by '60s boxes.
Simon Courtauld's ‘Out of Town’ column returns next week.
Property: DES RES
By CHRIS PARTRIDGE
NASH COURT, near Ludlow, Salop, holds vivid memories.
The huge Georgian house, set in acres of gorgeous countryside, used to be a sort of evangelical holiday retreat for young lads, and I spent a couple of winter weeks there.
The garden has a dog cemetery, complete with gravestones.
We were told that if you went there in the dark your hand would be rubbed by a cold, spectral doggy nose.
We all went, and a good half came back claiming to have encountered the spirit world.
Nash Court is for sale through Bernard Thorpe at £550,000.
SOME of the most unusual chimney stacks in the world — grand enough for Hampton Court — are for sale, attached to the lovely 17th-century Old House in Blandford Forum, Dorset.
Brick cylinders, surrounded by attached classical columns, theycost £350,000, with the house thrown in (Savills).
Money-Go-Round: Insuring a higher living standard
GROWING affluence has not alleviated anxiety about the future and we are a better insured nation now than we were in 1979.
Premiums paid for life insurance and funds under management have risen more than five-fold to £14.5 billion and £224 billion respectively, despite there being only a 2m rise in the number of life insurance policies to 106m.
Sales of traditional industrial life insurance policies plunged by half, but there has been a growth in endowment policies.
David Hudson, an insurance analyst with BZW, said: ‘This is because of increasing wealth and a rise in the general standard of living.’
In 1979 the average family spent £71 a year on motor insurance, £21 on buildings insurance and £15 on contents policies.
By 1990 motor insurance had kept in line with average earnings and risen to £223.
But buildings and contents insurance outpaced earnings rising to £116 and £72 respectively.