

Nitrate content in pig food cut
By Our Agriculture Correspondent
THE Green movement was given a helping hand by the pig industry yesterday.
BOCM-Silcock, a feed manufacturer, launched a range of pig rations designed to reduce nitrate pollution from muck on the land.
By lowering the nitrogen content, the company said it could cut the amount of nitrogen deposited on the land by pigs by 23 per cent.
This, it claimed, would help reduce nitrate pollution of water supplies in line with EC demands.
Mr Nick Major, the company's pig feed marketing manager, said: ‘It is this nitrogen, when converted to nitrate microbes in the soil, which is potentially damaging to the environment.’
Food supplements for pigs ensured they received the right amount of nourishment which ensured British farmers did not suffer a competitive disadvantage with others in the EC.
British pigs produce about seven million gallons of liquid muck a day, posing a big disposal problem for farmers and a water quality headache.
Bread moves from stone ground to Stone Age
By David Brown, Agriculture Correspondent
BREAD made from spelt, a type of grain first grown in the late Stone Age, is poised to become a new ‘health-food’, a miller of organic flour forecast yesterday.
It could become a money spinner for farmers looking for alternative crops in the face of expected cutbacks in EC farm support prices.
Mr Michael Marriage, an organic grower and miller of Doves Farm, Ham, Wilts, said yesterday: ‘Spelt has excellent bread-making qualities and there is a theory that the bread can be eaten by people allergic to wheat gluten.’
Spelt — Triticum sativum — was grown in small amounts in Britain until about 50 years ago.
It is a tough relative of wheat, but fell out of favour with farmers as they switched to higher yielding wheat varieties which were easier to grind into flour.
It is still grown on the Continent and is said to contain more protein.
Its hard, tight-fitting husks act as armour to protect it from pests and diseases — a boon to farmers who do not want to use pesticides.
Allergy specialists are beginning to recommend spelt for patients on wheat and gluten-free diets but only under medical supervision until clinical trials are complete.
Currently, organically grown wheat fetches farmers about £70 or so a ton more than conventionally grown grain, the premium more than compensating for substantially lower yields.
Child of five first to get advanced gene therapy
By Christine McGourty Technology Correspondent
A CHILD with a rare inherited disease that affects the immune system has become the first in the world to receive an advanced form of gene therapy.
The five-year-old child, treated in Italy, lacks an enzyme crucial to providing protection against common infections.
To correct the problem, researchers transplanted a copy of the missing gene into the child's body in order to trigger production of the crucial enzyme.
The first form of the therapy was carried out by scientists at America's National Institutes of Health in 1990 on a four-year-old girl suffering from the same potentially fatal inherited disease.
But the treatment has to be repeated because the Americans transplanted the gene into cells that only live for a few months.
Now, the Italians have transplanted the gene into so-called stem cells which in theory have an unlimited life span.
If successful, the procedure could cure the child completely without the need for repeated transplants.