

Two killed as bombs shatter election victory celebrations
By Wendy Holden, Ben Fenton, Charles Clover, Neil Darbyshire, Alastair McCall, Richard Savill and Chris Ryder
AT LEAST two people were killed and 80 injured when a car bomb exploded in the heart of the City of London last night in a suspected IRA attack timed to detract from the Tory General Election victory celebrations.
Early this morning another device exploded under a flyover at Staples Corner, Hendon, north London — the junction of the M1 and the North Circular.
No one was injured but the interchange was closed because of fears of major structural damage.
The first bomb went off at 9.20pm near to the Commercial Union building in St Mary Axe as City workers were heading home after celebrating the Tory win.
St Bartholomew's hospital surgical manager Ian Johnson said two people died at the scene of the blast.
The hospital admitted 35 people, four of whom had serious injuries — including one man with multiple injuries.
The rest suffered shock and cuts, mostly to the chest, arms, legs and face, he said.
Seventeen of the injured were taken to Guy's hospital, including two little girls, one wearing a white dress, their faces covered in blood and holding their arms out in front of them.
‘You just wanted to hold on to them and cuddle them,’ said hospital visitor Lisa Faulds, 23.
A spokesman for Royal London Hospital, Whitechapel, east London, said the hospital treated 24 ‘walking wounded’, and detained a 50-year-old asthma sufferer who suffered breathing difficulties after the windows of his house were blown out.
‘All the others have been allowed home,’ he added.
The blast — in the City of London and Westminster South constituency of Mr Brooke, Northern Ireland Secretary — caused several other buildings in the City to collapse.
Anti-terrorist officers were quickly on the scene and investigating the further reports of suspect devices.
Commander George Churchill-Coleman, head of Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist unit, who visited the scene, said the explosion was caused by at least 100lbs of high explosive, probably Semtex.
If the explosive used was Semtex it would almost certainly be the biggest IRA bomb ever planted on the British mainland.
In St Albans last year two IRA terrorists blew themselves up as they were planting a 5lbs to 7lbs Semtex bomb destined for Royal Marines bandsmen.
And at the Royal Military School of Music in Deal, Kent three years ago, 11 bandsmen were killed by a 20lbs Semtex bomb.
Yesterday's bomb went off 20 minutes after a warning was telephoned to Waterloo railway station that there was a device at the Stock Exchange.
Police said the message was a decoy to distract attention from the real danger area.
Commander Churchill-Coleman said: ‘As always with the Provisional IRA when they commit these acts the information they gave was erroneous.
It was given to delay the police operation to find the bomb and officers were half a mile away looking for the bomb at the Stock Exchange.’
On the day that the Sinn Fein president Mr Gerry Adams lost his seat in West Belfast, the blast was being seen as a deliberate attempt by the IRA to place the Irish question firmly back in the political agenda.
The Prime Minister heard the explosion while working on his new Cabinet appointments at Downing Street.
Mr Baker, the Home Secretary, was keeping Mr Major fully informed of developments.
It was understood that most injuries were caused by debris falling from the Commercial Union and other buildings on to passers by.
Witnesses said hundreds of windows were blown out and scores of City workers, enjoying a Friday evening drink in pubs and wine bars, were forced to flee the area.
Mr Kinji Natsur, 30, an office worker in the Commercial Union Building was working late with colleagues.
He said: ‘There was a huge noise like thunder and all the lights went out.
The building shook like an earthquake.
All the windows were broken and came in and landed on the people working.’
A cab driver, Mr Derek Steen, spoke of a ‘tremendous bang’ as he was driving near the area.
‘I had a job to steer.
I went over to the right towards the island in the middle of the road.
The person in the back fell off the seat in the cab — it was just raining glass everywhere.
‘The smoke, you couldn't see, it was like thick fog everywhere.
As I drove further down the road there were computers thrown out on to the pavement and whole window frames completely blown out into the street.
‘I saw a young girl who was lying on the side of the road.
.. she wasn't moving.
Whether she was just fainted or stunned from the shock or whether she was seriously injured, I wouldn't like to comment on that.’
He said that moments before he heard the explosion all the street lights and office lights went out.
‘By the time I said ‘power cut’ to myself there was this tremendous bang.’
Mr Neil Lancaster, who was drinking in the Swan Wine Bar in Leadenhall Market, half a mile from the scene of the explosion, said glass lampshades were thrown from the ceiling on to the floor.
‘The whole place just shook and lampshades fell off the ceiling.
We walked outside to near the Commercial Union building and there was a car alight.
The Commercial Union is a tall building and every single window in the whole building had been blown out.
‘There was no warning.
It just went off and the whole place shook.
There were a lot of people around.
Some were being put into an ambulance.
There was glass everywhere.’
Mr Y Hazama was driving his car out of the car park beneath the Commercial Union building when the bomb went off.
‘I heard a big bang and I saw smoke coming out.
Somebody came towards me shouting ‘Bomb, bomb’.
I just left my car and ran.
There was glass, smoke and dust everywhere,’ he said.
Mr Steve Marshall, a Reuter technician working in a nearby building, said: ‘The blast wrecked loads of buildings.
The Commercial Union building is in tatters.’
Bystanders said police were hunting for further devices, bringing traffic to a standstill as police sealed off the area.
The Staples Corner explosion — less than a mile from the Metropoltan police training college — went off just after 1am as Mr Kenneth Baker, Home Secretary, arrived at the scene of the City blast.
A telephone warning had been given to Portadown telephone exchange in Northern Ireland at 12.20 am, which said that the device was in a white Bedford van parked at Staples Corner.
Police cordoned off and evacuated the area, which is just yards from the Brent Cross Shopping Centre.
Share prices soar as City celebrates
By Richard Northedge, Deputy City Editor
SHARE prices soared yesterday in celebration of the Conservative election victory.
The pound strengthened on the foreign exchanges and in the money markets interest rates fell, bringing forward the prospect of cuts in bank base rates and mortgage costs.
As the overnight election results came in, the Bank of England activated a programme to sell more than £2 billion of gilt-edged stock to help fund the Government's high public spending.
Some stockbrokers had remained open overnight and marked up prices as results were declared.
When the Stock Exchange opened the FT-SE index of the 100 largest companies' shares jumped by more than 130 points and peaked at lunchtime with a 151-point rise.
Prices remained high and the index closed 136 points up on the day at 2,573.
Leading the rise were the prices of privatisation shares which would have been threatened by a Labour government.
Electricity shares rose by 24 per cent while British Telecom gained 19p for the part-paid shares to finish at 1191/2p.
The London futures market had its busiest day with 650,000 contracts changing hands — 60 per cent more than on the previous record day.
Most of the business was in shorter-term sterling futures as the pound gained against other currencies.
The pound gained more than two cents against the dollar to close at $1.7724 and 21/2 pfennigs against the German mark, closing at Dm2.8801.
The sterling index finished 1.9 higher at 91.2.
House prices and sales are ‘set for recovery’ after the Conservative election victory, Halifax, the largest building society, said yesterday.
Election ‘92: 21 majority triumph for Major
By GEORGE JONES
A VICTORIOUS Mr Major was back in Downing Street last night finalising an extensive Cabinet reshuffle as the twice-defeated Mr Kinnock was preparing to stand down as Labour leader, probably in the autumn.
Mr Major, delighted with his spectacular success in securing an historic fourth term in power for the Tories, said his first task was to ensure there was a ‘broadly based recovery in which all will share’.
Senior Tories forecast there would be radical ministerial changes, with a ‘50–50’ chance that Mr Lamont, the Chancellor, could be switched to another senior post, possibly Defence or the Home Office.
However, Mr Lamont wants to stay at the Treasury to oversee the long-awaited economic upturn.
With all 651 results declared, the Conservatives had an overall majority of 21 — enough to sustain Mr Major for the five-year lifetime of a Parliament.
It was one of the most remarkable election victories of modern times.
Labour's fourth successive defeat was a crushing personal blow for Mr Kinnock, whose modernised party failed to oust the Conservatives despite the recession and the aftermath of the poll tax debacle.
As the implications of Labour's defeat sank in, some left-wingers were already calling on him to quit, accusing him of depriving Labour of pure socialism, introducing ‘designer’ socialism instead.
Other MPs, however, paid warm tribute to Mr Kinnock's achievement in bringing Labour back from the point of near-extinction.
The Tories entered the record books as the first party to secure a fourth term in power since the early 19th century and caused a further surprise by regaining seats in Scotland — confounding predictions of a Conservative collapse north of the border.
It was a disappointing night for Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, whose hopes of being a powerbroker in a hung Parliament were dashed.
His party was returned with 20 MPs — two seats worse off — though they inflicted the biggest upset of the election, defeating Mr Chris Patten, the Conservative Party chairman and architect of Mr Major's victory.
Mr Patten was the only Cabinet casualty, although eight other middle-ranking and junior ministers also lost their seats.
But Labour — while winning a net 39 seats — achieved only a 2.1 per cent swing, well short of the eight per cent needed to achieve outright victory.
Mr Patten brushed aside the disappointment of the loss of his own seat.
He said the Tories had won an ‘incredible victory’ against the predictions of all the pundits and pollsters.
‘We have bucked the trend across the world, where governments have suffered election defeats in Greece, Germany, Italy and France.
‘We started this campaign three points behind — and we have ended it six points ahead.
We have won four elections in a row — a first this century,’ Mr Patten said.
Outside No 10, Mr Major smiled broadly as the tension of the past four weeks evaporated.
He had taken the gamble of calling an election when he was behind in the polls — and kept his nerve despite widespread criticism of a lacklustre and negative campaign.
He greeted cheering members of the Downing Street staff with handshakes and kisses, declaring: ‘I have only got one thing to say — it's nice to be back.’
Mr Major said he was immensely proud to have been elected Prime Minister in his own right.
He reaffirmed his promise — made outside No 10 when he succeeded Mrs Thatcher 16 months ago — to create a ‘truly classless society’ with opportunities for all.
He also gave a firm pledge to ‘build up and cherish’ the National Health Service — which Labour had made one of its central campaign themes.
‘It will remain as it is now.
It will not be privatised, not now nor at any stage,’ he said.
Mr Major was consulting colleagues on possible ways of keeping Mr Patten in his Government.
One option being canvassed at Westminster last night was an early by-election in a safe Tory seat, possibly caused by elevating an MP or minister to the House of Lords.
With his authority enhanced by securing his own mandate, Mr Major is expected to announce this afternoon a restructuring of Whitehall.
The Department of Energy will be wound up and two new Cabinet posts created: a minister responsible for the Citizen's Charter and reforming the civil service, and a new department responsible for broadcasting, the arts, sport, the national heritage and the film industry.
While there has been criticism of Mr Lamont's performance during the election campaign, Mr Major admires the way his Chancellor has withstood the criticism and held firm to tough economic policies.
But some of Mr Major's close colleagues are urging him to use his mandate to start with a ‘clean sheet of paper’ when constructing his Cabinet.
Mr Douglas Hurd is expected to stay as Foreign Secretary, with promotion likely for key performers in the election campaign such as Mr Michael Heseltine, Mr Kenneth Clarke and Mr Michael Howard.
Mr Clarke has been tipped as possible Chancellor or Home Secretary and Mr Heseltine could get an expanded Department of Trade and Industry.
But there was a question mark last night over the continued Cabinet careers of several ministers, including Mr Baker, Home Secretary, Mr King, Defence Secretary, and Mr Lilley, Trade and Industry.
Mr Major is also expected to take the opportunity to bring a woman into his Cabinet.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley (Health) and Mrs Gillian Shephard (Treasury) are front-runners.
Two middle-ranking Ministers, Mr John Patten (Home Office) and Mr Michael Portillo (Environment), can also expect promotion.
As the Conservatives celebrated their victory against the odds, a Labour inquest was already beginning.
Although Labour fought a highly professional and glossy campaign — as in 1987 — it again failed to convince people that the party and Mr Kinnock were ready to govern.
Meanwhile Mrs Thatcher — shortly to go to the House of Lords — welcomed the election outcome: she said: ‘It was a famous victory with a clear majority.
Full steam ahead with the business of government.’
‘Terrific bang — then there was chaos’
CITY workers described last night what they were doing when the blast occurred.
Mr Neil Lancaster, 25, of the City firm Warburgs, said: ‘We were drinking in a bar, celebrating the Tory victory, when there was a terrific bang.
The lights crashed to the floor.
‘We went outside to see if we could help.
All the windows in the Commercial Union Building were smashed.
There were people holding each other.
Some of them were bleeding.
People were coming from every doorway into the street.’
An inspector with London Transport, Mr Michael Hawkins, said: ‘There was an almighty explosion.
I was knocked to the ground.
The earth moved under me.
‘There were people lying everywhere.
There was glass all around.
I saw this one bus thrown across the road.
Every window was smashed.
‘All I could see of the explosion was this huge cloud of dust.
There were people on the floor.
There was one bloke with a piece of glass sticking out of his head.
‘Then there were 20 to 30 people standing there shocked and bewildered.
Then all the glass started to go everywhere and the police helped us out of the area.’
Mr Ivor Lynch, 24, a builder, was drinking in The New Moon Pub in Lombard Street.
He said: ‘We heard a blast which shook the pub.
We ran out into the street and there were people running all about.
Some were crying and screaming.
‘In Bishopsgate there was a man lying on the ground and other people were giving him the kiss of life.’
Mr Jeremy Dalgliesh, 22, a bank clerk, was also drinking in the New Moon.
He said: ‘There was a bang and the doors flew open of the pub.
I ran out into Leadenhall Street.
All the windows of the Barclays Bank were blown in.
‘There were women crying and a lot of anguish.
It was chaos.
The ambulances arrived and I saw people being carried into them all covered in blood.’
Mr Mohamed Sefi, 26, of Stoke Newington, north London, heard a ‘loud explosion’ as he worked in a Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurant in Houndsditch.
‘The window in the floor above flew down into the street,’ he said.
Fears of backlash by IRA
By Chris Ryder Irish Correspondent
THERE ARE fears of a wave of IRA violence in Northern Ireland after the Sinn Fein president, Mr Gerry Adams, narrowly lost his West Belfast seat to Dr Joe Hendron, the nationalist SDLP candidate.
Mr Adams's defeat in the only Northern Ireland seat to change hands was widely welcomed by nationalist and Unionist politicians.
It was achieved because many Protestants voted tactically for the SDLP instead of the Ulster Unionists.
Dr Hendron said: ‘This is a vote for peace — the people of West Belfast are so sick of murder and mayhem.’
He pledged to work for all sides in the constituency.
Mr Adams said: ‘The seat has been stolen from the people of West Belfast.
I am sure it will not be long until they get their seat back.’
Mr Richard Needham, Northern Ireland Minister, said: ‘That the two communities in West Belfast kicked out the trumpet of terrorism is the most wonderful message of this election.
‘It was the best news I have had in six and a half years.’
The Irish Prime Minister, Mr Albert Reynolds, said that Unionists had ‘crossed the line to vote for peace’ by backing Dr Hendron.
Sinn Fein failed to get on top of the SDLP in other constituencies but in some areas such as Fermanagh-South Tyrone it ran it a very close second, and it remains to be seen how it will develop its position and policies.
The SDLP turned in the best performance of any local party.
Apart from unseating Sinn Fein in West Belfast, the SDLP converted a 731 majority in South Down into a commanding one of 6,342.
Mr John Hume, the party leader, and his deputy, Mr Seamus Mallon, retained their seats in Foyle and Newry and Armagh with increased majorities.
In mid-Ulster the party dramatically increased its vote.
The Conservatives, fighting in Ulster for the first time in 70 years, failed to win any seats.
Nevertheless, they carved out a 5.7 per cent share of the overall vote.
The major political consequence of the election result for Northern Ireland will be the prompt resumption of the inter-party talks, probably by the end of the month.
Election ‘92: Tough agenda set by Major for new term
By George Jones, Political Editor
WITH the prospect of a five-year term, John Major has set himself a formidable agenda.
His immediate priority will be to ensure the economy comes out of recession.
Yesterday's surge on the stock market was a welcome signal of confidence.
Tory MPs and the City will be looking for an early cut in interest rates to stimulate recovery.
The Tory manifesto also foreshadowed a restructuring of Whitehall, with the Department of Energy wound up and its responsibilities shared between the Industry and Environment departments.
Two new Cabinet posts will be created — a minister with responsibility for the Citizen's Charter and reforming the Civil Service; and a new department responsible for broadcasting, arts, sport, the film industry and the national heritage.
First on the agenda of the new Minister for Broadcasting and the Arts is likely to be the future of the BBC, whose charter is due for renewal in 1996, during the likely lifetime of the new Government.
The BBC's coverage of the election caused great offence to Mr Major and senior Tories, who voiced concern in private that it wanted to see the return of a Labour government to safeguard its future.
Mr Major believes privatisation might be the answer but he could yet be persuaded against such a drastic course.
The election result is a clear mandate for the Government to proceed with the reforms of the National Health Service and education.
Labour tried and failed to make the election a referendum on these changes.
Now the uncertainty has been lifted, hundreds of hospitals will seek self-governing status while more family doctors are expected to opt for their own budgets — although Mr Major reaffirmed yesterday that he would continue to cherish and build up the NHS.
But the campaign revealed concern about ‘underfunding’ and low standards in some public services.
Mr Major now has the opportunity to demonstrate his commitment to ‘caring Conservatism’ by ensuring that the opening of services to market disciplines is not at the expense of adequate funding.
Scotland is a problem that is unlikely to go away.
Mr Major took a gamble by playing the Unionist card and warning that devolution and nationalism could lead to the break-up of the UK.
However, he will come under pressure to fulfil his undertaking to ‘take stock’ of the situation after the dust has settled.
Many Tories believe he will have to make concessions to the aspirations of Scots for more say in the running of their own affairs.
Mr Major can draft a Queen's Speech at his leisure, The State Opening of Parliament is not until May 6.
Priorities will include tax reforms announced in the Budget — and dropped when the election was called; reintroducing the Asylum Bill curbing bogus refugees and asylum seekers; legislation to pave the way for the ‘creeping’ privatisation of British Rail.
White Papers on the privatisation of British Coal and the setting up a national lottery are also expected.
The cornerstone of the Queen's Speech will be a Bill to ratify the Maastricht Treaty that he negotiated last December.
Like the election, that was another occasion where his nerve held — and he proved his critics wrong.
Yesterday's result means that he will be able to take on the Euro-sceptic rump in the Tory Party and put through the legislation that could put Britain on the road to a single European currency by the late 1990s.
There are seven summits between now and the end of the year.
In June, Mr Major will go to Rio de Janeiro for the ‘earth summit’ on the future of the environment.
On July 1, he will assume the presidency of the EC.
There is a difficult agenda ahead, including reform of the Common Agricultural Policy, completion of the 1992 single market and progress to economic and monetary union.
But at a time when incumbent leaders across the world are facing a recessionary backlash from their people, Mr Major can go out on to the international stage with enhanced authority.
Election ‘92: INS AND OUTS Colin Randall on the well-known faces that are departing — or will soon be arriving at — the House of Commons
By COLIN RANDALL
OUT: apart from Chris Patten, party chairman, eight ministers lost their seats:
Mrs Lynda Chalker, 49, the Overseas Development Minister, whose tiny majority in Wallasey was easily overturned by Labour; two Treasury Ministers, Mr John Maples, 48, and Mr Francis Maude, 38, fell to Labour in Lewisham West and Warwickshire North respectively.
Defeat came in Lewisham East for Mr Colin Moynihan, 36, the junior Energy Minister who married during the campaign.
(Ironically it completed a night of happiness for another married couple.
Mrs Bridget Prentice, who ousted Mr Moynihan, will join her husband, Gordon, victor in another Tory marginal, Pendle, on the Labour benches).
Other ministerial losers were Mr David Trippier, 45, the Environment Minister squeezed out by just 120 votes in Rossendale and Darwen; Mr Michael Fallon, 39, junior Education Minister in Darlington; Mr Nicholas Bennett, 42, junior Welsh Office Minister, in Pembroke; and Mr Christopher Chope, 44, the Roads Minister, in Southampton Itchen.
Mr Dave Nellist, 39, and Mr Terry Fields, 55, expelled by the Labour Party for their Militant Tendency links, both failed in defiant stands against official candidates.
Both finished third — Mr Nellist within 1,351 of the Coventry South East winner and Mr Fields a decisive 12,000 votes behind.
IN: The new Commons stage will be graced by the actress, Miss Glenda Jackson, 55, who produced sufficiently convincing a performance in her debut as an active Labour politician to stir Hampstead and Highgate.
Savouring her 1,440-vote capture of the Tory marginal, the double Oscar winner said yesterday her acting career was over.
A rather less celebrated thespian, Miss Liz Lynne, 43, best known for voice-overs and her work as Mr Ashdown's voice trainer, follows Sir Cyril Smith into Parliament for Rochdale.
Mr Gyles Brandreth, the broadcaster, won in Chester, although he saw the Tory majority cut almost five-fold to 1,101.
Mr Sebastian Coe, 35, the double Olympic gold medallist, and world record-holding distance runner, headed the field in Falmouth and Camborne for the Tories.
The winning margin of more than 3,000, after the Liberal Democrats failed to maintain their brisk early pace, surprised even the Tory camp.
Among prominent Tory women, Mrs Edwina Currie, 45, the outspoken former junior Health Minister, rode a determined Labour challenge to retain South Derbyshire with a much-reduced majority while Lady Olga Maitland, 46, daughter of the 17th Earl of Lauderdale, former gossip columnist and tireless campaigner against nuclear disarmament, held the safe seat of Sutton and Cheam.
Election ‘92: Labour cannot win without us, says Ashdown
By Jonathan Petre, Political Staff
MR ASHDOWN blamed his party's disappointing showing on an 11th-hour migration of voters to the Tories, which he said demonstrated the long-term ‘unelectability’ of Labour.
With his party winning 20 seats — two fewer than in the previous parliament — Mr Ashdown conceded that the high hopes generated by his widely praised campaign had not been fulfilled.
He had expected to pick up ‘one or two’ extra seats.
In the eve-of-election euphoria, party aides had been confidently predicting that the Liberal Democrats could achieve a total of 29 or 30 seats.
However, despondency soon set in early yesterday morning with the losses of the seats won in by-elections — Eastbourne, Ribble Valley and Kincardine and Deeside.
After the early victories in Bath and Cheltenham, the faces of party supporters gathered at the Liberal Club in Mr Ashdown's Yeovil constituency grew progressively longer as it became clear the predicted breakthrough was not going to happen.
The party's share of vote was squeezed, dropping five points from 1987 to 18 per cent.
But senior party figures will privately be far from unhappy; a Labour victory would have destroyed their long-term goal of establishing themselves as the main opposition to the Conservatives.
With Labour facing a period of confusion, the Liberal Democrats will seek to offer ‘leadership’ to demoralised anti-Tory voters who now fear that the Conservatives cannot be beaten.
Party strategists believe that Labour will have to embrace proportional representation and form some kind of alliance with the Liberal Democrats to provide a credible challenge to the Conservatives.
With a leadership battle looming in the Labour Party in the wake of its fourth successive defeat, the issue of electoral reform may prove to be the central issue for internal debate, a factor the Liberal Democrats will exploit to the full.
Foreshadowing the pressure his party will exert on Labour, Mr Ashdown said at a news conference in the National Liberal Club in London yesterday: ‘I think they've got to get down off the fence and I believe they will.’
Speaking after delivering an emotional tribute to his party workers, he said: ‘There's a great deal of serious reflection that has to go on in the opposition parties, but I've no doubt that most of the reflection has to take place within Labour and it has to take place on the subject of PR.
‘I've have absolutely no doubt that this is an agenda which is moving in PR's direction.’
To go into the next election with two parties agreeing on PR would be ‘a very, very powerful change in British politics’.
He said the Liberal Democrats had experienced a squeeze in the last few days of the campaign as the Tory message that a vote for the Liberal Democrats would open the door to Labour hit home.
‘I believe our vote would have been very substantially higher had it not been for the fear, the concern, that people had for the prospect of a Labour government,’ Mr Ashdown said, adding that the election showed Labour could not fight the Conservatives, even in the depths of a recession.
The Liberal Democrat MPs, complete with their new faces from Bath, Cheltenham, Devon North and North Cornwall, will hold their first post-election meeting in London on Monday.
Party leaders have already begun the damage limitation process by reasserting that their primary aim in the election was to begin the process of building for the future, and aides believe the party's campaign will equip Mr Ashdown with greater status in the House of Commons.
The Liberal Democrat leader said the result had to be judged in the context of the party's six per cent standing in the opinion polls two years ago, following the Liberal/SDP merger.
Election ‘92: Just what the doctor ordered
By NEIL COLLINS
THE economy has had the tonic its doctors ordered.
As investors and the better-paid alike give thanks for their deliverance, that most essential and intangible ingredient for economic recovery — confidence — is suddenly present for the first time in three years.
The picture, measured by the statistics, has not changed significantly since the Budget a month ago, but consumers who had braced themselves for the biggest cut in living standards ever imposed at a single stroke suddenly find themselves spared.
It would be odd indeed if they did not celebrate by spending more and saving less.
This change of behaviour will be quickly felt in the economy, increasing demand for goods and services across the board.
Consumers may not have any more cash in their pockets than they did 48 hours ago, but it is their willingness to take on extra debt that drives demand for housing, cars, and other big items of spending.
A decision to borrow depends as much on confidence as on affluence.
The election result has diminished the fear of an asset ‘meltdown’ as middle-class mortgage-payers became forced sellers of their houses after Labour's confiscatory tax plans.
The decline in house prices is likely to come to a halt as vendors become more reluctant to accept distress prices.
All this will change consumers' behaviour.
The surge of inquiries for new cars after the five per cent tax cut in the Budget was subdued by election uncertainty; it should now become a flow of firm orders.
The spring entertainment of looking round the developers' show houses might even translate into more sales — the combination of better weather and a better economic climate is a formidable friend for the salesman.
Yet the economic spring will be a slow affair.
The new Conservative government cannot profess terrible shock at discovering the truth, blame the last tenants and administer some swift, foul-tasting medicine like devaluation.
The truth is that public spending is a juggernaut that is almost out of control.
The size of the problems is spelled out with embarrassing clarity in the ‘Red Book’, the publication that underpins the Budget.
The spending plans were laid down on the assumption of no recession.
By the time it arrived, and the plans were clearly far more than the government could afford, winning the election took priority over admitting to economic reality.
Spending is rising, but the revenue to pay the bills is sluggish as the number in work (and thus paying income tax) falls, and company profits (and hence corporation tax) melt away.
The result is the now-famous £28 billion Budget deficit for 1992/3, a figure which requires the government to borrow more than £100 million every working day of the current financial year.
The borrowing requirement is almost two-thirds the expected yield from VAT, and almost half that from income tax.
Yesterday the Bank of England raised around £3 billion by getting up early and cashing in on the market's victory leap.
Yet the Bank must repeat this trick another eight times in the coming year to raise the money.
Next year, before privatisation receipts, the Red Book expects the Budget deficit to be £38 billion.
The markets will provide this money, but at a cost.
Interest rates will stay high, and while the pound remains in thrall to the mark, there is no scope for more than a token cut.
Indeed, Britain's forthcoming presidency of the European Commission might be used as an opportunity for the more dirigiste members of Mr Major's staff to press for a move to the narrow band of the ERM, in which case interest rates must be locked into those of Germany.
A weak pound, a poor trade picture and a burgeoning Budget deficit might imply higher rates.
But both dearer money and emergency cuts in public spending can be averted, provided the Red Book figures gain credibility, rather than lose it, as they get older.
There is no room for error.
The public sector unions will be cross at the failure of their political favourites, and control of public sector pay has been a conspicuous government failure in the last two years.
Then there is the replacement for the community charge.
The council tax will produce just as many anomalies, revolts and howls of rage as the poll tax, each needing the balm of public money.
It is clear that local government promises to be an even worse headache for the new government than it was for the old.
Mrs Thatcher succeeded in forcing local councils to raise half their own spending money, but removing the sting from the poll tax has meant that only 15 per cent of local authority spending is raised by town halls.
As a result, a small increase in local spending will translate into a big rise in council tax.
As with the poll tax, central government is likely to be blamed.
The new Treasury team has a lot of rot to stop.
Election ‘92: Fund holding by GPs ‘will snowball’
By David Fletcher Health Services Correspondent
THE National Health Service will be permanently transformed as a result of the Conservative victory, with fund-holding family doctors and self-governing hospitals becoming the more usual form of organisation of health care over the next five years.
The election result will spare the NHS further reorganisation and will entrench the key aspects of the reforms.
The defeat of Labour was greeted with relief by health service managers, but critics said the NHS was now set on the road to privatisation and a two-tier service.
Dr Howard Freeman, a Wandsworth GP and spokesman for the National Association of Fund Holding Practices, describes the election result as excellent news for patients.
He said: ‘It means fund holding will snowball to the point where all GPs will be fund holders by the time of the next general election.’
Election ‘92: Rate of school opt-outs set to soar
By JOHN CLARE
A 10-FOLD increase in the number of schools opting out of local authority control is likely to be the most dramatic consequence of the Conservatives’ victory, writes John Clare, Education Editor.
Mr Bob Balchin, chairman of the Grant-Maintained Schools Foundation, said yesterday that he was expecting an avalanche of parental ballots after the Easter holidays.
He predicted that up to 2,000 schools would vote to join the 200 that had already chosen to run their own affairs — a development that could spell the end of council involvement in education.
On past form, secondary schools in Conservative areas will be the first to take the plunge.
Some are expected to apply for permission to reintroduce selection, joining the 150 grammar schools reprieved by Labour's defeat.
Radical changes to teacher training will be the next significant development.
Within two or three years, all post-graduate trainees will be spending 80 per cent of their time in schools learning on the job instead of listening to lectures on education theory.
Regular testing, the annual publication of league tables and four-yearly scrutinies of schools by independent teams of inspectors will further increase the pressure on teachers to raise standards by concentrating on the basics.
The reform of GCSE, placing more emphasis on terminal examinations and graded papers, will introduce greater academic rigour and more streaming by ability.
At the same time, new vocational qualifications and grants to encourage schools to develop high-quality technology courses will mean wider opportunities for pupils less academically inclined.
The experimental network of 15 city technology colleges is likely to be expanded.
A-levels will be preserved, as will the assisted places scheme, which helps to pay the independent school fees of 30,000 bright children.
In higher education, the pressure will continue on universities and polytechnics to teach more students more efficiently.
Election ‘92: To the victor, the Marks and Sparks champagne
By Robert Hardman
THE CHAMPAGNE had been pouring into Downing Street since dawn, everything from a Nebuchadnezzar of Moet & Chandon to a bottle of Marks & Spencer's own, but Mr Major touched not a drop.
He celebrated his election victory with a greasy knife and fork and a snooze: fried eggs, bacon, sausage and fried bread at 8am were followed by two hours in bed.
He had his mandate, he was truly his own boss and if he wanted to sleep, he would.
When George Bush and others rang up with congratulations, they were told to call back later.
Downing Street's double glazing must have proved invaluable as the camera corps set up camp and squabbled on the doorstep.
One man was not going to be kept waiting, though.
Party chairman Chris Patten, the tragic hero of the hour, arrived shortly after 11.00 for a lengthy post-mortem.
Outside, the world was waiting for Mr Major's victory oration and shortly after 1.00 he made for the front door.
He sent up a huge cheer in the hallway as he told the Downing Street staff: ‘I have only got one thing to say — it's nice to be back.’
The door swung open and Messrs Major and Patten stepped into a crossfire of flashbulbs and an even greater cheer from the public.
No one was expecting a gloat, although a spot of bragging might be in order.
But Mr Major's address was one of thanks, even humility.
‘I feel deeply honoured to have been given the opportunity of continuing the work I've started in the last 16 months,’ he said.
Being Prime Minister was ‘the most enormous privilege…and one I shall treasure.
I shall try and ensure that I reach the aspirations of the people and that I let no one down.’
The health service, Britain's standing in the world and the classless society were his themes, recrimination was not.
He did not mention Labour and even refrained from a sneer at the opinion pollsters.
When asked to comment on the surveys, he noted, with a grin: ‘They were wrong.
The Conservative Party was right.’
He paid tribute to his beloved secret weapon, the old plywood box: ‘It is temporarily put to one side.
As and when it's needed, out it will come.’
Before saying anything, the duo had gone across the street to meet the crowd.
Mr Major seemed to shake as many hands from Michigan, Brussels and Canada than the Home Counties.
He couldn't care, though.
At last, it was irrelevant whether they were voters or not.
Some could barely contain their emotions.
‘I'm a young man.
Thank you for giving me an opportunity for the future.
Thank you,’ trembled one worshipper.
Mr Major, unused to near-deification, managed: ‘A good one, too.’
Back inside, he spent a further two hours talking with Mr Patten before coming out, minus jacket, to see him off.
The Number 10 hallway was stuffed with presents, but Mr Major was not going to let his chairman, already seatless, leave empty-handed.
He went over to the biggest gift of them all, picked it up and plonked it, gratefully, in Mr Patten's hands.
It was the Nebuchadnezzar of Moet & Chandon.
The Prime Minister would make do with the Marks & Spencer.
Election ‘92: High on technical tricks, low on common sense
By NOEL MALCOLM
THIS was the highest of high-tech election nights.
Never before has so much technology been devoted to getting things wrong with such instantaneous precision.
For the first couple of hours at least, the world of the BBC and ITN election studios seemed like something out of science fiction — with science and fiction in roughly equal measures.
Perhaps they were just ahead of their time.
This, one felt, was what elections would be like 100 years from now.
All that would be needed to perfect the system would be to eliminate the final and most tiresome source of error — the electors.
Electrons are so much more reliable.
The designers of the BBC studio had tried hard to be futuristic.
With David Dimbleby and Peter Sissons occupying curvy command modules jutting out over a sea of computer screens and flashing lights, it seemed rather like a cross between the deck of the Starship Enterprise and an Italian disco.
It was hard to guess whether Mr Spock or Gianni de Michelis would be next on the screen.
But in such a setting Peter Snow's neon swingometer was, frankly, a disappointment.
However clever it was at irradiating all those little blue MPs as it passed over them, it still looked too much like something from a game show or a funfair at the end of the pier.
ITN's secret weapon was much more advanced, an experiment never tried before: it was a computer simulation of the chamber of the House of Commons, with John Suchet walking around inside it.
This is what is known as ‘virtual reality’.
But the experiment had gone terribly wrong.
Somehow the virtual reality had overflowed the confines of that simulated chamber, and was taking over the entire broadcast.
The first person to succumb was Roy Hattersley.
Told that the ITN exit poll was predicting 305 seats for the Tories and 294 for Labour, he sniffed: ‘In the BBC exit poll, the Labour Party is ahead.’
This was odd, since the BBC had just come up with the figures of 301 for the Tories and 298 for Labour.
Perhaps he had taken to heart Mrs Thatcher's quotation from Mark Twain: ‘Never prophesy about the future.’
Only Mr Hattersley could prophesy about the past and still get it wrong.
But something more serious was happening to reality.
As the first results came in, so too did the first signs of a strange disruption in the space-time continuum.
ITN's Alastair Stewart offered a clue when he said: ‘In Scotland there is a four-dimensional tussle.’
The real tussle was going on within the fourth dimension itself — the dimension of time — between ITN and BBC.
And ITN was winning.
At precisely 11.07 (Earth time), a message flashed up on the ITN screen: ‘Con hold Torbay.’
Over on BBC, David Dimbleby announced a minute later: ‘We're still waiting for Torbay.’
One's first thought was: how could they have missed it?
But then at 11.10, there was the result being read out, live, by the Torbay returning officer.
This inexplicable phenomenon was repeated again and again.
At 11.57 ITN reported that 12 results were now in.
At 11.58 David Dimbleby assured us on BBC: ‘A total of four results have been declared so far.’
The USS Enterprise may have been able to go into hyperspace, but the ITN news machine was in hypertime, boldly going where no returning officers had gone before.
And then, just as I was reaching for my battered copy of Einstein, Jon Snow gave away the secret.
Reporters for ITN were getting the results a few minutes ahead of the announcement, by asking the candidates.
This was a revolutionary tactic, employing something even more advanced than the most state-of-the-art technology: common sense.
If only they had possessed just a little more of that rare commodity, plus the assistance of a blind man with an abacus, it might not have taken both channels until 1.30 in the morning to start predicting an absolute majority for Mr Major.
Election ‘92: Hopefuls jockey to succeed Kinnock
By Philip Johnston, Political Correspondent
LABOUR'S shadow Cabinet began jockeying for position last night in anticipation of a leadership battle in the wake of Labour's fourth consecutive defeat.
After nine years as Opposition leader, Mr Kinnock, 50, is expected to announce on Monday that he will not put his name forward for re-election at the party's annual conference.
In a statement issued on his behalf yesterday, the Labour leader, said: ‘I am consulting with colleagues to inform them of the action which I propose to take in the wake of the election defeat.
I will make a full statement on Monday.
There will be no further communication on this matter until then.’
The speculation at Westminster last night was that Mr Kinnock was preparing the ground for a dignified exit by leaving his colleagues six months in which to mount their campaigns for a contest in the autumn.
If he were to stand down immediately, however, there would need to be a special Labour conference to choose a new leader under the electoral college system, which gives the lion's share of the vote to the trade unions.
Alternatively, Labour's rules allow for the shadow Cabinet to choose an interim leader who would take over until the annual conference chose an official replacement.
But such a move would risk triggering a bitter battle for power, further weakening the party at a moment when it is especially vulnerable.
Mr John Smith, 53, the shadow Chancellor, was seen last night as the favourite to succeed Mr Kinnock.
Opinion polls suggested throughout the campaign that Labour would have stood a better chance with the Scottish lawyer at the helm, and he has powerful support on the backbenches, especially among fellow Scots.
He could also expect the backing of Dr John Cunningham, Labour's campaign's co-ordinator, and other key shadow Cabinet figures.
But while Mr Smith campaigned well, he may in hindsight come to be blamed for Labour's catastrophic defeat.
His decision at the outset of the election campaign to disclose his Budget plans drew intense Conservative fire and reinforced Labour's reputation as a high-taxation party.
It was this impression that might have cost Labour the marginal seats — especially in London and the South — it needed to make the breakthrough.
Labour may decide — as it did when Mr Michael Foot stood down in 1983 — to skip a generation and opt for one of the new breed of classless, ‘voter-friendly’ politicians who do not carry the baggage of the party's failures in the 1970s and 1980s.
Mr Gordon Brown, 41, the trade and industry spokesman, and Mr Tony Blair, 39, employment spokesman, must be considered contenders, though they are unlikely to run against one another.
Mr John Prescott, Labour's pugnacious transport spokesman, who stood unsuccessfully against Mr Roy Hattersley for the deputy leadership two years ago, may also be in the frame.
Mr Robin Cook, who wants Labour to adopt proportional representation for Westminster elections, could also be tempted to run but he does not command strong support in the party.
Mrs Margaret Beckett, the Treasury spokesman, may decide to make a bid to become Labour's first woman leader.
Another contender mooted last night was Mr Bryan Gould, the environment spokesman.
Labour leaders were quick to praise Mr Kinnock's achievement in pulling the party back from the brink of disintegration in 1983, when it was almost beaten into third place.
But, as a two-time General Election loser — and a perceived drag on his own party's prospects — there were few who did not concede that his career at the top of British politics was at an end.
Mr Kinnock was coming to terms with his disappointment at his Ealing, London, home yesterday where he threw a barbecue party for family and close friends.
He and his wife, Glenys, received a stream of visits from neighbours and well-wishers, many bearing good luck cards and flowers.
Publicly, Mr Kinnock's closest colleagues were urging him to remain in post.
Dr Cunningham said: ‘The important thing is for Neil to stay on as leader of the party and build on the gains we have made in this election.’
Mr Blair said the leadership was not on the agenda, adding: ‘Mr Kinnock had a brilliant campaign.’
Mr Brown said: ‘Even those who are not Labour supporters recognise he grew in stature during the campaign.’
But few Labour MPs privately believed Mr Kinnock had the appetite to continue, and a number of backbenchers were prepared publicly to call for his resignation.
‘I think Neil Kinnock will probably stand down quite soon,’ said Mr George Galloway, MP for Glasgow Hillhead: ‘He has reached the summit of where he can take the British Labour Party.’
There are also growing rumblings of discontent among Labour's Left about the party's drift in recent years into what one MP described as ‘designer socialism packaged by the yuppie tendency’.
Election ‘92: Where election battles were won and lost
By Anthony King
THE TORIES owe their victory to a swing to Labour scarcely half that required to deprive them of their overall majority.
Labour scored its biggest successes in London, where it gained a dozen seats on an above-average swing of 3.4 per cent.
It gained an additional eight seats in the North West, but the swing there was only 2.0 per cent.
To have a majority Labour needed nine more gains in Cheshire and Lancashire.
In the West Midlands, Labour gained six seats on a swing of 3.1 per cent but needed three more for victory.
The biggest swings were mainly in areas — the South, the Midlands and East Anglia — that have been hard-hit by the recession.
The big surprise, apart from the overall result, came in Scotland.
Far from being squeezed, the Conservatives held Ayr, Stirling, Edinburgh Pentlands, Edinburgh West and Galloway and Upper Nithsdale.
They also gained Aberdeen South and regained Kincardine and Deeside.
To some extent Labour, despite its defeat, has ceased to be a Welsh, Scottish and North of England regional party.
Before Thursday, Labour held only three seats outside London south of a line from the Wash to the Bristol Channel.
It now holds seven.
The Daily Telegraph on Monday and Tuesday will publish the results of a post-election Gallup survey intended to help to explain the result.
LONDON & SOUTH-EAST: There were few glimmers of encouragement for Mr Kinnock as the party picked up a dozen seats in the capital and a handful outside, writes David Millward.
But there was little disguising Tory delight in what proved to be a highly effective exercise in damage limitation, despite the above-average swing towards Labour.
WALES: Tories breathed a sigh of relief as they kept six MPs in the Principality despite two former Welsh Office ministers being unseated, writes Michael Fleet.
Labour and Plaid Cymru put on seats, with the nationalists going from three to four by taking Ceredigion and Pembroke North from the Liberal Democrats.
Labour now holds 27 Welsh seats, its best total since 1970, but the Liberal Democrats were left with just one MP in their traditional stronghold of Wales, Mr Alex Carlile in Montgomery.
NORTH WEST: Labour targeted 28 seats, so Tory workers were delighted to have kept the region's losses to nine, with two gained from the Liberal Democrats, Ribble Valley and Southport, writes Nigel Bunyan.
Despite having 48 North West seats, compared with the Conservatives’ 29 and the Liberal Democrats' two, Labour was bitterly disappointed by its performance.
However, it was pleased to see the electoral annihilation of Terry Fields, former MP for Liverpool Broadgreen, who was expelled from the party over his Militant links.
The Liberal Democrats' four seats were reduced to two.
MIDLANDS: Labour did well but not well enough.
A fifth of all the party's gains were made in the West Midlands and it achieved double the national swing in the region, writes David Graves.
It achieved more than a four per cent swing in the West Midlands and won seven of its nine target seats, with only Coventry South West and Dudley West failing to fall.
In the East Midlands the Conservatives had more reason to celebrate.
They hung on to most of the key marginals, with Labour only managing to win three of the eight constituencies it hoped to capture despite increasing its vote in almost every seat.
The Liberal Democrats were pushed into third place in most seats, and failed to win their target constituencies of Hereford and Birmingham Yardley.
Both major parties now have 29 MPs each in the West Midlands.
WEST: New voices and opinions will be vying to be heard in Westminster now the Conservatives' grip on the region has been eased slightly, especially by the defeat of the Tory chairman, Mr Patten, in Bath, writes Paul Stokes.
Labour, previously with only one MP, increased its share to four and the Tories lost five seats.
Election ‘92: Ashdown seeks to put on pressure over PR
By Jonathan Petre, Political Staff
MR ASHDOWN blamed his party's disappointing showing on an 11th-hour migration of voters to the Tories, which he said demonstrated the long-term ‘unelectability’ of Labour.
With his party winning 20 seats — two fewer than in the previous parliament — Mr Ashdown conceded that the high hopes generated by his widely praised campaign had not been fulfilled.
He said he had expected to pick up ‘one or two’ extra seats.
In the eve-of-election euphoria, party aides had been confidently predicting that the Liberal Democrats could achieve a total of 29 or 30 seats.
However, despondency soon set in early yesterday morning with the losses of the seats won in by-elections — Eastbourne, Ribble Valley, and Kincardine and Deeside.
After the early victories in Bath and Cheltenham, the faces of party supporters gathered at the Liberal Club in Mr Ashdown's Yeovil constituency grew progressively longer as it became clear the predicted breakthrough was not going to happen.
The party's share of vote was squeezed, dropping five points from 1987 to 18 per cent.
But senior party figures privately will be far from unhappy; a Labour victory would have destroyed their long-term goal of establishing themselves as the main opposition to the Conservatives.
With Labour facing a period of confusion, the Liberal Democrats will seek to offer ‘leadership’ to demoralised anti-Tory voters who now fear that the Conservatives cannot be beaten.
Party strategists believe that Labour will have to embrace proportional representation and form some kind of alliance with the Liberal Democrats to provide a credible challenge to the Conservatives.
With a leadership battle looming in the Labour Party after its fourth successive defeat, electoral reform may prove to be the central issue for internal debate, a factor the Liberal Democrats will exploit to the full.
Foreshadowing the pressure that the Liberal Democrats will exert on Labour, Mr Ashdown said at a news conference in the National Liberal Club in London yesterday: ‘I think they've got to get down off the fence and I believe they will.’
Speaking after delivering an emotional tribute to his party workers, he said: ‘There's a great deal of serious reflection that has to go on in the opposition parties, but I've no doubt that most of the reflection has to take place within Labour and it has to take place on the subject of PR.
‘I've have absolutely no doubt that this is an agenda which is moving in PR's direction.’
To go into the next election with two parties agreeing on PR would be ‘a very, very powerful change in British politics’.
He said the Liberal Democrats had experienced a squeeze in the last few days of the campaign as the Tory message that a vote for the Liberal Democrats would open the door to Labour hit home.
‘I believe our vote would have been very substantially higher had it not been for the fear, the concern, that people had for the prospect of a Labour government,’ Mr Ashdown said, adding that the election showed Labour could not fight the Conservatives, even in the depths of a recession.
The Liberal Democrat MPs, complete with their new faces from Bath, Cheltenham, Devon North and North Cornwall, will hold their first post-election meeting in London on Monday.
Party leaders have already begun the damage limitation process by reasserting that their primary aim in the election was to begin the process of building for the future, and aides believe the party's campaign will equip Mr Ashdown with greater status in the House of Commons.
The Liberal Democrat leader said the result had to be judged in the context of the party's six per cent standing in the opinion polls two years ago, following the Liberal/SDP merger.
Election ‘92: Clashes may follow the congratulations
By Boris Johnson in Brussels and Our Foreign Staff
WHILE the European Commission refused to give any public reaction to the Tories’ victory, senior Brussels bureaucrats made little secret of the fact that they would have preferred a more pliable Labour government.
Masked by the formalities of the telegram sent yesterday morning to Mr Major by M Jacques Delors, EC commission president, the mood in the corridors of Brussels was less than euphoric.
‘Dear John, Congratulations on your election victory.
I look forward to continuing our fruitful and close co-operation.
Jacques Delors,’ said the message — in tones which observers yesterday took to be ironical, given the sometimes bitter sparring between London and Brussels over a wide range of policies.
If the Government sticks to anything like its pre-election stance on EC social law, it faces a serious clash with the Commission and almost every other Common Market country on April 30.
Mr Howard, or his possible successor as Employment Secretary, could be humiliatingly voted down over plans to impose a 48-hour working week and a workless Sunday.
The matter had been deferred until after the election.
For M Delors, a Labour government held out the hope of support for some of his budget proposals, which are set to cost the British taxpayer an extra £1 billion per year.
Labour would have backed his ambitious scheme to step up funding for European industry and would have been less rigid in opposing transfers of cash to the poorer regions.
With the election out of the way, the Commission has called a halt to the period in which British questions were either postponed or handled with kid gloves.
In particular, Germany can be expected to become more outspoken in its demands that Britain surrenders at least a part of its ‘budget rebate’, finally clinched by Mrs Thatcher in 1988.
That, more than anything else, will be seen in Brussels as the test of whether Mr Major intends to use his new personal mandate to take Britain to the ‘heart of Europe’.
France had been hoping for a Kinnock victory, to provide a second socialist power in one of the leading EC countries to act as an ally for President Mitterrand at summit talks.
The Left-leaning Le Monde newspaper said: ‘The beautiful social democratic dream has been dashed.’
Germany considered Mr Major's victory good news for Conservatives everywhere, said Chancellor Kohl.
He told Mr Major: ‘This is a well-deserved honour for you and a great encouragement for all of us who hold the same convictions.’
America's President Bush congratulated the Prime Minister on a ‘substantial and wonderful’ victory.
It was seen as healthy for the British-American relationship and a good omen for Mr Bush's re-election hopes this autumn.
Officials said that, had Labour won, there would have been a period of uncertainty, although Mr Kinnock's policies had changed and he was no longer the frightening prospect he seemed to the US administration a few years ago.
Russia, preoccupied with economic crisis and political in-fighting, seemed hardly to notice the Conservatives' victory.
Television and radio carried brief reports, while the the story squeezed on to the front page of the national evening newspaper Izvestia, between larger accounts of the Congress of People's Deputies, Russia's row with Ukraine and an explosion at an Armenian arms depot.
Japanese business was relieved at a result that ensures a continuing welcome mat for them in Britain.
Britain has attracted the biggest concentration of investment from Japan, and the Japanese feel comfortable with the Conservatives, even if they reserve their deepest admiration for Mrs Thatcher.
Hong Kong politicians called on Mr Major to end months of uncertainty by immediately appointing a new Governor.
Britain's last major colony has toiled under a lame duck administration since Lord Wilson's impending removal was announced at New Year.
Israel's President Herzog said Israel should scrap proportional representation and adopt the electoral system used by Britain.
Election ‘92: Can Labour ever recover from this?
The pendulum has ceased swinging
By ANTHONY KING
AN OLD maxim of British politics states that oppositions do not win elections, governments lose them.
After Thursday, a new maxim ought to state that governments do not win elections, oppositions lose them.
The election has profound implications for the functioning of British democracy.
By 1997, the probable date of the next general election, Britain will have been governed by one party for 18 years.
The pendulum has ceased swinging.
The alternation of parties in power has — at least for the time being— stopped.
The textbooks will, accordingly, have to be re-written.
The Conservatives had every reason to think they would do badly.
Quite apart from the adverse opinion polls, they were conscious that Britain was in the midst of its second deep recession in little more than a decade.
Unemployment was high, so were business failures and house repossessions.
Moreover, ministers were aware that the Government's own actions had contributed to the recession.
Mr Lawson, as Chancellor, responded to the stock market crash in October 1987 by relaxing the Government's tight monetary and fiscal policy.
Mr Major and Mr Lamont spent the months following his resignation seeking to undo the consequent inflationary damage.
It was working, but it was also hurting.
The election campaign also got off to a poor start.
The assault on Labour's tax policies appeared to miss its target; the Tories’ handling of Labour's controversial election broadcast on the health service served only to put the NHS at the forefront of the campaign; and Mr Major and his advisers seemed uncertain how he should be presented.
The campaign's apparent failures not only caused tensions in Central Office, they were reflected in the polls.
Most showed Labour ahead.
Asked who they thought had ‘campaigned most impressively’, the great majority of voters cited Labour or the Liberal Democrats.
Why, then, did the Tories win?
The search for the answer must go back to the late 1960s.
While the Labour government under Harold Wilson was still in power, the Labour Party — largely unobserved — began to move sharply to the Left.
Increasingly Left-wing trade union leaders dominated the party conference.
Traditional Labour moderates drifted away from local parties and more ideologically minded activists moved in.
Mr Tony Benn was in the ascendant.
He was also chairman of Labour's home policy committee.
The result in February 1974 was a Labour manifesto that promised ‘a fundamental and irreversible shift in the balance of power and wealth in favour of working people and their families’— and only just stopped short of promising to nationalise the country's leading 25 companies.
Voters were unimpressed by this pre-echo of what a decade later became known as ‘the longest suicide note in history’, and in 1974 Labour suffered the largest drop in any opposition party's share of the vote since Britain became a democracy.
But Labour ‘won’ on a minority vote and governed for the next five years.
Those years were disastrous from Labour's point of view.
Inflation was often in double figures.
A sterling crisis in 1976 brought in the IMF, effectively as overseers of the economy.
The government's attempt to impose a strict pay norm culminated in the so-called ‘winter of discontent’.
In 1979, the Tories under Mrs Thatcher won with the largest swing to any party in any post-war election.
Labour's response was to blame Mr James Callaghan's financial orthodoxy — it was his government that introduced cash limits on government spending — and to lurch still further to the Left.
When Mr Michael Foot became leader, activists gained greater control of the party machine.
More than 30 Labour MPs broke away to form the SDP.
In the 1983 election Labour's vote slumped to its lowest since 1918.
The 1974–79 Labour government was a failure and the party adopted an agenda of extreme socialism.
Then in the 1980s, the party also became associated in the voters' mind with extremists.
The effects were apparent in 1987.
Despite a slick campaign — a precursor of that just ended — Labour lost for the third time in a row, its vote scarcely up on that of 1983.
That was the year the excuses ran out.
In 1979, Left-wingers could blame Labour's defeat on Mr Callaghan's small ‘c’ conservatism.
In 1983 the whole party could blame the public persona of Mr Foot.
But in 1987 the party, at all levels, was forced to accept that many of Labour's traditional policies — not merely its recently acquired ones — were electorally unsaleable.
In a state of post-electoral shock, Mr Kinnock and the trade union leadership undertook a ‘thorough-going policy review’.
Out went unilateral nuclear disarmament, old-fashioned (and even new-fashioned) nationalisation and opposition to Britain's European Community membership.
In came renewed assaults on Militant, luncheons in the City and the new emphasis on competition and even markets.
The Red Rose replaced the Red Flag.
By the time the 1992 election was called — exactly a month ago today — Labour had a new leader (at least since 1983) and new policies.
The Conservatives were in trouble, yet still Labour lost.
The easy explanation points to the personality of Mr Kinnock — and it probably is true that the Labour leader's worthiness and lack of grasp of detail probably did damage the Labour cause.
However, any explanation that focuses on Mr Kinnock or the details of the recent campaign misses the essence of Labour's problem.
As the chart shows, it is not a four-week or even a five-year problem.
Labour has not succeeded in winning as much as 40 per cent of the vote in any of the past six elections.
It is nearly a quarter of a century — longer than the periods between the first and second world wars — since Labour last had the support of as many as four votes in 10.
Labour's decline coincides with — and was almost certainly caused by — its failures in government, its ever-closer ties to the union and its espousal of ‘true socialism’.
Voters were aware of what was happening.
They did not like it.
More to the point, Labour's legacy from the 1970s and 1980s lives on.
For one thing, Labour's failures and lurch to the Left broke the emotional bonds between the party and thousands of voters.
Habits were broken and loyalties eroded.
Thousands were no longer instinctively Labour.
Labour had to make its case afresh.
This decline in ‘party identification’ is compounded by Labour's virtual disappearance in many parts of England.
For instance, Labour in a good year used to hold a dozen or more seats in rural East Anglia and the northern Home Counties.
Electorally, Labour has almost ceased to exist in those counties.
The absence of a local ‘Labour culture’ further erodes habitual loyalties.
But the most serious element in Labour's legacy, from Labour's point of view, is what has become folk memories in voters' minds.
Ask voters to say what comes to mind when they think of the Labour Party and a large proportion mention, ‘the unions’, ‘strikes’, ‘the winter of discontent’, and ‘the three-day week’, even though this last event occurred under Mr Heath.
Young people are almost as likely as their elders to respond in these terms.
Political prejudices pass down the generations.
This widespread mistrust of Labour — well captured by the Tory slogan ‘You Can't Trust Labour’— almost certainly explains what happened at the end of the campaign.
As many Tory candidates and canvassers noted during the past few days, thousands of voters were shrugging their shoulders and saying: ‘We don't like you, but’(said with a sigh)‘we'll have to vote for you.
We can't let that other lot in.’
In other words, so long as the campaign was in effect a referendum on the Government's performance, Labour won.
As soon as voters came to see it as a real choice between Labour and the Conservatives, thousands of waverers who had told the polls they were going to vote Labour or Liberal Democrats, clearly decamped.
Voters'’ intentions’registered by the polls turned out not to be real intentions.
If this analysis is broadly correct, Labour's problems go deep — and to a large extent are beyond the party's control.
It can change its leaders and policies but not its path.
Moreover, there is a danger that the longer the Labour Party is out of office, the less fit for office it will seem.
Anthony King is Professor of Government at Essex University.
Election ‘92: The moment the red rose withered
By JOHN HIBBS
Dawn was breaking over Labour's headquarters in Walworth Road, south London, yesterday as Mr Kinnock stepped on to the balcony, his face ghostly white in the television arc lights and his lips drawn tightly after the longest night of his career, writes Jon Hibbs.
He was handed a microphone, but with an irony that summarised Labour's plight, it failed to work.
Straining to be heard above the traffic, his voice hoarse with too much campaigning and cracking with too much emotion, the Labour leader conceded defeat in a dignified and moving statement.
We told the truth, the country deserved better than it got, and Labour would keep striving to create a country better in spirit and soul, he said, appealing for the party to retain in defeat the unity and vitality it showed in the campaign.
‘We are and will remain the only party capable of offering an alternative government,’ said Mr Kinnock.
With his wife Glenys choking back tears beside him, he added: ‘I naturally feel a strong sense of disappointment, not so much for myself for I am fortunate, very fortunate, in my personal life.
‘But I feel dismay, sorrow, for so many people in our country who do not share this personal good fortune and who as a result of further years of Tory government will experience further disadvantage.
They deserve better than they got on April 9, 1992.’
As three cheers rang out from a few dozen loyal supporters gathered in the street below, Mr Kinnock took off his glasses, put them in his pocket, and gave a wistful smile for what might have been to the colleagues clustered around him.
Election ‘92: Recriminations begin on black Tory's defeat
By Michael Fleet
SENIOR Tories in Cheltenham were trying yesterday to persuade Mr John Taylor to remain as their prospective parliamentary candidate after his failure to become the first black Tory MP.
Mr Taylor refused to blame the race row that greeted his adoption 18 months ago for his defeat by Mr Nigel Jones, who won with a six per cent swing to the Liberal Democrats.
But several of his supporters agreed with Mr John Patten, the former Home Affairs Minister, who spoke of the ‘wicked, old-fashioned racism’ that had led to the overturning of the 4,896 Tory majority and brought shame to the spa town.
‘I am convinced that if the people of Cheltenham had been blind and not seen the colour of John Taylor's skin he would have been elected,’ said Mr Nick Leach, secretary of a Cheltenham Tory ward.
He said he would be pressing for the expulsion of several members of the local association who had privately aired derogatory views about a black candidate while publicly supporting him.
Mr Leach, who had originally opposed Mr Taylor's selection on procedural grounds, said: ‘Some of them still treat me as an ally and I know what they are saying.
There are outright racists holding Tory membership cards and I want to see them out of the party.’
Mr Chris Smith, chairman of the Cheltenham Tory political committee, said he and other leading officers wanted Mr Taylor to stand again.
‘If he is not invited to remain as our candidate I will resign.
He is a first-rate candidate and I almost feel Cheltenham does not deserve him.
There are some in this town who should be ashamed of themselves today,’ he said.
There were others in the party, however, who made it clear that Mr Taylor's path to re-adoption would not be easy.
Mr Bob Williams, another of the original ‘gang of eight’ who opposed his selection, said: ‘John Taylor is a good candidate but not for Cheltenham.
A local man would have won the seat.’
He said the fact that Mr Taylor, 39, a barrister, was black had been a factor.
‘It came across on the doorstep that people wanted a local man and the race question did come up,’ he said.
‘The executive committee of the local party was politically naive to think a coloured gentleman could hold this seat in Cheltenham.’
Mr David Bruce, a member of the local Tory association, said he did not believe Mr Taylor would be asked to stand again.
‘He did not fit into Cheltenham and he did not make the right impression,’ he said.
He denied the opposition was because Mr Taylor was black.
‘Cheltenham is not a racist town.
My local golf club has just elected a black man to the committee,’ he added.
Through all the recriminations and pledges of support, Mr Taylor maintained a dignified refusal to criticise those who had voted against him because of his colour.
‘I am determined to be a healing factor who brings people together.
I am very grateful for all those who worked so hard on my behalf and I feel more sorry for them than for myself,’ he said.
Mr Taylor would not be drawn on whether he would seek re-selection.
‘This has been quite a punishing time and some of my family have been badly hurt.
This is not the time for hasty decisions,’ he said.
Nirj Joseph Deva, 44, became Britain's first post-war Asian Tory MP when he held Brentford and Isleworth for the party.
‘It shows what the Conservative Party is really about,’ he said.
‘It is about one nation.’
Election ‘92: Why did they get it wrong?
By Anthony King
ALL THE opinion polls were seriously wide of the mark, Gallup for The Daily Telegraph fractionally less so than the others.
Gallup was the only one of Thursday's four polls to put the Tories ahead.
ICM for the Guardian showed the two main parties neck and neck.
Mori in the Times gave Labour a one-point lead.
NOP in the Independent expanded Labour's lead to three points.
All the polls underestimated the Tory share of the vote by between four and five points and overstated Labour's share by between two and six points.
The polls’ average errors were: NOP 3.7 per cent, Mori 3.3 per cent , ICM 3.0 per cent and Gallup 2.8 per cent .
It was undoubtedly the polls' worst performance in any election.
Even when in the past they have had the party order wrong, they have invariably been nearer the actual figures.
Two explanations suggest themselves.
One is that the pollsters overlooked the potential effect of differential turnout.
For example, Gallup found that among those who said they would ‘definitely’ vote the Tories' lead was two points compared with half a point among all electors.
If Tory supporters were in fact more likely to vote than those of other parties, a more refined analysis might have picked it up.
Another possibility is very late switching — which Tory canvassers thought they detected.
All the polls stopped interviewing early on Wednesday afternoon.
Many floating voters may have finally decided which party to back later on Wednesday or even on Thursday — and have voted disproportionately Tory.
An alternative possibility is less obvious — and also less likely.
It is conceivable that some electors actually misled the pollsters, not in the sense of lying deliberately but in the sense of ‘letting off steam’.
People unhappy with the Major government may have told interviewers they intended to vote for one of the opposition parties even though they had not made up their minds or were even leaning towards the Tories.
Whatever the explanation, no one knows what it is.
The pollsters, who are publicly embarrassed by episodes like these, will be conducting their own inquest over the next few weeks.
Mr Bob Worcester of Mori said it was ‘the worst result for the opinion polls since they were invented’.
Mori put Labour between one and seven points ahead during the campaign.
‘We now have to do a survey to find out if there was a late swing,’ Mr Worcester said.
Election ‘92: It wasn't meant to happen this way
By Allan Massie
THIS WAS the way it wasn't meant to happen.
It was to be the election in which the SNP made a breakthrough, the election that made Scotland a ‘Tory-free zone’ and the case for constitutional change unanswerable.
Instead it demonstrated that Scotland is profoundly conservative and still possesses a robust and apparently irreducible Conservative and Unionist vote.
The Prime Minister and his Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, gambled by fighting on the Union.
They have been rewarded by what may be the most remarkable statistic of this election: for the first time since 1966 the party in office has improved its position in Scotland.
Admittedly the rise is small — from just under 24 per cent of the vote to 25.6.
But that rise is significant.
It pushes the Tories back beyond the point at which they receive the support of a quarter of the electorate.
This is the real story of the election in Scotland.
The Unionists were going to be wiped out.
They have held all their seats and gained two.
No doubt there were other reasons besides the constitutional question.
The imminence of a Labour government may have persuaded some of the middle class to consult their interests rather than their tender consciences, and so return to the Tory fold.
That would account for the eight per cent swing from Labour to the Conservatives, which boosted Alan Stewart's majority in Eastwood to over 11,000.
It might account for the recapture of Aberdeen South and Kincardine and Deeside, for Michael Forsyth's survival in Stirling, and for the remarkable defence by Phil Gallie, a new candidate, of George Younger's 182 majority in Ayr.
It must have something to do also with the close shave that Scottish Liberal Democrat leader Malcolm Bruce was given in Gordon, where his majority was trimmed by 9,000.
There is another intriguing thought.
It has been received wisdom that Scotland is fiercely opposed to the NHS reforms, especially to hospital trusts.
At the beginning of the campaign the Secretary of State approved the application by Forresterhill Royal Infirmary in Aberdeen to become a trust; the Tories' revival in and around Aberdeen suggests this did them no damage at all.
The other trust hospital is at Ayr: enough said.
Of course, Labour has won the election in Scotland.
But everyone (except perhaps the SNP) knew it would.
Labour will be delighted to have regained Govan by ousting the SNP deputy leader Jim Sillars; but that was its only gain.
In fact, while the overall United Kingdom result shows a modest swing to Labour, in Scotland Labour's share of the vote fell by 3.5 per cent, dropping below 40 per cent for the first time since October 1974.
Labour fought a complacent and lack-lustre campaign in Scotland and deserved no better.
That cannot be said of the SNP, which campaigned with zest and intelligence, and yet finds itself with only the same three seats that it won in 1987.
It can take some comfort from the rise of 7.5 per cent in its vote and from the fact that it came second to Labour in so many seats and is at last beginning to nibble at Labour's huge majorities in the Central Belt.
But the revolt against Labour in the housing schemes, which it was promising at the start of the campaign, never materialised, and its prediction that it would win a majority of seats now looks silly.
The SNP vote is higher than at the last three elections, but it is a soft vote, and still well below the figure it reached in October 1974.
The party has scarcely advanced in the last 20 years, and its brave new policy of ‘independence in Europe’ has proved a fine slogan, but not a convincing one.
The Liberal Democrats can take no comfort from the result.
True, they have lost only one seat, but they almost lost Mr Bruce and his predecessor as Scottish leader, Sir Russell Johnston.
The vote fell by 6.2 per cent, and the party has lost all momentum.
The election will take the heat off the constitutional issue, at least for the time being.
The Conservatives will, however, be very wrong if they think that the whole constitutional thing can be forgotten.
They have talked during the election of improving the Union, and Mr Lang hinted yesterday that they would now seek some sort of consensus.
His own position has been greatly strengthened and the election has been a personal triumph for him.
If he is to build on that, he must seek means of reconciling still more Scots to the Conservative Party.
IRA suspects charged with Army murder
By Our Bonn Correspondent
Two IRA suspects, extradited to Germany from Holland, have been charged with the murder of a British Army major in Germany.
Sean Hick, 31, and Paul Hughes, 28, were accused of the murder of Major Michael Dillon-Lee in Dortmund on June 2, 1990, and the attempted murder of a guard at the British Army's Langenhagen Barracks, near Hanover, on May 4, 1990.
The indictment said that Hick and Hughes were members of an IRA terrorist unit, consisting of four to six people, ‘to which Donna Maguire and Gerard Harte as well as Desmond Grew (later shot by security forces in Northern Ireland) belonged’.
Wheelchair speed limit is dropped
By Alastair McCall
PLANS to restrict the speed of wheelchair entrants in tomorrow's London marathon have been scrapped amid fears of a mass boycott.
The decision follows pressure from disabled racers, furious they were unable to chase personal best times because of the time restriction set for safety reasons.
It was feared that wheelchair racers would arrive at roads before they had been closed off, so a fastest time limit of one hour and 50 minutes was set.
Nine of the original race entrants have personal best times below 1:50:00.
Competitors complained that the restriction would effectively turn the race into a one-mile sprint at the end when motorcycle outriders moved from their path to allow the race to proceed at its natural pace.
Mr Chris Brasher, the race chairman, cleared up the confusion last night, saying: ‘There was a misunderstanding.
They can go as fast as they want and there will be no restrictions.
I will write to competitors to clear up the situation.’
He said a letter sent to competitors informing them of the restriction and threatening possible exclusion of wheelchairs from future London marathons if the rule was not adhered to should not have been sent.
Mr Don Taylor, of the British Sports Association for the Disabled, welcomed the change of heart last night.
‘The pressure had to be made.
It's just difficult to know why the final decision was changed and where it was made in the first place.
‘But the important thing at this stage is that the right decision has been made for the athletes.
It means we can have a real race now,’ said Mr Taylor.
Mr David Holding, the leading British contender in the race, was delighted by the news.
He predicted that the course record was likely to be broken with a time inside one hour and 50 minutes.
‘It's great and it has opened up the race again,’ said Mr Holding, 23.
‘Now anybody who feels good on the day can go out and do their best.’
The announcement lifts the threat of a boycott of the event from all of the British entrants, which was to have been considered by the British Wheelchair Racing Association today.
The marathon will result in the closure of a large number of London streets on Sunday.
Tower Bridge, Victoria Embankment, Parliament Square, Lambeth Palace Road, Commercial Road and dozens of other small roads will be closed between 8.55am and 3pm.
Solicitor denies fondling secretary
By ALASTAIR MCCALL
A LAWYER from a London legal firm yesterday denied touching a secretary's breasts at a Christmas party at which he ate a chocolate penis covered with cream, writes Alastair McCall.
Mr Anthony Hamnett, 48, a trainee solicitor at the time with Nabarro Nathanson, admitted eating the penis under pressure from secretaries during the lunch held in a Chelsea restaurant just before Christmas 1990.
But he denies harassing Miss Donna Van Den Berghen, 21, by putting his arm around her, touching her breasts and giving her a bear hug in front of colleagues.
Miss Van Den Berghen, of Hillingdon, west London, claimed sexual discrimination at a south London tribunal yesterday against Nabarro Nathanson, secretarial agency Eagle Place Services, and Mr Hamnett, after being dismissed from her job three months after the lunch.
Mr Hamnett, of Hassocks, Sussex, said chocolate penises had been given as Christmas gifts by departmental secretaries during the lunch.
One had asked a waiter to pour cream on one of them.
‘The secretaries were determined that somebody at least should make use of them, and there was much pressure put on me to do so.
It got to the stage where there was no way I could back out,’ he said.
He denied fondling Miss Van Den Berghen at the party and in a taxi later.
The hearing was adjourned to allow all parties to submit written statements by April 24.
Farmer killed by gun hidden in camouflaged box
By Paul Stokes
DETECTIVES are still trying to unravel the mystery surrounding the death of a wealthy farmer shot dead with a sophisticated camouflaged gun.
Mr Peter Jowett, 43, was found face down in a copse on his 1,000-acre Wiltshire estate on Wednesday night with a .38 bullet lodged in the centre of his back.
His body was still warm when it was discovered by police after his farm manager had reported him missing.
A trail of blood led to a two-foot high by 18-inch timber box 20 yards away, perched just off the ground on tiny stilts and carefully camouflaged with twigs and branches.
Inside the box, with just the top of the barrel showing, was a single-barrelled shotgun.
At the back of the box was a battery-operated firing mechanism and a wire led from the box into the copse, where Mr Jowett's body was found.
Police believe the weapon may have been a standard cartridge shotgun, specially adapted to fire bullets.
Det Chief Insp Dave Sinclair, of Wiltshire CID, said: ‘He could have been shot at close range to the device and staggered 20 yards away before collapsing.’
And Mr Peter Sandall, a Wiltshire police spokesman, said: ‘After examining the evidence we must consider the possibility that the injuries to Mr Jowett could have been caused accidentally.’
He said it was not clear whether the device was intended for an animal or a person’.
‘We are still treating this as a murder investigation,’ he added.
Mr Jowett, who had a shotgun licence and took part in pheasant shooting, had been involved in a bizarre knife attack at his home four months earlier.
He needed micro-surgery after being stabbed in the groin and chest when he tackled a masked intruder.
He told police his attacker had broken in by levering beading from a window of his farmhouse.
Telephone lines to the property were also said to have been cut.
Mr Sinclair said preliminary inquiries were started into the incident, but were stopped at Mr Jowett's request.
Yesterday police were still combing the area for any similar devices which may have been hidden and for further clues.
A post-mortem examination revealed two shotgun wounds in Mr Jowett's back.
After spending the evening lambing, he had driven a few hundred yards to the copse from his home nearby at New Manor Farm, Winterslow, Wilts, where he lived with his Australian-born wife, Lavinia, 39, seven-year-old son and five-year-old daughter.
His wife raised the alarm at 10.20pm and Mr Brian Ealey, the farm manager, called police.
Police name game reserve death suspect
By Neil Darbyshire and Jenny Rees
GAMBIAN police have named a man they want to question about the murder of a British conservation worker who was killed in a game reserve in December.
Omar Kujabi, a Senegalese labourer and amateur wrestler, has not been seen at the Abuko reserve, near Banjul, since the body of Mrs Penelope Hiscocks, 42, was found in the grounds of a house where she had been staying.
She had been attacked with a machete.
Her left hand had been cut off, probably as she defended herself, and her head had been severed.
Police say they are anxious to trace Kujabi after an inquest returned a verdict of death by unnatural causes.
Kujabi is related to a watchman working at the house, owned by Mr Eddie Brewer, 72, an ecologist and former British colonial service official.
The watchman is said to have loaned a machete to Kujabi on the day of Mrs Hiscocks's death.
Mrs Hiscocks, a divorcee, had been looking after a 650-acre wildlife sanctuary at Abuko for Mr Brewer, while he was in the UK for medical treatment.
Rumours circulating among Gambian expatriates have spoken of a witchcraft connection, although the motive is thought to be robbery.
Mr Brewer, said: ‘I think the man attacked her to try to get the keys to the house.
But the degree of violence is hard to explain.’
Bare-footed rapist jailed for 14 years
By Paul Stokes
A RAPIST who was captured after he left bare footprints at the scene of the crime was jailed for 14 years at Bristol Crown Court yesterday.
Stephen Tomkinson, 32, lay in wait in his 46-year-old victim's bathroom in Leigh Woods, Bristol, wearing only a pair of goalkeeper's gloves.
He twisted a bathrobe belt around her neck and forced her on to a bed before raping her twice in July 1991.
Tomkinson, of Bishopston, Bristol, was unanimously convicted of both rapes.
Sentencing him, Mr Justice French said: ‘This was a planned offence.
You violated not only the lady but her home in which she was entitled to expect she would be safe.
‘You subjected her to the sight of yourself indecently exposing yourself by way of a prelude to what you later did,’ added the judge.
Tomkinson had a previous conviction for exposing himself to a woman in 1985 and was given probation in 1990 for assault.
He became a suspect for the double rape because he was the goalkeeper for a local amateur soccer team and police were able to match his footprints to those found on a floor in his victim's house.
Farm ‘champagne’ recipe challenged
By A J McIlroy
CLAIMS that a non-alcoholic drink being sold by a farmer was the elderflower champagne ‘grandmother used to make’ were challenged in the High Court yesterday.
The assertion, by Mr Guy Woodall, 37, of Leatherhead, Surrey, that his sparkling British drink was the 400-year-old tradition known as elderflower champagne did not stand up to analysis, said counsel Mr Nicolas Bragge.
Mr Bragge was applying for an injunction on behalf of French champagne producers Taittinger and the champagne growers' association, to prevent Mr Woodall and his partner, Mr Ray Bevan, 39, selling their product in bottles labelled ‘champagne’.
Mr Bragge said that Mr Woodall had maintained that, because the elderflower champagne was a British tradition, using ‘elderflower champagne’ on their labels was perfectly proper.
The application was for an injunction to stop Mr Woodall and his partner using the name ‘champagne’, pending a full trial hearing.
Deputy Judge Robert Reid, QC, said he would give his ruling on the application on Wednesday.
International: Hero's welcome for injured Arafat
By Our Tunis Correspondent
Yasser Arafat, Palestine Liberation Organisation chairman, had a hero's welcome in Tunis yesterday.
He was greeted by President Ben Ali and the Tunisian Cabinet on his arrival from Libya, where his plane crashed on Tuesday.
An Arab ambassador said he was bruised, looked badly shaken and needed at least two weeks to recover.
Otherwise, he was his usual theatrical self.
International: Bosnia's leader appeals for help from EC
By Michael Montgomery in Sarajevo
THE President of Bosnia-Hercegovina, Mr Alija Izetbegovic, appealed yesterday for international intervention to halt the conflict consuming his country after Serbian rebels virtually blockaded the capital, Sarajevo, and continued a drive into the republic.
‘I call on the international community, the UN Security Council, the EC and all governments to use their powers to prevent the aggression against Bosnia and Hercegovina,’ Mr Izetbegovic said in a TV and radio address.
Mr Izetbegovic, a Muslim, also called on President Milosevic of Serbia to ‘stop the terror in Bosnia’ by ordering the removal of all paramilitary groups that had invaded his republic and clashed with forces loyal to Bosnia.
He renewed an appeal to the Serbian-dominated Yugoslav army to prevent further massacres in Bosnia, where hundreds of civilians have been killed in the past month.
His call coincided, however, with the mobilisation in Serbia of reservists, suggesting that the Yugoslav army may be on the verge of intervention in the newly independent Bosnia.
The policy of drafting reservists was put into abeyance when the conflict in Croatia eased, and the new call-up has brought hundreds of angry men on to the streets insisting they will not fight.
Efforts to secure a ceasefire have so far failed to halt the clashes, which began when Serb nationalists launched an offensive to carve out a separate state which would be attached to a truncated Yugoslavia after Bosnia won international recognition.
Mr Izetbegovic said Serbian-based paramilitaries who overran the eastern town of Zvornik on Thursday were threatening to kill 3,000 Muslims sheltering in a fortress.
The offensive has driven the majority Muslim population out of town and nearly 10,000 are crammed into a village just to the south, according to UN officials.
Mr Izetbegovic delivered the appeal for intervention as Muslim defenders of the town of Visegrad, 75 miles south of Zvornik, threatened to blow up a dam on the Drina river and flood a large lake if they sighted Serbian territorial defence members, Tanjug news agency reported.
‘We will flood Serbia if we have to,’ said Mr Murat Sabanovic, head of the town's crisis council.
‘We have no other means with which to defend ourselves and our families.’
Serbian mortar and artillery attacks on Visegrad and Foca began on Thursday after the capture of Zvornik.
Serbian fighters poised in the hills to the south and east of Sarajevo loosed a fresh mortar and machinegun attack on the city early yesterday, briefly knocking out the main television transmitter, forcing Sarajevo Television to switch to emergency power.
Gunfire also struck a hotel lodging UN peace-keeping troops operating in neighbouring Croatia.
Interior ministry officials yesterday admitted that all main roads into Sarajevo were blocked after rebels had cut off the main northern route.
Supplies of milk, meat and other necessities are running low.
Senhor Jose Cutileiro of Portugal, EC special envoy, arrived in Sarajevo yesterday to reconvene talks between the warring parties.
International: Ghost town celebrates day one of ‘liberation’
By Philip Sherwell in Zvornik
THE celebrations were as absent as the residents yesterday in the ‘Free Town’ of Zvornik on the Bosnian-Serbian border.
In the vocabulary of Balkan propaganda, Serbian nationalists opposed to this week's recognition of Bosnia-Hercegovina have ‘liberated’ the town from the grip of Muslim extremists.
The so-called ‘Green Berets’ had, they insisted, seized control of Zvornik and looted Serbian homes and shops.
The allegations were unverifiable, but what was clear was that the mixed population was not around to enjoy day one of its newly-bestowed freedom.
The local Serbs have streamed out of Bosnia, across the River Drina, to escape the fighting, while thousands of their former Muslim neighbours are reportedly holed up with the Green Beret forces in an old hill fortress.
In the ghost town below, pock-marked buildings bear the scars of this week's bitter clashes.
Inhabitants of the worst-hit tower blocks fled with such haste that their washing is still hanging out.
Artillery shelling rings around the abandoned old quarter as Serbian forces fight with Muslims for control of the surrounding hills.
In Zvornik's empty streets, a ragbag collection of Serbian fighters edgily dash from doorway to doorway to avoid sniper fire.
The only civilian is a confused old woman wandering around with her life's possessions in two plastic bags, and even she has her documents checked.
Although the Serbian-dominated federal Yugoslav army claims to have entered Zvornik to restore order, a few soldiers lounging around on two immobile tanks were its only evident presence yesterday.
The real power lies with warlords such as Arkan, leader of the battle-hardened ‘Tigers’, who have turned their attentions to northern Bosnia after ‘liberating’ towns in Croatia with such ruthless efficiency.
At the local police station it was the Serbian flag, not the federal colours, that was hoisted and saluted before the cameras of state-run Belgrade television.
Zvornik, sitting astride the main road from Belgrade to Sarajevo, will play a linchpin role in the campaign to join together Serbian pieces of the ethnic jigsaw of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
If the Tigers can clear other Muslim communities to the south, they will have established a safe corridor between the Serbian and the Bosnian capitals.
International: Yeltsin wins more time for reforms
By John Kampfner in Moscow
PRESIDENT Yeltsin neutralised the Russian opposition yesterday and gave his government several months' leeway to press ahead with radical economic reforms.
He told the Congress of People's Deputies that, while he would make a few personnel changes in his Cabinet, he would not give up his position as Prime Minister until he was sure the reforms had become irreversible.
In a confident speech, Mr Yeltsin told deputies he would add as many as five ‘experienced, authoritative industrialists and managers’ to his team, but warned them that wholesale changes would lead to ‘major destabilisation in our society’.
‘I will not do that,’ he declared.
Russia's highest legislature put off until today a decision on whether to introduce a resolution asking Mr Yeltsin to nominate a new Prime Minister.
It seemed likely last night that the various opposition groups had used up all their ammunition.
For Mr Yeltsin, who had been under great pressure all week, it was a victory achieved with the smallest of concessions — a vague promise to loosen monetary controls and grant extra help to Russia's poorest.
It will allow him and Mr Yegor Gaidar, First Deputy Prime Minister and the architect of the reforms, to press ahead concertedly over the summer.
The next stage in the economic shock therapy will be freeing energy prices, which Mr Yeltsin has postponed several times for fear of a popular outcry.
The most likely concession to economic conservatives will be the appointment of a Deputy Prime Minister one rung below Mr Gaidar to look after industry.
The two favourites are Mr Arkady Volsky, once touted as a potential Prime Minister under Mikhail Gorbachev, and Mr Vladimir Shumeiko, deputy Speaker of Parliament and an interventionist Mr Gaidar has indicated he would tolerate.
Mr Yeltsin also managed to push through parliamentary ratification of his Federation Treaty that brings under one roof 18 of the 20 ethnic republics of the Russian Federation and all the smaller regions.
The accord, signed 10 days ago, is aimed at preventing the sort of conflicts that led to the break-up of the Soviet Union from being repeated within Russia.
Some deputies accused it of giving away too many powers to the regions.
But it was passed by 848 votes to 10.
The victories were a measure of Mr Yeltsin's grip on Russian politics.
No matter how fiercely they attack him and his government — one deputy called for his impeachment yesterday — the conservatives have failed to mobilise their forces effectively.
Yeltsin supporters, who formed a ‘creative coalition’ within the chamber, have ensured that the emergency powers to rule by decree for a year, which Congress bestowed on the President last autumn, remain wholly intact.
The liberals believe they are under-represented in the Congress, which was elected two years ago under the old Soviet system.
They have given warning that they could call — and win — a referendum on dissolving the body and on a constitution to consolidate Mr Yeltsin's powers.
International: Air force urged to bomb volcano
By Our Rome Correspondent
Italy's air force was told yesterday that unless it bombed fast moving lava flows pouring from Mount Etna to divert their course, the 6,500 people living at the foot of Europe's highest volcano could face destruction.
Experts said lava, which since December has been flowing out of the eastern Sicily volcano, had now increased in speed to a rate of 1.5 miles a day.
International: New ‘Berlin Wall’ splits twin city
By Matthias Lufkens in Valga-Valka
IN THE Estonian-Latvian twin city of Valga-Valka, nobody is really clear about who started building the new ‘Berlin Wall’ that now divides it.
‘It's the Estonians,’ said the Latvian border guard, pointing towards his counterparts 20 yards away.
At the Estonian barrier, the duty officer said: ‘We all did.’
Most of the former Soviet republics have started to erect customs posts on their borders; and after more than 50 years of peaceful co-existence, the twin cities are again divided by a border.
All streets going from Valga (Estonia) to Valka (Latvia) are closed by a 6ft fence and inhabitants have to show a pass at the three border posts in the city centre.
The customs officials take their jobs very seriously.
Every car is double checked.
‘We cannot allow the export of meat except for personal consumption,’ said Mr Laimonis Dremanis, a Latvian volunteer.
‘The border is absurd,’ said Mr Erich Hark, an Estonian electrician, voicing the general feeling of the 25,766 inhabitants on both sides.
For 400 years the city has been divided between Estonians and Latvians, but today Russian speakers account for about 40 per cent of the population.
They have been torn apart by the border.
Mr Viktor Dimitriev, 27, registered in Valka, leaps the Frog river to go to work at the train depot in Valga.
Olga, his wife, is registered in Estonia but works in the children's cafe on the Latvian side.
Mr Ainis Bormanis, mayor of Valka, said he would ‘like to have the town as a kind of free economic zone without inner city customs’.
But he added: ‘I'm afraid we are ahead of our time.’
‘I would love to see only flowers marking the geographical border across the city,’ said Mrs Kalina Morvina, mayor of Valga.
‘Then we could employ all the men guarding the border in watering the flowers.’
International: Brown threat to sue over drugs claim
By Our Washington Staff
Democratic presidential candidate Jerry Brown has threatened to sue an American television network over reports that, while Governor of California, he threw parties where marijuana and cocaine where used.
Four of Mr Brown's police protection squad told ABC News they saw drug use at his Los Angeles home.
Two appeared on television wearing hoods, while the faces of the others were obscured.
Denying the report, Mr Brown said: ‘These anonymous accusers have waited 15 years to tell these lies.
One can only speculate as to who put them up to it.’
International: Reformers on course to win Iranian poll
By Anton La Guardia in Teheran
IRAN'S leaders declared yesterday's general election a success and a ‘practical response to the enemies of Islam’, despite signs of voter apathy and disenchantment with the political system.
Observers said they expected pro-reform supporters of President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani to win 70 per cent of the 270 seats.
In Teheran's poor southern suburbs, which supposedly form the bedrock of support for the Islamic revolution, many young people said they would not be voting.
This disillusionment among the young must be worrying for the Iranian regime, which is one of the few countries in the world with a minimum voting age of only 15.
Of those who did go to the 30,000 polling booths, set up in mosques and schools, few expressed enthusiasm about the current leaders.
There were no reports of turn-out estimates, but voting appeared slow.
Privately, senior officials said no more than eight million of the 30 million voters had turned out.
A large turn-out would ‘punch the mouths of idle prattlers and enemies of Islam and Muslims’, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, successor to the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini as Iran's spiritual guide, told reporters as he voted.
Beneath the large golden dome and towering minarets of his shrine in the dusty plain outside Teheran, Ayatollah Khomeini still dominates the political life of Iran three years after his death.
His son, Ahmad, called on successful candidates to ‘follow the ideas of the late Imam Khomeini.
They should consider their prime responsibility as making all efforts to export the revolution’.
But the depth of respect and affection felt for the late leader of the Islamic revolution does not extend to his successors, who have broken into two loose camps of so-called ‘radicals’ and ‘pragmatists’.
They have presented separate lists of candidates to the 270-seat Majlis, or parliament, which until now has been dominated by radicals.
The pragmatists are led by Mr Rafsanjani, who has steadily extended his control over the chaotic government structure.
They want to continue a gradual opening to the West, chiefly to obtain the finance and technology needed to rebuild the economy.
The process has also involved a degree of cautious political liberalisation to attract back Iranian exiles and their funds.
But it is uncertain how far Mr Rafsanjani is willing to roll back the Islamic revolution.
The radicals say the pragmatists' policies are a betrayal of Khomeini's legacy and that the move away from state control of the economy will harm the poor.
However, many of the very same down-trodden, whom Khomeini liked to call the ‘shoeless’, are sceptical about their leaders' empty promises.
‘What is the point of voting?’ asked one 24-year-old student in south Teheran.
‘I look at all these candidates and don't find any who are competent.
Because of the policies of this regime, such as the unreasonable animosity towards others and the violations of human rights, all the intelligent people have gone away.’
Another passer-by, a 21-year-old salesman, said: ‘I only voted because I want to get married and I don't want any problems.’
In a country with no official opinion polls, street conversations suggest the pragmatists will win a majority, mainly because voters hope the reforms will help to improve living standards and curb Iran's high inflation.
A victory for the pragmatists may help them to speed up the reforms.
But this would also rob Mr Rafsanjani of the useful excuse that the country's economic problems are caused in part by obstruction from the radicals.
Only hours before polls closed late yesterday afternoon, Mr Rafsanjani urged voters not to boycott the election.
He said that even if voters did not want to help any candidate, they should still go to the polling station to register their grievances.
He praised the smooth running of the election, and denied reports that people had been forced to cast their ballots.
Thirty seats were being contested in Teheran.
Voting is taking place over two rounds, with a second round likely in about a month.
First results are expected today.
International: Iraq helps to destroy nuclear weapons complex
By Alan Philps Diplomatic Correspondent
IRAQ is co-operating with United Nations efforts to destroy the heart of its secret nuclear weapons building programme at Al Atheer, 45 miles south-west of Baghdad.
Its engineers dismantled a partly-built bunker designed for explosives testing, the International Atomic Energy Authority said in Vienna yesterday.
The UN has targeted eight of 90 buildings at Al Atheer, a multi-million pound complex thought to be the centre of President Saddam Hussein's attempt at a nuclear bomb.
The 26 UN inspectors, headed by Mr Dimitri Perricos, do not have the manpower to destroy all the buildings, but they are impressed with the level of co-operation from Iraq's engineers.
He said 90 per cent of the equipment at Al Atheer had been destroyed this week, though the buildings and laboratories, some with three-foot-thick walls, were built to resist attack.
They were scarcely damaged when hit by bombers during the Gulf war.
At one massive bunker, two test charges laid at a corner made little impression on the walls.
It was agreed that the Iraqis should fill the bunker with concrete as a cheaper alternative to blowing it up.
Iraq had previously refused to destroy the complex, arguing that it served civilian purposes.
Only after barely-veiled threats of a resumption of air strikes did Baghdad agree to co-operate.
Much of the centre, which has metallurgical equipment capable of working with uranium, was incomplete.
However, specialists have no doubt it was built to produce a nuclear bomb.
The UN is charged with destroying all of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction — nuclear, chemical and biological arms as well as ballistic missiles and their associated technology.
Despite Saddam's co-operation on the nuclear issue, there is no sign that Iraq has given up its policy of testing the West's determination to enforce the UN's ceasefire terms.
The United States, Britain and France are preparing a strongly worded warning to Iraq to ground its aircraft and pull back anti-aircraft missile batteries that have been moved to the north, where allied patrol aircraft protect the Kurds.
The Pentagon is particulary worried that Iraqi anti-aircraft radar has been tracking allied planes.
The warning is likely to be delivered though diplomatic channels in New York, probably early next week, though the issue was raised when US officers met their Iraqi counterparts in Kurdistan.
He made up his mind — and won
By CHARLES MOORE
WHEN you learn to ride a bicycle, you start with a feeling of hopeless bafflement.
How can I ever make that thing stay upright? you ask yourself.
You scramble on to it and it topples over; you feel you will never learn the strange, simple secret.
But you keep trying, and one day, quite suddenly, you find you can do it.
You weave uncertainly along the road at first, but soon you pick up speed and rush smoothly forward, and your heart leaps with joy at the mastery of the thing.
That is what the campaign was like for John Major.
Ever since he became leader, he knew that the election was the great test, and a test for which his curiously sheltered political career had little prepared him.
Three or four weeks ago, everyone watched the first wobbles of his journey with a critical eye, so critical, in fact, that they did not notice when he picked up speed later.
In the last days, when the press concentrated on Mr Kinnock's hubristic progress round the land, few noticed Mr Major's growing confidence.
He came to believe that he could do it.
Now he knows that he can.
The success did not come because Mr Major mastered technique.
Indeed, his technical electioneering skills remained rather weak.
In his public speeches, he never emphasises the right words.
In his interviews, he plays too much off the back foot, letting the Dimblebys and Waldens bully him.
He lacks the star quality which makes its possessor the automatic focus of attention.
No, success came because Mr Major discovered what he believed, and that made him feel free at last.
It has been a moving process to watch.
The man schooled to regard policy questions in technical terms and to see controversial matters of principle in terms of party management has been learning that he is a Tory.
In doing so, he had to jettison most of what those close to him had been telling him for the past 16 months.
The overwhelming desire of the Chris Pattens and Sarah Hoggs and Michael Heseltines was to get away from what they saw as the incubus of Mrs Thatcher.
Only thus, they believed, could the election be won.
That worked, temporarily at least, with the replacement of the poll tax, but in other areas it failed.
It failed for the simple reason that no coherent principles or policies came forward to replace the old ones.
Mr Patten's ideas of European Christian democracy and social markets did not catch fire.
The undeniable need to establish a personality clear of the shadow of Mrs Thatcher was confounded with the mistaken urge to repudiate what she stood for.
The result was that the Conservative Party suffered an identity crisis.
In the move to the middle ground of politics, it risked becoming indistinguishable from its rivals, except that it was tarnished with holding office for so long.
The tone was apologetic.
The manifesto was a slab of bureaucratic dough.
Just in time, Mr Major rescued himself.
Calling in Mrs Thatcher to amplify his own quiet words, he started to say things which explained why his party was different from the others.
He defied several debilitating orthodoxies of the centre.
Don't talk about schools and health, the centre says, those issues belong to Labour.
But he did, and explained why the Tory reforms attended to patient and parent whereas the Labour ones only pandered to the producer.
The exit polls suggest that people thought about this proposition, and began to accept it.
He resisted the frightened calls to throw sops of self-government to the Scots, and was rewarded with an increase in seats and votes in Scotland which no one had dared imagine.
Michael Forsyth held Stirling and Chris Patten lost Bath.
That does not fit in with any orthodoxy.
Mr Major defied the wise saw which says that the British people are happy to pay more tax in order to get better public services, and played the issue of Labour's higher taxes for all it was worth: it was worth the difference between an overall majority of 21 and a hung Parliament.
He stopped the bland, pre-Maastricht talk about partnership in Europe, and warned against the slide towards federalism.
He even played what some call the ‘race card’, and others see as a proper concern for social cohesion.
There was not a single soft, liberal policy for which he picked up votes.
The only softness was in the man's agreeable personality, but his strong views fitted with that fine.
Everyone knew he was nice.
Now they saw that he was not merely nice: he was sincere.
Sincerity is a form of toughness.
Today, this toughened man is master in his own house.
For the first time he has the respect of all sections of his party.
He has won the Tories a fourth consecutive term — unprecedented, won at the height of a recession — unprecedented too, and delivered the coup de grace to socialism.
But he is not master of the weather that howls outside.
Mr Major leads a country with a debt-driven recession.
The debt continues, because real short-term interest rates are six and a half per cent(they are as good as zero in the United States).
And any ‘green shoots of recovery’ may well be choked by the tares of something close to a world slump.
As Mr Major got back, the Japanese stock market fell down and all the Japanese banks lost their triple A credit rating.
Germany is in no better case.
We know from the Budget that the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement is almost out of control.
We know that unemployment will rise.
So two things have to happen very quickly.
There have to be big spending cuts and bigger interest rate cuts, the latter compensating for the former.
That means political unpopularity for the first and the wrath of the ERM for the second.
The cuts dictate the choice of ministers.
Mr Michael Heseltine is known to want the Department of Trade and Industry.
At present its budget is a modest billion pounds.
How can the money be found for Mr Heseltine's interventionist policies at such a moment?
Isn't Mr Peter Lilley's enthusiastic parsimony rather more in tune with the tenor of the times?
This will probably be one of the most unglamorous, thankless years in modern British politics.
Unfortunately, it needs to be.
The ERM is just the sort of orthodoxy from which Mr Major has learnt he can escape.
It is a subset of the supreme orthodoxy of ‘Europe’.
But economic and political facts are discrediting ‘Europe’, if by that is meant the subsuming of national economies and currencies and handing Brussels the supreme power.
Soon someone will have to say boo to this goose fattened up for foie gras, and it ought to be someone British.
Being tied to the Deutschemark at present is like being Hector dragged round the walls of Troy.
The situation is so serious that for any government to do what is necessary, it will have to be hated.
This will be a new experience for Mr Major, the last and hardest of his political initiation rites.
But one feels now that the man who stood on the soapbox and who made himself a target for eggs is ready for it.
Today, however, Mr Major is liked.
It was touching to watch him cross the road to the crowds in Downing Street yesterday to talk quietly to them.
The scene was so friendly, but so restrained, and so English.
The nervous man who 16 months ago called for ‘a country at ease with itself’ seemed at last to have achieved that ease in his own mind.
He deserved it.
Letter to the Editor: Never canvassed
SIR — I have now lived in the same place through nine general elections without once seeing, let alone being accosted by, a parliamentary candidate.
Is this a record and by what percentage would you estimate it increases the value of my dwelling?
TIM GODFREY London SW11
Letter to the Editor: Proof given of Tito's efforts
SIR — Jean Howard (letter, April 8) may have given the impression to your readers that her knowledge of Ultra material ‘never released to the public’ proves her theory about the military insignificance of Tito and the Partisans.
They would do better to read the chapter ‘Developments in Yugoslavia’ in volume iii of Prof Hinsley's official history of British intelligence, part one, for a refutation of the claim that Tito did not fight the Germans, supported by copious and conclusive quotations from Ultra
To take one illustration out of many.
On Oct. 20 1943 II SS Panzer Corps upgraded to Army status for the operation, attacked the Partisans in the Zagreb-Ljubijana area (where Mihailovic never operated) with five full divisions, elements of five other divisions and some smaller formations.
About the same time, V SS Mountain Corps carried out an offensive in the Sarajevo area.
By Nov. 1 1943 the German C-in-C Southeast had concluded ‘that Tito's forces had to be treated as a full military threat and not merely as insurgents and that it was more important to defeat them than to prepare against the less likely threat of an Allied landing’.
Leading Article: Three cheers for democracy
RELIEF and gratitude will have been the principal sensations to move most readers of The Daily Telegraph yesterday.
A part of this is personal: the shadow of Labour's punitive taxation plans has been lifted from thousands of households.
But there is also a sense of collective satisfaction.
If the British people had voted on Thursday for a Labour government, they would have run counter to the swing away from socialist prescriptions across the whole of the rest of Europe; more, they would have signalled the rejection of everything that has been so painfully achieved since 1979 in making Britain a competitive modern society founded upon the doctrine of personal responsibility and enterprise.
As it is, the voters have confounded the pollsters by granting John Major a clear mandate, which should enable him to lead a reforming Conservative government until 1997.
No one doubts the seriousness of the problems Mr Major must address, the recession foremost among them.
It may be mid-1993 before a major economic upturn takes place.
One of the first duties of the new Tory government is likely to be the imposition of a harsh round of public spending cuts.
But the clarity of the election result will provide a vital spur to business confidence.
Reform of the National Health Service and the education system should become much easier, now that nobody can entertain a realistic prospect of its reversal.
Britain will be able to approach the European Community, and the critical period of our own presidency later this year, with determination to defend British interests and turn back the follies of the Euro-federalists, without the need for a constant backward eye upon political threats and divisions at home.
We shall be spared Labour's radical and dangerous plans for constitutional reforms, although if the Tories are wise they will display a new sensitivity and imagination in their government of Scotland.
For a host of reasons, the nation today has much for which to be thankful.
But beyond gratitude, there is some bewilderment.
How has it happened, this overthrow of the apparent will of the electorate to evict the Tories, exhibited by month after month of opinion polls?
It could be that Mr Major owes a debt to the pollsters for his victory.
Survey after survey, purporting to display a swing to Labour which would instal Mr Kinnock in Downing Street, must have helped to focus many uncertain minds.
John Major made a perceptive observation a few days ago when he declared that he found many people to be cross, rather than angry, about the recession.
This is not trifling with semantics; many people were indeed displeased with the Government, and may have sought to frighten their rulers by telling opinion pollsters that they would vote against the Conservatives.
But, in the privacy of the polling booth, cooler and more hard-headed calculations came into play.
It was not merely that many people were dismayed by Labour's tax plans: they also felt a wider and deeper sense of mistrust, that Labour's numbers on revenue and spending simply did not add up.
They liked Mr Major, whose performance visibly improved as his public assurance grew in the later stages of the campaign.
They remained uneasy and mistrustful of Mr Kinnock.
In a reverse image of Mr Major's public appearances, as the Labour leader's belief in victory grew in the last days, so his studied calm and restraint slipped away, and a fatal hint of the ‘cocky Welsh boyo’ marked his public performances.
But all these observations remain surmise.
The only certainty is that the eclipse of the pollsters, and — by implication — all of us in the media who focus so much attention upon their findings, is a happy outcome for democracy.
It emphasises the huge element of mystery and uncertainty in voters' behaviour, which makes them spurn the most fluent campaigns and ignore the gaffes and trifles which dominate television news bulletins and front pages.
Not for the first time, the British voter has confounded the pundits and returned a shrewd, sensible verdict which should renew our respect for his discernment.
Finally, to the unquestioned hero of the hour, the Prime Minister Mr John Major.
In the first days of the campaign, even many loyal Tories were dismayed by his stiffness on the press conference platform, the lack of rhetorical fire in his speeches on the campaign trail.
Mr Major on the stump was exactly what Mr Major is in Downing Street, in a television studio, in private conversation: calm, prudent, reasonable, sympathetic, friendly, not easily moved to public passion.
The question was asked: we know that he is a sound and effective Prime Minister; but is he also a leader who can save the Conservative Party from the fate that undoubtedly awaited it at a general election had Mrs Thatcher remained in office?
No one much doubted that Mr Major's political doom was sealed if the poll predictions were fulfilled and the Tories lost the election.
Instead, yesterday, he returned triumphant to Downing Street, his mastery of his country as well as his party secured, his personal mandate to govern achieved.
‘Nice’ is a wholly inadequate adjective to describe any man who is elected Prime Minister.
Yet it is not inappropriate to raise it here.
Because Mr Major is indeed an exceptionally nice man, as well as a very able one, few even among his political foes could grudge him and his wife Norma heartfelt congratulations on a great personal victory.
The shadow of his predecessor, great Prime Minister as she was, has hung heavy over him for 16 months.
Today, it is removed, because he has become his own man, with his own government.
He has earned the gratitude of every Conservative, and the brightest of best wishes for the challenging and exciting five years that lie ahead.
Peterborough: Pink ‘un
CITY financiers are still gasping at the Financial Times editorial column on Thursday which backed Labour.
One stockbroking grandee tells me: ‘The FT faces a double shame — it not only endorsed the socialists, it also picked a loser.’
The latter, of course, is the greater sin in the eyes of most City boys.
Richard Lambert, editor of the FT, says the decision to go for Labour was a collective one taken with senior colleagues, although he did write the article himself.
‘There have been quite a few calls from readers…
’ Fleet Street's Edith Piaf adds: ‘I regret nothing.’
NOTICE at Blackfriars railway station: ‘Caution.
Uneven flaw.’
Peterborough: Bridle party
STIRRUP cups were being raised in the country yesterday as hunt followers celebrated the Tory victory.
Labour had hoped to ban the sport.
‘I wasn't quite brave enough to put the champagne in the fridge on election night,’ said Edmund Vestey, chairman of the Campaign for Hunting.
‘We may have some over the weekend.
The result gives us a breathing space, but there is still the risk of a private member's Bill.’
After a bracing day in the Welsh countryside, Sir Watkin Williams-Wynn, Bt, who has his own hunt, was ebullient.
‘I sat up late watching the election results and could hardly believe my eyes.
It's good news for hunting, although I never gave much for Mr Kinnock's observations in the first place.’
FRANCIS Maude may feel sore about losing his seat and his job at the Treasury, but not for long.
There was serious talk in Hong Kong yesterday that he would make an excellent governor of the colony.
He knows the place well — it was part of his Foreign Office brief three years ago — and he impressed people there with his sympathetic views.
David Owen's late endorsement of the Tories makes him the strongest contender for the Hong Kong post, but do not write off Maude just yet.
Peterborough: Horlicks factor is Patten's only hope
CHRIS Patten may have to wait a year or two before he returns to the Commons.
There seems little chance of one of the party's senior professionals stepping down in the next few months to create a by-election for the Tory chairman.
However, he could remain a minister pro tem.
‘There's nothing constitutionally improper about a minister not having a seat in either House of Parliament,’ says Lord Blake, the historian.
‘He is a servant of the Crown.
But it should only be for a matter of months.’
Other than timing, the problem with such wheezes is that voters do not take kindly to ‘unnecessary’ by-elections.
One has only to remember the painful experience of Patrick Gordon Walker, appointed Foreign Secretary by Harold Wilson after the 1964 election despite losing his seat of Smethwick.
Gordon Walker held office for three months, outside the Commons, awaiting a by-election.
But then the electors of Leyton decided to reject him amid tearful scenes, strangling his political career.
A year or so earlier George Younger stepped aside for Prime Minister Sir Alec Douglas-Home, who had renounced his peerage.
Senior Tories doubt if anyone will do the decent thing for Patten.
‘I've only just been elected, dammit,’ barks one.
‘I'm hale, hearty and can do five years, no problem.
I also need the money!’
The one hope yesterday was that septuagenarians such as Edward Heath and Sir Trevor Skeet might find the Tories' small majority wearisome.
The Whips will be in overdrive and there comes a time when even a politician prefers early bed and a mug of Horlicks to the thought of another late night in the lobbies.
On the big day, he could only strike air
By ALLAN MASSIE
PADDY ASHDOWN told him: ‘Unthinkable as Prime Minister’, and in the end perhaps the electorate agreed.
Yet, only a few days ago, Labour's campaign seemed to be swinging to victory.
Its Sheffield rally had a whiff of Nuremburg triumphalism, and it was odds on that Ashdown would be waiting to learn on what terms he would be invited to support ‘the unthinkable’.
After enduring years of contempt and obloquy, Neil Kinnock was ready to step into No 10.
So, what went wrong?
Already his political obituaries are being prepared, as he considers his future over the weekend before making a statement on Monday.
But Kinnock is a fighter; he is no more likely to go willingly than Mrs Thatcher was.
He will argue that there is only Jordan to cross, and he may well be supported by those who fear the consequences for Labour of a new bloodletting.
Kinnock has struggled and shifted for years, abandoning long-held beliefs in the quest for power.
He has achieved much.
He has rescued Labour from the ‘terminal decline’ with which it was threatened in 1983.
But he has failed in his great ambition, and perhaps the task was too much for a man who has had to spend time inventing a new identity for himself.
‘Neil Kinnock,’ the SNP deputy leader Jim Sillars said, ‘would boil his granny down for glue to win votes.’
While political consistency can be over-rated as a virtue — Ted Heath being an example of what happens to a politician whose mind remains fixed while the world moves by him — the rapidity with which Kinnock changed position may have damaged him more than his supporters thought it would.
People after all prefer grannies unboiled.
Margaret Thatcher's strength was that people knew exactly where she stood; Kinnock's weakness, admitted (privately) even by his friends, was that nobody was sure of his position on any issue.
Kinnock's shifts were justified by the need to recover support which slid away between 1979 and 1983.
He has done that.
The vote of 11.5 million is back to its 1979 level.
He set himself to heal the rifts in the party, and apparently succeeded, not only because Labour politicians are hungry for office but also because of his position of centrality, born and bred in the Labour movement.
The historian G M Young once asked an ancient Tory why the party had distrusted Disraeli for so long.
The reply was: ‘His early radicalism.’
Kinnock's early socialism may have made him unable to appeal beyond Labour's natural constituency, but it is why people within that constituency have trusted him.
‘Neil's heart is in the right place.
He wants to look after his people.’
That heart is Welsh, and it is his Welshness which gave him an inner security that enabled him to come this far.
Bright Welsh boys — and Kinnock is bright — quick in repartee and fertile in argument, are usually spoiled by their mothers.
Family life in South Wales is matriarchal.
Mary Kinnock, a district nurse, cherished him, and pushed him hard; he could never doubt that he was the centre of her world, and therefore, rightfully, the centre of other people's.
Metropolitan critics have misunderstood the significance of Kinnock's Welshness, going further astray by dwelling on his youthful hero worship of Aneurin Bevan, comparing the two, to Kinnock's disadvantage.
Certainly he is a lesser man.
He is neither intellectual nor artist, as Bevan was.
Though he is a good platform speaker, he is not in Bevan's class.
The succession from Bevan to Michael Foot (Nye's biographer and Neil's patron) to Kinnock may be seen as a progress from genius to talent to mediocrity.
This is to miss the important point which has made Kinnock master of the Labour party, as Bevan never was: Bevan was a rebel; Kinnock is not.
Bevan grew up when the line between Capital and Labour was clear, and when Capital was the enemy.
He grew up oppressed by the sense of belonging to a broken culture, deprived of his inheritance.
He regretted his lack of the Welsh language.
Kinnock feels none of this.
It is a matter of generations.
Kinnock, born in 1942, grew up in a South Wales scarred by memories of the Depression but recovering from its reality.
Labour had become the establishment.
The party was no longer trying to overthrow a system it considered unjust; it was running a system it had constructed.
Kinnock grew up in a society in which it was natural to be Labour and which Labour controlled.
Viewed from London, Kinnock is an outsider.
Viewed from Wales, he is a natural member of the establishment.
Britain has been governed by south-east England for the past 13 years, and it has become possible for London and the Home Counties to ignore some aspects of reality.
The Conservative party has not understood that in Wales, Scotland and the north of England, it is the opposition, even if an opposition wielding the powers of the state.
The depth of the resentment Mrs Thatcher aroused was occasioned by the challenge she represented.
This is better understood if you look beyond Kinnock to the Labour party itself.
Membership of the parliamentary party has changed; the manual workers have all but disappeared.
They have been replaced by lawyers, academics and people with social sciences degrees.
But the intellectual toffs are also thin on the ground.
Wilson's cabinets were dominated by Oxford and Cambridge: Jenkins, Jay, Crossman, Stewart, Healey, Benn — they were all members by birth or education of the metropolitan British establishment.
The new leaders — Kinnock, Smith, Brown, Cook, Hattersley, even Tony Blair (despite being Fettes and Oxford)— belong to a different background.
Our national politics have been polarised.
The division between those who look naturally to the private sector and those who look to the public is geographical as much as ideological.
Labour's strength has rested in the alternative establishments in Wales, Scotland, and the English provinces remote from London.
John Smith may of necessity have toured the prawn cocktail circuit of the City but he represents those parts of the UK deeply suspicious of its working.
And Kinnock himself is at the heart of the alternative establishments.
Consequently, he achieved a domination of the Labour party which more able men, Gaitskell and Wilson, sought in vain.
Despite his defeat, Labour is more homogeneous than it has ever been.
This has been obscured by its weakness in the South-east, where leaders such as Ken Livingstone were reduced to trying cobble together the rainbow coalition.
Labour has no need of such fripperies in Wales, Scotland and the North.
There, like all establishments, it is sober, respectable, and conservative.
It sets the tone of debate.
It controls the avenues by which men and women advance their careers.
It is an establishment which distrusts individualism, which prefers to proceed through collaboration, which looks still to the state to redress the workings of the market, to resist centripetal force which the City of London exerts.
It makes sense for this alternative establishment to be pro-European, not only because it is in tune with the music Jacques Delors is making, but because it sees Brussels as a counterpoise to London.This is why it has been pointless to question the sincerity of Kinnock's conversion to Europe.
He was driven to it by the logic of interest and events.
Naturally there have been pockets of Tory resistance in Labour strongholds, just as there are pockets of Labour resistance in the South.
But the real division in Britain is geographical, which is why the West Midlands has become the decisive battlefield in elections, the Debatable Land, where neither establishment is dominant.
So we have been watching a battle between rival establishments for control of the UK.
Labour's, and therefore Kinnock's, weakness lay in the measures it was forced to take, the promises it had to give, to secure its base.
The commitment to devolution in Wales and Scotland was wrung reluctantly from Labour in the Seventies.
A period of Labour government had failed to satisfy its clients.
The nationalists represented a challenge to the Labour establishment.
That is why Kinnock, a member of that establishment by birth, upbringing and conviction, was so hostile to devolution then.
Subsequent years of Tory rule reduced the Labour establishment to frustration.
Though it still controlled local government, it lost some of its power of patronage and could no longer direct national policy in favour of its clientele.
This loss of influence made it fear the nationalists more.
It therefore moved towards them, and its commitment to Scottish home rule and to some measure of home rule for Wales became firmer.
In this way it secured its base.
This success would, however, have created a problem for Kinnock in office.
He could only have satisfied the expectations Labour has raised in Scotland and Wales by putting Labour's ability to win future British elections at risk.
He could only have shored up Labour's establishment in Scotland and Wales by fragmenting its UK establishment, and betraying the north of England component.
The commitment to devolution was the Trojan horse within Labour's gates.
Kinnock's innate suspicion may have been justified.
Conventional wisdom will now have it in Scotland that Labour should push more energetically for home rule.
If so, it would have to do it without Kinnock, and at the risk of alienating Scots and Welsh Unionists who still vote Labour because they think economic and social matters more important than constitutional reform.
If Kinnock chooses to fight to retain his leadership, he will have to confront the Trojan horse.
He will have to argue, with all the ruthlessness he can muster, that evolution will betray the English part of the Labour party and will confine it to the periphery of British politics, rendering a future Labour government less likely.
That would be a hard battle to win, since he would have to overcome prejudice, defeatism and small-mindedness.
But a man who has struggled to make Labour electable, at the cost of jettisoning his beliefs, might still have the heart to continue that battle.
When people analyse Labour's failure to win an election against an apparently unpopular government in the midst of a long recession, the obvious course will be to blame its leader.
Certainly the late swing towards the Tories suggests an unwillingness to see Kinnock as prime minister.
The Dewey factor — that last-minute revulsion which cost the Republican candidate the 1948 American presidential election — may have been operating.
Yet I suspect Kinnock's problems transcended the personal.
The obverse of his strength as party leader in the peculiar circumstances of British politics today has been his inability to present himself as a national leader.
This was a difficulty which Mrs Thatcher, though far more able, intelligent and industrious than Kinnock, failed except at a few critical moments, to surmount.
Indeed it was this failure which led ultimately to her rejection by the Conservative party which, remembering Disraeli's warning that ‘the Conservative party is a national party, or it is nothing’, was alarmed by the hostility she aroused in half the nation.
So it chose John Major to begin the work of reconciliation.
The Tory revival in Scotland, modest statistically, but profoundly important in more serious respects, suggests that this is under way.
Kinnock may have failed in this election ultimately because he could not convince the country that he would be a truly national leader.
His achievements as Labour leader have earned him respect and admiration, but he has not been able to appeal beyond the party in which he has made his life.
It must now be doubtful that he will ever do so, doubtful, but not impossible that he should.
Peterborough:
THE Irish golfer, Eamonn Darcy (above), has been given a delicate commission — to design two new golf courses on the site of the Battle of the Boyne.
On Monday, a consortium will submit £10 million plans to develop the 570-acre Oldbridge estate in Co Meath, one of the most historically sensitive sites in Ireland.
The plans include a 60-bedroom hotel, a conference centre and three holiday ‘villages’ alongside two 18-hole courses.
The development will bring a jauntily commercial air to the site of the 1690 battle where William III (’ King Billy’, above) defeated the Catholic James II.
Orangemen are not pleased.
In Belfast, George Patton, executive officer of the Grand Orange Lodge of Ireland, says: ‘The battle marked a turning point and brought great benefits to these islands.
Unfortunately the Irish Republic has never seen fit to look after its battlefields.’
Darcy was out on the links in Jersey yesterday and unable to come to the phone, but a member of the team of architects working on the project dismisses fears that the site will be ruined.
‘It will be a very sympathetic treatment,’ he says.
‘We even plan to put up an observation tower.’
Peterborough: Distant fizz
DAVID Gladstone, bewhiskered British charge d'affaires in Kiev, threw an election party for his staff last night.
Showing the pzazz one expects from a descendant of the Victorian prime minister, he hired a room in the Zhovtnevy Hotel and invited some friendly locals.
‘The Ukrainians don't really know much about Britain, but I'm going to serve champagne and two kinds of caviar so I expect we'll have a good time,’ Gladstone told me over a crackling telephone line shortly before the party began.
His last two months in Kiev have made a welcome change from his tour of duty in Sri Lanka, which expelled him last year, accusing him of interfering in elections.
‘Nobody seems to know who I am here,’ he said.
‘In Sri Lanka they were absolutely fascinated by William Gladstone.
I spent the whole time trying to explain the family connection.’
ON a day which saw a host of prophets confounded — and a month of near despair for many Conservative loyalists — the reputation of one sage is intact.
From start to finish, our own Bill Deedes predicted a Tory majority of around 20.
‘When you've lived through 16 general elections and fought eight of them, you develop an instinct,’ says the modest Deedes, opening a bottle of champagne.
Obituary of Ronald Eyre
RONALD EYRE, who has died aged 62, was an accomplished stage, television and opera director, though he was probably best known for his investigation of religious themes.
The theological certainties he found in others intrigued, but never convinced Eyre.
In his television series The Long Search, screened in 1977, he travelled the world in search of faith, only to conclude that God (if He existed) was unlikely to favour one form of religion rather than another.
Eyre's down-to-earth style was well suited to the exploration of these recondite matters.
While so many documentary-makers seem chiefly eager to exhibit their punditry, he appeared as a genuine seeker after knowledge.
After The Long Search Eyre was dubbed ‘The Whicker of the God Slot’.
Another television series, Seven Ages (1987), an inquiry into the stages of existence enumerated by Jacques in As You Like It, led a critic to christen him ‘Ron Hot-Eyre’.
Yet if Eyre irritated those who desired no truck with the mystery of things, he revealed an unfashionable — though much admired — willingness to see the best in humanity.
His work in the theatre indicated a similar reluctance to conform to pre-ordained patterns.
Although he was involved with the Royal Shakespeare Company and the National Theatre, he never settled with any organisation for long, nor did he believe that permanent companies were likely to produce better work than ad hoc assemblies.
Naturally versatile, he liked to switch between television and theatre.
And whether tackling plays ancient or modern he brought to the task in hand an integrity tailored to the particular piece, never to his own glorification.
Eyre's annus mirabilis was 1972.
At the Haymarket he directed Alec Guinness as John Mortimer's blind father in A Voyage Round My Father; at the Royal Court his version of Charles Wood's Veterans starred John Gielgud and John Mills as two film actors on location (the play was said to be based on the filming of Tony Richardson's Charge of the Light Brigade); and at the New Theatre, Donald Sinden scored a brilliant success as an urban fop pursuing a country heiress in Eyre's revival of Dion Boucicault's London Assurance.
It could be difficult persuading Eyre to undertake the direction of a play, but once he had committed himself his absorption was total.
London Assurance owed much to his ability to hammer a text into presentable shape.
Alan Bennett, with typical modesty, has described how Eyre managed to distil a spare and functional farce from the original version of Habeas Corpus.
The performance of the play at the Lyric in 1973, featuring Alec Guinness in the role of a doctor with sex on the brain and an urgent desire to locate it elsewhere, elicited hysterical laughter from the audience.
In opera, Eyre's production of Berlioz's Beatrice and Benedict for the Buxton Festival in 1980 was considered by some observers to be the best thing he ever did.
But his most prestigious effort as an opera director was his autumnal interpretation of Verdi's Falstaff at Covent Garden in 1982, under the baton of Carlo Maria Giulini.
Two years later Eyre brought off the first British professional staging of Cavalli's Jason at the Buxton Festival.
The Daily Telegraph's Michael Kennedy considered Eyre's translation and production to be ‘an irreverent and witty excursion into baroque opera which reduces to a minimum the longueurs of the genre.’
Eyre went on to direct Benjamin Britten's Curlew River for the Nexus Opera and the BBC in 1986, and Peter Grimes for Opera North in 1989.
But he never received the second call to Covent Garden for which he longed.
The son of a miner, Ronald Eyre was born at Mapplewell, Yorks, on April 13 1929 and educated at Queen Elizabeth's Grammar School, Wakefield, and University College, Oxford, where he became the secretary of OUDS.
On coming down Eyre taught English for two years at Queen Elizabeth's Grammar School, Blackburn, where Russel Harty was one of his pupils.
‘Harty was a pushy schoolboy,’ he recalled.
‘I was a pushy graduate’.
In 1954 Eyre became senior English master at Bromsgrove before moving two years later to the schools' drama department at the BBC.
Soon he was writing and directing plays for television.
In 1963 he turned to the theatre, directing Titus Andronicus and other plays at the Birmigham Rep, and showing himself adept at producing the intimate and affable atmosphere of the small screen on stage.
His theatrical reputation went from strength to strength.
He proved as capable in modern plays, such as the Scottish Marxist John McGrath's Events While Guarding the Bofors Gun (1966), as in classics like Shaw's Widowers' Houses (1965).
His production of Mrs Warren's Profession for the National Theatre in 1971 steered cunningly clear of melodrama; his Much Ado About Nothing for the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1971 featured white parasols and sun-dappled lawns that seemed to evoke the world of Turgenev.
In Edna O'Brien's A Pagan Place, which followed Veterans at the Royal Court in 1972, Eyre drew from a 16-year-old school girl called Veronica Quilligan, who had never acted before, a performance of exquisite subtlety and emotional truth.
By contrast his own play, Something's Burning (1974), earned no critical laurels.
Later in 1974, however, Eyre uncovered another masterpiece for the Royal Shakespeare Company with Frank Wedeking's The Marquis of Keith, the tale of a cynical racketeer who exploits the German passion for kultur by projecting a ‘Multi-Dome Art Palace’, for which various dupes are only too eager to put their hands into their pockets.
Ian McKellen brilliantly seized the opportunity to display his camp humour in the title role.
In 1979 Eyre directed Othello at Stratford, with Donald Sinden as the Moor and Bob Peck as Iago.
This production was only a qualified achievement, but Eyre succeeded in a different vein when he brought out the kindliness and charm of Harold Brighouse's Hobson's Choice at the Haymarket (1983), in which Penelope Keith appeared to splendid effect.
Eyre's northern sense of humour was also in evidence in his production of J B Priestley's When We Are Married at the Whitehall Theatre (1986).
More notably, however, at the Chichester Theatre in 1983 he rescued the reputation of A Patriot for Me, John Osborne's tragi-comedy of homosexuality which had been banned after its first performance in 1965.
Alan Bates took the leading role.
In 1988 Eyre directed various Chekhov pieces under the title of The Sneeze at the Aldwych, and that same year he again joined forces with Alec Guinness, who played the tired cynical pessimist Botvinnik in Lee Blessing's A Walk in the Woods at the Comedy Theatre.
Last year Eyre was once more seen on television, quizzing representatives of ‘the major league’ of world religions — a Jew, a Muslim, a Buddhist, a Christian and a Hindu — about matters of spiritual import.
To the end, certainty remained elusive.
Obituary of Roger Manley
ROGER MANLEY, the doctor and engineer who has died aged 61, was the inventor of the Manley Ventilator as well as several other pieces of life-saving equipment.
In 1961, while working as anaesthetics research registrar at the Westminster Hospital, Manley designed a machine to monitor or assist breathing during anaesthesia and other forms of unconsciousness.
The ventilator, improved and updated, is now standard equipment in most operating theatres around the world.
Manley was aware that the high cost of modern anaesthetic apparatus was often prohibitive for hospitals in developing countries, and at the time of his death he was working on a prototype of an inexpensive, but effective ventilator for the Third World.
Roger Edward Wentworth Manley was born in London on June 29 1930 and educated at King's College School, Wimbledon, and London University.
He went on to Westminster Hospital Medical School, where he qualified as a doctor in 1954.
After junior hospital jobs he decided to specialise in anaesthetics.
He spent a year as senior anaesthetic house officer at the Westminster Hospital and did his National Service in the RAF medical branch as a junior anaesthetic specialist.
On his return to the Westminster he was for a time senior house officer in the department of clinical measurement before becoming anaesthetic research registrar.
Manley's invention transformed his career.
Having switched to engineering, he became technical director of Blease Anaesthetics Equipment and two years later was appointed managing director.
He was also a director of Hutchinsons Engineering and from 1968 to 1970 he was chairman of the International Standards Organisation Technical Committee.
He also held the post of chairman and managing director of Medical Developments.
In 1977 Manley became a Chartered Engineer and a member of the Institute of Mechanical Engineers.
His other inventions included the Maxaman ventilator and resuscitator, a life support unit which allows the victim to breathe oxygen freely at his own rhythm but acts automatically in the case of respiratory failure.
Some of his designs are standard equipment for the ambulance and fire services as well as mine rescue teams.
Manley was also honorary adviser in medical engineering to the Westminster Group of Hospitals and honorary clinical assistant in anaesthesia and intensive care to the Medical Research Council Clinical Research Unit.
He is survived by his wife, Jane, and two children.
Obituary of Daniel Bovet
Aged 85.
Italian physiologist who won Nobel Prize for physiology and medicine in 1957.
Discovered the first antihistamine, a drug effective against allergies, 1944.
Later, while doing research on a poison used by South-American Indians on arrow tips, he discovered muscle relaxants.
He once recommended two or three cigarettes a day as an aid to clarity of thought and memory.
Obituary of Samuel Reshevsky
SAMUEL RESHEVSKY, the Polish-born chess player who has died in New York aged 80, was a celebrated child prodigy, though he never fulfilled his early promise.
As a blond, curly-haired eight-year-old, invariably dressed in sailor suits, young Reshevsky dazzled the chess world as he confidently took on up to 75 adult opponents at once.
His boyhood feats set the pace for a long and successful career as an international grandmaster, but, though he scored some spectacular defeats, Reshevsky never became a close challenger for the world championship.
Samuel Herman Rzeszewski was born into an Orthodox Jewish family at Ozerkow, Poland, on Nov 26 1911.
He learned the moves of the game at four years old, and made his first competitive appearance in Vienna two years later.
His exceptional progress soon led to exhibition matches and tours of western Europe, and on to America, where his family settled in 1920.
Reluctant to become dependent upon his skill at the game, the ‘boy wonder’ resolved to complete his education.
After studying accountancy at Chicago University, he worked on and off as an investment analyst.
He never lost touch with chess though, and on resuming active competition in 1931 he won the Western Open, before taking first prize against Capablanca, the great Cuban player, at a tournament at Margate.
Reshevsky's style of play was fast and fluent, rather than ponderously strategic.
His quick tactical eye allowed for subtle opening and middle game combinations, in which resourceful and original moves often took his opponents by surprise.
This fluency once led Mikhail Botvinnik to class Reshevsky as a mere ‘spieler’, meaning a coffee-house player.
But Reshevsky was much more than that.
After being defeated by Botvinnik on a number of occasions — notably at the great Avro Tournament of 1938 and at the first post war tournament held to find a successor to the late Alekhine — he finally got his revenge with a triumphal victory over the Soviet champion in the USSR.
Reshevsky won the American title seven times, and until the arrival of the equally talented and even more combative prodigy Bobby Fischer in the late 1950s, was easily the dominant player in the United States.
In 1961 a rancorous match between them ended level with two wins each and seven draws, before Fischer, then 18, walked out.
Reshevsky went on to lose an interzonal play-off for the World Championship in 1964 and was beaten again in the quarter-finals four years later.
Short, pugnacious and lacking in charm, Reshevsky tended to spend too much time on the early part of his games, but remained a tough opponent.
He won the US Championship for the last time in 1971, and continued to play well into his seventies, finishing equal first at the Reykjavik open in 1984.
He published Reshevsky on Chess (1948) and How Chess Games Are Won (1962).
Reshevsky is survived by his wife, a son and two daughters.
Way of the World: Who rules Britain?
By AUBERON WAUGH
NOW we have sent the Calibans grimacing and snarling back to their caves for a further spell, perhaps nice Mr Major will address himself to a problem with which we did not like to trouble him during the election.
This week's riot by 150 schoolgirls at Wimbledon station will almost certainly prove to be the crucial event of the election period, and the one which sets the tone for the next decade or so.
In theory, it was set off by two boys who stole a can of soft drink from a third boy.
In no time at all, girls from three schools in the neighbourhood were punching each other and being dragged away by the police.
‘They went right over the top.
We are just a bunch of girls,’ said one 15 year old from the Ursuline convent.
‘A policeman in plain clothes jumped on my friend, so another one of my friends jumped on his back and then another policeman came up and smashed a radio into her head.
I got hold of him and got a punch in the face as well…’
This, I suspect, will prove the pattern of the future.
Let us hope that these two threatening elements in our society — the schoolgirls and the police — will continue to slog it out between themselves without disturbing the rest of us.
Our greatest fear must be of an alliance.
If asked to choose which should run the country between the two of them, I would have to register a ‘don't know’.