

Farmlands crisis lies in the soil
by Greg Neale Environment Correspondent
SEVERE drought coupled with damage to the ozone layer is likely to threaten crop growth in Britain, scientists fear.
They warn that a fourth year of drought will further hit farmers struggling in the potential ‘dustbowl’ regions of eastern England.
But concern for the vulnerability of land threatened by erosion and climate change is spread across much of the country.
Environmental scientists say the depletion of the ozone layer — thinner than ever before over the northern hemisphere — could cause serious damage to crops and other plants as extra ultra-violet radiation reaches the planet's surface.
Earlier this year, The Sunday Telegraph reported scientists also fear damage to life in the oceans.
Last week, a conference of the Society for Experimental Biology at Lancaster University heard new information about the possible risks to crops from increased UVB radiation levels.
Dr Nigel Paul, a Lancaster biologist now in the third year of a research programme funded by the Department of the Environment, said yesterday that preliminary research suggested crops such as barley, peas, cauliflower, sprouts and broccoli were most at risk.
Scientists are equally worried about the soil in which they grow.
Figures suggest that more than 40 per cent of arable land in England and Wales is potentially at risk from erosion by wind or water.
There are mounting implications for water supplies, food production, roads, buildings and engineering work, together with the very face of the countryside.
While other European Community countries are increasingly aware of the vulnerability of land, however, Britain's pioneering national field-by-field soil survey remains incomplete, 53 years after it began.
Professor Peter Bullock, director of the Soil Survey and Land Research Centre offices at Silsoe, part of the Cranfield Institute of Technology, near Bedford, said: ‘We have to realise that a significant proportion of our soils are fragile.
Given changing pressures on the land — from shifts in policy to the prospect of changes in our climate — we simply have to know which soils can sustain which uses.
‘Our biggest problem is that we do not have an organisation in the country that has a monitoring role for the quality of our soil.’
Robin Maynard, a campaigner for Friends of the Earth, said: ‘It's a hidden problem; most farmers don't know soil is being eroded as they increasingly rely on a mixture of new strains of crops, fertilisers and farm equipment.’
Farmers in East Anglia, one of the regions most affected by the drought, hope that there may yet be sufficient rain early in the growing season to safeguard this year's crops.
Geoffrey Kemp, 58, farms some 230 acres near Chatteris, 12 miles north of Ely in Cambridgeshire and is no stranger to the effects of drought or erosion — particularly that caused by wind on parched, dry soils.
‘I lost 100 acres of carrots in one evening 10 years ago,’ he recalls.
Nearby, Holme Post shows how far the land is vulnerable to environmental change.
The post, erected in the 1840s when the area was drained, shows the land has sunk some 13ft-14ft — an ominous decline in view of forecasts that global warming may cause the nearby sea to rise.