

Exam boards pass free-market test Schools targeted as pricewar looms
by Fran Abrams Education Correspondent
FREE-market economics took on a new meaning last week as schools received an invitation to shop around for the cheapest General Certificate of Secondary Education exams.
The examination boards predicted a price war after one offered discounts in return for an exclusive deal with schools.
The move by the University of London Examinations and Assessment Council (ULEAC) has angered other GCSE boards.
They warn that if they cut costs to compete they must also lower their standards.
Last week every secondary school head teacher in the country received a glossy brochure from the London board, which has 800,000 exam entries each year.
It offered a 7.5 per cent discount on exam fees, free computer analysis of results and cut-price management consultancy and training services from a private company.
The offer could save schools up to £1,500 a year in exam fees, which currently cost about £15 per entry.
In return they must agree to buy their English, maths and science syllabuses from ULEAC.
But Don Ramsden, secretary of the Midland Examining Group, said the initiative reduced the boards ‘to the level of supermarkets’.
He said: ‘When you take 15 pence off the price of sugar as a loss leader, you have got to recoup that money from somewhere.
The important thing is the quality of our syllabuses and schemes of assessment, and we already offer the lowest level of fee possible.’
Mr Ramsden said he would oppose any moves within his own organisation to cut prices, but others felt they might be forced to follow ULEAC's lead.
Andrew Holden, joint secretary of the Northern Examining Association, said: ‘We will be looking at the position and seeing whether we think it is worthwhile to offer a similar scheme or whether we would prefer to cut the general level of fees so that we are competing on even terms.’
He pointed out that schools which took up the offer would not know in advance how much the discount would save them.
They must begin teaching a syllabus this September to pupils who will sit their exams in 1994, but the exam fee will not be set until the end of next year.
If ULEAC decided to set a higher fee than the other boards, the discount might be worthless, he said.
Dr Adrian Woodthorpe, deputy chief executive of ULEAC, denied that the move was the first shot in a price war.
‘It will be far easier to deal with large entries from fewer centres, and we will make financial savings from that,’ he said.
‘If that is the case, we would wish to pass those savings back to the school.’
He said that reforms aimed at giving schools more choice had caused an administrative headache.
Since the GCSE was introduced in 1988, schools had been encouraged to buy courses from any board instead of just from the one in their area.
Many now use syllabuses from several different boards.
He argued that the National Curriculum had rendered such freedom unnecessary because there were fewer differences between syllabuses.
If schools could be persuaded to use just one board again, he said, a cheaper service could be provided.
Another reform that gave schools an incentive to save money was the passing to schools of control over their own budgets.
In the past, exam fees were paid directly by local authorities, but now head teachers can spend any money they save through discounts on extra staff or maintenance.
Polys fail to get into good universities book
By FRAN ABRAMS
STUDENTS hoping to begin degree courses next year face confusion over their applications because of a power struggle between polytechnics and universities, writes Fran Abrams.
Although 14 polytechnics will become universities this autumn under the new Higher Education Act, potential recruits will not find them in the university entrants' handbook for 1993.
This is because polytechnic directors who tried to list their institutions withdrew under threat of legal action.
Among them was Baroness Perry, director of London's South Bank Polytechnic, which is shortly to become the University of the South Bank.
She was told by the Polytechnics Central Admissions System, PCAS, that she would breach her contract with them if she joined the Universities Central Council on Admissions, UCCA.
‘I think it is a great pity,’ she said.
‘One of the reasons we want to become a university is to be on a level playing field in terms of recruiting students.
Keeping open the division like this is stupid.’
The PCAS has accused UCCA of poaching after the universities' system approached polytechnics and told them it would delay the deadline for its 1993 handbook by two weeks to allow them to join.
The new deadline has now passed.
Institutions pay either PCAS or UCCA for each student they recruit through their handbooks, which have just gone to press.
They will be available in schools this autumn for 1993 entry.
Talks on a merger between the polytechnics' and the universities' admissions systems now seem to be in trouble, and many students will be left unsure how to go about applying to the new universities.
Some in the polytechnics fear the changes, allowing them to become universities, will amount to a takeover, and in a second dispute, they have accused one of the universities' ruling bodies of poaching senior staff.
Polytechnic directors were invited to defect from their ruling body, the Committee of Directors of Polytechnics, to the Committee of Vice Chancellors and Principals, the universities' ruling body.
But the CDP has objected.
Universities pay up to £160,000 per year to join the CVCP, polytechnics £29,000 for CDP membership.
The trouble-torn merger talks began 18 months ago.
The polytechnics have responded to the universities' attempts to recruit CDP members by demanding a merger deadline — probably April 1993.
Foreigners costing the NHS millions Purge on patients who dodge paying bills
by Victoria Macdonald
THE Department of Health has warned hospitals to be more vigilant after evidence that millions of pounds a year are being lost because of foreigners leaving the country without paying bills for their NHS treatment.
The problem has become so widespread that the Department has told health service managers that if there is any doubt about the patient's eligibility for free care, staff should ask for proof or a refundable deposit.
The latest figures for 1990–91 show that the NHS was left with bad debts of £764,000, which a department spokesman admitted was mainly due to people leaving the country without paying for their treatment.
But the true figure is much higher, with one London health authority estimating that its hospitals alone lose up to £1 million a year.
A spokesman for North West Thames health authority said its hospitals in Hillingdon and Ealing were particularly badly affected, probably because they are close to Heathrow.
He said North Americans were the worst for ‘taking the bills away but not sending back the cheque’.
However, a consultant physician at the Hospital for Tropical Diseases in London believes the worst offenders are those travelling from Africa and Latin America.
Over the past few years, Dr Anthony Hall, an expert in tropical medicine, has compiled a dossier of patients who he claims have entered Britain ‘pretending to be tourists, students or refugees’ but who are in reality coming for free medical care.
The list includes: A Brazilian who was admitted with a chest infection.
He later revealed that he had had fevers for at least six weeks before arriving in Britain and was HIV positive.
He was an in-patient for 40 days, receiving drugs for tuberculosis and syphilis.
Cost: approx £14,000.
A Nigerian priest who was first admitted to an Italian hospital with a fever.
When they could offer no diagnosis, a cousin suggested he come to Britain.
He told immigration authorities he was on holiday and was admitted for 11 days during which time he was treated for typhoid and genital ulcers.
Cost: approx £4,000.
A woman from Somalia with kidney failure arrived in Britain claiming political refugee status.
She was treated with dialysis and then had a renal transplant, jumping ahead of patients on the waiting list.
Cost: approx £100,000.
A Peruvian man with drug-resistant tuberculosis was advised to come to Britain for treatment, but warned not to bring any medication in case he was stopped at immigration.
He claimed he was in the UK for a conference.
He was found to be highly contagious and received 37 days of in-patient treatment.
Cost: approx £10,000.
At St Mary's, in Paddington, west London, a senior manager, Ian Robertson, said he thought identifiable unpaid bills were costing the hospital about £250,000 a year.
But many more could be slipping through the net.
‘Sometimes you come across patients you feel have been coached on what to say, or who just claim to be residents.
That is all they have to do,’ he said.
Under Government guidelines, anyone is entitled to free accident and emergency treatment.
Other NHS treatment is free only for those from countries with reciprocal agreements, such as Australia, the European Community, refugees and those who have taken up residence here.
Dr Hall believes the only way to crack down on the problem is to tighten up entry requirements.
For instance, he says potential students and immigrants should be examined in their own country at their expense by British doctors employed by the Foreign Office.
He suggested they should undergo tests for Aids, sickle-cell anaemia, syphilis and hepatitis B.
Tourists should have to sign a declaration that they are healthy and will leave Britain if a chronic disease is diagnosed and if they are treated their passports should be kept until their fees are paid.
Private health care at prison angers officers
by Valerie Elliott Home Affairs Correspondent
PRISON officers are furious about private medical care arrangements for inmates at the new Wolds remand jail in Humberside.
John Bartell, chairman of the Prison Officers' Association, has warned that any remand prisoner suffering a condition that requires constant nursing care, or carrying the HIV virus, would not be sent to the Wolds because of the possible cost.
Mr Bartell said: ‘The average taxpayer will be outraged to hear that prisoners are being afforded private medical care.
This is not a private prison as such — it is a public building built and run by taxpayers’ money.
These medical arrangements are a graphic anomaly of the Wolds privately run prison.’
AMI, an American healthcare group, has been contracted to provide doctors and nurses to staff the new 20-patient health centre inside the privately run prison.
The company confirmed last week that it was providing 10 nurses and two doctors at the Wolds and that the staffing arrangements could be increased or reduced according to demand.
Salaries are believed to be above NHS levels.
The health care issue is one of a number of complaints to the Home Office about the running of the Wolds — the first prison in Britain to be run privately by Group 4 Remand Services.
The POA has initiated formal dispute proceedings about the Wolds to Joe Pilling, the prison service director-general.
Other prisons employ their own prison medical service staff — doctors are paid £26,622 to £36,178, with a top rate of £42,724, plus London weighting.
AMI would not say how much the contract was worth or how long it was due to run.
The POA is also concerned about plans to draft in prison officers to help Group 4 security guards if there is any trouble at the Wolds.
Under a plan, codenamed Operation Tornado, officers from the neighbouring prisons of Leeds, Full Sutton, Durham and Everthorpe would be called in.
Mr Bartell said: ‘We do not know the command structure in these circumstances.
We work for the prison service director-general and negotiate with him.
He can't give me any straight answers about all this because he is only concerned with the state-run prison service.
‘We are also concerned that any troublesome remand prisoner is unlikely to be sent to the Wolds, and that while we have to deal with them the Group 4 people are cushioned.’
Review: Scares that fly in the face of fact
Dr James Le Fanu castigates the health experts who spread alarm unnecessarily
BY DR JAMES LE FANU
DR PAUL TALALAY, a research scientist at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, has discovered that broccoli prevents cells from becoming malignant — and so presumably broccoli-eating enthusiasts should have a reduced risk of getting cancer.
Regrettably, using the same experimental techniques he also found that red-leaf cabbage, beets and cauliflower have the opposite effect and appear to be carcinogenic.
What is one to make of this nonsense?
Are shoppers now expected to hover over the vegetable counter at the supermarket, stricken with anxiety trying to remember which greens cause cancer and which do not?
Common sense dictates that single items of food cannot either cause or prevent a potentially life-threatening illness.
So, whatever Dr Talalay's experiments did show, they must be irrelevant.
However, as Voltaire famously observed, the trouble with common sense is that it is not very common — least of all, it seems, among research scientists.
There is nothing new in the experts spreading unwarranted alarm and despondency.
One of their more innocent victims turns out to have been the common house fly.
In a famous Victorian poem, the fly was depicted as a little man with ‘rainbows on his wings, a black and brown gown laced around his waist’.
Even his voice was pleasingly human:
‘When it rains
He complains
Against the window panes
He sings
With his buzzing wings.’
But in 10 short years at the turn of the century all this changed and the ‘common, innocent, friendly’ house fly was subjected to the most vicious of character assassinations.
One of its main accusers, Rennie Done, a professor at Stanford University, California, warned: ‘The fly which sups from our cups, swims in our soup, walks delicately over the beef steak and frosted cake leaves behind a trail of filth and bacteria.’
Flies, it was argued, were the main vectors of disease, carrying on their tiny feet the bacteria responsible for dysentery, cholera, tuberculosis and even smallpox.
Nor was this transmission accidental.
Rather, one public health official wrote: ‘The fly seeks filth wherever it may be found, setting out from its foul breeding place, it feasts at your privy, and greets you with unwashed lips and unwiped feet in your parlour and at your dining table.’
No one, it seemed, was safe, and these flies provided much the best explanation why children from the most privileged and hygienic households succumbed to infectious illnesses.
They must have contracted them from bacteria transported from the teeming insanitary slums on the other side of town.
And to emphasise the point that flies caused more death than ‘all the wars there had ever been’, there was a serious campaign to get it renamed the ‘typhoid fly’ or even the ‘filth fly’.
Cartoons showed malevolent-looking flies with a smoking gun labelled ‘anthrax’ in one hand and a dripping knife labelled ‘typhoid’in the other.
‘Sanitation parades’ forced the message home, in which giant models of the house fly were paraded through the streets dragging empty prams, symbolising the fly's lethal effect on babies.
Campaigners boosted the impact of their warnings by drawing a close connection between the fly and the home.
Lecturers at women's clubs and citizens' organisations cautioned that the fly was no longer a welcome guest but a carrier of dangerous germs.
‘Swat-the-fly’ campaigns were mounted with a view to its mass extermination and financial rewards were offered to assiduous members of the public with the highest kill rates.
Eventually anti-fly hysteria died down, but not without having caused a lot of pointless anxiety on its way.
Who could doubt that it was a mother's failure to have been sufficiently vigilant against the fly menace that her child succumbed to some grievous, infectious illness?
It was common sense that finally prevailed.
After all, it was one thing to show that malaria was transmitted by mosquitoes, and sleeping sickness by the tsetse fly, quite another that the common, innocent and friendly house fly was responsible for virtually every other infectious disease known to man.
WESTERN political commentators were supercilious, to put it mildly, when India elected as a prime minister to succeed Mrs Gandhi, a man who, on his own admission, drank his own urine every morning, Morarji Desai.
What they did not know — and perhaps Mr Desai did not know either — was that urine contains large amounts of melatonin — a chemical secreted by the pineal gland which is involved (no one knows how) in setting the body's natural rhythms.
According to doctors Mills and Faunce of the University of Newcastle in New South Wales, melatonin tricks the body into thinking it has slept more than it has, has mild pain-killing qualities, and slows brainwave activity, thus ‘enhancing meditative practices’.
For Mr Desai, and many thousands of Indian yogis who rise at 4am and sit cross-legged for two hours, meditating on profound spiritual questions, a glass of melatonin-rich urine does seem to be the ideal thirst-quencher.