

PM gives Heseltine top post Major promotes women as race ison to succeed Kinnock
by David Wastell Toby Helm and Valerie Elliott
MICHAEL Heseltine was rewarded yesterday for four weeks of dynamic and effective campaigning by being appointed Trade and Industry Secretary, the Cabinet job he has long coveted.
The move was part of a radical ministerial reshuffle by John Major designed to bring new blood to the Government after the Conservative election victory.
All but six Cabinet ministers were moved or replaced as Mr Major took the opportunity provided by winning his own mandate to give his senior team a personal stamp.
It includes the appointment of the first women to his Cabinet, Gillian Shephard and Virginia Bottomley, and cuts its average age from 54 to 51.
Kenneth Clarke, who as Education Secretary was another star of the Tory campaign, was appointed Home Secretary, one of the top three offices of State.
Chris Patten, architect of Mr Major's victory, will remain as party chairman despite losing his seat in Bath but will be allowed to attend Cabinet only for party political discussions.
The decision to move Mr Heseltine to the DTI marks a decisive break with the Thatcherite past.
It will infuriate the Right because of Mr Heseltine's interventionist approach to industrial policy.
But Mr Major felt that the man who brought down Mrs Thatcher had earned his passage to the department of his choice.
Mr Heseltine, who has emerged as one of the key figures in Mr Major's administration, will be expected to help Britain out of recession and inspire hard-pressed business and industry.
The Right will be cheered by the promotion of Michael Portillo, 39, the new Treasury Chief Secretary.
Mr Portillo, a member of the Thatcherite No Turning Back Group, is regarded as a potential party leader.
His new job was a springboard for Mr Major's own Cabinet career.
Mr Portillo's promotion makes him the youngest Cabinet minister since Dr David Owen was appointed Foreign Secretary under Labour.
Michael Howard, another standard-bearer for the Right, was moved from Employment to Environment, the largest Whitehall department.
Apart from Mr Patten, four other ministers have lost their Cabinet posts: former Home Secretary Kenneth Baker, who is believed to have refused an offer to take over as Welsh Secretary; Tom King from Defence, who asked for a break from office four months ago; Peter Brooke from Northern Ireland; and Lord Waddington, former leader of the Lords.
The other new Cabinet minister is John Patten as Education Secretary.
In a move that may prove controversial, Sir Patrick Mayhew, former Attorney-General, whose family originates in the Irish Republic, is the new Northern Ireland Secretary.
He is to be replaced as Attorney-General by Sir Nicholas Lyell.
Mr Major has decided to maintain what Downing Street sources called ‘a core of competence and experience’ by keeping Douglas Hurd and Norman Lamont as Foreign Secretary and Chancellor.
Mr Lamont has been given the task of piloting the economy out of recession.
Despite unease over his campaign performance, he is credited by Mr Major with wrong-footing Labour on tax.
The Prime Minister also feels that having taken the flak for the longest recession since the war, Mr Lamont is entitled to receive the laurels when the predicted recovery begins.
Other ministers who have been retained are John Gummer at Agriculture, David Hunt at Wales and Ian Lang at Scotland.
David Mellor, Treasury Chief Secretary, who also took a front-line role in exposing Labour's tax and spending plans, was given his own department, in charge of National Heritage — including arts, sports, broadcasting and the national lottery.
Criticisms of William Waldegrave's handling of the health portfolio fuelled speculation that he might be sacked.
In fact Mr Major, who is said to have been delighted with the way Mr Waldegrave introduced the health reforms, has put him in charge of implementing the Citizen's Charter.
Also moved sideways are Peter Lilley, from DTI to Social Security, Tony Newton from Social Security to Leader of the House of Commons, John MacGregor, from Leader of the House to Transport, and Malcolm Rifkind, from Transport to Defence.
The appointment of two women will end accusations that Mr Major was not serious in his stated intention to promote women.
Mrs Shephard, 52, who was the first woman Treasury minister when Mr Major formed his first government, was drafted into Conservative Central Office last year as joint deputy party chairman.
As Employment Secretary she will also have responsibility for women's issues.
Mrs Bottomley, 44, formerly Health Minister, has been rewarded for her robust defence of the health reforms in the run-up to the campaign by being promoted to Secretary of State.
John Patten, 46, a long-serving Home Office minister, has been put in charge of Education.
His five-year-old daughter is at a State school.
The Cabinet changes were the subject of a day-long series of Downing Street meetings, in which Chris Patten and Richard Ryder, the Chief Whip, also took part.
The reshuffle was made easier by the decision of John Wakeham, formerly Energy Secretary, not to stand for re-election.
His department is to be wound up and its responsibilities divided between an expanded DTI and Environment.
Mr Wakeham is to be given a peerage and will become Leader of the Lords.
Lynda Chalker, Overseas Development Minister, who lost her Wallasey seat, is to be made a baroness and retains her post.
Tomorrow Mr Major will reshuffle lower-ranking ministers.
Third bomb victim found
by Christopher Elliott and Victoria Macdonald
THE VICTIMS of the post-election IRA bomb that devastated a large area of the City of London — the largest to have exploded in London since the war — included a 15-year-old girl who was killed and her eight-year-old sister who was still in hospital last night.
A man in his 20s also died and a further 90 people were injured.
Last night a third body, a man, was found in the rubble.
No one was seriously hurt in a second explosion early yesterday at Staples Corner in north-west London, but damage was severe and many roads are closed.
Guy's Hospital confirmed last night that the dead girl was Daniella Carter, who had been standing near the blast.
Her injured sister and their friend, Christina Carter and Sara Shadoo, were in a car ‘50 yards away from the seat of the explosion’, police said.
Police are braced for a traffic nightmare today as more than half a million sports fans converge on the capital for this morning's ADT London Marathon and the Rumbelows League Cup Final at Wembley.
The two devices are among the biggest detonated on the mainland.
They have wreaked havoc that will take months to restore.
Repairs will cost up to £200 million, according to initial reports.
The IRA admitted responsibility for the explosions.
Commander George Churchill Coleman, head of Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist branch, said that the size of the bombs ‘marked a different dimension in the IRA campaign’ and warned of more mainland attacks.
The City bomb, the largest since the Harrods bombing in 1984, was a clear attempt by the IRA to overshadow the election and demonstrate an ability to strike at will at the heart of London.
Containing up to 200lb of high explosive, it was left in a white Transit van that blew apart at 9.20pm on Friday, shattering windows and showering debris and razor-sharp slivers of glass.
About a dozen people were still in two hospitals last night.
Surgeons believe they can save the sight of a seven-year-old girl who was injured, with the dead girl and her sister.
Many of the injured were City office workers celebrating the Tories' election victory.
As dozens of workmen and structural engineers moved in yesterday to sweep up and make the area safe, it became clear that it will take weeks, possibly months, to return to normal.
In a small area flanked by Bishopsgate, Leadenhall Street and Houndsditch, buildings had buckled from the ferocity of the blast.
Every window in the Commercial Union tower, next to St Mary Axe, where the van was parked, was smashed, and a 12ft deep crater was left.
Windows in the adjoining Natwest Tower were blasted out all the way to the top of the 600ft building.
Through the holes in the side of the Hongkong Banking Group building in Bishopsgate, papers fluttered on desks, books were scattered around the rooms.
Shards of glass were still falling 12 hours after the blast and computers had been blown on to the pavement.
The explosion came 20 minutes after a coded warning to British Rail at Waterloo, which sent police to the wrong location outside the Stock Exchange.
A warning about the Staples Corner bomb was received at 12.20am at a telephone exchange in Portadown, Northern Ireland.
It exploded at 1.10am, seconds after two police officers sent to inspect what they thought was an abandoned white van under the flyover received the warning.
As they fled, the bomb blew up the northbound lanes of the Edgware Road flyover, destorying some of its supports and a nearby a B & Q DIY warehouse.
Police said it would be months before the traffic gateway to the north was normal.
They believe the flyover may have to be demolished.
One of the first jobs Mr Kenneth Clarke, the new Home Secretary, is to decide on whether the task of gathering intelligence on Irish terrorism on the mainland should be given to MI5 rather than the Special Branch.
Two-way fight for Labour
by David Wastell Political Editor
A TWO-WAY fight for the Labour leadership between John Smith, the shadow Chancellor, and Bryan Gould, shadow Environment Secretary, will begin tomorrow when Neil Kinnock announces his intention to resign.
Mr Gould was under pressure from front-bench colleagues last night to declare his candidature as soon as Mr Kinnock makes his decision public, in an attempt to head off Mr Smith, who is widely regarded as the favourite.
Gordon Brown, Tony Blair and Robin Cook are likely to back Mr Smith rather than stand themselves.
The likely shape of the leadership contest emerged yesterday as Labour began an inquest on its election defeat.
Senior front-benchers called for the party to reflect and rebuild, rather than offer ‘instant wisdom’ on the reasons it lost.
But the battle to take over as Labour leader will become the focus for a potentially acrimonious debate between the two wings of the party over the cause of the defeat.
Pressure to move to a policy of electoral reform is certain to grow, and the Left is expected to line up behind Mr Gould by calling for a radical rethink of economic policy.
Mr Gould, a prominent Euro-sceptic in the early 1980s, is likely to argue for the commitment to maintaining sterling's value within the Exchange Rate Mechanism to be ditched, to increase a Labour government's room for manoeuvre.
Tomorrow Mr Kinnock will call for his successor to be chosen ‘sooner rather than later’ and will urge the ruling National Executive Committee to hold a special June conference to decide the issue.
The leadership will be decided by an electoral college made up of trade unions, MPs and constituency parties.
Divisions were emerging last night over the wisdom of forcing the pace.
Some senior shadow Cabinet members believe it would be better if Mr Kinnock delayed his departure until later this year, allowing the debate on the party's future to unfold first.
They would prefer the leadership to be decided at the annual autumn conference.
There are suspicions that Mr Kinnock, who will not intervene publicly in the contest, is trying to speed up the process in order to boost the chances of Mr Smith, who is believed to be his preferred successor.
Ken Livingstone, the former Greater London Council leader, is likely to be proposed as a candidate by the hard-line Campaign Group of MPs.
But the group is only 25 strong, and Mr Livingstone is unlikely to win the backing of the 55 MPs needed to sign his nomination.
John Prescott, shadow Transport Secretary, is a possible contender but is thought more likely to enter the fray in the election for deputy leader.
Roy Hattersley is to stand down with Mr Kinnock.
Mr Smith is expected to stand with Margaret Beckett, shadow Treasury Chief Secretary, as his deputy.
Labour campaign strategists argued yesterday that the task for a new leader was to convince the public that the changes to the party made under Mr Kinnock are permanent.
‘Voters liked our message but did not have the confidence to make the change,’ one said.
‘The new leader must be able to show that our public and private faces are the same.’
Paddy Ashdown will write to Mr Kinnock this week with a proposal for an all-party commission to examine electoral reform.
BBC braced for a Tory backlash
by Dominic Loehnis
THE BBC was bracing itself yesterday for a Government onslaught over its election coverage, which many ministers believe was biased against the Conservatives.
A senior Tory source said last night: ‘We felt that from before the election there was a will to expose the Tory Party as being wrong.’
He denied that there was a ‘knives out’ feeling, but said many ministers were angry.
The Conservative Central Office media monitoring unit is to prepare a dossier on the coverage.
John Major is reported to have ‘unprintable’ feelings about it and many ministers have expressed annoyance.
Referring to an interview with Mr Major during the campaign, Chris Patten the Conservative chairman, on Friday accused Radio 4's John Humphrys of giving ‘a party political broadcast on behalf of the BBC’.
Michael Heseltine has remarked that the BBC was ‘not known for its independence’.
John Wakeham said: ‘TV has tended to trivialise the campaign.
You had to read the newspapers to understand the depth and thrust of what this campaign was all about.’
The Tory manifesto said renewal of the BBC charter in 1996 would be considered ‘against the background of the much more varied and competitive broadcasting environment which our policies have created’.
The BBC is worried that this is a veiled hint that parts of it are to be commercialised and that cuts will make investigative programmes such as Panorama — which has occasionally angered the Government — impossible to make.
A source at the news and current affairs department said there was ‘understandable distress in the BBC’.
‘There is genuine fear, most of which centres around the exit poll,’ he said.
This suggested a hung parliament with Neil Kinnock leading a minority government, and Tory campaigners are furious that the BBC did not mention the party's share of the vote, which would have shown it performing much better than predicted.
However, a BBC news and current affairs spokesman said: ‘We believe our coverage was fair to all parties concerned both during the campaign and on election night.’
He pointed to a poll of 1,000 people, which showed that they agreed.
One BBC insider said they were expecting complaints from Mr Major about coverage of his early speeches, when his attempts to focus on constitutional issues went largely unreported.
Tory campaign managers complain that the BBC concentrated on the negative aspects of the campaign at the expense of the positive.
Journalists blame this on the fact that Mr Heseltine, David Mellor and the other ‘dogs of war’ who make for the best viewing concentrated on attacking Labour.
The Conservatives also feel the BBC went ‘out of its way’ to find critics of their campaign.
They are particularly angry at the extensive use made of Brendan Bruce, the communications director sacked by Mr Patten.
Radio 4's Today is singled out for attack.
Conservatives complain that interviews with them were broadcast out of peak time and that the programme's interview with Mr Kinnock was soft compared with the grilling of Mr Major.
John Simpson, who has complained about pressure from officials of both parties is also under fire for his report on the first John Major ‘Val Doonican’ rally, in which he suggested there was a tame audience and that Mr Major was no great orator.
Tories concede the validity of both points but they say no one attacked Mr Kinnock for his refusal to be interrogated.
Another criticism is aimed at the Nine O'Clock News on Friday March 20, which opened with three minutes of a Kinnock speech.
On Friday, John Birt, director-general-designate, sent a message of congratulations to journalists in which he defended the way the BBC had handled the campaign.
But morale is low, say insiders.
‘We know that if the Conservatives decide that they want to prove something, they can always find instances,’ said one.
Surgeons fight for girl's sight
by Amit Roy
SURGEONS hoped last night to be able to save the sight of a seven-year-old girl who was passing in a car when the City of London bomb exploded.
A cloud of metal, glass and debris smashed into the car, whirled inside momentarily and was sucked out again.
The girl's father, who was driving, escaped with relatively minor injuries but another passenger, an eight-year-old girl, suffered lacerations to her face and may need plastic surgery.
The girls were taken to Guy's Hospital, where they had operations yesterday.
‘They are both lucky to be alive,’ said Roberta Feggans, a senior nurse.
‘They were amazingly brave throughout their ordeal.’
A children's ophthalmic surgeon, David Calver, performed a two-hour operation on the right eye of the younger girl, Sara Shadoo, who lives in London.
Her friend, Christina Carter — whose sister, Daniella, 15, was one of three people killed in the blast — required an hour's surgery.
She also lives in London.
Michael Lyons, duty administrator at Guy's, said Sara's operation had been encouraging.
‘They think the eye has been saved,’ he said.
The operations had been mainly exploratory.
The girls had come out of surgery ‘looking like they had gone a couple of rounds with Frank Bruno’.
Doctors hope Christina's face will heal quickly and that she will be able to avoid plastic surgery.
But they are concerned about the psychological effect the experience may have on the girls.
Last night Christina was unaware of her sister's death.
Mr Lyons said: ‘There are numerous questions that will haunt even youthful minds.
Will it happen again?
Will they want to go out?
Can they go in a car?
Or a Tube?
Pass buildings with glass?
‘It is the psychological problems that we are going to have to look at.
Already the senior nurse has seen all the patients and there will be a psychological follow-up in the next few weeks.’
Seventeen people were taken to Guy's, most of them with lacerations to arms, wrists, tendons, backs and shoulders.
Six, including the two girls, remain in hospital.
Two men with eye injuries were transferred to St Thomas's Hospital and have now gone home.
The Royal London Hospital treated 29 patients, who all went home.
St Bartholomew's treated 47 casualties, mainly with minor injuries.
Of the four patients who remain there, two were still in intensive care last night.
Tories divided on Scottish question
by Toby Helm
THERE was division among senior Tories last night over whether the Conservative Party should pave the way for a referendum on the constitutional future of Scotland within the United Kingdom.
Although delighted at the election result, which saw the Tories increase their Scottish seats from nine to 11, ministers have failed to agree on how to defuse the growing controversy over calls from opposition parties for devolution and separation.
Labour, which has 49 Scottish seats, and the Liberal Democrats, which have nine, are calling on the Tories urgently to endorse some form of devolution.
Both parties want a Scottish Parliament with tax-raising powers.
The Scottish Nationalists are also considering a programme of civil disobedience in protest at a fourth term of rule by a party with few seats north of the border.
But while some senior Tories are urging a softening of the ‘no compromise’ line on Scotland, others are urging the party to stand firm and endorse an approach which increased the party's vote north of the border by 1.5 per cent.
Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, said on Friday that it was now time to change ‘the tone and mood of Scottish politics’ and added: ‘I have always accepted that a referendum could be an appropriate mechanism for sounding out opinion, particularly on constitutional issues.’
But another senior Cabinet figure said the party had no need to take stock over policy on Scotland.
‘No, we do not need to do that.
We have done rather well in Scotland,’ he said.
Although Mr Major has said he wants the debate over Scotland's future to be extended, he has so far refused to be drawn on the need for a referendum.
He has insisted that when the arguments are fully aired, the Scots will realise that dismantling the Union would damage their economy and lessen their country's influence.
Bill Hughes, deputy chairman of of the Scottish Conservatives, said he was elated about the election results and stressed that the Union was safe in Tory hands.
‘The debate on the constitution is only in an early stage and it is worthy of more intelligent debate,’ he said.
Several Labour MPs will attend a rally in Glasgow today organised by a new cross-party group, Scotland United.
George Galloway, MP for Glasgow, Hillhead, said the new group would campaign for a referendum on Scottish home rule.
The Scottish National Party will make the consitutional issue its main campaign plank in next month's local council elections.
IRA blasts its way back onto agenda
by Chris Ryder Irish Correspondent
THE IRA bomb that killed two people in the City of London on Friday night was intended to drive the general election result off the front pages and put the Northern Ireland issue firmly back on the national political agenda.
This was the IRA's way of renewing its claim to a place in the political negotiations that will shortly begin in Belfast.
Remember, the terrorists were saying, that there can be no lasting peace if we are not involved.
Their claim was all the more pointed for it was made in the City of London, in the heart of the constituency of Peter Brooke — replaced last night as Northern Ireland Secretary — who has led, with consummate patience, the process of bringing all the Ulster politicians to the same conference table for the first time in 16 years.
During his time in Belfast, Mr Brooke, and also the Irish government, have repeatedly told Sinn Fein that there can be no place for them in the peace process unless there is an abandonment of the campaign of violence.
Their stance is underlined by the constitutional Unionist and Nationalist politicians.
Neither will sit side by side with Sinn Fein because they do not concede the right of anyone to bomb their way to the conference table and they fear that, if the talks hit problems, Sinn Fein would once again resort to violence to get its way.
The attack was almost certainly planned long before polling day and would have taken place whether or not the Sinn Fein president, Gerry Adams, lost his seat in West Belfast.
But it underlines the fears about IRA intentions that have been heightened by the result.
In recent months Mr Adams and the more pragmatic elements in Sinn Fein have been trying to distance themselves from IRA violence, and during the campaign they called for talks about the future of Ireland with all parties to the conflict.
This line did not meet with the approval of the IRA hardliners, who have escalated the violence in Northern Ireland over the last year to an intensity not seen since the worst days of the 1970s.
The political consequence of the general election result for Northern Ireland will be the prompt resumption of the inter-party talks about the province's future, probably by the end of the month.
James Molyneaux and the Rev Ian Paisley have already set this deadline for the resumption of talks and even as their two parties vigorously fought each other in several constituencies, joint working groups were in session drawing up vital working papers for the forthcoming negotiations.
The return of a Tory Government with a workable majority of 21 has denied the Ulster Unionists the balance of power and the chance to drive a hard bargain with a minority administration, and they will now buckle down to what will be tough negotiations over the next few months.
Once a team of ministers is assigned to the Northern Ireland Office over the weekend, an early meeting of the Anglo-Irish Conference will take place.
That meeting, which could occur as early as two weeks' time, will then declare at least a three-month gap in meetings to fulfil the Unionist precondition for talks and clear the way for the first of a three-stage set of inter-party and inter-government negotiations to prepare a new British-Irish Agreement.
The talks will not be easy and the fundamental differences between the parties remain as potentially irreconcilable as ever.
But both Mr Major and the recently appointed Irish Prime Minister, Albert Reynolds, have actively committed themselves to moving the Ulster problem forward.
With the election out of the way, this objective will enjoy a high priority in London and Dublin.
Any increase in IRA violence will only give the process added urgency.
Yeltsin defied in vote by Congress
by John Kampfner in Moscow
BORIS Yeltsin, the Russian President, suffered two serious blows last night when the country's highest parliament voted to strip him of direct control of the government by July, and Ukraine made clear it would not ratify a landmark arms treaty between the United States and the former Soviet Union.
With Mr Yeltsin absent from the Grand Kremlin Palace, the Congress of People's Deputies voted down his request for an extension of his emergency executive powers until December.
It then approved an amendment calling for a new law on forming a government by July.
Cabinet members, led by Mr Yegor Gaidar, First Deputy Prime Minister and architect of the radical economic programme, stormed out of the hall and into Red Square, where pro- and anti-government demonstrations were taking place.
Ministers said they would meet Mr Yeltsin today to decide whether to resign en masse.
‘This is the death of any hopes of serious co-operation with the outside world,’ Mr Gaidar said.
The Congress decision was ‘the road to the collapse of the financial system’.
Mr Yeltsin could either plead with Congress when it resumes tomorrow to reconsider its vote or go over its head and call a referendum on a new constitution that would effectively dissolve it.
Meanwhile, foreign ministers of the four ‘nuclear’ republics — Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan — failed after a day of talks to agree on a formula for ratifying the 1991 US-Soviet START agreement that would cut strategic nuclear arsenals by up to a third.
Ukraine has refused to recognise Russia as the successor in international accords to the Soviet Union, and is seeking a modification that would effectively turn START into a multilateral treaty.
Andrei Kozyrev, the Russian Foreign Minister, who attended the talks, said Kiev was blocking agreement by demanding recognition as the ‘de jure nuclear power’.
He told a news conference after the meeting: ‘We must all agree that there should be only one nuclear state’ in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), apparently referring to Russia, which holds about 17,000 nuclear warheads.
Ukraine has 4,300, Kazakhstan 1,600 and Belarus 1,200.
Washington is likely to react angrily to Kiev's stance, the latest example of brinkmanship between Russia and Ukraine over military matters, which could scuttle what was hailed as the most significant arms deal reached by the superpowers.
De Klerk pelted at township rally
by Fred Bridgland in Johannesburg
PRESIDENT F. W. de Klerk was pelted with bottles and stones at a major political rally yesterday in Mitchells Plain, South Africa's biggest coloured township.
The missiles, accompanied by booing, were hurled by members of the African National Congress.
Mr de Klerk had to call off the rally and a lunch at which he was to have been honoured, and was whisked away in an official car to nearby Cape Town.
The rally, which was to have featured all the razzmatazz of an American political campaign, with drum majorettes, a motor cavalcade, bands and balloons, was to have marked the beginning of the ruling National Party's drive to recruit coloured, black and Indian members.
The NP, once the party of apartheid, is determined to broaden its base, ahead of a general election in which it will confront the ANC.
Trouble broke out when Mr de Klerk entered a big candy-striped marquee in the Mitchells Plain town centre to address about 3,000 people.
From the start he struggled to make himself heard above jeers and cheers.
ANC supporters raised placards saying: ‘Mandela for President’, ‘Votes before Visits’, and ‘Kiss Your White Privilege Goodbye’.
Mr de Klerk began: ‘I say thank you very much to Mitchells Plain.
I see Mitchells Plain as National Party territory.’
At this stage bottles and stones began landing in front of the podium, amid general uproar.
Mr de Klerk declared: ‘The NP has closed the book on apartheid.
The NP is the party of peace.
We will make this the biggest party in South Africa.’
But, faced with the barrage, he broke off his speech and was shepherded to his car.
Mitchells Plain, home of 500,000 coloured people (of mixed race), many of whom were forcibly removed from Cape Town in the early '70s, was chosen for the launch of the NP drive to recruit members right across the racial spectrum because it has seen a clear swing of support in the past year from the ANC towards the Nationalists.
Scuffles and fierce arguments between NP and ANC supporters continued long after Mr de Klerk had left.
Meanwhile, the troubles of Mrs Winnie Mandela, who is facing new allegations of involvement in murder, continued.
ANC sources said the funds of the ANC Department of Social Welfare, which she heads, had been frozen on the orders of the movement's treasurer-general after she failed to account for more than 400,000 Rand (£80,000) that is missing.
The Cabinet Reshuffle: An ambition to take the hot seat
by Chris Ryder Irish Correspondent
SIR Patrick Mayhew, the new Northern Ireland Secretary, comes from Anglo-Irish Protestant stock in Co Cork, and has long aspired to the testing role he has won.
‘He wants to do this job above all else and that is a major plus,’ a close friend said last night.
In 1989, when he was tipped to succeed Tom King, Peter Brooke was appointed.
Despite his disappointment then, he continued to interest himself in Irish affairs.
His tall, usually pin-striped, figure was seen regularly at Irish get-togethers in Britain.
As attorney-general, he visited Belfast monthly and knows the top players in the establishment there, and responsibility for issues such as extradition has brought him into contact with senior figures in the Republic.
Nationalists, however, will be concerned at his role in the Stalker ‘shoot-to-kill’ inquiry when, as a senior law officer, he decided in the national interest not to bring prosecutions.
But those who know him well say that Sir Patrick's tact and political skills will disarm his critics and persuade them to work with him.
The most challenging task he faces is to stamp his personal authority on the chairmanship of the imminent inter-party political negotiations when he picks it up from Mr Brooke.
Friends said last night that his legal ability and intellect would add a new dimension to the negotiations.
‘He will not be as emollient as Peter Brooke and that is maybe a good thing at this stage,’ said one politician with a detailed insight into Ulster affairs.
Sir Patrick, born in 1929, educated at Tonbridge and Balliol, is a former president of the Oxford Union.
Called to the Bar in 1955 he became a QC in 1972, MP for Tunbridge Wells in 1974, and attorney-general in 1987.
He is married with four sons.
The Cabinet Reshuffle: Top trio bow out
IT WAS a sad day for three long-standing members of the Government, writes Valerie Elliott.
The main casualties of the reshuffle were the former Home Secretary Kenneth Baker, former Defence Secretary Tom King, and former Northern Ireland Secretary Peter Brooke.
Each will become a Companion of Honour.
Mr Baker, 57, was apparently offered the post of Secretary of State for Wales, but he clearly felt unable to accept such an obvious demotion.
It is known that he wished to stay in the Government and would have liked to have pressed on with the reform of prisons.
It is understood that he would have liked to have been offered the post of Leader of the House.
Tom King, 58, has been a member of the Government since January 1983 when he was appointed Environment Secretary.
Since then he has held the Transport, Employment, Northern Ireland and Defence portfolios.
He informed the Prime Minister four months ago that he would now like a break from Government office.
Peter Brooke, 58, leaves the Northern Ireland office at a critical moment.
He was well-liked in the province and brought Ulster's politicians around the table to discuss the peace process.
His judgment was called into question earlier this year when he sang on a chat show just hours after an IRA bomb killed eight building workers in Co Tyrone.
He offered his resignation but it was turned down by Mr Major.
It is possible that he may still be a candidate for the post of Speaker of the House of Commons.
The Cabinet Reshuffle: Healthy leg up for golden Virginia
by Valerie Elliott
A CABINET seat has long been mooted for Virginia Bottomley, who is unique in managing to elicit praise and admiration even from the die-hard male chauvinists in her party.
She has won her spurs in her role as Minister of Health, where she has frequently had to appear in place of her beleaguered former boss, William Waldegrave.
Mrs Bottomley, 44, has been dubbed variously ‘the milkmaid’ and ‘golden Virginia’, but the epithets do nothing to promote her cleverness and political acumen — she coined the jibe ‘scaring not caring’on Labour's health pronouncements.
She has English rose looks and charm, and while she thrives on being at the centre of events she is still extremely shy.
She embodies the moderate, sensible face of Toryism, but critics would prefer her to adopt a more cutting edge with political opponents.
They believe she is sometimes just ‘too nice’.
A niece of the former Labour minister Douglas Jay and first cousin of Peter Jay, the former British ambassador in Washington who is now the BBC's economics editor, her ratings went up in certain quarters when she once said of Mrs Thatcher: ‘She is not the sort of person one would invite to dinner.’
The new Health Secretary is married to fellow MP Peter Bottomley, who was sacked from office by Mrs Thatcher.
They have three children and divide their time between London and a cottage in Milford, Surrey.
Her background as a social worker helped when she intervened in the child abuse row and played a key role in drawing up new guidelines on how the social services should handle future cases.
She would also like to do more to help women, particularly working single mothers on low incomes.
Mrs Bottomley says she loved being a backbencher, loved being a parliamentary secretary — first to one of her greatest fans, Chris Patten, and then to Sir Geoffrey Howe — and she loved being an Environment Minister.
But of her job as Minister of Health she said: ‘If I had been forced to pick any job it would have been this one.’
The Cabinet Reshuffle: Nearly Man is there at last THERE was a fear that John Patten might never make it to the Cabinet.
Appointed a Privy Counsellor two years ago, his promotion seems to have been a long time coming, prompting some commentators to dub him ‘The Nearly Man’.
When Lord Waddington moved to the Home Office, Mr Patten was invited to become Minister of the Arts, with his own department.
He could think of nothing less suited to him, and the job went instead to his colleague at the Home Office, David Mellor, who subsequently pipped him to the Cabinet.
But Mr Patten, who has been at the Home Office as Minister of State for four years, has clearly harboured doubts about his decision to turn down that Arts job.
Formerly an Oxford don, he is a visionary keen on policy-making, and he will scour the country, even the globe, for innovatory models to translate into policy.
He is brimming with ideas, but in the past has been accused of hogging the limelight.
A Guardian profile said he had ‘shown devotion beyond the call of duty to self-publicity’.
But his world is not devoted to politics.
Mr Patten and his wife, Louise, 36, an executive in a management consultancy, are one of the most affable couples on the Westminster scene.
He is also the epitome of the New Man, and has been known to leave his office to arrive home in time to bath his daughter, Mary-Claire, and read her a story before bed.
He is a devout Catholic who loves classic cars, stodgy puddings and paintings.
At weekends he is likely to be found at his stone cottage complete with Aga, stream and duck pond.
Brought up a gardener's son in Surrey, a country cottage had been his dream.
Now he has gained what seemed to be a pipe-dream, a seat in the Cabinet.
The Cabinet Reshuffle: The good Shephard receives her reward Junior minister promoted from oblivion to stardom
by Valerie Elliott
ON THE DAY of the Conservative manifesto launch last month Mrs Gillian Shephard was given a place in the parade of Cabinet Ministers.
This was star billing indeed for a junior minister and Sir Robin Day mischievously asked Mr Major why Mrs Shephard was in the line-up if she was not a member of the Cabinet.
Was it tokenism?
After pointing out that Mrs Shephard was deputy chairman of the Conservative Party, Mr Major then made what was probably the nearest thing to a gaffe in the campaign: ‘She's a splendid acquisition, don't you think?’ he said to a packed conference centre.
No one there doubted that the lady with a ‘shampoo and set’ hairdo favoured by Tory ladies would quickly become a more permanent fixture in a new Major administration as Employment Secretary.
Mr Major's affection and esteem for Mrs Shephard — Gill to her friends — is well known.
The MP for Norfolk South West, which she won in 1987, she was a key member of Mr Major's leadership team, working under the Chancellor Norman Lamont, and was rewarded for her efforts by being promoted from parliamentary under secretary for Social Security to Minister of State at the Treasury responsible for VAT, Customs and Excise, and harmonisation of EC taxes.
But quickly she was allowed an even higher profile and last October was formally appointed party deputy chairman to take on a prominent role during the election campaign and to sell the party to the business community.
Her promotion yesterday was an inevitable step.
Mr Major clearly thinks she is now ready for high office.
When he failed to promote any women into his first cabinet he insisted he would only appoint on merit.
Mrs Shephard, 52, a former inspector of schools and senior education officer, has always joked that nothing could have prepared her more for being thrown into the deep end than leaving Cromer, where her father was a cattle dealer, for St Hilda's College, Oxford, where she read modern languages.
Her rise had always been anticipated and when Mr Major secured the premiership her political career was more or less clinched.
Her key asset is her ability to get on with everyone.
Indeed she is such a kind and caring person that colleagues have questioned whether she is sometimes too subservient to her officials.
Civil servants have enjoyed working with her, and Central Office young pups brought in to assist the election campaign have been thoroughly spoiled by her.
One said last week: ‘She's such a sweet person that one day when she thought we looked tired and hungry she ordered in pizzas.’
But everyone says it would be a mistake to dismiss Mrs Shephard as ‘a mumsy suburban type’, even though she shows some housewifey traits such as walking from Westminster to a West End restaurant in a pair of sensible shoes where she will then change into high heels carried in a plastic bag.
She is considered incredibly bright, capable, and is said to have been the prime mover in persuading Mr Lamont to reduce tax on new cars — a popular move in last month's Budget statement.
Another appealing trait is that Mrs Shephard can be quite irreverent about the whole business of politics and government and does not take herself too seriously.
When people failed to recognise her during the election campaign, with characteristic modesty Mrs Shephard said: ‘No one knows who I am.
I'm not a famous face.
Why should they?’
All that is about to be changed.
The Cabinet Reshuffle: Leader-in-waiting loyal to Thatcher
By VALERIE ELLIOT
AT LAST month's Conservative local government conference, Michael Portillo delivered a speech noted for its intellectual rigour and its steadfastness to Right-wing ideals.
The councillors loved it, and journalists filed it away for some distant future when Mr Portillo might feature in a Conservative leadership election, writes Valerie Elliott.
He has long been hailed as a potential leader, and for many on the Right he is still the Thatcherite hero-in-waiting.
He remained loyal to Mrs Thatcher to the end, pleading with her to stay on.
This promotion from his post as Minister of State at Environment will delight her.
Mr Portillo, 39, was the original Ribena kid who, as a fresh-faced eight-year-old, beamed on television: ‘Each day a little older, a little wiser, a little stronger.’
The juice clearly did him some good.
He went on from Harrow (County Boys') to Peterhouse, Cambridge, leaving with a first-class honours degree in history.
It was a passport to the Right-wing group known as the Peterhouse Mafia under the influence of historian Maurice Cowling and commentators Sir Peregrine Worsthorne and the late George Gale.
He was appointed by Chris Patten to the Conservative research department but soon moved on to be an adviser to Cecil Parkinson at the Department of Energy.
He so impressed the permanent secretary, Sir Donald Maitland, that he was invited to the key civil servants' committees.
Since then he has steadily moved on and mostly up.
After winning the Enfield by-election in 1984, his first job was in the whip's office, followed by a stint as junior health minister.
He was promoted to Minister of State at Transport, then went to Environment, where he was charged with burying the poll tax and devising its successor with Michael Heseltine.
His claim for a plum job in a fourth Tory administration was evident weeks ago when he sported a new bouffant hair cut.
An aide had apparently taken him aside and told him to do something fast about his image.
His demeanour, intellect and ambition would suggest there was little else to satisfy him.
He lists no hobbies in Who's Who? but then again, he has little time, although he and his wife, Caroline, a high-flying recruitment consultant, are renowned ‘foodies’.
But this man will pull no punches when he is irked: as the head of the Thatcher loyalists determined that she should fight to the end, he threatened to floor a Thatcher aide who was guarding her door unless he allowed him in to see her.
The Cabinet Reshuffle: As one door opens, another career ends
by Mark Palmer
THE FLOW of cards and bouquets was nothing to the stream of very important people arriving at No 10 Downing Street yesterday.
Peter Brooke was an early caller.
His shrug on arrival said more than his smile and when he left an hour later there was no shrug and not much of a smile.
Kenneth Baker arrived shortly afterwards, positively beaming.
And they were all speechless.
Well, almost all.
David Mellor naturally had a soundbite up his sleeve.
‘What are you hoping for, Mr Mellor?’ went the chant from the terraces.
‘A Chelsea victory,’ he volleyed — into the back of the net and onto the evening news.
Then suddenly Michael Heseltine, the conquering hero, was on the horizon, striding purposefully up the street having abandoned his car to avoid the security check hold-up.
‘What are you hoping for, sir?’ the reporters grovelled.
For a second it looked as if he might make a stab at it, but then he saw John Wakeham, looking a little crestfallen, coming out in front of him, while behind John Patten, Tony Newton, Michael Portillo and Sir Patrick Mayhew were about to swing through Downing Street gates.
Sir Patrick was in danger of letting the side down, sporting, as he was, a red rose in his left lapel.
How could you?
‘It's the real thing, not a bogus one,’ explained the attorney general, who was about to be attorney general no longer.
But he had to do better than that.
And did.
‘It's a camellia from Kent, actually.’
Lord Hesketh, the chief whip in the Lords, also went for flower power in the form of a pink carnation set off nicely by a red bow tie and cream shirt.
He strolled up to No 10, the door opened but Lord Hesketh kept going.
Elevenses with the Lamonts at No 11, perhaps.
But no, he passed their door as well and opted for No 12.
The Lamonts weren't at home.
With Chancellor at the wheel, they had left en famille to do the shopping.
Peter Lilley looked like he would have more time than most to do so.
His audience with the Prime Minister lasted less than 30 minutes.
Gillian Shephard, the queen of the moment, arrived on the dot of 4pm looking happy.
Virginia Bottomley arrived in her husband's Ford Fiesta.
Peter Bottomley, the former Transport Minister, quipped to waiting reporters: ‘I don't exist.
You shouldn't talk to ministerial drivers.’
Was this some sort of a clue?
John Patten came out of No 10 looking pleased with himself just as William Waldegrave arrived looking rather less so.
For a Health Secretary he looked pale and peaky.
Meanwhile, amid the to-ings and fro-ings, Norma Major, with her daughter Elizabeth, was turning heads dressed in Liberal Democrat yellow as if she was about to parade through the Royal Enclosure at Ascot.
Island fraudsters feel heat Wave of arrests to follow banks inquiry by British police
by Christopher Elliott and David Renwick in Port of Spain
MONTSERRAT, the tiny Caribbean island that once boasted one bank for every 40 inhabitants, is bracing itself this Easter for a spate of arrests following a three-year fraud and corruption investigation by Scotland Yard.
More than 300 banks have been closed and one American banker has died in mysterious circumstances since police began their investigation, which includes allegations involving former members of the government.
Fraud Squad detectives are waiting for the go-ahead from the island's Attorney General, Stanley Moore.
They submitted their final report together with recommendations to him two months ago and last night, Foreign Office officials said a decision was expected soon.
The investigation has penetrated every level of society on the island and involves allegations of corruption among government ministers.
Tourism dominates the economy of the 12,000-strong British colony, which lies 27 miles south-west of Antigua.
But it had also become a flourishing offshore finance centre with 347 banks before the investigation.
The Yard and the FBI believe that many of the banks have been used in tax evasion schemes, by fraudsters and to launder money for South American cocaine cartels, which moved to the island after the US authorities applied pressure on the Panamanian banking system.
Detectives have been to the island, which covers 39 square miles, three times since they were called in by Christopher Turner, the former Governor.
He said there were ‘good grounds for suspicion that certain offshore banks are used for fraudulent purposes’.
Most of those closed were known as paper or ‘brass plate’ banks — banks in name only, with few assets but with the precious protection of confidentiality and secrecy.
In theory, anyone wanting to set up a bank should have $300,000 (£175,000) capital.
But this requirement could be circumvented with documents showing that shares to that value had been issued.
However it was not necessary to disclose to whom they had been sold or where the cash had gone.
The affair took a sinister turn four months after the investigation began when a young American banker, due to appear in court on fraud charges connected with offshore banking transactions, died in mysterious circumstances.
John Perry Garibay of Michigan, whose offshore bank, Zurich Overseas, was among those being investigated by the Yard and the FBI, was found dead in the sea off the southern part of the island after going bathing with friends.
He was said to have been a strong swimmer.
The problems of Montserrat are mirrored in most of Britain's Caribbean dependencies.
Banks are used for a variety of frauds as well as money-laundering.
They issue certificates of deposits, often based on fictitious assets such as bogus gold mines.
Their worthlessness is discovered only when the duped client attempts to sell them on the legitimate market.
Apart from drugs, detectives believe money is laundered from a variety of black market deals involving arms and high technology.
The FBI is keen to set up a joint task force with Scotland Yard to combat the growing number of insurance, investment and banking frauds in the dependencies which cause a great deal of embarrassment to the British Government.
British detectives would be posted to Miami, Florida, where the FBI's Caribbean fraud team would use their considerable resources to support them.
International: Murder link puts ANC on trial Winnie's co-accused says he lied over alibi
by Fred Bridgland and Ross Dunn in Johannesburg
THE African National Congress and its leader, Nelson Mandela, are on public trial over their integrity and professed democratic principles as they struggle with a mass of allegations connecting Mrs Winnie Mandela to murders and other scandals.
One of her co-accused in the Stompie Seipei Moeketsi trial, who supported her alibi that she was away in another state at the time of the 14-year-old's murder, now says he lied throughout the proceedings.
John Morgan, her former driver, says Stompie died in Mrs Mandela's Soweto home, that she led the assault on him and other youths with a sjambok (rhino hide whip) and then ordered him to dispose of the body.
Mrs Mandela, who was sentenced to six years imprisonment for complicity to kidnap and assault, is free on bail pending an appeal.
Her chief bodyguard, Jerry Richardson, was sentenced in 1990 to death for the boy's murder.
Describing in today's Sunday Times of Johannesburg how he found Stompie's body in Mrs Mandela's house, Morgan said: ‘One morning I got to the house early and I was told by Winnie to pick up the dog and dump him.
I looked through the window of the back room and saw him [Stompie]lying there.
I told Winnie I would never do something like that and went inside the house.
I knew he was dead because he had already been stabbed and had blood on his neck.’
Describing Mrs Mandela's alleged assaults on the youths on December 29, 1988, he said: ‘Winnie hit them with a sjambok, not choosing one target, but hitting whoever was in front of her.
They started doing ‘breakdown’[lifting the boys above their heads and dropping them on the ground].
Before they hit the ground there were already many kicks in their faces.’
His claims are certain to escalate into a big political scandal, following as they do new evidence linking Mrs Mandela to the murder of a prominent Soweto doctor.
Journalists published last week a copy of an affidavit made to the police saying that Mrs Mandela had put a 20,000 rand (£4,000)‘contract’ on the life of Dr Abu-Baker Asvat, shot dead in his surgery on January 27, 1989.
Two illiterate Zulu youths, Zakhele Mbatha and Nicholas Dlamini, were sentenced to death for the murder.
At the time, police said the motive was robbery.
For reasons yet to be explained, the ‘contract’ affidavit concerning Mrs Mandela, given by Dlamini to a police lieutenant, was not presented at the trial.
Sunday Telegraph investigations uncovered a series of pertinent facts relating to the Asvat killing and to the crisis in the ANC, whose leaders have ordered officials to retreat behind a laager of silence and denials.
Sources close to the ANC said that, in late December 1988, Mrs Mandela called Dr Asvat to her Soweto home to examine injuries sustained by Stompie Moeketsi.
Dr Asvat had refused to treat the boy because his condition was too serious.
He said that Stompie must be taken to a hospital if his life was to be saved.
Dr Asvat subsequently reported his examination of Stompie to the Soweto Crisis Committee, set up in 1988 to monitor and try to control the activities of Mrs Mandela, director of the ANC's Social Welfare Department.
The committee was led by the current ANC secretary-general, Cyril Ramaphosa, a veteran ANC activist; the Rev Beyers Naude, a radical Afrikaner churchman; and the Rev Frank Chikane, secretary-general of the South African Council of Churches.
The Sunday Telegraph has discovered that, on the day before he was murdered, Dr Asvat was visited unexpectedly by Jerry Richardson.
Richardson also went to the surgery on the day of the killing, shortly before it happened.
He saw Dr Asvat's nurse-receptionist, Mrs Albertina Sisulu, wife of the ANC deputy president, Walter Sisulu, before going into the surgery.
The doctor entered in red ink on the newly opened medical card: ‘Sent by Winnie.’
About two hours later, Mbatha and Dlamini arrived, registered with Mrs Sisulu, entered the consulting room and killed Dr Asvat with two pistol shots.
They took 135 rand (£27), but left behind more than 300 rand (£60) in the doctor's desk.
In an affidavit given after his arrest, Dlamini alleged that Mbatha, also known as ‘Johannes’, had told him: ‘Look, I've been bought by Winnie Mandela and I must go and shoot Dr Asvat dead.’
Dlamini's affidavit, published in three newspapers in America and South Africa, went on: ‘He [Mbatha, alias ‘Johannes']said I must go inside [the consulting rooms].
I must tell the doctor I am seriously ill.’
After describing the shooting, Dlamini added: ‘When we came back [to Johannesburg from a hiding place in Sebokeng township]on Wednesday, Johannes said he must fetch the money from Winnie Mandela on Friday.
The money was 20,000 rand (£4,000).
I was arrested on Thursday.’
Mystery surrounds the Winnie Mandela scandals.
One concern is why Cyril Ramaphosa, Frank Chikane, Beyers Naude and Albertina Sisulu were never called to testify at any stage of the trials connected with the murders of Stompie Moeketsi or Dr Asvat.
Mr Ramaphosa — who last week accused journalists of lending themselves to ‘mischievous purposes’ to discredit Nelson Mandela and the ANC — was co-investigator in January 1989 for a crucial internal ANC document which accused Mrs Mandela of assaulting Stompie.
The Sunday Telegraph was allowed to read and take notes from a copy of the report, which was taken to Lusaka, the Zambian capital, and given to Oliver Tambo, then president-in-exile of the ANC.
The report was compiled after Dr Asvat had reported his findings on Moeketsi to Ramaphosa, Naude, Chikane and three other members of the Crisis Committee.
The report by Ramaphosa and others to Tambo said that Mrs Mandela had participated in the beatings of Stompie and other youths, and that the Crisis Committee had decided to demand that Mrs Mandela should produce Stompie and disband her private bodyguard, the so-called Mandela United Football Club.
‘She shows utter contempt for both the Crisis Committee and the community,’ the report added.
Mrs Sisulu, who cried as she cradled the dying Dr Asvat in her arms, has maintained a public silence on both murders.
But her friend, ANC activist and employee Mrs Dudu Chilli, whose niece Finky Msomi, 13, was shot dead by the Mandela United Football Club, told how she and Mrs Sisulu used to arrange escapes out of South Africa for youths who wanted to defect from Mrs Mandela's bodyguard.
‘One of the boys came back and gave the game away to Winnie,’ said Mrs Chilli.
‘Ma Sisulu phoned and said: ‘Dudu, we're in trouble.’
Shortly afterwards, Ma Sisulu's house was petrol-bombed, but no one was hurt.’
International: Bishops' gospel of dissent rocks Banda's church
by Scott Peterson in Lilongwe, Malawi
A GOLDEN coffin has arrived in Malawi and now awaits the death of Africa's modern-day Methuselah.
But before Life President Hastings Kamuzu Banda, 85, can safely be put to rest, he must come to terms with an explosive mixture of secular and sacred trouble brewing in Malawi.
Since Dr Banda took control of this picture-postcard country in 1964, he has allowed various religions to serve as opium for his masses, to keep Malawian minds from dwelling on his authoritarian rule.
The one religion offered by the state, however, is mandatory for all: the ‘four pillars’ of the Malawi Congress Party require absolute unity, loyalty, obedience and discipline.
Those bold enough to query the official faith risk detention and death.
As one critic of the regime put it sarcastically, salvation in Malawi can be bought for 20 pence: ‘With my Party Card, I am free!’
The Catholic Church has now questioned — at great risk — the total control of the government over the minds of its citizens.
The Catholic bishops of Malawi have launched their own ‘Liberation Theology’ that deplores official repression.
The Catholic flock — who constitute one third of Malawi's population — are tired of dividing their loyalties.
An unprecedented Lenten letter read out in Catholic churches last month pointed out the injustices of Dr Banda's one-party regime.
‘It is the Church's mission to preach the gospel which liberates from every oppressive situation,’ the letter said.
‘Like Jesus, the advocate of the poor and oppressed, the believing community is invited — at times obliged in justice — to show…love for the the voiceless who live in situations of hopelessness.’
Applause greeted the bishops' letter.
The Church distributed 16,000 copies before it was declared seditious.
In Dr Banda's eyes, the Church has deliberately sown ‘confusionism’, and for this treason the regime has reacted violently.
At an emergency high-level meeting of the Congress Party, it was decided that the bishops should die, according to Church sources and Western diplomats.
Citing previous ‘death squad attacks’, Amnesty International has launched an urgent appeal to the government to safeguard the bishops.
An official demarche, given directly to Dr Banda by the European Community last week, said the EC regarded the government as ‘personally responsible for the safety of the bishops’ and demanded to know why the letter was declared seditious.
The regime has cast its fury in the inflammable language of a Holy War.
An official editorial in the Malawi News entitled ‘No Mercy’— ironically under the paper's motto ‘Freedom of expression, our birthright’— calls the Lenten letter the work of ‘Mafia-style crooks’ who aimed to ‘import IRA terrorism into this country to spread here the chaotic situation now existing in Northern Ireland by non-conformist and satanic Catholics’.
For a President who often refers to his holy status as an elder of the Church of Scotland, these are harsh words.
The Church of Scotland said in a statement: ‘Any threatening action taken against the Catholic bishops in Malawi is a threat to the whole Church of Christ.’
It added that Dr Banda was not an elder of the Church ‘in any meaningful sense’.
To control the damage, the Minister of State in the President's Office, John Tembo, met the seven bishops.
But the bishops would not apologise for nor retract the letter, and Mr Tembo could not convince them that the Congress Party had the right to pass death sentences upon them.
The bishops' letter has shown the possibility of open dissent to a population that since independence has known nothing but calm.
Malawians have learned to keep their heads down politically to survive.
University students summoned the courage to demonstrate for multi-party changes soon after the Lenten letter was read.
For their sacrilege, they were dispersed with guns and teargas, and three campuses were closed.
Now back home, they are spreading the new gospel of dissent.
International: Coup gamble of Peru's Little Chinaman
by Alasdair Ross
AS OPPOSITION to the palace coup in Peru mounts inside and outside the country, it seems President Alberto Fujimori, by turning the guns of dictatorship against his own government, has succeeded only in shooting himself in the foot.
Fujimori suspended the constitution and dissolved the judiciary.
Parliamentary leaders were put under house arrest.
A cordon of armour was parked around newspapers and broadcasting stations, and key members of the previous administration were arrested.
Alan Garcia, Fujimori's predecessor, slipped the net.
His whereabouts are unknown.
But while tanks revved in Lima's main square, Washington shut off aid to Peru, worth nearly £200 million, and signalled it might veto new loans from multilateral institutions.
Japan, Peru's biggest creditor, said it was monitoring the situation.
The Organisation of American States called the action ‘a threat to democracy in Latin America’, fearing it could spark a new round of dictatorial governments.
Such apprehensions seemed justified when on Thursday Bolivia's President Jaime Paz Zamora ordered his Congress to become more efficient ‘so that it will not be necessary to eliminate it’.
In London, the Foreign Office called for a return to democracy, and EC talks have begun on concerted action.
In Berlin, Mario Vargas Llosa, the novelist defeated at the polls by Fujimori nearly two years ago, said he would ‘knock on every door to muster international support and…force the coup-mongers to turn back’.
International anger and domestic turmoil threaten to reverse fragile gains made during Fujimori's 20 months in government.
His government's free-the-market monetarism was beginning to bear fruit.
Monthly inflation had been cut from more than 300 per cent to about five per cent since he took office.
Peru was beginning to share in an increased flow of foreign investment that has benefited the whole continent.
The scale of Fujimori's problem was highlighted as troops moved to take control of Lima's Castro Castro prison, where the high-security rating is no more than a wistful reminder of an architect's intentions.
They got only as far as the gate of Cell Block 6B.
The Sendero Block (named for the Sendero Luminoso — Shining Path — guerrillas it houses) is run by the prisoners themselves.
Daubed with slogans, it echoes to elaborate revolutionary tableaux on visiting days.
The inmates had rudimentary weapons for just this moment, and Fujimori backed down when they fought the troops.
The sudden polarisation of Peruvian politics is the best news yet for Sendero, which has waged the continent's bloodiest insurgency.
It relies for new blood on people aggrieved by the state, and the move towards gloves-off repression that army backing for the coup represents will boost recruits.
‘If [Fujimori]had a script to do grievous harm to the country today, tomorrow and for years to come, this would be it,’ said Gustavo Gorriti, a prominent Peruvian journalist, exhausted after his release from police custody.
He was arrested and his files were confiscated soon after Fujimori's power play.
In some ways the coup is a continuation of the process that brought Fujimori's political movement to power.
The rise of this agronomist and sometime television presenter reflected the frustration of the electorate with Peru's traditional parties, which had brought economic disaster, terrorist violence and rampant corruption.
The disenchantment is still there.
An opinion poll said 70 per cent of Peruvians supported the dissolution of Congress and 83 per cent were happy to see the judges go.
Lima's politicians may rue their election strategy of branding Fujimori, the son of Japanese immigrants, a ‘foreigner’, for the Quechua-speaking majority in the Andean highlands, estranged from a state apparatus that functions in Spanish, sympathised with the man they nicknamed the ‘Little Chinaman’.
In return, Fujimori has embraced the ugliest tradition of Latin politics: the dictator with a cause.
He aims to mop up corruption, overhaul the politicised and ineffectual judiciary, and bypass political pussyfooting in fighting terrorism and drugs traffic.
First, he must regain support abroad, stop the economy from re-entering the tailspin in which he found it and reconquer the two-thirds of the country lost to an undeclared civil war, without driving new recruits into the arms of the guerrillas.
Roberto Lui Wu, a congressman who was a member of Fujimori's small political party, was shot dead by masked gunmen as he had lunch in a Lima market yesterday.
Two other people were killed in what appeared to be a guerrilla attack.
— AP
International: A candidate for the slaughter Democrats doubt that Clinton can live up to presidential ideal
by Xan Smiley in Washington
WOUNDED but still doggedly alive, Arkansas Governor Bill Clinton is lurching remorselessly towards the Democratic presidential nomination — to the delight of White House strategists who are mostly convinced he will be a wonderfully bloodied candidate for President Bush to beat up and kill off in the autumn.
Even as he won the New York primary last week, yet another damaging twist to the army draft-dodging story forced him to mutter implausibly that he had ‘forgotten’ about induction papers sent to him, but conveniently overlooked, when he was a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford.
Even among Democrats in New York, over half those who voted doubt he has the ‘integrity or honesty’ to run the country.
Statewide, only a tenth of registered Democrats voted for him.
Nationwide, some two-thirds of Democrats say they want another — unspecified — candidate to take on Mr Bush.
‘The drop in turnouts has to terrify the Democrats,’ says Paul Tsongas, the former senator who mocked Clinton's 41 per cent in New York by scoring 29 per cent even though he had already declared his candidacy over.
But nobody else looks as though he might suddenly emerge.
Clinton has seen off those who have had the guts to compete for the prize.
Former Governor Jerry Brown of California is now reduced to a spoiling game.
It is mathematically impossible for any Democratic rival to overhaul Clinton in the primary process.
He can be denied the nomination only by an extraordinary blocking coalition of ‘super-delegates’— party bigwigs who make up nearly a fifth of the voting delegates at the convention — and delegates already won by Tsongas and by Brown, plus a handful of delegates (more than a tenth of the total) who are already pledged as ‘uncommitted’.
But it is very unlikely that enough super-delegates, more than a quarter of whom have already endorsed Clinton, would gang up to deny him the title.
The mathematics are quite complex.
Clinton needs 2,145 delegates to win outright on the first Democratic Party ballot at the July convention.
He has already won 1,267 — just under half of those so far contested.
If he wins, say, 60 per cent of those still to be fought, in a thinning field, he will still need 300 of the 772 ‘super-delegates’ to wrap up the nomination.
Some 203 ‘super-delegates’ already promise him support.
Many delegates already won by Tsongas and Brown will probably rally to Clinton on a second ballot.
But there is a lingering ‘brokered convention’ idea where the party's fixers produce a last-minute white knight.
The only other way Clinton could be denied the nomination is if yet another scandal breaks out — perhaps proof positive of his alleged affair with Gennifer Flowers — and he voluntarily withdraws.
But that would not be in character.
Even Clinton's enemies have to admit that, with the bruising he has taken, he is no quitter.
So the chances are that Clinton will be chosen to face Bush on November 3.
Yet the queasy feeling persists among Democrats and Republicans that the accident-prone challenger may still collapse before reaching that final hurdle.
Even if Clinton were to implode, this year's electoral circus has been so unpredictable that many diehard Republicans remain almost as queasy about their own candidate, with the economy still ropey, with Bush's inarticulacy on home affairs still staggeringly uninspiring and with the nation utterly fed up with politicians.
Almost as critical as the prospect of another ‘smoking bimbo’ popping out of the Clinton closet is the probable wild-card candidacy of the pint-sized, populist, anti-politics Texas billionaire, H. Ross Perot, who might hurt Bush harder than he would hurt Clinton.
The White House will not admit it publicly, but Perot certainly has the Bush camp almost as rattled as Clinton does.
‘He would be the most significant independent candidate since Theodore Roosevelt ran in 1912,’ says John Anderson, the last heavy-hitting wild-card candidate, who took nearly 7 per cent of the vote in 1980.
‘Ross Perot is getting a good deal more attention than he deserves because there's a perceived vacuum,’ says Tsongas.
‘My argument to the Democrats is very simple: fill that vacuum before Ross Perot fills it for you’.
In both New York and Kansas, where Clinton also won the Democratic primary comfortably last Tuesday, more than a quarter of voters said they would vote Perot for President if he ran.
Democrats sound as interested in Perot as Republicans do, though most pundits think his pro-business background would attract more disaffected Republicans and hurt Bush hard in Texas.
For Bush, the economic indicators are improving, but not by much.
It is still touch and go whether Americans will go into the election feeling better off than four years ago or whether they will still be blaming their President for keeping them comparatively poor — that's to say, better off on average than anybody else in the world but not by as much as before.
Democratic optimists say Clinton will now shift gears, promoting himself as the candidate of energy and change against Bush's stuck-in-the-mud, colourlessly pragmatic, status quo conservatism.
Sighing deeply, Democratic pundits and brokers are beginning to rally to the Clinton flag.
The New York Times declared edgily: ‘Bill Clinton appeals to hope.’
The Washington Post said: ‘The knock against Clinton is that he is shifty.
To the contrary, he has a pretty steady history and has survived the investigative onslaught pretty well…
Maybe the next phase of the campaign could shift to…issues of substance.’
If only — for the Democrats — winning the presidency was like that.
If it were not for the debilitating character question, Clinton would surely have a fair chance of beating Bush.
But for ordinary voters, their President's character is easily as important as his programme.
International: Old hatreds rise to wreak havoc on the dead
By FRANCIS HARRIS
‘THERE were no political reasons behind this, it's just vandalism,’ Pavel Edelstein said, looking around the remains of the Pribram Jewish cemetery before turning away to engage a group of old women in conversation.
‘It's horrible, truly horrible,’ one of them said surveying the damage.
The tree-lined, walled graveyard on the outskirts of the old Czechoslovak silver mining town, 40 miles south of Prague, had been wrecked, more than 150 headstones knocked over by vandals.
Mr Edelstein is one of the few Pribram Jews left.
He left home with his two brothers in 1939 to fight the Germans, becoming a sergeant-major in the Czechoslovak Free Army and serving alongside British forces in North Africa and Europe.
He returned to find that his mother and sister had been murdered by the Nazis.
He pointed out the family graves: ‘That's my father.
Next to him are my two uncles and my aunt.
My grandparents’ headstones, up there, were knocked over.’
Then he walked off towards an irregular stone monument near the graves, a memorial to the 543 Jews from the area murdered by the Germans.
No Jews live in Pribram now.
Mr Edelstein lives in Prague.
As in hundreds of communities across Central Europe, the Jews and Germans who lent a cosmopolitan air to towns and villages in Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary were murdered or expelled.
But in the forests and hills, the graveyards of vanished communities remain, a target for deranged young vandals and the politically sick.
The Pribram constabulary caught the offenders, three girls and two boys aged between 13 and 14.
Being below the age of criminal responsibility, they will not be prosecuted.
It is easy enough to brush aside the Pribram incident.
But the demand for scapegoats in the economically troubled countries is considerable and extends even to the dead.
There is still racial hatred, although fewer than 5,000 Jews remain in the whole of Czechoslovakia.
In the eastern republic of Slovakia and in Poland to the north, nationalist ultra-Right-wingers have made politically motivated attacks on Jewish graves, leaving destruction and fascist slogans.
In Hungary, Right-wing extremists attacked reporters at a recent rally, shouting: ‘Go home to Israel.’
Even the Budapest government refers darkly to ‘Cosmopolitan forces’ in the media, meaning Jews.
In Slovakia, nationalists talk of the ‘Prague Jewish-Bolshevist-imperialist’ conspiracy.
There have been attempts to protect the graveyards from the ignorant and the malicious.
But these have often come too late.
Many cemeteries have almost been destroyed, either through neglect or by attacks by vengeful or greedy Czechs after the war, looking for gold said to have been left behind by Jews and expelled Sudeten Germans.
But Mr Arnold Keilberth, of the German Union in Prague, said there were individual efforts to forge new relations: ‘There have been voluntary agreements between Sudetens and Czechs to clean up cemeteries in Bohemia.
Young Germans come over and work together with the Czechs on renovation projects.’
International: Taxing time for Germany's believers
by Philip Sherwell in Berlin
IN THE life of secular Germany, the constitutional imposition of a religious levy on taxpayers, be they believers or not, is an anomalous but undisputed historical quirk.
The church tax reaps a handsome £5 billion a year for the Protestant and Catholic Churches and the Jewish community, or about two-thirds of their total income.
There has long been an unspoken consensus across the party spectrum that challenging the system would be to enter a political minefield.
Besides, the levy works to the state's advantage, allowing the church to pursue a useful social role and earning extra funds for federal coffers.
But in recent weeks three backbench MPs from the three major parties have, for different reasons, caused a stir in the aisles with the heretical suggestion that the tax should be abolished.
The number of Germans registering their official exit from the church — the only way to avoid the charge — surged to a record last year as people sought to offset the one-off ‘solidarity surcharge’ imposed to meet the astronomical costs of unification.
‘Tax too high: 35,000 Berliners quit the church,’ announced a recent newspaper headline.
While Christians in Britain lapse, in Germany — home of bureaucracy and regulation — they formally notify the local authorities of their Austritt (resignation).
Every baptised German who has not done this and who pays income tax must also pay the additional church tax.
The levy is nine per cent of the personal taxation level, meaning that most tax-payers contribute between two and four per cent of their incomes to the church (or about £1,000 a year for someone on a £30,000 salary).
The £5 billion raised puts the income of the German churches among the highest in Europe.
In 1989, the last year for which full figures are available, the Church of England's income was £405 million.
The anomaly of church tax — only a few sleepy Swiss cantons employ a similar system in Europe — has its explanation in the appropriation early last century of the bulk of German church lands, the main source of religious wealth and income.
The Prussian crown and several smaller principalities which seized the properties told the churches to raise money from their own members instead.
The church tax became institutionalised during the Weimar Republic and was incorporated into the Basic Law of the new federal republic in 1949.
The same procedure has been extended to the former communist east.
Wolfgang Luder, MP with the liberal Free Democrats, whose radical wing has long criticised the link forged by the tax between church and state, claims the levy breaches European law.
The Social Democrat Edith Niehuis has come up with the dubious argument that, because of the Catholic approach to female priests (who have practised in the Protestant Church here for two decades), the tax is an ‘unconstitutional discrimination against women’.
Franz Romer of the conservative Christian Democrats has proposed that the church levy should be replaced by a cultural and social levy for all.
The religious authorities are not impressed.
Reinhard Stawinski, spokesman for the Protestant Church in Berlin, says: ‘This is an equitable system and a cost-effective system.
It has proved its worth for the church and the state and it is supported by the leadership of the Christian Democrats and Social Democrats.
‘We do not believe there is a realistic alternative.
Of course the church would survive without it.
But it would be a major blow to our work in the community.’
The tax's defenders point out that only between a third and a half of church members pay the levy, and then only in proportion to their incomes.
About 70 per cent of the funds raised by the tax go on salaries for everyone from parish priests to kindergarten teachers.
Critics suggest the wage bill element is excessive; the church authorities argue that they work with people through people.
What is clear is that it is social activities — such as the provision of kindergartens, youth clubs and advice centres — which would be hit first by any change to the levy.
Abolition would be catastrophic, says the Association of Church Workers.
The benefits for the German state are two-fold.
The churches fulfil a valuable social function which the government would otherwise have to meet, and the state receives about £100 million a year for levying and passing on the church tax.
About 56 million of the 78 million Germans are church members.
The churches put the annual number of registered departures at 140,000 each, a loss of 0.5 per cent, although the total leapt by an estimated 50,000 last year because of the ‘unification tax’.
Although they accept that these numbers include practising Christians unable — or unwilling — to pay the tax, they believe that most are people who have long drifted away from the church.
International: Expo 92 will be ready manana Seville struggles to get show ready
by Helena de Bertodano
in Seville
TWO workmen balanced precariously on a ladder and juggled a giant silver letter A into position on a glaring white wall.
The largest national pavilion on the Expo 92 site, a white cube and dome structure overlooking a lake, had finally found its identity: Espana.
With only eight days to go until the opening of Seville's World Fair, workmen are putting the finishing touches to the site.
Or so the organisers would have you think.
But it takes a supreme act of faith to believe that everything will be ready on time.
The basic structures of several pavilions have yet to be completed and the biggest universal exposition ever mounted still bears more than a passing resemblance to a building site — albeit a very colourful one.
Nevertheless an heroic effort is being made to lick Expo into shape before Easter Monday.
Construction work continues around the clock and the site on La Cartuja island is steadily metamorphosing from an ugly duckling into a presentable swan.
An unattractive, cement-filled track in the morning magically becomes a welcoming tree-lined avenue by mid-afternoon.
A sign to Venezuela which points somewhat desperately towards an empty plot at dawn proudly signals the completed metal pavilion only 13 hours later.
Several major problems have arisen in recent weeks but most have been overcome.
A construction strike called for the first week of April by Spain's two largest unions originally dashed hopes of completing the project on time.
But a deal was reached before any serious damage could be done.
Then came predictions that a severe drought would limit Expo's water supply, vital in cooling the site and central to the designs of many of the 95 pavilions — not least Britain's where a spectacular wall of water cascades down the faade.
But the city council has said Expo can have all the water it needs, even if this means cutting off supplies to the city itself, a decision which has not thrilled Sevillanos, already resentful of the ephemeral extravaganza planted on their doorsteps.
Even threats by the Basque terrorist group, ETA, to sabotage the World Fair seem less frightening now that key leaders have been captured.
Spanish secret police have also intercepted ETA's plans to cut off the site's electricity supply during key events.
Javier de la Puerta, chief spokesman for the World Fair, said the recent blows to ETA were ‘very good news’ but added that Expo organisers could not afford to be complacent.
‘We know that we have done everything humanly possible to prevent any incident from happening but nobody can be 100 per cent sure.
There is no such thing as absolute security.’
A potentially crippling problem arose last week when hundreds of policemen from the 17,000-strong security force said they would not take part unless they were guaranteed proper living conditions and pay rises.
The newspaper El Mundo said the conflict emphasised the fragile nature of the government's security plans, but Mr de la Puerta dismissed the threat as ‘irrelevant’.
Indeed, a euphoria seems to reign among those directly involved in the organisation of Expo.
No one will admit to any obstacle in this celebration of national pride.
The fact that some of the buildings still do not have opening licences and lack the necessary safety conditions will be ‘sorted out’.
Any reminder of the catastrophic fire which destroyed the main thematic Pavilion of Discoveries in February is happily dismissed with references to past World Fairs.
‘Look at Osaka which suffered 121 fires and was still a success, or at Montreal which had a month-long transport strike but stunned the world,’ said one Spanish official.
Sir John Ure, commissioner general of the British pavilion, is also confident that Expo will succeed, but injects a note of caution: ‘It's a very tall order for Spain to mount something like this.
I think they're going to make it, but to pretend that it's a foregone conclusion or a walkover or anything like that would be quite unrealistic.
I don't think it's surprising that there are a few sceptics around.’
Although the overall impression is still one of chaos, some of the pavilions are beautifully sculpted and show great imaginative flair.
The Swiss building is capped by a 104ft paper tower shaped like a castle of playing cards, and inside, an unfinished banquet with plates bearing the remains of real food has been frozen in varnish.
The Hungarian pavilion, a hill with turrets peeping over the top, is hailed as one of the best.
Inside, a huge leafless oak has been planted in a glass floor with the roots splayed out beneath your feet.
But some of the larger pavilions damage this fairytale impression.
The US pavilion is a dull rehash of a Barton Myers design used in a previous exposition and will need a super-human input of labour to be ready on time.
Expo's commissioner general, Emilio Cassinello, is adamant that all will be finished by next week.
Standing on top of the Mexican pavilion, still an empty shell with a few plants sprinkled over the roof and a 1,500-year-old cactus guarding the entrance, he said: ‘I am not only sure that Expo will be ready on the day.
I am absolutely convinced.’
International: The whiter than white new face of the Klan Ex-skinhead gives extremism a clean-cut image
by Hugh Davies in Denver
THE EYES are blue.
The hair is crew-clipped.
The voice is engaging and articulate.
Shawn Slater, 25, whose grandfather ran a fish and chip shop on the seafront at Bournemouth, is the new, disarming face of the Ku Klux Klan in America, intent on building on the political success of neo-Nazi groups in Germany and France.
Call him, and you get an answerphone message that ends with a cheery ‘Have a nice day for white America’.
He eventually comes on the line.
‘Hullo, mate,’ he says in the English accent of his late father.
‘Meet me in the snug of Flanigans.’
Nursing a pint of Foster's lager — and ordering another through a hatch at the Irish bar in downtown Denver — black-shirted Slater breezily outlines his strategy.
His message for the 1990s is: ‘Equal rights for all; special privileges for nobody.’
He peddles a newspaper called The White Patriot — the Worldwide Voice of the Aryan People.
He avoids racial slurs — although at one point in an interview he referred to blacks as ‘gang-bangers’— and is running for a Republican seat on the city council of Aurora, a Denver suburb.
‘Within 10 years I hope to be the governor of Colorado,’ he says.
All this might sound like hot air in a Rocky Mountain state where flakey liberals are usually the norm.
But few critics are laughing at a time when ex-Klansman David Duke is able seriously to contend the governorship of Louisiana.
Television networks such as CBS are featuring documentaries with Slater as a main character.
The pro-Jewish New York Times describes him as ‘tall, handsome and affable’.
Thomas Halpern, of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, said: ‘He is young, savvy and using the media to present a cleaned-up image of the Klan with new code language such as: ‘We don't hate blacks.
We just love whites.’
It's baloney, of course, but it's getting them a high degree of visibility.
He's a pied piper of sorts, being somewhat successful in drawing young people to the hate movement.
For that reason, he is dangerous.
He is an adept talker and looks good on TV.’
The League, in a report on the KKK, cites what it calls secret meetings in North Carolina and Arkansas of the two most powerful Klans, the Invisible Empire and the KKK Knights, where leaders, including Thomas Robb, Slater's mentor, told members to begin lowering the racist rhetoric and avoid lawsuits.
Courts are holding Klans responsible for the deeds of acolytes.
The White Aryan Resistance leaders, Tom and John Metzger, were ordered to pay a major share of a $12.5 million award to the family of an Ethiopian immigrant beaten to death by a group of skinheads.
The men were held responsible because they incited the crime.
The United Klans of America were bankrupted when Morris Dees, executive director of the Southern Poverty Law Centre, won $7 million for a woman whose son was killed in Alabama.
Robb, Grand Wizard of the KKK Knights, spoke warmly of Slater at his home in Harrison, Arkansas: ‘He has a lot of energy, a lot of vision.
He doesn't get discouraged easily.
He is just the kind of stable, bright young man we think can articulate our viewpoint and reach a mass of people.’
Robb said that he, too, was running as a Republican in elections for the state legislature in Little Rock, but the Republican Party was resisting his plan to run as an official candidate.
‘They have called me a rotten apple, which, coming from them, I take as a compliment,’ he says.
Angela Lowry, of Klanwatch, a project of the Southern Poverty Law Centre in Montgomery, Alabama, said that ‘hate groups’ like the Klan were multiplying because of hard economic times.
‘Over the past year we noted an alarming 27 per cent increase in the number.
Slater seems to be a new species of skinhead.
The Klan has been trying to recruit a new type of kid: young, middle-class and white.
Robb is obviously manipulating him.
‘The Klans are toning down the rhetoric to make themselves more palatable to Americans.
But there seem to be differences of opinion about how they are perceived, with some getting more political — kinder and more gentle, if you will — while others are as militant as ever.’
Slater was born in Carlsbad, California.
His father, Robert, a US Marine Corps major, was on contract to the CIA for the notorious Vietnam-era Phoenix programme, in which US teams apprehended hundreds of thousands of Vietcong sympathisers for secret police interrogation.
He also served in Beirut.
‘He instilled in me a sense of pride in my country, the need to preserve our heritage and culture.
He died last year.
He was last in England in 1972, and used to say that his homeland was going to hell because of all the immigration.
People all over are getting sick and tired of all these thousands of immigrants.’
As a student at Smoky Hill High School, Denver, Slater wore his hair spiked and purple, and was suspended for sporting a Sid Vicious T-shirt depicting a swastika.
He makes no pretence about his early notoriety as a skinhead, dressed in leathers, boots and Nazi insignia.
‘That was the uniform of the times: the Mohawk cut, the pierced nose.
People might say: ‘Hey, look at this guy; what a degenerate he is.’
But I have always worked hard and paid my taxes.
After I graduated from high school in 1984 I shaved my head and kept my hair short and they labelled me a skinhead.
I've been a skinhead for eight years.
Now I am a Klansman and a politician.
It doesn't bother me what they say.
Let's face it, the hippies of the 1960s are now the politicians, the corporation heads and the journalists.’
He admits he has tattoos around his waist depicting Hitler, Mussolini and Himmler.
‘Critics use this against me.
So what?
I had them done when I was a kid, in 1985 and 1986.
I didn't think anything of it.
I didn't know then that I was going to be a politician.’
As state leader of the KKK Knights, he has celebrated Hitler's birthday.
‘That was just kidding.
The only reason we did it was to gain notoriety.
We made world news.
We got on TV.
We did it for a laugh.
They say we were praising Hitler.
I don't care about the guy.
I wasn't alive in the 1940s, so it doesn't bother me.’
However, he has firm views on the Holocaust.
He rejects the notion of six million dead.
‘Not even a million,’ he says, casting doubt on Hitler's gas chambers.
‘I believe some were killed, mostly gipsies and homosexuals.
Most died of natural diseases.’
Does he like Jews?
‘No.
I don't really care.
I don't hate them.
I feel it is my need as an American to address and educate other Americans about what they're up to.’
He admires the Black Muslim leader Louis Farrakhan.
They share views on the separation of the races.
Slater takes pains to denounce violence, explaining that an incident at a rock concert last year was an act of self-defence.
‘This guy kept calling up my answering machine making death threats.
Then my buddy pointed him out as the crazy maniac making the calls.
‘Here he comes, look out for this guy.’
So I hit him before he could hit me.
‘He came after me.
I got the first shot in: one good punch.
He went down and they carried him out.
I knocked his teeth into the back of his throat.
He filed charges.
The judge said it was self-defence.’
Slater, a hotel chef trained at the Culinary Institute of America in New York (he has worked at a restaurant in Kensington), got his first headlines by being sacked from a grocery store deli counter because of his Klan activities.
With help from the American Civil Liberties Union, he is suing the shop.
He and his blonde wife, Adrienne, a Klanswoman who is expecting their first child next month, now have to be careful, they say.
Slater explains: ‘We have hate messages every day.
Some nut called saying: ‘I am going to kill Adrienne and your unborn baby.’
Every time you go out to dinner, you worry.’
Raised as a Roman Catholic, he has cut his ties with the Church.
‘Mom is not happy about that.
We have differences about religion.’
He said his mother, Eva, who is Irish, had reminded him of the Klan's history of persecuting Catholics.
‘I told her things have changed.
People think of the Klan as those rootin'-tootin' guys who chew tobacco and drive pick-ups.
That era is gone.
I'm an average middle-class suburban guy.
The Klan is full of people like me.’
Election Focus: Common touches
Andrew Roberts discovers some remarkable similarities between today's man at Number 10 and a predecessor from the Napoleonic wars
By ANDREW ROBERTS
IN ORDER to find a precedent for the Tories' four consecutive election vic tories one has to return to the politics of Regency England.
Robert Jenkinson, second Earl of Liverpool, was Tory Prime Minister for 15 years until 1827, winning the General Elections of 1812, 1817, 1821 and 1826.
The similarities between his personality and career and that of John Major are striking.
Both entered politics early and came to the height of their power in their late 40s.
They each became Prime Minister after serving in two of the great offices of state.
And each took over after an assassination — in Liverpool's case, an actual one (that of Spencer Perceval, killed by a mad gunman in 1812).
Liverpool won early popularity as a result of Britain's military victories in the Peninsula, just as Mr Major's reputation was enhanced by the Gulf War.
The charismatic maverick George Canning served with outward loyalty under Liverpool, while continuing to plot the succession.
Mr Heseltine should remember that, though he won the crown in the end, Canning had to wait until the Prime Minister had finally retired.
Liverpool was a curiously sensitive man who presided with firmness and tact over a series of Cabinets containing men of greater ability, several of them future prime ministers.
Like Mr Major, he had the ‘Teflon’ touch — that invaluable ability of politicians not to be held personally responsible for mistakes.
After the Peterloo Massacre of 1819, it was his Foreign Secretary, Viscount Castlereagh, who was the butt of Shelley's philippic: ‘I met Murder on the way, He had a mask like Castlereagh.’
This was more than just because ‘Liverpool’ isn't easy to rhyme.
Lord Brougham believed of Liverpool that: ‘No minister ever passed his time with so little ill-will directed against himself, or had so much forbearance shown him upon all occasions.’
Yet he could not resist the sting: ‘Respectable mediocrity offends nobody.’
Like Mr Major, Liverpool was a candid speaker who was scrupulous in refusing to descend to misrepresentation or fancy political footwork.
For all his lack of charisma he steered his country through Napoleon's blockade, the Waterloo campaign, the agricultural depression, the regency question and reform agitation.
In the three years after his retirement, Britain chalked up no fewer than four prime ministers until Earl Grey managed to fill his shoes.
If Mr Major, having presided over an economic recovery, should also win the next election, the Tories would come within striking distance of Sir Robert Walpole's record of 21 unbroken years in office, set between 1721 and 1742.
Election Focus: For sale: old spin-doctors
By LORD MCALPINE
THE LAST week of the campaign began strangely — like a pas sage from Alice in Wonderland: the Prime Minister on his soapbox one minute, in a space-age film set another.
It was distinctly confusing.
The Tory vote began to seem like the Cheshire Cat that Alice came across in her travels.
‘It vanished quite slowly, beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the grin, which remained some time after the rest of it had gone.’
The opinion polls did not look good.
Then something changed.
I think the turning point came when Chris Patten and Michael Heseltine joked at a press conference on Tuesday, with Mr Heseltine impersonating Neil Kinnock.
Suddenly, there was an atmosphere of optimism in Central Office.
As anyone who has ever worked in 32 Smith Square knows, a winning campaign is a good campaign, a losing campaign, however slick, is a bad campaign.
The Tories should celebrate their victory.
It is a fantastic achievement to win an election amid deep recession; marred by the loss of Mr Patten's seat, and so many of his colleagues.
But now the party must look deeply at its campaign strategy.
The Prime Minister may decide to keep Mr Patten as chairman.
It has, however, become the habit to assume that Central Office is of little importance immediately after an election and to give the chairman's job to some minor figure in the party, replacing him later with someone of greater stature.
This is a habit John Major should break.
For the Conservative campaign was not in reality a very good one.
The strategy was right.
Central Office correctly assessed the good will for Mr Major.
It was right, too, about the nation's fear of high taxation.
But the style and organisation was less than wonderful.
So why did the Conservatives win?
In the first place, the opinion polls frightened the life out of everyone.
A number of people had detected there was something amiss but these people — and I was one — believed that they erred by favouring not Labour but the Conservatives.
In the second place, those of us close to Smith Square greatly underestimated the influence of the press.
The heroes of this campaign were Sir David English, Sir Nicholas Lloyd, Kelvin MacKenzie and the other editors of the grander Tory press.
Never in the past nine elections have they come out so strongly in favour of the Conservatives.
Never has their attack on the Labour Party been so comprehensive.
They exposed, ridiculed and humiliated that party, doing each day in their pages the job that the politicians failed to do from their bright new platforms.
This was how the election was won, and if the politicians, elated in their hour of victory, are tempted to believe otherwise, they are in very real trouble next time.
For me, I would like to see these all-singing, all-dancing stage sets sold, if they can find anyone who wants them, and there is no doubt the press department of Central Office needs to be looked at closely.
Indeed, this week I would like to read in the columns of Exchange and Mart: ‘Spin-doctors for sale, one careful owner; low mileage, immaculate grey paint.’
Election Focus: At Last— It's My Party…
At dawn on Friday, John Major came of age, shaking off the shadow of Mrs Thatcher that had dogged him for 16 months.
Trevor Fishlock watched him show that nice guys can be good politicians — even Prime Ministers
By TREVOR FISHLOCK
EVEN AT five o'clock in the morning, in the flush of victory and vindication, John Major did not let himself go.
No sky puncher he.
No crass shaker of champagne bottles.
It took the urgings of the mob of photographers to get him to raise his glass of fizz higher than his chest.
His speech on the staircase at Conservative headquarters in Smith Square was filled with the proper pleasure of achievement but was not gloating or exultant.
It was as if he had returned to the pavilion to celebrate with lemon barley water after a half-century.
His manner, as ever, was invested with suburban seemliness.
Norma, unshowy as always, smiled shyly.
Perhaps she was wondering if someone had remembered to switch the electric blanket on.
Two things mattered to Mr Major when he set off on the campaign road a month ago.
The first, a deep and strong desire, was that he should win his own mandate from the people.
He felt acutely that he lacked the authenticity that the popular vote bestows upon a leader.
For 16 months, like a prince in medieval England who succeeds to the throne before he comes of age, he was tied to a particular past and regime, hedged by his predecessor's courtiers and advisers, living through his minority and aching to make his own mark.
On Thursday Mr Major reached his majority.
He is at last, and to his evident relief, his own man.
The constraints of the past slip astern.
The second of Mr Major's personal concerns in the campaign was that he should remain true to himself.
He was not prepared to put on an act, to don a tiger skin and go roaring about.
The vague beige word that has naturally attached itself to Mr Major is ‘nice’.
It is hard to believe that an inhabitant of the political jungle can be nice; but in his case all those qualities that we heap under the label of niceness are aspects of the real man.
He really does believe there is an importance in being earnest.
His charm, politeness, friendliness and decency are not a front.
There does not lurk somewhere a Dorian Gray-like picture of an irascible, opinionated Attila; although people say he is not entirely without a temper.
But grey is the word, and now the joke.
‘Grey Alert!’ the reporters used to say when Mr Major approached on one of his studiedly dull campaign photo-opportunities.
His minders were angry with us when we said and wrote that he is no great orator.
But he is not a thrilling speaker.
He does not have the lungs or larynx or the theatrical dynamic for it; indeed, his own preference is for the small-scale gathering, almost a teach-in.
Major was perplexed that his niceness should be considered by some to be an electoral disadvantage.
In the early stages there was anxiety and anger within the Tory machine that the campaign was too flat and unfocused in its response to what was perceived as a dangerous Labour push.
For all the outward show of confidence among Tory front-men there was a real concern that the polls accurately reflected an anti-government mood and a disenchantment after 13 years of Tory rule.
Victory tends to wipe the tapes of history and in the euphoria of Friday dawn the campaign was hailed as brilliant.
But it was not so long ago that many leading Tories faulted it for being mismanaged, diffused, uncertain, failing to set the agenda; in a word, bad.
They had misgivings about Mr Major's diffidence, felt he was not carrying the battle to the strongly challenging enemy.
That was the time when there was a clamour to release the dogs of war and to send out Mrs Thatcher with a fully-loaded handbag.
But Mr Major said that if he tried to be a Tory tough the public would know him for a phoney.
I'll be myself, he said, plain John Major, and what you see is what you get.
His speeches were hardened a little, but he wasn't much good at abuse or jokes or stridency or sneering.
By my observation Mr Major was most effective when he was being himself, an earnest, unexciting, understated conviction politician, meeting people, being jostled.
And his style was much the same at the end of the campaign as at the beginning: he stayed true to himself.
He has a disdain of showiness.
He asked not to be photographed drinking tea.
It can be argued that he won the election not because of the Tory campaign but in spite of it.
The Conservatives never did mount an efficient and effective campaign.
Neither the posters nor the television commercials were inventive.
No great phrase rang through the speeches.
To have a Coronation Street star and Cilla Black introducing your rallies showed an eye for the bathetic.
Many of the photo-opportunities were staged by men with stunted imaginations.
Some of the ‘themes’ launched to illustrate Tory triumphs and Labour follies were duds, of no public interest.
On one embarrassing day policies were unveiled at a press conference and when questions were invited on them there was silence.
The spin-doctors turned out to be young men who would point out a Labour sticker in the window of a public library as evidence of the socialist canker, or who would remark that Neil Kinnock's latest speech was the worst he had ever made.
Some spin.
But above all, the Conservatives were impaled on the difficulties of saying why, since they had run the country for 13 years, they had not taken certain actions sooner.
Their campaign reflected the uncertainties and weakness that led the Financial Times to back Labour.
The campaign, too, demonstrated the ambivalence in a party torn between its Thatcherian past and the calmer consensus politics exemplified by Mr Major.
The piquancy and paradoxes of this dilemma were illustrated when the victim of the matricide was hauled out, praised, sent into battle like a version of El Cid, and then, with mingled relief and regret, seen off to the New World.
In some ways Mr Major himself rose above a muddled and inexpertly directed campaign.
He first of all asked for a mandate based not on the distortions of a month's electioneering but on his 16 months in the leadership, not least his performance on the international stage.
He did not disavow Thatcherism but made plain his distance in both style and substance.
Throughout the weeks on the stump he remained entirely amiable, even if his nice smile sometimes seemed the work of a plastic surgeon.
On the whole his face gave little away, unlike Mr Kinnock's, where emotion raced like the shadows of cloud and splashes of sunshine over a landscape.
Mr Major talked abundantly, often tediously, about tax, because he believed that in the sanctuary of the polling booth people would feel their fearful hearts pounding against their wallets.
And he talked effectively about Britain's place in Europe and the world.
To those concerned about political stagnation, about the need for a change, he suggested, with some effectiveness, that it was enough that change was being wrought in his own party.
He cast himself as a chairman in the new consensus which is in part a return to the old style of consensus in British politics.
He indicated that he will chair Cabinets, not terrorise them.
He suggested that there is a new course and he is the horse for it.
He himself originated the best moves of a patchy campaign.
The bar stool and the soapbox were corny but they worked, up to a point.
His willingness to get into the crowds earned points.
Each thrown egg was worth at least a score of votes.
A number of women have told me they voted for him because they felt sorry for him, because he was a trier, a bit of an underdog, because he was a hubby figure, the man they would most like to buy a pullover for, a man who knows where his slippers are.
All of these things, like his Huntingdon middleness, sincerity, capability and relative popularity, went into the equation, as did Mr Kinnock's relative unpopularity.
In the dizziness of victory many Tories said they knew all along they would win, never had any doubts that the polls were wrong.
But some of the reporting reflected their genuine anxieties that the polls were right.
At Tory headquarters there was a bleakness of expression as counting started.
The Basildon result seemed but a straw to clutch at.
Mr Patten's defeat sent ice into hearts.
Then there was a spread of relief, an outbreak of joy, a contagion of exuberance.
It was salutary that the poll experts were dished, pundits confounded.
The New Statesman's In Memoriam to Mr Major is a collector's item, like the newspaper headlines giving victory to Dewey over Truman.
Reports of the electoral death of the Conservatives were exaggerated.
Having spent so long staring into the national navel we can raise our heads.
Election Focus:…and I'll cry if I want to
No one ever said losing was easy, but in politics it must be done graciously.
No matter how well-prepared, says Anthea Hall, the real test comes when the returning officer takes the stand
By ANTHEA HALL
ON A psychologist's scale of life's traumas, losing a parliamentary seat may not be as painful as divorce, separation or bereavement.
But it is a blow to self-esteem and status that no amount of respect for the processes of democracy can remove.
With the possible exception of Mrs Major, who has to struggle not to look cheerful at the mention of leaving 10 Downing Street, and Sir Denis Thatcher (’ I'm so bloody glad we're not doing it this time’), every good political consort must learn how to be a good loser.
Whereas the candidate has, in a sense, asked for it by choosing to enter the precarious and high-profile world of politics, the husband or wife in the wings has every right to feel resentful.
Being married to even a would-be politician involves many sacrifices which may achieve no more than being landed with a morose husband (or wife) hanging round the house for the next four or five years.
The traditional ceremony by which candidates must stand and face the music as the returning officer reads out the results presents the moment of truth for all to see.
Here is Paddy Ashdown, clasping his wife Jane in a huge, protective embrace at 3.41 am in Yeovil.
His seat is safe but high hopes of Liberal Democrats holding the balance of power in a new administration have already faded.
One observer at Yeovil said: ‘Despite Mrs Ashdown's reluctance to get involved, whenever the opinion polls were announced she was far more demonstrative than she was made out to be.
The party's failure hit her pretty hard and while she was determined to comfort her husband, it was he that ended up comforting her.’
Less than an hour later, at Bath, the strain of running the campaign as party chairman only to lose his own seat is painful to see in the face of Chris Patten, who bites his lip.
His barrister wife, Lavender, is clearly swallowing back tears.
Mrs Patten had admitted that canvassing was ‘rather more stressful when it's your own husband's job’.
She said that she did not think in advance about the possibility of him losing his seat.
‘You have to accept politics is an uncertain business and take it as it comes,’ she said, adding firmly, ‘I'm quite sure he's going to win.’
Now, in the faint light of the dawning day she had to accept that he had not done so.
At Monklands East, John Smith's Edinburgh constituency, the shadow chancellor has been re-elected, but everything about his body language speaks not of jubilation but an understated sense of acceptance.
He was back in parliament but there was no chance of moving into 11 Downing Street during this administration.
It was hard not to see in his wife Elizabeth's face a marked sense of relief.
Rosie Barnes's pretty face, not unlike the young Margaret Thatcher, is etched with disappointment and pain as she hears she has failed to keep her seat for the Liberal Democrats in Greenwich.
Standing behind her in a dark shirt, her investment company director husband, Graham, a local councillor before his wife became an MP and who, as her election agent, has been deeply involved in her political life and aspirations, reflected a mood of deep disappointment.
In Darlington, Michael Fallon, the Education Secretary, and his young wife Wendy, mother of their two small sons, hear the results which meant he has lost his seat.
Mr Fallon has been described as the kind of man who does not suffer fools gladly.
His popular wife, who was a National Farmers' Union branch secretary before the birth of their children, is seen in the constituency as calm and strong, but also gentle and kind.
Mr Fallon, known as the man who described the TV series Neighbours as ‘junk’, has a look of stoic resignation, almost as if some injustice has occurred, while his wife registers a wary but altogether more wistful expression.
Perhaps the hardest of all the faces to read are Michael and Anne Heseltine's, when the Environment Secretary makes his speech of acceptance.
His seat is secure but he is also seeing the man who defeated him for the party leadership on the way to another victory for the Tories.
What is striking about the Heseltines is that both register exactly the same expression of expectant acceptance.
Though they stand well apart, there is an intimacy of clear understanding.
Mrs Heseltine has said that she and her husband talk things over endlessly: ‘I want him to succeed, but I don't want it for myself.
Some Westminster wives do mind terribly and get angry and frustrated when their husband fails or resigns.’
Over the Westland affair, she said: ‘I was sad for him because he minded a lot, but not sad for the rest of us.’
This could be a maxim that all political consorts should bear in mind.
Election Focus: Petronella Wyatt joined the metropolitan set — and Mrs Thatcher — at the glitziest of election night shindigs
By PETRONELLA WYATT
IF YOU can't have Mr Major at your election night party then there is always the next best thing: Mrs Thatcher.
The former Prime Minister flew back from America on Thursday just in time to embark on a royal progress through London's Tory drawing rooms.
From early on it was clear there was little danger of the jollities turning into a wake.
It was the Labour Party that was putting the Dom Perignon back on ice.
In a stark black dress and accompanied by her husband, Denis, and son Mark, Mrs Thatcher greeted friends and supporters.
First stop was a party given by Lord Wolfson, the businessman, at Claridges.
As the Tory vote surged, she swept into the foyer like Mrs Melrose Ape, Evelyn Waugh's female evangelist, convinced that the message had got through.
There was no need, though, to get it through to Lord Wolfson's guests.
They were Conservatives to a man.
Such men of enterprise and initiative as Lord Stevens and the publisher Lord Weidenfeld stood in huddles around television sets.
There was a cheer when Basildon was declared a Tory hold.
‘I've got a £10 bet on a Conservative majority,’ said Sir Charles Powell, formerly Mrs Thatcher's private secretary.
Then the Tories lost a seat to Labour.
‘Oh well, you can't have everything,’ said Mark Thatcher.
Sir Denis was becoming jovial.
‘I feel very well, very well indeed!’ he guffawed, a phrase he was to use throughout the night with growing conviction.
At about 11.45 Mrs Thatcher left, wearing a magnetic smile.
Next stop was the Telegraph's party at the Savoy, hosted by the chairman, Conrad Black.
It was the most ecumenical occasion of the night.
Guests ranged from John Mortimer and Lady Rachel Billington (both Labour supporters) to the Duke of Marlborough (though peers, like lunatics, are deprived of the vote, there is no need to say which party he supports) and Mr and Mrs John Profumo.
Jeffrey Archer and Sir Tim Bell sailed resolutely towards the lobsters and champagne as the Tories cast off for a fourth term in office.
The Tories regained a seat and Jeffrey Archer punched the air.
The Duke of Marlborough grinned: ‘Labour's not doing very well.’
Lord Montagu of Beaulieu studied a television, cigar held anxiously aloft.
Mr Mortimer was dispirited.
At around 3am, people began to leave.
Lord McAlpine, the former Tory treasurer, was holding a party at his house in Westminster.
It was here that Mrs Thatcher came to rest.
Members of the ancien regime, such as Cecil Parkinson, Nicholas Ridley and the Charles Powells perched by her in front of a television set.
As glum Thursday became glad Friday, Mrs Thatcher's severe chic remained as pristine as ever.
Downstairs, champagne buckets sweated.
Upstairs Mrs Thatcher sipped coffee and sneezed.
It may have been jet lag or it may have been the excitement.
Whatever it was, Mrs Thatcher had caught a cold.
‘Do you have a tissue, dear?’ she said to a pretty girl in black.
A tissue was fetched.
Then came one of the blows of the evening: Mr Patten's defeat at Bath.
Eyes swivelled to Mrs Thatcher.
Who better than she knew of the transience of power?
She commiserated with Mr Patten's disappointment.
‘I know how it feels,’ she said.
But all sorrow was submerged in the flashing blue lights that kept on saying ‘Con Gain’.
Even the loss of Hampstead to Glenda Jackson, the Politically Correct actress, failed to dampen the merriment.
(In fact, it increased it.)
Mr Ridley sat smoking and smiling.
Mr Parkinson hopped delightedly from foot to foot.
Lord Hesketh, the Tory Chief Whip in the Lords, made jokes.
By four o'clock it was clear that the Tories had it in the bag.
A smell of bacon and eggs wafted up from the kitchen.
Sir Denis and Mrs Thatcher rose to go home.
Cameramen and reporters were waiting for a statement.
The former Prime Minister briefly held her husband's hand before walking out, blinking, into the flash of bulbs.
Photographs: Eric Roberts, Karen Davies and Judah Passow 
Election Focus: US ripple effect
Xan Smiley in Washington senses relief on the Bush telegraph over Kinnock's defeat, but bad vibrations among Clinton's puzzled Democrats
By XAN SMILEY
FOR AMERICAN Democrats, the news from Britain is bad.
Devotees of the Democratic presidential challenger Bill Clinton drifting out of the British embassy's election party on Thursday night — where ITN's coverage was beamed direct — looked puzzled and miffed.
Well they might.
President Bush had coated his pre-election remarks with the thinnest veneer of neutrality while actually endorsing John Major as ‘a superb leader’.
Although the White House had convinced itself that a Labour victory would be perfectly tolerable, the President is undoubtedly pleased that Britain is still being run by a man and a party he knows he can rely on.
Labour leaders had done well over the past few years to present themselves in Washington as solid members of the alliance and as social democrats more than socialists.
The likes of Gordon Brown, Tony Blair, John Smith and Martin O'Neill have made good impressions, though Neil Kinnock, who got on famously badly with Ronald Reagan but adequately with Mr Bush, is still often referred to by the few Americans who pay any attention to British politics as ‘the Welsh windbag’.
All the same, Americans are naturally most comfortable with what they know, and Mr Major's win is obviously welcome to people in power — both for reassuring them about their closest ally in Europe and for the omens it casts on their own politics.
True, the two countries' systems of choosing a leader and choosing a government are different, but there have been enough historic parallels to make Americans peer keenly at British elections.
Since the Second World War, swings Left and Right have had a knack of coinciding on both sides of the Atlantic, with Wilson riding on the post-Kennedy-Johnson wave, Callaghan coming back with Carter, and Margaret Thatcher heralding the Reaganite counter-revolution.
According to the wily anglophile Right-winger William Safire, the ‘British election means more to America than usual’ this time because the parallels are even sharper.
Just like Mr Kinnock, Mr Clinton, having ‘schmoozed’ for years with the Left-liberal intelligentsia, abetted by a pushy and progressive Glenys-style wife, is determined to shove the Democrats to the centre for the showdown with Mr Bush in November.
‘Electability’ has been the watchword, and Mr Clinton will be at pains to fend off the ‘special interest groups’— militant blacks, gays, feminists, welfare-wafflers, anti-military isolationists — who have given the party a bad name among ‘ordinary folks’.
Just like Mr Major, Mr Bush succeeded a leader who very much knew what he/she thought, whose stamp of ideology was far clearer, who was a hero/heroine to a missionary movement.
Like Mr Major, Mr Bush is frequently accused of being colourless and too pragmatic.
The voters, it is said, ‘do not know who he is or what he stands for’.
He is slightly dull.
Just like Americans, many Britons, with the ideological and stylistic gap between the two parties narrowing, were said to be simply ‘bored’ with the Tories after 13 years.
Mr Clinton, too, is the candidate of ‘change’, of anti-boredom, after 12 Republican years in the White House.
Many conservatives in both countries think their leaders are washed up and need a kick in the pants.
Many Clintonites look ruefully at the surge in Paddy Ashdown's polls after the adultery confession.
Surely, they feel, youthful vigour should outgun out-of-date prudery.
Above all, both countries are facing their worst recessions for many years.
This is where the British omens for Mr Clinton seem worst.
Britain's recession has been worse.
Unemployment is 9.4 per cent and rising, compared with 7.3 per cent and falling.
British inflation is higher, American wages higher still.
Democrats are still stuck with the label of ‘the tax-and-spend party’.
If voters vote with their wallet in both countries, the Bushites — come November — should have a bigger marginal edge than the Major lot on Thursday.
The parallels should not, however, be drawn too tightly.
On the economy, Americans may be better off, but they also have higher expectations.
Americans still have to believe that they and their society are getting better all the time.
Staying level isn't good enough.
The figures may be better, but a sense of directionless malaise in America may hurt Mr Bush harder.
Yet — and this is probably the most powerful message to Americans — in the depth of a recession, with a government looking tired and error-prone, the Conservatives probably clinched victory because Britons like and trust Mr Major more than Mr Kinnock.
The ‘character question’— generally an American obsession — rules in Britain as well.
Mr Clinton is cleverer than Mr Kinnock.
Mr Bush is very much less popular in America than Mr Major is in Britain.
Americans have less patience for bad times.
But overall the British vibration for American Democrats is bad.
Election Focus: Border Battles
John Major has convinced the Scots that he cares far more about them than Mrs Thatcher did, but the real test in Scotland may be about to start, writes Toby Helm
By TOBY HELM
SCOTTISH Tories, awaiting their election counts in the early hours of Friday, were prepared for the worst.
The rout of 1987, when they lost more than half their seats north of the Border, had inured them to disaster.
This time many were braced for heavy losses again.
Against a background of rising unemployment and deepening recession, blamed to a large extent on economic mismanagement by Tories in London, some feared John Major's staunch defence of the Union could only drive more voters to Labour and the Liberal Democrats, both promising a Scottish Parliament.
It might also stoke up the SNP vote in seats such as Perth and Kinross where Sir Nicholas Fairbairn was threatened by the Nationalists who lay a close second.
The pessimists feared the Conservatives' nine seats could even be wiped out north of the border.
But, as the results came through soon after midnight, nervous apprehension turned to triumphant incredulity.
Great victory followed great victory.
Against all the odds it was Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the Nationalists who squirmed, the Scottish Tories who punched the air.
In Galloway and Upper Nithsdale, Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, survived a challenge from the Nationalists and Michael Forsyth, Scottish Minister of State, held off Labour in even more vulnerable Stirling.
In Ayr, the second most marginal seat in the United Kingdom, Phil Gallie, the successor to George Younger, held on by 85 votes seeing off Labour who were thought certain to seize the seat.
In fragile Edinburgh Pentlands, Malcolm Rifkind, the Transport Secretary widely tipped for defeat, stormed home with an increased majority.
In fact, every Tory MP north of the border hung on, and three, to the astonishment of punters, increased their majorities.
To cap it all, the Tories made two gains, Aberdeen South from Labour, and Kincardine and Deeside, forfeited to the Liberal Democrats last November.
The night was complete.
But the argument settled at the polls has broken out elsewhere.
On Friday, just hours after the final election result was declared, more than 300 demonstrators gathered outside the Scottish Parliament building in Edinburgh calling for democracy for their country.
It was an impassioned, largely peaceful protest.
But pro-devolutionists warned that in a week's time they would return in larger numbers, each bearing a fiery cross, the Jacobite symbol of warfare between the clans.
Back in London, Mr Major's reaction was typically sober.
‘Our vote is up in Scotland, our seats are up in Scotland and our argument is getting through in Scotland,’ he said on Friday.
Despite his matter-of-fact analysis, the Scottish success story was arguably Mr Major's greatest personal triumph of the entire election.
It was he, above all, who had determined to tackle the Scottish question head on, he who wanted it and a broad defence of the British constitution to be at the heart of the Tory campaign.
By highlighting the threat to the constitution from Labour and Liberal plans for a Scottish Parliament and the proportional representation system by which its members would be elected, he consistently and robustly drove home the message that the Tories alone stood as the party of Union, of collective strength in negotations abroad and strong government at home.
When speaking to Scots about Scotland, Mr Major's words carried a conviction and a passion lacking so often in the Tory campaign.
At a rally in Edinburgh he attacked Labour and Liberal policies as a slippery slope to independence.
‘In all this we see the very bedrock of our constitution beginning to quake…
‘The Union is, I believe, the rock on which this Kingdom's authority rests…
Separating or separated, we would be tossed on its tides.’
It was Mr Major who saw that in the preservation of the Union lay an issue which would strike a chord not only in Scotland, but across Britain.
He turned defence over Scotland into attack.
Refusal to open the door to any form of devolution was a gamble.
But it paid off.
While the Tory vote rose by 1.5 per cent in Scotland, Labour and the Liberal Democrats lost seats.
The Nationalists were up seven per cent but ceded two of their five strongholds.
The decline of the Scottish Tory Party which had marred the Thatcher years had been halted.
The paradox, however, is that the Tories' revival may merely deepen their problems.
No one, not even Mr Major, believes that the Scottish problem will now go away.
With Labour still holding 49 seats to the Tories 11, the Liberal Democrats nine and the SNP's three, many believe the prospect of five more years of Tory rule will simply intensify the demands for change.
Indeed, immediately the election was over — and as the nationalists planned a campaign of civil disobedience — Scottish Tory ministers seemed to acknowledge as much, recognising that the tough ‘no compromise’ stance needed modification if mounting resentment was not to explode into violent disorder.
Suddenly on Friday, Scottish Tories changed tack.
MrLang who firmly ruled out the need for change during the campaign itself, changed tune saying it was ‘time to change the tone and mood’ of Scottish politics.
Whereas the most the Prime Minister had ever conceded before polling day was a vague pledge to ‘take stock’, Mr Lang, while stressing the need to preserve the Union at all costs, said: ‘I'm certainly not ruling out change…
I've always accepted the possibility that a referendum could be an appropriate mechanism for sounding out opinion, particularly on constitutional issues.’
Here was a different language.
Although determined to keep the demon of separation caged, the party ruling Scotland with only 11 out of 72 Scottish MPs in its ranks had to look ahead.
But how?
Mr Major believes any rebellion can be quelled by extending the debate on Scotland and continuing to drive home the message that devolution leading to independence would harm Scottish interests, reduce Scotland's influence within the EC, and cause political uncertainty which would draw investment away south of the border and abroad.
‘Mr Major is not suddenly going to say let's have a referendum,’ said one Scottish Tory source.
‘He wants to increase the debate in order to get his point across.
‘Mr Major has made clear that if after an exhaustive debate the Scottish people want a divorce then there is no way they can be kept in the union against their will.
But he does not believe it will get to that stage.
The debate which we will have will ensure that the facts are established, that a majority of Scots realise the dangers of going down such a dangerous road.’
Another measure which the Tories may consider is increased influence over their own affairs for Scottish MPs through the committee structure at Westminster.
The Tories believe they have time enough to put over that case.
Labour, they say, is likely to be distracted by deepening internal division over its constitutional plans and its election failure.
The Scottish Nationalists, already blaming Labour for holding out false hopes of victory to the Scottish people, will resort to extremism which will dent their increasingly respectable image.
But danger still lurks for the Tories.
If the SNP manages to overcome its bitterness towards Labour and join it in a united push for change, the cause of devolution could well be advanced.
The SNP leader, Alex Salmond, has already made clear that he could tolerate a deal with Labour.
Mr Major may have played a clever hand over Scotland in the run-up to the election, and one which brought unexpected success.
He has also convinced the Scots he cares far more about their future than did his predecessor, Mrs Thatcher.
Now, with the Conservatives beginning a fourth consecutive term, the real test in Scotland may begin.
Mere promises of an extended debate may not be enough.
Election Focus: Doubtful fraternity from Frere Jacques
John Major must go straight from his victory into battle with the EC, against a backdrop of growing Tory anti-federalism, says Robin Lodge
By ROBIN LODGE
JACQUES DELORS swallowed hard, gritted his teeth and sent off the telegram: ‘Dear John, congratulations on your election victory.
I look forward to continuing our close co-operation.’
Such is diplomacy, but the message did little to disguise the fact that from the Delors point of view a Labour victory would have been infinitely preferable.
Mr Delors finishes his term as European Community Commissioner in December.
It would have been nice for him to wind things up by breaking the back of Britain's opposition to integration.
Under Labour he would have got it: full commitment to the social chapter and to political and economic union.
But Europe never became an election issue.
Now he has to wait and see how much John Major's attitude to Europe has been affected by the gift of five more years in power.
In July Britain takes over the EC presidency.
Some may see it as a chance for Mr Major to show how Britain can use the EC to promote its own policies from within.
But Conservative Euro-sceptics detect a hardening of the party's anti-federalist position.
They point to what they see as the devastating effect of the Exchange Rate Mechanism on keeping interest rates high and maintaining a debt-driven recession.
There is also a growing belief among City analysts that the criteria for monetary union are unlikely to be fulfilled, particularly by countries such as Italy.
But if Mr Major is at heart opposed to greater union, Britain's policy is likely to be affected by the institutional pressures of Whitehall, which has over the years committed itself to the pro-European line.
In the past few days Mr Delors has signalled his determination to boost the executive powers held by Brussels.
He is also attempting to push through a plan to increase the EC Budget by 30 per cent— costing British taxpayers an additional £1 billion a year — with the aim of raising the Budget from its present level of about £4 billion to £30 billion by 1997.
Britain can be expected to use a series of meetings to resist such proposals.
On April 28 the agriculture ministers will meet in Brussels.
The Government will maintain resistance to farm reforms which it believes discriminate against large British concerns.
Two days later the Employment Secretary will join battle in the Social Affairs Council over the 48-hour week and workless Sunday.
On May 1 the foreign ministers will meet for two days of talks on how much of a say Brussels should have in working out joint foreign policy.
Britain, is determined that it should be worked out by member governments.
The following week the Environment Secretary flies to Luxembourg to voice reservations over a planned EC tax on fossil fuels.
European finance ministers meet in Lisbon on May 8, when Britain is expected to press home its opposition to the Delors Budget proposals.
Mr Major will need allies.
So far the omens from Germany appear good.
Quite apart from sympathising with some of Britain's doubts over certain Brussels policies — the Budget proposals in particular— Chancellor Helmut Kohl is especially keen to promote an alliance between European Conservative and Christian Democrat parties.
In his message of greetings to Mr Major — in which he used the intimate German du form of address, rather than the formal Sie he uses in exchanges with President Franois Mitterrand — Mr Kohl emphasised that the election result was ‘a deserved honour for you and a great encouragement for all of us who share the same convictions’.
Perhaps so, but Mr Kohl was careful not to mention that a Christian Democrat alliance is inseparable from commitment to federalism.
And while du is sure to have gone down very well with Mr Major, he is far from ready for the F-word.
Election Focus: The Big Fall
After nightmare on Kinnock Street David Wastell, Political Editor, finds Labour about to be trapped in the maze of a leadership battle compounded by a shrinking power base and the grip of union barons
By DAVID WASTELL
IT WAS the result they least expected and most feared.
They believed they had come tantalisingly close, but they had failed.
In the small hours of Friday, the real nightmare on Kinnock Street began.
How, it was being asked, could Labour have done better?
How, after 13 years in opposition, could the party have done more?
It had changed half its policies, modernised its machine, replaced two leaders.
And did the fourth consecutive Tory victory imply that Her Majesty's loyal Opposition was destined to remain so for the foreseeable future?
In nine years as leader, Neil Kinnock had done everything possible to tailor himself to the demands of the electorate.
He had made himself prime ministerial: adopting double-breasted suits and gold-rimmed spectacles, shortening his sentences and restraining his instinctive jerks of the head.
Labour had taken on a flagging government in the midst of the longest recession since the last world war.
‘It is difficult to see what more we could have done,’ said one gloomy Labour frontbencher on Friday.
‘If we cannot win now, when everything is against the Government, when can we ever win again?’
The party's spin-doctors had remained sceptical about the polls, but they were expecting to be able to argue that the Conservatives had lost their mandate, even if they were clinging to power in a hung parliament.
As it is, the swing to Labour was a feeble 2.1 per cent, scarcely more than it achieved in 1987, and well short of the 5.2 per cent to the Tories which brought Mrs Thatcher to power in 1979.
The Conservative share of the vote was scarcely down on last time; Mr Major's mandate is secure.
Campaigning mistakes there may have been.
This weekend Labour and Tory strategists agreed on the worst of them: the triumphalism that crept into Labour's Sheffield rally, a week before polling day; the decision to push constitutional change to the top of the agenda in the final week.
The former, combined with an opinion poll lead which caused a sharp plunge in the stock markets, frightened off wavering voters; the latter obscured issues such as health and the recession with which Labour ought to have concluded its campaign.
By last Tuesday night, the Conservative chairman, Chris Patten, presented to the Prime Minister the worst case envisaged by party researchers: 305 seats held, enough to keep power in a hung parliament.
Never mind the opinion polls, he said, there was a possibility of up to 40 seats more.
The reality sinking in for newly-elected Labour MPs this weekend is that Mr Patten's estimate was right.
What now, they are asking, is the future for the Left in Britain?
Ask any senior Labour politician the reason for defeat and he demurs.
Press again, and the faintest of murmurs can be heard: perhaps, he says, perhaps Neil Kinnock is part of the problem.
The murmur might become a clamour, were it not that Mr Kinnock is already preparing to leap before being pushed.
Tomorrow he will make a ‘personal statement’ which is expected to announce an intention to resign.
Roy Hattersley, his deputy, would step down too.
The front-runner to replace Mr Kinnock is the Shadow Chancellor, John Smith, 53.
The Kinnock question has dogged Labour for years.
It is a cruel irony that the man who has done most to reform the party and its policies, taking it to within a whisker of power, should be blamed for its failure to make the final leap to power.
But politics, as Mrs Thatcher can vouch, is a cruel trade.
Mr Kinnock has been If we cannot win now, when everything is against the Government, when can we ever win again? consistently less popular than his party.
Despite a slight rise in his approval rating during the campaign, he remains a liability.
To have lost the 1987 election could be forgiven; it provided the final catalyst for Labour's long-drawn out policy reform.
But to lose in 1992 as well— consigning his front-bench colleagues to many more years of frustration — is the death-knell for his leadership.
Even so, replacing him will be a messy and damaging business.
Despite his ambition, Gordon Brown, 41, the shadow trade and industry secretary, is unlikely to take on Mr Smith.
He knows he would probably lose now and can afford to bide his time.
The same goes for Tony Blair, 38, the employment spokesman and another rising star.
But at least one candidate of the ‘soft Left’ is likely to emerge, probably Bryan Gould or John Prescott.
Others might launch an attempt if they can garner support: Ken Livingstone could emerge as candidate of the hard-Left Campaign group.
Labour's complex leadership rules, first used to elect Mr Kinnock in 1983, make a smooth transition impossible.
In normal circumstances, any candidate would have to be nominated by early July.
The outcome would be decided at Labour's autumn conference, by an electoral college of MPs, trades unions and constituency parties.
Under a rule introduced to prevent frivolous challenges in the wake of an attempt by Tony Benn in 1987, each candidate must first be backed by at least 20 per cent of Labour MPs.
That means it is unlikely there would be more than three.
It also means that aspirants will emerge, in a rush to garner MPs' support, almost as soon as Mr Kinnock announces his intention to step down.
Opposition to Mr Smith's candidacy would mean seven months of squabbling and, even if no other candidate emerges, the party would be without clear direction until autumn.
As a result, pressure is growing in Labour's National Executive Committee to convene a special conference, probably in June, to settle the issue sooner.
But another problem lies ahead.
One reason why Mr Smith is regarded as the front-runner is that he has already secured the support of key trade union leaders, including John Edmonds of the GMB general workers' union and Gavin Laird of the engineers.
That would deliver almost half of the trade union votes — 40 per cent of the electoral college.
Although Mr Smith would also win widespread support from MPs and constituency parties, the Conservatives could argue that Mr Kinnock's replacement had been sent on his way by the union barons.
When Mr Kinnock succeeded Michael Foot in 1983, the early support of the ASTMS white-collar union gave him a crucial head-start.
But, one well-placed Labour MP said: ‘Neil may have got away with it in 1983, but I am not sure it is acceptable in 1992.’
But would the superficially reassuring figure of Mr Smith get Labour out of its bind?
He is already being blamed by some sections of the party for the redistributive tax plans which, it is said, lost Labour potential support.
Tax was cited by 23 per cent of Conservative voters in ITN's exit poll as the ‘most important’ issue determining their vote.
By the end of the campaign, 50 per cent of voters believed their taxes would rise under Labour.
Mr Livingstone was one of the first to step into the debate on Friday, claiming that Mr Smith's plans had frightened middle-income earners.
His analysis was a taste of what is to come from the Left: Labour should have promised drastic defence cuts to pay for its spending plans.
Mr Smith's supporters argue that voters were not frightened by the reality of the shadow Budget but by Tory ‘scare stories’ about Labour's ‘tax bomb-shell’.
‘It is hard to know how we can ever tackle that,’ one said.
‘After all, we will always be offering a more progressive tax system than the Conservatives.’
Or is it that the working class has shrunk to a level which means it can never put Labour into power?
By the end of last week, Conservative strategists were talking about broadening Tory support still further from the 42 per cent achieved on Thursday.
This, it was said, was the possibility opened up by Mr Major's consensual strategy.
‘Our task is to push up our share to the mid-40s, as in the 1950s, and even to 50 per cent,’ a senior Tory said.
‘We must aim to raise the baseline of our support by making John Major's principles even more accessible.’
Such a strategy would also help blunt the impact of the next move which Labour seems almost certain to take: endorsement of electoral reform, opening the way to a pre-election pact with the Liberal Democrats.
This would produce the ‘fundamental realignment on the Left’ which Paddy Ashdown has said would be the inevitable result of a fourth Labour defeat.
For several years some shadow Cabinet members — notably Robin Cook — have argued that electoral reform is the way forward for the party.
Others are now likely to join in, and the issue is likely to become a crucial element of the Labour leadership battle.
The unions backing Mr Smith are moving towards endorsement of proportional representation; Mr Smith himself is said to be open-minded.
But other shadow Cabinet members are sceptical.
After all, they point out, the decision to raise the issue in the closing stage of the election distracted attention from Labour's strongest ground.
Nor is it clear that support for proportional representation would win votes: in the ITN exit poll, 52 per cent said they preferred the present system, including 45 per cent of those who voted Labour.
Strong reservations remain about Mr Ashdown's party, despite much common ground.
‘To do a deal with the Liberal Democrats would be to help put in power a party which has just lost a share of its vote,’ said one source.
Others argue that Labour would first have to win power on its own merits — a point that will be made again and again by such figures as Mr Blair in the weeks ahead.
PR, they say, cannot be allowed to obscure the other changes which Labour must make: a drastic reduction in the influence of the trade unions, which voters find increasingly repellent, and recruitment of a broader basis of support.
‘There is no iron law of politics that says the Conservatives always win elections,’ Mr Blair said.
‘We were serious contenders for government in this election because of the changes in the Labour Party which Neil Kinnock put through.
Our first task now is to continue the reforms which we have already begun.’
Election Focus: When nearly isn't quite good enough
When he was just in sight of the promised land, Neil Kinnock stumbled.
Can he rise again, or is it all over for the Moses who led the Labour Party out of the wilderness, asks James Langton
By JAMES LANGTON
IF ONLY, they are already saying.
If only it had been that nice John Smith, with his twinkling accountant's eyes and trust-me smile.
Then Labour would have walked it.
Neil Kinnock?
Never quite thought he had what it takes.
Yet Neil Kinnock nearly took them all the way.
From the shambles of the 1983 election he took the wreckage of the Labour Party and rebuilt it.
The opinion polls said that the Shadow Chancellor would have been the better man to defeat the Conservatives.
Still, we all know about the opinion polls.
It was the same polls that said Neil Kinnock looked a winner.
It was in the stale stink of the sports hall at Pont Llanfraith leisure centre that he at last looked like a loser: hands thrust deep in the pockets of his best suit, face set solid with emotion, like a football manager who has just lost the Cup Final.
He had won the biggest-ever majority in this corner of South Wales but it was not enough.
So the Kinnock entourage fled into the night for London.
Inside, a bowl of red roses wilted under the lights of a makeshift television studio he could not face.
When the journalists looked up from their notebooks and cameras, they had all gone, the multitude of minders, aides and advisers, as if none of this had ever happened.
Outside, someone found the press coach, deserted and with the engine running.
Now, as he sits at home with his wife and children in their suburban house in Ealing, the revisionists are wandering the streets.
The campaign was wrong, the policies were wrong, the leader was wrong.
Tomorrow, Mr Kinnock will make a personal statement about his future as leader of the Labour Party.
He is expected to resign.
Mr Kinnock knew all along he walked a tightrope.
The Labour Party he remade is a curious pile of contradictions balanced against each other to provide a stable whole.
One wrong move and the lot collapses.
Likewise with his personality.
His inner strength is forged in his relationship with his wife, Glenys.
Perhaps only she knows the journey he has made, from the cocky Jack-the-lad who neglected the discipline of academic study for the raw excitement of Left-wing politics to the measured politician with an answer for everyone.
He knew that success depended on the latter and was endangered by the former.
On Wednesday he returned to Wales on his personal campaign jet, emblazoned with red roses.
As it banked over the Cambrian Mountains, the reservoir which featured in the first party political broadcast sparkled far below.
His head of press, Hilary Coffman, slipped a tape of Labour's thumping campaign tune on the aircraft's intercom.
The airline served champagne to mark this last flight.
Mr Kinnock was the only person to refuse a glass.
The occasion was bursting with barely suppressed triumph.
As we landed at Cardiff, those in the seats closest to his party heard the Labour leader holding himself in check: ‘Prime Ministerial.
Prime Ministerial.
Very double-breasted.’
So Labour celebrated while the Tories got stuck in and won the election.
Despite their best efforts not to, they had been doing so since the giant rally at Sheffield a week earlier.
It was then that the Labour campaign began to run out of steam.
It was also then that Mr Kinnock showed the part of his personality he tries so hard to contain, whipping up the audience like a second-rate holiday camp entertainer.
Many will now say that Sheffield was a huge mistake, a symbol of the image-makers gone berserk on a massive scale.
It was not the British way of politics.
Perhaps they are right.
At the time it looked like a masterstroke, a piece of breath-taking audacity.
It was also important for the party faithful, the little people who stuff envelopes and turn out for pointless committee meetings in drafty rooms above pubs.
Mr Kinnock is one of those few politicians, Mrs Thatcher and Mr Heseltine among them, who seem to enjoy meeting ordinary people.
He can kiss a strange baby and make it look the most natural thing in the world — another skill some of his younger and brighter rivals do not find easy.
He also understands the party machine, the smoke-filled rooms, the endless tortured resolutions and rule books.
It is how, as a fire-brand of the Left, he was able to seize control of it in 1983 and then haul the lumbering edifice to the Right.
Many of those who have risen with him are the product of those changes.
If they do not fully understand them, they may be destroyed by the voices of the old unreconstructed socialist Left who will briefly find their voice again.
His personal failure was for two reasons: firstly, that the metamorphosis from the Left-wing backbencher with a CND badge and a baggage of similar lost causes could be seen a mile off.
Too many people twigged — or at least thought they did — that he had done it only to open the door of Number 10.
Secondly, it was often difficult to understand what he was about.
Labour had taken the election manifesto of 1983 — the so-called ‘longest suicide note in history’— and rewritten it on the basis of what it thought the people didn't want.
Labour under Kinnock ditched popularism for popularity.
Explaining this took some doing.
Mr Kinnock had carefully rehearsed his explanations, and in interrogations during the campaign he rarely slipped.
Most interviewers knew that a mass of inconsistencies lay at the heart of Labour's campaign, but getting Mr Kinnock to trip over them was another matter.
But damage limitation is not perhaps the best way to manage an election campaign when you are in opposition.
Whoever replaces Mr Kinnock is likely to be chosen on the basis of all the things he was not: considered, consistent, classless.
It will not be easy.
Labour has made much of its front bench team collectively, but individually there is no one— Mr Smith included — who can provide an easy solution to their problems.
What will Mr Kinnock do?
He is just 50 and apparently at the limits of his political ambition.
He has a devoted wife and family.
Perhaps he will settle for a life on the back benches, cushioned by his massive majority, but it cannot be the most exciting prospect in the world.
Early last week the Sun apologised for saying he had never had a real job, but in truth a four-year stint as a tutor organiser in industrial and trade unions at the Workers' Educational Association 25 years ago does not exactly set him up for a glittering new career.
Perhaps this weekend Mr Kinnock will be overwhelmed by one of his well-known attacks of Celtic gloom.
Perhaps also he will reflect that he has reduced the Conservative majority to its lowest since 1951.
Will he be Moses — in sight of, but doomed never to enter, the promised land?
Or might he just be tempted to make one last attempt to lead the Labour party across the river?
Election Focus: There are some you win…
Apart from the obvious ones, who else did well and badly last week?
WINNERS: Peers of the realm, who can continue to make use of the facilities in the Other Place without having to humiliate themselves at the hustings.
Sam Ward, patissier of Blackley, Manchester, whose sales of red, blue and yellow party-coloured muffins accurately predicted the election result.
Matthew Parris, who spotted on April 2 that Labour had gone awry.
He wrote in the Times: ‘Last night in Sheffield, image throttled intellect and a quiet voice in every reporter present whispered that there was something disgusting about the occasion.
Those voices will grow.’
David Owen, who, though he could not save his two remaining SDP MPs, came out for John Major and confounded those who said his support was the kiss of Dr Death.
Gamblers who find it infra-dig to do the pools, and now have a national lottery to look forward to.
Carol Thatcher, daughter of the former Prime Minister, who won the sweep on Radio 4's Loose Ends after she predicted Mr Major would be back at Number 10 with an overall margin of up to 20 seats; one seat short of 21.
Anatole Kaletsky, the Times economics correspondent, who was the first person to expose the punitive nature of John Smith's shadow Budget.
John Bader of Guernsey, who made a profit out of selling roses to Labour and then sought to safeguard it by voting Tory.
Party Politics, winner of the Grand National.
Stephen Fry, who put Labour's case for higher taxes (in The Daily Telegraph) more eloquently than any party politician, and who has now escaped having to pay them.
LOSERS: The Financial Times, which was slow off the mark in exposing Labour's tax plans and by declaring for Labour has shown itself to be as pink as its paper.
Mrs Major, who now has another five years of red boxes in bed and official lunches in Downing Street to look forward to.
The pollsters, who said that Labour's campaign was swinging, then that Parliament would be hanging, but must now be counted among the Don't Know's.
Tax advisers, for whom Labour's belt-tightening would have meant an accountants' bonanza.
The BBC, which despite backbreaking efforts to avoid bias (largely successful outside the Radio 4's Today studio) secretly hoped a Labour victory would avert a shake-up.
Harold, John and Melvyn, who might have become Lords Pinter, Mortimer and Bragg — until the House of Lords was abolished.
The British people, in that Andrew Lloyd Webber is no longer planning to emigrate.
Mr Major, a promising runner in the 3.40 at Ascot last Wednesday, withdrawn after being declared ‘unsound’.
Peter Mandelson who — though elected an MP — will be forever tainted as the inventor of Labour's ‘glitz’ which reached its grisly apogee in the now-notorious Sheffield rally.
The New Statesman, which ran an In Memoriam piece about John Major in Friday's issue with the cover-line ‘Yesterday's man’.
AND FINALLY…
Michael Heseltine who has won Cabinet promotion but appears to have lost the chance of being Tory leader.
Election Focus: HEALTH
By VICTORIA MACDONALD
THE Conservative election victory will give the National Health Service reforms a further boost.
There is now no doubt that the internal market — with hospitals and doctors each managing their own budgets — will be pursued with vigour.
Even if it is from a base of ‘it is better to be in than out’, many family doctors are likely to apply to become fundholders.
There have been more than 600 formal expressions of interest in the third wave of fundholding, to be announced next April.
If successful, 25 per cent of the population would be served by practices controlling their budgets.
More hospitals and community units, on top of the 157 in place, will want to become Trusts, opting out of health authority control.
It is estimated by those in the health profession that within the next three or four years all those units that can become self-managing will have done so.
But one of the Government's first moves will be to push through the Health of the Nation White Paper, which William Waldegrave, the then Health Secretary, was forced to shelve before the election.
It is almost certain that targets will be set, including efforts to reduce by a third the number of smokers by the year 2000.
There will also be targets aimed at reducing the incidence of strokes, heart disease and preventable cancers.
The Tory manifesto promised to reduce waiting times from 18 months, but the greatest concentration will be on increasing the power of the family doctor in areas such as community care.
The predictions are that this will go further to encompass accident and emergency, maternity and even psychiatry.
One fundholder said that within five years he expected to see practices controlling every aspect of health care.
This has been done in America, but only at practices with a patient-list of 50,000 or more.
There are suggestions this could be achieved in Britain by joining fundholding surgeries.
Most important is that, within hours of the election results being announced, the British Medical Association said it was looking forward to ‘constructive talks’ with the Health Secretary.
There were changes to be made, a BMA spokesman said, but they would be made within the existing system.
Election Focus: EDUCATION
By FRAN ABRAMS
AN AVALANCHE of applications by schools wanting to opt out of local authority control is now expected.
The number of grant-maintained schools could rise to up to 10 times the current 226.
Leaders of the opt-out movement say more than 2,000 have expressed a strong interest in balloting parents on such a move.
More than 150,000 children are already educated in grant-maintained schools but, if the prediction is correct, two thirds of all state school pupils in England and Wales could be under the new system.
Schools which have opted out since the reform was introduced in 1989 have had full control of their budgets, and have applied for major grants direct from Whitehall.
Now they will be given even more freedom — they may change their characters if they wish to do so.
This has led to predictions that a large number of new grammar schools may be created.
A new Bill will be introduced to prevent hostile local authorities from making life difficult for schools which want to opt out.
For example, they will be prevented from spending public money on campaigns to stop them.
In other areas of education, there will be more sweeping changes.
Schools will be inspected regularly by privatised inspection services chosen by the head teacher and governess.
Parents will be given simple, straightforward details of the inspectors' findings.
Authority by authority, league tables of examination results will be published.
In primary schools, there will be renewed emphasis on the ‘three Rs,’ particularly in National Curriculum at seven.
The National Curriculum will continue to be reviewed and slimmed down, and integrated with the GCSE exam.
Pupils sitting GCSEs will find more of their mark concentrated in a final exam and less in course work.
After 16, A-levels will remain the ‘gold standard,’ but schools will teach more vocational courses which will also be used for entry to higher education.
The expansion of higher education will continue — numbers have already risen from one in eight school-leavers to one in four — and polytechnics will be able to become universities.
Election Focus: TRANSPORT
By TOBY HELM
IF THE promises are kept, the fourth Conservative term will see private operators competing on the railway network, a huge road-building programme to ease congestion and further moves to increase choice for airline passengers, all underscored by a commitment to transport safety.
It was hoped that transport would provide the one really ‘big idea’ for the Tory election manifesto in the form of the privatisation of British Rail.
As it turned out, the huge complexity of deciding exactly how to sell off all or part of BR dogged and divided ministers right up to the election campaign.
What eventually appeared in the manifesto was less dramatic.
Rather than wholesale privatisation, which remains a long-term objective, ministers pledged merely to end BR's state monopoly.
The plan is to increase the efficiency of the rail services, both for passengers and freight, by allowing private sector operators to run services on the network, widening choice for customers and increasing competition.
Chosen services will be put out to franchise, and required standards of ‘punctuality, reliability and quality’ will be laid down.
A Rail Regulator will ensure that all companies have fair access to the track and will make sure that those who win the franchises honour the terms of their contract.
The Government concedes that subsidies for loss-making services must be maintained, but support for a radical change in the way the railways are run and financed has come from several large private companies, including Richard Branson's Virgin Group, which is drawing up plans to run trains on key InterCity routes.
A better deal for passengers is already promised under Mr Major's Citizen's Charter, with compensation for unreliable and late trains.
Radical plans for the railway network will be pushed through in parallel with the continuation of the huge road-building programme.
The manifesto contains a promise to invest £6,300 million over the next three years in the trunk road and motorway network, with concentration on the building of bypasses, a further 40 of which will be opened by 1995.
The Government is also committed to new road safety measures, including raising penalties for drink driving and installing more cameras at dangerous road junctions to film those passing through red lights.
Deregulation of the London Buses subsidiaries and moves towards the privatisation of the Docklands Light Railway are also planned.
A minister will be given responsibility for transport in the capital, including the £750 million upgrading of the Central Line Underground service.
In aviation, moves to open up routes to more competition will be continued, and ministers want to bring more transatlantic flights to regional airports.
Local authorities will also be encouraged to sell their airports.
Tory transport policy is geared to increasing competition, widening customer choice and, in the long term, reducing state subsidy and control over public services.
The biggest challenge will be the moves towards privatising BR.
The sceptics argue that the cost of running rail services will prove too high and the return too low for the private sector.
But it was said by many doubters that British Airways could never be privatised.
The Tories take comfort from the knowledge that the BA sell-off has proved one of the most successful.
Election Comment: Living on the margins of error The Pollsters
Smile at us, pay us, pass us; but do not quite forget.
For we are the people of England, that have never spoken yet.
AT EVERY election someone, like Sir Robin Day last Wednesday, will take Chesterton's lines down from the shelf and dust them off.
And, hackneyed as they are, every now and again they acquire a new freshness.
It happened again on Thursday, when the people not only of England but of the United Kingdom as a whole blew a resounding raspberry at all the wise men, the opinion pollsters most of all.
Who are these pollsters, how do they work — and how could they get it quite so wrong?
On the morning of the election, the nearest of all the major opinion polls to a correct result was Gallup in The Daily Telegraph, which put the Tories half a point ahead of Labour (38½ per cent to 38 per cent, a change-round of one percentage point over the course of the preceding week).
Other polls ranged from ICM in the Guardian, which put Tories and Labour neck and neck on 38 per cent, to NOP for Newsnight and the Sunday Times, giving Labour a three-point lead.
The actual result was Tories 42.8 per cent, Labour 35.2 per cent .
There has not been such a bad outcome for the professionals since the American election of 1948 when the pollsters confidently predicted a clear victory for Dewey.
On that occasion, one polling company went bankrupt and out of business.
That will not happen this time, though the election was very bad news for the polling organisations.
Most of them earn their bread and butter from market research, and political polling is the decorative jam on top.
The organisation that calls the general election closest is the one that is most attractive to Tesco or Finefare or whomever it might be when they want to discover what the public thinks of their baked beans.
In the beginning was Dr George Horace Gallup.
This ‘tweedy, rumpled’ mid-Westerner (as Time once described him) was a professor of journalism and advertising.
In 1935 he joined the advertising agency Young and Rubicam to apply his academic expertise to practical matters.
In the following year Alfred Landon ran against Roosevelt.
The nearest thing to accurate soothsaying in those days was the ‘straw poll’.
The Literary Digest ran the best-known, compiling 2.5 million poll cards, which its readers returned.
Gallup said the poll would predict a Landon victory, that Roosevelt would actually win — and calculated the margin of the straw pollsters' error to within one percentage point.
Polling had come to stay.
Instead of setting up branches of his company internationally, he authorised ‘Gallup Institutes’ to be created in other countries.
The British division was begun in 1936 as the Institute of Public Opinion, organised by Dr Henry Durant of the London School of Economics.
Like his American mentor, he too made his name with an election.
In 1945, almost everyone supposed that Churchill would win the ‘victory’ election.
Gallup said Labour would win, and so Labour did.
Since then, polling organisations have multiplied.
Mr Bob Wybrow of Gallup reckons that year by year only about a tenth of his own time is occupied with politics, and ‘about two per cent of the organisation's time’, though of course this doubles in an election year.
Mr Wybrow entered Gallup straight from school, as an office boy, 35 years ago and learned his trade on the job.
His first election was 1959, when the polls did rather better than this year.
Indeed, Mr Robert Worcester, the American chairman of Market and Opinion Research (Mori) and doyen of pollsters in this country, while understandably rueful about Thursday, emphasises that the polls have been ‘spot on’ for the previous three elections.
As much to the point as the previous accuracy of polling is the fact that the polls were pretty much spot on in 1979, 1983 and 1987 at the moment the election was called.
So much so that it has become a saw of pollsters and political commentators that ‘election campaigns make no difference’.
All you need to do is to take the polls in the week a Prime Minister calls an election and you have the subsequent result.
That was startlingly untrue this time.
So no-one got it right, pollsters, reporters or bookmakers.
It would be unkind to talk of the pollsters making excuses, but they do have explanations.
Although they like polling elections as a publicity gimmick — if they get them right — they do not like elections technically.
All pollsters emphasise how unsatisfactory election polling must of necessity be.
They speak of election campaign polls as a musician might of an orchestra out of tune, or a painter of defective paint.
Good polling requires accurate sampling.
This is not a question, as a layman might think, of the size of a sample but of its genuine randomness.
One academic authority on the subject is Sir Claus Moser.
He is Warden of Wadham College, Oxford, and sometime Professor of Statistics at the LSE.
He points out the surprising truth that an accurate random sample of 1,000 people will work whether it is taken from a population of 5,000, five million or 50 million.
But ‘random’ means the pollsters must make a selection of citizens from the electoral roll, and then stick to those names, always going back to them.
The trouble is that during a general election this is not possible.
Random sampling is expensive because it is time-consuming continually to contact the chosen names.
And as one pollster sourly says, the newspapers and television companies want constant, instant information.
So during an election the pollsters work not with random sampling but with ‘quota sampling’.
An individual pollster with one of the organistations will be given not names but a number, the people of certain types, usually 10 a day, who must be polled.
The polling is ‘weighted’ to take account of possible discrepancies inescapable in any human organisation.
These are among the reasons why Sir Claus is so sceptical of election polling.
For four weeks we have heard telecasters mutter about the margin of error.
The truth is, Sir Claus says, that if there are no more than two or three percentage points between the parties, then ‘the interpretation is strictly meaningless’ to a statistician.
He does not want opinion polls banned, as is the case in Australia and some European countries.
That would be unacceptable to anyone who believes in open democratic government and freedom of information.
But he would like to see far fewer — and more scientific — polls.
It is all very well, he argues, to say that voters should know what is going on, and use this knowledge to formulate their own electoral decisons; but not when they are ‘acting on duff information’.
The information is duff partly because the polls have not yet found a reliable way to deal with non-voters, or with Don't Knows (who may become Do Knows on election day).
A poll that would satisfy the aesthetic sense of a professional statistician would, for example, always ask any Don't Know how he voted last time, and collate this information into the poll.
Nor can polls cope with voters who are capricious or plain mischievous.
There can be no doubt that many of those polled recently thought that it would sound nicer — or would somehow tease the pollsters — to say that they were voting Labour, when that was not their intention.
Excuses, excuses?
Well, yes.
But the pollsters have a point when they complain that at election time they are like a doctor asked to make a diagnosis over the telephone.
And they have one further excuse: the fickleness and, to be blunt, the hypocrisy of the public.
It is not difficult but plain impossible for any poll to anticipate swings of opinion, such as certainly took place last week.
Mr Worcester says unblushingly: ‘We will know on Sunday how accurate our final polls were.’
This sounds a little like Peter Simple's racing tipster, who always gets the name of the Derby winner right, but never manages to get his tip into the paper on time, always the day after race.
But as the pollsters say again and again, even at their most accurate they can only give ‘snapshots’ of opinion at any given moment.
To put it further in racing terms, a photograph of the Derby field at Tattenham Corner is correct, at that moment.
It does not show the order in which the horses will cross the line.
There is a final factor.
All democratic electorates are two-faced, the British peculiarly so.
It is unknown to find any subject of Her Majesty who does not say, when asked, that he cares passionately for the Health Service, and believes that more money should be spent on it.
Even the slowest-witted voter has, however, an inkling that the NHS is not funded with fairy money, but with his own hard-earned bunce.
If there is a single secret behind the Tories' amazing, unprecedented four-timer it is this.
Paying income tax was once a middle-class prerogative.
Now, in our classless society, it has been well and truly democratised.
Sixty years ago four million people paid income tax, now more than 40 million do.
And the implications of that cannot be catered for by opinion polls.
One of the memorable election slogans of the century was used by the Christian Democrats in 1948 when there was a serious possibility that Italy might vote in a communist government: ‘In the polling booth, God can see you but Stalin cannot.’
In the polling booth your mind's eye sees the deductions on the payslip more vividly than the hospital queues.
And until that changes — which is to say until human nature does — the opinion polls, spot on as they frequently are, will continue to experience gratifying humiliations such as last week's.
Election Comment: Are we all parking mad?
By OLIVER PRITCHETT
UNFORTUNATELY, I was unable to be present at the luncheon at a London hotel on Tuesday when the Duke of Gloucester presented the first English Tourist Board car park awards.
I feel that this event was another small step towards a recognition of the very important part the car park plays in our culture.
Bridgefoot multi-storey car park in Stratford-on-Avon won the urban award and the rural prize went to the village car park in Downham, in the Ribble Valley.
They will now be able to display plaques.
The reason I was not able to attend the function was that, as chairman of the Parking Facility Appreciation Society, I was hosting an awards ceremony and luncheon at another hotel in London.
After 10 years, these events have become something of an institution.
It is everyone's ambition to win a coveted ‘Barry’ which is a replica of an automatic yellow and black striped car park barrier.
About 500 people attended the lunch in the hotel ballroom where there was seating for only 400.
Those without places hovered behind the chairs and kept moving round the room so that they could nip in when people left their places to collect their awards or for any other reason.
Many of parking's living legends were there.
We were proud to welcome Wayne C. Fairbrother who survived after 188 days wandering round a Birmingham multi-storey car park trying to remember where he had left his blue Sierra.
Wayne's account of his ordeal was published in On the Level, the quarterly journal of the multi-storey freaks.
We were also glad to see 82-year-old Wally ‘Left Hand Down’ Perkins who has selflessly devoted the past 33 years to the unpaid unofficial work of guiding people reversing into the bays in a car park in Ipswich.
Well done, Wally!
At our function he was signing copes of his light-hearted autobiography, When it Comes to the Crunch.
This year's PFAS Child of Valour award went to Wendy Windsmoor, aged nine, who stood for no less that 17 minutes, reserving a vacant meter spot in Oxford while her father negotiated the one-way system.
In that time she had to out-glare three Renaults, four Cortinas and a Volkswagen.
Our Life President, Lady Sybil Clampe, was unable to be with us because she had been hemmed in by an inconsiderate BMW in the station car park in Swindon, but she gave a rousing presidential address over her car phone.
There was very much a ‘municipal’ theme to our function this year as we celebrated the contribution made to civilisation by car parks run by local councils.
This was reflected in the cabaret.
We had the Astounding Reg Atkins who can juggle 12 empty bottles and then toss them accurately into a bottle bank from a distance of 30 feet so that the green, brown and clear bottles go into the correct holes.
There was also a thrilling supermarket trolley formation display by the Safeway Green Arrows.
Now for the news of the Barry awards.
The first category is for Gangster Film that Does Not Include a Car Chase in a Multi-Storey Car Park.
Regrettably, for the fifth year running, no award could be made in this category.
The prize for Best Car Park Love Song went to Patsy Hubcap, known as ‘the nightingale of pay-and-display’, for her poignant number, Are You Just Leaving?
The fiction award went to Lionel Ramp for his novel Bay of Dreams.
This is the story of a young man who falls in love with a girl as he is driving away from a car park.
Shyly he gives her his ticket that still has 25 minutes on it.
Still dreaming of her grateful smile, he crashes his car and it is a write-off.
After three months in hospital he returns to the car park, seeks out the girl and gives her another ticket with time left on it.
The procedure continues for weeks with the man unable to tell the girl that he still buys the ticket even though he no longer has a car, and the girl not wanting to hurt his feelings by revealing that she is just taking a short cut, walking through the car park on her way to W. H. Smith.
There was stiff competition for the Barry for the Most Eloquent Mime Through Car Window.
G. S. Staines, of Darlington, was highly commended for ‘No, I'm not going just yet; I'm still waiting for my wife who has gone to collect a prescription.’
But the award went to Ms Rose Twisk, of Llandudno, for ‘You unscrupulous swine!
I suppose you think that's very clever and macho.’
This year's luncheon of the Parking Facility Appreciation Society was judged an outstanding success.
Guests paid £25 per head for the two-hour function, but as it overran by three minutes, they gladly paid out an additional £25.
Leading Article:
THE RESULT in Scotland has been especially heartening.
Mr Major and his Secretary of State Ian Lang mounted a robust defence of the Union, deliberately challenging the opposition parties on ground they consider their own.
The other parties talked of making Scotland ‘a Tory-free zone’.
They failed, as the Unionists gathered more than 750,000 votes.
Other factors contributed to the Tory revival, Scottish hard-headedness about matters of the pocket doubtless among them.
Whatever the reason, for Scotland to swing even in a small way from Labour to Conservative is remarkable; and there can be no doubt that the brave decision to put the Unionist case at the centre of the argument has been justified.
The Government must now seek ways of strengthening the Union to ensure it continuing vitality, while showing appropriate sensitivity to the nationalistic sentiments stirred up by this election.
Election Comment: A vote for political correctness
By PEREGRINE WORSTHORNE
IF ONE had not been reading the newspapers, listening to the radio, watching television and, above all, paying attention to the opinion polls, the election results would have come as no surprise.
But, of course, one had been doing all these things, ad nauseam .
And as a result of doing all these things, ad nauseam, one had begun to believe something which now, with the benefit of hindsight, appears utterly incredible: that Labour was going to win the general election.
Six months or so ago nobody thought this could possibly happen.
The conventional wisdom was that Labour had no chance of overtaking the Tory Party's huge majority.
Such a swing had never happened before and would not happen this time.
It was also taken for granted that Labour would never win under Mr Neil Kinnock.
Only under a more plausible leader would it ever have a chance, particularly during a recession.
That Labour under Mr Kinnock would reduce the Tory majority pretty substantially, nobody doubted.
‘But not a chance in hell, old boy, of overturning it,’ the refrain went.
‘Next time, possibly, when they've got rid of Mr Kinnock, but not this time.’
That, as I say, was the conventional wisdom.
Conventional wisdom is too flattering a description.
It was the saloon-bar cliche; so obvious as to be apparent to the least sophisticated political intelligence.
What happened, then, to make people change their minds?
Why did Friday's results come as such a surprise?
Realistically speaking, nothing happened.
Certainly nothing happened in my personal experience in the last six or so months to make me change my mind about Labour unelectability.
I did not run into a lot of people who told me that they had been unexpectedly impressed by Mr Kinnock or unimpressed by Mr Major.
If anything, the deepening and lengthening recession made it more rather than less unlikely that the electorate would turn to Mr Kinnock as an economic messiah.
Or so common sense should have suggested.
No, the sole reason for changing one's mind was that the newspapers and television told one that lots of other people had done so.
Nor was this a false impression supplied only by the vastly expensive opinion polls.
All the greatest journalistic intelligences in the business, who had spent the past few weeks travelling around with their ears to the ground, confirmed it.
Mr Major, they said, had fought an appalling campaign and Mr Kinnock a superb one.
Only one journalist, Mr Bruce Anderson, a former colleague, did tell us precisely and consistently what was going to happen.
But since he now writes in a newspaper notorious for its pro-Tory partisanship, the Sunday Express, and is known unaffectionately in the trade as ‘the Brute’, nobody took him seriously.
None of the above is written to rub the nose of my profession in the dirt, although it does deserve to be so rubbed.
It is rather as a precaution against compounding one media mistake with another.
But that is what is likely to happen.
For having encouraged us all to believe that Labour was going to win, the media will now encourage us all to believe that something astonishing must have happened to stop it winning.
Having exaggerated the likelihood of Labour's victory, the media are almost bound to exaggerate the significance of its defeat.
Thus stage by stage we get carried ever further away from real life.
In real life Labour had no chance of winning.
The best it could do was what it has done: substantially reduce the Tory majority.
So in real life this is not the end of the world for the Labour Party.
Yes, it has lost its fourth successive election.
But that is what six or so months ago it was expected to do.
By the same token, it has not been a triumph for the Tory Party.
For in the real world the Tories were never expected to lose their immense majority in one go.
In the real world, these results are neither as good for the Tories nor as bad for Labour as the polls and media predictions have made them seem.
But having given Labour false hopes, will the media now make sure that Labour suffers from false despair?
And having prepared the Tory Party to lose under Mr Major, will his victory now assume the misleading proportions of a sensational personal triumph?
Both these misinterpretations need to be guarded against.
For if one of the main results of this election is that the Labour Party ditches Mr Kinnock as leader in favour of Mr Smith, it could well be a case of reculer pour mieux sauter — a kind of Pyrrhic defeat.
A Kinnock government in this recession would have been a disaster.
In the real world he had to be ditched before Labour could ever seriously hope to form an effective government.
That necessary ditching, in all likelihood, will now be done in time for the next election.
Labour supporters should be sighing with relief.
A Kinnock government in present conditions of economic crisis might well have done in Labour for good and all.
As it is, having escaped this poisoned chalice and been given a good excuse to get rid of a woefully implausible leader, it is still very much in business to fight another day.
Equally important to guard against, on the Tory side, is the idea that Mr Major must now be regarded as some kind of superman.
In the real world it did not require a superman to beat Mr Kinnock.
Here again the media emphasis on the opinion polls was woefully misleading.
Mr Kinnock's election interviews were indescribably awful and had it not been for the polls one would have assumed that they had dished Labour's chances irrecoverably.
All the Tories needed to win was to play those interviews back as party political broadcasts.
No, preserving a small majority was not a triumph for Mr Major in the real world.
Still less was it a triumph for Thatcherism.
What struck one about the campaign was how un-Thatcherite the Tory leaders sounded.
On the eve of polling day I listened appalled to Mr Hurd, on Newsnight, saying amen to Bryan Gould's guff about creating ‘a fairer society’.
If Mrs Thatcher had been on the programme she would have blown the whole idea of fairness out of the water.
What does it mean?
It means an incomes policy determined by government, differentials determined by government.
A fair society and a free society is a contradiction in terms.
On another TV programme there was a most extraordinary discussion in which a Labour industrial expert, Lord McCarthy, sought to contradict a Lancashire industrialist as to the effect of a minimum wage on his company.
The poor industrialist had said that the minimum wage would put him out of business, only to be told by the noble academic that it would not need to if he ran his company properly.
In other words, the Labour expert thought he knew how to run the business better than the businessman.
Again, if there had been a Thatcherite on the programme, the Labour expert would have been blown out of the water.
As it was, his impudence went unchastened.
By Thatcherite standards Mr Major fought a dreadfully mealy-mouthed campaign in which pretty well everything with a cutting edge about the Tory record was blunted.
If the free marketeers really have won the argument in the past 13 years, then the Tory rhetoricians in this election campaign certainly chose an odd way to celebrate the victory.
So my conclusion is that the election result will complete, rather than undermine, Labour's progress towards political correctness.
And it will complete, rather than undermine, the Tory Party's regress from Thatcherism, also towards political correctness.
Two cheers are more than enough.
Election Comment: They nearly caught us napping
By NORMAN TEBBIT
AGAINST all the polls and against the odds, Britain has a Conservative Government again.
A majority of 21 looks pretty slim against the three-figure majorities of recent years, but it should be sufficient for a full Parliament.
The Labour Party was rejected and Paddy Ashdown brushed aside, even in the midst of a long and worrying recession and after the Government's uncertain start to the campaign.
That gives encouragement to all of us who argue that the British electorate has an enormous collective wisdom that has seldom let it down.
But what lessons are there for the politicians to learn?
If Labour could not win at a time of economic gloom, bolstered by the most effective campaign it has ever fought, and facing a Government whose campaign did not really come to life until the last 10 days — then when could it?
If, after almost 10 years of revisionism, of U-turns on nuclear weapons, devolution, the European Community, state ownership, trade unions, the sale of council houses and more, Labour is still unelectable, is it now time or even overdue for Labour to pull up its roots and die, making room for an acceptable alternative to another decade of Conservative rule?
Or, if it axed Neil Kinnock, junked Clause 4, cut the trade union links and purged the remaining socialists, might it have a chance — or would it be just the old SDP?
Mr Ashdown, too, must face a bleak future, having scored only 18 per cent of the vote against 22.5 per cent for the Alliance after what was called a disastrous campaign in 1987.
As Mr Yeltsin preaches that Russia needs tax cuts to save the economy and brings in private contractors to manage a Moscow hospital, perhaps we should conclude that selling socialism, like selling moonbeams, is unlikely to be a lasting business.
Perhaps it is time we had a choice between parties which agree that liberal free-market economics are here to stay.
They could then contest on their competence in managing such a system, and on the non-economic social, moral, defence and overseas issues.
But what lessons should John Major take to heart?
Above all that the electors want him to speak out and act boldly.
The Tories were perilously close to defeat when the April Fools' Day polls pointed to a majority Labour Government.
The contemplation of Mr Kinnock in Number 10 doubtless brought wavering Tory voters back into the fold.
Just as important, it seemed to galvanise John Major.
He seemed suddenly to hear his own call to wake up before it was too late.
By sharpening his policy differences with Mr Kinnock he persuaded the voters that life under Labour would not go on much as before.
Suddenly the election was transformed.
It became a parting of the ways, not a harmless flutter over whether to have a bit of a change or a grumble about poll tax.
It swung back to John Major.
The Prime Minister now has his mandate.
Constitutional meddling has been rejected, but his first move should be a decisive step towards fair votes.
The smallest constituency in Britain has only 23,500 electors, the largest more than 100,000.
In Scotland the average is 53,000.
In England, it is almost 70,000.
The Boundary Commission should be set to work immediately and told to report in time for new constituencies to be in place for the next election — to bring fair representation across the United Kingdom, ensuring that a vote in Scotland is no longer worth more than one in England, or a vote in one constituency worth more than one in another.
Reforms in the Health Service and our schools must be accelerated.
If they are given another four or five years to bed in, no Government would dare to reverse them, any more than Labour could take back council houses from their new owners, or renationalise privatised industry.
Then if Mr Major takes a cool look at why Mrs Thatcher was overthrown, why he became Prime Minister in 1990, and why he came so near to defeat in 1992, he will see a cycle of excessive boom, high inflation and then prolonged recession.
More important, he should see that they all spring from the same error — the attempt to fix the exchange rate.
First Nigel Lawson kept interest rates too low for too long, letting the boom boil over as he shadowed the D-Mark.
Now the ERM has kept interest rates too high for too long.
Further small cuts in nominal rates would be welcome but are not enough.
Indeed, although interest rates have been falling, inflation has fallen even faster, so real rates (after allowing for inflation) have been rising.
If they continue to rise, our recession will become deeper and deeper.
It is time that Mr Major let British interest rates be fixed by the needs of our low-inflation recessionary economy, not by the Germans' need to fight the rising inflation caused by their economic mismanagement.
If that means sterling has to have a long leave of absence, judicial separation or divorce from the ERM, so be it.
The ERM has only two uses.
One is to stiffen the anti-inflationary resolve of wobbly coalition or spendthrift socialist governments — and we have not got either of those.
The other is to be a stepping stone to a single European currency, and it is becoming clear that Europe is not going to have one of those.
Fortunately, Britain takes on the presidency of the European Community on July 1 so the Prime Minister could convene a conference to rethink the Maastricht conclusions.
I have no doubt that most of our partners now realise that British scepticism about economic and monetary union was right and that Europe must be saved from unthinking, slap-happy federalism.
And he should make it plain that Parliament will yield no further on the right of the British people to make their own laws, issue their own currency, set their own taxes and elect their own Government, free of foreign domination.
Chris Patten has now joined me as a party chairman held responsible for winning an election by running a bad campaign!
The Tories did come near to letting Neil Kinnock steal the election from us, but if the party either blames it all on Chris Patten or just forgets the matter as a bad dream, it would not deserve to win next time.
Britain woke up just in time.
The Conservative Party must never be caught dozing again.
Election Comment: Decisive win over the quack troops
By FRANK JOHNSON
What all the wise promised has not happened, and what all the damned fools said would happen has come to pass.
(Lord Melbourne)
OPINIONS may differ as to whether this column should be included among the wise or the damned fools.
But let us suppose that it counts among the wise.
If so, it did not get it wrong.
In the 16 months of Mr Major's premiership, whenever the outcome of the election was mentioned here, it always said that the Tories would win.
It did not also say that Mr Major was yet much of a Prime Minister.
But that is another matter.
We do not yet know how good a Prime Minister he is.
His entire premiership until now has been devoted to winning the election.
Winning elections, and governing well after doing so, are two different activities.
This weekend there are plenty of voices implying that Mr Major must be a good Prime Minister because he won the election.
That is just success-worship.
It was always argued here that, if Mr Major cut direct taxation, then made direct taxation ‘an issue’, and generally endeared himself to Essex Man and Woman, he would be still more likely to win than he otherwise would.
Helped by Mr Smith's shadow Budget, he did so, and won.
Election night's first intimation of disaster for Labour came from Basildon.
Symbolic.
Another of this weekend's conventional theses, which was anticipated here, was that of Kinnockian hubris — the possibility that voters went off Mr Kinnock for carrying on as if he had already won.
Last week's column observed that he was ‘distrusted on the doorstep…
Mr Kinnock has started to appear cocky’.
To sum up: I told you so.
But there is a problem.
By the time the campaign started, and never more strongly than on polling day, I was convinced that the Tories would lose — that Labour would be the biggest party in a hung Parliament.
So, I thought what nearly everybody thought.
At dusk, on Thursday, in the square outside Conservative Central Office, a television reporter and I had a brief talk.
‘You can feel it in the streets that Labour will win,’ the television reporter said.
‘Exactly!
That's it!’
I replied.
‘You feel it in the streets.
And I've been round the country a little bit.
I was down in Bath with the PM.
They can't stand Patten any more.
And Bath's the capital of the West Country chattering classes.
Serves him right for sucking up to them — being the Thinking Person's Tory, and all that, eh?
Byeee.’
So, having consistently been right about why and how the Tories would win, I was wrong when it came to the point.
The explanation is to do with the influence on one another of the communicating classes — the people who practise politics, write about it in the higher journalism, and put it on the screen.
My friends are members of the communicating classes.
They said that Labour was going to win, and wanted it to.
But my relatives are members of the C2 classes.
They were not sure Labour would win, and did not want it to.
They were frightened of Mr Smith's taxes.
Except in the ballot box, the communicating classes have the skills to win any battle for influence against the C2s.
Among the C2s, plumbers plumb, and double-glazing contractors double-glaze.
Among other strata, communicators communicate.
But, the layman may object, this does not mean that the communicating classes should be allowed to get an election wrong, and just carry on communicating as if nothing had happened.
I am afraid that it is not as simple as that.
When the communicating classes get something wrong, it is usually because of their prejudices.
To them, prejudices are what the C2s have.
But the communicators have just as many, and their prejudices affected their accounts of the campaign.
For example, they cannot stand the well-off, pushy, pleased-with-themselves, Tory young.
That meant that they could not stand the Central Office youths involved in the nuts and bolts of the campaign.
BBC television's reporter on the Prime Minister's election tour, Mr John Simpson — an embodiment of the communicating class — wrote about them in the Spectator with special rage.
I try to rise above such prejudices, much as the communicators rise above the prejudices of the C2s.
But, on the two days on which I travelled with Mr Major, even I succumbed.
A junior spin doctor wandered down the aisle of bus and aeroplane using the language which presumably they drum into them at medical school: ‘I will certainly convey your request to the Prime Minister for a comment on these polls, but I think you will find him taking the view that after April 9 you will all be writing about him winning the only poll that matters.’
In what I hope was a rare lapse into intolerance, I asked the reporter next to me: ‘Does that little sod always talk like that?’
The reporter replied: ‘That's one of his more informal sentences.’
But the little sod was right — or at least, his side won.
This has enraged and dismayed most communicators.
But the communicators can take heart.
The election was won despite the spin doctors.
For months, the spin doctors relied on the training imparted at such teaching hospitals as the Downing Street Policy Unit.
Throughout his premiership the diagnosis from such authorities was that Mr Major should not place too much emphasis on low taxes, and should ‘distance himself’ from Thatcherism.
Voters were now said to be more worried about ‘poor public services’ than they were about high taxes.
So, the Conservative response to Mr Smith's Budget was at first feeble.
They simply appeared to be defending high earners.
They did not convey the threat which Mr Smith posed to average earners trying to become higher earners, and to low earners who relied on higher earners for work.
But, two weeks into the campaign, Mr Major seems to have stopped taking the quacks' advice.
The patient started treating himself.
He talked about taxes all the time, rather as the last unexpected Tory winner, Mr Heath in 1970, talked all the time about prices.
By last Thursday, Mrs Thatcher may still have been unpopular but Thatcherism was not.
It was Thatcherism's fourth election victory.
In the campaign's second half, Mr Major (apparently without being told to do so by any important surgeon from a teaching hospital) came out against proportional representation, and Mr Kinnock (apparently incited by Labour's teaching hospitals) as good as came out for it.
In the last week, Italian politics became even more chaotic than usual, and Germany went in for some ‘neo-Nazism’.
Even then, Central Office did not immediately establish the link between those two developments and PR.
That was done by the Tory press.
In the end, victory was given to Mr Major by disgruntled Italians, disgruntled Germans, the tabloids, his own inner resources, the C2s, and God — in reverse order.
Election Comment: One for the record book
By CHRISTOPHER BOOKER
I SHALL treasure my copy of Friday morning's Times carrying the front-page headline ‘Exit polls point to certainty of a hung parliament’.
It is hard to avoid the conclusion that Thursday's extraordinary election result was one of the finest jokes played on almost everyone in sight for years.
Is there honestly a single person in the country, the Prime Minister included, who could have dared to predict that the Conservatives would end up with the largest number of votes ever recorded in a British election?
I am not sure even Mrs Thatcher will have appreciated the joke of her modest young protege surpassing her own record Conservative vote of 1987.
It has long been one of the curiosities of our political history that the previous all-time record was set by a party that actually lost the election, Clement Attlee's Labour Party in 1951.
But at least on that occasion the pollsters did manage to predict correctly which party would form the Government.
On this occasion Mr David Butler will have an even finer collection of predictions to record in his book about the election than he did in 1970, when almost every distinguished political correspondent of the time echoed Peter Jenkins of the Guardian in asking ‘Why is Labour winning with such apparent ease?’, just before Ted Heath won by a majority of 43.
IN THE run-up to last Thursday I found my thoughts turning to a story Alistair Cooke once told to explain the most notorious of all opinion poll upsets, Truman's victory over Dewey in 1948.
Cooke recalled how, like everyone else, he was utterly baffled as to how the pollsters could have got it all so wrong — until, a few days later, he found himself in a train sitting opposite a Republican county chairman.
At first the Republican claimed to share the general bafflement, until finally, rather shamefacedly, he confessed to Cooke:
‘I don't know about anyone else, but I know what happened in my case.
I had been campaigning for Dewey night and day for six months.
I arrived in that polling booth all ready to vote the straight Republican ticket.
At that moment there came into my mind the image of that little guy with a moustache and I thought, dammit.
I just don't want a little guy with a moustache in the White House.
I voted for Truman.’
I suspect something not dissimilar may have happened on Thursday.
Whatever they may have told the pollsters, there must have been countless voters who, as they finally confronted their choice, saw in their mind's eye the image of a beaming Neil and Glenys standing at the door of Number 10, and thought, dammit — prompting them to switch back to that decent, straightforward, reliable Mr Major.
Of course, the real reasons for the biggest joke played by Britain's voters on the pollsters since 1970 were more complicated.
But at least one ingredient in the extraordinary reversal of expectation must have been the cumulative effect of seeing all those smug Labour front-bench faces oozing such complacency about their forthcoming victory in the weeks before the poll — Roy Hattersley, Robin Cook, Jack Cunningham, Bryan Gould.
The biggest irony of all is that probably no single factor proved more damaging than the contribution of the man who we were told was so universally respected and popular that, if he had been Labour leader instead of Neil Kinnock, Labour's lead in the polls would have been 49 to 33.
In retrospect it can be seen that the most fatal blunder of the campaign was John Smith's Budget — proclaimed at the time as ‘an unparalleled act of honesty by any opposition party going into an election’.
As is now clear, it was this totally unnecessary act of hubris that more than anything else frightened the voters away.
In the end it was not Mr Kinnock who lost the game for Labour.
It was the supposed election-winner, Mr John Smith.
I HAD particular reasons for enjoying an article in the Sunday Times last weekend which suggested that only on three occasions in recent decades has satire actually had a real impact on our political life.
The first instance cited was a sketch on That Was the Week That Was attacking the Home Secretary, Henry Brooke.
This, it was claimed, had utterly destroyed Brooke's reputation.
The second was the Spitting Image portrayal of David Steel as a little kangaroo in the pouch of David Owen, which Steel himself admitted had been seriously damaging to him.
The third was Private Eye's Adrian Mole-style Diary of John Major, which it was claimed had made the Prime Minister such a figure of ridicule that it might be a significant factor in his losing this election.
I agree that the effect of Spitting Image's caricature on Steel's relationship with Owen was such that, as I commented at the time of the collapse of the Alliance, it was the only television programme that could claim to have brought down not just one but two political parties simultaneously.
As for the Brooke sketch, as its author I recall that the person most upset by it was Tony Benn.
He recorded in his diary that he thought it represented such a threat to the good name of politicians that a special regulatory authority should be set up to stop the BBC ever doing anything so wicked again.
Brooke's Cabinet colleague R. A. Butler, on the other hand, took a rather more robust view — confiding to the BBC's Director General, Sir Hugh Greene, that he had not enjoyed anything on television so much for years.
As for the supposedly devastating impact of the John Major Diary in Private Eye, of which I am also a co-author, I can only say that, despite the article's prediction, it did not seem to stand in the way of a gratifying number of people giving him their enthusiastic support on Thursday — including myself.
AFTER months of enduring the relentless taunts of Robin Cook, my Somerset neighbour William Waldegrave was in remarkably equable mood when I found him washing his car on Friday morning.
On the eve of poll he had placed a £5 bet at 16–1 with a Bristol bookmaker that the Tories would win an overall majority of between 20 and 25 seats.
Election Comment: Now the battle begins
John Major can reclaim the ground lost to Labour by nurturing the natural Tory instincts of the British, says Maurice Cowling
By MAURICE COWLING
THE general election result was a defeat for the BBC, the higher thinkers, the opinion polls — and the Liberal Democrats who once again have been exposed as a hollow shell.
A gain of only 39 seats is a sign that, even in favourable circumstances, the Labour Party cannot persuade large parts of the electorate that the interests of the homeless, the frail, the old, the sick and the unemployed (to say nothing of the healthy, the employed and the prosperous) would be safer in its hands.
For the Labour leaders, as for Labour MPs, the election is full of ironies.
Many of them grew up during the student revolution of the 1960s when an extraordinary hostility to wealth, power and respectability came to dominate a generation.
It was the alliance between this frame of mind and some of the trade union leaders of the 1980s which edged Mr Healey aside, drove out Dr Owen and the Gang of Four and, in elevating Messrs Foot and Benn, gave the Labour Party an unelectability as great as that which Mr McGovern gave the Democrats in America.
It was the attempt to restore the appearance of Gaitskellite centrality that produced Mr Kinnock's revolution and the packaging operation to which he allowed it to be subjected, and his failure, even so, to conceal the Labour Party's true character which produced disaster last Thursday.
Hostility to wealth and demands for its redistribution have been normal features of British politics since the 1890s.
Yet no election campaign has been as unctuously hostile to wealth as the Labour one of 1992 in justifying its policies about the poll tax, the health service, education, and national and local taxation; and nothing in the public packaging operation left any reason to suppose the Labour Party had abandoned the assumptions of the 1960s.
It has not only been a victory for Mr Major: it has also put an end to the leadership crisis Mr Heseltine created in 1988.
Mr Heseltine is the other Welsh casualty of this election.
Mr Major is now the unchallenged leader.
He has achieved this through one of the most remarkable election results of the century, and has, for a time at least, restored faith in the compatibility of democracy on the one hand and sane politics on the other.
There were before the election Conservatives who wanted a Tory defeat in the hope of a subsequent reconstruction under a new, more Thatcherite leader — who would restore the purity which Mr Patten was being allowed to destroy.
This was an unreasonable wish since it was not clear that such a leader would be available and the effect of defeat might as easily have been an undesirable fudging of economic issues and a gerrymandering of constitutional issues.
Now that Mr Major has won his own mandate, it is important to understand that, though the Conservative Party has sometimes been successful because it has stolen the Labour Party's clothes, this is not the reason for its success on this occasion.
Mr Major's manner no doubt helped, as did the abandonment of the poll tax.
But the election was won in Basildon.
It was won because Labour was the party of high taxation, because the Conservative Party presented an alternative, and because most electors neither admired Mr Kinnock nor believed that he could deliver the promises that he was making.
After the election Mr Bryan Gould, when asked why he thought Labour had lost, replied that it was because the electorate was too ‘conservative’.
This is true in the sense that electors want stability and do not much want the higher thought.
But it is not the whole truth.
Electors may have conservative instincts but they need to be helped if they are to trust those instincts.
In particular they need to be reminded of that combination of unashamed materialism and gnarled, disbelieving scepticism about the power of political parties to give effect to Utopia which is characteristic of a certain type of Conservatism.
Labour has the culture of a Utopian party; the strength of the Conservative Party is that it does not.
In Mrs Thatcher and Mr Tebbit pre-eminently, it has politicians who have adapted 20th-century Conservatism to make this clear.
Mr Major's victory — a victory for what was only a marginal adaptation of what went before — should not be interpreted as a defeat for Thatcherism.
The Conservative achievement in the 1980s was to put Labour on the defensive by presenting Thatcherism as a continuation of historic Conservatism.
Mr Kinnock's achievement in the 1987 Parliament was to put the Conservative Party on the defensive from his poll tax campaign onwards.
It will be one part of Mr Major's task to ensure that, with the election won, the argument will be won too.
This will involve tone as much as doctrine, but he would be as ill-advised to go on about the Government's intention of building a classless society, which it can't build anyway, as to adopt the easy belief that the climate of opinion can be left to look after itself while ministers get on with the practical business of government.
Election Comment: My last-minute right turn
by Mary Kenny
VOTERS like me are surely one of the reasons why the Conservative Party was returned to power.
You see, I had every intention of voting Liberal Democrat.
I had thought about it seriously, examined the political parties with an open mind, and finally come to the conclusion that the Lib-Dems should have my vote.
In fact, our constituency Tory MP is hard-working and conscientious, and deserved to be returned: but in terms of party politics I felt the Tories had had a long enough crack of the whip.
I favour proportional representation.
And I like the way the Lib-Dems are: catholic in their outlook, tolerant and wide-ranging, able to embrace the raffish radical and the Wesleyan non-conformist alike.
And anyway it's bad for democracy for any one political party to be in power for too long.
But a funny thing happened on the way to the polling station.
Once I actually got inside the privacy of the polling booth, a wave of doubt came over me.
Kensington was now a marginal constituency.
My younger son had said to me, going out of the door: ‘Remember, Mum, if you let the Labour Party back in, you will ruin my education.’
He has horrific memories of the days when the loony Left ran London education.
As I stood there with the pencil hovering over the ballot paper, the child's voice echoed in my ear.
Voting Lib-Dem could mean, in effect, favouring Labour.
Could I sacrifice my child's education — which, under the Tories, has been excellent?
I made my mark against the Conservative candidate.
If a pollster had approached me in the run-up to the election, I would have said I was voting Lib-Dem, because I had a sincere intention of doing so.
I am sure lots of people who were approached by pollsters had similarly sincere intentions: but a funny thing happened to them, too, on the way to the polls.
They got an attack of the wobbles.
They suddenly worried about their jobs, or their mortgages, or their children's schooling.
It's not terribly smart to admit that you vote Tory.
‘Tories are greedy, racist and materialistic,’ said Stephen Fry in an interview with Irish radio on Friday morning.
‘That's why I could never be a Tory.’
In this, he is saying something significant about the way Conservatives are perceived among the fashionable folk; and this perception is transmitted to sensitive souls who hate to think of themselves as being racist, greedy and materialistic.
So there may be a sort of shame attached to being a Tory, up to the last minute, when a different instinct intervenes.
I would call it the instinct for survival rather than for selfishness.
I approved of Paddy Ashdown's commitment to spending more on education — but then no amount of money will make education good if the unions and the race relations industry are running the show.
Yet I am not 100 per cent sure I want another five years of Tory rule.
I think the Conservatives are rotten about the family — they seem as keen to separate mothers from their children as the most demented feminist (it's called ‘getting women into the market’).
I think public services such as London Underground are appalling, and the capital city does need some kind of burgomaster — Ken Livingstone at least gave London leadership.
There are lots of flaws with the Tories.
I suppose they would not deny that they represent not Utopia but Original Sin, and the imperfect state of man.
But people like me voted for them.
And thus we shall get the Government that we deserve.
Way of the World: Extremism
By PETER SIMPLE
‘PROPORTIONAL representation,’ said Mr Baker, the Home Secretary, towards the end of the election campaign, ‘has helped the fascists to march again in Europe.
It is a terrible warning to us about what could happen if we threw away our system of first-past-the-post elections.’
Objectionable and un-English as proportional representation is, sponsored, moreover, by the ‘Europe’ -crazed ‘Paddy’Ashdown and his Liberal Democrats, Baker's outburst yet seems frenetic and nonsensical.
The people who voted for what are called ‘extremist’ and ‘fascist’parties in France and Germany seem to have mostly done so, however mistakenly, for one reason only: fear that the stability of their countries is threatened by unassimilable immigrants and bogus ‘asylum-seekers’.
They are not so much ‘on the march’— where are their jackboots, eagle emblems and other traditional paraphernalia?— as shambling along in worry or despair.
In this country, which has no serious experience of genuine fascism, the word ‘fascist’ is beginning to be applied to anyone who does not accept the statutory myth of the ‘multi-racial society’, imposed on us by successive governments who have even contrived to make any open, honest discussion of it illegal.
By the Great Semantic Shift which has operated in English politics over the past 30 years or so, opinions on this and many other matters which were once held by the majority and described as ‘moderate’, ‘of the centre’ or merely ‘patriotic’have gradually come to be described first as ‘right-wing’, then as ‘extreme right-wing’, then as ‘lunatic fringe’and finally as ‘fascist’.
It is possible, however, that such once commonsensical opinions are still held by many, perhaps most people in this country, even though they are afraid to say so.
No wonder politicians of all parties are terrified that these opinions and feelings might find open expression through elected members of parliament.
Their own consensual efforts to deny and suppress them would then be exposed for the deceitful sham they have always been.
If this should happen, and the long-suppressed voice of moderate, long-suffering English people should be heard at last, that voice might well be captured, taken over and perverted by genuine ‘extremists’ and ‘fascists’for abhorrent and evil purposes.
Who would be most to blame but those who have so long suppressed it?
Way of the World: Groundroots
BECAUSE the Labour Party does not know how to cope with popular demands in Scotland for devolution or independence, it wanted to dilute the trouble by spreading it over the whole United Kingdom, creating ‘regional’ authorities even in England, where there is no popular demand for them whatever.
I have never heard of anybody, apart from people who may hope to get good jobs in these bogus new regional authorities, who, thrilled by a weird kind of socialist local patriotism, longs for the day when the flag of the East Midland Region is raised over the Great Roundabout of Retford, or the parliament of the West Midland Region holds its inaugural meeting at Telford New Town.
What might inspire the people to new fervour would be the emergence, out of those absurd Kinnockian regions, of the Heptarchy, the ancient kingdoms of Wessex, Mercia, Northumbria and the rest.
Who would not thrill to see Alderman Foodbotham of Bradford rise at last from the mountain tomb at Northowram, where he lies awaiting the summons of destiny, to assume the united crown of Deira and Elmet, and soon, in his irresistible advance, the crown of all Northumbria?
The Scots, alleged to be so keen on independence now, might not be so keen on it then.
For what is Scotland, after all, if we understand by it the south and east of that country, the clearly predominant power in it, but the northern part of the English Kingdom of Northumbria, with its western extension in formerly Welsh-speaking Strathclyde and its capital in the noble city of Edwin's Burgh?
Albany at Large: Speaker betrays no confidences
By KENNETH ROSE
BERNARD Weatherill, Speaker of the House of Commons until his successor is elected on April 27, tells me that he will not be writing his memoirs — unlike his predecessors Selwyn Lloyd and George Thomas (now Lord Tonypandy).
He took the decision soon after he had been elected Speaker in 1983.
There was a rumpus in the House caused by the late Eric Heffer, so Weatherill afterwards sent for him.
‘As you voted for me,’ he told that turbulent Labour MP, ‘why do you not support my authority or at least let me know beforehand what you intend to do?’
‘Because,’ said Heffer, ‘you would only put it in your bloody memoirs for money.’
That determined the Speaker never to cash in on his office with a book of personal revelations.
Instead he has sent all his parliamentary papers to Kent University, with a 20-year embargo on their use.
Before moving out of Speaker's House on Friday, Weatherill had the traumatic experience of disposing of his trappings of office.
A velvet court dress made for him by his fellow tailors is to go on show at the Croydon Museum.
But his full-bottomed wig he has kept in the hope that his barrister son, also Bernard, will one day need it as a QC.
A kindly and charming pair, both Bernard and Lyn (the first Mrs Speaker for 20 years) have earned admiration and affection at Westminster.
His guiding rule, he tells me, has been taken from St Bernard of Clairvaux: ‘Notice everything.
Correct a little.
Cherish the brethren.’
Letters to the Editor
Summerhill ignorance
A. N. WILSON is not as well-informed as he claims (April 5).
The Cutting Edge documentary on Summerhill, as suggested elsewhere in The Sunday Telegraph and an evening paper to which he contributes, was unbalanced and misleading.
But, taking it all at face value, Mr Wilson appears as ignorant as he mistakenly supposes Summerhill's pupils to be.
In this review (as earlier this year in the other paper) he reveals no knowledge of the principles behind what is perhaps the most famous school in the world.
Even a slight awareness of A. S. Neill's compassionate philosophy would have prevented him from making the inept link with the Nazis and racism.
What the film demonstrates above all is the power of television to deceive the uninformed and the gullible.
Laurence Johnson Summerhill School, Leiston, Suffolk.
Gassing game
WITH all the generation of hot air in the past few weeks, one might ask what effect this will have on the ozone layer?
Roy Kilner Margate, Kent
Therapy, not potty training
YOUR description of regression therapy (April 5) is inaccurate, misleading and thoroughly denigrates what can be a valid and invaluable method of the location and removal of problems that have a hidden psychological cause.
Conducted professionally, regression therapy does not involve subjects being taken back to childhood ‘by being put in nappies, bottle-fed and alternately shouted at and hugged…’
This is not regression.
Frank Beck and his ilk have hijacked the word.
Regression is a trip in time, in the mind, to an earlier period in life.
The therapeutic use of regression, which I am concerned with here, usually relates to a subject's current life, and takes place purely at a psychological level.
In a deep trance, the subject is taken back to an earlier age, in order to discover the possible cause of a problem, such as a phobia, or a psychological reason for a physiological condition, which, on the surface, appears to have no organic cause.
To take the former example, a phobia can occur as a result of a severe emotional shock, possibly experienced in childhood, the severity of which has caused the subject to bury his recollection of it in his subconscious mind — it being too traumatic to cope with at a conscious level.
Once located, the operator will be able to completely remove the subject's fears caused by the trauma; but not necessarily, as your article also stated, by making the subject relive the original experience, which could cause further damage.
Undertaken sensitively and carefully by an experienced operator in controlled circumstances, regression therapy should be a beneficial and restorative experience for the subject, enabling him to be rid of a serious problem that may have been troubling him for years and indeed possibly ruining his life.
Philippa Muggridge Member of the Institute of Curative Hypnotherapists, London SE1.
Where's the ‘sport’ in this?
PEREGRINE Worsthorne (April 5) left me in despair.
According to a recent RSPCA report, cruelty to animals is on the increase, yet, using one of the privileges of his beloved free society, he condones a form of ritualistic animal abuse merely because it is a ‘tradition’ within a tiny percentage of our population.
In certain areas of Britain there is also a ‘tradition’ of digging out badgers, so that they may be subjected to the same merciless treatment that is meted out to the fox.
This ‘sport’ is, of course, confined to scruffily attired, working-class yobbos, and therefore, I am certain, in Mr Worsthorne's eyes, could never be accorded the status of a ‘tradition’.
I am neither a religious person nor a politically correct thinker, simply a human being who finds cruelty of any sort degrading and saddening.
Tradition is not sacrosanct.
We must learn.
We must use our freedom to become enlightened, or we are doomed.
Peter Goldberg Stretford, Manchester.
Enoch blunder
EVEN Enoch sometimes nods…
In his much-quoted anti-Europe speech last weekend Mr Powell referred to the Praetorian soldiers who ‘murdered Nero [and]dragged Claudius out of the blanket in which he was hiding, to succeed Nero…
‘. The murdered emperor was Caligula; it was Nero who succeeded Claudius.
James Young London N1.
Merits of Oxbridge
THE report on Oxford and Cambridge (March 29) seemed to be much concerned with finance.
But consider merit, the Order of Merit.
Trinity College at Cambridge can claim more members of the Order than all the 30 or so colleges at Oxford put together (25 against 20).
Godliness too is important.
John Fisher, a Cambridge man, is the only head of a college at either university to have been made a saint.
He was executed in 1535, the first of seven Chancellors of the university to suffer in this way, and canonised in 1935.
Henry G. Button Cambridge.
Snide about Monaco
MOST of those who read Glenys Roberts's moan (March 15) and who know Monaco felt, I suspect, more sorrow for the author than disdain for the place.
The article is bad-tempered, many of its assertions either inaccurate or half truthful, snide and pervaded by a snobbery that is almost misanthropic.
I would here like to acknowledge my use of Henry Porter's words, published on the same spread.
In his article he boasts that Britain today offers a choice of five quality newspapers: would he, and you, offer Ms Roberts's piece as an example of that quality?
Philip R. Zimmerman Chemin des Panoramas, Vence, France.
Potter was the winner
YOUR correspondent Mrs Kalinowsky (April 5) is perhaps thinking of Gillie Potter, who used to regale us with accounts of the goings-on at Hogsnorton.
He used to stay at Hogsnorton Towers with Lord and Lady Marshmallow and their son, the Hon ‘Twister’ Marshmallow.
On the occasion of the Great Hogsnorton Handicap, he gave a list of runners.
Unforunately, the only two I can remember are the Vicar's Wife's Half-Crown by Stealth out of Trouser Pocket, and the Vicar's New Overcoat by Good Luck out of Easter Offering.
Gillie Potter used to begin his broadcasts, in a beautifully clear-cut voice, with the words: ‘Good evening, England.
This is Gillie Potter speaking to you in English.’
Potter, thou shouldst be living at this hour.
(Mrs) Edith Hastings Surbiton, Surrey.
What really happened in Shingle Street
SO THE eagle has now landed and flown (’ Did the Eagle really land?’by Christy Campbell, April 5).
As I believe I was one of the earliest users in the country of county wartime incident archives from 1949 onwards, here are some East Anglian pointers.
On January 28, 1941, a German naval air-filled life-jacket of greenish canvas and rubber construction was found on Aldeburgh beach, Suffolk.
A police report said it was ‘identical with those taken from the bodies of German sailors washed ashore at Sizewell’, north of that town.
These bodies, I have always understood, came from German invasion barges attacked by the RAF or the Royal Navy while on routine pre-invasion exercises close to the Dutch coast.
As for an alleged German seaborne attempt on the old RAF radar research station at Bawdsey Manor, close to Shingle Street, Suffolk, Mr Laurence S. Harley, scientist and antiquarian, who died in 1983, told me in 1969: ‘At the outbreak of war, I was a principal scientific officer concerned principally with research into radar…at Bawdsey…
The enemy soon became aware of the importance of the work at Bawdsey and our intelligence got wind of plans for a massive attempt to demolish the research station.
Because of this, work was transferred to the south coast and then to Malvern.’
Mr Harley, who made a long statement to me at the time, would doubtless have indicated if the Bawdsey site was ever raided from the sea.
With regard to Jack Higgins's recollections of Blakeney, Norfolk, I noted long ago in county archives that on April 6, 1944, men dressed in German uniforms took part in ‘military exercises’ in the Weybourne-Sheringham-Bessingham area in daylight.
Was there not a training school of some kind in north Norfolk where German uniforms were worn?
Christopher R. Elliott Wimbledon, London.
MY diary (and letters to my wife) noted what I saw and heard on night duty in the guardroom of an RAF aerodrome on the weekend of September 7–8 when reports came through that big Luftwaffe daylight raids had begun on London.
Orders came to the guardroom to stand to; priority telegrams recalled those on leave; station defences were considerably strengthened; living-out people were hastily brought back, and nobody could leave the camp.
And news came in that all local service personnel in cinemas, pubs and dance-halls had been ordered back to their units.
Stories circulated about paratroops and invasion barges.
We now know that during the Saturday daylight raids on London, a chiefs-of-staff meeting took urgent action on deciding that invasion was likely within a few hours; they had the code word ‘Cromwell’ flashed from the War Room to military units at 20.07 hours that evening (which presumably led to the flap at my unit; the station commander was away that weekend, and the acting CO in charge).
It also transpired that parts of England (east and south-east) were put on full invasion alert at the time, but it seems that ‘Cromwell’ had been ignored in some places where the junior officers who happened to be on duty had not been let into the secret of what it meant.
The morning papers gave no hint of anything amiss and, in broad daylight, the events and the disturbing stories of the night seemed like a bad dream.
L. R. Sidwell Poynton, Cheshire.
MY MOST vivid memory of Shingle Street, where I was stationed between July and November 1940, was the issue of…300 Canadian Ross rifles to our Company together with…303 ammunition that didn't fit the breech.
We received…300 ammo later but never found out if it worked as we did not fire the rifles, even on a range.
I had a small beach searchlight but was not allowed to switch it on at night.
We were told that there would be a General's inspection and the searchlight had to be turned on at a specified time, but when the great moment came we could not start the engine that drove the dynamo and darkness still prevailed.
In fact nothing happened during those five months in 1940 except for the odd German plane flying over.
There certainly were no bodies to be seen.
Denys Paterson Guildford, Surrey
I WAS surprised to read that Terry Charman of the Imperial War Museum gave credence to the myth that the loss of life during one of the Slapton Sands invasion rehearsals had been ‘kept quiet for 40 years’.
That is not so.
The publication of details at the time would not have helped the morale of the Allies, but it was impossible to prevent the incident being talked about by servicemen in the area.
(It was common knowledge when I was drafted to Dartmouth in July, 1944.)
While I do not know when details were first released to the public, there is an account of the incident in Captain Roskill's The War at Sea — published by HMSO in 1960, or 16 years after the event.
Captain Roskill records that due to error there was no effective naval cover for the operation and German E boats succeeded in sinking two landing ships and damaging a third.
The action caused 441 military casualties and 197 naval casualties.
The BBC put on a programme about the event a few years ago, harping particularly on the fact that it had been hushed up until then.
Although I wrote to the Corporation drawing attention to Captain Roskill's account of the incident, the letter was neither published nor acknowledged — presumably on the basis that the BBC saw no reason why facts should spoil a good story about a ‘cover-up’.
E. A. Tredget Cyncoed, Cardiff.
FEW people seem to remember a 1942 film called Went the Day Well?, the first Ealing film to be directed by Alberto Cavalcanti.
The film has been shown on television several times and the similarities between it and The Eagle Has Landed are striking.
The screenplay for the film was written by John Dighton, from an original story by Graham Greene.
Not surprisingly, it has a strong and compelling storyline and undoubtedly captures the original ‘spy-phobia’ of the early war period.
The intriguing point is this: if the Germans really did land in East Anglia in 1940, and there was an elaborate cover-up, it is surely inconceivable that Ealing would have been allowed by the censors to portray such an accurate reconstruction only two years later.
Whatever Jack Higgins's inspiration for The Eagle Has Landed, the existence of the story by Graham Greene as early as 1942 is curious, to say the least.
Did fact inspire Higgins's fiction, or did Greene's fiction spark wartime speculation?
Stuart Valentine Beckenham, Kent.
MY OWN researches show that many wartime stories still remain secret and, as we saw with the Ultra story, if no documents are available it is extremely difficult (as Chapman Pincher found in 1959) to expose the truth.
There are persistent claims that Churchill sent a small group of secret agents to France outside SOE operations but, because no documentation exists, these claims are ridiculed by self-professed experts.
Equally, even after 50 years, the Foreign Office will not place in the Public Record Office any documents relating to the breaking of Japanese codes before or after December 1941.
There is, therefore, good reason to believe the Shingle Street story is true.
James Rusbridger Lanivet, Bodmin, Cornwall.
The British family is divided against itself
YOUR profile of the British (April 5) was accurate — for the moment.
We are, I fear, in danger of becoming extinct.
The English, Irish, Scots and Welsh have always been like a family which, despite differences and disagreements, remains loyal.
Recognising our differences, we have laughed at them with ‘There was an Englishman, Irishman and a Scotsman’ type of jokes.
Try making such ‘racist’ jokes today.
Sadly, I cannot share your optimistic conclusion, which implies we will always muddle through together as we have done so often in the past.
During the Gulf war we saw Muslims openly praying for the defeat of our boys.
Separate schools, languages, customs and even governments are all demanded.
A multi-racial country might work but a multi-cultural one does not.
It is time to take into account the feelings and views of the ‘natives’ and to make it quite clear that anyone who does not want to be part of the family shouldn't come to the house.
(Mrs) J. Marlowe London W2.
YOUR profile writer rebukes our politicians for neglecting the people's wishes in the matter of hanging.
He suggests that, since most Britons have a taste for the rope, politicians have a ‘democratic’ duty to reintroduce capital punishment.
But no civilised state can be bound by the whims of the people.
I am surprised that a conservative newspaper should place such faith in ‘democracy’.
Thomas James London NW6.