

Science: Windows on worlds beyond Science editor RogerHighfield spotlights the best of British space wizardry about to go on display in Seville
By ROGER HIGHFIELD
SPACE science will be the centrepiece of the British pavilion at Expo ‘92, opening in Seville next Monday.
About two million visitors are expected to see the display on British scientific and technological breakthroughs, unravelling the mysteries of the Sun and monitoring the Earth's health.
Britain has contributed to the European Space Agency's ERS-1 satellite, launched last July to monitor the oceans.
A feature will be one of the satellite's most important instruments, the Along Track Scanning Radiometer (ATSR), backed by the Science and Engineering Research Council as part of its £75 million contribution.
ATSR will measure sea surface temperature to an accuracy of 0.3 degrees.
Since its launch, it has provided a base line for studying global warming.
‘It is a beautiful piece of technology and science,’ said Dr David Llewellyn-Jones of the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory in Oxfordshire, one of the ATSR team.
The pavilion will also feature the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory, SOHO, and Cluster space missions.
Scheduled for launch in 1995, Britain has contributed some £70 million.
One of ESA's cornerstone scientific missions, SOHO will lurk between the Sun and the Earth.
On board will be the British-built instrument that will attempt to answer why the Sun's outer atmosphere — the corona — is heated to over 1 million degrees, boiling off charged particles to produce the solar wind.
The wind and its effect on the Earth's magnetic field will be measured by Cluster, a joint ESA/Nasa project.
The wind swirls around the Earth and its magnetic field, triggering spectacular aurorae.
Because this wind, consisting of charged particles such as electrons, is constantly changing, Cluster will use four spacecraft flying in formation.
It will study, for instance, how the Earth's magnetic field forms a shield.
The Ulysses probe will also feature at Expo.
In February, it swept past Jupiter with British instruments on board, harnessing the planet's gravitational field to hurl it into an orbit enabling study of the poles of the Sun in 1994–95.
Ulysses has already relayed data on Jupiter's magnetic field, how the solar wind interacts with it, and on the interplanetary region.
It will study this unexplored region, the ‘uninhabited world beyond the Sun’, as described by Dante in his epic poem about the Greek mythological figure.
Science: Breaking even in the name of invention Christine McGourty previews the Edinburgh Science Festival
By CHRISTINE MCGOURTY
ANEW method of repairing bone fractures using a device like a series of ‘plastic chinese lanterns’ has been developed at Heriot-Watt University.
The technique will be announced at the fourth Edinburgh International Science Festival, which opened on Saturday.
The fracture repair is being tested first on the upper arm, which is difficult to encase in plaster and also makes the insertion of plates and screws hard because of the large amount of tissue, muscle and nerve material.
After early trials the technique will be tested on other human bones and on animal fractures; Bruce Davies, who developed the process, said it could be generally available in two to three years.
It is one among many ‘heavyweight’ events being introduced into the festival by organisers who are trying to gain credibility in the science community, their main aim being to bring science to the people, mostly Scottish.
In this it succeeds.
However, only a small number of overseas visitors and speakers attend each year, and the festival hardly merits its ‘International’ billing.
This is one aspect organisers hope to change if it continues beyond 1993, when the five-year guarantee of public funds runs out.
With funds of about £150,000 from the district and regional councils and a similar amount from the private sector, the event ‘just about breaks even’ each year, a spokesman said.
It does not provide an important venue for researchers to announce new results, but offers instead a brief taste of science to the locals in more than 300 events covering everything from fitness testing to X-ray astronomy.
A ‘Mad Lab’ boasts a host of ‘flashing, gyrating, noisy’science-based gadgets, with something for every visitor to take home, and a boomerang workshop promises a prize for the ‘best returner’.
A ‘Bubble Blowout’ gives advice on bubble-making, and making a rare public appearance is Droopy, the legless, wandering robot whose aim in life is to seek out warm, dark places in which to hide.
On a more serious note, there are talks on the speed of expansion of the universe, the ethics of the international project to unravel man's genetic code, fraud in the laboratory, and a seminar on how to protect your inventions with patents.
Virtual reality, ‘smart’ materials, biosensors and other examples of leading-edge science also feature.
If it all proves too much, visitors may find refuge in a seminar on stress control.