

BBC and Thames link up for repeats
By Jane Thynne, Media Correspondent
THE BBC is joining forces with Thames Television to launch a channel of popular entertainment on the Astra satellite later this year.
BBC Enterprises, the corporation's commercial arm, will revive comedy classics such as Steptoe and Son and Dad's Army, while Thames will contribute 10,000 hours of programmes like Minder and Van der Valk.
The channel will initially be broadcast free to more than two million homes with satellite and cable links.
It will later charge a fee, probably as part of a package with British Sky Broadcasting.
Costing between £15-£20 million to establish, it will be funded by advertising and will concentrate on drama, light entertainment and children's shows with no news, documentaries or sport.
Foreign and British broadcasters are now negotiating for stakes but it will be based at Thames's headquarters in Euston west London.
Thames had long discussed the option of launching a popular entertainment channel on Astra, in which it has a 10 per cent shareholding and two reserve channels.
But the company, which loses its ITV franchise at the end of this year, was anxious to find partners so it could keep its status as an independent producer.
Under existing ownership laws no broadcaster may own more than 15 per cent of an independent company.
Owning the entire channel would have qualified Thames as a broadcaster.
BBC Enterprises, which is funding its share from profits not the licence fee, will take around 20 per cent of the channel.
Sir Michael Checkland, BBC Director General, said: ‘This important new development with Thames will fulfill three strategic aims for BBC Enterprises; partnership in a satellite service for the UK, a new source of finance and the use of the BBC's extensive archives for the secondary market.’
Mr Richard Dunn, managing director of Thames, said: ‘Ten years ago, we planned a satellite channel like this between Thames and Granada.
Then, in 1989 we planned one between Thames and LWT.
‘Neither worked out but now the time is right and, by the end of the decade, cable and satellite should be in half the homes in Britain.
Mr David Mellor will end his first day as Heritage Minister under pressure to launch an inquiry into the future of the BBC.
The Voice of the Listener and Viewer pressure group claims in BBC2's Open Spaces tonight the BBC is already making ‘drastic’ and irreversible cuts in jobs and resources.
Art Sales: Siren call of the deep blue sea TREASURES FROM THE DEEP /or not, as the case may be.
Two sales stir memories of maritime disaster Godfrey Barker and Georgina Adam wonder why
Britons pay so much for objects from the ocean floor
By GODFREY BARKER
Full fathom five thy father lies;
Of his bones are coral made:
Those are pearls that were his eyes:
Nothing of him that doth fade,
But doth suffer a sea-change
Into something rich and strange
IN 1690, a nameless ship, probably Dutch, was ploughing the South China Sea en route to Jakarta (Batavia) when it burned and sank, with 28,000 pieces of Chinese export porcelain on board.
The wreck, snagged by a fisherman's nets in 1989 about 100 miles south of Vung Tau on the coast of Vietnam, was brought to the surface last year and emptied, last week, into Christie's salerooms in Amsterdam.
Something close to shipwreck fever erupted over its cargo.
Mr Colin Sheaf, Christie's Chinese porcelain expert and auctioneer, mounted his rostrum against a vast reredos of 1018 blue-and-white bowls and vases — for all the world like a Harrods sale in 1690, had Harrods then been invented — and presided over mayhem from Lot 1.
In the saleroom was a crush of the fashionable of Amsterdam, faces straight out of the portraits of Ochterveldt and Rembrandt, echoing the 17th century prosperity which made the Dutch bourgeoisie the richest in Europe.
When all was done, however, it was the greatest naval power in Europe, the British, who had scooped the honours and 75 per cent of the sale.
The trophies of the Vung Tau cargo will be visible across London this week.
Harrods is building a shipwreck to litter with some 3,000 urns, bowls and vases, priced from £50 to £25,000.
Other dealers transporting back gigantic quantities from Amsterdam include Cohen & Pearce, Heirloom & Howard, Helen Buxton, Konrad Bernheimer and S. Merchant & Co.
It will soon be impossible to move through Mayfair, Kensington and Knightsbridge without the Vung Tau cargo's blue and white arresting the gaze in every shop window.
Nothing like it has been seen since — well, since the Nanking Cargo was unloaded at Christie's in April 1986.
That Christie's estimates were no guide to value was clear at once, when Mr Sheaf began 16 hours of auctioneering by selling a rare feathery painted goblet and cover for Dfl16,100 (£4,878), four times expectation.
By Wednesday night, bidders from Lisbon to Jakarta had created a new Chinamania, with, for example, five-piece garnitures painted with unusual views of canal houses in Amsterdam selling up to Dfl126,500 (£39,655), where Christie's forecast Dfl8/Dfl12,000 (£2,500/£3,500).
Yet last autumn Christie's sold another ‘canal houses’ garniture, perhaps popped in by the Vietnamese just to test the water, for a mere Dfl28,000 (£8,484).
No shipwreck story surrounded that.
Here is some pause for thought.
An object is still the same object, is it not, whether it has spent the past 300 years on a mantelpiece or on the floor of the sea?
Or has its value genuinely undergone a sea-change?
PERHAPS it has.
Perhaps the romance of the wreck, that vision of ‘a brave vessel/Who had, no doubt, some noble creatures in her/Dash'd all to pieces.
O! the cry did knock/Against my very heart’ has turned these drowned wares into something subtler and stranger than they seem.
No nation quite so much as the British likes its art to tell a story (witness the pictures of Victorian England) and no nation went overboard quite like the British to buy the Vung Tau cargo; but with French, German, Italian, Dutch and Taiwanese buyers sharing out these decorations of the age of William and Mary, we must assume that the ‘shipwreck factor’ in these prices appeals to more than the nation which owned the Titanic and whose schoolboys read Mr Midshipman Easy and Moby Dick.
No one could be found after the sale to say that it was crazy to pay sums of up to £40,000 for garnitures which until recently were as deeply unfashionable in the English house as the aspidistra.
Least disposed of all to complain were the Vietnamese, who pocket £2.6 million in hard currency from this sale and who in 1991 lifted a second wreck, this one jammed with late Ming Thai ceramics, off Phu Quoc Island.
The expectation is of five to come by 2000.
Could they flood the market?
Art Sales: Rembrandt down, Canaletto up
By GEORGINA ADAM
ON WEDNESDAY, Christies' two star lots are Canaletto's view of the Old Horse Guards, wonderfully fresh and the most significant of the artist's London paintings, while Rembrandt's jewel-like Daniel and Cyrus before the Idol of Bel has never had the slightest sniff from the Rembrandt Research Project, which has whittled 1,000 ‘Rembrandt's’ down to 300 and whittles on remorselessly.
However, its estimates have roller-coastered since they were first unveiled.
In March, the Picture department, when pushed, warily quoted Canaletto's world record of £1.2 million to the press, while Daniel and Cyrus was put ‘in the Mantegna league’, which translated as £7–8 million.
Since then, their fortunes have changed spectacularly.
Canaletto has shot up to £8–10 million, which seems high even considering the undisputed quality of the painting, while the Rembrandt has plunged to £5 million.
Presumably Christie's knows something that we don't.
GOOD NEWS from the mezzo region of the art market.
Bonhams has announced that its turnover from the first quarter of 1992 is 34 per cent up compared with the same quarter of 1991.
And Phillips is restarting jewellery sales in New York, with a first Silver and Jewellery auction on Wednesday.
Is Phillips getting to parts that other auction houses cannot reach?
FOLIE? is the title of a film and a book about Maurice Utrillo just published by the couple infernal Fabris-Petrides.
Jean Fabris, you may remember, was the maverick Utrillo specialist who was left ‘moral rights’ to the artist's estate by his widow, Lucie Valore.
He used to enliven auctions by yelling ‘fake’ at any picture authenticated by Petrides, Utrillo's dealer.
Last year, however, they had a spectacular reconciliation, fell into each other 's arms, quaffed champagne and gave birth to a new double Fabris-Petrides certificate (tariff: £250 for a drawing, £300 for a painting).
Gilbert Petrides has produced the 52-minute video film, Fabris has written the book — which, I am told, contains exclusive documents on the painter's years of imprisonment for alcoholism.
Une douce folie lucrative…
SIR HUGH Leggatt corrects me gently for my placing of Home's copy of Zoffany's Cockfight in Cannes.
It hangs, he assures me, in the billiards room of White's.
I take him at his word, for I cannot go to see for myself, not being male.
Meanwhile, Zoffany's now prime version of the picture has returned to its London home, having failed at £1.1 million on Friday in Christie's British Pictures sale.
Turner's Mercury and Herse suffered a similar fate, dragging down the sale's total to £1.2 million with a punishing 42 per cent bought in by value.
Art Sales: THE WEEK AHEAD
By GEORGINA ADAM
THIS should be the year when Old Masters make their long-overdue comeback; and this is the week to watch.
Christie's Old Masters sale on Wednesday has lost its sparkle slightly since the National Gallery squirrelled away the Holbein, but there are still two stars in the sky — discussed in Round-Up, below.
The same sale also features Salvator Rosa's superb self-portrait with the artist glaring suspiciously at himself, at £200/300,000.
On Tuesday, Christie's fires the first salvo of the Salm-Reifferscheidt-Dyck armoury sale — one of the most famous private German collections.
The 700 lots include rarities such as a pair of mid-17th Century Swiss flintlock pistols or a wheel-lock rifle by Maucher, both estimated in excess of £60,000.
Same day, same place for a previously unknown album of 60 drawings by Henri Fuseli, acquired by a London couple a few years ago.
The drawings are expected to fetch up to £500,000; the owners apparently had no idea of their value.
And also on Tuesday, Kensington is awash with Titanic memorabilia (see columns 7 and 8).
It is Jewellery week in New York, with plenty to drool over.
On Tuesday at Christie's, a one-owner collection includes a neckful of serious diamonds by that ‘Jeweller to the stars’, Harry Winston ($600/800,000); while on Wednesday at Sotheby's, a necklace with 25 huge pearls should not be far from the world record of $1.26 million.
Across the oceans, Sotheby's continues to plug away at the Japanese market with its Print sale in Tokyo, now bolstered by a few nihonga (Japanese-style) paintings.
Great things are expected of Meeting the Dawn by Hishida Shunso (est £130,000).
At the dealers: Richard Green at 39 Dover Street, W1 has the best exhibition of English Marine Paintings for years; the Royal Institute of Painters in Watercolour shows at the Mall Galleries; Anthony d'Offay switches on neon art by Bruce Naumann.
The Belgrave Gallery honours Sven Berlin at 80.
Vivid colour from Nicaragua in Michael Heindorff's paintings are at Bernard Jacobson at 14a Clifford Street, W1.
Karsten Schubert shows a fine cactus installation by Anya Gallacio and milk crates by Michael Landy, Gerald Godfrey brings Chinese oil paintings from Hong Kong to 104 Mount Street.
The Bruton Street Gallery shows Fred Ingram's Ingrams's (son of Richard) landscapes and vividly impastoed nudes.
Art Sales: BUOYANT BOOM OR SOGGY HYPE?
By GEORGINA ADAM
EIGHTY years ago tomorrow, on the night of 14/15 April 1912, the ‘unsinkable’ passenger liner Titanic, steaming at high speed on her maiden transatlantic voyage, ran headlong into an iceberg off Newfoundland and plunged to the bottom of the ocean, taking more than 1,500 souls with her.
To this day, public fascination with the disaster remains so strong that a flourishinhg market has developed for Titanic memorabilia.
Tomorrow, the Titanic fishing fleet steams into London.
On a collision course are Onslow's — who started the fleet sailing in 1985 with the first specialised sale — and Christie's South Kensington.
At 11 am, Onslow's plonks 262 assorted items on the block at Cale Street, including Lot 41: ‘White Star Line ink pot, £40/60’.
Meanwhile, just around the corner and at the same time, Christie's South Kensington offers ‘Lot 78, a 78 rpm gramophone re cord of Titanic, ‘Stand to Your Post’, and ‘Be British’, under £100’ or ‘1912 Titanic postcard, personally autographed by four survivors, £100/120’.
Don't imagine that the postcard, ink pot or record were ever anywhere near the doomed ship.
Titanic sales are jammed with souvenirs, models, special edition newspapers, sheet music, jigsaws, medals and so on, mainly spawned after the disaster.
Collectors seem prepared to Hoover them up, however tenuous the connection with the liner.
Serious collectors (and there are only a handful in the world) are looking for pre-sinking letters, postcards or photographs disembarked at the Titanic's last port of call, Queenstown; signals or accounts of the sinking; or, best of all, something that was actually in the ill-fated vessel.
Such items do appear — carried off by survivors, or fished out of the sea by the lifeboats.
Onslow's has quite a scoop with the keys of Ernest Hemming, lamp-trimmer — each stamped Titanic and estimated at £4,000; it also has a doll found floating around the wreck and which was mistaken for the body of a child, at £1,500/3,000.
Christie's is hoping to break the world record for a Titanic item (£8,250, for a watercolour, Fitting Out the Titanic by Charles Dickson, Onslow's 1988) with a whole archive of Marconi cables.
These were copies of messages sent and received by the liner and other ships in the area and include the dramatic ‘Ship sinking and wants immediate assistance’.
Book 1 of Mr Ismay's messages (used at the inquiry into the disaster) is estimated at £4,000/6,000.
The 80th anniversary factor is working here — last year, Book 2, an identical set, made just £814.
Is this the start of an immense boom, or just immense hype?
Will Titanic memorabilia stay the course, or should it be put into the same category as Michael Jackson's rhinestone glove (£16,000 last year), something that will flower today and be consigned to the dusty bunkers of oblivion tomorrow?
As long as nothing from the Titanic is raised — and the American Congress has decreed the hulk of the doomed liner to be an international memorial which must remain inviolate — the market for historical items genuinely connected with the ship should be safe.
The scraps of handwritten messages from survivors huddled in the Carpathia (Lot 9 at Christie's, £6,000/8,000); a letter written in the Titanic and posted at Queenstown (Onslow's, £1,500/2,000) are witness to the greatest maritime disaster of modern times.
And new items of great interest, according to Onslow's, continue to surface.
Should you be tempted by Lot 160: ‘Titanic, a brass lettered railway-style nameplate — £300/350’, then you can put it on your mantelpiece, not the bank vault.
The Arts: Skulduggery at high table TELEVISION
Lewis Jones is left baffled by BBC1's whodunnit, A Masculine Ending
By LEWIS JONES
IT LOOKED great on paper, like a feminist Inspector Morse.
It combined fashionable cred (the story was adapted from a novel by the right-on Joan Smith); professional pedigree (the sure hand of Alma Cullen); and solid mainstream appeal (detective work in the photogenic purlieus of Cambridge).
And if that wasn't enough it also offered an impressive array of sexual permutations: gay, bi and toyboys, as well as old-fashioned adultery.
Even the title was very good: A Masculine Ending.
It might seem unfair to pursue the Morse comparison, but it could hardly have been more strongly invited in this BBC1 thriller.
Cullen is a Morse veteran, the cast is to some extent interchangeable, and the story is re-jigged so that instead of opening in Paris — as in the book — it began with the Fellows' Winter Feast at St Mark's College, with intrigue and skulduggery at high table.
Nor is the comparison an especially testing one.
John Thaw's Inspector has lately become virtually paralysed by his pain and disgust, and his psychological travails have tended to hijack the plots — I find myself watching mainly for the architecture and the music.
But there is usually some semblance of coherence to the proceedings, and a proper hook to draw us on.
It was at this basic level that A Masculine Ending failed to deliver.
It was one of the most unsatisfactory whodunnits I've ever seen.
I'm all in favour of impressionistic narratives, with fast cutting and flashbacks galore, but this was simply a mess.
For 90 torpid minutes, one didn't know anything — or care about anything — and then the whole thing was unravelled in the most perfunctory fashion.
The cast was rather good, featuring Bill Nighy and his floppy blond hair and a very svelte-looking Charlotte Cornwell, though I was irritated by the unsympathetic little-and-large duo at the centre, with Janet McTeer towering above the tubby little Imelda Staunton (as I recall, the heroine of the book hunted alone).
It cost a lot and looked lovely, and the BBC has commissioned a sequel.
A novelist I know has devoted the last 20 years to writing stuff that is completely impossible to film, with the result that he has not been published for some time.
One might have thought he had been beaten to the composition of the most perfectly unfilmable book by William Burroughs's The Naked Lunch, which depicts a peculiarly literary and private nightmare.
The South Bank Show (ITV) looked at the attempt of one of Hollywood's young finest, David Cronenberg.
Most appropriately, his approach has been to break through the author's privacy, effectively dragging him out of the closet and giving an imaginative frame to the book by presenting the deplorable facts of Burroughs's life.
There were some diverting interviews with the old buzzard himself — Burroughs is to drugs what W. C. Fields was to booze — and Cronenberg seems to have caught the humour, as well as contrived some stunning special effects.
The South Bank Show is as good as it has ever been — serious, humane and unstuffy — though its theme tune now sounds is beginning to sound jolly dated.
The hell of making a film out of anything was lovingly rehearsed in Ready When You Are, Mr McGill, a play by Jack Rosenthal, first shown in 1976 and repeated on Saturday in Channel 4's TV Heaven slot.
Frank Muir, introducing the slot, described it as the television industry's favourite play.
One could see why.
It presented the industry through a day in the life of an extra, who after 13 takes — a day's filming — fluffed his only line, so that the scene was dropped by the director.
It was funny and sad, but the miracle of it was the good-humoured way in which Rosenthal (an old Coronation Street hand) made the crushing boredom of it all, the sullenness and tantrums, seem somehow interesting.
The Arts: Subtle Strauss
By MICHAEL KENNEDY
DURING his recent spell as guest conductor of the Halle Orchestra in the Free Trade Hall, Manchester, Tadaaki Otaka has displayed the qualities which have enabled him since 1987 to turn the BBC Welsh Symphony Orchestra into a first-rate ensemble.
Some of his interpretative shortcomings, too, have been evident, such as a tendency to fuss over detail at the expense of the main structural outline.
Beethoven's Seventh Symphony, for example, was exciting on the surface but lacked depth.
But the orchestra played exceptionally well for him.
In a Mozart Divertimento (K 136) he persuaded the strings to sound like an expert chamber orchestra, no mean feat, and in last Thursday's concert J. C. Bach's Sinfonia in B flat (Op 18, No 2) was notable for superb oboe-playing and rhythmic elan.
It was an ideal curtain-raiser to Mozart's last piano concerto, No 27 in B flat, K 595, played by Howard Shelley with a degree of understatement that still took account of the melancholy underlying the music.
Otaka's penchant is for the post-Wagnerian Romantics, particularly Strauss, three of whose works he conducted.
The early wind Serenade made a showpiece for the Halle's excellent wind section and he obtained rich and often subtly detailed playing in the tone-poem Also sprach Zarathustra.
But this performance sagged at the point where it should have taken off, the Dance Song.
In the Four Last Songs, it was good to discover that the soprano Amanda Roocroft's voice is unimpaired after her long bout of glandular fever.
Her special quality of lustrous richness was as striking as ever.
Though her performance does not yet fully encompass the poignancy of the texts, the final ‘Is this perhaps death?’ was sung with a numbed awe that one seldom encounters.
If one can speak of a vocal Achilles heel, then Miss Roocroft's is still her cloudy diction.
Her ability, however, to sustain Strauss's long cantilenas in an unbroken span is a rare accomplishment.
The Arts: Lamenting the loss of friends
By ROBERT HENDERSON
DANIEL BARENBOIM has selected just four cities — London, Madrid, Paris and Cologne — for the Chicago Symphony Orchestra's first European tour since he succeeded Sir Georg Solti as its music director last autumn.
With a Mozart concerto framed by Beethoven and Richard Strauss in the first, and the British premiere of American composer John Corigliano's First Symphony scheduled to be partnered by four Ravel pieces in the second, the originally announced programmes for its two Festival Hall concerts had been deliberately chosen to illustrate the Chicago's versatility.
That carefully planned emphasis on diversity, however, gave way to a more consistent Austro-German bias when the promised Ravel was replaced by some meaty, exultantly played, but dramatically awkward cuts from Wagner's Gotterdammerung, leaving Corigliano as the daring odd man out.
Barenboim has identified the First Symphony of the 54-year-old Corigliano as a work of great courage, and it was equally brave of him to take it on tour.
For what Corigliano tackles head-on, and with an unashamed emotionalism, is the huge subject of the Aids crisis and the searing way in which it has impinged directly on his own life.
His ambitious score contains within each of its four substantial, trenchantly argued movements both portraits of, and tributes to, many of his close friends who have died of Aids.
His explicit sense of personal grief and reactions to their deaths range musically in this vast symphonic threnody from a virulent anger and furiously hollow rhetoric to hauntingly elegiac meditation.
While looking forward in its powerfully climactic, funeral-march sections to the episode of Siegfried's death in the Wagner excerpts later, the instrumental virtuosity of its writing also seemed to pick up where the preceding concert left off in the Chicago's bravura, if sometimes coarse-grained account of Strauss's Ein Heldenleben.
The orchestra's disciplined and responsive virtuosity was never in doubt.
But — as in its streamlined playing of Beethoven's third Leonora overture and elegant, shapely performance of Mozart's G major Piano Concerto K 453, in which Barenboim combined the roles of soloist and conductor — what one missed in the Strauss tone-poem was any distinctive, defined character.
In all three works it seemed a little too often as if you simply had to programme in the appropriate music, push the right button, and out it came with a pat brilliance, with an irreproachable but impersonal expertise.
The Arts: Mementoes from the royal attic Fascinating insights are to be found among the bric-a-brac in the V&A's celebration of the Queen's reign, says Leslie Geddes-Brown
By LESLIE GEDDES-BROWN
THERE is a cartoon from the Vancouver Sun in Sovereign (as in monarch, not coin), an exhibition designed by the Royal College of Art at the Victoria and Albert Museum.
It shows an exasperated Royal — we don't know which, since only a hand is visible — wondering how to store the vast pile of gifts from a grateful Canada.
‘But where in the bloody attic?’ says the caption, as a row of airport handlers bring stuffed fish, totem poles, old baths and stetsons towards a limousine.
Another part of the exhibition is a caseful of just such gifts, presumably dusted down from a very full royal attic: a Maori figure with crossed eyes, a table with cowrie shells hanging from it as from an Australian hat, a fetching Japanese lacquer picnic set and a sinister raffia figure wearing a balaclava.
Or, at least, I think that's what they are.
On this subject, like so many others in the exhibition, the labels are silent and what should be a catalogue is more of a souvenir brochure.
Or is it possible that no one ever catalogued these shark-tooth necklaces and ivory ceremonial stools?
If that is so, that's very sad, since the Royal Family must have one of the world's most interesting ethnographic collections.
I found myself frustrated by unanswered questions at every turn: why are the shields of Prince William and Harry blank in the College of Arms's pedigree book — and why does Mark Phillips's coat of arms have a horse jumping over a small white-flowered plant?
Why is the lovely silver Royal Victorian Order insignia decorated with a rose, thistle, shamrock — and a sunflower?
Or is it a Welsh leek in bloom?
Are the Orb and Sceptre on display replicas?
Surely they cannot be the real thing but, in that case, is the 1689 William and Mary Coronation throne, covered in graffiti, only fibreglass?
In this great amorphous exhibition where, truly, there is something for everyone, the real hero is George IV, who commissioned with gusto.
Thus the star of the show is the mock-up of a banquet complete with the extraordinary salt cellars he commissioned from the Regency silversmith Paul Storr — a crab and winkle here, a triton or braying donkey there, all of gold.
Prinnie's taste may have been exuberant but it was good.
You cannot imagine him putting up with the committee which apparently advised Elizabeth II in 1960 to buy an all too committee-like selection of modern artists — Nolan, Lowry, Hitchens, Davie — chosen, one suspects, so that none of the great men felt left out.
All were displayed in Sir Hugh Casson's 1960 suite at Windsor Castle, decorated in what seems to be hessian.
The kindest thing one can say of this is that, one day, we may come round to liking it.
What the Queen really wanted (and what hang in her rooms at Windsor) were oils of her corgis and horses by Susan Campbell.
Nor is it possible to imagine the Regent allowing such a hideous series of plates to be made to commemorate his coronation, though, to be fair, even Regency designers might have had trouble making an elegant plate incorporating a photographic portrait of the old reprobate.
Among all the fashion designs (dull, dull, dull), the press photographs (which the Queen apparently believes are chosen for maximum ugliness), the portraits and fashion plates, one image only shines out — the charming relief of the Queen's head by Arnold Machin (the catalogue calls him Andrew, but we all make mistakes), which, after more than 25 years, still appears on British coins and stamps.
That so much is dull, bad or unexplained does not make the show uninteresting.
On the contrary.
All kinds of attics have been raided to bring it together and it provides a sharp view of our Royals.
There are copies of old magazines, many now defunct; there are films of the Coronation and photographs of the Queen on her many tours.
There is an oil of the Queen by Prince Philip, bravely hung alongside Sutherland and Seago.
There are wonderful paintings collected by earlier monarchs who had a better eye.
The final room consists of a series of three roomsets from Sandringham, Balmoral and Windsor.
These are laid out as though the Royal Family were in residence: an enormous jigsaw is barely started, a stuffed corgi lies beside a desk and, at Balmoral, a dog basket has its own heraldic blanket, while a headscarf is tossed on one side.
The comfortable chairs and sofa are covered in a shiny white chintz with purple thistle motifs.
This was, in fact, designed specially for Queen Victoria by Holland and Sons of London in 1855.
But the catalogue doesn't mention that, either.
‘Sovereign: A Celebration of Forty Years of Service’, sponsored by The Daily Telegraph, Pearson and Reed International, runs until Sept 13
The Arts: Country legends
By MARK COOPER
WATCHING the four Highwaymen step up to their microphones together is like watching one of those westerns in which the grizzled heroes finally stand shoulder to shoulder.
Only Waylon Jennings wears a cowboy hat, but Willie Nelson's bandana and grey pony-tail make him an obvious Indian scout, Johnny Cash wears the frock-coat of a gambler and Kris Kristofferson's cut-off T-shirt suggests his pardners will be calling him ‘Junior’ well into his sixties.
Cash and Co stand at the very heart of country's embrace of the western myth of rugged individualism.
All four still look as though they'd be more comfortable in jail than in a rhinestone suit, while their voices remain wonderfully battered instruments — weathered, stoic and yet still full of yearning.
The Highwaymen have now recorded two albums together, but on stage they largely prefer to stick to their solo turns.
As a result, all four benefited from a Wembley Arena show that was a study in contrasts: Cash's rockabilly bass, Nelson's plaintive Texas whine, Jennings's bad-boy blues and Kristofferson's world-weary romanticism.
Inevitably Cash and Nelson dominated, Cash still singing about how he ‘shot a man in Reno, just to watch him die’ with terse relish, and Nelson drawing on a very Texan blend of swing, blues and country for a string of tender ballads.
Jennings is less well-known in this country, but his rowdy yet candid songs stood up well, driven by an urgent guitar style.
As for Kristofferson, his voice is barely serviceable, but he is a valuable presence in this quartet of songwriters, not least because the songs he brought to Nashville in the Sixties reconnected country with the street.
A large band played faultlessly behind the heroes, the hits just kept on coming, and Johnny Cash stole the show with some country harmonica on an encore of Orange Blossom Special that huffed and puffed like a steam engine on a frosty morning.
Perhaps in time they'll turn more of their songs into group showcases, as they did on Cash's Big River, but as the Highwaymen rode into the sunset, they'd succeeded in that most country of missions: they'd kept their pride intact, and their boots on.
The Arts: Pronounced triumph THEATRE
‘It is hard to imagine a finer production,’ says Charles Spencer of Shaw's Pygmalion at the National Theatre
By CHARLES SPENCER
SHAW was perplexed by the success of Pygmalion, first seen in London in 1914.
‘There must be something radically wrong with the play if it pleases everybody,’ he wrote, ‘but at the moment I cannot find what it is.’
It is easy to see why this has become the best-loved of all his works.
The story of a Covent Garden flower-girl being transformed into a glittering social success has a fairy-tale quality that audiences cannot fail to respond to.
Shaw's wit and good humour are at their most engaging in this play, his analysis of language and class characteristically acute, and there is little of the wilful perversity that so often mars his drama.
Nor is there a single moment when you find yourself wearily wishing that the characters would put a sock into their ceaseless flow of Shavian chatter, a depressingly familiar experience in too many of his plays.
For once the major characters seem like flesh-and-blood creations, and the comedy has a surprising depth of emotion.
Shaw's infatuation with the actress Mrs Patrick Campbell, who was to play Eliza, clearly found its way into the script, giving Pygmalion a powerful undercurrent of sexuality, despite all the playwright's blustering attempts to deny it.
Howard Davies's superb new staging at the National's Olivier Theatre does the play proud.
In run-of-the-mill performances you often find yourself lamenting the absence of Lerner and Loewe's songs from My Fair Lady, but in this detailed, absorbing production, Shaw's verbal music is enough.
The final text of Pygmalion is a hybrid of the stage play and the later film.
Shaw incorporated descriptive passages and additional dialogue from the movie, while admitting that they would be technically possible only ‘on stages furnished with exceptionally elaborate machinery’.
The Olivier, of course, is blessed with just such equipment.
With the help of the theatre's drum-revolve and back projections, we are able to watch Eliza ride through London in a taxi to her slum in Drury Lane, cut with cinematic fluency to the hilarious scene in which the housekeeper Mrs Pearce forces her whimpering charge to take a bath for the first time, and enjoy the full splendour of the embassy ball, complete with marble staircases and palm court orchestra.
William Dudley's sets are magnificent, but there is no feeling here of empty spectacle.
Throughout Davies is responsive to the humour, the provocative argument and the emotion of the piece, and there are outstanding performances in the leading roles.
Frances Barber hilariously and touchingly charts Eliza's progress from squawking indignation to assured self-confidence.
In the early scenes she sometimes seems less like a human than a terrified wild animal, and she is in extraordinary form in her first public apppearance at Mrs Higgins's tea party, moving with the stiffness of an automaton and speaking in a voice that sounds like a Martian after a course at the Berlitz.
Her wonderful speech about the death of an aunt (’ It's my belief they done the old woman in’) is as blissfully funny as anything on the London stage.
There is real passion and pain in her bruising confrontation with Higgins after the embassy ball, and Alan Howard provides an equally fine performance as the irascible phonetician.
He leaves the audience in no doubt of the character's heartless egotism and yet you find yourself warming to his sheer vitality.
But Howard's performance also suggests that Higgins is an emotional cripple.
Whenever the subject of sex comes up (’ that thing’, as he puts it), he becomes painfully embarrassed, while in the presence of his mother he behaves like a gangling schoolboy.
This fine psychological portrait becomes especially poignant in the final scene, in which Eliza declares her affection for him and he, though deeply moved, is incapable of responding.
The playing is so fine here that the notoriously ‘unsatisfactory’ ending makes complete sense.
For once, you don't want Eliza to settle down with Higgins — she has achieved an emotional maturity he will never be able to match.
There is plenty of excellent support.
Michael Bryant is in characteristic scene-stealing form as that ‘original moralist’ Alfred Doolittle, and Gillian Barge enjoys some wonderful put-downs of her son as Mrs Higgins.
Alison Fiske plays the housekeeper Mrs Pearce like the brisk and plummy matron of an exclusive girls' boarding school, while Robin Bailey offers continuous delight as a ripe and fruity Col Pickering, finding humour in even the most unpromising lines.
It is hard to imagine a finer production of Shaw's most enjoyable play, and it is surely destined to become one of the National Theatre's greatest successes.
The production is sponsored by Digital Equipment Co Ltd
The Arts: Gala thriller
By GEOFFREY NORRIS
IT IS no secret that, however welcome the social change in the former Soviet Union, it has left many orchestras and opera houses in parlous financial circumstances.
No longer can the state be relied upon to provide funds; money must be sought from elsewhere, from private sponsorship and from foreign tours.
This all sounds faintly to anyone who knows how the arts work in Britain.
There was even a touch of irony in the fact that the proceeds from the gala evening given at Covent Garden by the St Petersburg Mariinsky Theatre were to be split between the Mariinsky itself and the Royal Opera House Trust.
It was a gala of thrilling performances, about one-third ballet, two-thirds opera.
In ballet, the Mariinsky (or the Kirov, as we have known it since 1935) has an almost unassailable reputation, with the choreography of Marius Petipa as one of its foundations — as we saw in the pas de deux from Le Corsaire, danced brilliantly and poetically by Elvira Tarasova and Igor Zelensky, and in Diana and Actaeon, which highlighted the virile athleticism of Farukh Ruzimatov.
In opera, the Mariinsky has not always been so illustrious, but in recent times, particularly under the directorship of Valery Gergiev, standards have risen beyond recognition.
He has a dynamic personality and musical discrimination, and without exception the orchestra played much better for him than it did for the ballet conductor, Viktor Fedotov.
But then, Gergiev was conducting significant music by the likes of Tchaikovsky and Rachmaninov, rather than the dross churned out by Minkus, Drigo et al.
We had involving scenes from Prince Igor, Boris Godunov and Khovanshchina in which the chorus — in appropriate costume — caught each opera's atmosphere.
Moreover, the Mariinsky can now field wonderful, sensitive, characterful singers, including Sergei Leiferkus, Evgeniya Tselovanik, Paata Burchuladze, Olga Borodina and the electrifying Galina Gorchakova.
Letter to the Editor: Well beloved
A RARE insight into the kindly nature of novelist Thomas Hardy has come to light, thanks to the efforts of a retired Dorset schoolmaster.
Frustrated by the less than flattering interpretation of biographer Robert Gittings, who presented Hardy as a reclusive, grumpy sort, Dr James Gibson is to publish a more generous account next spring.
The reappraisal comes, incidentally, just after I drew attention to Emma Tennant's forthcoming biography, which makes some play of Hardy's relationship with an actress 60 years his junior.
‘Although Gittings was my friend, I felt he was rather mean to Hardy,’ Gibson tells me.
‘As for Miss Tennant's view, I don't think there was anything improper.
Hardy was just a very kind old man.’
Gibson, deputy chairman of the Hardy Society, is now gathering opinions from the old boy's contemporaries, many of which have never been published before.
EM Forster was delighted to find Hardy the perfect host, commenting later that he ‘always made sure one had plenty of cream in one's tea’.
Virginia Woolf thought him charming, especially because he offered her extra helpings of chocolate roll.
As she noted affectionately in her diary, he nodded his head over the teapot ‘like an old pouter pigeon’.
A LATE bouquet for percipience please, for Tam Dalyell, Labour MP for Linlithgow.
In a conversation in March with one of our correspondents he pooh-poohed the idea that the Tories in Scotland were destined for extinction.
‘I expect them to put their seats up slightly,’ he said, ‘perhaps to 11 or 12.’
Well done.
Commentary: It wasn't any funnier then
By W F DEEDES
DURING the final week of the election, Punch breathed its last.
I thought it would be fun to discover from old volumes I possess how Punch handled the elections of 1906, 1910 and 1919.
Its coverage of the 1919 campaign is subdued, perhaps because in that ‘khaki election’ Europe was still mourning the dead of 1914–18.
Bernard Partridge, Punch's heavyweight cartoonist of those years, devoted a full page to a leaden joke about the arrival of Lady Astor in the Commons.
‘Mr Punch doing penance for his error of 35 years ago,’— presumably around 1884 he had said something silly about women in Parliament —‘and begs to offer his respectful congratulations to Lady Astor’.
In the campaign of February 1910 Mr Punch is peering down a well.
The joke, captioned The Poisoned Well, runs:
‘Voice of truth (from bottom of well): ‘Is this going on much longer?’
‘John Bull: ‘No, it's nearly over.’
‘Voice of truth: ‘Thank heavens’.’
None of this attracts my sense of humour, but it sparkles alongside Mr Punch's contributions to the 1906 election.
In the first, a canvasser is talking to a farmer's wife.
‘Canvasser: ‘What does your husband think of the Fiscal Question, Mrs Hodge?’
‘Mrs Hodge: ‘Well, sir, when ‘e's talking to a Protectionist, ‘e's a Free Trader, and when ‘e's talking to a Free Trader, ‘e's Protectionist, and when ‘e's talking to me, ‘e's a raving lunatic’.’
The most frightful joke of all relates to an election meeting being addressed by the candidate.
‘Labourer: ‘What I want to know be this.
Will this ‘ere election ‘ave any effect on our rights in this parish?’
‘Candidate (thinking he has at last come upon a Village Hampden): ‘I cannot conceive that the Election can in any way affect your rights here.’
‘Labourer: ‘I'm perfectly satisfied.’
So much for those who think that the Punch of old had a magic quality we have lost for ever.
A FOUNTAIN of humour in Punch of those days were the malapropisms of the working class.
One supposes that sort of snobbery is behind us.
But I read in The Independent that Bernard Shaw's comedy Pygmalion, about the flower girl with a common accent and Professor Higgins, the speech doctor (written for Mrs Patrick Campbell in 1916) has been revived at the National.
Its musical version, My Fair Lady, is never off the stage.
The Independent goes on to illustrate that in our so-called classless society bad speech is today as much of a barrier as it was in Shaw's time.
‘Those who drop their aitches lose their jobs.’
A London elocution teacher, Edwina Pickett (inundated with demands for lessons), adds, ‘I get girls who want to marry well, who don't want to marry a lorry driver.’
My hat!
Plus a change…
TO CELEBRATE polling day, The Times published a poem by the Poet Laureate, Ted Hughes, about the alleged effects of toxic chemicals on the sperm count of males throughout the Western world.
This phantasmagoria is not entirely original.
I have on my shelves a novel published some years ago, entitled Mr Adam.
A reporter in New York learns from a friend, a gynaecologist, that after a certain date she has no more patients on her books; others in her profession are in the same boat.
All are keeping quiet about it, supposing it to be some reflection on themselves.
It transpires that an atomic explosion has sterilised the world's males.
While the universe is mulling over the implications of this, Mr Adam turns up.
He was in a lead mine when the bomb went off, and escaped damage.
The Americans, who see him as their property, move in an army corps for his protection.
The Russians plead for sympathetic consideration.
If the book is still obtainable, read on from there…
IN A short profile of Sir Robin Butler, Cabinet Secretary, last week, we remarked on the stag's head that decorates his Whitehall office, adding: ‘The prized antlers were awarded to Sir Robin after a victory in the Treasury's golf tournament.
Unable to leave it in his old department because some objected on animal rights grounds, the head followed Sir Robin to his new home in Downing Street.’
What a lot that tells us about the Treasury.
Pianist of 14 is best young musician
By Christopher Lockwood
A PIANIST of 14, from Chestfield, Kent, has been named the 1992 BBC Young Musician of the Year.
Frederick Kempf beat three other finalists at the Royal Concert Hall, Glasgow, at the weekend, performing Rachmaninov's Rhapsody on a theme of Paganini.
As well as £2,000, and a trophy presented by the Duchess of Kent, he has won a place in the Eurovision Young Musician of the Year heats in Brussels in June.
For his performance, he wore an outfit designed for him by one of the finalists in the Lloyds Bank Fashion Challenge, and made by Paul Smith, the designer.
Frederick said yesterday: ‘I started playing the piano when I was four-and-a half.
‘My parents had given me a little electric keyboard for my fourth birthday, and I quickly learnt to play the tunes in the manual.
So I started having piano lessons, and before I was five, I had a real piano’.
Frederick, who is developing a sideline in composing, plans to stay at school until after A-levels before going to a musical academy.
The other finalists in the competition were Thomas Carroll, 16,(cello) of Swansea, Rachel Barnes, 16,(bassoon) of Westcliff-on-Sea, Essex, and Kevin Norbury, 16,(tuba) of Chester.
Enter ‘toned-down’ Mikado — on stilts
By JAMES DELINGPOLE
STUNG by the jeers and booing which greeted last year's avant garde production of The Gondoliers, the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company says it has toned down the designs for its new version of The Mikado — despite the presence of a Lord High Executioner in flourescent pink leggings and yellow platform shoes, writes James Delingpole, Arts Correspondent.
The company says that the production, which features a 12-foot Mikado on mechanical stilts, has yet to offend the sensibilities of Gilbert and Sullivan purists.
Although the costume designer James Hendy has dressed the cast in disturbingly bright colours and given Katisha fingernails which would do credit to the monstrous Freddy Krueger from Nightmare on Elm Street, a spokesman said The Mikado had been produced in the spirit of compromise.
‘We were conscious of the reaction to The Gondoliers,’ he said.
‘And it shows in our Mikado.
The designs are really quite traditional, but the colours aren't.
We have had an enthusiastic response from both our young and old audiences.’
The Mikado opened in Birmingham last week and will transfer to the company's old London home, Sadler's Wells, on April 28 as part of a season marking the 150th anniversary of Sir Arthur Sullivan's birth.