

Insurer pledges it will not make a drama out of a crisis
By Roland Gribben, Business Editor
COMMERCIAL Union, one of the big five insurance groups, stuck to its slogan, ‘We don't make a drama out of a crisis’, yesterday and promised business as usual after losing its headquarters in the explosion.
Emergency arrangements were made to house key staff in other City buildings and at Croydon, where the company has four offices.
All the 650 headquarters staff were told to report for work as normal.
Policy holders were assured that their records and data were safe.
A spokesman said: ‘We have lost nothing as far as our computer records are concerned and there is no need for policy holders to be concerned.
Our computer centre is in a different building.’
The firm occupied 10 of the 23 floors in a building now owned by the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority.
The insurance group itself will be among the banking and shipping tenants with damage claims as it retained a 20 per cent stake in the building.
Police allowed specialist Commercial Union staff to enter the shattered building over the weekend.
Despite the considerable damage, they found desks and filing cabinets intact and a preliminary inspection showed that valuable paintings by Sutherland and Bacon, in the executive suite on the top two floors, appeared to be intact.
Two Commercial Union building maintenance men and one security guard were injured in the explosion.
The offices are frequently used for functions, but for the first time in three months there were no special events on Friday.
An executive said: ‘We're trying as far as we can to ensure that our business operates normally.
Of course, there is extensive dislocation at headquarters, but our branches will be functioning as normal.
‘We are asking staff who have not been given another location to turn up at their nearest branch, where a desk and computer terminal will be provided for them.’
CU has taken a floor in another large City building, Plantation House, for key staff dealing in insurance markets to reduce the risk of disruption.
The British management team has been allocated space in Croydon, where Mr Tony Brend, chief executive, chaired emergency meetings over the weekend to try to maintain ‘business as usual’.
The executive added: ‘I've no idea what the insurance claim will be.
The engineers tell us that the core of the building is intact and that it could be rebuilt and restructured.
But that is going to take some time.’
CU has been among insurance groups hard hit by soaring claims and recently announced a pre-tax loss of £68.6 million on last year's business.
Underwriting losses jumped by more than £120 million, to £462.6 million, but investment earnings and profits from life business were also higher.
Maxwell writ
Roger Patey, a former £100,000-a-year executive and director of Maxwell Business Communications, is claiming more than £300,000 breach of contract damages from the company.
Mr Patey, of High Street North, East Ham, east London, says in the writ that he was sacked without notice last November.
Rover ballot
By Our Labour Correspondent
Rover's 35,000-strong workforce votes today on whether to accept Japanese-style working practices that will virtually guarantee them jobs for life.
Mortgage rescue plan in trouble
By John Grigsby Local Government Correspondent
THE Government's mortgage rescue scheme has run into difficulties.
Few proposals have been agreed, five months after the idea was approved by Mr Lamont, Chancellor, in an attempt to save about 40,000 families from having their homes repossessed.
Under the scheme, a building society would lend money to a housing association at a low interest rate to buy homes, whose former owners would become tenants of the association.
The building society would share in the capital gain at the end of the loan period.
Mr Chris Griffin, of the National Housing and Town Planning Council, said yesterday: ‘The scheme is just not working.
Basically the interest rates being levied by the building societies are too high.
‘They are asking for eight per cent, whereas the housing associations can afford to pay only three-and-a-half per cent .’
Mr Jim Coulter, director of the National Federation of Housing Associations, said the Nationwide Building Society had agreed rescue schemes with Notting Hill, Newlon and London and Quadrant housing associations.
The Halifax had entered a similar agreement with Hyde housing association and other agreements were being negotiated.
He added: ‘The scheme has not produced the numbers expected.
The building societies in particular allowed exaggerated views of the numbers to be made public.’
The number of people evicted for not paying their mortgages may still be below the estimate of 75,000 for last year, however.
Mr Coulter said: ‘It is becoming clear that building societies are pursuing their own interests by rescheduling loans or entering into shared ownership agreements, rather than biting the bullet of low interest loans to housing associations.’
They were doing so because they were beginning to take a more optimistic view of the housing market and the economy in general, he added.
Pay freezes ‘sign of recession’
By Our Labour Correspondent
Fresh pay freezes affecting tens of thousands of employees are cited today as evidence that the recession is continuing to bite.
Incomes Data Services, an employment research group, says there was a rise in the number of postponed pay increases during the first part of the year.
Granada Motorway Services, Asda and the vehicle building and repair industry were among those imposing 12-month freezes.
Car firms act over soaring ‘hot hatch’ insurance costs Prices of some performance models are plunging as cover becomes almost impossible for the under-25s, writes John Langley
By JOHN LANGLEY
CAR firms including Ford, Vauxhall and Peugeot are having urgent talks with insurers over the soaring cost of premiums on many of their high performance models.
Prices of both new and second-hand models of some popular hot hatchbacks such as the Ford Escort XR3i and Peugeot 205GTi have fallen in the wake of insurance increases of up to 70 per cent.
Some high performance models have become virtually uninsurable for drivers under 25.
Many of the biggest companies are refusing to take on new clients with such cars, and are jacking up the premiums on existing business.
Insurers, who have lost millions of pounds on their motor accounts in the past year, blame the steep increases on the poor claims record of hot hatches.
They have become a prime target for teenage joyriders who often set fire to stolen cars when they have finished with them.
Insurers want car manufacturers to fit improved security measures to reduce the incidence of theft.
Matters have come to a head with the publication of a new and more detailed insurance group rating system which insurers say will enable them to pinpoint the higher risk models more accurately.
But the manufacturers claim that the insurers are still using a blanket approach which does not take full account of differences between models, and improvements they have introduced.
Vauxhall and Peugeot are offering £500 ‘cash back’ vouchers to buyers of their top hot hatches as a contribution towards the cost of insurance, on top of discounts customers can negotiate with the dealer.
Ford is also considering help with insurance.
Peugeot is introducing a built-in engine immobilisation system on many models, operated automatically with the remote-control central locking ‘blipper’ switch.
Ford is testing a sophisticated electronic security system on cars used by its own executives before deciding whether to standardise it on all high performance models.
The company has also introduced a telephone ‘quote line’ which potential customers can call to get an insurance quotation before buying a particular car.
Meanwhile, after winning awards for its vehicle security systems, Vauxhall says it is ‘deeply disappointed’ that its initiatives have not been sufficiently recognised in the new ratings structures.
A Ford spokesman said: ‘We are looking at various aspects of our high performance models, not just the hot hatches…it would be fair to say that we are being a lot more discreet about the badging and ‘dressing up’ of some models now.’
An official of the Association of British Insurers, which drew up the new insurance ratings, conceded that the structure, which is due to be introduced on July 1, is being revised ‘almost daily.’
The new system has 20 groups compared with the existing nine group structure.
They are regarded as advisory rather than mandatory.
The prices crash has resulted in used hot hatchbacks selling for up to £1,000 less than they were fetching a few months ago, according to Mr Tom Atkins, general manager of BRS Car Auctions, Stoke.
A motoring breakdown scheme being launched today is offering members a 20 per cent‘no claims’ discount if they do not call out the service during the year.
The C A R E service gives a choice of five subscription schemes ranging from £69 to £30.
Details are available from CARE, Fieldhead Business Centre, Listerhills Road, Bradford BD7 1LW.
Glaxo chief sacked after disclosure
By Our Health Services Staff
THE flourishing circular trade in drugs was a key reason for the sacking last month of Glaxo's chief in France.
Relations between the British company and the French Health Ministry have hit an all-time low after claims by the multinational that officials have for 15 months blocked a licence for Glaxo's new migraine drug.
Mr Edwin Nathan has left his post as head of French operations after telling a French newspaper that in exchange for a high price for Imigran — £32 for a month's supply in Britain — Glaxo would build a £100 million factory in France.
Another aspect of the proposal was that Glaxo would set up a research centre and co-market Imigran with a French company.
Soon after the embarrassing disclosure, the French ministry announced an inquiry into claims that Glaxo had placed numerous articles in the popular press and on television promoting its prescription-only migraine cure.
This is deemed unethical until a product is licensed.
Glaxo is refusing to comment on Mr Nathan's departure, but it is thought he erred by drawing attention to a common practice that is seldom discussed.
However, it seems unlikely that the British parent did not back Mr Nathan's proposal, which would have secured a price for Imigran similar to that in Britain.
Manufacturers are acutely aware that the only way of stopping parallel trade in the Community is uniform pricing.
They often prefer to withhold sales rather than accept a lower price because of the consequences for other sales.
Industry figures say privately that French refusal to license new drugs is in line with French farmers attacking lorry drivers importing lamb or onions.
Aliens in the new El Dorado Foreigners are pouring into Japan, hoping to make a quick million yen.
But, as Robert Whymant in Tokyo reports, they face rising racism
By ROBERT WHYMANT
THE CHERRY blossoms have bloomed, and the pavement in the Ginza district has already warmed up nicely — enough to entice Dave the Busker, from Yorkshire, out on to Tokyo's streets with renderings of old Beatles and John Lennon numbers.
Weekend strollers stop in their tracks, mesmerised by Dave's busy handling of guitar, drum, cymbal, harmonica and rhythm box.
Pretty OLs (office ladies) dip deeply into their Louis Vuitton handbags.
The Japanese are fascinated by foreigners making a spectacle of themselves in this way — the natural heirs to the dying tradition of performing street monkeys.
With no indigenous buskers to be seen, the pickings are good for gaijin (literally outside people) like 34-year-old Dave, from Silsden near Keighley in Yorkshire.
But Dave has a complaint: ‘Tokyo's getting crowded with foreigners,’ he says.
‘It's hard to find a space.
There are a lot of buskers now.’
Seven years ago, when Dave first arrived, a foreigner on the pavement singing, or selling paintings mass-produced in Hong Kong, was a novelty.
The Ginza and bustling Shinjuku and Shibuya stations were Dave's oyster.
Caucasians, newly-arrived at the airport, were hired by English school operators to teach tired Japanese businessmen how to say ‘this is a pen’.
No matter that their French or German accents were as thick as a slice of sushi.
A white face was the only qualification required for work, modelling or hamming it up in a TV commercial.
Those days are over — market forces have devalued the earning power of white skin.
The reason is simple: the unemployed and unemployable have flown in to try their luck in Japan.
Bucket-shop travellers are lured by the rumours reaching Harlow, Haifa and Harrisburg of yen notes showering from the trees.
Westerners, who expect work to be as light as their skin, are vastly outnumbered by job-seekers from places like Iran, the Philippines and China, ready to try their hand at anything.
It is this alien presence that has sown alarm in a country where all foreigners — but particularly poor ones with darker skin — are unwelcome.
Officially, Japan accepts no unskilled foreign labourers.
The job-seekers from Asia enter the country on tourist visas, then disappear into a netherworld of tiny foundries, building sites, restaurant kitchens or — in the case of women — bars and nightclubs.
Few intend to stay beyond a year or two.
Frozen out of Japanese society, their ambition is to return home with a nest egg of at least two million yen (£8,000).
Small businesses are crying out for workers, and poor foreigners plug a gap.
Sucked in by Japan's juggernaut economy, they take the jobs disdained by an affluent Japanese workforce.
About a third are female, mostly Filipinos and Thais ensnared in prostitution rings.
The numbers of blue-collar foreigners are estimated to have increased five-fold last year and Justice Ministry officials say, privately, that there are close to half a million ‘illegals’ in a nation of 120 million people.
To anyone in Western Europe or the USA, what the media alarmingly describes as a ‘tidal wave’ looks like a tiny splash.
But the prospect of a multiracial society horrifies the Japanese.
Foreigners are seen to contaminate their precious homogeneity and disturb the peace.
W ITH NO minimum wage, no health insurance and no rights, illegal workers are often cheated by employers.
Mihir, a 28-year-old Bangladeshi working illegally on a long-expired tourist visa, is paid 150,000 yen (£650) a month at a manual job in a car parts factory north of Tokyo.
This is many times what he would earn as a university graduate in Bangladesh.
But a Japanese man doing the same work in the same factory gets paid 30 per cent more.
Mihir left a previous employer who owes him two months' wages but, fearing deportation, cannot complain to the authorities.
‘The Japanese do not want any foreigners,’ says Mihir.
‘They need labour but want foreign labourers to be invisible.’
The illegals have only to look at the plight of the large Korean minority — 690,000 of Japan's 1.1 million registered foreign residents — to know they will never be accepted in this xenophobic land.
Their grandparents may have been brought over as forced labour when Korea was still a colony, but even descendants born and brought up in Japan are denied civil service jobs and positions with major corporations.
Some Japanese parents have hired private detectives to ensure their child's prospective spouse is not from the despised Korean community.
Neo-fascist orators play on fearful stereotypes of these outsiders: they all have Aids, they molest Japanese women, and they rob 24-hour grocery stores.
‘We must protect Japan against foreign intruders who rape our women and terrorise law-abiding Japanese,’ screams a speaker of the Taikosha, a paramilitary group, outside a railway station.
The most rapid increase in illegal workers was among Iranians, who have not, until now, been required to obtain entry visas.
Their fondness for congregating in a Tokyo park on Sundays makes them the most visible target of discrimination.
They swap tips about jobs, and play soccer, but many Japanese see something sinister in such large gatherings of foreigners.
Few Japanese object to the modest surge of Western stockbrokers and investment bankers into the gaijin ghettoes of high-rent Roppongi.
Numbers of Americans and Britons have doubled in the past decade but, at 40,000 and 11,000 respectively, they are not seen as a threat to the social fabric in the same way as the Iranians and other Asians.
In a nation where rank is everything, and everything is ranked, these ‘yuppiewhites’ are placed by Japanese at the top of the gaijin pecking order.
A rung down are the expatriates hired by Japanese companies, who inhabit an eerie social no-man's-land.
These foreigners provide window-dressing for big Japanese corporations keen to prove how well they are ‘internationalising’.
Nothing is quite so telling about the peripheral position of foreigners in Japan as the sorry fate of these Westerners.
Practising their bows in front of bedroom mirrors in their eagerness to be accepted, they quickly realise they are doomed to the furthest fringes of company life.
‘No matter how hard you try for acceptance, you will always be an outsider,’ says a disillusioned Englishman employed by a Japanese stockbroking firm.
‘You're never going to rise in a Japanese company.’
For mutual solace, locally-hired Americans and Europeans banded together five years ago in the Kaisha (company) Society.
Its members live in a constant state of irritation that their salaries are about a third of what ‘yuppiewhite’ expats make.
The pay of David Kershaw, 30, from Merseyside, a locally-hired computer programmer at Fujitsu is the same as that of Japanese colleagues — which he describes as average because, he says, ‘the basic pay is so low you end up putting in lots of overtime to bring your income up to the level in England.’
A TERRIBLE shock awaits many when they return to New York or London — their hard-won knowledge of Japanese business methods elicits only yawns in top-ranking Western firms.
According to the Kaisha Society, 90 per cent end up working for overseas subsidiaries of Japanese firms — and become outcasts in their own countries.
As recession deepens in the West, Japan continues to glitter like some new El Dorado — despite its own mild economic slowdown.
But increasing exposure to foreigners will reinforce the Japanese sense of being special, and deepen scorn for outsiders.
‘Ten years ago we had some curiosity value,’ says Edward Foy, from Minnesota, one of the few foreigners with tenure at a Japanese university.
‘Now, the more they see of us the less they like us.’
City: Maxwell £140m questions
By Matthew Doull
ADMINISTRATORS to the Maxwell private companies are raising questions with Kevin Maxwell about the purchase of shares in Maxwell Communication Corporation for secret Liechtenstein trusts last summer.
John Talbot of Arthur Andersen, administrator to Robert Maxwell Group, Bishopsgate Investment Trust and London & Bishopsgate Group, has written to Mr Maxwell asking him to explain the payment of almost £140m from those companies to American investment bank Goldman Sachs.
The 10 payments listed in the letter range from £607,500 to more than £55m and took place between the end of May and the beginning of September 1991, the same time as the transfer of £250m from MCC to private Maxwell companies.
Mr Talbot refers to a meeting last December at which Kevin Maxwell refused to discuss the transactions for fear of self-incrimination, but says his investigations indicate that certain of the payments were made on Mr Maxwell's authority and that his response is ‘urgently’ needed.
The letter suggests the payments were for MCC shares transferred to Liechtenstein trusts called stiftungs, and adds: ‘It appears that companies of which I am joint administrator have substantial claims against the stiftungs and any other entities which benefited from these payments.’
Mr Maxwell is asked to provide detailed information about the trusts and his family's relationship with them, and whether any reimbursement was made in respect of the payments.
He is also asked to confirm that neither he nor his family will cause assets to be removed from the trusts.
A spokesman for the administrators would not comment on whether Mr Maxwell had answered the questions.
The spokesman would say only that Mr Maxwell was co-operative in matters relating to the ‘trading companies’.
The Serious Fraud Office, which is investigating alleged Maxwell share support schemes, also refused to comment.
City: Bond report publication
A 600-page report by the Australian Securities Commission into the collapse of Alan Bond's financial empire may never be made public following a federal government decision that publication may prejudice pending criminal trials.
The report concentrates on the A$1.2 billion (£525m) transfer of cash from Bell Resources to Bond Corporation and the transfer of other large amounts from J N Taylor (a Bell subsidiary) to Dallhold Investments, the private company of Mr Bond.
City: Lombard in joint venture
LOMBARD Odier International Portfolio Management of London and Western Asset Management of Los Angeles today announced the formation of a joint venture, WLO Global Management.
Lombard is a subsidiary of the private Swiss bank Lombard Odier & Cie and manages $5 billion in assets for institutional clients in America, Europe and the Middle and Far East.
It will provide investment management for the non-American fixed income investments.
Western Asset is an affiliate of Legg Mason, a New York stock exchange-listed financial services company.
It manages $8 billion mainly for United States pension funds, and will provide the investment expertise on American fixed income assets for WLO Global Management.
City: A Cabinet made in John Major's image
BY SIR ROBERT MCCRINDLE
TO WHAT extent does the change in the ministers in the economic departments foreshadow a change in policy direction?
Should business leaders be bracing themselves for a wave of intervention now that the Department of Trade & Industry is in the hands of Michael Heseltine?
Or will it be at most a change of tone, a more positive role in supporting industry but falling far short of what the free marketeers fear?
The new men and women all reflect the brisk style which characterises the approach of John Major.
Yet continuity of basic policy is virtually guaranteed by the retention of Norman Lamont at the Treasury.
It is no secret that many business leaders would have preferred a new assertive Chancellor.
That is a view echoed in the corridors of Westminster.
Certainly Mr Lamont did not perform well at the hustings; arguably his Budget last month did not in retrospect maximise the opportunities, limited though they were.
But the Prime Minister has obviously decided that having ridden the rough waters of the recession, the Chancellor should be given credit for the recovery.
Hopefully his continuing presence at the Treasury will not delay it.
One feature of this post-election scene is the need to get a grip on public expenditure.
Some critics believe it is already out of control and that the wave of public sector pay claims likely in the aftermath of Labour's defeat could tip it over the top.
This means that the job of the new Treasury Chief Secretary takes on a significance which may unnerve Michael Portillo.
His will be the task of saying no to the spending departments.
That he has great charm and a strong intellect there is no doubt but the coming review of public expenditure will test him to the full.
He is still referred to as Thatcherite but as that term begins to lose its currency my own view of him is of a free marketeer with a strong sense of economic realism.
Whether he lives up to his promise as a future Tory leader may depend on his success in one of the hair shirt Government posts.
In contrast to Mr Portillo's languid charm the best way to describe Gillian Shephard, the new Employment Secretary, is briskly efficient.
Her rapid rise to the top is well deserved and she does not suffer from having political labels stuck on her.
She does have strong views on women's role in employment, on child care facilities and on the effect on part-time employment of the Social Chapter.
She has a sharp cutting edge and woe betide the Europhile who treads on her toes.
I expect her to preside over the abolition of wages councils and to be strong on industrial training.
It is however the arrival of Michael Heseltine at the DTI that will flutter the dovecotes most of all.
There is no doubt he will be a dominant figure and in the view of many he is just what is needed to revive a moribund department.
But the free marketeers are wrong to suspect a revival of intervention in industry.
He will certainly lead from the front and export promotion and a strong anti-monopoly stance will characterise his reign in the DTI.
I predict he will be a breath of fresh air for the business community.
The franchising of British Rail services will be in the hands of the avuncular John MacGregor.
His canny bank manager approach probably means he will hasten slowly but prepare for some stand-offs with his civil servants and possibly with the chairman of British Rail too.
All in all these are changes which are good for business and very much in the image of the Prime Minister and the new conservatism of the 90s.
Sir Robert McCrindle, after 22 years as a Tory MP, is now a public affairs consultant.
City: Hanson silent on Ever Ready rumours
By David Wighton
HANSON, the industrial conglomerate headed by Lord Hanson, yesterday declined to comment on rumours that it is planning to sell its Ever Ready battery subsidiary.
Observers believe the company is looking to make disposals to boost profits which are under pressure from recession in Britain and the United States.
Analysts reckon a sale of Ever Ready could raise up to £140m.
But Martin Taylor, vice-chairman, said last night: ‘I have nothing to add to any speculation.’
One suggested buyer for Ever Ready is Ralston Purina, the American food group which owns the Ever Ready and Energizer battery brands in the United States.
Hanson bought the European Ever Ready business for £95m in 1981 but then sold the unprofitable continental operations to rival Duracell.
In addition to its British business, which is thought to make profits of between £15m and £20m, Ever Ready has a profitable subsidiary in South Africa.
City: National Savings attracts £7.5bn to post record year
By Charlotte Beugge
NATIONAL Savings toppled all its previous records in the last financial year-attracting £7.57 billion in savings.
This compares with an inflow of £6.2 billion in 1990–91 and beats the previous record year of 1986–87 by £1.1 billion.
Withdrawals were down to £6.42 billion from £7.21 billion in the 1990–91 tax year and were £2.9 billion lower than the peak withdrawal year of 1989–90.
This produced a net inflow figure of £1.54 billion-beating the previous best-ever year of 1983–84 and reversing the fortunes of the previous four years when there where net outflows of savings.
By the end of the tax year, National Savings had invested £39.7 billion-another record figure.
National Savings contributed £3.13 billion to government funding last year — an improvement of £1.81 billion on the figure for 1990–91.
But the government savings department is unlikely to rest on its laurels.
The present tax year is expected to be even better — experts predict a net inflow of £3 billion and a £5 billion contribution to government funds in 1992–93.
Last month was National Savings' best month in recent history — the gross inflow of £975m beat the previous record month of August 1984 by £15m.
Net receipts at £374m were the best since August 1984.
The most successful products in March were the 36th issue fixed interest certificates and Series C Capital Bonds.
Children's Bonus Bonds had their most successful month since their launch last July.
City: Gloom in financial services
OPTIMISM in the financial services sector has fallen despite signs of a pick-up in business, according to a report today.
A further weakening in confidence in banking is totally responsible for the latest decline, adds the report produced by the Confederation of British Industry and accountant Coopers & Lybrand.
The analysis shows 31 p.c. of financial institutions expect business volumes to increase in the present three-month period, against 17 p.c. forecasting a fall.
Confidence in several parts of the sector has improved, notably among venture capital businesses, fund managers and building societies.
Overall confidence is down because of the gloom hanging over the banking sector.
Total business declined in the first quarter, although at a slower rate than at any time over the past year.
Insurance brokers and venture capital concerns recorded the strongest growth.
banking, general insurance, finance houses and building societies all experienced declines in activity.
City: Wanted banker turns up
AN America banker, accused of embezzling $13m and sparking a financial crisis in the state of Rhode Island, yesterday gave himself up to the authorities.
Joseph Mollicone, president of the Heritage Loan Investment Bank, disappeared in November 1990 after auditors asked him about millions of dollars in missing loans from the bank.
He was later accused of writing fraudulent loan and deposit records.
The alleged fraud led to the collapse of the Rhode Island Share and Deposit Indemnity Corporation which in turn forced the authorities to close 45 other banks insured by the company.
City: Bank director returns home
By Mary Brasier in Budapest
A SENIOR director of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development flew back from Budapest last night to assess damage to the bank's London headquarters after Friday night's IRA bomb explosion.
Anders Ljungh, the bank's vice-president for finance, left the bank's first annual meeting before its official opening today, to report back on the state of the offices in Leadenhall Street, immediately opposite the Baltic Exchange.
He will be accompanied by a member of the British delegation.
A bank spokeswoman said one person on the staff had been injured in the explosion but most had already left for Budapest when the bomb went off.
She added that the effects on the bank's business would be ‘minimal’.
The blast has led to concern that the bank might be forced to decamp to another set of temporary premises — its third resting place in the 18 months it has been in existence — although this now seems unlikely.
It is due to move later this year to a permanent headquarters in nearby Broadgate.
The British government lobbied hard to have the EBRD sited in London rather than on the Continent and the decision was made as part of a political deal, which also appointed Jacqes Attali as its French president.
Lynda Chalker, Britain's governor to the bank, will after all arrive here in Budapest today for a shortened visit.
Mrs Chalker, who lost her seat at the general election, faced giving up her job as Minister of the Overseas Development Administration and Britain's leading representative at the European Bank, leaving a gap in the British team but will continue in her post from the House of Lords.
EBRD meeting — P21
City: Bank of England ready to help City casualties
By Roland Gribben
MOVES were made by the Bank of England yesterday to head off any problems in financial markets caused by Friday's bomb attack as leaders of key institutions made extensive efforts to ensure it is ‘business as usual’ in the City today.
The Bank opened a ‘helpline’ to handle foreign exchange difficulties and institutions offered help to businesses forced out of the bomb-ravaged area in St Mary Axe, the heart of the shipping market.
Lloyd's of London cleared space on the fourth floor of its nearby building left vacant by the reduction in under-writing capacity to ensure the Baltic Exchange can open for business this morning.
Commercial Union began to cope with the temporary loss of its headquarters building by making the maximum use of available space elsewhere.
The estimated 35 insurance, shipping and banking businesses forced out of the area were yesterday finding temporary homes in the considerable amount of empty office space in the City.
The Bank of England's main concern was to head off potential operational difficulties caused by settlement and clearing problems facing banks forced out of the area.
Officials were in touch with four banks, two of them Japanese, Sanwa and Daiwa, both tenants in the Commercial Union building, to try to help ease their problems.
The others are Hong Kong and Shanghai and Saudi International.
The four have fairly considerable wholesale banking business while the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, whose temporary building was considerably damaged, was offered dealing room space in the Bank of England.
A Bank of England spokesman said: ‘We are monitoring the situation overnight.
In the past we have been able to help out when there have been settlement and clearing difficulties and are ready to do the same again.’
The disruption to the shipping and insurance markets is expected to be limited but British Telecom moved quickly to restore services and provide the affected companies with links to ensure that callers could dial the usual numbers.
Two mobile caravans with payphones were sited in the area affected by the bomb damage.
Customers will be able to make essential calls free of charge.
Sir Brian Jenkins, the Lord Mayor of London, who co-ordinated the emergency re-location programme with leaders of the shipping and insurance markets, said the effect of the bomb on the international trading capacity of the City ‘would be nil’.
Businesses in buildings with glass shattered by the blast were re-assuring staff that it would be safe to turn up for work.
City: German economic outlook worsens
By Robin Gedye in Bonn
GERMANY'S recession appears to be deepening according to a report published yesterday which was forced to halve predictions of 2 p.c. growth this year because an increase in exports has failed to materialise.
The report by Germany's five leading economic research institutes said their more optimistic autumn predictions had been confounded because of east Germany's failure to turn the corner.
The pessimistic tone provides little hope that the Bundesbank will provide scope for Britain to reduce interest rates.
The report, which predicted an inflation rate of 3.75 p.c. in west Germany compared with 3.6 p.c. in 1992, contradicted repeatedly optimistic government assessments.
Although inflation was set to drop in east Germany from 13.6 p.c. to 12 p.c. in 1992, the actual inflation rate for the whole of Germany would be closer to 5 than 4 p.c.
Unemployment in west Germany will rise from 1.69m to 1.78m and in east Germany from 913,000 to 1.35m, giving a total unemployment rate of 8.1 p.c.
The institutes said they were far from certain whether the latest indicators signalled a stabilisation of the economic downturn.
‘The world is only slowly emerging from recession and it is not certain whether Germany's has been arrested.
We believe a real revitalisation of European economies will only be possible with a noticeable lowering of interest rates in Germany.’
Their warning came on the eve of talks between employers and union leaders representing 2.3m public employees demanding pay rises of 9½ p.c.
City: First domestic bond issue planned for Hungarians
By Antonia Feuchtwanger in Budapest
A SIGNIFICANT step was taken at the weekend towards the development of eastern Europe's capital market, as representatives of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development discussed making the bank's first domestic bond issue in a former communist country with Hungarian investors and finance ministry officials.
The bond issue, which could be launched as early as the end of this year, would be the first capital raising in an east European home market by the bank, which was set up by western governments in London in 1991 to catalyse investment in the former communist countries.
The bank would use the funds raised to lend to projects and businesses in Hungary, avoiding the currency risk involved in borrowing abroad.
At the same time, the bonds would stimulate the development of a local fixed interest bond market in a country where investors have had a bumpy ride.
Sandor Czirjak, vice-president of the National Bank of Hungary, said that earlier bond issues ‘did not take into account the difficulty of high inflation rates.
So the market for bonds is practically closed.’
Lurches in the values of shares had also damaged investor confidence, Mr Czirjak added.
The bank itself conceded in its ‘financial sector operations policy’ published at the weekend, that ‘public offerings also require a fair degree of investor sophistication which may take some time to develop in some of the bank's countries of operation’.
But markets provide useful competition with local banks, which have a long way to go before they learn to allocate capital efficiently.
City: Fire sale
BLUE Circle Properties, the property management subsidiary of Blue Circle Industries, has sold the former headquarters of Birmid Qualcast to the West Midlands Fire Service for £1.75m.
The building, Alpha House, is part of Blue Circle's 18-acre Alpha Park development at junction one of the M5 motorway.
The fire service will use Alpha House and the 2.4 acres of ground that come with it for practical and theoretical training courses.
Blue Circle Properties has already let one unit at Alpha Park and will announce another letting this week.
City: Davis deal
BANK of Scotland's NWS Bank subsidiary is buying Godfrey Davis (Contract Hire) for £5¾m from the Davis Service Group.
The vehicle contract hire business, which has net assets of £5.6m, will continue to be operated as separate subsidiary by NWS.
The sale completes Davis's withdrawal from car distribution and hire.
Last May it sold three of its four Ford dealerships to a management team for £6.7m and changed its name from Godfrey Davis (Holdings).
City: Name change
ACCOUNTANT Coopers & Lybrand Deloitte has announced that from June 1 it will be known as Coopers & Lybrand.
The firm has decided to drop Deloitte to avoid confusion among clients and to strengthen its identity with its parent firm, Coopers & Lybrand International.
City Comment: Treasury gets new team but needs new ideas
BY CHRISTOPHER FILDES
A CLEAN sweep at the Treasury, where Norman Lamont has been given a whole new team of ministers.
They will need to bring new ideas, for the supply has been running short and the election has not made the need any less urgent.
From the old team, David Mellor and Gillian Shephard have been wafted away on promotion, and the election left two more empty saddles in the Treasury corral.
The voters unseated John Maples, who as Economic Secretary became the acceptable televised face of the Treasury — no great compliment to his colleagues.
Any winsome volunteers to take over?
Francis Maude has gone too — reverting, so he says, to the real world, and leaving a vacancy for a Financial Secretary.
Now that is a job worth having — traditionally the stepping stone to the Cabinet and the place for a man of ideas.
Nigel Lawson showed what could be done with it.
Now it would be helpful if some of the new ministers' ideas had to do with money.
The old Treasury team showed no interest in it.
They behaved as though the European exchange rate mechanism had equipped them with a monetary policy and had left no point in discussing the subject further.
The Chancellor in his Mansion House speech rattled past the monetary arguments and in his Budget speech brushed them aside.
The newcomer might diagnose that money mattered.
He would go on to look at the banks and their debtors, and find all the symptoms he needed to confirm a diagnosis of monetary anorexia.
There is a lot of it about, he would say — notably in Japan.
The old team budgeted for government borrowing of £28 billion this financial year and more next year.
Revenues have sagged, but public spending carries on upwards.
The new team must have some response which goes beyond tamely printing and busily marketing ream after ream of gilt-edged stock.
Public spending — or rather, keeping it under control — is the job of the Chief Secretary, the Treasury's other Cabinet minister.
It was John Major's first starring role.
He gave it to his fellow football supporter Mr Mellor, who looked energetic but miscast — an excitable terrier rather than a good-tempered watchdog.
He will be more at home at the new Ministry of Fun.
Michael Portillo, who takes over, brings with him the label of Thatcherite hero-in-waiting.
He need wait no longer for his chance to show heroism, since he has the most thankless and necessary job in Mr Major's new government.
He is the man who must enable the Treasury to recover its grip of public finances.
Standard procedure after an election is to review the spending promises which were put in to please voters and, now that they have served their turn, cut some of them out.
Easiest to cut are the big projects which have not got beyond an existence on paper.
So the country's day-to-day spending goes on and its capital investment is cut back.
It is an old story.
If only such projects could be taken off the government's books and handed over to the private sector, to get on with them.
That too, is an old story and an unhappy one, for Treasury doctrine responds to these hopes by finding a difficulty for every solution.
Treasury ministers must either submit to this doctrine or find the way to rewrite it.
Forward, the minister with ideas.
The new team will find financial markets in a high state of excitement and looking forward to a cut in interest rates.
Better than finding them in a flap and fearing higher rates, as they were a week ago.
Ministers will be advised to keep markets waiting.
The Bank of England, old nanny that she is at heart, always believes that it is good for her charges to learn patience.
Then they will sit straight and eat up all their nourishing gilt-edged stock.
Daunting though it is to argue with nanny, the minister with ideas must try.
He should begin by drawing her attention to the dividend yield of Barclays Bank.
Until the general euphoria on Friday, the shares of our only Triple-A bank were yielding close on 10 p.c.
That is not a healthy sign.
It implies that Barclays cannot possibly do well enough this year to raise the dividend or, perhaps, to cover it with earnings.
That may not be all it implies.
Barclays has run into a sequence of big borrowers who cannot service their debts on time and cannot sell their assets to repay the debts.
There is no telling how many borrowers and banks are in the same bind, but it is familiar to householders, who have found that they can neither keep up with their mortgages or sell their houses on terms which would not bankrupt them.
There are only two ways out — the value of their assets must rise or the cost of their borrowing must fall.
How, though, can asset prices rise in the face of forced selling?
There is really only one way out, through interest rates.
It is not (as the old team likes to say, to excuse our recession) just a British phenomenon.
The Federal Reserve cut dollar interest rates last week but then the Fed is professionally interested in money.
It saw monetary growth stalling and it feared that the American recovery might stall too.
The Fed will also have had one eye on Japan — a working model to show what a collapse in asset values can do to banks.
By Japanese standards British bank shares look positively healthy.
A quarter of all Japanese bank lending is secured on property, and values are down by some 30 p.c. from their peak.
Japanese share prices are down by more than half, and share values form part of the bank's capital base.
The banks have been busy shoring up their capital and trimming their balance sheets, cutting loans and selling everything from government bonds to third world debt.
They will have to sweat it out — but gone are the expansive days when the Japanese banks were the world's lender of first resort.
At least the Bank of Japan, like the Fed but unlike the Bank of England, has felt free to cut its rates.
The 4 p.c. inflation rate which greeted our ministers on the morning of victory means that the real price of money (that is, allowing for inflation) is now 6½ p.c.
That is a crisis rate, but designed for the opposite kind of crisis.
Time for new ideas.
The Treasury team needs to realise that it is now in competition.
Into the Department of Trade and Industry sweeps Michael Heseltine, full of ideas — for action, intervention and expansion, and an alternative economic power-base in government.
Treasury ideas are bound to be different, and should have to do with choice and with making markets work.
It would be nice to hear them.
Economic View: Tories win some breathing space
BY PATRICK MINFORD
I AM as delighted as anyone with this Tory victory.
It means that Mrs Thatcher's great reforming legacy is safe and will be built on and it means that Britain's Euro-sceptic approach to Maastricht will dominate our coming Euro-presidency at a time when the federalist dream is turning sour all over Europe.
Yet I cannot share in the triumphalist chatter of the past three days, so reminiscent of 1987.
The fact is the Conservatives are on probation, saved in the end from the worst recession since the war by the British people's suspicions about Labour's tax plans.
If Labour had eliminated these plans from its programme and continued to emphasise John Smith's prudence (as opposed to his curious ideas about minimum wages and confiscatory ‘social justice’), then they would have swung more London and Midlands marginals their way.
The Tory nightmare ought to be that Labour revamps itself yet again and becomes truly a centrist democrat party, committed to sound money, tight budgets, and moderate taxation.
Labour's capacity to resist change can never be under-estimated and their conversion will always be suspect, but after their partial success by moving in this direction, this is what they will certainly try to do.
Fortunately the Tories have bought a breathing space in which to sort out their policies.
There are two things they have to grasp.
The first is that the recession they have caused and which so nearly ditched them will not go away automatically.
The second is that lower taxes, not higher public spending, is the key to their continued supremacy over Labour and equally any softer Liberal Democrat challenge.
Start with taxes.
What the voters perceived and clung on to, especially in London, was that there has been a revolution in Britain in the 1980s and that it would be foolish to put it at risk because of deeply felt resentment at the recession.
But the irony is that this perception was not clearly shared by the Conservative high command, at least until quite late in the campaign.
Fortunately, in the last week John Major came out fighting on the past reforms and his vision of a free, low tax, property-owning Britain.
With Labour now likely to bury their tax madness in their charge to the right, the Tories have to stay well ahead of them and consolidate their position as the party committed to cutting public waste and bringing down tax rates.
Incidentally a lot of nonsense is talked about tax rates under the Tories.
Average tax revenue went up from 34 p.c. of national income in 1979 to 40 p.c. in 1982 but this was necessary to eliminate public sector borrowing, which at some 6 p.c. of national income was an implicit (deferred) tax rate.
Since then the average tax rate has fallen steadily to 36 p.c., as the benefits of public spending control have come through.
More importantly, by reforming the tax structure, the Tories have brought down marginal tax rates further still, even compared with 1979; for example for the average earner the marginal rate including VAT has fallen from 49 p.c. then to 45 p.c. today.
The trick of combining lower marginal tax rates with a higher average tax take comes from the stepped progression of the tax system: as incomes rise people's taxable income rises proportionately faster and larger slices of it attract the higher rates.
But continued success in cutting tax rates is at risk from the Tories' present policies.
They have lost control of public spending in their undignified pre-election panic.
They have to recover their posture of tough reform of the public services, with renewed emphasis on opting-out in schools and the National Health Service, and less embarrassment about spreading the market to all these middle class perks.
The core of our public spending is social help for the poor, needy and unfortunate, not outdoor relief for the middle classes.
It is economically damaging to give the middle classes things free when they could perfectly well pay for them directly.
Of course, at the end of the day they pay the same for them whether directly or through taxation, but if they pay for them directly, in return for service or as private insurance, then their incentives to work for them are greater and the economy benefits.
This argument is crucial, if not yet fully absorbed, by the Conservatives' current strategists.
But this is probably the easier of the Tories' tasks.
I have left the more difficult to last: the recession.
There is still a complacency in official thinking about the recession which is frightening.
It is as if ‘recovery’ must come provided one sticks to whatever policy there is.
Yet, as the latest troubles with Olympia & York and the Tokyo stock market remind us, the recession shows no sign of ending and could get a lot worse unless real interest rates are brought down with a bang — and that means willingness to put the exchange rate mechanism second to domestic monetary policy.
Complacency about recession could destroy the Tories yet: they have been given a sharp warning by the electorate and they disregard it at their peril.
If John Major believes that his narrow majority is a vindication of his decision to join his darling mechanism, then his understandable sense of personal triumph will have gone to his head.
The fact is that he has been saved from a disaster primarily caused by his ill-judged decision, based on terrible advice, to join the mechanism.
Now he has won his spurs, he can afford to recognise mistakes like that without fearing loss of face.
He needs to get himself a proper economics team independent of the accident-prone Treasury establishment.
Another frightening development since Mrs Thatcher went has been the lack of genuine economic debate in Whitehall.
The establishment has taken over and the more wrong it has proved, the more it has stifled the dissent that might have saved the economy.
The Tories have perhaps three years before back-bench revolts and by-election defeats force them back to the country.
They have had a warning, and a reprieve.
They have no time for self-congratulation on their narrow escape.
Patrick Minford is professor of applied economics at Liverpool University
City: Eurobank poised for Russian row
By Mary Brasier in Budapest
SHAREHOLDERS in the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development are set to clash today over proposals for a substantial increase in resources to the former Soviet Union.
The bank is to ask its members to consider proposals for extra funds to speed the conversion of the Soviet military machine to civil uses.
But the British and American governments are opposed to what they see as a diversion of the bank's core activities in encouraging private enterprise in eastern Europe.
The European bank is looking at the use of soft loans to supplement the 10 billion Ecus (£7.1 billion) it has to commit to reform in the region.
President Jacques Attali will argue that the bank, which was set up one year ago and before the break-up of the Soviet Union, needs new forms of financing to meet the growing economic crisis in the former republics, although he has insisted that the bank's problem is not limited overall resources but the lack of suitable projects to finance.
According to one French banker, the soft-loan proposal, if agreed, would open a new front in the bank's financing of reform in the east.
The plan looks unlikely to get agreement given the opposition by two of the bank's largest shareholders.
According to a senior British official: ‘These are rather vague outline ideas, there are no detailed proposals.
It's not clear that new institutions are needed rather than simply an intensification of activities in the republics.’
In the two years since the idea of a European bank was first mooted, the Soviet Union has gone from a net contributor to the bank's budget to potentially its largest beneficiary.
The bank has recently lifted the original cap on how much the former Soviet Union can borrow, but faces pressure to do more to help the republics, which with one exception, are in the process of becoming the bank's newest members.
At the same time, the European bank will have to reassure countries such as Hungary, host to the annual meeting, Czechoslovakia and Poland that they will not be overshadowed by the needs of the old Soviet Union.
City: UK heads worldwide takeover activity
By Roland Gribben
CROSS-BORDER merger and acquisition business is picking up, say accountant Peat Marwick in its latest report on international activity, published today.
British companies were the most active buyers, picking up 87 foreign companies worth $2 billion
Richard Agutter, head of Peat's merger and acquisition network, said the relatively low average values indicated that British companies were making cross-border deals for strategic reasons ‘rather than going for the mega-deals’.
The total value of cross-border deals in the first three months of this year at $13.3 billion was 45 p.c. up on the corresponding period a year ago but was still well below the 1989 peak when the quarterly average reached $32.6 billion.
Mr Agutter said: ‘This is the first sign of a turnaround.
It marks the end to a continuing downturn for the last six consecutive quarters.’
Peat believes the market has now stabilised although at a significantly lower level than before the Gulf crisis and recession in key economies.
Buying interest in the first quarter was focused on Germany, helped by the sale of the former East Germany's assets.
The biggest deal, worth $3.1 billion, involved the sale of Minol, a petrol chain, to a consortium headed by Elf Aquitaine of France.
The 46 cross-border deals involved in the German total were valued at $3.7 billion.
America was the second biggest market with 64 sales worth $2 billion and Britain in third place with 61 companies sold for $1.5 billion.
City: Keating jailed for 10 years over ‘junk’ deception
By Jonathan Confino in New York
CHARLES Keating, a prominent figure in the $500 billion savings and loan scandal in the United States, has been jailed for a total of 10 years for deceiving depositors into buying junk bonds that became worthless.
Keating, former head of the failed Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, which is costing the government $2.6 billion to rescue, was also fined $250,000.
Savings and loan associations are the American equivalent of Britain's building societies.
The 68-year-old financier was found guilty of misleading thousands of investors into buying risky securities in Lincoln's parent company American Continental, which at the time was already in deep financial trouble.
A court heard emotional evidence from many elderly investors whose life savings had been wiped out by the fraud.
Bondholder Erica Bachman told the court: ‘Let him live in the same misery he brought upon his victims.’
Keating, who came to symbolise the fraud and corruption that lay behind the collapse of hundreds of savings and loan institutions, which are comparable to British building societies, is still awaiting trial on more serious fraud and racketeering charges.
City: Morgan Grenfell tops league
MORGAN Grenfell has maintained its position as the top financial adviser for British public takeovers.
According to Acquisitions Monthly, Morgan Grenfell advised on five deals in the first quarter — including Redland on its takeover battle with Steetley.
Second was SG Warburg — which advised Steetley.
There were 23 takeovers in the first three months of this year, worth £1.1 billion, 150 private acquisitions totalling £1.7 billion and 49 management buyouts, worth £367m.
City: Pet food steady
BELOW average price inflation and a growing pet population resulted in a stable pet food market last year, according to the Pet Food Manufacturers' Association.
The association, which represents 98 p.c. of British pet food manufacturers, reported that 1.4m tonnes of food worth £1.2 billion was sold last year.
City: Computer post
JOHN Ockenden, chairman of Data Logic, has been appointed chairman of the National Computing Centre, succeeding Dr John Ashworth of the London School of Economics who has held the post since June 1983.
City: Polish venture
MCVITIE'S, part of the United Biscuits Group, announced today that it is to invest £4m in its Hungarian operation Gyori Keksz to build a crisp factory.
McVities bought 84 p.c. of Gyori Keksz, Hungary's largest biscuit manufacturer, for £11.6m in April 1991.
Building work starts on the factory in the summer and production will begin early in 1993.
Questor Column: ANGLIAN WATER
SELL, says Hoare Govett, at 411p.
After the surge in the share price on Friday the yield on Anglian shares is down to 6.1 p.c. on likely pay-outs for the current financial year to March 1992.
Against the rest of the sector and the market, that looks a good deal less attractive than it has in the past.
Questor Column: BRITISH GAS
BUY, says Panmure Gordon, at 258p.
Despite having been through the regulatory mangle time again and time again, the group still has the potential to generate a lot of cash, and yields about 8 p.c. on forecasts for 1993.
Gas is an environmentally-friendly fuel and demand for it is increasing.
European Business: Lisbon axe to fall on forex rules
THE sudden popularity of the Portuguese escudo, which rose from obscurity to a position of strength inside the European exchange rate mechanism after it joined a week ago, could lead to the removal of restrictions on foreign investment earlier than planned.
Last year a bonanza of foreign capital attracted by interest rates of more than 18 p.c. poured $6 billion into Portugal, equivalent to 8 p.c. of gross domestic product, and forced the country to slam on the brakes and restrict foreign purchases of escudo investments.
Analysts believe that the central bank, which cut interest rates by 1 percentage point last week in an attempt to stem the rise of the escudo, may be prepared to remove its barriers over the next few weeks if rate cuts staunch the flow of hot money into Lisbon.
‘If this process of sharp interest rate falls continues, the Bank of Portugal may lift the restrictions on foreign buying of floating rate notes and mutual funds specialising in bonds,’ believes Miguel Namorado Rosa, an economist at Banco Comercial Portgues.
BCP was one of the companies to benefit from a surge of interest in the equity market alongside increases in the foreign exchange market last week following the ERM move.
Its shares shot up 10 p.c last week and the company, Portugal's largest quoted stock, is hoping to ride the tide of interest in the escudo when it launches a sale of shares and convertible bonds later this month to raise $300m of new capital.
The bank is planning a European and American roadshow on April 28 and is negotiating to become the first Portuguese company with a full overseas listing on one of the American stock exchanges.
‘We would like to have more foreign shareholders.
The Portuguese capital market is currently in a state of apathy and relatively stagnant, so the bank has decided to enlarge and diversify the shareholding,’ says BCP's chairman Jorge Jardin Goncalves.
The international share sale is the latest in a series of foreign initiatives by Portugal's fastest growing bank, which was started from scratch by a group of industrialists in 1985 and now ranks fourth in terms of assets in a country notorious for its profusion of banks.
Faced with a rush of competition from foreign banks when Portugal is forced to remove remaining barriers to entry after next year, banks such as BCP have been expanding fast in an attempt to ensure their market share of domestic business in banking and other financial services.
BCP has established links with Friends Provident in Britain and has an insurance joint venture in Portgual with Cariplo, an Italian bank.
Its foreign partners have taken what the chairman describes as ‘symbolic’ stakes in BCP.
Friends Provident has 1.5 p.c. of BCP and there is talk that the British insurance company could increase its holding and, in the longer term, change its mutual status to allow the Portuguese to take a reciprocal stake, probably if the two groups expand into further joint ventures.
‘The international strategy of the bank is to have one partner from each European Community country and no conflict of interests among them,’ says the BCP chairman.
‘There have been approaches by several institutions but we are not considering new ventures as a priority,’ he says.
European Business: Gloom on car makers' expansion
WESTERN car makers hoping to expand into the new consumer markets of eastern Europe will have to mark time until 1995, according to figures from DRI/McGraw-Hill which is predicting a jump in new registrations in the next half of this decade, but continuing sharp declines until 1995.
Poland and Czechoslovakia will dominate the region in terms of output, although until 1995 western manufacturers will be limited by economic conditions and trade barriers to improving local models and establishing kit assembly operations more than building western brands.
City Diary: P&D loses top bond salesman
BEN Allen, one of the highest Extel-ranked sterling bond salesmen, has resigned from UBS Phillips & Drew.
He is off to Kleinwort Benson where he will be reunited with former UBS colleague Ken Humphries, who left about nine months ago.
Insiders say UBS fixed-interest staff have gone through a considerable shake-up in recent months and Ben Allen had been increasingly unhappy.
City Diary: Blue shirts order of day
PERHAPS it was the presence of TV cameras on the company's Fleet Street trading floor, or perhaps it was a genuine surge of Conservative support, but for some reason a number of staff at Goldman Sachs were instructed to wear blue shirts, ties and braces for election day.
The Japanese warrants department, at least, complied.
‘A lot of our traders, particularly the younger ones, compete to see who can wear the most outrageous clothes,’ says a spokesman, ‘There was a discussion to do it as a joke but there was not a real consensus.
Not many did it.
But, anyway, are you surprised?’
Questor Column: BRITISH TELECOM
STILL very attractive, says Barclays de Zoete Wedd, at 345p.
Fears about excessive regulation have now disappeared, allowing the market to focus on the more fundamental attractions, with profits growth set to be stimulated by cost reductions.
The broker forecasts profits of £3.13 billion before tax for the financial year to March, giving earnings of 33.8p and a multiple of 10.
The yield, assuming dividends rise to 14.4p, is 5.6 p.c.
Questor Column: WATER SHARES
HOLD Thames Water, bellwether of the sector, at 416p, and buy Anglian Water at 411p and Wessex Water at 456p, says County NatWest.
Make no mistake, argues the broker, the regulatory regime for utilities will get tougher under the Conservatives.
Bearing that in mind, County likes Anglian because it is the most regulator-friendly of the 10 water stocks and likes Wessex for its significant waste management interests.
Questor Column: GENERATORS
HOARE Govett is neutral on the two power generators (National Power at 222p, PowerGen at 233p).
They will gain from the ability to buy cheap imported coal in coming years.
But there are concerns over the longer term outlook, with the all-important coal contracts up for renegotiation.
Questor Column: Post-election share rallies
THE ten shares tipped in our Questor Selection series were not all at the forefront of the post-election rally on the stock market on Friday but some showed good gains.
Scottish Hydro was up from 79p partly paid on Thursday morning to 98p at the close on Friday.
Guinness rose from 534p to 599p over the two days.
Seven out of the current ten are now ahead of their starting prices.
Two, Unilever and Guinness, substantially so.
Two other shares, Tesco and NFC, were sold from the selection, both at a profit, in the weeks before polling day, when the opinion polls were suggesting a Labour victory.
Both Tesco and NFC are back above the levels at which Questor sold them.
But that is hardly an excessive price to pay for cutting risk, in the midst of a tight election campaign.
The significance of the outcome of the poll should not be under-estimated.
Gone is the risk that tax changes and an erosion of confidence could cause severe damage to the British economy.
The recession is not going to go away overnight, especially in the most bombed out sectors such as construction and property.
Government borrowing is a worry, and the recent spectacular market falls in Japan are disturbing too.
This spring, however, there really are a few green shoots of recovery, and in a more confident climate, where people are once again prepared to plan for the long term, they could blossom rapidly.
So shares linked to the domestic economy look ripe for a bit of selective picking.
As a cautious start, British Telecom is a good choice to buy for the long term.
After modernising and its network, BT is about to benefit from a rapid fall-off in investment and staffing costs.
The shares, at 335p, are not expensive.
Buy BT as a way of plugging into the potential benefits of recovery — such as rising telephone call volumes — without taking undue risks.
Questor Column: SCOT ELECTRICS
UNDERVALUED, says County NatWest of Scottish Hydro-Electric at 98p and Scottish Power at 95½p.
Here they yield 20 p.c. more than the rest of the market, on forecasts to March 1993.
But since their dividend growth should be ahead of the market's, the yield premium should be slimmer.
European Business: French plan for share buying without tears
BY MARY BRASIER
FRANCE'S new prime minister, Pierre Beregovoy, who cut top rate value added tax in his first policy statement last week to give an estimated £500m boost to consumer spending is likely to turn his attention next to savings and investment with new incentives to stimulate share buying.
Mr Beregovoy is expected to approve proposals for a Gallic form of personal equity plans in the next few weeks which would allow French investors up to £60,000 worth of shares each, free of dividend and capital gains tax.
The plans are a variation on an earlier form of PEPs which restricted investors to bonds and insurance plans.
A stream of new money flowing into the country's stock market from both individual investors — the tax perks are not available to foreign buyers — and reforms also in the pipeline to the French pension industry are prompting hopes of a surge in the Paris bourse.
‘Paris is below its historic high, there are no further elections until 1993 and there will be increased liquidity from the new Plans d'Epargne.
A lot of people have also sold their Perrier shares following the Nestle bid, so a lot of money could go into blue chips’, says Thierry Flama at BZW Puget-Mahe in Paris.
Dividend yields on expected 1992 earnings are up to 3.8 p.c., compared with an average 3 p.c. over the last seven years and the economy can count on a resilient currency, low wage claims and an expected 40 p.c. fall in the trade deficit this year.
Richard Davidson at Morgan Stanley prefers Germany.
‘The impetus for interest rate cuts will come from Germany and growth from the east this year should be 15 p.c. and smoothe any fall in the west German economy’, says Mr Davidson.
Although European markets will be later than Britain in feeling any economic recovery coming from America, the bonus for investors is that share prices remain relatively undervalued and dividend policies, traditionally less generous than in America or Britain are now catching up, chivvied by foreign and domestic investors who are more demanding than in the past.
‘The main feature of the 1991 results season is the size of dividend payments.
In the first quarter only 10 companies in Europe cut their dividends out of a universe of 103 stocks we follow.
Fifty-eight companies increased them’, said Jo Rooney European strategist at stockbroker James Capel.
Dividend growth last year was 10.3 p.c. in France and although it is expected to slow in 1992, will recover to similar levels in 1993, according to Mr Rooney.
He added: ‘Whereas in the previous downturn in the 1980s when a lot of cyclical companies were haemorraging cash, this time the pressure on profits has not been at the expense of their financial position.’
MARY BRASIER
European Business: Telecom ready to put travel costs in a video perspective
BRITISH Telecom will unveil later this month a sight for sore eyes — or at least for bleary eyed business travellers worn out by taking early morning shuttle flights to meetings on the Continent.
BT and five public telephone companies in France, Italy, Germany, Norway and Holland are launching an experiment to test video telephones among more than 100 businesses with cross border European operations.
According to marketing manager Steve Gandy, BT has been swamped by offers from British companies to take part in the experiment which will test the usefulness of desk top video links for business.
The trial follows the rapid growth of BT's video conferencing operations which allow subscribers to replace expensive business travel and face to face meetings with a television link.
Royal Bank of Scotland a pioneer user of video conferencing seven years ago when its merger with Williams & Glyn's forced it to split operations between London and Edinburgh now televises meetings with its Spanish alliance partners at Banco Santander in Madrid.
‘There is less wear and tear on top management and it allows us to arrange meetings more quickly which might not take place otherwise,’ says Royal Bank spokesman Alwyn James, speaking in Technicolor from his studio in Edinburgh.’
The year before we put it in the costs of air fares and hotel bills were horrendous.’
At their cheapest video links can be made with £35,000 of equipment and twice the cost of a phone call.
City Diary: No cross for Heseltine's daughter
MICHAEL Heseltine, the new Secretary of State for Trade & Industry may be interested to know that his powerful exhortations last week to vote Tory were unsuccessful with his daughter Annabel.
Not that she supported any other party, but I gather the former deb failed to register in Westminster, where she has a Notting Hill flat.
When the registration forms came through, she apparently mistook them for election bumf and threw them away.
Friends think it unlikely that she was registered at her parents' Oxfordshire seat, and her two flatmates, journalist Andy Harris and design consultant Lizzie Schoon — both Tory supporters — were also unable to vote.
A chum of Annabel's says fondly: ‘It's hardly surprising — she is not renowned for her attention span.’
City Diary: Sheppard bans ‘lefty FT’
SIR Allen Sheppard, chairman of Grand Metropolitan, is taking direct action against the Financial Times for its controversial support of Labour on polling day.
The leisure chief, who was once a Labour party member but is now an ardent Thatcherite, was so incensed by the FT leading article that he has cancelled Grand Met's daily subscription.
His St James's headquarters used to take 30 copies a day, but now staff refer to the paper as the ‘lefty FT.’
Predictably, Grand Met's official response is: ‘No FT?
No comment.’
City Diary: Going long in avocados
EMBOLDENED by the election result, that near-extinct breed, the yuppie, is taking its first tentative steps abroad for some time.
In the Moorgate branch of Marks & Spencer, where caviar and foie gras upstage the chicken Kiev, I spotted an Alex lookalike.
His choice of vegetables was being dictated to him over a portable telephone.
Incidentally, he seemed to be going long in avocados.
City Diary: Video game with a difference
AS international confidence in Japan's economy wavers, a Japanese company has launched a new video game about international trade, called Japan Bashing.
Fukuoka-based SystemSoft is marketing the £40 game which tests players' negotiating skills in 15 scenarios based on realistic US-Japan trading disputes.
Players must fight Japanese opposition to US construction firms into the country and protest against Japan overfishing of blue-fin tuna, among other things.
The video responds with inscrutable Japanese phrases like: ‘Very difficult but we will do our best.’
The goal is to improve relations, although racial stereotypes are a crucial part of the game.
One scenario, ‘Anger the Americans,’ sets off a cowboy firing his six-shooter, while ‘Rile the Japanese’features a samurai with his sword.
Business Monitor: Beware mobile phone cheats
THE Road Haulage Association is warning about a team of bogus engineers who are contacting mobile phone users on the pretext of tracing and solving connection problems.
During the inquiry they ask for the electronic serial number of the mobile phone which is then used for the illegal duplication of the phone unit.
According to the association, calls made on the duplicate telephone are then charged to the account of the legal phone.
Business Monitor: Cheap loans ‘fixer’ comes under fire
By Andrew Griffiths
FINANCIAL consultants are becoming increasingly concerned about the activities of North Star Ventures, an Isle of Man company collecting thousands of pounds in advance fees for cheap loans, a number of which have so far failed to turn up.
Offers of funds sourced in America at interest rates of 8 p.c. fixed for 15 years are the latest in a series of schemes around the country to have attracted brokers seeking capital for their clients.
North Star recently advertised for brokers in the financial trade publication Financial Adviser, requesting replies to be sent to a P.O. Box in Bournemouth.
It is offering unlimited loans said to be from Global Finance Corporation, of Delaware, America.
Daca, the main agent for North Star, has issued copies of a letter from a City solicitor vouching for the ‘good standing’ of Global Finance which says the corporation is understood to have access to ‘significant funds’.
Steve Sharp, of mortgage broker Chain Chase in Milton Keynes, was impressed by the low rates, and offered to act as an introducer.
He has paid £4,000 in fees and has 25 clients seeking loans ranging from £20,000 to £5m.
But last month he became worried as deals due to be completed failed to materialise and North Star sought to change the terms.
A second tranche of arrangement fees due to be paid on receipt of the loan, were now being demanded in advance.
Mr Sharp is refusing to proceed, not least because the fees would amount to more than £80,000 for some clients.
He said he had ‘no idea at all’ whether the loans would arrive.
‘All this sounded very nice to start with but now I am beginning to wonder,’ he added.
Mike Binstead, of Homelink Mortgage Brokers of Guernsey, is concerned that North Star has failed to establish its credentials to his satisfaction.
Mr Binstead, who says he has investigated many similar offers, none of which have produced loans, said: ‘We are making inquiries, but we have not been able to establish whether these offers are going to come through.’
Interest in this scheme, which can generate big commissions, appears to have spawned a network of introducers and brokers all leading to Daca.
But concern about the operation has been so great that police on the Isle of Man have been flooded with more than 50 calls asking if the operation is above board.
Enquiries by The Daily Telegraph have revealed that North Star is in fact operated from Swindon, Wiltshire, by a man called Robert Tancock, and is an ‘off-the-shelf’ company purchased from a formation agency.
The City solicitor whose letter is being used to vouch for Global Finance was shocked to hear of details of North Star's advance fee demands.
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle, of Throgmorton Avenue, said it had now revoked the letter.
Bruce Palmer, a partner, said he had helped Mr Tancock set up Global Finance earlier this year, but had not received independent confirmation of what the company did.
No one from Daca, which is based at Albion Place, Northampton, and run by a man called David Frisby, was available for comment.
Hooleys, North Star's solicitors in Swindon, failed to return calls.
Mr Tancock, who operates from Mannington Park in Swindon, refused to say if anyone had ever received loans from North Star, or to say why he had set up Global Finance.
‘I can't answer questions over the telephone.
It is against company policy,’ he said.
Business Monitor: Companies steer to hiring
COMPANIES appear to be moving away from outright purchase of company cars towards contract hire, according to a survey by salary and benefit specialists Alan Jones & Associates.
It found that more than half of companies now use contract hire compared with only three in 10 during 1991.
Leasing cars has fallen in popularity from two in 10 last year to less than one in 10 now.
More than two in five companies have changed their method of obtaining company cars in the last 10 years, says the survey, and of these, half changed to contract hire.
The survey also found that three out of five companies use contract hire because of ease of administration, while, for outright purchase, three in 10 gave this reason.
Business Monitor: Growing into foreign territory PROFILE
Waterers sprouting as other gardeners fall on rocky ground
BY PATIENCE WHEATCROFT
EURO DISNEY has moved from the realms of make-believe to become reality.
Inside this compound of fairytale castles and cartoon characters, it is difficult to distinguish between what is artificial and what is real.
Be assured, the plantlife, at least, is genuine.
One British firm has just come back from France with almost £1m for its contribution towards landscaping.
Waterers Landscaping became involved in the project in September and proved so popular that the original £150,000 contract grew and grew.
Now it hopes that the rest of Europe might prove a similarly fertile source of work.
‘Euro Disney has been very successful for us and now we are getting some interest from other potential clients on the Continent,’ says Peter Fane, one of the four brothers who own Waterers.
Brother Mark is no outsider to Continental markets, having done his MBA at Insead, the business school at Fontainebleu, which trained executives for the Single Market.
Mark oversaw the Euro Disney contract while Peter, another MBA, was managing the business from Sunningdale, Berkshire.
Two trained and experienced businessmen in one landscaping company is unusual, and Peter suspects it might have been part of the reason for success.
Many gardening businesses have hit rocky ground but Waterers expects to increase turnover from £4.8m to £6m in the year to July.
Two years ago, before Mark and Peter began working in the firm, turnover was £1.5m.
The landscaping business was part of a bigger horticultural company in which their father was involved.
When he died in 1980, the brothers decided to buy the landscaping division and concluded the deal almost four years later, when Waterers was losing money on a staff of 12 and a turnover of £400,000.
The four boys were young but funded the purchase themselves.
The eldest, Nick, then in his mid-twenties, joined the company at that stage, and remains in charge of the day-to-day operations.
The company has more than 150 staff, some permanently employed on clients' premises tending the results of its landscaping and planting efforts.
There is little point paying large amounts to establish a leafy bower outside an office if it is left to wither at the mercy of cleaners or caretakers.
Instead, businesses pay Waterers to maintain the effect.
Maintenance contracts now give the company a cushion of £1.5m of income.
Peter's first priority has been to build the commercial side of the business, where image-conscious companies are prepared to spend heavily on landscaping and planting.
Hence RMC spent almost £1m with Waterers to get the desired effect at its headquarters at Thorpe Park and Esso's Leatherhead headquarters was adorned with lavish landscaping.
The promise of plenty of planting can prove useful to a company in search of planning permission, so Waterers has found its services increasingly in demand by supermarket giants Sainsbury's and Tesco as they try and inveigle their way on to the green belt.
A new superstore at Camberley is graced by a parade of 40 ft trees.
Ready-made trees, specially brought over from the Continent, provided an instantly acceptable environment.
Major planting jobs are no longer restricted to the outdoors.
Hotels, shopping centres and offices increasingly seem set on going into competition with Kew Gardens.
Peter Fane has noticed that his customers' demands are becoming more adventurous as they try to appear lusher and leafier than their rivals.
One client recently had 25 ft date palms brought in from Egypt.
Trees are being imported from Florida for the vast Little Britain office complex near the Barbican.
‘First the trees will go into our glasshouses to be acclimatised to the UK light levels,’ Peter explains.
He wants his trees to be happy in their new environment for obvious commercial reasons.
‘If the product does snuff it, we have to replace it,’ he says.
This may contain the secret of why Waterers is flourishing while the average turnover of British landscaping companies languishes at £300,000.
The Fane brothers' primary interest is business, not plants.
The youngest, Tim, does not even work in the firm.
But in the last three years, they have invested more than £500,000 in improving the 30-acre Sunningdale site, adding huge glasshouses and improving the show gardens.
They have opened offices in Bristol and Maidstone to service maintenance contracts.
The brothers recently launched two-day design courses for amateur gardeners and suspect that the Waterers name might be profitably used on gardening equipment.
They like the idea of design shops which might cater for the plentiful supply of individuals with small gardens and several thousand pounds to spend.
Mark, who worked at investment house Foreign & Colonial, evaluates all the ideas with the same attention to the bottom line he used when looking at applications to provide venture capital.
He and his brothers take the view that, whatever their ambitions, they have no wish to fund them via a stock market flotation.
They enjoy their status as a family company and intend to retain it.
PATIENCE WHEATCROFT
Business Monitor: North West survey shows optimism
NORTH West businesses have ‘some optimism’ that economic conditions will improve over the next six months, according to an independent survey of more than 1,000 companies carried out before the election.
Service and manufacturing sectors reported more confidence about improvement, although the regional economy as a whole continues to feel the full effect of the recession, despite a ‘bottoming out.’
The survey by accountants Price Waterhouse and Manchester Business School says definite signs of recovery include a greater degree of confidence in sales growth, and a rise in companies planning to increase capital expenditure.
Business Monitor: London agency has £3m for minnows
GREATER London Enterprise, the regional development agency for London, has raised a £3m fund to invest in smaller companies in the capital.
The Second London Enterprise Venture Fund will invest amounts between £150,000 and £1m and brings to £9.4m the funds under management with the agency's subsidiary GLE Development Capital.
Business Monitor: World-class needs leadership
LACK of leadership is a main factor behind difficulties experienced by British companies in achieving world-class quality, says a study by London Business School.
An absence of strategic vision and insufficient customer focus were two other areas identified as key problems facing companies which are also being held back in their quality objectives by the recession.
Business Monitor: Surveyor who will go far
ANNE Stokes, a 30-year-old rating surveyor and taxation adviser who surveys and values cement works and quarries, has won this year's Young Career Woman award organised by the Federation of Business and Professional Women.
Miss Stokes, of Bedworth, Warwickshire, works for Blue Circle Industries.
She hoped the award would encourage more women into industry.
Runner-up was Yve Carter, 35, the owner and director of a Bristol recruitment consultancy.
‘We have seen yet more trail-blazers in a man's world this year,’ said Ann Swain, national president of the federation.
Other finalists included a detective sergeant in Kent police drug squad; an estate manager for the National Trust; a general manager of Iberia Airlines; and a technology project manager for ICI Engineering.
Also in the last 11 were the proprietor of California Cake & Cookie; a geophysicist in oil and gas exploration; an credit review manager for Midland Bank; a training officer for GEC Sensors; and a land registrar for the Isle of Man.
Miss Stokes was presented in London with £1,000 and an engraved rosebowl by industrialist Baroness Denton.
The award was sponsored by National Westminster Bank.
Business Monitor: Licence to increase chances of success FRANCHISING
A low failure rate makes for an attractive proposition
BY MICHAEL BECKETT
LUCK keeps companies afloat.
What distinguishes the companies still with us after a long period of recession is that they are lucky — they do not seem to have been hit by the unexpected.
Luck is a rare commodity but the harder a manager works the more he has of it.
Napoleon demanded to have lucky generals around him, and with good reason.
It is the mark of good management: a surprise-free environment, prepared or braced for the unexpected.
Franchise operations seem to provide a surprisingly large amount of luck to judge by their substantially better survival rates.
There is after all not a lot that sets franchise outlets apart from other businesses.
They are just service outlets providing anything from hire cars to hair dressing, hamburgers to hotels.
They do not even have lower costs.
Often they are in relatively expensive sites on high streets with costly business rates.
On top of that they have an extra cost other shops are spared — the royalty payable to the franchise provider.
They must therefore have something extra to compensate and yet survive.
The people who grant the franchise licences would say that, offsetting the extra costs of royalties, there is the benefit of wholesale buying.
With the greater buying power and distribution for many items, the franchisor can often get a better price for supplies than an individual shopkeeper could manage.
In addition to providing supplies of ‘consumables’, the franchisor also normally provides the outlet with advice and frequently accountancy help, plus guidance on publicity and efficient management.
Indeed, there is little point in paying out good money from hard-earned income merely for a name.
The businessman might as well go off and start his own photographic processor, print shop, or plumbing company but for the initial advice on how to run the organisation.
Brands bring luck as well.
Certainly some of the largest companies think so — those such as Forte, Allied Lyons, Grand Metropolitan, McDonalds and Kentucky Fried Chicken spend much time and money developing brands which they are now franchising.
But although brands may be valuable aids for getting market share, they are not indispensible.
What the dealer buys is experience and assistance.
This is vital because most people taking up franchises are not experienced in running their own businesses.
They may be former bankers or miners, students, nurses or printers but there is nothing in their previous experience that is much help in running your own show.
National Westminster Bank, in its 10 points to remember for would-be choosers of a franchise operation, says: ‘Make a personal assessment of the franchiser's management skills and track record.
Be sure his management structure is sufficient to support his existing and future plans.’
It also advises talking to a number of franchisees in the proposed franchise.
‘In particular, ask them about the accuracy of sales forecasts, cost projections and the quality of the back-up he provides.’
Barclays Bank, which has a six-point plan, also suggests taking to existing franchisees about the product or service to be offered.
This is good advice because even franchises are no guarantee of success.
In general, the failure rate of franchises is dramatically lower than the equivalents outside — though that sort of statistic is highly affected by definitions.
Company liquidation figures have been more than double the level of a year before, with about half the companies dying within the first five years.
By contrast, according to the British Franchise Association fewer than 10 p.c. of franchise operators go under.
Moshe Gerstenhaber, chairman of Kall-Kwik Printing, has been using this as a promotional feature: ‘If ever evidence was needed to prove the merits of franchising, the present difficult trading conditions have to be an example.’
Its rival Prontaprint, which has 258 outlets and won the franchiser of the year prize, reckons to have kept the failure rate to less than 3 p.c. a year.
When the financial conditions turn hostile it takes all the luck in the world for businesses to stay alive, much less prosper.
It seems franchising has a garland of white heather and four-leaved clover but some of the operations have rabbits feet wearing horseshoes as well.
It is worth searching them out.
MICHAEL BECKET 
Business Monitor: Microsoft Windows has a clean sweep
By Rob Murray
THE latest version, of the Microsoft Windows operating system, numbered 3.1, was released last week.
Extensive testing and feedback from the previous version have produced about 1,000 changes.
The installation procedure has improved understanding of hardware and software configurations and it will alert the user to problems with any memory-resident software.
It is easier to put the system on a network and ‘custom installation’ allows users to select United Kingdom settings, installing the ‘£’sign and asks whether to install other accessories such as help files.
A tutorial is included to familiarise users with the pictorial symbols and with using a ‘mouse’.
However, should users run into problems help is just a press of the F1 key away.
Some of the major new features include TrueType, which can create type of varying sizes without any jagged edges.
TrueType fonts can also be faster as they have better access to the computer's memory.
A selection of typefaces is offered including Courier new, Helvetica, Times New Roman and Symbol.
‘Object linking and embedding’ allows objects created by different applications, ie text, graphs or charts to be easily inserted into into a single document.
By double clicking on the object, the program which created it originally will start up ready for editing.
If the object is linked, changes in the original will be automatically updated in the object.
Windows comes with Applets — the name given to the collection of programs, including Write, a reasonable word processor although sadly lacking some advanced features; Clock, with either a digital or analogue display; Cardfile, a flat-file database; Paintbrush, drawing program; and Terminal, a basic communication program which supports Kermit or Xmodem file transfer protocols.
The new features along with a faster Program Manager, File Manager and SmartDrive disc cache, make upgrading to version 3.1 a sensible choice.
Windows 3.1 requires at least a 80286 processor, 1MB of memory, a hard disc with 10 MB free and a DOS of 3.1 or later.
It costs £99 although upgrades are available for £45. (081 893 8000).
ELONEX, a British supplier of computers, is about to be one of the first to deliver the latest and fastest 33MHz 80386SX microprocessor made by AMD.
By designing its machines to have a modular architecture upgrading, it becomes a simple task of swapping one processor card for another.
Together with a 50MB hard disk, 2MB of memory, Super VGA colour monitor, mouse, DOS and windows the new machine will become Elonex's entry-level up-gradeable computer, with a price tag of about £925.
Price cutting is rife in the computer industry with Elonex cutting prices three times this year already.
The latest reduction has taken the PC-420X a 20MHz 80486SX computer to under £1,000. (081 452 4444.)
ALAN Sugar made his Amstrad company famous through bringing computing to millions.
Yet outside the computing industry who has ever heard of Intel?
In fact Intel, an American company, produced all the microprocessor chips (the brain of the computer) for every Amstrad personal computer, and until recently most other manufacturers too.
Intel has been trying to get itself known better recently with television and magazine advertising to offset the rising power of several competitors.
It has also encouraged computer manufacturers which use the Intel family of processors to proclaim that in advertising.
However, the ‘Intel inside’ has now become Intel outside as Intel will manufacture a range of computers, using the 486SX and DX processors, for Amstrad.
The Intel machines branded ‘The Amstrad Professional Series’ will be built in Ireland to Amstrad's specification and feature Overdrive, a socket that enables the machine's microprocessor to be upgraded.
Business Monitor: Mix with the bank manager
By Andrew Griffiths
KEN Miller is a rarity among small businessmen.
He likes his bank manager.
Mr Miller started his London restaurant business Kenny's at the beginning of the recession and says that, what with high interest rates, business rates and rents, an increase in value added tax, plus the recession, it has had many problems.
Profits on a £1m turnover have not been spectacular.
But while many small traders blame the lenders for many of their difficulties Mr Miller says the Royal Bank of Scotland has helped him through the downturn by being flexible.
He admits to cashflow forecasts ‘always late, early, or wrong’, not warning of problems until the last minute, and having an overdraft which is higher than it should be.
‘Notwithstanding all these problems, the bank has kept faith with us in the face of the single most important failing of small business — the failure to provide adequate information on a timely basis,’ he says.
Royal Bank won its first gold star when it lent £70,000 to help Mr Miller, a professional caterer, to buy a restaurant business in Hampstead, north London.
No other bank was interested, he says.
It also provided an £80,000 rent guarantee to the landlord.
Despite poor trading, the bank stumped up another £70,000 for a second premises in Chelsea last year.
Mr Miller says meetings every six weeks with his account manager in London or Edinburgh have encouraged a better relationship.
‘The strength of the personal relationship with our account manager has allowed us to get through a number of fairly serious problems,’ says Mr Miller, who believes the owners of small businesses need to make extra efforts to communicate with their bankers during hard times.
‘What many people commenting recently seem to have forgotten is that account managers have bosses too,’ says the caterer.
‘You may have the best relationship in the world but if you do not provide your account manager with the ammunition to fight your corner then all his boss sees is a problem account.’
Business Monitor: Questions without answers
By Michael Becket
Barrie Pearson and Neil Thomas (eds)— The Short MBA.
Thorsons £25, 165 pages).
IT LOOKS a substantial book but there are so many blank pages it is rather expensive for the amount of information.
It contains a lot of questionnaires for which there are no answers and with not much guidance on what to do with the answers once you have filled in the pages.
Fortunately, further into the book there is some meat.
For instance, the chapter on finance — the longest — explains in simple language how the profit and loss account is compiled, what a balance sheet shows and how to derive indicators from such figures.
Eric Short — Saving for Your Retirement (Bloomsbury £10, 217 pages).
AS AN actuary and a former journalist Mr Short is factual, reliable, and readable.
Medical advances ensure more of us will live to old age and will be active enough to need cash to indulge our whims.
So guidance is welcome.
But do not look here for specific advice.
Mr Short explains that one needs to choose with care the life company which is taking our pensions premiums but, apart from a favourable mention of Equitable Life's charges (the company sponsored the book) he merely suggests seeking consistent performance.
On the other hand, there are tables and graphs and a methodical list of the alternatives, so the intelligent and diligent reader can make up his own mind.
Business Monitor: The new buy-in hopefuls
BRITAIN'S next generation of buy-in managers will be experienced managing directors seeking greater job satisfaction and prepared to invest around £100,000, according to new research carried out by investment capital group 3i.
The picture has been built up from an analysis of 715 applications to join the group's management buy-in programme.
More than half have an average of five years managing director experience in at least two positions and four out of five claim experience in turning around a company.
More than two-thirds have previously been involved in making an acquisition and most are in their forties.
Patrick Dunne, who heads the management buy-in unit, says research indicates a new wave of buy-in activity and the likelihood of an increase in the success rate.
‘There are an increasing number of executives looking to break out of the corporate hierarchy,’ he said.
Business Monitor: Pay increases slow to rate of 6.5pc
By Roland Gribben
A SLOWDOWN in the rate of pay increases after an earlier ‘blip’ is shown in the latest Daily Telegraph and Reward Group index which is published today.
Average base pay was rising at an annual rate of 7.3 p.c. in February but recession, the reduction in working hours and bonuses meant the increase in total pay was down to 6½ p.c. although still comfortably ahead of inflation.
The previous index, based on the pay position in December, caused some surprise with an acceleration in the rate of increases.
Total earnings, after slowing down earlier in the year, were higher, rising to a range between 7 p.c. and 8.3 p.c.
It was felt at the time that the upward movement was out of line with the underlying trend and the latest figures analysed by Reward suggest it has in fact been short-lived.
The February index provides renewed evidence of a slowdown although the average 7.3 p.c. rise is only marginally below the 7.5 p.c. recorded in the October index.
The widening of the gap between basic increases and total pay is one of the most marked trends in the latest returns.
The profits squeeze has reduced bonuses while a further reduction in overtime means operatives' earnings have suffered.
Average working hours have dropped by 40 minutes over the last year, implying either the need for less overtime or further indications that management is keeping a tighter control on costs while continuing to improve productivity.
The February index shows the increase in total earnings at management level down from an annual rate of 8.3 p.c. in December to 7 p.c., from 7 p.c. to 5.6 p.c. at clerical level and from 7.4 p.c. to 6.8 p.c. among operatives.
There have been modest shifts in terms of regional differentials.
Management base pay in Greater London was 18.2 p.c. above the national average against 18.7 p.c. in December.
Reward believes more recent figures point to a further fall in the rate of increases.
Since last November the average settlements recorded by Rewards' clients has been 5 p.c.
The forecasts for the rest of the year suggest they could level out slightly higher at 5.4 p.c. with companies in the south budgeting for awards of 5.7 p.c.
‘The reasons for this are unclear unless people do not believe the inflation forecasts of 3.8 p.c. for the year and are anticipating a hardening labour market as the country comes out of recession,’ says Reward.
Business Technology: SHORT TAKES
Drug link XENOVA has signed a drug discovery collaboration with Genzyme, a leading American biotechnology company.
The aim is to develop drugs for several inflammatory diseases, particularly respiratory.
Genzyme announced last week that Ceredase, its drug for Gaucher disease, is being used in Britain for the first time in 10 patients seriously ill with the rare and potentially fatal inherited disease.
Smart army WAR in the 21st century will see soldiers in ‘smart’ helmets that allow them to see through clouds and over hills, according to a report from America's National Research Council.
It predicts that swarms of robots will carry out the most dangerous tasks and soldiers will be able to adapt their genetic make-up to improve the body's protection against chemical and biological warfare.
Fuel bond AN ADDITIVE that bonds diesel fuel and water to create a solution that burns cleanly without loss of power has been developed by a team led by Prof David Thorley of City University.
Called Aquasolve, the product is designed to prevent water contamination of fuel — a common cause of transport breakdowns.
It can be used in all types of diesel engines and is being marketed by SHURflo of Reigate, Surrey.
3D cinema THE NEXT generation of cinema technology from Imax will be shown in Europe for the first time at the Expo ‘92 world fair in Seville, which begins this month.
Echoes of the Sun — a film showing how photosynthesis turns sunlight into energy — will be shown on Imax Solido, which presents three-dimensional images in a wrap-around screen cinema.
Special liquid crystal glasses are required to see the 3D effect.
Business Technology: Assault on the Colorado
POTATO farmers in Byelorussia, Ukraine and Russia are to use a biological pesticide to protect their crops from an assault from the Colorado beetle.
Because potatoes do not absorb radioactive nucleotides, they are one of the few crops that could be grown safely in the heavily contaminated soils around Chernobyl.
Sensitive to further environmental damage after the nuclear disaster, authorities banned the use of chemical insecticides in the worst affected areas, leaving crops vulnerable to insect pests.
The farmers are now among the first to use biological insecticides, becoming increasingly popular as a replacement to conventional chemical ones, to protect the environment and overcome the problem of resistance, which insects can develop after extended exposure to the same chemical.
Novo Nordisk's pesticide Novodor FC, based on a subspecies of Bacillus thuringiensis, is highly specific and controls the larvae of the Colorado beetle without harming non-target insects or animals that feed on them.
No toxic residue is left in the crop or the environment.
After spraying, the beetle feeds on the crystallised proteins which react in the insects' gut, causing paralysis then death four to seven days later.
Business Technology: A clear-cut way to save millions Roger Highfield discovers a superficial revolution in plastics
BY ROGER HIGHFIELD
AIRLINES could save millions, motorway signs could be more efficiently lit and bags could be sealed without the need for adhesive thanks to new technology to put microscopic grooves and markings on a surface.
A recent meeting at the Royal Society was told how the properties of a transparent film can be transformed by making microscopic markings.
‘You can imagine a series of plastic films with the same chemistry, made of the same material and same thickness, and yet each one having different properties,’ said Roger Appeldorn, of the 3M Company of America.
A precision machine with a diamond tip measuring around one-fortieth of the diameter of a human hair is used to cut furrows, grooves, pyramids, rings and other shapes into a metal surface which in turn is used to stamp the microscopic features into a plastic film.
Appeldorn said the method could even be used to help make silicon chips, adding that the world leaders in diamond machining are in Britain, at Cranfield Precision Engineering.
He described how using films covered with tiny grooves called riblets could save the world's airlines billions.
Running in the direction of the air flow, the riblets push the turbulent air flow off the surface of the aeroplane, cutting drag and saving fuel.
Riblets have been tested by Nasa and are being tested on Boeing and Airbus aircraft.
By cutting microscopic, concentric grooves, clear film can be turned into thin lightweight lenses, called kinoforms.
Special bifocal kinoforms have been made for implantation into the eye after the removal of cataracts.
Appledorn said clear plastic film can also be covered with triangular grooves to make it into a mirror for use as ‘light pipes’ for more efficient road lighting, while other shapes create a reflector to make a road sign stand out when illuminated.
By enmeshing two sets of grooves, films can be made to stick together, providing a re-usable airtight seal that needs no adhesive.
Coated with a conductor, they can also be used as electrical connectors, enabling about 100 to be packed into a ½ in plug.
Business Technology: Simple tests that can be a turn-off for mosquitoes
TESTS that detect pesticide-resistant insects have been developed to help tackle malaria and a range of other tropical diseases.
They are already in use in Australia, America, Brazil and Tanzania, and could make a major contribution to managing insect-borne diseases and crop pests, according to Dr Janet Hemingway of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.
Dr Hemingway and colleagues, who developed the tests, have also found one of the genes that makes malaria-transmitting mosquitoes resistant to pesticides such as DDT.
‘If we can find out how the insects switch this gene on and off then we may be able to prevent resistance by switching it off permanently,’ said Dr Hemingway, at a Science and Engineering Research Conference in King's College, London.
Until this is possible, the new test kits will allow researchers to quickly identify areas where insects have become resistant to pesticides, so that they can use alternatives before the diseases spread.
The tests work by detecting enzymes present in the resistant insects' nervous systems.
‘We can tell very quickly what's happening, so we can tackle the problem as soon as it arises rather than using a pesticide until it fails.
This should mean that pesticides will last longer, because they could be used in other areas before resistance spreads, and researchers could switch back to using the original pesticide once resistance has been wiped out, she said.
The kits work for a range of tropical diseases and for crop pests.
‘The principle behind them is similar to that for pregnancy detection kits and a simple colour change gives you the answer,’ Dr Hemingway said.
‘They're very easy to use.
The tests are relatively simple but nobody thought of doing them before.
In the long run we still want something that will enable us to stop the resistance completely,’ she said.
‘We're looking at the resistance mechanisms and hope to develop technology to control insects by stopping them developing resistance.’
C. M.
Business Technology: Time for a tune-up
FOR accurate timekeepers, a watch that automatically sets itself to special radio time signals will be launched in Europe later this year.
Citizen, which developed it, says it is the first watch to have a built-in radio that tunes to time broadcasts linked to highly accurate atomic clocks.
The coded time signals are available in Japan, Europe and the United States, though the watch cannot be used in America at present because broadcasts there use different codes.
The wristwatch has a antenna coil across its face to receive the radio signals.
Outside the radio reception areas, the watch runs with a normal quartz movement.
The company hopes that the watch will be bought by people whose jobs require accurate timing, such as television directors.
The price has yet to be fixed.
Business Technology: The rise and rise of an industry's best-kept secret Monica Horten finds Unisys profiting from a change of strategy
BY MONICA HORTEN
UNISYS is the best-kept secret in the computer industry, at least its customers say so.
Though the company rarely boasts about it, its technology is often better than its competitors, they say.
One of the world's top 10 computer manufacturers, Unisys was created in 1987 out of the merger of two smaller companies, Burroughs and Sperry.
But it has kept its head down in recent years because of a huge $4 billion corporate debt and a slide in sales.
Now it believes it has halted the downward slide following a restructuring and product strategy review over the past year.
Later this month, it will announce an operating profit for the first quarter of 1992, the second quarter running in which it has been profitable: the last quarter of 1991 produced a small profit of $80 million, although the year as a whole showed a $1.4 billion loss on turnover of $8.6 billion.
Unisys president Reto Braun said that the corporate debt was now ‘controllable’.
It has been reduced from $4 billion after the merger, to $2.5 billion.
John Perry, chief executive of Unisys UK, added that the British subsidiary made a profit of around 10 per cent, in spite of the adverse economic climate.
Braun said that the ‘order books are cause for cautious optimism.
The downward trend is stopping or slowing down’.
He admitted that Unisys's sales have suffered from a lack of confidence among customers about its financial situation.
He also conceded that Unisys has been hit by the same technology shift with which IBM is having to come to terms.
Unisys concentrated on selling large proprietary mainframe computers, which cost several million pounds, and have a gross profit margin of 80 per cent.
Now, only half the company's revenue comes from mainframes: the new strategy means selling smaller machines, based on industry standard ‘open’ operating software.
These machines have a gross margin of 50 per cent.
In addition, he pointed out that the price/performance ratio has changed by a factor of 6,000 in the past few years: ‘If the car industry had had the same change that the computer industry has experienced since 1960, a car that cost $10,000 in 1960 would now be sold for $1,’ he said.
This year, the company intends to move further in the direction of computer networking and professional services, which is where Braun believes there is still market growth.
By 1995 he wants the company to earn 20 per cent of its revenues from services such as consulting, software and management.
Braun has also overseen a thorough examination of all the corporate processes and product lines.
Its aim was to cut operating costs.
The result is a flatter seven-layer management structure, the closure of seven factories, a tightening of the time it takes to bring products to market, and a concentration of effort on selling to industry sectors in which the company has established expertise.
These include finance, government, and defence.
However, 10,000 people were laid off in the process, including many of the 650 who worked at Unisys's factory in Livingstone, Scotland.
The factory used to make cheque processing systems for banks; these are now made in factories in France and America.
Unisys customers, attending a bi-annual meeting of the Unisys Users' Association in Amsterdam this month, were in favour of the new direction, but they feel it is time the company put its head above the parapet: ‘Unisys has very good products, but they never tell anyone about them,’ said one insurance company systems manager.
Business Technology: Handing out better health Christine McGourty on the small companies benefiting from production of chiral drugs
BY CHRISTINE MCGOURTY
A TREND in the pharmaceutical industry towards designing drugs specifically to interact with certain molecules in the body is creating a new industry sector devoted to the development of ‘one-handed’ molecules.
Nature produces many chemicals in two forms that are mirror images of each other— so-called left-handed and right-handed molecules.
Though identical in almost every respect, these ‘isomers’ react quite differently from each other in the body.
Many drugs on the market today contain a mixture of right- and left-handed isomers, but often only one type has the desired effect; the other may be inactive or even produce harmful side-effects.
Thalidomide, the drug prescribed in the Fifties for morning sickness, is the most infamous example.
It is thought that the right-handed molecule produced the therapeutic effect but the left-handed molecule produced the birth defects.
A desire for more effective drugs with fewer side effects, combined with an increasing knowledge of the molecular basis of treatment, has given rise to a clutch of new companies developing ‘handed’ molecules.
The so-called chiral drugs (from chiros — the Greek word for hands) made with these molecules are said to be safer and more effective.
Among the companies developing their business on the technology are Celgene Corporation of Warren, New Jersey, and Sepracor of Marlborough, Massachusetts.
Celgene has developed a patented method of isolating left- and right-handed versions of compounds known as amines, used as building blocks in a variety of drugs for cardiovascular diseases and central nervous system disorders.
Sol Berer, the company's senior vice-president, said that more than 75 per cent of pharmaceutical companies with chiral drugs were now taking only one of the two isomers to the market.
The market for intermediates — the building blocks for pure isomer products — was worth about £300 million and due to increase to £1.7 billion by the year 2000.
The boom was good news for small pharmaceutical companies.
‘The individual products are not very profitable by the standards of a Hoechst but represent a good market for a small company.’
Celgene, with a turnover of about £3.3 million, is working with most of the major pharmaceutical companies in America and Europe.
Through its OptiPure programme, Sepracor is developing improved forms of several commonly prescribed drugs.
The company intends to commercialise its products in partnerships with major pharmaceutical companies.
It claims that developing the single isomer form of conventional drugs is a good way for such companies to minimise erosion of their market share by generic drug manufacturers by effectively extending patent protection for the product.
In Britain, Dr Chris Evans, the original founder of Enzymatix, has led a buy-out of its chiral division to form a new company, Chiros Ltd, based at Cambridge University's science park.
It was set up with funds from leading venture capitalists Schroders, Apax and 3i.
Chiros acquired from Enzymatix — until recently a subsidiary of the troubled food group Berisford International — more than 30 scientists and its research and pilot plant facilities.
It also acquired a collection of thousands of enzymes, which underpin its business.
Enzymes are inherently sensitive to the chiral nature of chemicals and, combined with their ability to catalyse reactions, this allows very efficient chiral processes to be developed.
A single enzyme molecule can make many millions of single isomer product molecules per minute in a chemical reactor.
Dr Andy Richards, Chiros's commercial director, said the company had ‘more opportunities coming in than we can handle’, and aimed to be the world's leading supplier of chiral chemicals.
He argued that not only did the technology bring safer products, but it could cut the number of chemical steps in production, and simplify the manufacturing process, lead to more effective use of chemical plant and improve return on capital investment.
Major pharmaceutical companies often did not have the multi-disciplinary expertise to develop the necessary products and processes and Chiros was collaborating with several of them, Richards said.
The company has products in clinical trials with two American and European pharmaceutical companies.
Glaxo and Wellcome are among its customers and one of its products — gamma lactam — is currently being used by several companies to make a new generation of anti-Aids drugs.
Euro Disney opens its £2bn theme for a dream Wary French make the Mickey Mouse connection Jenny Rees joins first-day visitors to the Enchanted Kingdom
BY JENNY REES
EURO DISNEYLAND, a little bit of America in the flat farmlands of Seine-et-Marne to the east of Paris, opened an hour earlier than planned yesterday as thousands of visitors arrived at the Enchanted Kingdom.
The Germans came in their camper vans.
The British got there in their usual resourceful way.
Mr Peter Cousins, 43, a civil engineer, his wife, Angela, and their two children, David, 10, and Louisa, 11, brought over their caravan from Kent.
Mr Ian Ralph, 43, from Gloucestershire, took a taxi, with his wife, Carol, son Robert, 17, and daughter Jennifer, 14, from their hotel in Paris.
Mr Ralph had taken his children to the Disney resort in Florida because he thought they would enjoy it, but he had fallen in love with Mickey Mouse himself.
‘Mickey Mouse was Walt Disney's alter ego,’ he said.
‘He created him as the person who could do all the things that grown ups are not allowed to do.
He gave us licence to be silly, which is why there are thousands of us here today.’
Senior Disney executives, each accompanied by posses of security men on a presidential scale, and the 14,000 staff waited anxiously to see whether the expected crowds of between 40,000 and 60,000 would materialise.
The 140-acre park — which has taken about £2.2 billion and four years to build — will be open from 9am to midnight every day of the year.
A family of four would need about £150 comfortably to cover the price of a daily ‘passport’, meals and shopping in the five themed areas.
However, there have been rumblings of discontent at what has been called an unwelcome invasion of American popular culture into the heart of France.
Euro Disneyland's railway station, provided by the French government, was closed yesterday by a strike called by rail unions to spoil the big day.
On Saturday night, an electricity pylon near the site was blown up, causing power cuts in the Disneyland hotels.
Police suspect it was some form of protest.
But Disney executives, serious men in grey suits who describe themselves as ‘nice solid businessmen who do things in a nice solid way’ and who hope to take a nice solid £500 million this year alone, have taken criticism in good heart.
Tremendous emphasis has been put on the fact that many of the themes are French or European, not American.
Mr Michael Eisner, chairman and chief executive of the Walt Disney Company, announced from the castle walls that Snow White was a German fairytale, Pinocchio was written by an Italian, Cinderella and Sleeping Beauty were both written by a Frenchman, Charles Perrault, and Mary Poppins and Peter Pan were English.
French is the first language of Euro Disneyland.
British visitors may be confused to find Sleeping Beauty is La Belle au Bois Dormant, and Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs are Blanche-Neige et Les Sept Nains.
Speaking about the remark made by Ariane Mnouchkine, a French writer and theatre director, that Euro Disneyland was a ‘cultural Chernobyl’, Mr Eisner said that he and his colleagues were aware that some French intellectuals had been poisonous about the Enchanted Kingdom.
‘At first, when we were told, we tried to figure out who these French intellectuals were,’ he said.
‘When we heard that some might be communists we decided that we didn't have to take any notice of them anyway.
But I think that if they bring their children here they will find they have a good time.’
But the French crowd showed that any American cultural invasion of their nation had taken place long before Euro Disneyland was even a dream in the imagination of its creators.
They arrived wearing cowboy boots, blue jeans, T-shirts and jackets stamped with US Marine Corps or Miami Dolphins.