

Business as usual pledge while City clear-up goes onBuildings face demolition: Staples Corner flyover could be closed for year
By RICHARD SAVILL, ALASTAIR MCCALL AND NEIL DARBYSHIRE
THE CITY of London was determined to resume ‘business as usual’ today in defiance of the IRA bomb that devastated office blocks and other buildings on Friday night.
Damage is estimated at hundreds of millions of pounds.
Up to 15 of the 40 companies affected may not be able to function from their normal premises for the foreseeable future.
Three people were killed and 91 injured by the bomb.
The dead were named last night as Mr Paul Gordon Butt, 29, a securities dealer, Mr Thomas Casey, 49, a door keeper, and Danielle Carter, 15, whose eight-year-old sister was among the injured.
The Lord Mayor of London, Sir Brian Jenkins, said: ‘The City of London will be ready for work on Monday morning as usual.
The effect on overall international trading capacity in the City of London is nil.
‘Regrettably we have had to live for several years with the threat of these appalling incidents happening.
They have not affected the determination of the British people to carry on their lives as normal and I don't see any reason for that to change now.’
At Staples Corner, a key road junction on the northern approaches to London and scene of a second IRA bomb attack on Saturday, civil engineers and motoring organisations predicted months of severe disruption.
The junction, which links the M1, North Circular Road and A5 Edgware Road flyover, is already an area of congestion and diversions are certain to cause chaos.
The A5 flyover is expected to be closed for up to a year.
The Staples Corner bomb went off at 1.05am on Saturday, almost four hours after the City explosion.
A warning was given, the scene sealed off and no-one was injured.
Preliminary estimates suggest that insurance claims could reach between £200 million and £300 million after taking into account the damage to buildings, the cost of reconstruction and loss of business both in the City and at Staples Corner.
Companies will be filing claims under explosion insurance which covers damage resulting from terrorism, while victims will be eligible for compensation from the Criminal Injuries Board.
Other reports and pictures — Pp2 & 3
Many City offices are likely to remain closed for some months and at least two — the Baltic Exchange Chambers and the Baltic Mercantile and Shipping Exchange — are expected to be demolished as a result of the most powerful IRA explosion since the mainland terror campaign began more than 20 years ago.
British Telecom has been installing extra lines ‘in terraced houses all over the capital’ so that some stockbrokers, bankers and insurance agents can work from home.
Most firms have found alternative accommodation already.
Glaziers and contract cleaners were also working over the weekend to limit the disruption to tens of thousands of workers returning to their offices today.
The worst of the damage was in a triangle of streets bordered by Bishopsgate, Houndsditch and Leadenhall Street.
However, all streets with the exception of St Mary Axe — where the explosion occured — and Bevis Mark re-opened during the night.
City of London police said that partial closures meant Leadenhall Street and Cornhill were open to vehicles for access only and not used as through routes.
People will be unable to reach their offices in St Mary Axe today, but arrangements have been made for police to escort staff to premises in adjoining streets.
The 100lb Semtex bomb shattered glass in a wide area, most notably in the 23-storey Commercial Union Building, which lost all its windows, and NatWest tower, where more than 200 were smashed.
The extent of the damage in the NatWest tower, home to the bank's corporate and institutional finance divisions, goes from the ground to the 42nd floor.
Other large businesses affected include the Japanese bank Daiwa, and the Hong Kong & Shanghai Bank, several hundred yards from the centre of the blast.
Some companies, including James Capel, the stockbrokers, called in their workforces to clear up the damage.
Mr Peter Letley, finance director, said he hoped that 500 of the firm's 800 staff would be able to resume normal working today at James Capel House in Bevis Marks.
Mr Ted Hartill, the City of London surveyor, said post-war buildings had suffered less than older buildings.
‘Post-war buildings have a relatively thin structure with few columns and lots of windows,’ he said.
‘The blast crashes through the windows and straight through the building and out the other side.
It does not damage the structure.
If you have a solid structure the blast hits it full on and moves the structure.’
British Telecom said it had redirected 300 numbers by last night.
City workers who had not been contacted by their own company were advised to call their normal switchboard number for direction.
Those unable to gain immediate access to their offices were advised to go to Guildhall, where company representatives would be waiting.
Two payphone caravans have been installed in the area from which essential calls could be made.
They are at the junction of Leadenhall Street and Bishopsgate and the junction of Billiter Street and Fenchurch Street.
Both bombs were planted in white vans.
Each contained around 100lb of Semtex high explosive, five times as much as was used to demolish the Grand Hotel, Brighton, during the 1984 Conservative conference and 40 times the size of an average car bomb.
It was the first significant indiscriminate attack on a public area outside the transport system since the Harrods bomb eight years ago and could signal an increasingly ruthless approach within the IRA command structure.
A coded warning issued 25 minutes before the City bomb gave the wrong location.
Police poured scorn on IRA protestations of regret that civilians were killed, contained in its statement admitting responsibility.
The largest previous Semtex bomb on the mainland — 70lb — did not explode.
It was found in November, 1990, in a car in Willesden, north London.
The car had been used by Nessan Quinlivan and Pearse McAuley.
Quinlivan and McAuley, arrested at Stonehenge a month before the Willesden cache was found, were due to stand trial for conspiracy to murder before escaping from Brixton prison.
They are still at large and Scotland Yard has not ruled out their possible involvement in the latest attacks, but they are believed to be firearms specialists rather than bomb makers.
At least two IRA cells are thought to be active on the mainland.
Detectives fear they are not short of Semtex, smuggled from the Irish Republic with relative ease.
A recent assessment estimated that the IRA may still have access to up to eight tons.
Detectives trying to trace the vans — a Ford Transit and a Bedford — have appealed for information from anyone who may have sold such vehicles in recent weeks.
‘Equally we want to speak to anyone who may have rented out property recently in what they consider to be suspicious or somewhat unusual circumstances,’ said a Scotland Yard spokesman.
Smith favourite as Labour leadership battle opens
By George Jones and Philip Johnston
MR NEIL KINNOCK and Mr Roy Hattersley — elected on Labour's so-called ‘dream’ leadership ticket almost nine years ago — will announce today that they are to stand down as leader and deputy leader.
Their decision to precipitate a leadership contest only days after Labour's fourth humiliating general election defeat threatened to plunge the party into a new bout of recrimination and in-fighting.
With Mr John Smith, Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer, emerging as the clear favourite to succeed Mr Kinnock, there were protests from senior Labour MPs about the way they were being rushed into choosing a new leader.
But Mr Kinnock, 50, clearly devastated by his party's rejection at the polls, wants a successor chosen as quickly and as smoothly as possible.
A special conference is likely to be held in late June or early July to pick a new leader and deputy under the party's electoral college system, in which the unions, constituency activists and MPs all have a say.
Mr Bryan Gould, the party's environment spokesman, intends to make a statement either today, after Mr Kinnock has formally resigned, or tomorrow.
It is possible he will be a candidate for both the leadership and deputy leadership.
The scale of the task confronting the new Labour leadership in trying to end an unprecedented run of election defeats is underlined by a Gallup survey of Thursday's results, published in today's Daily Telegraph.
It shows that Labour, despite the recession and abandoning many Left-wing policies, has still not made any significant advance with the voters.
Last Thursday was the sixth general election in a row in which Labour failed to win the support of 40 per cent of voters.
Even before the formal resignation announcements, the jockeying for position within the Shadow Cabinet was well under way last night.
Mr Smith had the overwhelming support of his senior colleagues and the main trades union leaders.
Mr Robin Cook, Labour's health spokesman — who called for an early contest — and Mr Donald Dewar, Scottish spokesman, were among the first senior party figures publicly to throw their weight behind the Shadow Chancellor's campaign.
Mr Smith, 53, is one of the few members of Labour's front-bench team with Cabinet experience.
A Gallup survey for The Daily Telegraph suggests that if he had been leader, the party would have had greater success last Thursday.
His age could count against him but he insists he has fully recovered from a heart attack in 1988.
Younger potential leaders such as Mr Tony Blair, 38, the employment spokesman, and Mr Gordon Brown, 41, trade and industry spokesman, are expected to back Mr Smith and one or the other might be persuaded to run as his deputy.
Senior Shadow Cabinet sources indicated last night that Mrs Margaret Beckett, spokesman on Treasury affairs, would not be seeking the deputy leadership as part of a ‘dream ticket’ with John Smith.
Mrs Beckett is understood to have suggested to Mr Smith that other contenders, such as Mr Blair or Mr Brown, might be more appropriate running mates for him.
However Mr Gould — who issued a warning against a hasty leadership change — signalled that he was preparing to stand and said it was ‘no secret’ that he was being encouraged to do so.
Mr Gould said that Labour must broaden its appeal rather than simply change its leader.
‘We need time to debate some of these issues, to decide what new appeal, what fresh approach we make to those voters who have not yet been persuaded to come to us,’ he said on BBC TV's On the Record programme.
There was support for Mr Gould from Mr David Blunkett, local government spokesman and a member of Labour's national executive.
He said on BBC Radio Four's World This Weekend programme: ‘Rushing into a leadership battle, holding special conferences which will cost the party money it does not have, trying to steamroller people into making rapid decisions, I believe is a mistake.’
But Mr Cook said he did not believe the party could leave the leadership in abeyance.
‘If Neil decides to go it is very important that the Labour Party shows that it can arrive in agreement on a new leader quickly so that he has a summer in which to establish his authority.’
Any candidate for the leadership will need to win the nomination of 55 Labour MPs, a barrier which is likely to rule out a challenge from a hard-Left contender, such as Mr Ken Livingstone.
It could also prove too great a hurdle for Mr Gould, a well-known Euro-sceptic, who made clear that he would be pressing for Labour to rethink its economic policy and to advocate realignment of the pound within the European exchange rate mechanism to enable it to put forward more positive policies on industry and employment.
Mr Hattersley said on LWT's Walden programme, that Labour should not lose sight of its egalitarian ideals.
He blamed the concentration on hung parliaments, proportional representation and potential election pacts towards the end of the campaign for scaring voters away from Labour.
Waldegrave chosen for charter task
By George Jones Political Editor
MR WILLIAM Waldegrave, appointed new Minister with responsibility for the Citizen's Charter in the weekend Cabinet reshuffle, has been charged by the Prime Minister with trying to develop ‘Majorism’ as a political philosophy for the 1990s.
Mr Major wants to ensure that his drive to improve public services is translated into a practical programme over the next five years.
The Citizen's Charter has failed to capture the imagination, although 18 detailed charters — ranging from the NHS to the Inland Revenue — have been published.
Mr Waldegrave will be responsible for implementing the Tory manifesto commitment to more open government, including ending the secrecy over Cabinet committees.
He will also be in charge of reform of the civil service.
His appointment is part of the most radical restructuring of Whitehall for more than a decade, with the creation of two new ministerial posts.
The other new post is the Secretary for National Heritage, which goes to Mr David Mellor, former Treasury Chief Secretary.
He will take over responsibility for broadcasting from the Home Office in addition to administering the new national lottery.
A second round of ministerial changes, in the middle and junior ranks, will be announced tomorrow.
Traffic chaos expected for months
By Gerald Bartlett
THE EXPLOSION at Staples Corner — one of Britain's busiest road junctions — will cause major delays for a long time, AA Roadwatch said yesterday.
Structural damage to the A5 Edgware flyover, immediately above Staples Corner roundabout, is so severe that it could be closed for months.
Civil engineers were checking damage at the site yesterday.
Scotland Yard said the westbound slip road on to the North Circular Road at Staples Corner, the eastbound slip road from the North Circular and most of the ground-level Staples Corner roundabout will be closed this morning.
A5 southbound traffic will travel on the east side of the roundabout and back on to the A5.
Southbound traffic on the A5 will be able to leave at Staples Corner in the normal way, but northbound traffic will be diverted, before Staples Corner, along Dollis Hill Lane.
Traffic was travelling freely, east and west, along the North Circular Road yesterday.
It is expected that traffic travelling southbound on the A5 and M1, and intending to go west along the North Circular, will be diverted via Brent Cross roundabout.
A lengthy diversion is expected for northbound traffic on the A5 wishing to go east on the North Circular — via Cricklewood Lane and Hendon Way.
In addition to vehicles using the motorway and North Circular, the junction normally copes with heavy traffic heading for the Brent Cross shopping centre.
An AA spokesman said: ‘Months of severe daily road jams lie ahead following the Staples Corner explosion.
This closure at one of Britain's busiest road junctions will cause lengthy hold-ups, prolonged for months.
Diversions will send traffic on to other nearby routes, meaning inevitable jams, worsened at times by roadworks on the nearby A1 at Mill Hill and the North Circular.’
Frustrated football fans, caught up in traffic delays on the M1 yesterday afternoon, left their coaches at the Edgware junction and started to walk to Wembley along the hard shoulder.
They were quickly spotted by a police patrol who ushered them off the motorway and down the A41 slip road.
The M1 was closed from junction 4 down to Staples Corner until the Cup Final began.
Both the police and the AA, who had been urging football fans to travel to Wembley via the M25 and the A40, avoiding Staples Cross, reported ‘little difficulty’.
The M1 was opened for a period at junction one yesterday, to relieve congestion.
Rival fans were involved in a skirmish in Kilburn High Road when windows and the interior of a pub were damaged.
Police separated them.
Demolition likely for Exchange
By David Wighton City Staff
THE Baltic Exchange, whose Edwardian listed building is likely to be demolished after suffering the full force of the bomb, is the world's leading market for the chartering of cargo ships and the sale of second-hand vessels.
Opened in 1903, the building had a huge domed trading hall lined with marble pillars and stained glass.
Able to accommodate more than 2,000 people, the hall has, however, become largely deserted in recent years.
Following the trend of other City markets, much of the Baltic's business is done by phone.
Mr Peter Tudball, Baltic chairman, was said to be worried that the market could lose business if trading was interrupted.
The Exchange is being moved into the nearby Lloyd's of London building and observers yesterday suggested that the effect on its business would be small.
London is still the centre of world shipping activity and the Baltic Exchange is Britain's second biggest ‘invisible export’ earner after Lloyd's of London.
Last year its earnings rose by more than half, to £664 million, making a large contribution to the balance of payments.
Apart from the trading hall and the Exchange's own offices, the building has two restaurants and a large conference room.
It also houses the offices of the General Council of British Shipping and markets for trading soya bean and potato futures.
Millions lost as trading park lies in ruins
By GERALD BARTLETT
B&Q's five-year-old DIY superstore was almost totally destroyed and scarcely a shop, office or warehouse on the Staples Corner trading estate escaped undamaged, writes Gerald Bartlett
No-one was hurt in the blast as there are few houses nearby.
But windows were reported to have been blown out in homes more than 1,000 yards away.
Offices of the Levi jeans company and the computer firm, Casio, were being checked yesterday for structural damage.
The front of Nevada Bob's golf equipment business, 200 yards away, was destroyed and walls were cracked and ceilings demolished.
Firms expect insurance claims to run into millions.
One retailer, who spent most of Saturday trying to reach his premises, said: ‘The scene was one of utter devastation with suspected gas leaks, rubble, mangled stock and cloying, clinging dust everywhere.’
A B&Q spokesman said last night: ‘Because our store was the closest to the viaduct it took the full force of the blast and it could well be that we are talking of a complete demolition.
One of our first priorities will be to get the 80 staff working in our stores nearby and see how soon we can find somewhere to re-establish business in north London.
‘We are very sad, naturally.
In business terms this store has been very successful, taking a lot of money, and has a multi-million pound annual turnover.’
Mr Ivan Norman, 30, Business Operations Director for Nevada Bob's, said: ‘The Easter weekend, April and May periods, are the busiest of the year for us It now looks as though we will spend them temporarily out of business.’
Rebuilding will cost at least £200m
By Bruce Kinloch Commercial Property Correspondent
AT LEAST four buildings will have to be demolished and rebuilt, including the Baltic Exchange Chambers and the Baltic Mercantile and Shipping Exchange, according to Corporation of London surveyors, who examined buildings at the weekend.
Surveys on buildings close to the explosion in St Mary Axe will continue today, but initial estimates put the bill for rebuilding and repairs at more than £200 million.
The area at the centre of the blast is mainly used by insurance and shipping companies, although many well known banks and financial services corporations have offices there, including National Westminster Bank and the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development.
Replacing windows will be a big expense.
In most cases it will involve new window units, which suppliers will not hold in stock.
A spokesman for Pilkington, the major glass manufacturer, said yesterday that it could take several weeks for new windows to be installed.
Owners of empty London properties were quick to offer up their offices.
Rosehaugh Stanhope, developer of Broadgate in the City, said it could house all those affected, and Olympia and York, developer of Canary Wharf, said it could also provide space.
But some companies made it clear yesterday that if possible they wanted to remain in the City.
Eight detained in hospital after ‘appalling carnage’ The bravery of two young girls hurt in the explosion has impressed their nurses, writes Alastair McCall
By ALASTAIR MCCALL
VICTIMS of the IRA's City bombing — including two young girls — are recovering from their injuries in London hospitals.
Mr Peter Hamlyn, consultant neurosurgeon, at St Bartholomew's Hospital, which treated 47 casualties, said: ‘It's difficult to think how much worse it could have been.
It was appalling carnage that went on, and came through the doors of this hospital.’
Eight out of the 91 injured are still in hospital, one of them in intensive care.
Another four were discharged during the day.
The two girls, travelling together in the back of a car as it passed close by the explosion in St Mary Axe on Friday night, are being treated for facial and eye injuries in neighbouring beds at Guy's Hospital.
One of them, Christina Carter, eight, was due to be told last night that her 15-year-old sister, Danielle, was one of the three killed in the explosion.
Her father was driving the car in which Danielle died and Christina was badly injured.
He escaped with only minor injuries.
Christina and her companion, Sara Saddoo, seven, won the praise of nursing staff at the hospital for their bravery.
They arrived at the hospital, their faces badly cut by flying glass and debris, with their arms stretched in front of them in shock.
Mr Michael Lyons, duty administrator at Guy's, said they looked as if they had ‘gone a couple of rounds with Frank Bruno’.
‘They were extremely brave.
They were not crying and screaming, but were incredibly calm.
They are making satisfactory progress.
Their families are at their bedside.’
Sara underwent an operation soon after admission to remove glass from her eye.
She will need another operation on Wednesday, but doctors are confident that her sight will not be affected.
Her uncle, Mr Eustace Saddoo, of Ayton Grove, Manchester, condemned the bombers for callous lack of ‘consideration for their own humanity and flesh’.
‘They are animals; they are not human,’ he said.
‘People, who are grown-up, who do things like this to children, are wicked.
They have no feelings for other people and no consideration for their own humanity.
‘Sara is a very quiet little girl.
She would not harm anybody, but she is a brave girl from a brave family,’ Mr Saddoo said.
His brother, and Sara's father, Mr Linval Saddoo, who is divorced from Sara's mother, travelled from Manchester to see his daughter early yesterday.
Another of those badly hurt was Mr Alan Ray, a taxi driver.
He was released from Guy's Hospital yesterday afternoon after being treated for severe lacerations to his wrists and arms.
‘He put his arms up to protect his face and that is why they took it all.
He has no tendon injuries and was very lucky,’ Mr Lyons said.
Mr Ray, 34, from Welling, south-east London, was waiting in his cab outside the Commercial Union building, which was devastated in the explosion.
He said: ‘It was like a nightmare.
I heard a loud explosion just to my left.
I put my arms over my head and pieces of glass started to rain down on me.
The most frightening thing was that I thought it would never stop.
When the glass started coming down, I started screaming.
‘It kept coming through the sun roof and at one point I heard the roof caving in,’ he said from his hospital bed.
‘After about 45 seconds it stopped and I managed to get out.
I was wandering around with other injured people, including two girls.
‘There was another rumble of masonry and noises of glass falling.
There was paper everywhere.
‘After getting out of the cab, I looked round and saw what looked like a car upside down on fire.
I tried to stay calm; I looked down at myself and saw I was bleeding heavily,’ he said.
He and the two girls, Sara and Christina, were rescued by a passing taxi, which took them to Guy's.
He said: ‘I do not feel any mercy for the IRA.
Look at me.
What have I ever done to anyone?
What about those children?
What have they ever done?’
Two other patients were also released from Guy's yesterday afternoon.
One other remained in hospital for an exploratory operation on a shoulder injury.
Three bomb victims were still in St Bartholomew's Hospital last night.
One one of them, a married man in his 20s, is in intensive care.
A young married woman was removed from intensive care during the day and a third patient's condition was unchanged.
Mr Hamlyn, who operated on Michael Watson, the boxer, said the victims had received injuries to every conceivable part of their bodies.
‘People were injured hundreds of yards away.
If it had been a more crowded time there would have been unbelievable numbers,’ he said.
Mr Hamlyn operated for four hours on the man who remained in intensive care.
He had suffered a ‘very severe head injury and extensive arm injuries’ and required eight pints of blood.
‘He is extremely lucky to have survived and that's due to the expert resuscitation he got.’
The woman transferred from intensive care had received disfiguring head and chest injuries.
One victim is recovering at St Thomas's after an eye operation, and another is in the Royal London Hospital, Whitechapel.
Both are expected to be released in the next few days.
Church ruined after surviving Fire and Blitz Kenneth Powell, Architecture Correspondent, assesses the damage caused to City landmarks
By KENNETH POWELL
THE BOMB devastated a part of the City which contains an outstanding series of buildings, dating from the Norman period to the present day.
The Church of St Helen, in Bishopsgate, which has been wrecked, survived both the Great Fire and the efforts of the Luftwaffe during the Second World War.
It was built in the 13th century on older foundations, as a shared church, serving both a convent of nuns and the local parish, and was added to over the next five centuries.
The interior was notable for medieval woodwork, important funerary monuments, and fine stained glass, some of it medieval and all now severely damaged.
Sir Thomas Gresham, founder of the Royal Exchange, is buried in the church with other important figures in the history of London.
(St Helen's is sometimes described as the Westminster Abbey of the City).
If damage to its structure is bad enough to warrant demolition, its destruction would be one of London's worst losses since the Second World War.
But efforts are certain to be made to restore, and, if necessary, rebuild the church, which is a well-used place of worship.
The Baltic Exchange was also wrecked and is almost certain to have to be demolished.
It is an elaborate example of Edwardian commercial architecture, designed by T H Smith and W Wimble and completed in 1903.
Many buildings of this period have been demolished for redevelopment since the War, so the Baltic Exchange had become a valued monument.
The 387ft-tall Commercial Union tower, designed by architects GMW and now a shattered shell, was widely praised at the time of its completion in the late 1960s as a successful adaptation of the modern American commercial style, fronting a Manhatten style piazza.
It remains a well liked and successful building of its era.
Richard Seifert's NatWest Tower, which has suffered superficial damage, looks 1960s but was not completed until 1981.
Also superficially damaged was Richard Rogers's Lloyd's building, finished in 1986.
Coroner quits after porn phone calls inquiry
Mr Donald Hawkins, 64, the Avon coroner, is resigning because of ill-health, the Lord Chancellor's Department has announced.
He has been on sick leave for more than three months during which Avon County Council has been inquiring into phone calls said to have been made from his Bristol office to soft-porn ‘adult’ 0898 numbers.
Mr Hawkins, of Sutton Benger, near Chippenham, Wilts, declined to comment on the calls, some of which lasted 15 minutes, at a cost of 48p a minute.
Thirty-three calls were made between July and October last year.
Police awards
Two Bristol detectives who disarmed a violent knifeman are to receive commendations for bravery.
Det Cons David Wilson, 45, of Brislington, and David Gribble, 32, of Southmead, will receive the awards from Mr David Shattock, Avon and Somerset Chief Constable.
Briton charged
George Wakes, 52, from Birmingham, has been charged with fraud and illegal possession of 20 tons of smoked salmon valued at £250,000 at Gerona on the Costa Brava.
Drugs arrest
Two men were arrested yesterday after a police launch halted a small boat 10 miles off the Suffolk coast and found two holdalls containing £350,000-worth of cannabis floating in the sea.
Flying finish
Britain's oldest fighter pilots, all aged between 90 and 100, will hold their final full reunion on Salisbury Plain tomorrow to celebrate the 80th anniversary of the Royal Flying Corps.
Pillion death
Zoe Hartley, 13, of Send, near Ripley, Surrey, died yesterday after being thrown from a motorcycle on which she was riding as a pillion passenger near her home.
Car brake alert
Citroen is recalling 170,000 BX models, built between 1983 and Nov 1990, for free brake checks.
Killer shop thief
A woman died yesterday after being knocked down by a shoplifter fleeing with a £2.58 descaler.
Mrs Lillian Amelia Smith, 81, sustained a fractured skull at the store at Newham, east London, on Friday.
Police are treating the incident as murder.
Duke promoted
The Duke of Westminster, Britain's richest man, has been promoted lieutenant-colonel in the Territorial Army and appointed commanding officer of the Queen's Own Yeomanry.
Farming lacks ‘young blood’
Britain's agriculture industry could be plunged into crisis early next century as fewer young people enter farming, says a survey for the Castrol company.
Research International says that the proportion of farmers under 35 dropped from 39 to 14 per cent between 1987 and 1991 and the number with under 10 years' experience dropped from 10 per cent to four per cent.
Cliff plunge
A man fell from a clifftop at Brighton early yesterday and landed only feet in front of a jogger on a path.
The dead man was later named as James Haynes, from Brighton, who was in his 50s.
Castle is open for business
By JENNY SHIELDS
THE DUKE of Roxburghe, owner of the largest house in Scotland, is to throw open the doors of his country seat for corporate hospitality, writes Jenny Shields, Scottish Staff.
Floors Castle, on the banks of the Tweed at Kelso, was designed by William Adam for the 1st duke in 1721.
Several years ago the castle's grandeur and dramatic setting, which can be enjoyed by the paying public from Easter until September, featured in the film Greystoke as the ancestral home of Tarzan.
The present duke, Guy David Innes Kerr, 37, said the venture ‘seemed a sensible extension to the castle opening without detracting from its primary use as a family home’.
Floors, or Fleurs as it was originally known, is situated in the Scottish Borders, halfway between Edinburgh and Newcastle upon Tyne.
With Scotland becoming an increasingly popular destination for conferences, the duke is confident of the venture's success.
Mr Roddy Jackson, who is co-ordinating the events on the duke's behalf, said yesterday that a number of companies and organisations had already made bookings.
They include a party of German businessmen, keen to try their hand at the traditional Highland Games sports of shot-putting and caber-tossing, and a group of Australians.
But anyone who thinks that the arrangements will include a night in the ancestral home of the Roxburghes will be disappointed.
‘We are not going into the B and B business,’ said Mr Jackson.
‘The duke owns Sunlaws Hotel close by and guests can book in there.’
Election 1992: Labour play down split on Scottish home rule
By Jenny Shields Scottish Staff
THE LEADERSHIP of the Scottish Labour Party yesterday played down talk of division between moderates and a group led by Mr George Galloway who founded Scotland United — a loose grouping of MPs, trades unionists and other prominent personalities — committed to home rule.
Scotland's Labour MPs gathered at their party headquarters in Glasgow yesterday for a four-hour post-election meeting but afterwards Mr Donald Dewar, shadow Scottish Secretary, dismissed talk of a split within the party.
He said the party's 49 Scottish MPs would campaign for a multi-option referendum on the country's future, something which they had endorsed at the meeting.
Mr Dewar said he abhorred the thought of civil disobedience adding he had been assured by Scotland United members that this was not part of their strategy.
Speaking at a news conference he said: ‘Ian Lang [the Scottish Secretary]has talked of a referendum and I welcome that.
He called for a change of mood in Scottish politics and closer unity among the political parties.
‘Mr Lang cannot expect co-operation or tolerance unless policies change and Downing Street shows a genuine willingness to respond to the Scottish people.’
A referendum which dealt with the central arguments about Scotland's relationship with the United Kingdom was needed, he said.
It must offer the choice of a devolved assembly, the status quo and independence.
Mr Dewar called for the setting up of a Select Committee on Scottish Affairs — it was, he said ‘a disgrace that the Scottish Office uniquely has not been subject to proper Parliamentary scrutiny’.
Later, Scotland United held their first public rally and attracted an estimated 3,000 people to George Square in the centre of Glasgow.
Earlier in the day Mr Galloway emphasised that the group would be seeking ‘peaceful ways’ to bring about constitutional change.
He said: ‘We don't want any confrontation.
The Government will cause that because it has no mandate so it follows that if the Government has no mandate you must resist its attempts to exercise one.’
Election 1992: Tory ‘super-party’ born out of last-minute vote switching The Conservative victory was a surprise.
Anthony King reports on a Gallup survey taken after the election to try to discover what happened
By ANTHONY KING
FOLLOWING last Thursday's election, Britain no longer has two major political parties.
It has one major party, the Conservatives, one minor party, Labour, and one peripheral party, the Liberal Democrats.
The Conservative Party during the 1990s will dominate British politics much as America dominates world politics following the Soviet Union's collapse.
The world has one superpower.
Britain has one super-party.
Three facts dominate any analysis of Thursday's results.
The first is the way the Conservatives have been able to sustain their vote at a consistently high level.
As the chart (right) shows, despite the recession and the birth of a new generation, the Tories' share of the popular vote has not varied by two percentage points since Mrs Thatcher's 1979 victory.
The Tories' share of the vote is not as high as in the 1950s under Winston Churchill, Sir Anthony Eden and Harold Macmillan, but it now appears impregnable to attacks by the other parties.
In 1983 and 1987 Britain was coming out of recession.
In 1992 it is in the midst of recession, but the Conservatives carry on.
The second fact is that Labour, despite the recession and its junking of almost all the policies that made it unelectable in the '80s, has not made a significant advance.
When losing to the Tories in the '50s, Labour used to win 44–46 per cent of the popular vote.
In the '80s and '90s it can win — as the chart shows — only 28–37 per cent.
This was the sixth general election in a row in which Labour failed to win the support of 40 per cent of voters.
Labour made a net gain of 39 seats on Thursday, chiefly because its share of the vote increased by four points, from 31 to 35 per cent, but most of this modest gain was at the Liberal Democrats' expense, not the Tories'.
The third fact is that Paddy Ashdown's Liberal Democrats have failed to establish themselves as a national political force.
The Liberal Democrats' vote on Thursday, 18 per cent, was lower than that secured by the Liberals under David Steel in February 1974.
Apart from Simon Hughes's redoubt in Southwark and Bermondsey, the Liberals today are strong only where the Liberals were strong in the '50s and '60s — in Scotland, the West Country and parts of Wales.
Politically peripheral, the Liberal Democrats are also geographically peripheral.
What accounts for the Tories' success in winning again against the odds?
More especially, what accounts for Labour's abject and persistent failures?
The Daily Telegraph commissioned the Gallup Poll to conduct a post-election survey to help find the answers.
The survey was conducted among 1,880 electors on Friday and Saturday after the election result was known.
Unlike the pre-election polls, Gallup's findings on how people had cast their ballots were very close to the actual result.
The Gallup survey makes it clear that the Conservatives won the campaign.
In the end it was ‘no contest’.
Not only did the Tories win more votes than seemed possible when the election was announced, but they improved their position relative to Labour on 13 of the 14 issues that Gallup monitored during the campaign.
The ‘double whammy’ was a triumphant success.
As the larger chart shows, two of the three issues on which the Tories' most improved their position between mid-March and Thursday were inflation and taxation — the issues they put at the heart of their propaganda effort.
Moreover, as the chart also shows, the greatest part of the improvement appears to have taken place in the last few days — or even hours — of the campaign.
Four weeks of near stasis in voters' attitudes apparently gave way at the last moment to a near avalanche.
The Conservatives also made dramatic last-minute advances on the central issue of economic management.
Gallup first asked in 1964 and then in all its 1992 surveys: ‘With Britain in economic difficulties, which party do you think could handle the problem best — Conservatives or Labour?
The Conservatives went into the campaign in a worse position than when they lost to Labour under Harold Wilson in 1964, and that position, if anything, deteriorated, yet there seems to have been a last-minute surge in the Tories’ favour.
The Conservatives' advantage over Labour in the post-election survey is nearly double what it was in 1964 and treble what it was as recently as on Tuesday and Wednesday last week: 1964Wk 1Wk 2Wk 3Wk 4Now Conservatives' best 45 45 43 44 45 52 Labour best 34 37 38 38 38 31 Con advantage+11 +8 +5 +6 +7+21 While the Tories were triumphing on the issues, they were also triumphing on the matter of personal leadership.
Voters were asked in 1987 and again in the post-election survey who they thought would ‘make the best Prime Minister’.
The 1987 and 1992 figures are not strictly comparable because five years ago the Alliance had two separate leaders — David Owen and David Steel — who could each be named.
Even so, the scale of Mr Major's personal victory over Mr Kinnock is clear.
The margin between them by the end of the campaign was considerably larger than the gap between Mrs Thatcher and the Labour leader five years ago: 1987Apr 7–8Now Thatcher/Major would make best Prime Minister 42 39 47 Kinnock would 31 28 21 Conservative advantage+11+11+26 Asked who they thought would ‘make the worst Prime Minister’, 51 per cent of Gallup's sample named Mr Kinnock — seven percentage points higher than the number who named him in 1987.
A measure of the difference between Mr Major's personal standing and Mrs Thatcher's is that, whereas a mere 19 per cent of voters on Friday and Saturday said they thought Mr Major would make the worst Prime Minister, nearly double that proportion, 34 per cent, thought the same of Mrs Thatcher five years ago.
Voters clearly have no difficulty distinguishing between real politics and the American show-biz variety.
They are prepared to rate the parties' campaigns in the style of drama critics reviewing theatrical performances, at the same time forming separate judgments about the parties' and leaders' ability to govern.
Asked to say who had ‘campaigned most impressively’, 32 per cent named Mr Ashdown and the Liberal Democrats, 27 per cent Mr Kinnock and the Labour party and only 23 per cent Mr Major and the Conservatives.
Their voting preferences were, of course, in the reverse order.
There is additional evidence in the survey of last-minute switching.
Gallup's interviewers asked in 1983 and 1987, and again on Friday and Saturday: How long ago did you decide which way you would finally vote?
The proportion saying they decided ‘during the last few days’ is nearly one in seven of all who voted on Thursday, and double the 1987 figure: 198319871992 Decided a long time ago788173 Two or three weeks ago141213 During the last few days 8 714
However, to emphasise the importance of the 1992 campaign's closing phase is probably to overlook longer-term forces.
Voters turned away from Labour and the Liberal Democrats because they feared the consequences of a Labour government — and the sources of that fear go well beyond the circumstances of 1992.
Labour is now linked in a considerable majority of voters' minds with high prices, high taxes, trade union power and strikes — with an unattractive mixture of incompetence and chaos.
The links are not primarily ideological but were forged on the reality of Labour — in and out of power — in the '70s and '80s.
The party's decline can best be traced via the decline in the proportion of people who ‘identify’ with it — that is, think of themselves as being Labour supporters even if they occasionally vote for some other party.
The proportion of Labour identifiers in the electorate has fallen steadily since Labour's last clear-cut victory in 1966 to scarcely one voter in three.
Likewise the number of voters who think of themselves as being ‘very strongly’ committed to Labour has fallen by more than half over the same period to a mere 10 per cent of the electorate: of voters with of voters with Labour'very strong' Labour identificationidentification 19665024 19704721 19744516 19794211 19833711 19873613 19923711
The fact that in 1992 only 37 per cent of voters think of themselves as Labour supporters but that on Thursday only 35 per cent actually voted Labour indicates that the party was scarcely able to poll its ‘core’ strength.
Labour today is rather like a car company whose models have acquired a reputation for unreliability.
The company can mend its ways and make cars as reliable as any of its competitors', but the reputation lingers on.
Potential buyers may be lured into the showroom by astute advertising, but in the end they usually take their custom elsewhere.
It is by no means clear what Labour should — or can — do next.
Anthony King is Professor of Government at Essex University.
Election 1992: Treasury takes £454,000 in lost deposits
The Treasury reaped a record £454,000 in lost deposits from more than 900 candidates who failed to win five per cent of the vote.
The Natural Law Party, which fielded 303 candidates, was the biggest net contributor, with £151,500, followed by the Green Party, losing £127,500 from 255 candidates.
Despite the increase in the deposit from £150 to £500 in 1985, the fringe was back in strength this time with with 96 parties fielding candidates including the Jolly Small Brewers, Chauvinist Raving Alliance, Wake Up Wokingham Campaign, the Forward to Mars, Justice from British Rail, Scallywag and Whiplash parties and the Up the Creek Let's Have a Party.
Election 1992: Ousted Chalker retains post
Mrs Lynda Chalker, who lost her Wallasey seat to Labour, said yesterday she was delighted that she would remain Overseas Development Minister.
Mrs Chalker, who is to go to the House of Lords, resumes ministerial responsibilities tomorrow when she travels to Budapest for a meeting of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Election 1992: Fresh demands to free Sikh
Mr Kenneth Clarke, the new Home Secretary, was faced with demands yesterday to release from prison a campaigner for Sikh independence who has been under threat of deportation to India.
The case of Karamjit Singh Chahal led to the High Court last December ordering the former Home Secretary, Kenneth Baker, to reconsider his decision to deport the man.
However Mr Chahal, jailed in August 1990, is still in prison.
Election 1992: Kinnock issues three libel writs
Mr Kinnock has taken High Court libel action over a front page story, A Man For All Reasons, in the Sun on April 3.
He also complains about a cartoon in the London Evening Standard.
A third writ is against Mr Stephen Green and Mr Graham Webster over a pamphlet ‘Conservative Family Campaign — bringing the family back into focus’.
Election 1992: Balancing the cost-conscious and the caring
By George Jones and Philip Johnston
MR MAJOR'S Cabinet is a careful balancing act that reflects the emphasis he has always placed on party unity.
His first years in government were spent in the Whips' Office, where he was schooled in the importance of ensuring that all interests were taken into account.
His Cabinet changes reflect his desire to reassure the Right while demonstrating his commitment to a more ‘caring’ form of Conservatism.
The appointment of Mr Heseltine as Trade and Industry Secretary, eager to develop a more interventionist role in industry, has been offset by the strengthening of a Right-wing, Thatcherite bias at the Treasury.
Mr Heseltine, whose challenge to Mrs Thatcher put Mr Major into Downing Street, has got the job he has long desired.
But his enthusiasm for spending is restrained.
Mr Lamont carries on as Chancellor and has been reinforced with the drafting in as his deputy and Treasury Chief Secretary, the Right-winger, Mr Michael Portillo.
Mr Portillo, at 38 the youngest Cabinet member since Dr David Owen, who was also 38 when he was made Foreign Secretary in 1977, replaces Mr David Mellor, the new Heritage Minister, who presided over a significant increase in public spending in the run up to the election.
With government borrowing having soared to £28 billion this year, and underlying concern that public finances are in a worse state than has been acknowledged, Mr Portillo's priority will be to curb further increases in public expenditure.
If he can make headway towards restoring a balanced budget, then his claims to be the Right's principal contender for the leadership in the 21st century will be considerably enhanced.
Interviewed on LBC yesterday, he said all members of the Cabinet would have to recognise it was important to keep control of public spending.
‘This level of public borrowing cannot be sustained in the longer-term,’ he said.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, who epitomises the ‘caring’ face of Conservatism, has taken over as Health Secretary, with the task of reassuring the public and the health professions that Mr Major does not intend to privatise the National Health Service.
But with her in the same building is the new Social Security Secretary, Mr Peter Lilley, an unreconstructed Thatcherite, in charge of the Government's biggest budget — the £66 billion spent on welfare benefits.
Mr Lilley never looked happy at the Department of Trade and Industry, where his non-interventionist views seemed out of tune with a deepening recession which was laying waste many of the businesses created in the boom years of 1980s.
He can now put his dry economic views to the test in an area of spending which has soared despite Mrs Thatcher's strictures on good housekeeping.
There was further reassurance for the Right with the promotion of Mr Michael Howard to the position of Environment Secretary.
Mr Howard is a tough Right-winger, regarded as a keeper of the Thatcherite flame.
The Cabinet reshuffle was less radical than some Tories had expected.
Mr Major proved himself reluctant to wield the knife, sparing Mr William Waldegrave, who was put in charge of the Citizen's Charter, and Mr Lilley.
Mr Kenneth Baker probably wisely turned down the offer of becoming Secretary of State for Wales but it was a serious proposition.
Mr Major had envisaged Mr Baker having an ‘Indian summer’ in government, as Mr Peter Walker did after the 1987 election, running the Principality.
Welsh Office responsibilities cut across most Whitehall departments and the Secretary ‘does his own thing’— and Mr Walker enjoyed probably his happiest time in government there.
Mr Baker has returned to the backbenches to concentrate on his writing, leaving the talented Mr David Hunt, who would have gained from wider Cabinet experience, at the Welsh Office.
But Mr Major's room for manoeuvre was limited by the loss of Mr Chris Patten, who could well have become Home Secretary, and two other rising stars: the two Treasury Ministers Mr Francis Maude and Mr John Maples.
Mr Patten stays on for the time being as party chairman while he and Mr Major consider what should happen.
Mr Major was prepared to do what his party chairman wanted, and it was Mr Patten who vetoed the idea of engineering an early by-election, as well as ruling out a premature end to any career as an MP by going to the Lords.
Another big reshuffle could come in 18 months to two years, by which time Mr Patten could be back in Parliament and Mr Douglas Hurd, having helped lead Britain's presidency of the EC in the second half of this year, may have decided to step down as Foreign Secretary to pursue another career.
The Cabinet will meet for the first time on Wednesday to draw up a programme of legislation for the new session of Parliament, which will last 18 months until the autumn of 1993.
Key items in the Queen's Speech for the State Opening of Parliament on May 6 are expected to include: Ratification of the Maastricht treaty on closer European economic and political union and a single currency.
Restoration of the Asylum Bill, designed to crack down on bogus refugees.
A new national lottery to aid sport, the arts and the national heritage.
Legislation paving the way for the privatisation of British Rail and the coal industry.
Leasehold reform to give new rights to owners of flats.
Ratification of the Maastricht deal is likely to prove the first real test of Mr Major's new Government.
It involves a further transfer of sovereignty to Brussels and is likely to be fiercely opposed by Tory Euro-sceptics.
After Wednesday's Cabinet meeting, ministers will disperse for the Easter holidays.
Mrs Bottomley reaffirmed the Government's commitment to the NHS.
She told David Frost on TV-am: ‘Now the election is behind us, everyone in the health service can settle down.
We want to get politics out of health care.
‘We have made clear our commitment to the National Health Service — it's not for profit, it's not for sale.’
She attacked as ‘outrageous’ Labour's ‘scares and deeply irresponsible myths’about privatisation.
Election 1992: New Ministry will be a sporting chance for Mellor
By Colin Randall
ALTHOUGH Mr David Mellor's new role as Secretary for National Heritage has been caricatured as Minister of Fun or Minister for Free Tickets, he was at pains yesterday to emphasise more serious aspects of his task ahead.
Mr Mellor will oversee the launch of the National Lottery in addition to taking reponsibility for government policy on the film industry, arts and national heritage.
Sport will also form part of his brief.
He shares the Prime Minister's passion for soccer — both can often be found at Stamford Bridge watching their favourite side, Chelsea — as well as more elegant expressions of culture.
But as he prepared to switch from the more austere environs of the Treasury, where he saw out the final 16 months of the last Tory Government, Mr Mellor spoke of the importance he and the Prime Minister attached to encouraging artistic excellence and preserving the national heritage.
Mr Major, he said, wanted to use the move towards the year 2000 to ‘celebrate our civilisation and leave some mark that we were more than just, hopefully, a successful entrepreneurial society.’
Mr Mellor told BBC Radio Four's World This Weekend there was a clear feeling that the arts, an ‘important and enduring part of society’, needed Cabinet representation.
‘We all know Mozart is remembered when the emperors he wrote music for are not,’ he said.
‘Certainly no minister can create a Mozart but I think Governments can assist the accessibility of the arts.’
The debate on the BBC's future, prior to the renewal of its charter in 1996, is another area where his influence can be expected to be felt.
However, he played down speculation that the Government would seek revenge for alleged anti-Tory bias in BBC coverage of the election.
It depressed him that some observers thought the debate would be used ‘as a way of paying off some scores, real or imagined’.
There would always be ‘chafing’ between broadcasters and politicans in a free society.
A former Arts Minister, Mr Mellor entered the Cabinet as Treasury Chief Secretary after backing Mr Major to succeed Mrs Thatcher.
Educated at Swanage Grammar School and Cambridge, he pursued a legal career and was called to the Bar in 1972.
In 1979, he was elected MP for Putney, south-west London, the seat he held with an increased majority last Thursday despite predictions that he faced defeat.
His other ministerial experience was gained in the Energy Department, the Home Office and the Foreign Office.
Election 1992: Banks sees his future in Europe
By PHILIP JOHNSTON
MR TONY BANKS, Labour MP for Newham North West, said yesterday he was proposing to leave Westminster for the European Parliament, writes Philip Johnston.
Speaking on London Weekend Television, the waggish MP said: ‘Power is moving and will continue to move to Strasbourg and Brussels.
‘As a serious politician who wants to be where the power is, you have to follow it.
That means moving.’
Mr Banks, 49, last chairman of the abolished Greater London Council, said later that he did not intend to leave Westminster immediately.
But he added: ‘I suspect that quite a lot of British MPs…will decide that power is now moving towards an enhanced European Parliament.’
Election 1992: Gillian and Virginia take the fast lane to the top
By Susannah Herbert
IF JEFFREY Archer were looking for a plot for his next novel, he could do worse than examine the rise and rise of Mr John Major's first female Cabinet ministers, Mrs Virginia Bottomley and Mrs Gillian Shephard.
It might be short on intrigue and backstabbing but it would move at a cracking pace.
Only five years ago, Mrs Shephard — the new Employment Secretary — was unknown to national politics.
The Oxford-educated daughter of a Norfolk farmer, she began her career as a local authority education officer and inspector of schools, married a headmaster she met on site — he is now an education administrator — moved on through the ranks of Norfolk County Council and chaired Norwich Health Authority.
In 1987, when she entered the House of Commons as the MP for Norfolk South West — a safe-as-houses rural Tory seat — she was already 46, with none of the outward trappings of a high-flier, merely a proven ability to work swiftly and effectively and an unthreatening charm.
One year later, she was private secretary to Mr Peter Lilley, who was then at the Treasury.
The Chancellor was Mr Major, who recognised in this diminutive capable figure an appetite for detail which rivalled his own.
The two developed a rapport which neither her next job — under-secretary for social security — nor the earthquakes of the leadership battle did anything to unsettle.
When Mr Major ran for party leader, the terrier-like figure of Mrs Shephard joined his campaign team early on, rounded up his support and delivered him a victory which he was swift to reward with the post of Minister of State in the Treasury.
Last year, she became deputy chairman of the Conservative Party.
On the stump in the Tory marginals during the election campaign, her enthusiasm and self-deprecating humour —‘No one knows who I am.
I'm not a famous face.
Why should they?’— enchanted party workers.
Yesterday, that ‘ordinariness’ was still to the fore, as she pruned shrubs in her Norfolk garden and mused on the task ahead.
‘I like getting back to earth,’ she said.
‘I like creating things.’
As Employment Secretary, this appetite for creation — job-creation, that is — should serve her well.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, her opposite number at the Department of Health, shares with Mrs Shephard a mild manner, a sharp mind and a rapid rise — but there the resemblance ends.
If the nearly-invisible Mrs Shephard is the John Major of parliamentary women — the glamorous Mrs Bottomley, 44, is more like an old-fashioned ambitious networker, closely plugged in to politics by virtue of both her birth and her marriage.
Peggy Jay was her aunt, Peter Jay is her cousin and Peter Bottomley — formerly of the Department of Transport — her husband.
More to the point, considering her new responsibility for health, one of the hottest potatoes in government, her daughter is working as a junior doctor.
‘I come from a great medical mafia, most of my relatives are medically involved one way or another,’ she told David Frost yesterday, adding that none of her family have private health insurance.
Her first job was as a psychiatric social worker at the Maudsley Hospital in south London.
Since becoming MP for Surrey South West in 1983 Mrs Bottomley has moved through the Department of Education and Science, where she was PPS to Mr Chris Patten, to the Ministry for Overseas Development and the Foreign Office.
In 1988, she stepped on to the ministerial ladder as Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at the Department of the Environment, where she took charge of one of Mrs Margaret Thatcher's pet hates — litter.
The following year, she became Health Minister — a post which grew in importance as Mr William Waldegrave piled gaffe on gaffe as Secretary of State.
Her neat footwork won her plaudits even from those who were inclined to knock her for her ‘lack of substance’.
Yesterday, she seized the chance to confound the carping with a firm commitment to continuing the reforms in the health service.
Typically, her statement was pragmatic: ‘We want to get politics out of health care,’ she said.
‘I spent 12 years working in the NHS and I didn't come into politics to privatise it.’
Election 1992:Mixed views on Mayhew in Northern Ireland
By Chris Ryder, Irish Correspondent
SIR Patrick Mayhew made no secret yesterday of his eagerness to get to work as Northern Ireland Secretary.
He was taking up an ‘exceptionally demanding’ post ‘determined to uphold the law and serve the brave and law-abiding people of Northern Ireland’.
There has been a mixed reaction to the appointment.
Mr Ken Maginnis, MP for Fermanagh and South Tyrone, described him as a ‘very fair man’ who was easy to communicate with.
‘He understands the complex relations between the procedures of law and the need to combat terrorism,’ said Mr Maginnis.
The posting has caused some concern among Nationalists and in Dublin, where, in the interests of building a good working relationship from the outset, the worry has not been publicly articulated.
A senior SDLP source said: ‘We will make our judgment on him when we see how gets on.’
While Dublin does not want to upset present political co-operation with Britain, there is anxiety about Sir Patrick's record while Attorney-General when he was closely involved in many aspects of Anglo-Irish relations.
His decision, ‘in the national interest’, not to bring charges against RUC officers involved in the shoot-to-kill controversy, investigated by Mr John Stalker, attracted widespread criticism.
Sir Patrick was also closely involved in differences between London and Dublin over extradition and clashed with the Irish government over the validity of warrants in several cases and notably over the Irish refusal in 1989 to hand over Mr Patrick Ryan, who is wanted in Britain for alleged involvement with IRA bombings.
Fr Denis Faul, a Catholic priest who has campaigned against excesses by the security forces, said the appointment was ‘rather unfortunate’.
He added: ‘How is he going to win the trust of the minority community with that sort of reputation?
I don't think it is a very good appointment at all.’
Sir Patrick, who comes from Anglo-Irish Protestant stock in Cork, has long aspired to become Northern Ireland Secretary.
Expressing his delight at being appointed, he said: ‘This is the one job I had hoped for.’
In 1989 he was tipped to succeed Mr King when Mr Brooke was appointed, and despite his disappointment then has continued to covet the job and interest himself in Irish affairs.
‘I have for nearly nine years served as a law officer for Northern Ireland.
That experience, which has brought me to the province so often, has given me a very deep sense of admiration for the resilience and warmth of the people.’
Sir Patrick's friends believe he will have no difficulty in winning respect and confidence from all sides as his predecessor, Mr Peter Brooke, managed to do.
As Attorney-General, he has visited Belfast monthly and knows the important figures there at first hand.
His legal responsibilities for issues such as extradition have also brought him into contact with senior legal and political figures in Ireland.
International: Bad weather hampers the fight to halt lava flows
By Bruce Johnston in Rome
ELABORATE last-ditch attempts to save a town from lava flowing from Sicily's Mount Etna were postponed for a second day yesterday because of poor weather.
The molten rock is within half a mile of the gates of Zafferana Etnea, a town of 7,000 people.
To try to divert it, 30 concrete blocks, each weighing two tons, are expected to be lowered today from Black Stallion helicopters belonging to Nato.
It is also planned to make use of explosives.
The flows, more than 200 yards wide, were said to have slowed yesterday from a rate of 100 yards an hour because of a decreased incline.
Since December they have been pouring from a new fissure in Etna, 7,500ft above sea level.
At first a natural depression reinforced by earthworks put up in January by the Italian army contained the lava.
Last week it broke through in several places, going underground along channels below the cooled crust, to reappear from smaller ‘ephemeral’ craters farther down the slopes.
It overcame four hastily erected dykes in as many days.
Signor Alfio Leonardi, Zafferana's mayor, has again asked that the mountain should be bombed.
Rome refused his first request to use bombs against the flows, menacing the agricultural community situated 1,600ft up the south-eastern slope of Europe's highest volcano.
The speed at which the lava began travelling and its overrunning of another dyke caused the government to declare a state of emergency for Zafferana.
It is hoped that mines placed about 600ft below the new fissure will create depressions to contain or restrain the lava and disperse the flows into rivulets which could cool quickly, slowing it down.
The concrete blocks, used for security at the nearby Nato Air Force base at Sigonella, have been transported by lorry to the mountain.
Weather permitting, the big helicopters will place them between the flows and the town.
Not all have agreed on how best to tackle the problem.
Prof Franco Barberi, Italy's Serious Risks Commissioner (Volcano Department), is firmly against the mayor's bombing plan, preferring more earthworks.
International: UN appeals for help to deal with flood of refugees
By Philip Sherwell in Tuzla
THE FLOOD of refugees fleeing the escalating conflict in Bosnia-Hercegovina took on crisis proportions at the weekend.
In scenes reminiscent of the Kurdish crisis, Muslim refugees crossed wooded hills on foot, by tractor and in lorries to escape the region's latest flashpoints along the River Drina.
A senior official of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees surveyed chaotic scenes at an emergency processing centre in a sports hall in the northern town of Tuzla, where about 2,000 people are sleeping on blankets on the floor, and appealed for immediate international help.
Another 4,000 have been found temporary shelter with families.
Mr Jan Huisman, a programme officer, said: ‘We urgently need more assistance from donor countries.
Bosnia is becoming a crisis situation for us,’ he said.
Several thousand new refugees were yesterday reported to have fled fighting near the town of Mostar.
They raise to 50,000 the number of displaced people who have escaped clashes between those loyal to Bosnia and the pro-Serb Yugoslav army and Serbian militia groups.
Most of the refugees flowing into Tuzla are escaping clashes around the key Bosnian border town of Zvornik, where unconfirmed reports of massacres abound following its ‘liberation’ by Serbian irregulars.
Their former Serbian neighbours of just a week ago have also left, streaming in the opposite direction across the Drina into Serbia.
Although we passed 60 tanks of Serbian-dominated federal forces parked near the Bosnian border, it is the ruthless veterans of the eastern Croatian conflict who are leading the Serbian offensive in the mountainous republic.
Constant references to gory massacres are impossible to check, but on the winding road from Tuzla to Belgrade a convoy of rickety buses carried Serbians from heavy clashes in Kupres, showing that ethnic distinctions become lost as the refugee tally mounts.
International: Russian crisis over Cabinet threat to quit
By John Kampfner in Moscow
THE RUSSIAN government threatened to resign yesterday if parliament prised its fingers from control of the country's economic reforms, a move that would plunge the country into its worst crisis since last August's coup.
But it emerged after an emergency meeting last night that parliament and government might stave off the crisis by agreeing a compromise to leave the economic reform programme intact.
Mr Yegor Gaidar, First Deputy Prime Minister, said: ‘I am convinced that so far we have agreed on effective co-operation in order to resolve the problem by joint effort.
‘But we are not ready to become a rubber stamp that only certifies the existence of reforms.
In that case we will clearly announce our resignation,’ he added.
Earlier the Cabinet, led by Mr Gaidar, met in emergency session to discuss a shock victory by hardliners in the parliament, the Congress of People's Deputies.
Senior sources said the mood at the meeting was belligerent.
‘Everything now depends on the President.
We have asked him to lodge a formal vote of confidence in the government when the Congress resumes today,’ one source said.
Mr Yeltsin remained out of the public eye at his country house, but sent two of his key lieutenants, Mr Gennady Burbulis and Mr Sergei Shakhrai, along with Mr Gaidar, to address a meeting of the parliamentary leadership.
Conspicuously absent was Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, the abrasive and ambitious Speaker, whose manoeuvring led to the latest crisis.
His influence on deputies is significant, but it will be Mr Yeltsin's performance that will swing the balance.
Until Saturday, Mr Yeltsin and his team had received a comparatively easy ride, thwarting attempts by the Communist-dominated parliament to assert its authority over the executive.
As a concession, Mr Yeltsin offered to pass the job of Prime Minister to someone else by the autumn, once the reforms were in place.
That had seemed enough to placate the deputies, who are living in fear of a referendum being called on dissolving the Congress and depriving them of their privileged status.
If today's brinkmanship backfires on Mr Yeltsin, he will almost certainly put to the popular vote the future of his reforms and a proposal for a constitution that would weaken parliament's powers.
‘If you try seriously to put into effect what the Congress agreed,’ said Mr Gaidar, ‘you must understand that this is the road to the collapse of the financial system.’
Mr Alexander Shokhin, a Deputy Prime Minister, said the West's £15 billion aid package for Russia now ‘hung by a thread’.
It was not a weekend Mr Yeltsin would care to remember.
On Saturday, the four ‘nuclear’ powers — Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan — failed to agree on means of ratifying Start, the US-Soviet agreement to slash strategic nuclear weapons.
Ukraine, at loggerheads with Russia on military issues, insists that the accord must be turned into a multilateral one and that Russia is not in a position to ratify it on behalf of the other republics of the former Soviet Union.
Washington is likely to put pressure on Ukraine's President Leonid Kravchuk, who said in an interview: ‘In its present form the Commonwealth [of Independent States]will not live long.’
International: Third ceasefire in Bosnia as troops seize more towns
By Michael Montgomery in Sarajevo
YUGOSLAV army troops seized more territory in Bosnia-Hercegovina at the weekend.
Their actions coincided with an agreement among political leaders in Sarajevo to yet another EC-brokered ceasefire.
An EC envoy said yesterday that an ‘immediate and total ceasefire’ would take effect at midnight last night across the republic, following talks between leaders from Bosnia's Serbian, Croatian and Muslim communities.
The accord was the third EC attempt to end fighting between those loyal to Bosnia and Serbian-led forces trying to partition the recently independent republic.
Signor Jose Cutileiro of Portugal said the deal called for the removal of heavy artillery from towns and villages, the suspension of mass mobilisation, the disbanding of all paramilitary groups and the resumption of talks on the republic's political and constitutional order.
The truce was, however, greeted with scepticism by defence officials and citizens, who pointed out that the document was unsigned and did not have the public backing of the pro-Serb Yugoslav army.
Western diplomats referred to the example of neighbouring Croatia, where a stream of failed ceasefires were used by militias to consolidate gains and prepare for new offences.
Just after the agreement was announced, Sarajevo Radio reported that Yugoslav fighter jets had launched new attacks on Croat-populated villages in western Bosnia and that army units had surrounded a strategic Muslim-populated town east of the Neretva river.
Federal troops took control on Saturday of another mainly Muslim town, Modrica, which lies in a corridor connecting Serbian enclaves in northern Bosnia.
Officials said unidentified saboteurs also used a dynamite-packed petrol tanker to blow up a bridge near the town of Mostar, cutting traffic on the main highway connecting Sarajevo to the Adriatic coast.
A Belgrade-based rebel group backed by federal troops has already seized control of the eastern Bosnian towns of Bijeljina and Zvornik.
The army said at the weekend that troops had reacted to ‘enemy provocations’ and intervened to protect local citizens.
But Muslim officials denounced the army and ordered resistance to its ‘occupation’.
More than 50,000 mainly Muslim and Croat refugees have fled Bosnia.
Officials believe the Serbs plan to create ‘pure Serbian areas’.
Representatives from the UN High Commissioner for Refugees have been struggling to cope with the flood of refugees and have appealed to the international community to step up relief.
Sarajevo Television also reported Serbian attacks in Foca and Visegrad, where a Muslim defender threatened to dynamite a major hydro-electric dam on the Drina river border with Serbia.
Yugoslav army and Bosnian officials barely restrained him on Saturday from detonating the explosives and flooding populated lowlands in Serbia.
During frantic negotiations broadcast on Sarajevo Radio, Mr Murat Sabanovic, the former Civil Defence chief of Visegrad, said: ‘I am not a terrorist.
This is the only weapon we have to defend ourselves.’
International: Handy lead for Clinton, but he still trails Bush
By Our Washington Correspondent
Democratic presidential candidate Bill Clinton had a handy lead over Jerry Brown in weekend party caucuses in Virginia.
The Arkansas governor had 53 per cent of the vote to Mr Brown's 15.
However, 32 per cent of Democrat voters were uncommitted.
Meanwhile, a poll following the New York primary showed Mr Clinton trailing President Bush in popularity by 33 per cent to 44.
International: UN fire-bomb threat woman surrenders
By Jonathan Confino in New York
THE daughter of the Nobel prize-winning nuclear physicist Owen Chamberlain, who had threatened to set herself on fire and detonate explosives in front of the UN headquarters in New York, surrendered to police yesterday after a tense confrontation.
Mrs Linne Gunther, 41, a divorcee, crashed her van through iron gates into the UN compound to protest at taxpayers' having to pay for the Gulf war.
She soaked herself with petrol before locking herself inside the back of the van for nearly a day.
Mr Chamberlain said his daughter ‘had some past psychological problems’.
While negotiating with her, the police wore silver heat-resisting flash suits.
International: Ex-chauffeur says he lied over Winnie Mandela alibi
By Christopher Munnion in Johannesburg
ANOTHER former employee of Mrs Winnie Mandela has said he lied in court to save her from implication in the murder of Stompie Moeketsi.
John Morgan, 64, who was her driver in 1988 when the young township activist was killed, told the Johannesburg Sunday Times that she had ordered him to remove the body from her Soweto home and ‘dump the dog’.
He also contradicted Mrs Mandela's alibi by saying she had not been in the Orange Free State on the day Stompie and three other youths were assaulted at her Soweto house.
Last week Mrs Mandela's former housekeeper, Mrs Xoliswa Falati, also told newspapers she had lied in court about the Stompie affair.
According to the newspaper report, Morgan has instructed a lawyer to seek indemnity and protection from the state in return for‘telling the truth’.
The lawyer has consulted Mr Jan Swanepoel, Deputy Attorney-General of the Witwatersrand, who prosecuted at the Mandela trial.
Mrs Mandela was jailed for six years on kidnapping and assault charges but released on bail pending a yet-to-be-heard appeal.
Speculation has been intensified that Mr Nelson Mandela, African National Congress president, will soon yield to pressure to distance himself from his wife by announcing that their de facto separation is official.
But he is also said to be intensely loyal to the woman who stood by him during his 27 years of imprisonment.
Changed testimony and the emergence of two key witnesses who disappeared before the trial have placed the judicial system under intense pressure to reopen the case.
International: Israel may boycott Mid-East peace talks
By Ohad Gozani in Tel Aviv
ISRAEL may boycott the next round of Middle East peace talks because a jailed man from the West Bank has been invited to join the Palestinian team.
Mr Ehud Olmert, Health Minister, said yesterday that the co-option of Abdul Khmail was designed to stall negotiations further, while putting the blame on Israel.
‘Does anyone really believe that Israel will sit down with someone who was convicted or involved directly in violence against Jews?’ he asked.
The United States-chaperoned talks resume in Washington on April 27.
Khmail, jailed for four years for intifada-related offences, was appointed to the Palestinian side by Mr Faisal al Husseini, delegation head, according to Israeli reports.
He is said to have offered to go into exile if the remainder of his sentence is waived.
Israel's Chief Rabbi, Mordechai Eliahu, has condemned Mr Shlomo Lahat, the mayor of Tel Aviv, for ‘moral degradation’ over his decision to have condom dispensers in schools.
International: Moderates set for victory in Iranian poll
By Anton La Guardia in Teheran
MODERATE supporters of President Rafsanjani were heading for an overwhelming victory over Iranian hardliners last night, according to the latest tally of returns from parliamentary elections held on Friday.
The Iranian Interior Ministry said that 29 members of the Association of Combatant Clergy which, despite its harsh-sounding name, is linked to President Rafsanjani's cautious opening to the West, were among the 30 highest scoring candidates in Teheran, the largest constituency.
Only three of them secured enough votes to be assured of their seats.
The rest will have to take part in a second ballot at a date yet to be announced.
In the rest of the country, about half of roughly 100 candidates who won seats in the first round were linked with the pro-Rafsanjani ‘pragmatic’ faction.
Many of them will be new faces in the 270-seat parliament, the Majlis.
The preliminary results, particularly in Teheran, indicate Iranians' weariness with more than a decade of revolutionary turmoil and a desire to rebuild the economy following the eight-year war with Iraq.
It was the first parliamentary election since the death three years ago of Ayatollah Khomeini, leader of the Islamic revolution and the radicals' principal mentor.
The radicals have steadily lost ground to the moderates since then.
They have opposed every attempt to improve relations with the West and to liberalise the economy as a betrayal of the legacy of Khomeini.
The most popular candidate in Teheran, after about nine per cent of the city's vote had been counted, was Hojatoleslam Akbar Husseini, a cleric and the presenter of a popular weekly television programme offering Islamic advice to resolve family problems.
Mr Husseini beat another cleric, Hojatoleslam Ali Akbar Abou Torabi, who had been a prisoner of war in Iraq for many years, and Dr Abbas Sheibani, a former minister.
The best known radicals, such as the Speaker of the outgoing parliament, Hojatoleslam Mehdi Karrubi, and Mr Ali Akbar Mohtashemi, the former Interior Minister and the founder of the Lebanese Hizbollah group, came 36th and 40th respectively.
In the Holy City of Mashad, Mrs Ghodssieh Alavi, a 50-year-old doctor associated with the ‘pragmatist’ faction supporting Mr Rafsanjani, took the highest number of votes and became the first Iranian woman to be elected outside Teheran.
Mrs Alavi beat Mr Hadi Khamenei, the brother of the Iranian leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who will take part in a run-off poll to decide the fate of the second seat in Mashad.
But the successful candidate will have to receive the endorsement of the Guardian Council, a higher body of clerics and lawyers which supervises the elections.
All Iranian papers reported large turn-outs, despite evidence from the streets of Teheran that many did not vote, either out of hostility to the regime or apathy.
The radicals were widely expected to lose seats after a committee judging the suitability of candidates prevented about 1,000 of the 3,000 hopefuls from taking part, including several well-known radicals.
Inside America: A growing emptiness is filling the Wild West heart of America
By CHARLES LAURENCE
ALBION is a dot on a large-scale map of the Northern High Plains, a place where a couple of dirt roads cross in the unchanged landscape of the American Wild West.
There is a sign driven into the short dry grass like a makeshift tombstone, and it says Albion was born in 1914 and died in 1963.
Behind it are a couple of clapboard cabins, their windows gone and their planks left to loosen in a wind that never quite dies.
But the sign is a premature announcement, for a third building boasts fresh white paint, two standing privvies set behind, and a row of children's swings.
The door opens to reveal a row of desks, blackboards dense with chalked up grammar and arithmetic, and a shelf loaded with books.
An old Bakelite telephone responds with a crackling dial tone.
It is 50 miles from anywhere.
For as far as the distant bluffs, the land is lost to prairie larks and prong-horned antelope.
But at 8.30am on Monday life returns to Albion, Montana, as Mrs Noralla Thomas, Grade School teacher, pulls up her battered station wagon in a column of dust.
‘What we have here,’ she says, ‘is an oldtime country school, and I'm still teaching and the kids are still learning.’
She is a lean woman of 57 in a plain dress but with a warm smile.
Her granddaddy came up here to farm in 1891, but her husband's family has been here longer.
His grandfather was the first white man in Carter County and built a fort against hostile Indians in 1883.
‘Finances here in cattle have gone bad and we are losing people,’ she says.
‘The population is half of when I was a little girl.
Why, in 1985 when we had all the farm foreclosures [bankruptcies], my class was down to two.
But we're not quitting; those that are left are too tough to quit.’
The school is a snapshot of the American West, the great swath of the Plains between the Missouri River and the Rockies that makes up one fifth of continental America but which in the last generation has become known as the Empty Quarter, or the Dying Heart of the US.
Life here plays on like a distant, steady backbeat to the often hollow din of modern America caught in the rituals of an election year.
With its cowboys, pioneers and homesteaders, this is the birthplace of the mythology that created post-colonial America's image of itself.
The Plains states — the Dakotas, Montana, Wyoming and south through Oklahoma to the Texas Panhandle — vote Republican by ‘small government’ instinct.
But with their sparse population they are scarcely worth the price of a campaign advertisement.
Instead, they have their cattlemen's lobby, still with the power to put US beef on the American table, and a rugged individualist pull on the national conscience.
‘That Goddarned government, I don't even want to talk about it.
Never did anything but harm to my way of thinking,’ says George Kittlemann, a rancher who agrees to explain the ‘for sale’sign posted by his fence.
The story is a history of the turns in the ‘boom-bust’ cycle of the Plains since the first days of the fur hunters.
In 15 years the 10,000 acres he leases have been sold at $120 an acre, then at $240, and then seized by moneylenders when the drought of 1988 bankrupted an owner crippled with land boom loans.
Now, at 62, Mr Kittlemann says he will be ‘on the road’ if the insurance company which owns it finds a buyer.
He says the cycle is killing farmers.
‘You got governments telling you to quit farming and take a grant, and bankers telling you what to grow.
You got environmentalists telling you this land should be left to nature, too poor for sodbusting [ploughing].
None of them know anything.’
In the offices of the Stock Growers' Association in Rapid City, South Dakota, Jack McCulloh, secretary, and Ed Anderson, local manager of the NorWest Bank, agree that the story is sadly typical.
It boils down to a sharp retraction in the Plains economy.
In South Dakota the number of cattle has dropped from 5.2 million to four million since the bankruptcy crisis of ‘85, and the human population is down 20 per cent.
Mr McCulloh says the shakeout has already seen prices rise from a low of 40 cents a pound for live beef to nearly 90 cents this spring.
He adds that if Washington wants to help, then it should ‘get off our backs’ and work at opening European and Japanese markets.
It doesn't matter if their numbers are diminishing; the descendants of the wagon-train pioneers are determined to see their children raising beef as they do.
But Mrs Thomas knows that most of her pupils will go on to college in distant cities, and few return.
Letter to the Editor: Weather factor
SIR — The psephologists seem to be struggling to find the explanation for the last-minute swing towards the government in power.
Has it escaped their notice that last Thursday was the first really warm and sunny day of the year?
On such a beautiful, peaceful spring morning who could possibly want to disturb the status quo?
DAVID LOVELOCK Cattistock, Dorset
Letter to the Editor: Swing where?
SIR — Although like most MPs I accept the principle that a majority of one is enough, I find it difficult to explain to my Southend Conservative supporters who have phoned me why your paper takes the view that there was a 4.43 per cent swing from Conservative to Labour in our constituency.
The facts are not in dispute.
Our Conservative vote increased from 23,753 to 24,591.
Our share of the total votes cast increased from 58 to 59 per cent.
The only significant event was that the Liberal Democrat vote fell from 9,906 to 5,107, and the majority of these former Liberal Democrat votes went to the Labour candidate, whose vote increased from 7,296 to 11,480.
It therefore seems to the logical residents of our borough that there was a swing in Southend from the Liberal Democrats to both Conservative and to Labour.
If there has been some new EC directive on the interpretation of election results, we should be told.
Sir TEDDY TAYLOR, MP (Con) Southend-on-Sea, Essex
Letter to the Editor: His own words
SIR — On July 28, 1980, Neil Kinnock told The Times: ‘I want to retire at 50, I want to play cricket in the summer and geriatric football in the winter, and sing in the choir.’
Letter to the Editor: Return our rose
SIR — As the Labour Party cannot be trusted to display the red rose without it withering, may we have it back again in time for St George's Day, April 23, so that it may be proudly worn again by loyal Englishmen.
It must never fall into the clutches of a political party again.
DOUGLAS TREW Burwash, Sussex
Letter to the Editor: BT addresses a problem
SIR — I suggest this is a unique ‘David and Goliath’ story, as it concerns one small individual telephone subscriber and the mighty BT.
Until last April the Directory Enquiries service was not only free; it would give addresses as well as telephone numbers.
But when BT introduced its computer service, it also brought in a charge of 43p per inquiry and, as a matter of policy, would not give addresses.
When I queried this, I was told that subscribers did not wish BT to divulge this information.
As I considered this pure nonsense, I pressed for a review.
BT's response was to carry out an area trial, promising to keep me advised on progress.
It has just told me that the trial has proved successful and that it will shortly make the address service available nationwide.
This is a pleasant surprise, on two counts.
First, it shows that common sense has prevailed and a useful customer service reintroduced.
Secondly, it appears that one of our largest companies has regard for the individual.
Incidentally, when I put the problem to Oftel, it was ignored.
REX GUPPY Leigh-on-Sea, Essex
Let snapping dogs lie: they did not sway the outcome Whatever indignation is aroused by certain programmes, the public is not convinced of BBC bias.
A rebuke from the Tories now, says GEORGE WALDEN, would seem unsporting
By GEORGE WALDEN
PROPPED in front of the television with a late night whisky after another sodden day arguing wavering Tories out of voting Liberal Democrat, you get tetchy with broadcasters.
‘Why don't you ask him about getting into bed with Neil Kinnock?
Oh no,’ you rave on at the box.
‘The BBC will never give Paddy a hard time, will they?
Because he is their sort of man.’
If I, defending a soundish majority, felt like that on occasions, how did the Prime Minister feel about the BBC's performance during the election campaign, with his future and that of his party in the balance?
Pretty raw, I imagine.
Maybe a bit vengeful as well.
So would we all.
Now the whole thing is over, rumbles of resentment are still coming from Government, and fears of retribution are being openly expressed by the BBC.
What should Mr Major and the first media mogul to sit in the Cabinet, David Mellor, do?
Reflect long and hard, I would hope, in the interests of the Conservative Party, before saying or doing anything at all.
And that goes for Chris Patten, the party chairman, as well.
We have been round the BBC buoy many a time, so there is no excuse for hasty words, or mistakes.
There is no doubt that the corporate lungs of the BBC would have heaved a not so silent sigh of contentment at a Lib-Lab coalition, as would the equally capacious lungs of the Health Service, Education, and others.
Along with many a public body that felt pushed around by the Tories, the BBC must have gone to bed on April 8 with dreams of a quieter life on the night; already swinging, as it were, in the hammock slung for them by a hung parliament.
For them, the stakes in this election were especially high.
With the renewal of their charter in 1996 and plans for mass redundancies in the interests of efficiency already sketched out, the future shape of the Corporation was in the balance, alongside the polls.
That fact alone put their election performance under even closer scrutiny than usual, from all sides — and they knew it.
Warm things are said in the flush of the campaign but now that it's over the first question the Tories should ask is how it would look to the country if a victorious party launched into a frontal assault on the BBC in the wake of its victory.
Remembering that, whatever the indignation aroused by this or that programme, previous studies have shown the public at large is not convinced of BBC bias.
People might think, in their innocence: ‘Look, John Major's won against all the odds, and good luck to him.
So why chop off the hand of the messenger when the news turns out to be good?’
Simple folk might likewise reflect that this is the fourth time the Conservatives have carried the day in elections in the teeth of alleged BBC bias.
Conservatives can't have it all ways.
Either the campaign on the electronic media isn't as important as we are all led to think, so any bias doesn't make that much difference, or the alleged partisanship is largely in the mind of the beholder.
Either way, kicking the ref when you have won might be seen as unsporting.
Any public rebuke to the BBC, still more any action, will need to be based on watertight evidence.
And whoever weighs that evidence will need to remember a number of things.
In all election campaigns, incumbent governments are going to be given a harder time than the Opposition.
The point is so obvious that it is easily overlooked.
The simplest inquiry about the Health Service (’ What are you going to do about waiting lists?’) will sound accusatory — even loaded — when put to the Secretary of State for the Department of Health.
The identical question, addressed to the Opposition, will sound tame to the point of collusion.
Whatever the truth about Jennifer's ear, the Conservatives were always going to take most of the rap, by virtue of being in office.
MOREOVER, individual examples of bias, such as the one I detected when Paddy Ashdown was allowed to get away with the ridiculous notion that he might do a deal with John Major just as easily as with Neil Kinnock, need to be balanced against the election coverage as a whole.
Try as I might, apart from a certain cosiness of tone I discerned in his interview with Brian Redhead, I don't remember Neil Kinnock getting such an easy ride in his appearances.
And how do we answer this question?
Conservatives know that our best ally in preventing Labour coming to office was Neil Kinnock.
If the BBC had been consistently loaded against us, and in Neil Kinnock's favour, how come these misgivings about him as Prime Minister have shown up yet again in the result of this election?
And if we are going to have a post mortem on the role of the telly, what of the press — the tabloids especially?
Little doubt what the weight of opinion was there.
Obviously, a public corporation is different.
But in the overall scheme of things, we didn't do badly for media support.
Broadly speaking, Conservatives rail at the box and the Left at the Press; our simple-minded observer, Joe Public, might see a rough democratic balance in that.
Fortunately for the Conservative Party, David Mellor is now in charge of this ticklish portfolio.
No BBC stooge, he has a sharp way with erring broadcasters.
But then, he also handled the Broadcasting Bill.
It was Mellor, as junior Home Office Minister, who was left by Mrs Thatcher to pick up the pieces when the last government went badly over the top in its determination to reshape television by deregulation, irrespective of quality.
Mellor, again, who realises that it was irascibility over broadcasters in general that got the then government into the fine mess from which he had to extract it.
Mellor, too, who denied yesterday evening that the Government was going to be in any way disagreeable to the BBC.
One important correction.
I've suddenly remembered that the programme that really infuriated me, when I was tired and wet and Paddy Ashdown was getting away with sheer murder before my eyes, and the polls looked terminal for the Tories, and I was beginning to think that the whole thing was rigged against us, was not the BBC at all.
It was an interview broadcast by a privately owned company, said to be not unfriendly to the Conservatives.
Perhaps I should have put a bit more water into my late night whisky?
Now it's all over, it looks as though the Government has.
George Walden is Conservative MP for Buckingham
Leading Article: Clear road ahead with a new team
THERE WAS much talk before the election of a radical revamping of the Cabinet if the Tories won.
In the event, the scope for major change is always limited by political realities, and by the simple truth that there is no bottomless reservoir of potential Cabinet material among ministers in waiting.
Mr Major's sackings had been widely discounted in advance, and would have been more extensive but for Mr Chris Patten and Mr Francis Maude losing their parliamentary seats.
The Cabinet might also have looked different had the Tory majority been smaller.
If another general election had been imminent, Mr Norman Lamont's presentational difficulties might have cost him his job.
As it is, Mr Major could think long and reappoint Mr Lamont, who has borne the enormous strain of knowing that, if the Tories had lost, he would have taken a substantial part of the blame.
Most of his colleagues feel that Mr Lamont's handling of Treasury policy has been sound.
He has kept his nerve under very trying circumstances.
The Government's principal task in the months to come will be to restore the right mix of monetary and fiscal policy — now badly out of balance — so that interest rates have a better chance of coming down, and staying down over the long run.
This means restraint in public spending and holding back the natural enthusiasm of a clutch of new ministers to open the purse strings.
The combination of three well known ‘dries’— Mr Lamont, the able Mr Michael Portillo and Mr Peter Lilley — in the front line will provide an essential counterbalance to the spending ambitions of Mr Michael Heseltine.
It was only just to give Mr Heseltine, who played so prominent a role in the Tory victory, the job he so much wanted as Industry Secretary.
Mr Heseltine's behaviour both in public and in private throughout recent months has commanded warm admiration from his Cabinet colleagues.
But he is likely to have a frustrating time of it as Industry Secretary until the economy recovers, wanting cash to fund his ambitious regeneration plans that will simply not be available in the next year or two.
Mr Kenneth Clarke has earned his promotion to the Home Office, and has the combination of brains and toughness to undertake the huge task of reforming the police.
But it seems a pity that he had to leave Education when the changes in the system still have so far to run.
Mr John Patten, who has suffered frustration for so long before reaching the Cabinet, now has the chance to prove himself in a formidably difficult role.
Both in Health and Education, the new Secretaries of State have the advantage that those they have to deal with on the shopfloor, so to speak, will know that the Government's policies are now here to stay.
Their tasks will be to win over the hearts of the doctors and teachers, while keeping the reform programme firmly on course.
Mr Major's appointment of two women to the Cabinet will certainly add a touch of glamour to his team, and had been widely expected.
Mrs Gillian Shephard's abilities are widely recognised.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, the new Health Secretary, is warmly liked and admired, but will need to overcome some reservations about whether, had she been a man, she would have won the Cabinet place on intellect alone.
Mr David Mellor, who had a good election campaign, has all the right qualifications to be an arts and heritage supremo — if such a role really deserves Cabinet status.
It is reassuring to know that his duties will include responsibility for the BBC, for as George Walden argues on this page, it was he who rescued the Broadcasting Bill after the last Thatcher government made such a hash of television deregulation.
Mr William Waldegrave can hardly relish his new role as guardian of the Citizens' Charter, but may well be relieved to remain in the uppermost ranks of government at all.
Mr John MacGregor inherits Transport, which has proved a bed of nails for a succession of Secretaries of State.
His predecessor, Mr Malcolm Rifkind, possesses the toughness and intellect to make a success as Defence Secretary.
No Defence Secretary in recent years has been able to grip his department effectively, which means taking harsh decisions that reflect a coherent view of Britain's priorities.
Mr Rifkind will deserve warm praise if he can succeed where several incumbents have failed.
He had better start by accepting that if he does the right things, they will not be popular ones.
It will be interesting to see whether Sir Patrick Mayhew's appointment as Northern Ireland Secretary signals a new direction for policy.
More likely, Sir Patrick's business will be to continue Mr Peter Brooke's painstaking attempts to find common ground among Ulster's politicians.
It is difficult to be optimistic about the prospect of a major breakthrough.
Mr Ian Lang has gained his reward for presiding over a modest Tory revival in Scotland, although it would be unwise to suppose that the difficulties of governing Scotland will go away.
As for Mr Douglas Hurd — it is becoming difficult to imagine anyone else as Britain's Foreign Secretary.
The country as well as Mr Major are very fortunate to have such a safe pair of hands at the Foreign Office at a time when the vital question of Britain's future within the European Union is still being determined.
From today, we are back to the business of government as usual, with a return to all the huge problems of recession, Europe, health and education where they were left a month ago when the General Election was called.
There is one important difference: the Prime Minister and his Cabinet can embark boldly upon their way forward, with electoral considerations banished for a long time to come.
Letter to the Editor: Too few people polled
SIR — As director of a company which supplies market research data to the pharmaceutical industry in the Republic of Ireland, I am looking forward to the forthcoming explanations from United Kingdom opinion poll organisations.
Doubtless there will be a plaintive cry about ‘a late Tory surge which was not in place until after our final interview batch’ and other such excuses.
In truth, both sample size and make-up in these pre-election polls were sadly inadequate.
Given an electorate of 28 million, the final four opinion polls sampled at best 0.0098 per cent and at worst 0.0062 per cent.
Such a ridiculous sample will go some length to explain the pronounced swings supposedly occurring in the run-up period.
A three per cent swing equates to one million electors changing their political allegiance.
Such changes were supposedly happening virtually every day; a concept beyond belief and credibility.
In truth this never happened.
We have seen not only regional variations in voting patterns but distinctly local variations within the regions.
It is clearly, on this basis, wholly insufficient to sample the equivalent of three/four voters per constituency, as has been the case.
It was interesting to note that as the election results came through, political commentators were readily able to offer a viable explanation: ‘Labour made no headway in Battersea due to the local authority, plus change in electorate profile’.
Or ‘Labour won Pendle because of poll tax resentment’, and so forth.
They were very wise and crystal clear — after the event.
But in no way were the results properly analysed and taken into account by those who seek, and are paid, to quantify such matters, before the event.
Of course, continuous and insatiable demand for ‘immediate’ opinion-poll results in the run-up to an election can lead only to inadequate, inaccurate and misleading data.
This serves, in turn, to bring the whole concept of such market research into question, if not disrepute.
MICHAEL HOLLINGSWORTH Blackrock, Co.
Dublin 
Letter to the Editor: Malts on standby north of the border
SENIOR officers in the Scottish regiments are delighted with the news that one of the most urbane Scotsmen in the House of Commons, Malcolm Rifkind, has been appointed Secretary of State for Defence.
His arrival at the Ministry has raised hopes that there may be something of particular interest in the Queen's Speech for those Scottish regiments threatened with amalgamation under Options for Change.
The word in the mess is that a review of the highly controversial changes is imminent and the 12-year-old malts are standing by for opening in early May.
Optimism is highest among members of the Royal Scots — the world's oldest infantry regiment, which received the lion's share of medals for bravery in the Gulf War — and the King's Own Scottish Borderers, which are due to become one regiment in 1994.
The thinking is that last year's lobbying may have convinced those who matter in Whitehall and Westminister that the proposals go rather too far.
‘It has been recognised that maybe the proposals are too extreme, particularly in respect of the infantry,’ says one informed source.
‘The Scots take the identity of their regiments perhaps even more seriously than the English and there is a clear case, on grounds of tradition and sentiment, to preserve the Royal Scots.’
For a regiment which has its headquarters at Edinburgh Castle and which recruits its officers largely from the city, the appointment of Rifkind, the member for Edinburgh Pentlands, will do the Royal Scots' (motto: No one may touch me with impunity) case no harm at all.
Neither can the fact that the bagpipes of the various regimental associations and lobby groups were remarkably silent over the past few weeks.
The Government may, one assumes, be particularly grateful for the fact that the question of the future of Scottish regiments failed to materialise as an election issue north of the border.
A breakfast tale of two cities
Heathrow airport's breakfasts are superior to the catering at Charles de Gaulle airport, in Paris, according to a report today from Egon Ronay, the food critic.
On a visit to Paris, he found that the Charles de Gaulle breakfasts were mainly ‘disastrous and abysmal.’
Surly waiters and waitresses added to the misery, said Mr Ronay, an independent consultant to Heathrow.
Obituary of Leonard Cutts
LEONARD CUTTS, the publisher who has died aged 87, was the first editor of Hodder and Stoughton's Teach Yourself series.
He himself invented the name, and also edited hundreds of the titles, from Atomic Physics and Swahili, from Practical Concreting to Budgerigars and Canasta.
Though he kept a folder packed with suggestions for new volumes, he was keen to emphasise their serious didactic nature: ‘We don't go in for quick quack books.’
Leonard Cutts was born on Nov 27 1904 and joined the Kent-based Hodder & Stoughton in 1922.
He had little formal education, but his Christian conviction ideally qualified him to be apprentice to the Reverend Arthur Hird, who worked on Hodder's religious publishing.
On Hird's death 10 years later, Cutts took over the list, and demonstrated his own publishing flair with his first best-seller, A J Russell's For Sinners Only.
He expanded the firm's activities to include technical and ‘home education’ publications; fiction soon followed.
In 1934 Cutts commissioned James Hilton to write a short story which eventually turned into Goodbye Mr Chips.
He also looked after Leslie Charteris and the Saint books at the height of their popularity, as well as managing the publishing of Peter Pan, the royalties of which J M Barrie had bequeathed to Great Ormond Street.
During the Second World War, when the younger directors and most of the managers were away, Cutts — along with R Davis — virtually ran the entire business.
After the war, he negotiated Hodder's investment in the new paperback series, Pan Books.
He masterminded the sale of foreign rights to John Hunt's The Ascent of Everest, the biggest book the firm had ever published, to publishers in 26 countries.
Throughout this time, however, he was still active in religious publishing, and was responsible for Leslie Weatherhead's Psychology, Religion and Healing.
The book of which gave him most satisfaction was William Neil's One Volume Bible Commentary.
A shortish, mild-mannered man, who grew tomatoes and travelled by bicycle, Cutts handled nearly all his business correspondence in his own hand, and liked to have dealt with it all by 9 am.
His wife predeceased him.
Obituary of The Rt Rev Charles Renfrew
THE RT REV CHARLES Renfrew, who has died aged 62, maintained an active ministry almost to the end of his life, despite being a kidney dialysis patient.
‘Donny’, as he was affectionately known, served as an auxiliary bishop in the Roman Catholic archdiocese of Glasgow from 1977.
He never let his thrice-weekly treatment stand in the way of his many activities: while on the dialysis machine he would write newspaper and magazine articles, including his weekly column for the Scottish Catholic Observer and for Flourish, the archdiocesan newspaper.
He also wrote several works of popular devotion, including the widely used St Vincent's Prayer Book (1971), A Pageant of Holiness (1983) and Rambling Through Life (1984).
A man of determined industry, Renfrew was one of the guiding forces in the development of the new Glasgow archdiocesan offices, where he was moderator from 1988.
His decision to unify the various administrative and pastoral functions of the archdiocese under one roof reflected his realistic approach to the Church of the 1990s.
As an assistant bishop his ministry included regular visits to the churches and schools of the archdiocese, where he was a favourite among the children, thousands of whom he confirmed.
Renfrew was a strong pro-life activist and a keen supporter of donor-card schemes for organ transplants, though he was aware that this was not an option open to him.
He took a great interest in the theological implications of transplant surgery.
Charles McDonald Renfrew was born in the Kelvinside district of Glasgow on June 21 1929.
He lost his mother as a young boy, and was partly brought up by relatives.
Educated at the city's Jesuit school, St Aloysius College, he studied for the priesthood at the Scots College, Rome, and was a graduate of the Gregorian University.
After his ordination in 1953, he spent three years as assistant priest at the Immaculate Conception Church, Glasgow.
In 1956 he joined the staff of St Mary's College at Blairs, Aberdeen, as professor and procurator.
In 1961 he founded another seminary, St Vincent's College, Langbank, and served as its first rector until 1974.
Within the archdiocese Renfrew was Vicar General as well as Vicar Episcopal for Religious from 1974, Chaplain to Notre Dame Convent, Dowanhill, for a year, as well as to Bons Secours Convent from 1975 to 1989.
On the wider stage of Scottish Catholic life his experience in training priests led to his appointment as secretary to the Vocations and Seminaries Commission from 1969 to 1974, and as director of the Vocations Centre for Scotland from 1973 to 1975.
Renfrew served on the National Catholic Commission for Social Care.
He was also the episcopal adviser to charismatic renewal in Scotland.
For many years he was an active member of the Scottish Religious Advisory Committee at the BBC and was a broadcaster on radio and television in Scotland.
‘Donny’ Renfrew was a man of deep spirituality who evangelised simply by being himself.
His courageous industry earned the respect, not only of his fellow Roman Catholics, but of Christians of all denominations.
He had an infectious sense of humour, and recently scripted an amusing and satirical pantomime.
He was also a great lover of grand and light opera, and ever since his seminary days had enjoyed producing Gilbert and Sullivan operettas for performance by amateur groups.
What little spare time remained was dedicated to his favourite radio programme The Archers, which he never missed.
Short gets off to a bad start
By Malcolm Pein Chess Correspondent
ENGLAND number one Nigel Short trails Anatoly Karpov 1.5-.5 after two games of their 10-game World Chess Championship semi-final match at the Hotel Anibal, Linares, Spain.
Short made a terrible start in game one when, playing black, he tried the dubious Budapest gambit in an attempt to catch Karpov off guard.
This gambit, which Short has never played before, is almost never seen at the top level.
Since the player of the white pieces can achieve a small but comfortable advantage against this manoeuvre with very little difficulty, it was a bad choice against Karpov, a player who is past master at exploiting small advantages.
Karpov played a relatively recent refinement of white's play on the seventh move.
He had obviously assessed the resulting positions before the match and it remains a mystery why Short played such a dubious line.
On move 11 Short had to allow a weakening of his pawn structure and then he chose to sacrifice a pawn instead of defending an endgame and struggling for a draw.
This soon looked like an unobjective decision, as Karpov secured his pawn advantage.
As time trouble approached, Short went for a wild kingside attack, but Karpov played well and it was Short's king which proved the weaker.
In yesterday's second game Short had soon obtained a slight advantage playing with the white pieces, but as the players again ran short of time Karpov obtained strong counterplay on the queenside.
Short's position looked a little insecure but both players had only 10 minutes to make eight moves and they chose to repeat the position and agree a draw.
Candidates Semi-finals: Short 0.5 Karpov 1.5.
Game 1: Karpov 1 Short 0, Budapest Gambit 43 moves.
Game 2: Short 0.5 Karpov 0.5, Caro Kann 32 moves.
Yusupov 1.5 Timman 0.5 Game 1: Yusupov 1 Timman 0, Grunfeld 34 moves.
Timman blundered in a slightly inferior position and lost material.
Game 2: Timman 0.5 Yusupov 0.5, Petroff Defence 31 moves.
The first 20 moves were theory, Yusupov played well to force repetition in an endgame where Timman had bishop and knight against rook and pawn.
Obituary of Unity Hall
UNITY HALL, who has died aged 63, worked for a number of popular newspapers before finding a niche as the agony aunt of the News of the World.
She embarked on the column in 1981 and over the next 11 years became, if hardly the guardian of people's secrets, nonetheless a gushing fount of comforting advice.
Hall was apt to be described as ‘a tough-as-nails reporter with a marshmallow centre’, though in her ‘Dear Unity’ role, the emphasis was rather on the concoction of sympathy than on the cutting edge of insight.
Her tougher aspect emerged while she was on the staff of the Sun in 1970, when she led 30 women journalists in the ‘Battle of Campari Creek’ at El Vino's on Fleet Street.
Enraged by the wine bar's policy of forbidding them to stand with their male colleagues to drink at the bar, Hall and her cohorts decided to stage a protest.
Braving a soda-syphon cannonade, they followed Hall's command to remain ‘sweetly and reasonably feminine’.
Victory swiftly ensued.
A carpenter's daughter, Unity Hall was born at Wembley, Middlesex, on Sept 21 1928 and at 16 had her first story published in Woman's World.
Soon afterwards she travelled to America, where she worked in a doughnut factory, and on her return home she joined the staff of Woman's World as a feature writer.
In 1952 Hall became a reporter on the Sunday Mirror, and soon moved from there to the Daily Sketch as woman's editor.
Her next job was as editor of the teenage pop magazine Fabulous, and then, at the height of the 1960s, she edited the woman's page of the Sun.
In 1970 Hall joined the News of the World, where she was woman's editor until 1988.
While writing her agony aunt column, she remained busy as a reporter, interviewing figures including Margaret Thatcher.
Away from Fleet Street, Hall also made her name as a writer of racy novels and of books on the Royal Family.
In the latter she wasted little space on such theoretical concerns as the position of monarchy in modern society, concentrating instead on the more trivial aspects of palace life.
By Royal Invitation (1988) related, for example, that the Queen was suspicious about the number 13, that a footman had once fallen in love with Princess Margaret, and that Prince Charles disliked chocolate cakes, but manifested a distinct partiality for Bath Olivers.
Her best known books, though, were Royal Service and Royal Secrets, which she ghost-wrote for the Prince of Wales's former valet, Stephen Barry.
They were published in America but never appeared in Britain — where, according to Hall, they would have been ‘too much frowned upon’.
Hall was married to Philip Wrack, the ombudsman of the News of the World.
Obituary of Air Vice-Marshal Geoffrey Thomas
AIR VICE-MARSHAL Geoffrey Thomas, who has died aged 76, served the RAF with distinction as a supply, equipment and movements specialist.
Poor eyesight had prevented Thomas from qualifying as a pilot; but he was not content to be a backroom boy.
During Bomber Command's costly daylight raids on the Heligoland Bight early in the Second World War, he accompanied a Hampden crew on at least one operational sortie over Germany.
He once arranged unofficially to take part in a raid from his station at Hemswell in Lincolnshire in a Hampden of No 61 Squadron.
When that aircraft took off without him, Thomas switched to a Hampden of No 144 Squadron.
The last-minute change saved his life: 61 Squadron's aircraft was lost on the raid.
After that exploit, the ‘penguin’ equipment officer was well and truly grounded by a posting in 1940 to No 929, a balloon barrage squadron which was then protecting shipping in the Firth of Forth.
The new job was not without its excitements, though, and Thomas greatly enjoyed observing his balloons from the heights of Dundas Castle, West Queensferry.
One dark and stormy night, accompanied by his wife Sally (whom he had married after admiring her motor transport repairs in a Hemswell hangar), he was wondering whether to lower the balloons, when lightning struck and solved the problem.
Geoffrey Percy Sansom Thomas was born on April 24 1915 and educated at King's College School, Wimbledon.
He then gained a job as a clerk in the City, and served as a signals lance corporal in the Territorial Army.
On the outbreak of the Second World War he was commissioned into the RAF's equipment branch.
From 1942 he served in India, where he attended the staff college at Quetta; he then undertook a number of staff appointments in south-east Asia.
On his return home in 1945 Thomas was posted to HQ Transport Command, where he helped pioneer routes for the RAF's troop and cargo airline.
In 1950 he was attached to the Turkish air force to teach logistics, and refused to be fazed when, in reply to his question ‘How do you define logistics?’, one of his students, General Mendiz, said, ‘We don't.
Anything you teach us will be logistics.’
After two years in Transport Command, he did a stint as deputy director of equipment.
In 1958 Thomas was promoted group captain and two years later was posted to the Royal Australian Air Force, where he commanded the Tottenham station at Melbourne and became affectionately known as ‘Father’.
Appointed director of movements in 1965, Thomas supervised the upgrading of the somewhat primitive passenger facilities at RAF Lyneham, and the rapid evacuation of British forces from Aden during the troubles there.
He retired in 1971, after two years as Senior Air Staff Officer at Maintenance Command.
He was appointed OBE and mentioned in despatches in 1945 and appointed CB in 1970.
A quiet, unassuming man, Geoffrey Thomas indulged a great fondness for nature and wildlife in the countryside around his house in Kent, and read so voraciously that his wife feared they might have to move house to gain access to a new public library.
He married, in 1940, Sally Biddle; they had a son and a daughter.
Way of the World: A historic settlement
By AUBERON WAUGH
OF THE 28 Tory Stinkers who voted on St Valentine's Day in support of a socialist's motion to ban hunting, four have now retired from politics — Mudd, Braine, Rossi and Clark — while a further five have been thrown out by the electorate.
This leaves 19 Stinkers, including the dreaded Ann Widdecombe in Maidstone, and the unspeakable ‘Terry’ Dicks, who squeaked in at Hayes and Harlington by 53 votes on a massive 6.8 per cent swing against him.
But perhaps the most worrying of the surviving Stinkers is young David Amess, of Basildon, Essex.
He attributes his success in holding Basildon to the front page of Thursday's Sun —‘If Kinnock wins today will the last person to leave Britain please turn out the lights’— and in being treated as something of a hero within sections of the Conservative Party.
It is said that 50 per cent of people in Basildon read the Sun, and the appalling ‘Terry’ Dicks also claims ‘I couldn't have done it without the Sun’.
Oddly enough, I would have thought it was the decision of the Financial Times to support Labour which swung many people behind the Conservatives at the last moment.
I have never taken the Financial Times, finding it dull, badly written and vulgarly obsessed with money.
Not many other people take it, either, but we could all read in our own newspapers that it was supporting Labour, and I should have thought a normal reaction among honest Britons, who have grown to mistrust businessmen in the age of takeovers, would be to do the opposite.
Where Essex man is concerned, Tories have a harder choice.
Mr Amess not only approves warmly of capital punishment, but has volunteered to ‘pull the lever myself’.
The time may have come to urge a historic settlement, whereby people in Essex can hang each other to their hearts' content so long as they do not interfere with traditional sporting practices in the rest of the country.