

Changing Times: ALL TOGETHER NOW — JUMP!
By Lesley Garner
THE PRINCESS ROYAL announces her divorce and the Queen is said to be upset.
The Royal Family is certainly going through a rough patch.
Any mother who has to deal with the separation of one child and the divorce of another within a matter of weeks would be upset.
If she knew that each of these unhappy events would be international front-page news she would be even more upset.
The personal pain must be intensified by regal uneasiness and its effect on the monarchy.
‘If your own family is so badly brought up,’ thundered a Scottish columnist, ‘so lacking in moral fibre that it cannot make a go of its marriages, what price all those Christmas homilies?’
Since there can be few families in the land untouched by divorce, most will be a little more sympathetic than this, but the columnist has a point.
The Royal Family isn't there to be an object of sympathy.
We have our own friends and family for that.
But those who believe in the monarchy like to think it stands for stability and good example.
What is the point of all that careful breeding with suitable people, all that specialised education and upbringing, if not to produce people who are somehow nobler and more self-sacrificing than the rest of us?
If that is the role of the Royal Family in a contemporary society, it is failing, but if it is failing it is not necessarily because the breeding and the education are wrong.
It is because no institution or individual is proof against the third essential ingredient that makes us what we are — the Zeitgeist, the spirit of the times.
The Royal Family may not believe in divorce, but the Zeitgeist does.
The Royal Family, just like the Labour Party, finds itself spooked by the Zeitgeist.
Call it the spirit of the times, call it the public mood, call it peer-group pressure; it is a powerful, often irresistible, influence on the way we behave.
Being well brought up is often no defence against it.
It can overturn an individual's innate instincts and cherished beliefs.
I remember Princess Anne speaking briskly on television when she and Captain Mark Phillips became engaged.
Divorce is simply not an option for people in our position, she said.
Oh yes it is.
The Zeitgeist has proved more powerful than her own undoubted moral fibre and the historical influence of her own Church and family.
The spirit of the times works through peer-group pressure, insidiously changing the moral colour of the landscape.
When our children say, as they all do, ‘but my friends are all doing this’, parents invariably say, smartly, ‘and if they told you to jump off a cliff, would you?’
An individual friend may not persuade you to jump off a cliff, but peer-group pressure can make Gadarene swine of us all.
If enough public figures, even characters in books and films, enough of one's own acquaintances, start jumping off cliffs, cliff-jumping begins to lose its shock value and finally becomes normal.
In this way, people lose their virginity, experiment with drink or drugs, run up debts, consider divorce and even vote for political parties they swore they would never support.
Some people believe that the effect of the Zeitgeist is invariably to weaken moral fibre and signal the downfall of the nation.
I can understand why Neil Kinnock might think so, but I am more optimistic.
I admit there are superficial reasons for gloom.
The spirit of our times does not believe in the sacrifice of private happiness for public duty, and this can be taken as a sign of moral decline.
The contemporary hero is one who stands out against the crowd to fulfil a personal destiny.
This is not the same form of heroism as those who put themselves at risk for others.
At their worst, contemporary heroes and heroines are stomach-churning models of narcissism, but the spirit of the times responds to Nelson Mandela as well as Madonna, to the Beirut hostages as well as the latest football star.
The effect of peer-group pressure and of change in moral fashion is not necessarily to leave us devoid of values.
If a collective ethic is replaced by a personal one, we are not left a landscape without virtue.
We simply value different virtues.
It isn't just lack of moral fibre which leads to a rising divorce rate.
It can take just as much fortitude to go it alone as it does to keep up a public front.
Single parents know as much about endurance as couples who live a lie for the sake of the children.
I think that the Zeitgeist values honesty and courage over stoicism and self-sacrifice, but honesty and courage are virtues just the same.
The question we are entitled to ask is: are new values strong enough to hold the old institutions together?
They didn't work for the Labour Party, which failed to persuade the voters of the value of self-sacrifice.
I don't see how they can work for the Royal Family, either.
Just because we have been born and brought up to something doesn't mean we will always value it.
The Royal Family is showing itself to be just as vulnerable to social change as the rest of us.
It has our sympathy.
Nevertheless, I would be shocked, but not altogether surprised, if one day the spirit of the times, which has so recently blown away apartheid, communism and the Berlin wall, did away with the Royal Family as well.
IN SHORT 
BY SARAH FOOT
Village workshops A WIDE range of ‘hands-on’ art study workshops is being organised by Georgina Lane and Sheila Young in Little Baddow's village school hall in Essex.
Courses include a two-day framing workshop with Diana Reynette-James, who has her own picture gallery, £75; fresh flower arranging with Jennifer Bentley, teacher of floristry to City and Guilds standard, £40; a three-day course in which you recane your own chair, £75; a two-day course in copper plate writing with calligrapher, Eric Smith, £60.
Details from Georgina Lane, Mill Cottage, Mill Lane, Little Baddow, Essex, tel: 0245 222601.
Walking for money THOSE not up to the London Marathon can instead walk for charity in aid of Enterprise Neptune, the National Trust's appeal to save unspoilt countryside.
To celebrate Landscape Year, the National Trust is holding two sponsored Walkathons: on May 10 at Dryham Park, Avon, and on May 31 on the Killerton Estate, Devon.
Details from the NT's regional offices at Eastleigh Court, Bishopstrow, Warminster, Wilts BA12 9HW and Killerton, Broad Clyst, Exeter EX5 3LS.
Dog aid THE National Canine Defence League is opening its rescue centres to collect medical items for animals in St Petersburg.
Drugs and equipment are in short supply and the NCDL is looking for flea collars, worming tablets and cotton wool — the sorts of things pet owners can spare.
Details from NCDL, 1 Pratt Mews, London NW1, tel: 071–388 0137.
Victorian doors THE Victorian Society has just published the first in a new series of information leaflets, Care for Victorian Houses: Doors.
The society is worried about traditional Victorian front doors being replaced with unsuitable off-the-peg doors.
Further titles in the series will include Decorative Tiles and Fireplaces.
Price £3, from the Victorian Society, 1 Priory Gardens, Bedford Park, London W4, tel: 081–994 1019.
Edwardian scenes DESIGNS on Film is an exhibition by Sanderson on the interiors in Merchant Ivory's adaptation of E. M. Forster's Howard's End.
Sanderson paints, wallcoverings and fabrics are used in a number of the roomsets.
Until May 9 at Sanderson, 52–53 Berners Street, London W1, tel: 071–636 7800.
Sarah Foot 
Shortage of cheddar predicted
By Virginia Matthews Consumer Correspondent
THERE will be a ‘significant shortage’ of English cheese in the shops this summer as EC milk quotas continue to bite, an independent cheesemaker said yesterday.
Mr John Clothier, proprietor of Wyke Farm in Wincanton, Somerset, said it was likely that supplies of quality matured cheddar cheeses, largely produced by the independent sector, would be hit particularly hard.
He believed that all home-produced cheese would rise in price and that the number of varieties would shrink.
Consumers who appreciated ‘full-flavour matured cheddar’ would have to buy imported ‘plastic-tasting cheese’instead, he said.
Dairy Crest, one of the largest producers, agreed that stocks were low and that supplies would be ‘restricted rather than abundant’.
Cheese-makers say they are being squeezed by the effects of two systems in the rigidly-controlled milk market.
EC milk quotas, which since their imposition in 1984 have seen milk production fall by 20 per cent, mean that supply to the manufacturing industry is rationed.
And secondly, priority for the milk which is available, and which is strictly distributed by the Milk Marketing Board, is given to normal milk suppliers or to sectors whose products have a limited shelf-life, such as yoghurt-makers, rather than to cheese or butter manufacturers.
‘We do try to be fair to everybody,’ said a Milk Marketing Board spokesman.
‘But the impact of rationing on the small, independent cheese-making sector is bound to be greater than on larger sectors.’
Reform of the board, intended to have taken effect on April 1, has yet to be ratified by Brussels.
CHESS
Short poised to overcome Karpov
By Malcolm Pein, Chess Correspondent
ENGLAND'S number one, grandmaster Nigel Short from West Hampstead, is poised to score only the second victory of his career over former world champion Anatoly Karpov in their World Chess Championship semifinal match at Linares, Spain.
The game has been adjourned after six hours' play with Short sealing the 61st move in an envelope.
This move will be revealed to Karpov when the game is continued this afternoon.
In the adjourned position, Short has rook, knight and three pawns to Karpov's rook, knight and two pawns and all the Englishman's pieces are actively placed.
Overnight analysis by Short should find the winning plan.
Playing black yesterday, Short again surprised Karpov with an opening variation he has never played before.
On the eighth move, Short played a very interesting pawn thrust in the centre which made Karpov ponder his reply for 15 minutes.
Ten minutes ahead on the clock, Short castled on the queenside and began a pawn advance which secured him the initiative.
Karpov decided to enter an end game in the hope of relieving the pressure, but Short skilfully took control of the only open file on the board with both his rooks and activated the king and advanced his pawn majority on the queenside.
Karpov, his position deteriorating fast, used up nearly all his thinking time trying to find a defence.
At one point, Karpov had to make 10 moves in one minute to reach the time control at move 40.
With more skilful manoeuvring, Short surrounded Karpov's king's pawn and invaded with his rook.
In the fifth hour of play, Karpov was reduced to shuffling his king to and fro as Short steadily improved his position.
In desperation, Karpov sacrificed a pawn but Short — playing quickly and confidently — forced the creation of a passed pawn which should be decisive.
RACING
Nell Gwyn offers few Guineas clues
By HOTSPUR (J A McGrath)
WHEN the first seven horses home finish in a heap, with less than three lengths covering them, it is fair to say that the race in question is not much of a Classic trial.
Such was the case with yesterday's Shadwell Stud Nell Gwyn Stakes at Newmarket, won by the well-backed A-To-Z, trained by Michael Bell.
This race had all the earmarks of a mediocre 1,000 Guineas rehearsal and it was no great surprise to see Musicale, the winner of last Friday's Fred Darling Stakes, at Newbury, cut to as low as 11–4 favourite for the 1,000 Guineas, on April 30 after yesterday's race.
Hatoof, narrowly beaten in France last Friday, is second favourite at 6–1.
Finally, it seems, Robert Sangster's Musicale is receiving some recognition for her fine performance on unsuitably soft ground after having a none-too-easy run.
Midnight Air, yesterday's 9–4 favourite, failed to accelerate and beat only one home, while Skimble (seventh) led but quickly petered out; Red Slippers, too, disappointed, finishing sixth.
A-To-Z, carrying the colours of Brian Cooper, of In The Groove fame, landed a few decent bets for the fortunate few.
She had been as long as 33–1 in the offices in the morning, opened 16–1 on course, before being sent off at 8–1, and ironically it had been an eye-catching workout with the Luca Cumani-trained Red Slippers last week that convinced Bell that he had a worthy contender.
‘She has improved a stone, at least,’ said Bell.
‘She has been doing some spectacular work, going very well with Governor's Imp, and Luca Cumani very generously let me work her with Red Slippers the other day, and after that I knew we had a live Group One horse,’ the trainer added.
‘She had been making a noise last season and was Hobdayed during the winter.
It has made a big difference.’
A-To-Z is game if nothing else, and it was her will to win which enabled her to get home by three-quarters of a length from the Michael Stoute-trained Perfect Circle, with Soiree running on well, a further length away third.
A-to-Z is a top-priced 14–1 for the 1,000 Guineas, while Perfect Circle is on offer at the same quote and Soiree is as low as 7–1.
For a man who had seen his filly defeated, Barry Hills was not too disappointed in Soiree, especially in view of the extra furlong of the Classic and the likelihood that there will be a faster gallop.
Hills said: ‘She has been crying out for a mile, and the way the race was run she has been lucky enough not to have had too hard a race.’
Andre Fabre, who made a succesful Newbury raid with Lion Cavern in last Saturday's Singer & Friedlander Greenham Stakes, may lift another 2,000 Guineas trial with Steinbeck in today's European Free Handicap at Newmarket.
The colt is the only horse to have beaten the flying Arazi and is a stablemate of Tertian, the 6–1 favourite for the 2,000 Guineas on May 2.
Trainer John Sutcliffe has been fined £500 by the Jockey Club after a banned substance, Isoxsuprine, was found in a sample taken from Brunswick Blue after a race at Lingfield on Jan 23.
On the jumping front, Laura's Beau is to miss the Irish Grand National at Fairyhouse on Monday and will now rest until next season.
Racing: Lightly-raced Miliyel is Best
By Course Correspondent
ONCE-RACED MILIYEL*, who came up against the 1,000 Guineas ante-post favourite Musicale when both made their debut at Lingfield last season, may open her account in the Geoffrey Barling Maiden Fillies' Stakes (2.00) at Newmarket today.
Ben Hanbury's three-year-old completely missed the break in that 16-runner event and in the circumstances did extremely well to finish sixth, 12½ lengths behind Musicale.
Cruachan a close second To Tel Quel in the Dubai Champion Stakes here last October, may resume winning ways in the Earl of Sefton EBF Stakes (3.05); the improving Wolfhound is expected to complete his hat-trick in the European Free Handicap (3.35) and John Gosden's Coniston Water is reported in good form for his debut in the Wood Ditton Stakes (5.15).
TABLE TENNIS
Gold one step away for men
By John Woodford in Stuttgart
ENGLAND ensured silver medals and could even carry off gold in the men's team event at the European Championships in Stuttgart.
With an inspired 4–2 win against France in the semi-finals yesterday, England overcame the threat of the world No 3 Jean-Philippe Gatien, who was in awesome form to beat the England champion Chen Xinhua.
Xinhua led the French ace 17–13 in the third game but was narrowly beaten 21–19 in a thrilling contest.
All four England men shared in a famous victory.
Carl Prean defeated Damien Eloi and Matthew Syed crushed Didier Mommessin 21–10, 21–13.
Alan Cooke, who has the disadvantage of playing ‘cold’ in the doubles while his opponents are invariably warmed up from previous games, hit a cascade of winners in the crucial mid-match doubles.
Chen clinched the England victory 21–15, 21–15 in 20 minutes against Mommessin.
Tonight England will play the world champions Sweden, who beat Germany 4–1 in the other semi-final.
Jubilant England manager Donald Parker said: ‘It was a wonderful team performance.
We worried Sweden yesterday and we can do so again in the final.’
Meanwhile, England women also finished their team event with a splendid 3–0 win against Hungary and finished in fifth position, four places up on the last European Championships in Gothenburg.
RUGBY NEWS
Moseley reassure Keay
By Charles Randall
MOSELEY are having to take drastic steps to improve their finances as they face a deficit of £110,000 at The Reddings, but the job of Alex Keay, their salaried coach, is not in danger.
This assurance was given yesterday by Bernard Hampson, Moseley's new chairman, who said that economy measures, which have already cost the club's general manager and his secretary their jobs, would not affect Keay's three-year contract.
‘This is not just ‘chairman's security’.
The decision was made by the committee — we have to have a strong playing side,’ he said.
Heavy losses are not new to this big Courage League Two club, but the full measure of their plight has been spelt out this week by Mr Hampson.
Mr Hampson this week announced a rescue loan of £140,000 from the brewery firm, Ansells, and said that the club would return to ‘prudent management and financial controls’.
A recruitment committee is to be formed to provide jobs for players and Greville Edwards has been invited back as a commission-only commercial manager to revive the sponsorship and hospitality income.
The Heineken League management committee have turned down Llanelli's request to have Saturday's League game against Swansea postponed.
They said yesterday that ‘the rules of the competition must be upheld’.
Llanelli are concerned at the prospect of playing the most important game of their season without four players involved in the Wales Under-21 match against Scotland, and three others who are injured.
Lancashire, without the benefit of first-choice Orrell players, field only four of their semi-final team for the ADT County Championship final against Cornwall at Twickenham on Saturday.
Only Paul Grayson, at outside-half, and forwards Mike Kenrick, the new captain, Nick Allott and Steve Bibby played against Hampshire.
Replacements: A Higgin (Vale of Lune), P Stansfield (Sale), C Mahon (Waterloo), A Helme (Vale of Lune), D Sandford (Orrell), P Ashcroft (Waterloo).
RUGBY IN WALES
Llanelli denied
By Edward Bevan
THE Heineken League management committee have turned down Llanelli's request to have Saturday's League game against Swansea postponed.
They said yesterday that ‘the rules of the competition must be upheld’.
Llanelli are concerned that they must play the most important game of their season without four players who are with the Wales under-21 team to play Scotland, and three others who are injured.
Their main worry is behind the scrum, where centre Neil Boobyer and wing Wayne Proctor are with the Welsh team, while Simon Davies another centre and Ian Jones, a utility player, are injured.
John MacLean, the Llanelli chairman and a national representative of the WRU, said: ‘I'm disappointed with the decision and I shall be asking for a detailed explanation of the management committee's decision.’
Gareth Jenkins, the club coach, said they had ‘big problems’ and his team would be at a disadvantage through no fault of their own.
Roger Blyth, the chairman of Swansea's selectors, sympathised with Llanelli's predicament, but said his club also had to make contingency arrangements earlier in the season.
Glen Ball, the Neath coach and team manager, is to stand down at the end of the season.
Ball, who joined the club in 1960 has been involved with coaching duties since 1983.
His successor, to be named today, is likely to be Leighton Davies, the former Maesteg coach.
Golf: Princes go out in marathon battle
By Ted Barrett
BRIAN and Alan Prince, of West Hill, the host club, fought out a losing marathon third-round battle in ceaseless rain against David and Alan Greenhalgh, of Royal Mid Surrey, in West Hill's Father and Son tournament yesterday.
The match, on level terms, finished on the fifth extra hole in gathering darkness as water began to deaden the greens and threaten floods.
The Princes will rue the fact that they passed up a wonderful chance to finish off the match on the 18th, for they were one up on that tee from which both the sons hit long and straight down the fairway.
But a cruel kick took Brian Prince's approach out of bounds.
Of previous winners, the Whites beat the Shiels in round two, at which stage the Hovils, Farmers and Laings, who won last year, also perished.
But the Whites and Baxters marched on by increasing margins and will be hoping to meet this afternoon to dispute a place in tomorrow's quarter-finals.
David Stirk's apparent penchant for extra holes proved his undoing in the second round against the Waughs of Walton Heath.
His son Graeme must take some of the blame for this, for his approach at the first extra hole found sand and his drive at the second left his father with an uneven stance on a bank.
They ‘got away with it’ with a half in bogey at the 19th, but they could not get their four at the 20th, where Tom Waugh, the son, holed an excellent putt.
David Stirk's effort stopped two rolls short of forcing a third extra hole.
The Waughs came a 5 & 3 cropper in their third-round match against the Boyds, of The Berkshire.
POINT-TO-POINT
Alner lands treble
By Hugh Condry
ROBERT ALNER continued his relentless progress towards taking The Daily Telegraph Men's Championship at Portman on Saturday when he rode three winners and now leads Philip Scholfield — who was restricted to one success at the Dartmoor — by 22 to 13.
Alner won on Ponteus Pilot, Lough Guitane and Seven of Diamonds, who has now won at all three meetings at Badbury Rings this season.
Alison Dare also won two Portman races with Sleepline For Pine and Grademount to raise her tally to 13 and now leads the women's championship race by six.
Sophie Mitchell, whose brothers Tim and Nick were both riding at the meeting, went to the Llangibby and won on Pernickety.
James Tarry, third to Alner in the men's championship table, stayed on 11 at the Bicester, where Sue Sadler completed a double on Big Order and Straight Bat.
Evan Williams landed a Llandeilo treble, but was beaten on Timber Tool in the Open by Brunico, whose trainer, Peter Bowen, again made use of the services of Ron Treloggen.
Daisy Miller won her fifth race in a row here and is one of a quartet with five successes — the others are Claxton Greene, Confused Express and Rubie's Choice — chasing Carl's Choice, who moved on to eight in the West Kent Open and must be favourite to win The Daily Telegraph Trophy.
Other treble scorers were Julian Pritchard at the United Pack and Simon Andrews at the Puckeridge, where As You Were recovered his form in the Ladies race.
TALKING RUGBY Logic overrides Welsh doubts
By John Reason
IT HAS not been much of a week for Welsh politicians because the country's resounding rejection of Mr Neil Kinnock has been followed by the decision of the International Rugby Board to ignore the reservations expressed by the Welsh Rugby Union and to hold the 1995 World Cup in South Africa.
I suspect that the second decision will have the almost unanimous support of the rugby electorate in Wales, however much the majority voters of their governing body may suck their teeth.
Indeed, I know that some members of that governing body will also be raising discreet cheers.
Realistically, South Africa is the only country in the southern hemisphere which has the commercial and playing infrastructure to host a World Cup on its own.
New Zealand has the playing infrastructure but it has nothing like a big enough commercial base.
Australia has neither and both countries are in a time zone which does not suit the world television audience.
Hopefully the IRB will make sure this time that a commercial agent is appointed who can take advantage of their enormous opportunities now on offer.
Someone who knows, for instance, all about such things as ambush marketing and the fact that one television channel in Japan (the one to which the 1991 event was sold) is not allowed to carry advertising!
That, and a hundred other things.
There has been a fair amount of half-hearted canvassing by Wales to try to persuade members of other unions that South Africa is not really stable enough as a country to host the 1995 World Cup.
For some months that canvassing has been echoed, somewhat surprisingly, both by Keith Rowlands, the Welsh secretary of the IRB, and by Ray Williams, the tournament director in 1991.
Clearly it fell on deaf ears.
Most of the members of the IRB know that even in 1992 the rejection of South Africa as the host country would be a King Canute job and that by 1995 it would look just plain silly.
Now the Springboks will be able to plunge into their rehabilitation programme.
And what a programme they have arranged: three matches in four days in Romania in June, followed immediately by two matches in Rome, including a Test in each country.
Then five matches against the All Blacks in August, intertwined with four matches against Australia.
A Test against the All Blacks at Ellis Park on August 15 and a Test against the Wallabies at Newlands on August 22.
That would be enough for most people, but in October South Africa play nine matches in France and follow that with four matches in England.
They will play two Tests in France and one at Twickenham.
So in the space of 5½ months South Africa will play 27 matches, including seven Tests.
‘By the time we get through that little lot,’ smiled Dr Danie Craven, ‘at least we will know how bad we are and how far we have to go to catch up.’
SOUTH AFRICA can take one great comfort.
Or rather, they can take five.
The five-man spine of their team might be the best in the world.
Uli Schmidt is certainly the best hooker in the game and Andre Joubert is almost certainly the best full-back.
Robert du Preez at scrum-half could take on anyone including David Bishop either in the boxing ring or on the rugby field and say what you like about Naas Botha, he is still the daddy of all the fly-halves.
He played a game in ankle-deep ooze in Hong Kong the other week and came off the field, having masterminded the entire operation, without a speck of mud on his shorts.
Botha will almost certainly captain South Africa rather than Jannie Breedt, though Breedt may well stay as No 8.
Breedt has been under pressure in his position but the Springbok selectors have learned from the many selection mistakes made by Pierre Berbizier with France this season.
They were thinking, like Berbizier, of building for the 1995 World Cup, but now they realise that confidence comes from getting your senior players right and winning each game as it comes along.
McEVOY TROPHY
Davidson to the fore
By Bill Meredith
GRAHAM Davidson, of Langholm, who earned the Daily Telegraph Junior Golfer of the Year title last year, is one of the front-runners in the Peter McEvoy Trophy, which starts today at Copt Heath.
Gary Harris, of Broome Manor, the runner-up in Penina to Davidson, will also be hoping to lift major honours.
David Ingman, of Delamere Forest, is one of two players in the field with plus-handicaps; the other is Neil Mitchell, of Penrith.
Both face tough competition in this 72-hole event not only from Davidson and Harris, but also from the likes of Scott Drummond, of Shifnal, Mark Foster, of Worksop, and David Hamilton, of East Herts.
The weather forecast is hardly optimistic, with wind liable to play a strong role, and when England captain Peter McEvoy presents the prizes tomorrow a sub-par score would be useful.
SQUASH
Jansher joy hides Pakistan's decline
By D J Rutnagur
THE MEN'S title in the Hi-Tec British Open Championships, won by Jansher Khan in a thrilling match against Australian Chris Robertson, stays with Pakistan for the 11th consecutive year.
But joy in that country at Jansher's triumph and their continuing monopoly of the game's most valued crown will be tempered by the fact that, in the absence of Jahangir Khan, the new champion was their only representative in the main draw of 32.
During the 1970s and well into the '80s it was usual for four Pakistanis to fill four quarter-finals places.
But in recent times the Australian challenge has grown steadily.
Pakistan, no doubt, will conduct an inquest into the state of their game.
But for different reasons there is reason for Britain to investigate her limitations.
There were 14 British players — 12 of them English — in the field, yet home interest ended in the second round, with only Peter Marshall showing any prospect of progressing further.
The large presence at the start was proof enough that the overall standard of squash in this country is at its highest-ever level.
But it is intriguing that, excluding the women players, England's very best cannot break into the world elite.
English players do not suffer from any obvious disadvantages.
Many contemporary players came under the Squash Rackets Association's coaching umbrella at a very early age and facilities are more abundant than for any other racket sport.
Competition at all levels is plentiful and sponsorship is generous.
Is it that English players are not hungry enough?
EQUESTRIANISM
Del Mar woos Europe's riders
Alan Smith sees hospitality of Californians work wonders
By ALAN SMITH
EUROPE'S showjumping horses ended their longest ever journey to a Volvo World Cup Final — from Frankfurt, Germany, to southern California — in spectacular fashion, when United States' fighter planes escorted them into two Miramar military air bases.
They had been given special permission to land there, only a short distance from the state fairgrounds at Del Mar, where the 13th final will be held this weekend.
Only two of the three previous 12 finals have been held outside Europe, both on the east coast of the United States, and the Del Mar organisers are trying to expunge these memories from the minds of the European riders.
The first, in Baltimore in 1980, when the Cup was in its infancy and a satisfactory formula still had to be worked out, was an almost unmittigated disaster.
In Tampa, Florida, in 1989, the Europeans quite rightly complained about the conditions in which their horses were stabled — overheated, with poor ventilation and an insufficient exercising area — compared with the facilities given to the North American horses.
Since the Del Mar organisers were given the 1992 final, they have built a £3 million arena alongside one of the finest race courses in the country.
All the horses will use the race course stables, and all riders have been guaranteed the same training conditions.
Punition, the mare ridden by Alexandra Ledermann to win the World Cup qualifier in Paris last month, was the only one of the 30 European horses upset by the journey.
It was not her first transatlantic flight, as she was in the French team last autumn in Washington, New York and Toronto, where Miss Ledermann rode her into second place in the World Cup round, behind Britain's Tina Cassan and Genesis.
But Punition fretted all the way across, and her groom and a French veterinary surgeon took it in turns to comfort her.
It does not look as though any real harm has been done.
The only major problem at this year's final results from the traditional fine weather in southern California.
The Volvo Cup is the world indoor championship, but Del Mar's new stadium has been built without a roof.
Only under a threat to withdraw the final from Del Mar did the organisers appreciate that a roof was an integral part of the deal, even if it may not be needed to protect horses and riders from the elements.
It was then discovered that it was impossible to put a solid roof on the stadium, so a compromise was reached in the form of an awning — a ‘symbolic roof’.
Ironically, the first three months of 1992 were the wettest in the this part of the country for many years, so that even the flowers in the desert, just a few miles inland, burst into bloom.
Fortunately, the rain seems to have come to an end just in time — and, in any case, Hermann Duckek, recognised as the world expert on producing artificial surfaces, says that a downpour could easily be dealt with.
RUGBY UNION
South Africans win battle to stage next World Cup
By John Mason in Wellington
SOUTH AFRICA, who will be competing for the first time, are to stage the 1995 Rugby World Cup.
Formal confirmation will be announced by the International Board in Wellington tomorrow afternoon.
The decision is a sweeping victory for South Africa's newly-unified rugby union, and an overwhelming defeat for Wales, who wanted the tournament to be in New Zealand.
Initially, New Zealand, Canada and Argentina, who celebrate their centenary in 1999, also wanted to run the next tournament, which is played on a four-year cycle.
But such was the surge of support for South Africa, who have been out of international rugby for eight years, that in the end only Wales, it is understood, voted against.
The Welsh objections, far more cautionary than anti, mostly related to the possibility of political and economic instability in an era of change and the attendant dangers of hurrying South Africa back into such rugby prominence.
The risk, they argued, was judging South Africa's rugby resources as they used to be, not what they might become.
While ample reassurances have been given about the financial implications of this massive support for South Africa, IRB delegates from New Zealand, Australia, France, England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland, Japan, Italy, Canada and Argentina were startled to learn in detail of the parlous state of the new union.
Funds, it seems, are so restricted that South Africa have only two official representatives in New Zealand this week for IRB business and the New Zealand RFU's centenary celebrations, which include three matches against a 26-strong World squad.
Ephraim Patel, the vice-preseident of the new South African Rugby Football Union, and Professor Fritz Eloff, a former IRB chairman, are the only two who have travelled of the four official nominees invited.
Professor Eloff (Northern Transvaal) is representing Dr Danie Craven, who has run South African rugby for more than 30 years and is about to stand down on grouds of age and health.
But before the collecting boxes are handed round for the benefit of the new but impecunious union, there are some familiar figures, South African and otherwise, from rugby's political elite to be seen.
Two Springbok officials, Nick Labuschagne (Natal) and Louis Luyt (Transvaal), are in Wellington this week privately to assist in putting South African point of view to interested parties.
So, too, are Cliff Morgan, the former head of BBC TV Sport, and Nigel Rushman, a director of CPMA, the London-based commercial advisers for the 1991 tournament in Britain, Ireland and France.
World Cup chairman Russ Thomas is here, too, though primarily in his capacity as a New Zealand IRB representative, a responsibility he shares with Eddie Tonks, the country's RFU chairman.
While World Cup matters have only been part of the Board's committee business this week, the speculation as to whether Welsh reservations would carry weight has been immense.
With Australia, Argentina, England and Japan having publicly asserted support for South Africa, the Wales case, put by Denzil Lloyd and Glanmor Griffiths, was not finally scuppered until New Zealand, irresepective of their own bid, decided that they, too, would opt for South Africa in 1995.
Danie Craven, president of the South African Rugby Football Union, said last night that the World Cup would be a big boost for the whole of the country.
He described it as the ‘best news since 1948’ when the National Party came to power on the policy of apartheid, which eventually led to South Africa's ban from the international rugby arena until this year.
‘This tournament would mean so much for the entire country, in terms of tourism, resultant job creation, and even other industry,’ he said.
‘We have world class facilities, possibly the best of any rugby nation.
Now we only need to jack up our airlines, and hotels.’
WOMEN'S GOLF
Eyes on Hall and Buxton
By Lewine Mair at St-Nom-La-Breteche
BRITISH girls' golf is this week moving into Europe, with as many as 22 players teeing up in the French Lady Juniors' championship, which starts today at St-Nom-La-Breteche, near Paris.
This mass exodus is at least partly explained by the fact that St-Nom-La-Breteche is the course which will host the Girls' European Junior Team championships from July 8–11.
Much interest will attach this week to the performances of Nicola Buxton and Caroline Hall, the two teenagers who will be teeing up for Great Britain and Ireland in the Curtis Cup at Hoylake on June 5 and 6.
The pair have already this season demonstrated form, finishing joint second behind Carol Semple Thompson, a member of the American Curtis Cup side, in the Harder Hall championship on Florida's Orange Blossom tour.
Cricket: Australia drop five
By a Special Correspondent
AUSTRALIA have taken action after their failure to reach the World Cup semi-finals, by leaving five established players out of their party to tour Sri Lanka in August and September.
Vice-captain Geoff Marsh, Bruce Reid, Merv Hughes, Peter Taylor and Steve Waugh have all been omitted from the party of 13 while uncapped batsman Damien Martyn and the Victoria and former Sussex all-rounder Tony Dodemaide have been included in a new-look team, along with spinners Shane Warne and Greg Matthews.
Martyn, 20, has just completed his first full season of Sheffield Shield cricket for Western Australia.
He scored 822 runs at an average of 51.37 this summer.
Dodemaide, the Sheffield Shield player of the year, has been recalled after a three-year absence, along with Matthews, who has not played internationally since last year's tour of the West Indies.
Mark Taylor was named as deputy captain to Allan Border in place of Marsh.
Australia.
— *A R Border, M A Taylor (vice-capt), D C Boon, A I C Dodemaide, D M Jones, I A Healy, C J McDermott, D Martyn, G R J Matthews, T M Moody, S Warne, M E Waugh, M R Whitney.
Cricket: Surridge, leader of dominant Surrey, dies
By William Gray
STUART SURRIDGE, who died aged 74 at his home in Wimbledon on Monday, wrote in his diary when appointed captain of Surrey in 1952 that the county would be champions for the next five years.
He under-estimated his side's dominance by two years, as Surrey held the champions' pennant from 1952–58.
Born Walter Stuart Surridge on Sept 3, 1917, in Herne Hill, London, he was introduced to the game at Emanuel School in Wandsworth.
He played for Surrey second XI at 20 and made his debut for the first XI in 1947, when he played five matches.
In 1951 he made his highest score, an 87 against Glamorgan, and also returned his best analysis, seven wickets for 49 against Lancashire, both at the Oval.
In 1952, his best season when he took 75 wickets, Surridge became captain.
He was always an attacking player, a fearless fielder at short-leg and an inspiring captain who was keen to encourage a frank exchange of views with his players.
Surridge retired from the first-class game in 1959 to concentrate on the family sports goods business.
He maintained an interest in two farms which produced willow for his bats.
Ricardo Ellcock, the Middlesex fast bowler, plans to study in the United States for a career as an airline pilot after confirming yesterday that he is to retire from first-class cricket, as reported in Monday's Daily Telegraph.
Ellcock, 26, took 117 wickets in 46 first-class matches at 29.01 during an injury-plagued 10-year career since making his debut for Worcestershire while still a pupil at Malvern College in 1982.
He has played only a handful of games since breaking down with back trouble in St Lucia while touring his native West Indies with England in 1990.
He never played a game for his adopted country.
Ellcock plans to spend two years pursuing his interest in flying (he already has a pilot's licence) and furthering his education.
His surgeon has said that two years' rest may improve the problem significantly.
Brian Statham has retired from Lancashire's cricket committee for ‘personal reasons’.
Statham, who played for the county from 1950 to 1968, served on the committee for 21 years.
His tally of 1,816 wickets for Lancashire is still a county record and he played 70 times for England claiming a further 252 victims.
The English Schools Cricket Association gave a lunch at Lord's yesterday in honour of their retiring secretary, Cyril Cooper, and his wife, Molly, writes Christopher Martin-Jenkins.
Cooper, painstaking but unassuming, has been secretary since 1978 and now becomes vice-chairman.
He was made an MBE for his services to schools cricket.
Formed in 1948 at a meeting at the Jolly Blacksmith in Twickenham, ESCA runs school competitions at all ages from under-11 to under-19.
Performances in their representative matches and in all school games will again count this season towards the Daily Telegraph Schools Cricket Awards, which now include an under-14 award along with those for under-15s and under-19s.
CRICKET
Gooch rests as Malcolm takes chance to warm up
By Peter Deeley at Lord's
Second day of four: Essex (8–1) trail England A (456–7 dec) by 448 runs IT was the kind of dank, dismal day when opening batsmen were happier to be off the field than on it.
Graham Gooch retired early to his hotel bed with a touch of ‘flu while Paul Prichard, taking a severe blow on his right hand from Devon Malcolm, needed no second bidding when the umpires offered the light in the next over.
Tomorrow Gooch is due to bequeath the bat with which he made 333 against India in the Test here two years ago to the Lord's museum.
Given the forecast, onset of winter and the state of the weather which washed out more than half yesterday's play, he may not need to stir himself further in this game.
There was more in the pitch than on the opening day for the quicker bowlers and with the second new ball Mark Ilott, playing his first game for Essex for a year after serious back problems kept him out of the game last season, was impressively hostile.
The left-arm Ilott has a smooth, accelerating run-up and delivery and soon had Graham Thorpe caught behind, forced to play at a rising ball.
His captain, Gooch, thinks highly of the 21-year-old from Watford and his continuing fitness will be crucial to Essex hopes of retaining the county championship.
In the next over, Derek Pringle claimed his third wicket of the innings when Paul Johnson went to cut a delivery that again got up higher than anticipated.
Johnson, who caught the eye on the England A tour of the Caribbean recently, had batted 110 minutes for his 53 and hit eight boundaries.
Neil Foster produced a very good ball to claim Dominic Cork — Mike Garnham's third catch of the morning — but Steve Rhodes, 39, and Ian Salisbury, 36, set about the Essex attack with gusto in an unbroken eighth-wicket partnership of 66 before the lunchtime declaration.
In Gooch's absence Garnham opened the Essex innings with Prichard.
Malcolm, out to prove that he is not yet a Test has-been, quickly worked up a rare pace and was quite a handful, coming in with the pavilion behind him.
All credit then to Prichard who, after the crack on his hand, smacked Malcolm's next ball handsomely for four.
Garnham quickly holed out to mid-off but the rain then had the final say.
Cricket: Smith receives England award
Robin Smith has won the England player of the year award which was presented to him in London last night by the sponsors, Cornhill Insurance.
Smith, 28, was chosen for his contribution to English cricket over the last 12 months, his batting and ‘outstanding fielding’, both close to the wicket and in the deep, and his performance in last summer's West Indies Test series, which included two centuries.
The South African-born Hampshire batsman was also singled out for his ‘general attitude on and off the field as part of the English team’.
Sports Round-Up: Hull face a gloomy future, says Cleal
NOEL CLEAL described his dismissal as Hull coach as a ‘kick in the guts’ and forecast a gloomy future for the club, writes John Whalley.
Mr Cleal said: ‘Finances are a big problem.
There may be no overseas players next season and high-profile players may have to go to recoup some cash and pay off debts.’
Hull, with three successive defeats behind them and 12th in the First Division, face Hull KR on Friday and Castleford on Monday in their final two games which will determine whether they continue their 13-year run in the division.
One victory is required to make them safe.
BOWLS: International players have found progress difficult in the Robert Hutchinson Opticians Masters tournament at Ely, where talented young players from the host club have illustrated the value of rinks knowledge, writes Donald Newby.
The Bulgarian gymnastics federation challenged the decision by an anti-drugs medical commission, claiming irregularities in the test on Mirela Peneva, Maia Hristova and Milena Mavrodieva.
ICE HOCKEY: Fife Flyers, poised for promotion to the Heineken League Premier Division, have been fined £2,500 by the British Ice Hockey Association, of which £2,000 was suspended until the end of next season, after their supporters caused trouble following a recent visit to Milton Keynes.
David Pickles, the BIHA secretary, said: ‘We are determined to uphold the tremendous family image of our sport and it is the reponsibility of clubs to make sure it is not tarnished.’
Paul Dixon, 18, of Humberside Seahawks, voted the Heineken League's Young British Player of the Year, has been awarded a two-week, expenses-paid trip to join the NHL club, Calgary Flames, during their pre-season training in September.
Defenceman Dixon, who represented England against Scotland at Murrayfield in December, is the seventh recipient of the award, made jointly by the government of Alberta, Canadian Airlines International, and the Ice Hockey News Review.
MOTOR RACING: Bicester-based racing car builders Reynard tightened their grip on the Japanese Formula 3000 championship at the weekend when Brazilian Paolo Carcasci won the second round at Fuji Raceway in a 92D model.
American driver Ross Cheever, winner of the first race of the series, went out of the second round event after tangling with German Volker Weidler, also in a Reynard.
Reynards also won the two opening rounds of the British Formula 3 Championship which continues on Easter Monday at Thruxton, Hants.
YACHTING: Iain Percy scored Britain's first major success at the Nautica World Youth Championships in Portual yesterday with an outright win in the Laser class.
His position in the overall standings was also helped by a jury hearing the previous night in which two boats finishing ahead of him in Monday's race were disqualified.
However, Britain struggled elsewhere with Christian Burge, fourth on the boys sailboard, the only other team member to make it into the top half of the fleet.
Cricket: Untroubled opening for Parker and Glendenen
Show of strength from Durham on their first-class debut
By Jeremy Allerton in The Parks
First day of three: Durham are 119–0 in their first innings against Oxford University BROWNING was probably right in suggesting that England is the place to be when April comes — but not as far as cricketers are concerned.
Rain spoiled the opening day of Durham's first match as a first-class county to the extent that play was possible for only the morning session, which allowed Paul Parker and John Glendenen to put on 119 in an untroubled manner off 34 overs.
A galaxy of cameramen and reporters gathered to witness the performance of the first county since 1921 to join the Championship.
No Botham and no Larkins, but Dean Jones sat champing at the bit and it will be a great pity if he is prevented from emptying the nearby chemistry laboratories with the prospect of his thrilling strokeplay.
On view yesterday was a well-organised 50 from Parker, the former Sussex captain, and an entertaining and promising 64 from Glendenen, who last year scored an unbeaten 200 against Victoria, the Sheffield Shield champions.
Glendenen, who also hit a century against Glamorgan in the NatWest Trophy, drove straight and powerfully on a slow wicket and he and Parker hit seven fours apiece.
These two, plus Jones, Botham and Bainbridge, will pose a strong threat to any attack.
Parker and Glendenen played the Oxford bowling strictly on its merits — tidy, without being thrustful.
Jeh, a Sri Lankan educated in Australia, has a good, fluid action and beat Parker several times on the front foot as well as having him dropped when 18.
Wood's figures of 8–0-20–0 tell their story, but he was more wayward than Jeh in line and length.
Montgomerie looked the sharpest fielder on a miserable day when tea was delivered to the fielders after one hour's play.
If Jones, who is on a £50,000, one-year contract sponsored by Tyne Tees Television, gets going today, Oxford will need stronger sustenance.
He is one of the most exciting one-day players in the world, with footwork which would do credit to Victor Sylvester.
In full flow, there are few better players to watch.
For this match Oxford are without Rob Macdonald, one of their opening bowlers, whose away swing for the Combined Universities caused Gloucestershire some embarrassment in the Benson and Hedges Cup last year.
Oxford will be looking to Richard Montgomerie to consolidate his promise of last season, when he averaged 33.33.
Cricket: Cambridge a safe seat for batsmen
By Doug Ibbotson at Fenner's
First day of three: Leicestershire are 279–2 against Cambridge University AS the weather forecast had been jointly compiled by Harris and Gallup, there was more than sufficient play in Cambridge yesterday for Nigel Briers to hit an effortless century and his fellow Leicestershire batsmen to profit from a true pitch and erratic University bowling.
By the time the threatened rain arrived around 4pm, 70 overs had been bowled, 50 of them by spinners, there had been two 100-run partnerships and Boon and Whitaker had picked up stylish half-centuries.
In short, things had gone much as they do when the counties canter out against the varsities these days.
No matter who wins the toss, and on this occasion it was Cambridge, the visitors invariably bat first and virtually as long as they choose.
Accordingly, Leicestershire made the most of an attack which contained only two seamers, neither of whom were able to make the ball lift above the knee-cap, and three spinners of uncertain intent.
A large proportion of balls went down the leg side, which was not the ideal means of curtailing the driving of Boon, Briers and Whitaker.
At all events Boon struck 11 resonant fours in reaching his half-century and Briers 15 boundaries before surrendering to his 186th ball, at 120.
Whitaker resumes today, undefeated on 73, and unless there is a merciful declaration the varsity bowlers, on a perfect batting pitch, can expect more of the same.
Malcolm Marshall was named as Hampshire's vice-captain yesterday as their season got underway with a friendly against Holland.
Marshall, 34, who announced his retirement from international cricket after the World Cup, has signed a new contract with the county and will fill a gap created two years ago when Paul Terry stepped down as No 2 to Mark Nicholas.
AMERICA'S CUP
Koch fails to dethrone the king of skippers
By Tim Jeffery in San Diego
BILL KOCH admitted yesterday that he had hoped ‘to dethrone the king’, but Dennis Conner's Stars & Stripes had totally humbled Koch's Kanza in the sail-off for the America's Cup defenders' semi-final trial on Monday off San Diego.
‘He's still the king — and deserves to be so,’ said Koch, who conceded that Conner's back-against-the-wall victory was one of the most remarkable escape acts in yachting.
Conner has only one boat and a £7 million budget.
Yet since January he has faced four different boats fielded by Koch — first Jayhawk, then Defiant and, more recently, America and Kanza — all reported to be an improvement on each other, at a cost to the America Foundation of some £38.25 million.
Koch had hoped to remove Conner from the final trials, which begin on Saturday, so he could spend the next 25 days honing his chosen boat for the America's Cup match against one of the two challengers — New Zealand or Il Moro de Venecia — which starts on May 9.
‘We're extremely disappointed,’ said the Kansas-born millionaire.
‘But we are proud of what we have done in the last year and a half.’
Conner was more bullish.
The America's Cup is his life and San Diego is his home city.
‘Whoever wins will provide a stronger defence of the Cup because we have both teams in the final,’ he said.
‘It will be better for the event and better for the sport.
The people now have two teams to root for.’
But Conner still knows the odds are stacked against him.
Stars & Stripes is slower than Koch's boats.
He has ruled out any keel or mast changes in the four days left before the final trials but hopes he can find more speed by using new sails.
Tom Whidden, Conner's friend, tactician and president of North Sails, turned to Conner after Monday's final race and said: ‘This is going to cost you big time.’
But the cost of the new sails will, in fact, be met by Conner's sponsors, who seemed reluctant to back him a year ago.
Now, however, the funds are flowing in.
What Stars & Stripes, which has the oldest America's Cup class hull still racing, has lacked in pace, her crew have made up for in guile.
In Monday's sudden-death sail-off they nailed Kanza's starting helmsman, David Dellenbaugh, on the start line, forcing Kanza into a strong current which stalled her acceleration on the gun.
This gave Conner the chance, when the breeze was light, to build up a sufficient cushion to protect him from Kanza's better moderate air speed as the sea breeze grew.
Precisely because Stars & Stripes cannot match the speed of Kanza and America, Conner's designers have optimised her for a narrow light air band of 5–8 knots.
Koch, who puts much store by his team's massive technology programme, admits that ‘Dennis really handles these flukey San Diego conditions well’.
But he was also at pains to point out that the wind is 2–5 per cent down on historical averages and that the water temperature is five degrees higher, producing softer winds than his boats had been designed for.
Koch admitted: ‘I wish I had my dollars and Dennis's luck,’ though many believe Conner's luck is more guile, judgment and experience.
The Russian America's Cup yacht, Age of Russia, which has been left stranded in San Diego, could be destroyed without ever being launched, let alone raced.
She was flown to San Diego last December but, as the entry of two former unsanctioned Soviet syndicates, she never competed and Port Security officials refused to give her permission to sail in San Diego.
Her crew left six weeks ago, their bills unpaid, and the six-million rouble yacht was handed to a local boatyard, Knight & Carver, in lieu of payment.
John Knight would like to sell the hull or cut it up to make souvenirs like the Berlin Wall.
But Customs regulations demand it should be returned to Russia or destroyed.
LAWN TENNIS
Lawn Tennis: Beaten Borg says he's playing for fun and the fans
John Parsons in Nice is saddened to see the former world No 1 humbled in another comeback attempt at the age of 35
BJORN BORG has a typically stubborn riposte to those saddened by the sight of one of the game's greatest champions being reduced at times to a level barely above that of a novice.
‘I'm playing for the fun I can get out of it for myself, and not for them,’ said the five-times Wimbledon champion after a 7–5, 6–2 defeat by Frenchman Olivier Delaitre in the Nice Open yesterday in his first relevant match of this year's comeback.
Borg said he understood people who hate to have their memories of his near-invincible tennis from 1976–1980 tarnished.
But he asked them to ‘see it from a different viewpoint.
They know there's no way I can play as I did when I was No 1 in the world but hopefully with more matches which will give me more confidence, they will see me play good tennis’.
Certainly from the rapturous reception when he walked on court and the sympathetic response after a performance containing too many embarrassingly bad moments, Borg can rightly claim that people still want to see him play.
Yet for how long?
Although he has no intention of exposing his limitations at any of the Grand Slam tournaments this year, Borg is taking wild-card entries into Monte Carlo and Munich as well as playing in several 35-and-over events.
‘I think that in six or seven months I'll be much more competitive and able to do more justice to myself,’ he said, adding that his current form in matches fell well below the standard he is reaching in practice.
‘It's only normal, not having played for so long.
I know I can play much better,’ he said after only five official matches (and one win) in 10 years.
However, much one may respect Borg's reputation and his unerring sportsmanship, I find it hard to share his optimism, especially as only 16 of the 54 points he won were from his winners.
Although supremely fit for his age — he will be 36 in June — his serve, at this level, is far from an asset.
There were three double-faults in one game alone, including one which bounced before even reaching the service line on his side of the court.
His forehand was erratic, to say the least, and the frequency with which he ran round the once almost impenetrable backhand was another sign of the times.
He began a forlorn final game by losing his grip on the racket altogether.
Yayuk Basuki, defending Volvo Open champion, was stretched by Noelle Van Lottum, of France, before winning 7–5, 2–6, 7–5 to clinch a second-round match against Britain's Monique Javer in Pattaya, Thailand, writes Barry Martin.
Basuki, of Indonesia, had held two points for a 4–0 lead in the decider but the fourth seed began to miss forehands and Van Lottum began to attack more at the net.
Basuki broke Van Lotum's serve in the final game.
The top two seeds won comfortably with Belgian Sabine Appelmans defeating Li Fang, of China, 6–2, 6–4 and Naoko Sawamatsu beating Japanese compatriot Tamaka Takagi 6–2, 6–1.
Top seed Petr Korda, of Czechoslovakia, was beaten 6–2, 4–6, 6–3 by unseeded Claudio Mezzadri in the first round of the USTA Men's Clay Courts of Tampa, Florida.
The 32-player tournament is Korda's first as a top seed and he admitted the pressure affected him.
Mezzadri, a Swiss coming back from a knee injury that dropped him from No 26 to 305 in the rankings in 1989, overpowered Korda with a steady flow of crushing forehands and big serves.
Mezzadri is now No 125 in the world.
Two other seeds lost their first-round matches.
Jeff Tarango, seeded five, was defeated 7–6, 7–5 by fellow American Todd Witsken and seventh-seeded Javier Frana, of Argentina, went out to Martin Strelba, of Czechoslovakia, 6–3, 6–4.
Soccer: Dearden lifts Birmingham back on top
By Richard Bright
KEVIN DEARDEN saved a second-half penalty to earn Birmingham a 2–1 victory over Bolton which lifted them back to the top of the Third Division for the first time since November.
Dearden turned Tony Philliskirk's spot kick around the post as Birmingham moved two points clear of Stoke with a game in hand.
Andy Walker gave Bolton a surprise 16th minute lead when he capitalised on a mistake by Trevor Matthewson but John Frain levelled from the penalty spot.
David Rennie earned Birmingham their fourth win on the trot with his first goal for the club.
Cardiff were denied full points just five seconds from the whistle in their Fourth Division game at Scarborough.
Chris Curran headed home from a Gary Himsworth free kick to seal a 2–2 draw for Scarborough.
Airdrie, who missed out on a place in the Skol Cup final after a penalty shoot-out, followed Liverpool by taking that same route to the Scottish Cup final.
Airdrie edged out Hearts 4–2 on penalties at Hampden Park after the semi-final replay had ended 1–1 following extra time.
They return to Hampden on May 9 to meet Rangers in their first final since 1975.
Colchester regained the lead of the GM Vauxhall Conference on goal difference ahead of Wycombe when they defeated Slough 4–0.
A flurry of three goals in the last seven minutes from Masters, Stewart and Kinsella clinhed the points for Colchester, who had taken the lead through McDonough.
Wycombe, meanwhile, saw their run of seven consecutive Conference victories ended at Macclesfield, who won 3–1 to complete a League double over the deposed leaders.
Soccer: Relieved Luton reveal their fighting spirit SOCCER
Hopes of survival rise at Kenilworth Road but the relegation gloom grows ever deeper at Upton Park
By Colin Malam
Luton 2 Nottingham Forest 1
FATE smiled on Luton through the rain at Kenilworth Road last night.
Offered the chance to beat a tired, patched-up Nottingham Forest, the First Division's great escapologists took full advantage with a spirited performance.
Goals by Mick Harford and Julian James enabled Luton to come from behind and claim a win that leaves them only three points behind Coventry, the club fourth from bottom, with four games each to play.
Coventry's goal difference is so much better than Luton's that the margin is more like four points.
But that will not deter a team who have cheated the drop for four seasons, twice on the very last day.
The team Forest were obliged to field last night, because of injuries, were tailor-made for a game Luton simply had to win.
Deprived of six senior defenders, they had to ask Nigel Clough to play in central defence and winger Gary Crosby at right-back.
Two others, Des Walker and Brett Williams, were thought to be playing in spite of injuries, and the England defender was unable to continue beyond half-time.
Roy Keane then took over from Walker alongside Clough.
So, though Forest began their seventh game in 17 days with eight of the side beaten in the Rumbelows Cup final by Manchester United two days earlier, their defence was almost unrecognisable by the end of this watery affair.
A heavy downpour before the start left the pitch covered with puddles, which made the behaviour of the ball very unpredictable.
Brian Clough's teams are never short of resilience or adaptability, though, and they made a fight of it throughout.
Forest began by taking the lead after just two minutes.
Keane put Orlygsson away on the right and the Icelandic international sent over a low centre.
It held up in the water, throwing the Luton defence off balance and enabling Black to drive home a left-footed volley.
The cruellest cut of all, of course, was that Luton sold Black to Forest for £1.5 million at the start of the season to ease their perpetual money worries.
But that and Saturday's 5–1 defeat at Oldham were soon forgotten.
‘I don't often associate the word passion with us,’ said Luton's manager, David Pleat, afterwards, ‘but I thought we played with a lot of passion in the first half.’
And he was right.
Varadi and Pembridge both went close before Harford equalised after 12 minutes.
Again the pitch played a part, Clough struggling to change direction as Harford ran in unmarked to steer Kamara's low centre into the bottom corner.
Further pressure yielded the winning goal 12 minutes later.
A right-wing corner by the left-footed Preece was met so powerfully by James that the young full-back could be proud of the header which brought him his first goal of the season…
A rising shot by Sheringham, tipped over by Chamberlain after 36 minutes, was just about the last moment of anxiety for Luton.
From then on, it was Crossley and the makeshift cover in front of him who had all the worries.
Luton: Chamberlain; James, Harvey, Kamara, Dreyer, Peake, Varadi (Hughes 79), Stein (Gray 72), Harford, Pembridge, Preece.
Nottingham Forest: Crossley; Orlygsson, Williams, Walker (Kaminsky 45), Glover, Keane, Crosby, Gemmill, Clough, Sheringham, Black.
Soccer: Wolves steal late winner
Steve Bull scored 200th goal of career last night
By Don Hardisty
Blackburn Rov1
Wolverhampton W2
KENNY DALGLISH, the Blackburn manager, faces disciplinary action after an argument with referee Allan Flood in the Ewood Park tunnel last night after Rovers' fifth successive defeat.
Mr Dalglish, who was angry that his side were not awarded a penalty for a first-half tackle by Madden on Wilcox, said later: ‘The only person who didn't play was the referee and because I told him so he says he is going to report us.’
Wolves, who are beginning to look for a place in the promotion play-offs, hit back in the second half after Scott Sellars had poached a fine first-half goal.
The 200th goal of Steve Bull's career pulled Wolves level and Paul Birch forced novice goalkeeper Matt Dickins into an injury-time error to score the winner from 30 yards out.
Dickins, a £200,000 signing from Lincoln on transfer deadline day, owed his debut to the thigh injury to Bobby Mimms, which cost him his ever-present record.
Rovers dominated the first half as Atkins hit a 25-yard drive narrowly wide, Cook blocked another from Atkins and Sellars curled a shot wide of Stowell onto the far post.
The home side's constant pressure paid off after 23 minutes.
Wilcox and Hill set up the move, Stowell could only block Shearer's shot and Sellars followed up to put Rovers ahead.
Dickins had had nothing more than a back pass and a free-kick to deal with in the first 30 minutes but showed signs of nervousness when Bull challenged for a Birch free-kick.
The goalkeeper's punch was indecisive and Wright had to clear the danger.
Shearer then had to clear after Dickins failed to hold another Cook kick.
The pressure increased on the Rovers defence in the second half.
Bull headed on a centre from Birch for Cook to volley inches wide of the near post and, after 54 minutes, Mountfield hit a free-kick down the middle, Mutch nodded the ball on and Bull hit it hard and low past Dickins.
Rovers returned fire, Wilcox forcing Stowell into another save and Madden clearing a Wegerle shot off the line.
The crowd were streaming away, muttering about a Rovers run of one win in 11 matches, when Birch hit a hopeful 30-yarder with the match 45 seconds into injury-time.
Dickins flapped at the ball, which went in off the post.
Blackburn Rovers: Dickins; Moran, Wright, Cowans, Hill, Hendry, Wilcox, Shearer (Newell, 75), Atkins, Wegerle, Sellars.
Wolves: Stowell; Ashley, Venus, Rankine, Madden, Mountfield, Birch, Cook, Bull, Mutch, Downing.
AMATEUR BOXING
Calzaghe makes a point
By Steve Bunce
JOE CALZAGHE knocked out Dean Francis with a smart left in the second round to reach his second successive George Wimpey Amateur Boxing Association final at Gateshead last night.
England dominated, as they did against Scotland on Monday, and beat their Welsh adversaries 9–3.
Calzaghe, from Newbridge, won the welterweight title last year but moved up one weight when he was promised the light-middleweight place in the Welsh squad for the Olympic trials last month in Milan.
However, he was not selected and a request for a box-off against Matthew Turner, the Welsh ABA's choice, was rejected.
‘Winning the ABA this year will make up for losing the chance of a lifetime of going to the Olympics,’ said Calzaghe, 20.
In the previous stage Francis had comfortably beaten double light-middleweight champion Tim Taylor, and at 18 he was considered a title hope.
But he was defenceless as Calzaghe's accurate counters started to connect.
‘I was just warming up when I caught Francis with the short left,’ Calzaghe said.
‘I knew I could beat Robin Reid, who qualified for the Olympics, and I just hope that winning the title will show the selectors they have made a big mistake.’
Kevin McCormack, the super-heavyweight champion, was denied entry but arrived as expected for yesterday afternoon's weigh-in.
McCormack, who has won the Welsh title six times and the national title three times, is now a Royal Marine training in Devon and he had to enter the championships in England.
But he missed out because he had been in Copenhagen trying for a place in the Olympic team.
‘I knew that I would not be allowed to box but I proved a point by showing up,’ he said.
‘Odd rulings are driving boxers away from the sport.’
ABA SEMI-FINALS (Gateshead Leisure Centre).
— Fly: M Horobin (St Pancras) bt N Swain (Gilfach Goch) pts.
Bantamweight: P Mullings (St Patrick's) bt R Vowles (Llanharan) rsc 1.
Feather: A Temple(Hartlepool) bt B Jones (Highfields) pts.
Light: M Newton (Coed Eva) bt A Green (Phil Thomas) pts.
Light-Welter: A Stone (Empire) bt J Williams (Gwent) rsc 2.
Welter: B Thorogood (Highfields) bt P Burns (Gemini) pts.
Light-middle: J Calzaghe (Newbridge) bt D Francis (Basingstoke) ko 2.
Middle: L Woolcock (Canvey) w/o.
Light-heavy: K Oliver (Bracebridge) bt D Hitchings (Pontypridd) rsc 1 Heavy: R Fenton (Pentwyn) bt C Henry (New Enterprise).
Super-heavy: D Holness (St Pancras) w/o.
Soccer: Spurs thwarted
By Keith Farnsworth
Sheffield Utd2 Tottenham0 TOTTENHAM'S hopes of completing a hat-trick of away wins in eight days were dashed when two first-half goals from Brian Deane sealed Sheffield United's first double over the North London side for 54 years.
Sheffield went ahead after 30 minutes when Gage knocked the ball past Allen as he burst into the goalmouth and, though Walker parried both his shot and Deane's follow-up, Deane beat him at the third attempt.
Spurs' best effort in the first period was a 25-yard shot from Gray just beyond the far post, though Samways tested Rees with a low effort from the left.
Deane was always a threat and two minutes before half-time he claimed his second when he turned in a low cross from Barnes.
Sheffield might have increased their lead when Davison headed against a post and Spurs were indebted to Walker for two saves from Hodges and Davison.
For Spurs, substitute Hendry was denied three times at the other end by Rees.
Spurs had Stewart booked after 87 minutes for a foul on Rogers.
Sheffield Utd: Rees; Gage, Barnes, Gannon, Gayle, Beesley, Hodges (Bradshaw 83), Rogers, Davison (Whitehouse 83), Deane, Bryson.
Tottenham: Walker; Van den Hauwe, Edinburgh, Gray, Cundy, Sedgley, Stewart, Samways (Fenwick 83), Howells (Hendry 62), Lineker, Allen.
Referee: K J Breen (Liverpool).
Tottenham could turn to Hugo Sanchez, Real Madrid's Mexican striker, to fill the void left by the imminent departure of Gary Lineker.
Terry Venables, Spurs' chief executive, tried to sign Sanchez, 34, in 1985 when he was at Barcelona and reports from Spain last night suggested that the pair could be joining forces this summer.
Soccer: Adams adds to the pressure on West Ham
By Martin Smith
West Ham 0 Southampton1 THE SENSE of hope that was beginning to grip Upton Park proved to be a false dawn as Southampton gave West Ham an extra shove towards the Second Division.
Micky Adams hit the decisive goal two minutes from time, leaving West Ham still nine points behind Coventry, the club immediately above the relegation zone, with only five matches left to play.
West Ham's 4–0 victory over Norwich on Saturday had offered a glimmer of hope and scuppered the planned mass second-half walk-out by supporters in their continuing protest at the general running of the club.
All but a handful of the 18,298 crowd stayed in their places but their growing frustration reached fever pitch in the 88th minute when Adams stole in unmarked at the far post to volley home Le Tissier's inviting cross.
Then the terraces emptied rapidly.
Although manager Billy Bonds refuses to give up, he admitted: ‘I think in the last month we have always felt it was going to be very difficult for us.
Despite the result on Saturday you still felt we had a lot to do.
‘Tonight we have got even closer but you just don't accept it until mathematically we can't do it.
We didn't give up tonight and kept plugging away and I can't fault the players for effort.’
Flowers, the Southampton goalkeeper was the main reason for West Ham's frustrations.
He dived through the mud in his six-yard box to deny Slater, Bishop, Rush and Allen.
But even he could do nothing about a shot from Bishop which flashed past a group of players from the edge of the area but went the wrong side of the post and a header by Martin seconds from time which was cleared off the line.
Bishop, who worked manfully to keep West Ham moving forward from midfield, also had a 20-yard first-time shot turned aside by the goalkeeper just before half time.
Rush, later to be carried off with what Mr Bonds termed a ‘bad groin injury’, also had a shot turned aside by Flowers, who later flung himself to keep out a stinging shot by Allen.
Southampton, who sent West Ham to the bottom of the division six weeks ago with a similar scoreline at The Dell, have hauled themselves close to safety with a run of one defeat in 13 matches.
They also beat West Ham in the Zenith Data Systems Cup and never gave up the belief that despite being under pressure they could record a third victory last night.
Indeed, Shearer, might have scored twice in the seven minutes before Adams's goal.
With West Ham committed to attack, Shearer was left unmarked to head just wide and then tested Miklosko with a fierce shot to the near post.
West Ham: Miklosko, Breacker, Dicks, Potts, A Martin, Morley, Bishop, Rush (Keen 78), Small, C Allen, Slater.
Southampton: Flowers; Kenna, Adams, Horne, Moore, Ruddock, Le Tissier, Cockerill, Shearer, Dowie (Widdrington 77), Benali.
Soccer: Butt keeps United in driving seat
By Sue Thearle
Crystal Palace1
Manchester United3 MANCHESTER United's impressive season continued when their youngsters clasped one hand firmly on the FA Youth Cup with a 3–1 victory over Crystal Palace in the first leg of the final at Selhurst Park last night.
Two goals from Butt and one from Beckham, with McCall pulling one back for Palace, were enough to silence an enthusiastic crowd of 7,825 and give United a two-goal advantage for their return leg at Old Trafford as they challenge for a record seventh Youth Cup win.
Despite the absence of Giggs, whose precocious talents were required by the senior side in their 1–0 Rumbelows Cup victory at Wembley on Sunday, the visitors confirmed their pre-match billing as favourites and demonstrated their ominous strength in depth.
After a confident start United took the lead in the 17th minute when the elusive Thornley centred for Butt to rifle home a first time shot.
They extended their lead 12 minutes later when McPherson's back pass let in Thornley, who rode Glass's crude challenge before slipping the ball to Beckham, who scored with a spectacular shot from 20 yards.
The home side staged an emphatic second-half fight-back and went close through Ndah, Thompson and Sparrow before substitute McCall headed home.
But the visitors regained their two-goal advantage two minutes from time when Butt collected his second.
Crystal Palace.
— Glass; Clark, Cutler, Holman, Edwards, McPherson (Sparrow 33), Hawthorne, Rollison, Thompson (McCall 76), Watts, Ndah,
Manchester United.
— Pilkington; O'Kane, Switzer, Casper, Neville, Beckham, Butt, Davies, McKee, Savage (Roberts 81), Thornley.
Soccer: Goodman sinks Ipswich
By Ian Whittell
Sunderland3
Ipswich0 DON GOODMAN, the cup-tied striker almost forgotten during Sunderland's run-up to the Cup final, scored two of the goals that should guarantee the team's safety in the Second Division.
The Wearside club made a mockery of their lowly League standing with a performance that gave leaders Ipswich only their second defeat in 18 games and their heaviest reverse of the season.
Sunderland fans have seen two distinct sides to their team since Malcolm Crosby took over.
While their Cup displays have rightly made national headlines, their mediocre League form has taken them to within one point of the bottom.
But last night they produced the sort of display that has taken them to Wembley.
After three minutes, Byrne glanced the ball narrowly wide and two minutes later he saw his header cleared off the line by Stockwell.
Torrential rain had left the game in some doubt and the waterlogged pitch ensured a tentative start by both sides.
That was especially true of Ipswich, searching for their sixth consecutive win.
Palmer had to head clear a menacing centre by Mooney and Rush went close with two excellent drives.
Yet Town's first real attack in the 28th minute almost gave them the lead.
Norman could only parry away Thompson's powerful shot but he recovered superbly to turn Kiwomya's follow-up drive over the bar.
Sunderland brought on Owers as a substitute for his first taste of football since sustaining a pelvic injury three months ago.
Goodman incorrectly thought he was the man to go off but Sunderland fans were soon relieved when he stayed on the pitch.
Owers showed no signs of rustiness, often winning the ball in midfield and supplying the deadly pass to Goodman which produced the first goal.
In the second half, Sunderland always looked more likely to score.
Forrest made another fine save, tipping Atkinson's 30-yard shot over his bar.
But the England under-21 midfielder only had to wait until the 53rd minute to exact his revenge when he chipped in a telling cross for Goodman to score.
Rush capped a brilliant evening for the home side in the 83rd minute when he volleyed a third goal from Dozzell's headed clearance.
Sunderland: Norman; Kay, Rogan, Bennett, Hardyman, Rush, Mooney, Goodman, Armstrong, Byrne, Atkinson.
Ipswich: Forrest; Zondervan, Thompson, Stockwell, Wark, Whelan, Johnson, Palmer, Whitton, Dozzell, Kiwomya.
Soccer: Problem for Bates
By Richard Bright
KEN BATES's hopes of finally winning his 10-year battle for Stamford Bridge hit trouble yesterday when Hammersmith and Fulham council opposed the Chelsea chairman's ground-sharing plan.
Mr Bates is negotiating to buy SB Properties, which owns the Bridge, from the club's landlords, Cabra Estates, for £13 million.
Part of the deal would bring Third Division Fulham to Stamford Bridge with Cabra re-developing Craven Cottage.
However, council leader Iain Coleman said yesterday that the council would oppose ground-sharing.
Mr Coleman said: ‘We are, and always have been, opposed to the ground-share.
‘When we gave planning permission to the new Chelsea development we attached a condition to it preventing ground-sharing.
‘If Chelsea were to proceed with the ground-share as it stands, the legal position of the development would be in doubt.’
But Mr Coleman offered a glint of hope for Mr Bates, adding: ‘This policy on ground-sharing was formed for very good reasons.
‘It would take very good reasons for us to change our minds.
‘However, we are reasonable people and if we are approached with a reasonable alternative, we would be prepared to listen.’
Mr Coleman, referring to Cabra's latest proposals for Craven Cottage, said: ‘We rejected the proposals because they did not follow our own guidelines for the future devlopment of the site, based on recommendations made by the government inspector following the public inquiry in February 1990.’
Soccer: Portsmouth pledge on promotion
By Pat Symes
PORTSMOUTH striker Guy Whittingham emerged from the FA Cup penalty shoot-out failure against Liverpool pledging to help his side win promotion.
Whittingham will lead Portsmouth's forward line in the absence of Northern Ireland international Colin Clarke, who dislocated an elbow at Villa Park.
‘We're desperately sick for Colin and now the least we can do is make the play-offs and win them for him,’ said Whittingham.
‘But none of us can believe we are out of the FA Cup.
Over the two matches we were every bit as good as Liverpool and, if we're honest, we know we should have beaten them on both occasions.
‘The only good news we got after the game was the fact that Middlesborough lost.
It was a small boost, but we certainly needed one after all we've been through.’
Portsmouth's manager, Jim Smith, said: ‘The FA Cup has cost us at least six League points and now we have to get back to our priority of winning promotion.’
Middlesbrough manager Lennie Lawrence last night warned his side: ‘Lose to Oxford tonight and you can forget the top two.’
Two home defeats have dented Boro's hopes of automatic promotion, and Lawrence said: ‘Failure to get three points against Oxford would make it almost impossible to make the top two.
‘We have two more home games this week, but if we don't improve on Monday night we can forget the top six, never mind the top two.’
Lawrence was fuming after Barnsley beat Boro 1–0 on Monday, and a season that promised so much is shaping up for a disastrous finale.
Boro fans seem to sense as much, with only 12,000 on hand to see the first of their team's four games in eight days on Monday.
Soccer: End of era for Schumacher
By Richard Bright
HARALD ‘Toni’ Schumacher, the former German international goalkeeper who arguably robbed France of a World Cup final place, ended his career with a testimonial in Cologne last night.
Touted at his peak as the best in the world, Schumacher, 38, shocked the world with a cynical and dangerous professional foul to prevent French defender Patrick Battiston from scoring a semi-final goal that would have almost certainly put France in the 1982 final.
Schumacher shows little remorse over the incident which left Battiston unconscious.
‘If I had to do it again…
I would take better care of him afterwards,’ he says.
Last night he played for a hand-picked team of personal friends against the national side after recent appearances to help out injury-hit Bayern Munich.
French club Cannes are refusing to obey a Football Federation order to replay their Cup match with Montpellier.
Montpellier lost the third-round match 2–1 after extra-time last Wednesday, but club president Louis Niccolin promptly lodged a protest about poor security at Cannes' La Bocca stadium after a pitch invasion.
The committee upheld the protest and ordered a replay on April 21 at a neutral venue.
However, Cannes club captain Luis Fernandez, who claimed to be speaking with the authority of the club's board, said: ‘We find it unacceptable that the disciplinary committee refused to accept our evidence and that Louis Niccolin should be judge and plaintiff at the same time.
As a result, we refuse to replay the match.’
After the verdict on Monday, an indignant Cannes president Alain Pedretti described it as ‘scandalous’.
The committee also punished the Corsican club Bastica by depriving them of home advantage for their Cup quarter-final tie against Nancy on April 22 after crowd trouble during their third-round away win against Nice.
Soccer: Sinton chasing ticket to Sweden
By Sue Thearle
ANDY SINTON, the Queens Park Rangers winger, will be one of several young hopefuls keen to impress England manager Graham Taylor before the end of the season.
Sinton's goal is to secure one of the remaining berths in Mr Taylor's England squad for the European Championship in Sweden in June.
And if the England boss had been to see QPR in recent weeks, he would have been impressed, especially with Sinton.
Rangers have been entertaining crowds with a slick passing game that has rewarded them with only three defeats in their last 21 League matches.
For Sinton, who made his England debut in Poznan in the crucial final qualifier against Poland last November and was a member of the England B side that defeated France B at Loftus Road in February, that run could not have come at a better time.
‘I'm really enjoying my game at the moment, because it's been a top end to the season for us,’ he enthused.
‘Obviously I'm hopeful of getting to Sweden and it's been great to be involved with the England squad.’
Sinton's classy effort against Tottenham on Saturday, despite Rangers' 2–1 defeat, will have given the former Brentford winger plenty of confidence.
He scored one superb goal, his fourth of the season, and hit the woodwork twice.
‘I've worked out now that I've hit the woodwork 10 times this season, so two inches either way and I could have had 14 goals instead of four,’ he lamented.
‘It's always nice to get on the scoresheet, but I really do see myself more as a goal-maker than a goalscorer.
Sinton's midfield role, alongside the flourishing Ray Wilkins, who has enjoyed an outstanding season in the twilight years of his career, has been complemented by the emergence of younger players like Ian Holloway, whose performances have ousted the more experienced Simon Barker and Andrew Impey on the right of midfield.
‘We've got some great talent at Loftus Road,’ Sinton added.
‘Andrew Impey has really come on in leaps and bounds since he first broke into the first team and Ian Holloway does a great job for us.’
Brentford striker Gary Blissett, 27, has been charged with assaulting Torquay United defender John Uzzel, causing grievous bodily harm, during the Third Division match at Plainmoor on Dec 14 last year.
He is due to appear before Torbay magistrates on May 1.
Terry Butcher, the former England centre half who was sacked as Coventry's player-manager earlier in the season, has made a surprise comeback as a player.
Butcher, who has been scouting for Sheffield Wednesday, turned out for their reserve side in a 2–1 Pontins League victory over Rotherham.
Erwin Koeman, 30, the Dutch international midfield player, may be unable to help his country defend the European Championship.
He tore a knee ligament during PSV Endhoven's 3–0 victory over Willem II Tilburg on Saturday and will be out for the rest of the season.
Sheffield Wednesday's John Harkes is one of five players with European clubs wanted by United States coach Bora Milutinovic as he prepares for the friendly match against Ireland in Dublin on April 29.
Diego Maradona will play in an exhibition match at the Velez Sarsfield stadium in Argentina today — his first game since being suspended for drug abuse in March 1991.
The proceeds will be donated to the family of former Argentinian player Juan Funes, who died last December of a heart attack at the age of 29.
Soccer: Suspensions could be key to deciding European finalists
By Graham Turner
THIS season's six European finalists will emerge from the matches to be played later today, with Barcelona and Sampdoria starting as very warm favourites for the European Cup final to be played at Wembley on May 20.
The Spaniards and the Italians need only home wins to set up an intriguing revenge match between two talented Latin sides who met in the Cup-Winners' Cup final in Berne three years ago.
The Catalans then won 2–0 against a Sampdoria side badly hit by injuries and suspensions.
Suspensions and the risk of them are the common denominators of today's European proceedings.
Benfica have travelled to Barcelona without their key Swedish midfielder Jonas Thern, who is suspended.
Winning in the Nou Camp is the Portuguese champions' only hope of reaching Wembley and their Swedish coach, Sven-Goran Eriksson, admits: ‘We have to be exceptional in defence, totally committed to maximum discipline and concentration, and inspired in attack.’
A draw could suffice for Barcelona, but only assuming that Sparta Prague do not beat Dynamo by four goals or more in Kiev.
Such a result may have been unthinkable when the competition began, but the Ukrainian side looked forlornly unmotivated in their 5–0 defeat by Benfica a fortnight ago and must now manage without midfielders Yuri Moroz and Sergei Zaets, plus the defender, Anatoli Bessmertnyi — all suspended.
In Group A, Sampdoria will qualify if they win at home against a Panathinaikos side who have not scored a goal in their five previous matches.
However, the Italian champions had six players cautioned during the 3–1 win over Red Star Belgrade two weeks ago and thus lose Ivano Bonetti, Pietro Vierchowod and Attilio Lombardo for tonight's match.
Six other players could miss the final if cautioned again.
A draw between Sampdoria and Panathinaikos would give Red Star Belgrade a place at Wembley, if they were to beat Anderlecht in Brussels by five clear goals.
The European champions' chances of achieving such an extravagant result are dimmed by the absences of Miodrag Belodedic, Ilja Najdoski, Goran Vasijevic and Dejan Savicevic — all banned.
Monaco also have six players within one yellow card of suspension as they travel to Rotterdam hoping to become the first French finalists in the Cup Winners' Cup.
After conceding a 1–1 draw in the Principality, Arsene Wenger's side is relying on the foreign attacking trio of Rui Barros, George Weah and Youssouf Fofana to break down the Feyenoord defence who, as Tottenham found to their cost, have conceded only one goal in seven matches.
Werder Bremen entertain FC Brugge in the other semi-final, with the balance tilted slightly in their favour by the minimal 1–0 defeat in Belgium.
But Brugge's attacking duo of Foeke Booy and Daniel Amokachi could complicate matters with away goals.
Real Madrid's attempt to regain the UEFA Cup which they last won in 1986 will be severely tested in Turin where the Italians are threatening vendettas after a stormy 2–1 defeat in Spain two weeks ago.
Roberto Policano, sent off during the away leg, is suspended but Torino have hit a patch of impressive form which has consolidated their fourth place in the fiercely-competitive Italian league.
Should Real survive, their Dutch coach, Leo Beenhakker, is likely to find himself facing Ajax, the club he left in November, in the final.
The Dutch side, now managed by Louis van Gaal, snatched a 3–2 win in Genoa two weeks ago, and the Italians travel to Amsterdam without defender Vincenzo Torrente and — more importantly — Carlos Aguilera, the Uruguayan who scored both goalsin the quarter-final against Liverpool.
Diesel Cars: There's little doubt now of a verve for derv
Diesels, thrifty and reliable, are making it in the charts, says John Langley
By JOHN LANGLEY
IN A GRIM YEAR for the motor business, one of the few bright spots for some manufacturers and dealers has been the buoyancy of diesel cars.
Recession has concentrated the minds of car buyers both private and corporate on the economics of running costs.
The result has been an expansion in diesel motoring at a time when other sales have been down.
More motorists have been buying diesel, both new and second-hand.
In fact it is the growing popularity of used diesels in auctions and dealers' showrooms that has made fleet managers think again about alternatives to the petrol car.
Canny used-car buyers are willing to bid for even high mileage diesels at a time when they are becoming increasingly choosy about other models.
(’ Canny’is echoed in the findings of a Gallup poll carried out for Shell last autumn which revealed that 60 per cent of Scottish motorists said they would buy a diesel car, compared to the national average of 49 per cent).
The diesel engine's 25 to 30 per cent better fuel economy is no doubt still the major attraction, but its reputation for durability and reliability must also be influential.
Both have contributed to the higher resale values for diesels, tilting the operating-cost equation in favour of the oil-burners.
The Consumers' Association magazine Which? recently concluded a diesel's lower fuel costs and lower depreciation can mean ‘substantial’ economies.
It cites an annual saving of £600 a year on the Peugot 309 1.9-litre diesel compared with the initially cheaper 1.6-litre petrol version, based on 12,000 miles a year.
Now that some manufacturers, including Citroen and Vauxhall, are beginning to list diesels at the same price as petrol versions, the sums may swing even further in the diesel's favour.
Traditionally it has been more expensive to produce because of its stronger build and sophisticated fuel injection systems, but the gap is narrowing.
Petrol engines also now need fuel injection, as well as electronic engine management systems and expensive catalytic converters to meet exhaust regulations, and even then they cannot match the lean-burn diesel for most emissions.
The result has been that sales of diesel cars in Britain last year reached a record 139,810, or 8.8 per cent of a smaller total market, compared with 128,167 (6.38 per cent) in 1990.
While sales of petrol engined cars dropped by almost 32 per cent, sales of diesels rose by nine per cent .
And in the last quarter of the year, diesels were taking 10 per cent of the total market.
What sort of motorists opt for diesel?
Relatively well-paid professionals over 40 who are not too worried about their image, according to a survey of 1,000 owners carried out by BRS Car Lease through Diesel Car magazine.
Teachers, engineers and civil servants were strongly represented.
Although more than half earned up to £24,000, with a further 17 per cent getting more, low running costs were given as the main reason for their choice.
Significantly a third of them regularly took their cars abroad, where the lower diesel fuel prices on the Continent are an added attraction.
Moves towards fiscal harmonisation within the European Community after this year could lead to lower diesel fuel prices in Britain, too.
The motor industry has already been lobbying the Treasury to widen the fuel tax gap further in favour of diesel, partly in the interests of reducing pollution.
The perceived image of the diesel as smoky, dirty and noisy is simply no longer true in the case of the modern car diesel.
The performance gap has also been narrowed.
(Nevertheless, the Shell poll showed that preconceptions linger: 85 per cent of motorists questioned thought diesel is noisy, 70 per cent thought it was smoky, and 64 per cent that it was smelly).
There has been considerable concern over the sooty specks (particulates) from diesel exhausts as a possible cause of cancer.
Stiffer emission standards are being introduced to reduce permissible levels.
Extracts from both petrol and diesel exhausts contain carcinogens.
To put the level of risk in perspective, one study concluded that anyone standing all day at a busy roadside with traffic containing 20 per cent diesel would be exposed to 1,000 times less benzo(a)pyrene than somebody smoking 10 to 15 cigarettes a day.
Another exciting prospect for diesel economy in even smaller cars is the diesel two-stroke.
Ford is working on this concept as part of its two-stroke engine programme.
Diesel Cars: Dog days mean discounts
Diesel economics used to be easy to calculate.
Now the equation is blurred, John Kerswill finds
By JOHN KERSWILL
JUST how big are the savings a diesel car driver can expect over petrol motoring?
Hitherto the elements in the equation were clear: cheaper fuel, much greater mpg, and no dispute about diesels holding their value better — as a rough guide, a second-hand diesel will retain 10 per cent more of its new value than a petrol version.
But there's the rub.
Traditionally there is a new-price premium on diesels which offsets cheaper running costs.
The break-even point where diesel starts to pay off varies considerably depending on the size of the premium and the extent of annual mileage (the higher the mileage, the faster you reach break-even).
Motoring Which? did its sums recently on comparable Peugeot 309s, suggesting that the diesel version would save £1,280 over two years at 12,000 miles a year.
New price lists tell and interesting but not a consistent story.
Some manufacturers now charge little or nothing extra for diesel.
But at the other extreme some manufacturers impose what seems an incredible loading against diesel versions.
The fact is that diesel engines are produced in huge volume compared with a few years ago, reducing costs considerably, while petrol engines have grown ever more complex.
Today's 16-valve twin overhead cam fuel-injected petrol engines with full electronic engine management cost far more to make than those old pushrod engines with a simple carburettor.
By the time you add a three-way catalytic converter there's not much difference in the cost of making petrol and diesel engines; take into account the lower warranty claims on diesels, and they may well actually cost the manufacturer less.
What has been distorting the diesel/petrol cost equation is the deep discounting by dealers desperate to unload stocks.
Are the best bargains going to petrol buyers?
At the Glasgow-based Arnold Clark group, with 24 retail outlets covering 14 different franchises in Scotland, group marketing manager Iain McMillan thinks not.
‘If people are prepared to look around there are plenty of good deals available on diesel as well as petrol models.’
Renault dealers seem happier than most at the moment, buoyed by the success of the Clio.
‘We'll do you exactly the same deal on a petrol or diesel Renault, and either way it will be a good one,’ says sales manager Christopher Ritchie at Renault dealer A.C. Williams in Stamford, Lincolnshire.
‘We aren't interested in quoting prices over the phone, because that only leads to a Dutch auction.
‘Come in and we're confident we can do a deal you'll be happy with on any diesel in the range.’
Ford dealer Abbey Garage of Street, Somerset, has advertised nationally that ‘We beat 'em all,’ listing Fords at bargain prices.
Proprietor Vic Medley explains: ‘The really good deals are on last year's models left in stock, and that includes a few diesels.’
What about 1992 models?
‘We wouldn't differentiate the terms we offer on diesel and petrol.
’ Even if a car isn't in stock and we have to wait for it to be built, we can generally hold the agreed price.’
There are some diesel-only incentives too; earlier this year, Peugeot dealers were throwing in £150-worth of diesel fuel with every sale.
Excess stock of hard-to-sell cars will sometimes be cleared out virtually at cost, but diesels seldom come into this category.
It is also true that some dealers are likely to be far keener to sell diesels than others, perhaps reflecting how much faith they have in their products.
Market leaders Peugeot and Citroen are likely to hold plenty in stock.
But only one in 25 Vauxhalls sold last year was a diesel, so it would be unrealistic to expect the same level of stocks and enthusiasm from a Vauxhall dealer.
In a way, though, it is a pity the diesel/petrol argument always revolves around costs.
Because although economic considerations are normally behind the switch, many new converts rapidly discover they prefer the diesel driving experience.
And that's what I call a real bargain: something that's an improvement and saves you money.
Diesel Cars: Smoke means bad maintenance, not a bad engine
Colin Dryden defends diesel against an abiding bad PR image
By COLIN DRYDEN
FOLLOWING an elderly taxi in London or heavy truck up a country hill, both spewing clouds of acrid smoke, makes it hard to believe that diesel exhausts can be no more harmful than those from a petrol engine that has been fitted with a three-way catalytic converter.
The trouble is that anti-social drivers making the smoke because their engines are not properly maintained give diesel a bad name.
Indeed, this factor is thought to have influenced successive Chancellors of the Exchequer — until Norman Lamont last month — against giving the fuel the tax incentive it deserves.
Because the diesel engine uses so much less fuel it releases substantially less carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
It scores especially because most people most of the time don't drive flat out.
Unlike a petrol engine with a throttle, or accelerator, to vary the amount of fuel and air being sucked into the engine, diesel works on the principle that air in a cylinder will, if it is compressed, heat enough to ignite fuel without the use of a spark plug.
Because the compression ratio is twice that of a petrol engine, diesel runs hotter, and therefore more economically, right from start-up, which gives it its edge in stop-start journeys.
But like the use of every fossil fuel there is some price to be paid at the tail pipe in pollution (although diesel is improving all the time).
The main problem with both petrol and diesel exhausts is the remains of unburnt fuel droplets which were not completely used up in the combustion process.Even after 100 years of internal combustion, the perfect engine has yet to be built.
Enormous efforts are being made by motor and oil industries around the world to clean up diesel's act and get it in shape to meet the stringent emission standards coming into force before the start of the 21st century.
Advances in electronic and micro processors enabling fuel to be delivered in the right quantity and at the optimum time in the combustion process now allow an efficiency to be achieved that Dr Rudolf Diesel could never have dreamed of in 1892.
The design of cylinder head combustion chambers is being further refined with the use of new light metal alloys and ceramics making it possible to overcome the weight disadvantage faced by diesel engines.
Direct injection, where the fuel is burned inside the cylinder head instead of in a separate chamber, is another big advance now used increasingly on smaller car engines.
The two-spring injector (which introduces the fuel in two stages) as well as turbo charging all help to make the diesel process more efficient.
However many improvements are made, exhaust emmisions maybe reduced, but they are always with us.
Although particulate traps can be made to work effectively for short periods under favourable conditions there is some way to go before they are reliable enough for the rough and tumble of ordinary operating conditions.
Meanwhile, engine design improvements are continuously helping to reduce the problem before it reaches the tail pipe.
The diesel engine burns its fuel so much more efficiently that its hydro carbon and carbon monoxide emisions are low enough to dispense with a two way catalytic converter.
But as environmental controls become more severe an oxidation catalyst will be required.
This, however, needs fuel with a low sulphur content, and as European Community regulations call for this to be progressively reduced, the oil industry is having to undertake multi-million pound capital investment programmes.
Some firms like BP try to use as much North Sea crude as possible, because it has a lower sulphur content than Arabian Gulf oil.
Ironically, producing cleaner fuel to preserve the environment will result in much greater use of energy at the refinery and therefore more greenhouse gases being released into the atmosphere.
And the extra production costs will undoubtedly have to be passed on to the motorist.
Diesel Cars: The boat-owner
By ANTHONY LEWIS
ALTHOUGH the onlookers might find the sight entertaining, you won't get very far trying to tow a full-size power boat with a Reliant Robin.
What you need is something with a bit of muscle, but which is frugal enough not to bankrupt you before you get within sight of open water.
That is why power boat owner David Peaks opted for a five-door turbo diesel Mitsubishi Shogun — rival to the Range Rover — after a succession of diesel Land-Rovers.
Friends had praised the Shogun's reliability and residual value.
‘So far as I could judge, it was the smoothest-running diesel of its type on the market at the time, and the quickest,’ he says.
‘It also gave us the seven seats we needed.’
Good passenger-carrying capacity is vital as far as Peaks is concerned because the Shogun is used to pick up some of his employees and take them to work.
As managing director of Peaks Marine, at Wansford, Cambridgeshire, he has a professional as well as an enthusiast's interest in the boat business.
Among other things, Peaks Marine supplies the sort of deck canopy you might shelter under to keep the rain out of your Pimms at Henley.
Serviced by main dealer Crightons of Peterborough, the Shogun covers around 20,000 miles a year and averages 28 to 30 mpg.
That is not bad considering that it spends so much of its time pulling a boat around.
‘It has proved reliable, and the fact that it is four-wheel drive is very handy if you're coping with a greasy slipway or launching off a beach,’ says Peaks.
‘What is more, it will cruise at the legal motorway speed, day in, day out, without problems.’
He was not too concerned that Mitsubishi was due to launch a new model when he bought his.
He much prefers to drive something that has been on the market for two or three years, reasoning that most of the initial problems should have been ironed out.
The Shogun is in any event protected by a three year unlimited mileage warranty.
Any gripes?
‘Having to change the oil at 3,000 miles is a bit of a hassle,’ he concedes.
Mitsubishi apparently agrees, and has extended the interval to 4,500 — still annoyingly frequent compared to petrol servicing.
Diesel Cars: The NHS couple
By ATHONY LEWIS
HEALTH Service executives Neville and Carole Baggaley had only one complaint with the petrol Ford Escort they used for their daily 75-mile round trip to work: its thirst.
The 1.3-litre hatchback rarely managed more than 28 mpg between their home at Kidsgrove in North Staffordshire and Manchester's Royal Infirmary and the headquarters of the North West Regional Health Authority.
So in 1989 petrol power gave way to a 1.8-litre diesel Escort, which has now been replaced by the latest version.
Neville Baggaley's only regret is that he did not make the change sooner.
‘It was a revelation.
We found that for the same journey in the same conditions, our average mpg shot up to 52.
We could go for eight days between fill-ups instead of having to brim the tank every four days,’ he says.
‘I wish I'd changed to diesel long ago.
For years our annual mileage was as high as 37,000 — we could have saved a fortune.’
Baggaley, now clerk of works with the Sutton Housing Trust, no longer faces the daily drive to Manchester.
But his wife still commutes there, where she is domestic service manager at the hospital.
‘On average, the mpg has risen to 55.
The engine is the same size as in the old car, but the bodywork seems lighter and the shape is certainly smoother, so that probably accounts for the difference,’ she says.
The couple regard their LX model as relatively expensive at £12,000 on the road, but feel that reliability and outstanding economy help jusify the outlay.’
There's also the matter of specification.
The old car was an L version and the new one has a lot more features — power windows, tinted glass, central locking and a sunroof.
There's no reason why diesel cars should be devoid of luxury.
‘We had no hesitation choosing another Escort.
Apart from fuel and servicing, the last one only needed a replacement throttle cable in 38,000 miles.
It also proved to be a particularly easy car to sell,’ says Mr Baggaley.
Diesel Cars: The vet
By ANTHONY LEWIS
DIESEL'S two Es — environment and economy — were the deciding factors for West Country vet Neal King and his wife Joyce when they both switched to oil-burners two years ago.
‘I love it,’ says Mrs King about her Peugeot 305 SRD estate.
I never seem to have to fill it up, and it will keep up with anything else on the motorway.
And I know I'm doing less harm to the atmosphere than the other drivers with their petrol engines.’
The conversion did not just affect the family transport.
The partners in the semi-rural multi-practice to the south-west of Bristol (a couple of miles from bus routes or shops) have installed a diesel fuel tank at the surgery for refuelling at considerable savings.
A litre of diesel costs 35p compared to pump prices of 45p–49p.
Shortly after Mrs King bought her 305 to replace a much-loved Renault 4, her husband swapped his petrol-engined Mercedes-Benz for a Peugeot 405 turbo-diesel.
Vets need reliability, and both cars have proved exemplary.
Flat batteries have been the only problem.
Frequent long motorway journeys are a feature of the Kings' life, and while the larger and more powerful 405 is favoured for these trips, the 305 is equally at home on the school run or the motorway.
‘My car is totally trustworthy,’ says Mrs King.
‘I never have any worry about breaking down.
Just before Christmas I had to go to Windsor, and didn't have time to get to the surgery to fill up.
‘I put £17 of fuel in, went to Windsor and back, used the car every day, and filled up again after the New Year.
It's wonderful!’
Diesel Cars: The chiropodist
By ANTHONY LEWIS
WHEN Kevin Cole drives to work he leaves his new Metro GTi behind and takes his wife's Peugeot 205 diesel.
‘It's a great wee car, with good economy.
We both like driving it so much that we end up using it all the time,’ says the Stirlingshire chiropodist.
He bought the Metro in March 1991; in June his wife, Wendy, who is hoping to qualify as a doctor this summer, got her 205 GLD.
They embarked on diesel motoring, with long-term reliability and economy in mind.
The fact that diesels tend to hold their price better was also significant.
‘We have a friend who always drives diesels, and that's what made us look at them,’ says Mr Cole.
They were fed up with three-door cars, which ruled out one of three they considered at the time — the Vauxhall Nova, although this is now available in five-door.
The other contender was a Fiesta —‘it seemed comfortable and well put together, but I'd read that the engine wasn't that good,’ says Mr Cole.
The Peugeot ‘seemed best at the price.’
Evidence that they had made a sound choice came with the £36 bill for the 6,000 mile service.
‘It's now coming up for its 12,000 mile service, and doesn't feel as though it needs it at all.
We know we're going a lot further for a tenner's worth of fuel, and we're delighted,’ he says.
He drives 12 miles to work and then has the usual round of home visits.
‘It's all winding roads and steep hills.
If I take the Metro you can almost see the petrol gauge dying in front of you.’
He admits he is tempted by a turbo-charged 205.
‘It must be a great car, but mine is a lot nippier than I thought it would be.’
[‘Mine’?
Isn't it Wendy's motor?]
Diesel Cars: The management consultant
By ANTHONY LEWIS
A NAME like Pauline Gascoyne inevitably conjures an image of a bimbo Gazza in a GTi, to whom a diesel car would be about as socially acceptable as dandruff.
But the real-life Pauline Gascoyne is a serious-minded import business management consultant.
And when her Ford Capri was in a crash the replacement was a diesel-powered Ford Sierra.
Now she declares unswerving loyalty to diesel: ‘I've experienced three petrol cars in the past, but it's going to be diesel all the way for me in the future.’
She commutes 30 miles from the outskirts of Kidderminster, crossing slow, steep byways over the Malvern Hills to Bishop's Frome on the Hereford-Worcester border.
Her Sierra covers her demanding journey briskly and economically.
‘The Capri had a 1.6-litre petrol engine which used to gobble up as much as £28 worth of four-star each week,’ says Mrs Gascoyne.
‘The Sierra, despite being more roomy and having a 2.3-litre motor, gets along nicely on a lot less.
I reckon I'm £10 better off most weeks.
‘Diesel cars really aren't that bad at all.
They sound a bit strange at first, yet it's surprising how quickly you adjust.
‘They are good to drive too, once you realise that the speed has to build up gradually.
I'd advise anyone who does at least 300 miles a week to consider making the change.
‘I'm really impressed with the economy.
My route to work involves a lot of difficult roads with the engine spinning away in second gear, but I average 38 to 40 mpg.
And on the M5 that goes up to more than 50 mpg, which I find very impressive.
‘I wouldn't describe the Sierra as fast off the mark, but it has sufficient power and cruises well.
It's not the quietest of cars, but I can still hear the stereo, which is all that matters.
‘The worst time for engine noise is at tickover.
I used to worry about the racket it makes at traffic lights when other drivers looked with scorn.
‘But that doesn't bother me now — in fact I sometimes stick my tongue out in reply as I drive away.’
P. Gascoigne Esq would appreciate that…
Diesel Cars: In love with the D badge on the back
Anthony Lewis talks to drivers who have taken the plunge and switched from petrol-engined cars to diesel with not a regret between them The doctor
By ANTHONY LEWIS
YEARS of motoring frustration caused by cold starts with obstinate chokes ended when Bristol GP Dr Annette Egginton switched to diesel.
‘It starts first time, every time,’ she says of her Citroen AX.
‘Then it goes without coughing and spluttering.
Even I can't stall it!
It's also quicker than I thought a diesel would be.’
Bad experiences with a sucession of petrol-engined cars prone to poor starting and unreliability prompted the conversion.
‘Reliability is very important for a doctor.
When you get called out at 2am and it's pouring with rain, the last thing you want is a car that won't start.
It was that aspect of diesel that particularly attracted me, as well as the environmental and economical advantages.’
The AX's reputation for economy is enough to convince her that this car was the right choice.
‘I've never bothered to check the mpg, but I only have to fill it once every two weeks.’
The daily drive to her surgery in south Bristol and then three or four home visits each day means the best part of 400 miles between pump visits.
‘There's a lot of stop-start driving and very short journeys which are essential and which are ideal for a diesel.
It is also quick enough to get me somewhere in a hurry if I'm called out on an emergency.
‘The noise doesn't worry me.
Inside the car you don't even notice it.
Although I'm aware of the noise when I start it up, I don't think the neighbours are.’
Size was another consideration.
‘I'm a city-based GP, so I need a small car that can cope with narrow roads and crowded parking.’
Diesel Cars: Fuel firms need to clean up their image
By ANDREW ENGLISH
DIESEL fuel needs a new PR agent to clean up its image in the minds of the public if it is to take its place as the efficient, environmental fuel of the future that many would like it to be.
Modern refining techniques mean that for every barrel of crude oil refined, there will be a split between diesel and petrol fuels that can only be varied a small amount.
In other words, there will always be diesel and petrol, however much the proponents of each fuel push their own products.
It has been argued that diesel takes a much smaller amount of process heat to refine, and is therefore more environmentally considerate all round.
But since one of the prerequisites of clean diesel engines is top quality fuel, the differences in the refining process are considerably narrowed.
The argument also takes no account of the extra oil-change services that diesel engines require.
The worst thing that happened to diesel recently is the allegation of carcinogenic properties.It is argued that diesel fumes contain microscopic particles of sticky carbon, on to which are attracted carcinogens that can enter the lungs.
While this is true, there are ways of minimising the problem, and eliminating it by altering the balance of the combustion in the diesel for the first, and by putting a particulate trap into the exhaust pipe for the second.
As petrol is beating the stigma of carrying lead, so diesel must beat the particulate rap.
The problem with trying to reduce particulates is that it has a trade-off in higher nitrogen oxides (NOx) produced, which are frowned upon in environmental legislation in the U.S. and EC.
The other pay-off with the diesel engine is between the same high levels of NOx and the fuel efficiency; if you reduce the NOx level, there is a commensurate improvement in fuel economy.
Diesel offers immediate fuel saving of between 20 to 30 per cent, and when such developments as the direct-injected, two-stroke, supercharged diesel come along the savings could be higher, 70 or 80 per cent , which would reduce carbon dioxide emissions.
One last compelling reason why diesel needs all the image-building it can get is the powerful petrol engine lobby, which includes manufacturers, motorists, and oil companies who would be stuck with an awful lot of petrol if the fashion should happen to change dramatically.
Diesel Cars: Why a good big-'un stands to win on economy points
John Langley finds that a boxing adage makes an ideal case for the large diesels
By JOHN LANGLEY
IF the sophisticated modern diesel engine now makes economic sense for small cars, the savings it offers for bigger cars are more worthwhile.
As they say in boxing, a good big-'un will always beat a good little-'un.
The cost difference between, say, 37 mpg and 49 mpg on a small/medium car is going to work out considerably less over a similar annual mileage than the potential savings between, say, 27 mpg and 38 mpg on a roomy two-litre executive saloon.
When you look at the popular big four-wheel drive off-roaders, the difference is more marked: 27 mpg at touring speeds makes a Land Rover Discovery turbo diesel a viable alternative to a large estate car, but 18 mpg from the petrol V8 would put it out of court for many private buyers.
While the diesel option has become popular among owners of off-roaders like the Discovery and the Mitsubishi Shogun, it has so far made little progress in the executive car class.
The main reason is that most executive cars in Britain are bought by companies for their managers and directors.
Fuel economy is generally of little concern to these drivers as the company pays the bills.
On top of this, the extra size and cost of the diesel engine hitherto put the driver into a higher personal tax class.
Now that Norman Lamont has begun to adjust company car tax rules to remove these disincentives, the other economies of big diesels have make them significantly more popular among business buyers.
At the moment, the best diesel buys for company drivers are the roomy, medium-sized models like the ultra-refined Peugeot 405 saloon and estate (which is the biggest-selling diesel model in the U.K.), the Citroen BX, the Ford Sierra, the Mercedes-Benz 190 and the ultra-economical Rover Montego turbo diesel.
Most of them are available with turbocharged engines below the 2-litre tax break.
The diesel's undeniable image problem in the upper echelons of the company car fleet may begin to change when BMW brings in its new high performance diesels for the attractive 3-Series and 5-Series saloons.
With six cylinder 2.5-litre turbo engines giving either 115bhp or 143 bhp, these diesels are capable of up to 129 mph, with matching acceleration, while still able to average around 40 mpg with more restrained use.
Performance of that order behind a BMW badge could shake a few prejudices, but these high-fliers may not be available in right-hand drive form until next year because of the demand for them on the Continent.
Another attractive German newcomer shortly to be on sale in Britain is the roomy new Audi 100.
It will have the option of a six-speed gearbox to give outstanding fuel economy with a 121 mph capability from its direct injection 2.5-litre five-cylinder engine.
The makers claim a range of more than 1,000 miles is feasible from its 17.6 gallon tank — it can do 64 mpg at a steady 56 mph (or 46.5 mpg at 75 mph, and 37.8 mpg on the urban cycle).
The big Audi has been developed to meet the world's toughest emission standards with the help of a turbocharger and intercooler as well as exhaust gas recirculation and an advanced engine management system.
Estates and saloon will be available.
The Peugeot/Citroen diesels, sharing similar engines, are generally regarded as the pick of the bunch for refined performance in the smaller cars and they now have two fine contenders in the big car sector — the Citroen XM and the Peugeot 605.
Both share the PSA group's advanced 2.1-litre 12-valve turbodiesel, giving refined performance with excellent economy.
On a holiday trip last year we were averaging 40 mpg on cheap French diesel fuel (another bonus point for the diesel if you like to take your car abroad) in the superbly comfortable big Citroen.
It had the added refinement of being fully automatic — still uncommon with diesels — and it was difficult to think of a better car for relaxed and economical touring.
It has now been joined by an attractive estate model, also available with automatic.
Mercedes-Benz were the diesel car pioneers in the 30s and I grew quite attached to their big 300 diesel estate car, also with automatic transmission.
It was smooth and refined, and no doubt durable, but a bit lacking in acceleration from low speeds in non-turbocharged form compared with some rivals.
A better bet for performance is the smaller 190, with the optional 2.5-litre diesel instead of the usual 2-litre version.
Renault offers a 1.9-litre diesel for its roomy 21, and I was particularly impressed by the 2-litre non-turbo diesel in the well-made Toyota Carina, which proved to be one of the best medium-sized diesels I have tried.
Surprisingly, the rival Nissan Primera is not yet available with a diesel option.
Vauxhall is making a big push with diesel models across the entire range, in many cases matching prices with the equivalent petrol models.
Its diesel competitor in the executive class is the Carlton, with a 2.3-litre engine in either turbocharged or normal form.
Again, the estate model looks particularly attractive, while there is a similar diesel engine option in the new Frontera 4 × 4 off-roader.
Ford has added a turbocharger to provide a better performance for the 2.5-litre diesel it offers in the spacious Granada (as well as a 1.8 turbo diesel in the Sierra range).
Rover has expanded its diesel options with a 2-litre direct injection Perkins engine offering economy and excellent performance in the medium-sized Montego saloon and estate, worth considering by both business and private buyers.
It is offering the excellent Peugeot diesel in the smaller Rover 200 range, while an improved and cleaner version of the Italian VM 2.5-litre turbo diesel, with 118 bhp, will be available shortly for the restyled Rover 800.
Diesel Cars: Escalating the Gallic wars Diesel-wise, Gaul is divided into three parts — Renault, Peugeot and Citroen.
Anthony Lewis analyses their conflict
By ANTHONY LEWIS
THE GRIP of French engine makers in Britain's diesel car market is overwhelming: under the umbrella of PSA, Peugeot has 32 per cent and Citroen 12 per cent.
Yet on their home turf in France it is Renault who are the market leaders with 27 per cent against Peugeot's 24 per cent and Citroen's 11.
Now Renault is hoping for a marked increase in U.K. sales with the arrival last month of its diesel challenger, the turbocharged 19 DX.
Renault's current share of the British diesel market is a niggardly 2.7 per cent(3,832 last year, six per cent of their total sales; compare that with Citroen's 32 per cent diesel sales).
Renault's communications director Phil Horton candidly blames supply constraints because of strong French domestic demand, and, hitherto, a lack of diesel interest within Renault U.K.
French diesel growth, buoyed by tax incentives on fuel, has been steady for the past decade, and spectacular between 1988 and 1991, when the diesel share of the overall French market doubled.
The Peugeot 205 was 1991's best-seller, toppling the Renault 21 from the No 1 spot it held in both 1990 and 1989.
The best seller in Britain is the Peugeot 405, finally ousting the Citroen BX.The Renault 19DX has scant breathing-space in its assault on the British market; early summer sees another PSA challenger with the arrival of the Citroen ZX turbo diesel.
The non-turbo ZX diesel, which went on sale at the beginning of the winter, has been acclaimed by motoring writers as the best in its class.
Part of the confidence surrounding the 19 DX comes from the very fact that it is turbocharged.
Five years ago only five per cent of all diesels sold in Britain were turbocharged; now it's 30 per cent.The 19 DX is a fine example of a 1990s diesel — quick yet quiet; economical but with all the trimmings of a GTi.
It at last gives Renault a diesel flagship worthy of the name, a car that should help Phil Horton and his team, in his words, ‘position ourselves as a major player in the U.K. diesel league with the aim of taking more fleet sales from our competitors.’
A tall order, considering the existing Renault 19 diesels, the Prima and GTD, managed to attract just 1,000 buyers last year.
(The U.K.'s fifth best-selling diesel last year, the Peugeot 309, sold 9,238).
The turbo-charged version of Renault's familiar 1,870 cc diesel engine produces 93 bhp (the non-turbo is 65 bhp), sufficent to propel it to a claimed top speed of 114 mph, yet return between 45 and 50 mpg.
Specification is high — remote control central locking and electric windows.
Competitive pricing is one of Renault's strong suits; the 19 DX starts at about £11,700.
Its obvious challengers are the Peugeot 309 GRDT (£12,031, and turbocharged) and the Rover 218SLD turbo (£13,275), which, uses the PSA engine.
Diesel Cars: In common with many drivers, John Langley is impressed by the all-conquering Citroen-Peugeot power plant You see it here, you see it there — the XUD is everywhere
By JOHN LANGLEY
CHOOSING my words carefully, I asked a top Mercedes-Benz diesel engineer some time ago which diesel he would drive — assuming that he couldn't afford a Mercedes.
‘I can tell you I've just bought a Peugeot 205 diesel for my son,’ he smiled.
A lot of other people might well agree that the Citroen-Peugeot XUD engine is the most refined small diesel in its class — not least Rover, who now fit it in their medium-sized 200 and 400 Rovers, and are soon to offer a version on the Metro.
It has become the world's most popular passenger car diesel since it was introduced just over 10 years ago.
In the first quarter of 1992, as diesel car sales reached a record 11.35 per cent, Citroen, Peugeot and Rover models with this engine accounted for just over half of the 46,114 diesel models sold in the U.K.
In various sizes and power outputs, from 1.7 litres normally aspirated to 2.1 litres turbocharged, and 60 bhp to 110 bhp, it is fitted to a wide range of Citroen and Peuegot cars, including the Citroen ZX, BX and XM, and the Peugeot 205, 309 and 605, as well as the Rovers.
I first became aware of its potential when I was let loose in a pre-production 205 diesel on a mountain rally course in France and clocked an indicated 100 mph on a downhill stretch.
It is the most numerous diesel on British roads, with more than 80,000 sales of this model.
It is probably the comparative smoothness, quietness and reponsiveness of the XUD that is overcoming British drivers' prejudice against diesels.
Company car drivers used to beg off being given a diesel by protesting that it was just too sluggish for business use.
The Citroen BX turbo diesel, with 90 bhp and a good 0–60 mph acceleration time, soon removed that excuse.
Then there were niggles about the lack of trim and equipment on some diesel cars.
Peugeot and Citroen countered that by providing diesel models decked out with all mod cons.
The most impressive new diesel model I have tried is the latest Citroen ZX.
With the normal 1.9 XUD engine it is exceptionally smooth and refined, and pulls like a train.
This Escort-sized model is now available with a four speed fully automatic gearbox, and 102 mph top speed, from £11,072, the only automatic diesel in its class.
There will soon be a turbo.
But Britain's current best selling diesel car, using the same engine, is Peugeot's Coventry-built Pininfarina-styled 405.
In normal and turbocharged form, and saloon and estate versions, the roomy medium-sized 405 is gaining increasing recognition as a comfortable and practical family and business car.
Even in non-turbo form, the 1.9-litre pulls strongly from low speeds, climbing considerable hills in top or fourth gears.
It is an easy-going long distance cruiser, with a top speed of 102 mph and 0–60 mph in about 15 seconds.
The top well equipped GRD model I tried comes with electrically operated sunroof, windows, door mirrors and central locking.
This well equipped version is priced at £13,168, but the 405 range with the same engine starts at £10,380.
The most expensive diesel turbo GRD with brisk acceleration is £13,740.
Diesel Cars: Engines that should watch their weight
By COLIN DRYDEN
BY petrol engine standards, a small diesel is almost a contradiction in terms.
Because it has to be larger and heavier to provide comparable power, the diesel fitted to a basic one-litre car tends to be at least 1.6 litres.
But diesel engines are improving all the time, and developments like turbocharging and direct injection mean that the power gap between the two systems is shrinking.
The diesel engine faces the same problem as many middle aged executives — it needs to lose weight.
Not that it carries the equivalent of flab — merely that it needs extra strength because of its different combustion process operating under compression ratios twice that of petrol engines.
There are few short cuts in any weight loss regime, but new light metal alloys and ceramics will probably enable the smaller diesel engine to shed a few pounds.
Rudolf Diesel's father might have been German but he was born in Paris.
He studied engineering in both France and Germany, patenting the first compression ignition engine in 1892, so it is fitting that while Germany probably had the early lead, particularly with trucks, French makers have had a love affair with diesel cars since the 1930s.
Now VW has made a strong comeback with its 1,588cc diesel for the Golf 40 years later.
This might not seem small in petrol engine terms but for a diesel it is quite dinky.
I list below some of the best small bets on the market:
Diesel Cars: DAIHATSU CHARADE
IF the Swiss were once the masters of miniaturisation, they have surely been overtaken by the Japanese.
Some of their multi-cylinder motor cycle engines have pistons little bigger than thimbles.
Their cars seem to be going the same way, with Daihatsu contriving to build a diesel engine of a mere 993cc for the little Charade four-seater hatchback.
It has fairly large pistons because there are only three of them, producing no less than 47 bhp.
This gives the car a respectable top speed of 84 mph as well as a Guinness Book of Records listed economy of 103.01 mpg on a 3,637 mile run round Britain.
The team of non-professional drivers reached the high point of 109 mpg and a low of 94 mpg, merely by accelerating smoothly, braking gently, and switching off the engine in traffic jams.
The 12ft Charade, with 13.6 cu ft of luggage space, costs £7,920.
Diesel Cars: Fuel tax will have to toe EC line
By STEVE BANNER
BRITISH diesel remains among the most expensive in Western Europe.
Motorists in the Republic of Ireland, Italy, and Sweden are the only ones who stump up more.
Buy anywhere else, and you will pay less.
The reason is tax.
Every gallon of diesel bought at a U.K. service station ensures that another £1.03 in duty flows into the Treasury's coffers.
Add on VAT at 17.5 per cent and the revenue men siphon off £1.34; 67 per cent of the average pump price of £1.95.
Buy the equivalent amount of fuel in Hamburg, and the German government will pocket a total of £1.07, VAT inclusive; 62.5 per cent of the £1.71 or thereabouts retail charge.
Go to Amsterdam, and the Dutch will take 92.8p, including VAT; a mere 52 per cent of the £1.78 or so you pay.
Holidaymakers contemplating taking their diesel estate cars to the Dordogne or Brittany this summer would do well to wait until they drive off the cross-Channel ferry before topping up the tank.
The French relieve you of £1.05 in tax, 63 per cent of the £1.66 pump price you would be charged if diesel happened to be sold by the gallon in Calais.
Not that petrol car owners in Britain have much to rejoice about.
They fork out £1.01 a gallon in duty on unleaded, and £1.26 on four star.
Tack on VAT at the standard rate, and you are looking at a total tax take of £1.33 (surprisingly, the same as on diesel) and £1.60 respectively.
The 7.5 per cent increase in duty on leaded petrol in the Budget was understandable, given that the aim was to encourage drivers to buy lead-free for the sake of the environment.
The duty on unleaded was simply allowed to go up by the rate of inflation.
Less understandable was the willingness to allow the duty on diesel to rise by the rate of inflation rather than slash it.
After all, diesel has Green credentials.
Furthermore all heavy trucks and a growing number of vans are diesel-powered, so such a move would have the additional benefit of giving the road transport industry a boost at a time of recession.
It would also be in line with the gradual drift towards fuel tax harmonisation across the Community.
A minimum permissible duty of diesel equivalent to 79.5p a gallon comes into effect on Jan 1 1993.
The EC has also put forward an advisory, non-binding, maximum figure that would work out at about 87.5p a gallon at current rates.
This means that other countries as well as the U.K. would have to reduce the tax they levy to.
Britain has yet to agree to this advisory figure, however, and talks are still in progress.
Diesel Cars: CITROEN AX
CITROEN disputes Daihatsu's economical motoring laurels; while admitting that it has not tackled the Round Britain run yet, it says that its AX diesel has achieved 112.01 mph over a 100 mile road route.
It is confident that it can take the long distance frugality title to add to its claim of being Britain's fastest small diesel with a top speed of 96.3 mph.
Its 1,360cc four-cylinder engine, mated to a five-speed gearbox, is new, having been developed specially for the new generation of AXs from the mainstream-car petrol engine.
It develops 53 bhp providing identical performance for the basic 14D Echo three- and five-door cars and the 14TZD.
The TZD is identified by slightly more opulent side mouldings, bumpers and wheel trims while the inside is better and includes central locking.
All models have laminated windscreen, rear screen wash-wipe, clock, locking filler cap, cigar lighter and side mouldings.
Diesel Cars: FIAT UNO
ITALY is one of the world's best markets for diesel cars, largely through an enlightened taxation policy, which means that Fiat's domestic diesel success is not mirrored here.
The little Uno, Car of the Year in 1983 and up-dated in 1989, is available in Britain with Fiat's 1,697cc diesel engine.
This produces 58 bhp, giving it quite lively performance and a top speed of 96mph in return for good diesel economy of 64.2 mpg at a constant 56 mph on the official Government figures.
There are two versions of the three-door hatchback, both with a normally aspirated engine and manual five speed gearbox.
Differences in trim level account for the price structure:
Diesel Cars: VW GOLF
RUDOLF Diesel's patent may be 100 years old, but if one company could be said to have re-invented the concept in recent years for the small hatchback it must be Volkswagen.
Their ‘dieselised’ version of a well proved 1,600cc four-cylinder engine first set the standard in 1976, and more than 2,300,000 have been sold since then.
Existing Golf diesels are sold out, and the first 1992 models with the new larger body in right-hand-drive form began arriving on this side of the Channel last month.
The size of the basic Umwelt (environment) model has been increased to 1.9 litres, which has put up power output from 60 to 75 bhp.
However, the engine should be quieter because of new noise reduction techniques isolating the rocker box cover.
The turbo version of the new Golf Diesel is not due until much later in the year.
Diesel Cars: PEUGEOT 205
COMPARED with Daihatsu, Peugeot goes to the other extreme and puts a 1.8 litre version of the XUD engine range in its diesel 205s.
In true French fashion this ensures a good power output and top speed to match, one of the highest in the class in fact.
Despite the fuel attracting a slightly higher tax than here, France is one of the best markets in Europe, mainly because Gallic drivers insist upon — and get — good performance with their diesel cars.
In basic form the 1,769cc diesel develops 60 bhp while turbo-charging boosts that to 78 bhp for the top model, putting up maximum speed from 96 to 108 mph.
Peugeot offers plenty of choice, with three versions with three doors and four with five doors to choose from.
Prices range from £8,144 for the basic three-door 205 style diesel to £10,346 for the GT turbo diesel.
Diesel Cars: Long life and more miles for the family
Andrew English with a check-list of tips on the pitfalls to avoid when buying second-hand
By ANDREW ENGLISH
THE IMPROVING image of diesels in the last couple of years may have encouraged sales.
But does it necessarily make a secondhand diesel a good buy?
Depends.
Although the engines are more complicated and finely engineered than petrol counterparts, they are also longer-lived, and mileages considerably in excess of 100,000 should be possible.
The rest of the car will also stand up to hard use as well, and diesel cars tend to have bigger batteries and more powerful electrical systems to cope with the greater demands of starting.
The suspension, springs and dampers have to be robust to cope with the greater weight of the diesel engine, which can be up to 250lb, and the greater mileage that a diesel might be expected to cover.
So the cars themselves are well built and tough as well as economical, while specifications have improved to equal those of petrol models.
Performance is up, too, as the early small-capacity diesels have given way to larger engines, often with turbocharged variants.
While diesel cars will never be seen as road burners, they will go at least as fast as the ‘cooking’ versions of ordinary petrol-powered saloons and hatchbacks.
Since a diesel is traditionally more expensive to buy new, secondhand values are consequently higher.
They are also propped up by several other factors.
With nine petrol cars being sold to every one diesel, scarcity keeps resale prices up.
And since the motor trade perceives a secondhand diesel as a good buy, there will be a lot of buyers from the taxi and motor trades chasing a finite pool of good cars.
That extra purchase price, and the cost of the more frequent oil-change services a diesel car requires, have to be balanced against the savings in fuel likely to be made — currently around 195p per gallon.
There are some very good used examples to be had.
Always check the service history, as a diesel car's fuel pump is a piece of complicated mechanics which will not suffer gladly the attentions of DIY servicers.
Look out, too, for clocked cars whose odometers have been turned back.
Diesels are much loved by the carriage trade, and can rack up alarming mileages in a short time.
Although it should be easy to spot ex-minicabs (look for heavy interior wear), ex-fleet cars which have been doctored are more difficult.
Turbo diesels should not be dismissed out of hand, but the turbocharger is a complicating factor, and a car which has not been carefully serviced may need an expensive replacement turbo.
Vauxhall's Nova 1.5TD, for instance, is a fast, frugal hatchback with an Isuzu turbodiesel which when properly maintained should last as long as a naturally-aspirated engine.
Older cars to search out are the Volkswagen Golf D, which is slow but incredibly reliable; likewise the VW Passat.
Peugeot has stopped making its 505D, but it is a fine car and very cheap.
Newer cars to look for are the Citroen BX range, the Peugeot 205 and 309 GRTD, and, if your pocket runs to it, Renault's smashing little Clio RN1.9D or Citroen's brilliant ZX Reflex 1.9D.
One thing you will need is patience.
A trawl I made through three small-ad market place papers yielded around four pages of diesel cars per 300–400 page issue.
I looked especially for a Peugeot 505.
There were three.
Diesel Cars: By turbo to hospital
Steve Banner on an ambulance service's ‘£1m a year’ savings
By STEVE BANNER
SCOTTISH Ambulance Service fleet manager Ed Hodson believes he is on the way to knocking £1 million a year off fuel bills by gradually switching totally to diesel.
‘That's money we can use elsewhere,’ he says.
Approaching a third of his 450 front-line emergency ambulances are now diesel.
He also runs another 450 (mostly diesels) which pick up from home disabled or elderly people needing regular outpatient treatment.
But are diesel ambulances quick enough for emergencies?
The ones Hodson operates are turbocharged.
‘They can certainly keep up with the traffic, and have a fair turn of performance.’
What is more, the performance of the turbo diesel is getting better all the time.
‘The new 100bhp Transit is a crackerjack.’
‘With petrol ambulances, we have been budgeting for a fuel consumption of about 11 mpg.
With diesels we are averaging more than 20 mpg.’
The high speed ambulance fleet consists of 127 Leyland DAF 400 turbo diesels, with the balance made up primarily of fuel-hungry V6-engined petrol Ford Transit, old Freight Rover 300s, and five petrol VW LT29s.
The outpatient fleet is dominated by non-turbo Renault Master diesel vans which have been converted to ambulance work by Customline and Devon Conversions.
Hodson favours the Master because of its high roof and low loading height, which makes it easier for the infirm.
To make it easier still, some have been fitted with a Hubmatic system, which raises and lowers the rear of the vehicle.
‘This allows us to wheel incubators, wheelchairs, and trolley cots up a gently-inclined ramp without any trouble.’
Diesel Cars: Sweeter smell of success
Fleets have welcomed the Budget and a fuel additive, says Peter Tucker
By PETER TUCKER
SOME observers think diesel-engined cars are about to enjoy another upsurge in popularity among company vehicle fleet operators.
The last increase in interest in diesel fleet cars was in the boom years of the mid-to-late Eighties.
But though diesels made sense on paper, some staff were not convinced and a few even changed jobs to escape employers who imposed diesel cars on them.
So what has changed?
For a start, some brands of diesel now have additives to make them smell sweeter.
Also, manufacturers have upgraded the specification of diesel cars as well as making greater use of turbo-chargers to improve performance.
In addition the Budget made the tax on diesel supplied by firms for employees' private motoring lower than the tax on petrol.
It also contained proposals — planned to be implemented in the autumn — to tax company cars according to original price rather than engine size which should alleviate the tax discrimination against company diesel cars.
For employers, the main attraction is still the fuel economy.
Research by Swan National Leasing into diesel take-up trends among its customers has found a slight renewal of interest by employers.
However, the company's managing director, Len Clayton, notes that fleet operators are finding the generally shorter service intervals an inconvenience.
He sounds a further note of caution: ‘It is sometimes difficult to be sure you are sending your cars to be serviced at a garage that is properly equipped to deal with diesel vehicles and has appropriately trained staff.’
He finds residual values of diesels are holding up well.
‘The diesel car is still pulling £600-£700 more than its petrol equivalent.’
But he has doubts about whether that edge will continue.
‘At the moment there is a shortage of diesels on the second-hand market.’
Nevertheless, he forsees that over the next two years there may be problems as fleets dispose of the diesels acquired during the last oil-burner boom.
Mike Gunnell writes: Since the Budget more and more companies are re-evaluating their own fleet policies.
Among companies that have opted for a total or partial switch to diesel in recent months are Philips Electronics, Dunn & Bradstreet, the Milk Marketing Board, London Electricity Board and Alliance & Leicester Building Society.
Even a number of police forces including Dorset and Bedford have switched to diesel patrol cars.
Supermarket chain Gateway Foodmarkets announced it was switching its 1,100 cars to diesel six months ago and said it expected to save around £400,000 a year on fuel alone.
The decision was taken on environmental, cost saving and residual value grounds, said Gateway commercial manager Brian Tomlin, the man behind the move.
‘At Gateway we had a major concern over environmental issues and one of the areas of concern was exhaust emissions.
This is an area where a diesel car scores very well and as it uses less fuel than a petrol car, it emits less noxious gas.
‘We have so far switched around 250 cars to diesel and we have seen fuel savings of 30–40 per cent.
‘Driver acceptance too has been very good and it looks like the misconception that diesels are dirty, slow and smelly is a thing of the past.’
The move to diesel has opened up the Gateway car lists, which were once primarily Ford-dominated but which now include European manufacturers such as Peugeot, Citroen and Renault as well as Ford and Vauxhall.
Tomlin is also talking to Rover Cars which has produced very acceptable and popular 218 and 418 turbo powered diesel cars.
‘There is no doubt in my mind that diesel was the right decision for us,’ he says.
Mike Gunnell is editor of Fleet News
Diesel Cars: Playing ‘cat’ and mouse over fleets
Mike Gunnell finds a Scottish brewery that has bucked the trend to diesel away from petrol
By MIKE GUNNELL
WHILE a growing number of British companies are switching from petrol to diesel-engined cars to improve fuel consumption and cut costs, one company, originally at the vanguard of the diesel movement, has dumbfounded the experts by reversing its decision and going back to petrol.
Edinburgh-based brewer Scottish & Newcastle switched its fleet of cars, currently numbering around 1,500, to diesel some 10 years ago.
The savings on operating costs alone were immense, some experts putting it in the order of £2 million a year.
But over 18 months ago, the company shocked the fleet world by announcing that, after carrying out an independent study, it was reversing its decision and switching to cars equipped with catalytic converters running on unleaded petrol.
It said that the study had proved that the capital and operating costs then being achieved made the advantages of diesel much less attractive and that the cost benefits had diminished.
By switching to petrol cars, the company would have a wider and more attractive choice of British and European cars.
And it would also be able to help the environment, the company said, the implication being that ‘cat’ equipped petrol cars are cleaner than diesels.
Barely had the decision been announced, than the criticism started.
The company would face higher fuel bills, lower miles per gallon, increased levels of harmful emissions and reduced residual values, said the pundits.
While S & N has announced itself ‘perfectly happy’ with the way things have gone since the switch and said it had been successful, some observers are convinced that operating costs have increased substantially and cite political rather than cost or environmental reasons behind the decision.
The environmental ‘benefits’ of switching from diesel cars to ‘cat’equipped petrol cars are doubtful in the extreme.
For example, catalytic converter equipped petrol cars contribute 30–35 per cent more carbon dioxide — gas causing much of the greenhouse effect — to the environment than diesel cars.
‘Cat’ cars also produce 2.5 times more harmful carbon monoxide and far more nitrogen oxide than diesel cars.
They also use more fuel, therefore contributing more pollution, and use more of an increasingly scarce resource than diesels.
The inherent lean burn properties and high compression ratio of a diesel engine on the other hand lead to a very efficient burning of the fuel, meaning less pollutants.
Concerns about ‘particulates’ or soot and their alleged carcinogenic properties, can be overcome by the fitting of a particulate trap, as in the case of Volkswagen's Umwelt diesel.
In addition, diesels generally require less maintenance than petrol engines and can retain impressive emission levels over large mileages.
It was, and still is, a situation which sticks in the craw of the man who was responsible for first introducing diesels at S & N, the company's former physical distribution director, Ray Stark.
Now an independent fleet consultant, he was made redundant by the company four years ago.
Now he says he wrote to S & N chairman, Alec Rankin, asking him to explain fully the reasons for switching away from diesel.
There is a suggestion that S & N directors were unhappy with the standard of diesel cars for senior executives, and the fact there are no diesel Jaguars may have had an influence.
Stark now travels the country lecturing and advising on the benefits of operating diesel cars.
He recently gave a seminar at Fleet Show '92 at Silverstone which was compulsory attendance for fleet operators at the show considering switching to diesel.
Diesel Cars: Meet the diesel missionary from Dagenham
Colin Dryden talks to the man leading Ford's drive to catch up
By COLIN DRYDEN
SALES of new cars may be falling — 20 per cent lower last year than in 1990 — but Ford still leads the shrinking market, and derives some comfort from not being able to make enough diesel engines to meet the demand.
Peter Lawrence, the man in charge of design and development of diesels at Dagenham, is a great diesel enthusiast.
His professional engineering career started on the truck side, and he sees his task mainly as miniaturisation to bring all the advantages of power and economy enjoyed by the heavy goods diesel driver down to the size where they can also be of benefit to the motorist.
As he points out, 16 per cent of all new cars sold in Western Europe these days are diesel-engined.
So whatever their perception here, other nations have absorbed the message not only about their better fuel economy, but also their low gaseous emissions.
‘The emissions factor becomes ever more attractive as environmental pressures spearheaded by California increase all the time,’ he says.
He fully accepts that there is the problem of the car's contribution to the greenhouse effect and the way it is making new car buyers more critical and raising their expectations.
They want to use less fuel and cause less pollution, but at the same time recoil from too many sacrifices in terms of comfort and performance.
These factors were borne in mind when designing the new family of 1.8L Ford diesel engines now fitted to medium-sized cars like the Sierra and the P100 pick-up.
They called for high power and torque, low smoke and exhaust emission levels, quiet, and good fuel economy.
The design and development work was done in-house by Ford's own engineers, while the Dagenham plant builds engines for the entire diesel needs of the company throughout Europe.
Production is now running at over 400,000 engines a year, compared with 100,000 in the 1980s.
Lawrence accepts that Ford entered car diesel design later than it might have liked compared with some of the opposition, notably Peugeot-Citroen (PSA), which enjoyed a head start from the 1930s.
(Ford's 1.6 engine entered service in 1984 and the 1.8 in 1988.)
‘Dagenham is going flat out, and we can't make enough diesel engines,’ says Lawrence.
Apart from the 2.5 litre for the diesel Scorpio which is bought from PSA, Ford produces its own for the Fiesta, Escort, Orion, and Sierra.
There are two four-cylinder engines: 1.6 litres and 1.8 litres.
The 1.6, fitted to the Fiesta and Escort, comes only in normally aspirated form producing 40 bhp at 4,800 rpm while the 1.8 is available in both basic and turbo-charged forms.
This means a choice of power outputs: 44 bhp at 4,800 rpm or 55 bhp at 4,500 rpm when turbo-charged.
Because of the extra loads imposed by the diesel process of compression — ratios of 21.5:1 in the Ford diesels at ignition, more than double those of their comparable petrol engines — cylinder blocks and crankshafts have to be stronger, heavier and therefore costlier.
Peter Lawrence is very conscious of the increased weight/cost factor in the diesel equation.
He accepts that it has to be traded off against the 25 per cent improvement in fuel consumption and longer engine life.
Direct injection (DI), where the combustion process takes place inside the cylinder head with high pressure fuel injection, instead of in a separate chamber, offers even better fuel economy — up to 12 per cent better than an indirect injection (IDI).
As well as higher efficiency, lower CO2 emissions, better cold starting and less contamination of lubricating oil, the DI diesel has a less complex cylinder head design and lasts longer.
Ford are proud of their 2.5 DI diesel engine in the Transit van and Lawrence is sure the future lies with DI for the smaller diesel car engine.
Ford's diesel exhaust catalytic converter is still awaited.
While its petrol-engined equivalent must have unleaded fuel, the diesel catalyser will only become effective when sulphur levels drop.
While adequate in other respects, diesel fuel sold in Britain is high in sulphur apparently.’
But the oil companies are working very hard on it,’ says Lawrence.
Diesel Cars: At last— a better deal over insurance
By ANTHONY LEWIS
ONE of the main complaints of many diesel car drivers is their unfair treatment at the hands of insurance companies.
But the matter is finally being dealt with.
The Association of British Insurers' new grouping for all cars more than doubles the number of categories and sorts out many anomalies.
And the launch last month by Ecclesiastical of a policy specifically for diesel drivers has inundated with inquiries the Chippenham offices of Parkins Scutt & Partners, brokers behind the scheme.
‘Diesel car drivers tend to have an ideal profile for insurance companies,’ says Rod Alcorn, the motivating force behind the launch of the new policy.
‘They are over 30, put performance well down on their list of priorities, and reliability, value for money and mpg at the top.
‘Diesel cars are less attractive to thieves.
We knew diesel car drivers go overseas more than others, so we created a package including features like free European cover.
The good response mirrored our picture of the typical diesel owner: 95 per cent have maximum no-claims bonus, and have not had an accident in the last five years.’
The ABI's new groupings increases the categories to 20 and gives diesels drivers a much a fairer deal.
The Peugeot 405, both non-turbo and turbo, is now in group 8; previously the non-turbo was in 4 and the turbo in 5.
The Citroen XM turbo diesel was in 6 and is now in 12, while the 2.0 litre petrol model goes from 6 to 13.
The turbo-diesel Citroen BX moves from 5 to 8, and its petrol GTI stablemate from six to 14.
Diesel Cars: Perkins rides out the big recession
By STEVE BANNER
LOOK for the tiny workshop where Frank Perkins and design boffin Charles Chapman founded the Perkins diesel empire 60 years ago, and you will look in vain.
The backstreet site in the middle of Peterborough has been obliterated by a glass and concrete shopping centre.
One suspects that Perkins, who died in 1967, would not have been too concerned.
After all, his real memorial is the sprawling factory he founded at Eastfield, on the outskirts of the city, in the 1940s; one of the biggest diesel engine plants in the world.
Now owned by Varity Corporation, Perkins has celebrated its diamond jubilee by signing a multi-million pound contract to supply Caterpillar for the next 10 years.
The construction equipment giant has been a customer since the early Seventies, and has taken delivery of 150,000 engines to date.
Perkins group managing director, Tony Gilroy says: ‘Despite the current recession in the construction industry, we expect to sell them a lot more than that under the new agreement.
Most of the product will be exported to Caterpillar plants all around the world.’
Other well-known names currently in Gilroy's order book include Caterpillar rival Komatsu, and German forklift truck maker Linde.
Rover uses Perkins diesels in the Montego and Maestro cars.
Some 75 per cent of Perkins' UK production is shipped overseas, and the company has picked up four Queen's Awards for export over the past few years.
The research and development offshoot, Perkins Technology, has been energetically marketing its services to third-party clients in continental Europe, North America, and Japan.
But not everything is rosy — 1991 saw a bruising strike at Peterborough, and Gilroy admits that the company has been hit hard by the economic downturn in almost every country in which it competes.
Around 400,000 engines a year are built in 15 different countries, and sold in 160.’
The difficulties have not been restricted to the U.K. It is a world recession, although the U.K. happens to be deeper in it than other countries,’ he says.
A variety of factors have combined to depress demand, not the least of them being the slump in truck sales in the U.K. — Foden and ERF are among Perkins' customers.
Uncertainties over the Common Agricultural Policy have made farmers reluctant to invest in new agricultural machinery.
Perkins supplies engines for tractors.
Armed forces cutbacks in the West have had an effect, too.
Perkins is a major defence contractor, and builds engines for the Challenger tank at the former Rolls-Royce Diesels plant at Shrewsbury, which it owns.
‘Clearly all this has had an impact on profitability,’ Gilroy says.
‘Having had some excellent performances in previous years, 1991 has certainly been a setback.
We believe that the downturn has genuinely bottomed out now, however, and we will be watching for a pick up during the next three months.’
A consequence of the recession has been a reduction of just over six per cent in the 5,000 worldwide workforce in the past 12 months.
Gilroy is optimistic about long-term growth.
He believes that an increasing number of vehicle and equipment makers who currently build their own engines will be forced to buy at least some of what they need from independents like Perkins.
The cost of developing power plants to meet ever-tougher emissons laws will make it cost-uneffective for them to do so themselves, he contends, especially if engines are destined for low volume applications.
He is also optimistic about the future of the diesel car.
Encouraged by friendlier tax treatment, U.K. sales could double between now and 1997.
Diesel Cars: Peugeot takes a fleet demo range on the road
Ashley Martin monitors a major push in the fight for business sales
By ASHLEY MARTIN
THE LEADING diesel manufacturer Peugeot-Talbot has taken its 27-strong line-up of oil burners on the road in an effort to change the buying habits of British businesses.
The company believes that 40 per cent of company cars will be diesel within the next few years, following Gallup research carried out for Shell Oil U.K.
Throughout April about 1,000 fleet operators are being given the chance to put Peugeot's entire diesel car range through its paces at various venues around the country, allowing road and track driving.
Last Tuesday, at the first Diesel in Action day at Millbrook Proving Ground, near Bedford, fleet buyers were able to test the cars, ranging from the 205 super-mini to executive 605, on a hills-and-bends circuit and the renowned high-speed bowl.
They also had the chance to compare the Peugeot product with rival diesels from the other leading manufacturers such as Ford, Vauxhall and Rover.
The eight-day 1992 Diesel in Action programme follows a highly successful similar venture last year.
Peugeot fleet sales director David Brookman said during the demonstration day: ‘The evidence is plain enough.
The increased number of requests we are getting for diesel demonstrators speaks volumes.’
Fleet diesel sales grew by 15.6 per cent last year, and Brookman naturally wants it known that Peugeot picked up the lion's share.
In 1991 the company recorded a 35 per cent increase in the sales of diesels, all in a total market that has dipped by 20 per cent.
‘Of the top five selling models, Peugeot takes first, second and fifth places,’ Brookman reminded listeners.
‘Clearly, something quite dramatic is happening.
It is the result of us winning the argument in favour of our diesels, not only on grounds of economics but also on quality.’
After the driving programme last week, several fleet executives appeared convinced that diesel is the right road for them to pursue.
Legal and General Insurance transport and equipment manager Peter Fenton runs a 1,500-strong user-chooser fleet; around 12–15 per cent of drivers are currently opting for diesel.
He says: ‘I think that number will increase once the promised summer tax review is carried out by the new Conservative government.
A lot of people are waiting to see what that brings and how it will affect diesel cars.
‘We have Peugeot and Citroen diesels.
I think they are perceived as the state-of-the-art diesel vehicles.
Drivers will be looking at the turbo variants, as their performance is more equivalent to petrol versions.’
Tony Busby, general services section leader with BP Chemicals, says: ‘I came here because people are always popping into my office to seek advice on what choice to make.
Diesels are creeping in slowly.
We have only seven out of 620 cars — we are getting there very slowly.’
Meeting his own customers at the event was David Cox, sales manager with Avis Fleet and Leasing Management.
‘I hear a lot of talk about customers going diesel, but everyone is on the fence waiting to see what happens with the Conservatives’ promised benefit-in-kind tax review.
‘The reps still say they don't want a diesel car because it's noisy, but that's changing.
Peugeot and Citroen have helped there.’
Fred Breadle, transport organiser for the Women's Royal Voluntary Service, and in charge of 550 cars, has just bought 57 Peugeot 309 diesels as replacements for Vauxhalls and Nissans, and has been mightily impressed with them, as have the women drivers.
He explains: ‘We bought two initially and put one in Scotland and one in Wales to see if the ladies liked them.
They fell in love with them, and we have since purchased another 55.
I've not heard any grumbles about them at all.
‘We buy 50 to 60 cars a year, and if they prove to be as good as they are at the moment at the end of the year I think we could be in the market again for more diesels.
‘I think we could go 100 per cent diesel eventually.
I tried just about every diesel and the Peugeots performed better than other manufacturers' diesels I tried.’
Aldermaston-based Blue Circle Industries' group car fleet manager Norman Gross says: ‘Diesels have been on the car choice list for some time.
But now ‘job’ cars are going diesel completely, because from next year all cars must be cat-equipped if they are petrol vehicles, and so the price differential has been ironed out between petrol and diesel, since ‘cat’cars are more expensive than non-'cats'.
In addition, diesels on whole life costs are more economic.’
Gross is in charge of a 1,100 fleet made up of 800 ‘job’ cars and 300 user-chooser vehicles, and is expecting to save around £400 a year per car by switching to diesel with a mix of manufacturers.
Peugeot's Diesel Action days will also be held at Capesthorpe Hall, near Macclesfield today, Dalmeny House near Edinburgh on April 22, and at Nidd Hall near Harrogate on April 28 and 29.
Diesel Cars: 160,000 miles of deliveries at more than 20mpg
By STEVE BANNER
THE U.S.-based parcels empire, United Parcel Service (UPS), relies on a fleet of diesel Ford and Mercedes vans to collect and deliver international packages and freight in Britain.
About 150 long-wheelbase, high roof Mercedes-Benz 308Ds are the mainstays of the operation.
As well as parcels, UPS accepts palletised air freight and the single rear wheels allow pallets to be slid into the vehicles through the back doors.
Twin rear wheels tend to obstruct the load area because they require larger wheelarches.
The hard-working, 2.5-tonne gross vehicle weight 308Ds stay in service with UPS for four years and cover 40,000 miles a year.
‘We expect to achieve 20 mpg and possibly even 25 mpg,’ says automotive manager Peter Harris.
The 308D is not the fastest thing on the highway, but Harris has no wish for his drivers to go breaking any speed records.
‘The van is quick enough for our purposes and we have no need for turbo diesels,’ he says.
‘Turbos mean a higher fuel consumption.’
Harris agrees that Mercedes parts can be expensive, but says this is balanced by the vans' good second-hand prices.
They are operated under a contract hire agreement.
The vehicles are standard models.
The load area is lined with plywood to protect it from scrapes and knocks and a full-height ply bulkhead protects the driver from flying parcels if he has to brake heavily.
As well as the 308Ds, Harris runs 50 long-wheelbase, high-roof 2.8-tonne gross vehicle weight Ford Transit 100s which handle parcels only.
The Ford has a more aerodynamic shape than the Mercedes, which means better fuel consumption, and he will not rule out the possibility of switching to Transits at 3.5 tonnes at some stage.
The Ford has enhanced appeal at this weight, he adds, given that the latest version is available with single rear wheels.
‘We are currently evaluating it.’
The UPS fleet operates out of 25 U.K. depots from Plymouth to Prestwick in Scotland.
Much of the air freight passes through Stansted and a sorting hub at Barking handles items destined to travel to any one of 13 European countries by road.
UPS is one of the biggest van operators in the U.S. It runs 60,000 vans which are built by the company.
Harris reports that UPS is already following this policy in Germany, and says it could spread to the U.K. The German vans use off-the-shelf diesel engines and gearboxes.
The bodies, however, are made with hardwood, aluminium sheet and glass fibre, and the vehicles are designed with ease of repair and service in mind.
When the bonnet is hinged up, for example, the wings and front grille hinge with it.
Building one of these vehicles is an expensive exercise.
‘But the life expectancy is in excess of 20 years,’ says Harris.
UPS's approach is a slap in the face for van manufacturers, who spend millions of pounds on development.
Harris argues, however, that a van like a Transit has to appeal to a wide cross-section of operators, and that means the design has to be a compromise.
Despite the greater reliance on petrol in the U.S., the van fleet there is starting to swing towards diesel, says Harris.
UPS is also experimenting with compressed natural gas, propane, and has run battery-powered and methanol-fuelled vehicles.
Diesel Cars: The red hot and green machine
EVEN the sports car of the future could be diesel-engined, according to Chris Smith, chairman of Westfield Sports Cars, producers of some of the raunchiest two-seaters on the market.
A 0–60 mph acceleration time of 6.6 seconds, with 0–100 mph in 24.5 seconds, is pretty quick even by the best sports car standards.
The figures were validated recently by an independent technical magazine for the prototype green machine.
Under the bonnet is a tweaked Ford Sierra 1.8 turbo diesel, tuned to give 110 bhp.
Top speed is nothing special, at 108 mph, but the mid-range torque, or pulling power, is said to be remarkable, enabling the car to sprint from 30 mph to 70 mph in just over six seconds.
The response to the experimental car has been so encouraging that Smith believes he will be obliged to offer a production version, costing probably around £12,500, in ‘almost built-up’ form.
The Kingswinford, West Midlands, company has just won an order for 200 of its light and rapid open two-seaters in petrol form from Japan.
‘With the environment under threat, it seemed appropriate to develop a cleaner running, more economical version of our range,’ says Smith.
‘We are delighted with the results so far, especially the performance, which stands up to comparison with the rest of the sports car world.
The turbo diesel is one of our investments in the future.’
Crows drive islanders up pole
By Robert Reid, Scottish Correspondent
ELECTRICITY engineers and linesmen on the Orkney islands went into battle yesterday against their public enemy number one — the hooded crow.
Thousands of the birds, also known as Hoodies or Corbies, inhabit the windswept islands off the north coast of Scotland despite the lack of trees.
Instead they use the plentiful supply of power poles strung across the countryside for nesting sites.
For years the result has been frequent power blackouts for Orcadians as the birds' elaborate home-making habits — incorporating everything from barbed wire and steel mesh to tin cans and nails — caused the electricity supply to short-circuit.
It was proving an increasingly costly and time-consuming problem for the supply company, Scottish Hydro-Electric.
A spokesman said: ‘During the course of the nesting season we have been paying out up to £2,000 a week in man hours just to patrol the lines and remove nests.
‘With the nesting period stretching for up to 10 weeks, the bill for this kind of activity in Orkney alone can quickly reach £20,000.
That's not counting the damage to transformers and other equipment from the nests that escape our attention, or the fact that we have to deal with similar problems in Caithness and Shetland.’
Scottish Hydro decided to go to war, but with environmental considerations in mind opted for a psychological approach rather than the shotgun option.
Twenty personnel landed on the tiny island of Rousay yesterday armed with experimental ‘weapons’ designed to eliminate the menace without harming the birds, which are regarded by farmers as pests, but by ornithologists as clever, adaptable and resourceful.
The objective was simply to drive the crows off the islands' 20,000 power poles and keep them away.
Three methods were being tried: A benign substance called Hot Foot Gel painted on the top of transformers and similar equipment to produce a ‘sinking’ feeling for the Hoodies when they try to land; Plastic strips with irregular plastic spikes fixed to the top of equipment to discourage the birds from landing in the first place; Non-working poles incorporating ‘alternative nesting pans’were erected at selected sites to encourage the crows to use them instead.
‘This method has been used successfully with larger birds like eagles in America and South Africa,’ said Mr White.
‘We have gone a step further, even starting some nests off by taping on twigs and other suitable material to the boxes.’
A spokesman for the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds said: ‘The hooded crow is a bit of a camp follower of man, and is attracted to anywhere that agriculture is going on.
‘They are undoubtedly a difficult problem for organisations like the power companies, who are perfectly entitled to take the kind of action they are taking.’
Ministry of Sound
The use of a picture taken inside the Ministry of Sound club in our article on the drugs Ecstasy and Ketamine (April 3) was intended merely to show young people in a club and was not intended to suggest that drugs are permitted or used at the Ministry of Sound.
We readily accept that management of the Ministry of Sound takes unprecedented and most stringent measures to prevent drugs being taken into the club and we apologise for any implication to the contrary.
We have agreed to pay damages and legal costs to the Ministry of Sound.
Letter to the Editor: Abbey best
SIR — Your report on the relics of King Edward the Martyr resting in a vault at the Midland Bank, Woking,(April 6) highlights a sorry state of affairs.
Would it not be more appropriate if the remains of this second King of the English, great-great-grandson of Alfred the Great, were transferred to Glastonbury, burial place of his forebears and King Arthur, or to Westminster Abbey?
Requiescat in pace.
PHILIPPA WIAT Bexhill on Sea, Sussex 
Peterborough:
ENTRY in the small ads of the St Austell Packet: ‘Wedding dress, lace, £50.
Shotgun, £200.’
Peterborough:
PETER Owen, the publisher, has received a sizeable order for copies of Falkland People, a book describing life on the islands.
The customer: the Argentinian Embassy in London.
Way of the World: Merrie England
I DID not see the London Marathon this weekend, and so cannot complain about it too loudly, but my heartfelt sympathy goes out to those who found themselves confronted by 25,000 runners, all anxious to show how goodhearted they were and what fun they were having.
From photographs I see that some were dressed as chickens, some as rabbits, some as Indian statesmen.
Many men wore cushions under their shirts or put on grass skirts and false breasts, whether in emulation or mockery of the gentler sex.
There are those who will argue there is no harm to this, it is all for charity; my objection is not moral but aesthetic.
It is not true to say that anything is justified in a good cause: vulgarity, exhibitionism and ugliness are things to be avoided.
There is no excuse for inflicting them on your fellow-citizens by saying it is done in a good cause.
The pains of living in an overcrowded island are apparent enough for those who have to travel inside it.
But if the torture is to be compounded by organised mass merrymaking, life will soon become unendurable.
When Disney's Euro park was first mooted I, too, saw it as a cultural Chernobyl and prayed that some mad French intellectual would blow it up.
It certainly sounds my idea of Hell on Earth, with no alcohol being sold (as in Fortress Wapping) because, as the American organiser explained: ‘We want to keep the Magic Kingdom magic.’
Now I feel that the French intellectuals are wrong.
There was a time when we might have hoped to educate our Disneyfodder to something better.
That time has now passed.
The theme for the future is not education but segregation.
If hundreds of thousands of Mickey Mouse fans choose to celebrate their preference together in a small area set aside for them in the north of France, then the rest of the country can breathe a sigh of relief and head somewhere else.
By the same token, if the London Marathon can be persuaded to run round and round Wembley Stadium, then the rest of us can happily offer to sponsor it.