

Seaweed may turn tide of costly drugs
By Roger Highfield Science Editor
SEAWEED is helping to slash the cost of a new generation of drugs by 1,000 fold, delegates were told yesterday.
Medicine is being revolutionised by a host of natural proteins that can be mass-produced by bacteria, ranging from human growth hormone costing $700,000 (£400,000) a kilogram to the blood clotting agent Factor VIII which costs $1 billion per kilogram.
Now the expertise of a small British company opens the way to cutting the cost of these biotechnology drugs by between five and 1,000 fold, the congress at Umist in Manchester was told yesterday.
Dr Ken Jones, of Affinity Chromatography, Isle of Man, said biotech drugs promise to increase life expectancy by 20 years.
Until now their cost made the price of gold appear ‘peanuts’ by comparison.
Now he has commercialised a method to recover the drugs, first developed by Dr Chris Lowe of Cambridge University.
The technique has already been used to manufacture anti-cancer drugs and blood products, with sales going to 21 countries including Japan.
‘This venture has proved to be that rarity in Britain, a classical technology transfer from a British university to a British company followed by success,’ he said.
The protein drugs are manufactured in vats of bacteria using genetic engineering methods.
It then takes up to 15 stages of filtration and other methods to separate the few parts per million of useful protein.
‘Now you can replace all those stages with one,’ said Dr Jones.
Using an advanced form of chromatography, the protein is separated by passing the bacteria through a column containing agarose, a seaweed-based material.
The protein is then released from the agarose by adding a salty solution, he said.
‘That is the beauty.
You can bring it off in one step with 99 per cent purity.’
High-pitched sound may be a powerful new weapon to help recycle plastic, the congress was told yesterday.
Ultrasound, which is audible to dogs and younger people, creates hot spots of energy that can mix disparate types of plastic, such as polystyrene cups and PVC, into a re-usable plastic, said Dr Gareth Price, of Bath University.
Highly toxic pollutants could be safely disposed of by burning them under water, Prof Keith Bartle, of Leeds University, told the conference.
Despite sounding unlikely, burning the waste in water is a much more controlled and efficient way to break it down than conventional incineration.
Cancer no barrier to parenthood
By Peter Pallot Health Services Staff
PEOPLE who survived treatment for cancer when they were children in the 1960s have been able to become parents of healthy children, research shows.
Fears that radiotherapy would cause genetic mutations leading to handicaps in offspring appear to be groundless, according to studies among 3,000 survivors.
Dr Mike Hawkins, of the Childhood Cancer Research Group at Oxford University, also allayed fears that susceptibility to cancer might be much higher among children of those who underwent treatment.
Further research is to be carried out among 5,000 people who survived childhood cancer and were born before 1969.
One mother who beat cancer as a child and grew up to have a healthy daughter is Sally Scott.
When she was 13 doctors discovered she had bone cancer.
Surgeons removed her right leg above the knee and she lost her hair through radiotherapy.
When she married Darren, 28, doctors told her that the side effects of drugs and radiotherapy might make it difficult to conceive.
But Mrs Scott, 26, from Crewe, Cheshire, gave birth to Katie two years ago and is expecting another child.
Balanced diet ‘still ignored’
Millions of pounds are spent on food promotion yet the importance of a balanced diet is often ignored by British health experts and food firms, the Consumers' Association said in a report yesterday.
Dr John Beishon, its director, said people were confused about what to eat and what to avoid.
Vested interests were reluctant to accept that the typical diet was a cause of coronary heart disease, strokes and cancer, and that people should eat less fat, sugar and salt and more cereals, fruit and vegetables.
Doctors condemn alternative cures
‘False claims’ made by practitioners of unorthodox medicine
By David Fletcher, Health Services Correspondent
ALTERNATIVE medicine practitioners were accused by the Royal College of Physicians yesterday of making false and misleading claims for their treatments of allergies by unorthodox methods.
In a report on conventional and alternative treatments for allergy, the Royal College said some tests and diagnostic concepts used by alternative practitioners could harm patients.
It said: ‘The public should be warned against costly methods of diagnosis and treatments which have not been validated.’
It not only criticises nearly all forms of alternative treatment, but accuses practitioners of reluctance to submit claims to scientific examination.
It says alternative practitioners fail to diagnose potentially serious problems and cause further harm by recommending unhealthy diets, by reinforcing obsessional behaviour, and by encouraging social isolation.
‘Vulnerable people should be aware that there are some laboratories and practitioners who rely on controversial and unproven procedures…which are not considered by independent observers either to be reliable or to have a scientific basis.’
Its comments on various therapies for some allergies are: Homoeopathy: ‘There is as yet no adequate evidence that any benefit is conferred.’
Acupuncture: ‘Claims…are not based on the results of well performed clinical trials although some studies have shown a small but temporary improvement in wheeziness.’
Hair analysis: ‘The concept of allergic symptoms being related to the levels of metal which are commonly found in hair samples is entirely speculative.
There is no scientific data to substantiate this hypothesis.’
Herbal remedies: ‘There is no evidence that they work’ apart from traditional Chinese medicinal plants in the treatment of childhood eczema.
Vega ‘black box’ testing: ‘There are no valid controlled trials to substantiate the claims made for its use.’
The report says many of the tests and concepts used by alternative practitioners are ‘speculative’ and there is no justification to pay for their treatments.
By contrast, the report lists a range of drug treatments for allergies.
It says avoidance of the substance causing the allergy is the first line of treatment followed by drugs, where possible, to relieve symptoms and by desensitisation in a few selected cases.
The report was bitterly criticised by the British Society for Allergy and Environmental Medicine which accused the authors of ‘many inaccuracies’ in describing treatments of which they had no first-hand experience.