

Freddie Mercury song earns £1m for Aids trust
By Susannah Herbert
THE rock group Queen has handed over £1 million to the Terrence Higgins Trust, the Aids charity, as a tribute to Freddie Mercury, its former lead singer.
The money came from royalties from Bohemian Rhapsody — the 1975 hit re-released following the 45-year-old singer's death from the disease last November — which shot to No 1 in the pop charts and was named best-selling A-side at the Ivor Novello Awards yesterday.
It was presented to the Aids organisation by Brian May, a guitarist in the group, and drummer Roger Taylor to set up the Freddie Mercury Memorial Trust.
Afterwards, Mr Taylor said: ‘Nothing would have pleased Freddie more than knowing his performing and song-writing talent would raise so much money to help Aids sufferers everywhere.
‘The best way to fight this appalling illness is to make sure everybody knows about Aids and how it can be fought.
Freddie's best known song has helped do that.’
Mr Nick Partridge, Higgins Trust chief executive, said the donation would help the charity buy a new headquarters.
‘Everyone is delighted by the enormous level of support we have received following Freddie's death.’
At the Novello ceremony, Mr May also accepted an award for the best television commercial theme for Driven By You, written for Ford.
Les Mis barricade is a show stopper
By Nigel Bunyan
IT WAS an uneven contest: the assembled cast of Les Miserables versus three-and-a-half tons of junk fashioned into a French Revolutionary barricade.
The barricade, impressive as it was immovable, won.
Yesterday Cameron Mackintosh, who as producer has successfully taken Les Mis around the globe, described the moment the musical's Manchester premier came to a grinding and inglorious halt.
‘The first half had been fantastic,’ he said.
‘Then we discovered a hydraulic pump, which moves the set on-stage, had broken down.
‘Our whole ethos is that the show must go on but last night there was absolutely nothing we could do.
‘The barricade is essential to the second half.
So I simply had to walk on stage after an extended interval and tell the audience we would have to end the performance.
‘The cast insisted on coming on behind me and, in tears, they sang the final song.’
The faulty pump helps to shunt half the barricade — a 20ft high pile of doors, railings and household furniture — along tramways stretching across the stage.
It then interlinks with the remainder of the barricade, creating a complex set upon which the performers act out choreographed battle scenes.
The cast relies on the set for footholds as much as dramatic effect.
‘It would have been too dangerous to continue,’ said Mr Mackintosh.
‘People are running around with guns and, even though these are loaded with blanks, there might have been accidents had we tried to transfer the action to a flat stage.
Mr Mackintosh said: ‘Last night was the first time I have ever had a show not continue.’
Mr Andrew De Rosa, the theatre's general manager, said: ‘It was actually a very simple thing that went wrong: not at all a piece of technical wizardry.
Just a pump worth a few hundred pounds.’
Technicians spent yesterday repairing the faulty pump for last night's performance.
Despite its first night technical problem, Les Miserables is expected to enjoy a successful run in Manchester.
Advance bookings amount to £4.5 million, a record for a show outside London.
Bubble bursts for makers of elderflower ‘champagne’
By A J McIlroy
THE producers of a traditional English elderflower drink reluctantly agreed yesterday to drop the word champagne from the label.
The official French champagne industry organisation and a representative champagne producer, Taittinger, had sought a High Court injunction banning Dr Guy Woodall and his partner, Mr Ray Bevan, from Leatherhead, Surrey, from using the name champagne pending a trial over their action.
Dr Woodall said after the hearing: ‘We fight on.
We don't think it right that a 150-year-old traditional English drink should be legislated out of the English language to satisfy the monopoly interests of the French champagne growers.’
Mr Nicholas Bragge, for the French producers, claimed that the elderflower drink had been ‘dressed up’ in a champagne bottle with the familiar wire top and was being passed off as the real stuff.
Dr Woodall, 32, denied this, saying he had produced 80,000 bottles of the non-alcoholic elderflower drink without anyone confusing it with champagne.
It was made from a recipe his grandmother used 70 years ago — flower of elder, citric acid, lemon and sugar.
He had simply added fizzy water.
‘How could there be any intent to deceive people into thinking it is French champagne?
Our drink retails at only £2.35p a bottle,’ he added.
An all-consuming passion for weeds
By Virginia Matthews, Consumer Correspondent
SENSITIVE gardeners who baulk at using pesticides, or are too unfit for hoeing, should instead eat their way to a weed-free garden, it is suggested today.
Fat-hen, stinging nettles, chickweed and hairy bittercress are all ‘largely edible’, and can provide interesting textures and tastes, says the report in Gardening from Which? magazine.
Putting weeds on the dinner party menu not only provides guests with added nutrition but establishes the host as a figure who truly understands the green revolution.
Gently cooked, fat-hen, or mutton-tops, tastes rather like spinach, according to Miss Laura Ponsonby, education officer at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew.
But she said: ‘As with many weeds, fat-hen should be consumed in moderation, and should be carefully identified before eating.’
While dandelion leaves and hairy bittercress are best eaten raw in salads, ground-elder, stinging nettles, chickweed and dead nettles — the sort that do not sting — are best cooked like other green vegetables.
Of all the edible weeds it is the humble nettle which is the most versatile in the kitchen.
Twinned with speciality cheese, served with soup, drunk as a tea or beer or cooked and tossed in butter, the young stinging nettle, or, from another plant family, the dead nettle, was thought 300 years ago to ‘drive away melancholy and make the heart merry’.
What better recipe for a gardener faced with a plot full of weeds this Easter?
Fashion: THE HEAD HUNTERS HAT WEEK
Kathryn Samuel introduces four top milliners who will present a series of special shows at Harrods for Daily Telegraph readers
By KATHRYN SAMUEL
JUST two months till Royal Ascot marks an unofficial ‘off’ to the hat season.
With attentive milliners advising sooner rather than later, the hat hunt for whatever date in your diary looms largest should be over.
And if there is a form guide to the milliners most fancied this season, the designers featured here would be odds-on favourites.
Freddie Fox, Graham Smith and Phillip Somerville are great individualists who between them dress the heads of the entire Royal Family, among countless other notables.
Philip Treacy, a talented novice who set up his company two years ago after leaving The Royal College of Art, makes guest appearances for the Karl Lagerfeld/Chanel stable, Rifat Ozbek and Jil Sander.
In just over two weeks, the four will take up the pins and the microphone for the benefit of Telegraph readers.
Nothing beats personal advice on what shape and style of hat will suit or flatter, and we have planned with Harrods a week of hats.
Somerville, who opens the week on Tuesday April 28, is a shy chap but, given a hat, an audience and the chance to natter on his favourite topic he becomes ‘a bit of an exhibitionist.
I like meeting people.
I advise and suggest; after all, if there is something wrong with your car, you go to a mechanic…’
New Zealand-born Somerville is celebrating 21 years with his own label.
In Britain, beavering for Otto Lucas in the mid-Sixties, he decided to set up his own business after Lucas was killed in a plane crash in 1971.
Wednesday is Graham Smith's day.
He prefers to structure his shows as an interview session, with fashion consultant Colleen Brand, where the audience can also ask questions.
Smith left the Royal College of Art in 1958, hyped by the likes of doyenne Ernestine Carter of the Sunday Times and the backing of the influential Francoise Garigues.
At 20, he found himself in Paris heading Lanvin's millinery department.
Overwhelmed, he retreated to London, eventually setting up his own label in 1967 and taking on the design directorship for Kangol hats and berets in 1981.
Like most hat designers, he does not like to confirm that rules exist.
He will admit, however, that one should ‘always stand up when you try on a hat — never sit down.
Never wear a brim wider than your shoulders or a crown narrower than your check bones.
That is why broad-crowned Edwardian style hats are flattering; they make faces, by comparison, look small and fragile.’
His prime concern is that clients should never be ‘overhatted, as in over-horsed’.
Freddie Fox, officially labelled Frederick Fox, has been designing hats for the Queen for the past 23 years.
It takes a degree of skill to ensure a hat remains in place at airports and the launch of ships.
Wind is only one of the constant perils his clients face, and his made-to-measure hats can surmount most of the elements.
His career began in Australia at the age of 12, running deliveries on his bicycle for a hat refurbishment service.
He launched his label in London in 1962 after working briefly for Otto Lucas and Madame Langee.
Little doubt, then, that the trusted trio know their stuff.
Philip Treacy's day at Harrods will be on Thursday April 30.
In the past month, he has been in Europe fulfilling a brief for international designers.
He loves performing magic tricks for the designers in their studios.
‘I can sketch 100 different hats on the spot and they may choose just 10.
It's exciting and stimulating; with a private client I love it when she trusts me.
I hate it when they try to add bits, I just like to subtract.’
Happy hat week.
Just dare to be different.
Peterborough: Snooze item
WHAT is the protocol at a smart lunch when one's neighbour drops off during the speeches?
Should one ignore the matter, laugh it off, or rouse the sleeper?
If the latter, how?
The question presented itself at yesterday's Foyle's lunch in Mayfair, when the distinguished scientist Sir Rudolf Peierls took an early siesta during an interesting speech by Lord Zuckerman, whose new book we were celebrating, and who at that very moment looked down the top table and described Peierls, rightly, as ‘one of the most brilliant theoretical physicists ever’.
The protocol matter is a serious one — in the past, for instance, I have worried about whether to ask waiters to bring a pillow for Baroness Elliot of Harwood and the TUC's Norman Willis.
Otherwise, yesterday's lunch was lively enough.
A distinguished biologist, Zuckerman's next book is about monkeys in art.
He can, apparently, date a picture precisely just by looking at the monkeys in it.
Lord Jenkins of Hillhead was on familiar ground here.
‘I was once in a hotel in India,’ he said.
‘A monkey came in and perched on a table.
I tried a little name-dropping: ‘Do you, by any chance, know my friend Solly Zuckerman?’
The monkey nodded gravely, appreciatively, affirmatively.’
Peterborough: In the swing
THERE is good news for those blazered types who used to go on ocean cruises and play blustery games of deck golf, hitting balls into the briny.
The New Scientist magazine reports that an inventor from California, Patrick Kane, has created the world's first dissolving golf ball.
This should beat a recent ban on the plastic variety — half a million a month used to litter the seas and endanger dolphins, whales and turtles.
The new balls are being welcomed by cruise veterans.
‘It's an excellent idea,’ says Capt Denis Scott-Masson, once master of the SS Canberra.
‘We used to have golfing cruises, stopping en route for matches in various ports.
There wasn't a great problem with deck practice on the Canberra because there were nets to catch the balls.
A few did escape, of course.’
Wrapped in paper pulp, gelatin and seaweed, Kane's ball, the Aquaflyte, has a core of sodium bicarbonate and sodium citrate — similar ingredients to an Alka-Seltzer.
In an emergency, that could come in handy for settling an attack of post-prandial mal de mer.
AFTER the photographers were ushered out of the Cabinet Room yesterday morning, John Major's first words to his colleagues were ‘welcome back’— a suitably downbeat successor to ‘well, who'd a thought it?’, his icebreaker after Mrs Thatcher's downfall.
Having congratulated Cabinet members on their return, Major yesterday baffled the gathering by noting that the new Attorney General, Sir Nicholas Lyell, lived in a house that was once occupied by the former Kent cricketer Alfred Mynn.
Short's attack on Karpov falls flat
By Malcolm Pein, Chess Correspondent
NIGEL SHORT, England's number one chess player, inexplicably failed to win the third match game of his World Chess Championship semi-final against Anatoly Karpov in Linares, Spain, last night.
Short, playing black, dominated the game throughout, and at the end of the first session of play on Tuesday he had a clear advantage in an endgame with superior pieces and a very strong passed pawn.
After lengthy manoeuvring Short won a second pawn and seemed certain to win.
However, some last-ditch defence by Karpov enabled him to reach a drawn rook and pawn endgame after 94 moves and a total of nine hours' and 20 minutes' play.
Short now trails 2–1 in the best of 10 match, the winner of which will be only one step away from a contest with world champion Gary Kasparov in 1993.
Short must be feeling very depressed after this lapse, since he played a model game.
However, he has the advantage of the white pieces in today's fourth game.
The other Western European semi-finalist, Jan Timman of Holland, also spoiled a winning position against his Russian opponent, Artur Yusupov.
In the following game, the third of the match, Timman had a completely won position until he made his 31st move.
After Yusopov's reply — which he found despite being in terrible time pressure — the Russian was always likely to escape with a draw.
Yusopov now leads the match 2–1.
Racing: Hills strikes 100 with Sure Sharp
By John Oaksey
SHEIKH MOHAMMED'S five-year-old Sure Sharp won the Earl of Sefton Stakes at Newmarket yesterday to give trainer Barry Hills his 100th Pattern-race success.
This was only the 12th race of Sure Sharp's career.
But now he has joined the select and, these days, sadly dwindling company of five-year-old Group-race winners.
A massive and handsome son of Sharpen Up, Sure Sharp ran a close second to Tirol in the 1990 Craven Stakes.
Hills fancied him to avenge that defeat in the 2,000 Guineas, but Tirol decisively confirmed the form.
Worse still, an injury kept Sure Sharp idle for the rest of his second season and it was only last year that Hills eventually got him back into action.
Listed victories in Ireland and Italy justified the trainer's perseverance, and on yesterday's showing, there may well be even better things to come.
Admittedly, the withdrawal of Mystiko made things easier but neither Cruachan, Desert Sun nor Star of Gdansk ever looked like troubling Sure Sharp.
From two furlongs out, the well-backed and fancied maiden Adam Smith was the only serious threat but the older horse, vigorously shaken up by Steve Cauthen, put him firmly in his place.
Cruachan, a close and gallant second in last year's Dubai Champion Stakes, was the biggest disappointment of them all here.
After he trailed in last, the stewards held an inquiry, but, according to his rider Ray Cochrane, the horse ‘felt dead after four furlongs,’ and a routine test was ordered.
Being by Sharpen Up, a proven ‘sire of sires’, Sure Sharp would only need a bit more Pattern success to earn himself a place at stud.
The Forte Mile at Sandown is his closest possible target but Hills will once again be prepared to travel the length and breadth of Europe in search of valuable prizes.
Muhayaa won the Wood Ditton Stakes for newcomers without convincing anyone that he is as yet out of the ordinary.
Of the several jumbled close behind him, Coniston Water looked a hopeful prospect.
The winner is still in the 2,000 Guineas but will not run and his trainer Alex Scott says we shall see him next over at least 10 furlongs.
Cash Asmussen, here to ride Dr Devious in this afternoon's Craven Stakes, landed a stylish gamble for Con Horgan on Mango Manila in the Ladbroke Racing Handicap.
Juniper Berry put Manton trainer Peter Chapple-Hyam back on the winning trail in the Geoffrey Barling Maiden Fillies' Stakes, beating Petal Girl by a length and half.
Racing: Cecil in Pursuit of Guineas glory
By HOTSPUR (J A McGrath)
PURSUIT OF LOVE shot to 5–1 favouritism for the 2,000 Guineas, on May 2, with an emphatic two-length victory in yesterday's European Free Handicap as he became the 200th winner trained by Henry Cecil for Lord Howard de Walden.
The improved colt quickened well to take it up over two furlongs out and went to the line clear of the dead-heaters Steinbeck and Wilde Rufo, with the latter subsequently disqualified when jockey Richard Quinn weighed in 6lb light.
Cecil has not won the 2,000 Guineas since Wollow scored in 1976, but Pursuit of Love is a genuine contender and it will take a convincing performance from either Forest Tiger or Dr Devious in today's Craven Stakes to displace him at the head of Ladbrokes' market — and other firms could well follow suit.
Hill's slashed Pursuit of Love's price to 8–1 from 33–1, while the first offer of 10–1 by Coral's immediately after the race was quickly snapped up and they now offer 7–1.
However, there could be some hasty revision later today.
Cecil explained that Pursuit of Love had been working at home with Desert Sun and the recent Newbury winner Rudimentary.
‘He is a very laid back, lazy, gross horse,’ the trainer said, ‘And I hope now that he can come on.
In the Dewhurst last year he couldn't do it when he was let down — he needs good ground.’
While the good to soft surface suited Pursuit of Love, Sheikh Mohammed's Steinbeck found conditions against him and Steve Cauthen's assessment was favourable.
‘I was delighted with the run as he definitely wants faster ground,’ he said.
Pat Eddery rode Pursuit of Love yesterday, but is committed to Tertian, who shares Guineas favouritism at 6–1 with both Hill's and Coral's.
Trainer Paul Kelleway was fined £500 by the stewards after their inquiry into Wilde Rufo failing to draw the correct weight.
‘Mr Kelleway forgot to include the weight cloth,’ explained Quinn.
Cecil's first winner for Lord Howard de Walden was Beninta in 1971 and there must be now genuine hopes that Pursuit of Love can succeed where the owner's Kris failed narrowly behind Tap On Wood in 1979 Guineas.
The Sheikh Mohammed camp are due to make up their minds over 2,000 Guineas plans later this week, and obviously the fluctuating ground conditions will make their decision a hard one.
Wolfhound, their second representative yesterday, was fourth past the post although later promoted a place.
The highlight of a very good card at Cheltenham was Katabatic's runaway win by eight lengths in the South Wales Showers Silver Trophy Chase.
Taking it up two out, he proved too strong for Waterloo Boy.
Later, Beech Road survived a shocking blunder at the penultimate fence to win the Coombe Hill Novice Chase.
There will be a carry forward of £285,364 to today's Tote Jackpot pool operating on the Newmarket card, on which Twist And Turn may prove hardest to beat in the Fielden Stakes.
A punter at Pontefract races collected £24,843 for a 10p investment while another customer at a Tote betting shop in Paddington picked up £12,421 for a 5p outlay.
The Ayr executive have announced plans for the Ayr Silver Cup, a consolation race over six furlongs, to be run as a prelude to the Ayr Gold Cup on the same card on Sept 19.
Those declared but eliminated from the ‘Gold Cup’ field will automatically go into the Silver Cup.
Racing: Nijinsky put down
NIJINSKY, the last horse win the 2,000 Guineas, Derby and St Leger, was put down yesterday morning, at the age of 25, owing to infirmities of old age.
He was the first son of Northern Dancer to make the grade on this side of the Atlantic.
Trained by Vincent O'Brien and ridden by Lester Piggott, Nijinsky won all of his five starts as a juvenile in 1969, culminating with a Dewhurst Stakes victory.
The following season, Nijinsky took the Gladness Stakes on his reappearance and then won five successive championship races.
The 2,000 Guineas, Derby — where he beat Gyr by two and a half lengths — Irish Derby, King George and the St Leger all fell to Charles Engelhard's colt.
Nijinsky then went to Longchamp as a hot favourite for the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe, but there, under a less-than-brilliant ride from Piggott, he tasted defeat for the first time, beaten a head by Sassafras.
He attempted to restore his reputation in the Champion Stakes, but the sparkle had gone and he was beaten a length and a half by Lorenzaccio.
Nijinksy was then retired to stud at Claiborne Farm, Kentucky, where he proved equally brilliant as a stallion, siring such good horses as Golden Fleece, Ile de Bourbon, Shadeed, and in 1986, he completed the Kentucky Derby/Epsom Derby double with Ferdinand and Shahrastani.
Racing: Promising Kansk is Day's Best
By Course Correspondent
FOUR of the last five winners of the Babraham Handicap at Newmarket have had the benefit of a previous outing in the season of their success and KANSK*, who fits into this category, should maintain the trend (2.15) today.
John Gosden's stable has already hit form, and the lightly-raced Kansk showed plenty of promise when third to Torchon at Pontefract last week.
Amaze, the impressive, wide-margin winner of a competitive handicap at Newbury last Friday, may make a successful step up in class in the Fielden Stakes (3.05).
Easy Doncaster winner Forest Tiger is expected to consolidate his 2,000 Guineas claims in the Craven Stakes (3.40) and Jack Berry's Heather Bank may make all in the Ladbrokes Boldboy Sprint Handicap (4.10).
Equestrianism: Big Ben could strike again EQUESTRIANISM
Germans lead European challenge in World Cup final
By Alan Smith in Del Mar, California
UNTIL John Whitaker had to scratch Henderson Milton with last-minute lameness a week ago, the 1992 Volvo World Cup final in Del Mar had been billed as the ‘duel of the World Cup champions’— Milton's rival in this ‘shoot-out’ being Canadian Ian Millar's Big Ben, the first horse to win the World Cup twice, in 1988 and 1989.
Big Ben, now 16, then missed the following two finals, which were won by Whitaker and Milton, through ill health.
But his recent form has shown the Belgian-bred gelding to be back to his best, and he must be favourite to be the first horse to take the World Cup for a third time.
As always, the United States is numerically the strongest country, as they have two leagues of their own from which to produce finalists.
Their 14 riders include two previous winners, Norman Dello Joio (1983), and Leslie Lenehan, who scored in 1986 after throwing away a winning chance 12 months earlier.
The biggest European danger to Millar seems likely to come from the six-strong German contingent, who include two of their Seoul Olympic gold-medal team, Franke Sloothaak and Ludger Beerbaum.
Beerbaum became this year's European League champion when winning the final qualifier in Gothenburg earlier this month.
France are also well represented with four riders, including world and European champion Eric Navet.
He has not brought his title holder, Quito de Baussy, but thinks a great deal of his mare, Roxanne de Gruchy.
His compatriot, Alexandra Ledermann's Punition, who beat Navet in the Paris World Cup round but who had a difficult flight to Del Mar, looked much more at ease at the official horse inspection here, after a few days' rest.
When Millar and Big Ben won the Tampa, Florida, Invitational just over two weeks ago, Britain's US-based Tim Grubb was runner-up, on Denizen.
Although Grubb has sent Denizen back to his New Jersey stable for a rest, before coming to Europe in May in search of a place in Britain's Olympic team, he brings a useful substitute in Ever.
Grubb, a member of the team who finished second in the Los Angeles Olympics, rode Ever in the 1991 World Cup final in Gothenburg, but afterwards the 11-year-old stayed in Europe, to be ridden by his owner, Enrique Sarasola.
They did little, however, and Grubb took over the ride again last November, but has taken him to only a few shows, mostly indoor, in which Ever has been extremely consistent.
Grubb said yesterday: ‘I would be more comfortable about my chance of winning the World Cup if I had Denizen here.
When he was second to Big Ben, he was two seconds faster and had only one fence down.
But I'm happy with my decision to rest him because he has been competing since January, and Ever is an improving horse.’
Britain's other challenger, and the only one to have made the transatlantic journey, is Tina Cassan with Genesis, the Toronto World Cup-winner.
This is by far the biggest task Miss Cassan, 26, has yet tackled, but she has shown both ability and determination to get this far.
She ran her own stable, near Newbury, Berkshire, until Yorkshire businessman Fred Brown offered her the ride on his horses just over two years ago.
She realised he could provide her with some top-class partners and she has made the best of them.
She and Genesis could well finish among the leaders.
Yachting: Host city sells the Cup short YACHTING
Challengers save deepest blushes of San Diego organisers
By Tim Jeffery in San Diego
WHEN it comes to marketing the greatest sailing regatta in the world — the America's Cup — the visiting nations in San Diego have beaten the host city hands down.
By any yardstick, starting even with television, the visiting countries have shown more initiative.
The defenders' and challengers' Cup trials, for example, have been covered by only ESPN, the sport cable channel, in the United States.
Only their subscribers have been able to watch the races on national television, and this will continue until ABC screen the Cup races themselves, starting on May 9.
Yet in France, even as early as the Janaury draw for the challengers' trials, the event was screened nationally — and special television walls were installed in Tokyo stations to carry pictures in Japan.
Italy has also provided extensive coverage, while in New Zealand there has been almost saturation screening of races, no doubt fuelled by the hope that, although the All Blacks and their cricket team failed to win their respective World Cups, New Zealand sailors can go all the way and clinch the oldest international sporting trophy in the world.
The same pattern has applied to the print media.
Cuttings books show that many foreign newspapers have carried far more reports and feature articles on the event than American newspapers and magazines — particularly in Californian, where the event is talking place.
So why has the Cup failed to repeat the huge media and financial success it enjoyed in Fremantle, Western Australia, in the 1987 series?
Much of the blame must be laid at the door of the disorganised America's Cup Organising Committee, who for the past 10 months have been on the brink of bankruptcy.
They are still being sued for £180,000 by a Los Angeles-based helipcoter firm for loss of income while assisting television coverage.
Had it not been for the financial support of the telecommunications giant, AT & T, and the local banker and real estate mogul, Malin Burnham, the ACOC would have been wound up long before now.
But AT & T are far from happy.
They are standing by the event mainly for the sake of their corporate image.
They have already had a ‘frank exchange of views’ with the ACOC over the International Village, a poor assortment of marquees which have cost AT & T a small fortune in sponsorship rights.
The village has attracted only a trickle of visitors.
Throughout, the ACOC have failed in their commitments or obstructed the work of others.
When the challengers, who have a bigger budget and more style than the host body, wanted to open their own village, the ACOC barred them from using the words ‘America's Cup’.
And it is thanks only to the challengers — and their sponsor, Louis Vuitton — that there are street banners, scoreboards in downtown San Diego, a telephonist in the media centre and, indeed, television coverage of the event.
The ACOC were forced, because of lack of funds, to surrender their rights to televising the Cup to the challengers.
It was like soccer's World Cup host country handing over the television rights to the visiting nations.
This must not happen again.
Although the Cup is run under the banner of yacht clubs, the sailing fraternity should be kept to ceremonial, courtesy and race duties, and corporate professionals should run the business side of the event.
Rugby Union: World stars enjoy their romp before serious play starts
By John Mason in Timaru, New Zealand
IT IS as well that the five-point try, which is about to be introduced by the International Rugby Board, did not apply when an assortment of stars drawn from eight countries, calling themselves a World XV, displayed their skills in the seaside town of Timaru, South Canterbury, yesterday, against a Hanan Shield XV — winning 74–3.
In their 13-try rout of a gallant group of farmers and freezing-plant workers, New Zealand's overseas guests for three centennial-season internationals in a week against the All Blacks, beginning on Saturday, enjoyed themselves.
Outside-half Didier Camberabero, not an immaculate hair out of place, converted 11 of those tries by way of reminding France, who left him out of the Five Nations' side, that he is still a formidable competitor.
South Africa's Andre Joubert, running spiritedly from full-back, collected three smartly-taken tries before retiring at half-time, and stylish Jeremy Guscott, England's Grand Slam centre, had friend and foe gawping in disbelief when he strode some 70 yards to the try-line.
Even the All Blacks squad, who were present, broke off from a cheerful public relations exercise of signing autographs to note two-try Guscott's regal progress that began from a standing start and a little shuffling half-circle to create the space.
The vivid acceleration that followed was as effortless as it was devastating.
These new-look All Blacks, who have been told by management that the often churlish ungraciousness of other recent seasons is not acceptable, stayed for more than an hour.
That in itself made for a notable afternoon at Fraser Park, not that goodwill will be the principal factor on offer when the serious business starts at Lancaster Park, Christchurch, on Saturday.
Nor would it do to come to too many conclusions on the evidence of yesterday's romp in the sun on a well-grassed but hard pitch.
As representatives of New Zealand's Third Division, the locals, drawn from two of Canterbury's district unions and North Otago, have no great playing pretensions.
But, headed by a ferociously fearless lad called Craig Dorgan on the wing, they did tackle themselves to a near standstill besides losing nothing in fitness.
The gap was a combination of speed of thought and ball skills.
Sympathetic refereeing also kept matters within tolerable bounds until late on, the side-effect being that the visiting all-stars could be relieved that Welshman Derek Bevan, the World Cup final referee, has charge of two of the three internationals.
The World team, unwilling to go into a full-scale international on Saturday without a warm-up game, sought yesterday's match as an extended run-out.
They were also permitted to install seven replacements at half-time.
Mendes, moving from tight to loose-head, White, who scored two tries, Nicol, Guscott and Hendricks played throughout, as did the Frenchmen, Camberabero, Roumat and Cecillon.
At the break it was 28–3 and Tim Horan (Australia) joined Guscott in mid-field.
The combination instantly raised the game to another level and eight more tries were scored, seven of which Camberabero converted, including several from either touch-line.
But as Naas Botha will be joining the party in Christchurch today, Camberabero could well have had his match.
Penalty goal: Fairbrother.
Replacements: G Hastings (Scotland), M Knoetze (S Africa), T Horan (Australia), P Fatialofa (Western Samoa), P Kearns, W Ofahengaue (Australia) and A Perelini (Western Samoa) came on at half-time for Joubert, Yoshida, Claasen, Sole, Schmidt, Nasser and Mackinnon.
Rugby Union: Foster returns to Rugby but Brain debates
By Charles Randall
ALLEN FOSTER has returned to Rugby as coach after ostensibly resigning two weeks ago, but the position of Steve Brain, the Courage League One side's captain, remains uncertain.
Foster will be in charge for the two Easter weekend home club games against Blackheath and Ebbw Vale before Rugby's relegation fate is decided in the final round of league matches on Saturday week.
After David Rees's surprise resignation as chairman on Sunday, Foster made a tip-toe return the following evening, giving another twist to events at Webb Ellis Road.
Brain, the team's only international, has been on the point of resigning both as a player and as the club's salaried steward, and his decision will not be known until today.
He was not available for comment yesterday.
Foster, a former coach at Leicester, originally stood down in protest at what he regarded as off-field interference.
This has underlined that the price of popularising rugby union has been the increase in pressures off the field, which can be as significant as the demands made on the players themselves.
Rees, a key figure in Rugby's rise from area league status to the top division over the past six years, made his decision for what he called personal reasons, though his increasingly sharp disagreements with Brain became a talking point.
An additional complication to Rugby's future has been legal writs for damages by Mal Malik, a former Coventry and Rugby flank-forward.
Lawyers are still attempting to settle out of court with Rees and Ivan Cawood, Rugby's secretary, who are the named persons in the writs.
Malik, who rescued Rugby from extinction in 1986 by buying the clubhouse from the liquidators, has alleged breach of contract in commercial dealings with the club and has used his ownership of the drive and car park to sue for trespass.
Malik, a Cambridge Blue, owns the Reflex health club, which used to be Rugby's clubhouse before they moved to the new one next door this season built at a cost of £438,000.
Some club members say that problems have arisen because power at Rugby has been restricted to a small executive committee, and major constitutional changes at the club now seem likely at the annual meeting in June.
England Students complete their domestic competitive preparations for the forthcoming summer Students World Cup in Italy when they entertain Ireland at Waterloo this evening, writes Graham Tait.
The home selectors have been shuffling their resources in recent matches and they take this opportunity to have a look at some members on the fringe of inclusion for Italy with one or two experienced players, such as flanker Martin Pepper stepping down to the replacements' bench.
Though they have little knowledge of the strength of the Irish Students England are confident they will be able to take another step towards their overall target and should it develop into an open game on the well-drained Blundellsands pitch they can expect few problems.
ENGLAND STUDENTS: C Dossett (Loughborough Univ); J Sleightolme (Chester Coll), L Boyle (Leicester Poly), S Ravenscroft (Univ of London), H Thorneycroft (Nottingham Poly); A Kerr (Birmingham Univ), K Bracken (Bristol Univ); C Clark (Swansea (Univ), A Fields (Nottingham Univ), J Mallett (Bath Univ), A Milward (Oxford Univ, capt), A Snow (St Andrews Univ), E Peters (Cambridge Univ), G Adams (Bath Univ), C Barrow (Exeter Univ).
Huw Davies, whose last-second dropped goal gave Wasps a dramatic 13–12 victory over Orrell last weekend, has a broken hand and misses Saturday's Courage League match at Gloucester at Kingsholm.
Davies suffered the injury in the 10th minute of the match against Orrell but stayed on until the end to score the points which virtually ended the Lancashire club's championship hopes.
Basingstoke, top of Courage Four South, have been banned from all rugby for two weeks by Hampshire after having had five players sent off this season.
The ban starts immediately but fortunately for them, their league programme has been completed.
Camborne gained their fifth Cornish Cup success after defeating Launceston 7–6.
Exeter defeated Brixham 30–10 to record their 10th victory in the Devon Cup.
Rugby Union: Hull inspires Services
By John Mace
British Police15pts Combined Services22 NEITHER the British Police nor Combined Services were at full strength for their annual match for the Securicor Trophy at Imber Court.
Despite this, they defied a cold and boisterous wind to produce a game full of movement and commitment.
An incisive early break by Champion gave the Police an attacking scrum from which a well-worked set move put Evans over for a try, converted by Wills.
Gradually, the Services backs began to gel, but it took a fine individual try by Hull to reduce the deficit.
Receiving slow ball from a line-out, he doubled round the front and shot up the touchline to beat the final cover with a deft piece of footwork.
The Services continued to run at the opposition and after Fenn was hauled down just short they took a half-time lead when quick hands gave Crossland sufficient room to veer inside at pace and score beneath the posts.
Hull converted.
Hull, having increased his side's lead with a further try, then masterminded a series of handling attacks from which Bethwaite and Bramble also scored.
In a rare sortie into Services territory, Agnew crossed for the Police and Lee converted to supplement an earlier penalty goal by Wills.
British Police: S Wills (C Brierley 55); G Agnew, G Champion, D Fairclough (J Meakin 70), S Morris; L Whitby-Smith, T Lee (capt); G Wilson, E James, R Zsabo, S Dear, M Bayfield, M Ellis, I Matthews, S Evans.
Tries: Evans, Agnew.
Conversions: Wills, Lee.
Penalty goal: Wills.
Combined Services: K Bethwaite; S Crossland, G Sharp, W Bramble, J Fenn; P Hull, P Livingstone; W Dunham, M Clay, D Robson, A Nisbet, R Castleton, M Hewitt (capt), S Jones, R Armstrong.
Tries: Bethwaite, Bramble, Crossland, Hull 2.
Conversion: Hull.
Referee: M Bayliss (Gloucester Society).
Rugby League: Castleford hit by injury troubles
By John Whalley
CASTLEFORD and Wigan, the Silk Cut Challenge Cup finalists, are experiencing contrasting build-ups to the Wembley match on May 2.
While Wigan seemingly have no problems, Castleford's are mounting.
Darryl Van de Velde, the coach of the Yorkshire club, already concerned about his side's indifferent form since the semi-final, has further worries with Graham Steadman, Grant Anderson and Dean Sampson injured.
Wigan, going for their 20th successive victory at St Helens tomorrow, have the opposite problem, playing so well individually and collectively that their coach, John Monie, has not enough places, especially with Martin Dermott and Steve Hampson fit again, to satisfy demand.
Mr Van de Velde stresses than any player not fit enough to play in the first round of the Premiership on April 26 will not be considered for the final.
This is an ultimatum that Steadman is ready to meet.
The country's leading try-scorer before sustaining a rib injury on March 17, he has suffered an ankle injury in training which has delayed his comeback.
While the coach waits for a satisfactory fitness test, Steadman, already out of tomorrow's game with Wakefield, said: ‘I hope to be ready for a reserve game on Saturday or possibly Monday's game at Hull but I am confident I will be fit before Wembley.
It's an old injury which I sustained against Widnes earlier in the season.’
Sampson (broken bone in hand) and Anderson (back) may cause bigger problems but Mr Van de Velde made it clear he expects improvements from a side who were unbeaten this year until after the semi-final.
Rugby Union: Bunce wins All Blacks place
By JOHN MASON
FRANK BUNCE, an outstanding World Cup centre for Western Samoa last October, is one of three new caps in New Zealand's team for the first of three centennial season Tests in a week against a World XV, writes John Mason.
Mark Cooksley, a 6ft 7in, 18-stone lock from Counties, and Richard Turner, who has succeeded Wayne Shelford as North Harbour's No 8, are the other newcomers.
Cooksley was 21 last Saturday, Turner is 24 and Bunce has earned his first cap at 30.
The selection of Bunce, who had a place in The Daily Telegraph's World Cup team of the tournament, will cause ripples at the International Board's meeting which ends in Wellington today.
But in fairness to Bunce, who plays for Auckland, he has long been resident in New Zealand and had no thoughts of international rugby until approached by Western Samoa, whose 26-strong World Cup squad included only one player still living in the country.
It is the qualification rules — the lack of them, that is — that are at fault and New Zealand are no worse than several other countries, including the Home Unions, in allowing, in the absence of directives, expediency to govern selection.
Laurie Mains, the new All Black coach, believes the World XV will give New Zealand considerable problems.
‘They've got some pretty potent combinations in some areas and they're definitely going to improve,’ he said.
LAWN TENNIS
New coaching team for Capriati after split from Slozil
By John Parsons
JENNIFER CAPRIATI, 16, the American prodigy, ranked sixth in the world, has parted company with coach Pavel Slozil less than four months after beginning work with him.
Her father, Stefano, who had listed himself as joint coach, is now once more directing her training on court, while Laurie Schuett, a trainer from the Palm Beach Sports Institute, Florida, has been drafted in to work on her fitness.
Capriati's early-season troubles seemed to have eased when she beat world champion Monica Seles in the quarter-finals of the Lipton Players International in Key Biscayne a month ago.
But matters came to a head following her surprise defeat by the 83rd-ranked Veronika Martinek, of Czechoslovakia, in Hilton Head two weeks later.
There was obvious tension between Slozil, Steffi Graf's former coach, and Capriati and between the coach and Mr Capriati, who did not believe his daughter was spending enough time practising on court.
Miss Schuett has been hired to travel with Capriati throughout the summer, with a particular responsibility for helping the teenager shed some puppy fat before it becomes a lasting problem.
There have also been hints that Tommy Thompson, chief coach at the Hopman's Resort, where the Capriati family live, may assist in her tactical and practical training during major tournaments.
Another of the promising young American players, 1990 US Open winner Pete Sampras, 20, believes he is about to make a breakthrough in the world rankings.
Sampras, who has a new coach and a fresh attitude, is at No 4 in the world list.
He said: ‘This is a time when I can do a lot for my ranking.
I'm definitely having thoughts about the No 1 spot.’
Jim Courier looks firmly entrenched at the top of the rankings, but the uncertain form of the two players behind him, Stefan Edberg and Boris Becker, will give Sampras added encouragement.
Edberg, whose most recent brief reign as No 1 ended with defeat by Richard Krajicek in Tokyo, has other things on his mind, such as his wedding in Sweden this weekend.
Becker's surprising defeat by Spain's Jordi Burillo in Barcelona last week suggests the former Wimbledon and world champion has still not come to terms with playing on the European clay, which predominates to the end of the French Open in early June.
Sampras, who registered a 2–6, 7–5, 6–3 defeat of Martin Jaite, the Argentine clay court specialist, in the second round of the Nice Open, said; ‘I had a tough European trip last year.
I'm a year older and bit more mature now.’
Elsewhere, an out-of-touch looking Wimbledon champion Michael Stich was swept aside 6–1, 6–3 by Kevin Curren, the 1985 Wimbledon finalist, in the second round of the Honk Kong Open.
Britain's Monique Javer, struggling with a sore shoulder after sleeping awkwardly, was beaten 6–4, 6–3 by title-holder Yayuk Basuki in the second round of the Thailand Volvo Open.
Mary Joe Fernandez is to undergo tests for glandular fever after being forced to withdraw from this week's Kraft Tour event in Houston.
HOCKEY
Draw gives Hounslow chance to reach final
By Chris Moore
HOUNSLOW will be defending an unbeaten record in the European Cup-Winners' Cup when they set off for Holland today to compete in this season's final stages.
Two years ago Hounslow won the inaugural Cup-Winners Cup but, after winning the National League in the same season, were unable to defend their title.
Instead they competed in last year's European Cup, finishing fourth.
Havant take over the daunting task of challenging for the European Cup in Amsterdam, with Hounslow moving to the south of Holland to compete at Vught where a favourable draw puts them among the favourites to reach Monday's final.
‘With two Dutch teams and the Germans in the other group, we certainly have the best of the draw,’ said Keith Rowe, the Hounslow manager.
‘We'll have no excuses if we don't reach the semi-finals and, with our experience in Europe, we believe we can win the trophy again.’
Europe should not hold any fears for the English cup-holders after only four defeats, including two on penalty strokes, in 22 matches on the Continent in recent years.
They open their programme in Vught tomorrow against White Star Brussels, late replacements for Rasante, the Belgian cup-holders.
On Saturday they meet Cork Harlequins and play their last group match against SPV Illescas from Madrid.
In the other group, Kampong Utrecht, who beat Havant in last year's Cup-Winners Cup final, compete against HGC, also from Holland, Rot-Weiss Munich and WKS Grunewald from Poland.
Hounslow, with no injury problems, have taken a deliberately low-key approach to their latest European venture, giving their squad, including Rob Thompson, Jon Potter and Paul Bolland, who have been on GB duty, a much-needed rest after the demands of the domestic season.
Many English teams playing in European competitions have fared badly when moving on to water-based pitches, still in short supply at home.
But Hounslow start with a welcome bonus for the pitch in Vught is sand-filled.
After a season on the unrelenting Feltham sand-filled surface, Hounslow should, once again, feel at home in Europe.
England, who won the Home Countries Under-18 Championship last weekend, take on Spain in their opening match of the six nations tournament which gets under way at Clifton College and Clerical Medical Sports Ground, Bristol, today, writes Cathy Harris.
In the under-16 tournament, three players, captain Fiona Greenham, Jane Money and Jemima Riley, remain from last year's squad, who play Scotland in the first game.
England U-16. -G Adams (Norton), A Bennett (St Joseph's Convent, Reading), F Civico (Notre Dame), M Clewlow (Sir Roger Manwood), N Gilmour (Woodkirk High), F Greenham (Neville Lovett, capt), L Grogan (St Julies), S Jones (Queens), M MacDonald (Sutton), D Marston-Smith, J Martin, L Sneaton (Gordano), J Money (St Mary's), G Riley (Rossall), K Walsh (Wakefield Grammar), N Westcar (St Mary and St Joseph).
England U-18. — T Bemowski (NWCTA), S Blanks (Bosworth College), S Duncton, N Phelps (Taunton School), J Empson (Chiselhurst and Sidcup Grammar), H Fannin (Crypt, capt), N Giles (Otter Vale), L Hipkins (Bromsgrove School), J Hodson (Wycombe High), K James (Bournemouth and Parkstone), C Kingsnorth (Queen Elizabeth's, Faversham), S Lockart (Southend High), R Millard (Gordano), M Morton (Stockport College), V Sandall (Wisbech Grammar), J Savage (Fort Pitt Grammar).
Today.
— U-18: England v Spain, France v Germany, Holland v Scotland.
U-16: England v Scotland, Spain v Germany, Holland v Belgium.
ROWING
Champions beaten by Searle brothers
By Geoffrey Page
A SURPRISE defeat for Britain's main rowing gold-medal hopes for the Olympics, the coxless pair world champions, Steve Redgrave and Matthew Pinsent, in the Olympic rowing trials at Holme Pierrepont, Nottingham, has emphasised the exceptionally high standard of the men's national squad.
The defeat of Redgrave, the reigning Olympic champion, who also won an Olympic gold medal in 1984, and Pinsent, his partner now for two years, by Jonathan and Gregory Searle, was comprehensive.
The former world junior gold-medallists were both in last year's world championships bronze-medal eight.
Redgrave and Pinsent took an instant lead but paid for their expensive 500 metres.
They were unable to shake off the Searle brothers after 1,000m and, rowing like men inspired, the Molesey pair overwhelmed the champions in the last 500m to finish some 2½ lengths ahead.
The wind that had made things difficult on Monday had died down by Tuesday evening, though it was sufficiently strong to benefit lane one and handicap lane six.
But the first two pairs were on adjacent lanes three and four and so were not affected by any inequality in the lanes.
The men's rowing trials were all in pairs and the racing for every place in both the men's pairs A final and the B final, to settle seventh to 12th places, was very fine.
Some idea of the standard can be gathered from the fact that among those in the ‘B’ final, and therefore not in the top 12 men, were two others from the eight and all the coxless four in Vienna last year, plus two other former medallists.
The defeat of Redgrave and Pinsent is unlikely to prevent their selection for the Olympic coxless pairs and it could prove to have been a useful warning to the world champions to raise their performance for Cologne in two weeks' time, when all the potential Olympic crews will have their first try-out.
The scullers raced in single sculls and the racing here was also of a high standard, but there was not an outstanding single sculler and the places at stake were for quadruple and double sculls.
Peter Haining and Mike Harris qualified for the final through the heats.
Repechages for the other places were rowed on Tuesday evening but yesterday's final was cancelled when the wind blew up again and made racing out of the question.
The questions had already been answered by then, however, and the potential quadruple and double scullers were being put together yesterday.
In the women's races, single sculler Alison Gill and a coxless pair were given a handicap start against the fours, which last year's unchanged representative four (K Marwick, R Hirst, J Turvey, P Cross) won convincingly.
Last year's world coxless pair bronze-medallists, Fiona Freckleton and Miriam Batten, were absent, training in Banyoles on the Olympic course.
Cricket: Warm welcome for S Africans
By Geoffrey Dean in Barbados
HAVING completed the first two legs of their Caribbean tour, the South Africans, who arrived here yesterday on what is the least volatile island on their itinerary, feel the political success of their visit is already guaranteed.
‘There has been an overwhelming reception and hospitality extended to our whole delegation, said Ali Bacher, managing director of the United South African Board.
‘Everywhere we've gone there's been a tremendous feeling of warmth shown us.
‘The acceptance of our presence throughout the Caribbean was going to be the most vital thing, because the people here took the anti-apartheid struggle very seriously.
‘It was imperative to come here quickly, break the ice and get that acceptance.
I believe, fundamentally, that has been achieved.
‘The fact we lost three one-day internationals is neither here nor there.
As for the Test, we've got nothing to lose,’ Dr Bacher concluded.
The West Indies selectors have been accused of bias against players from Barbados following the announcement of their Test team.
Desmond Haynes is the only Barbadian in the 13-man squad after the surprise omission of seam bowler Anderson Cummins and many local fans have threatened to boycott the match.
Cricket: Warwicks to rest Donald
By Richard Bright
WARWICKSHIRE have decided not to select Allan Donald in the Sunday League this summer because they feel the fast bowler has been over-played by South Africa in recent months.
Bob Woolmer, the county's director of coaching, claims the pace bowler was used unnecessarily in the World Cup.
He acknowledges that Donald is South Africa's top bowler and major attraction but he believes that is still no excuse for bowling him too much.
Mr Woolmer said: ‘I felt Donald was overused in the World Cup when there was no need for him to bowl in the games against Sri Lanka and Zimbabwe.’
The former England batsman also claimed that Donald was not a one-day cricketer and that Warwickshire only used him with the new ball in such games.
‘I know he's their trump card and the big draw, but not so much in one-day cricket, and I feel they overloaded him,’ Mr Woolmer said.
Donald, in the West Indies with the South African Test party, is expected to make his first appearance for Warwickshire in the Championship match against Derbyshire at Edgbaston starting on May 7.
Robin Smith does not regard himself as an automatic selection for this summer's campaign against Pakistan, despite winning the Cornhill player of the year award.
The Hampshire batsman said: ‘The fact is I haven't figured in the last two England sides, and I have still got things to prove.
I don't think my performances during the winter were as good as could have been expected.
‘I was very surprised to win this player of the year award, speechless to be precise.
I couldn't believe it, especially when Graham Gooch had played so well over the last year.’
Micky Stewart, the England manager, said: ‘Gooch, Phil DeFreitas, Phil Tufnell and Alec Stewart all came into consideration for the award — but Robin is a batsman I'd pay money to watch.’
CRICKET
Wisden in new and equally safe hands Wright steps down with call for ‘dynamic changes’.
Christopher Martin-Jenkins reports
By CHRISTOPHER MARTIN-JENKINS
WISDEN'S appearance this year for the 129th time (John Wisden, £21.50 hardback, £18.50 soft) coincided with the announcement that Graeme Wright would be handing over the stewardship of one of cricket's greatest traditions to Matthew Engel.
The new editor shares with the retiring one a proper reverence for the game, balanced by an ability to stand back and view it with a perspective born of experience of other important things in life.
He will inherit a small but dedicated team of which Wright was an essential part even before he became editor six years ago.
The 1992 Almanack is as admirably thorough as ever.
The editor's notes reveal his disillusionment with the increasing commercialisation of the game although he calls for ‘changes which would provide a dynamic, viable circuit for the professional game in the 1990s and beyond’.
To make those changes but to maintain the essential spirit of cricket is the continuing challenge.
We shall see this week what the latest TCCB committee has made of it.
Among some well chosen and written feature articles are an intelligent analysis of school cricket by Gerald Howat, Mike Brearley on John Arlott (who, I wonder, will take on his role as the most generous of book-reviewers?) and Teresa McLean on women in cricket.
Wisely, perhaps, she avoids any more than a hint of her own view of female membership of MCC.
Two more annuals which get hardier by the year are Playfair (Queen Anne Press, £2.99) truly pocket-sized and a marvellous source of instant information, and The Cricketers Who's Who (Lennard Publishing, £10.95) which has this year restored the first-class umpires and whose unique feature is a photograph of every player.
No player, with the single exception of Ian Botham, is photographed or talked about more than Graham Gooch, whose story has just been reliably and thoroughly told by Ivo Tennant in a book boldly entitled Graham Gooch, The Biography (£15.99).
It is not to be confused with various autobiographies but those expecting warts to be exposed will be disappointed.
There are none.
Gooch's captaincy and outstanding contributions last season as a batsman are analysed in much greater detail by Jack Bannister in Jack In The Box (Queen Anne Press, £14.99).
The series against the West Indies is recalled day by day as seen from the television commentary box, not excluding the various interviews and comments made between sessions of play.
There is, for example, a most interesting discussion between Tony Lewis and Laurie Brown about the England team's approach to fitness.
This is a worthwhile publication, much more than just a bland follow-up to an exceptional Test series.
Last of the spring blooms to reach my desk are Tangled Up In White (Hodder and Stoughton, £14.99) an anthology of some of the best of Peter Roebuck's sharply intelligent articles on cricket and The Guinness Book of Cricket Captains (Guinness, £14.99), the second large book about Test captains recently published.
As such it is hardly an essential addition to the sum of cricket literature but it is a pleasing production nonetheless.
BADMINTON
Nielsen fit for last eight
By a Special Correspondent
ANDERS NIELSEN, the national champion, showed no sign of the back injury which kept him out of the team event as he eased into today's men's singles quarter-finals at the Pilkington Glass European Badminton Championships in Glasgow.
While Nielsen's decision to miss England's bronze-medal victory over the CIS on Tuesday did little to impress his team-mates, the Surrey player reaped the benefits with two straight-games wins.
In the first round, he beat Belgium's Pedro Vanneste 15–2, 15–4 before recording a 15–7, 15–7 victory over Jeroen van Dijk, of Holland.
Nielsen will now meet Robert Liljequist for a place in the last four.
In the women's singles, England's Helen Troke, a former winner, lost a close second round match, 12–10, 9–12, 8–11 to Erica van der Heuvel, of Holland.
TALKING CRICKET Indian summer for Yorkshire
By Tony Lewis
LITTLE Sachin Tendulkar will soon walk out to bat for Yorkshire, Bombay-born, not Barnsley.
The blood of the great cricket tribe, almost purely Yorkshire, is at last to be diluted.
It is almost unbelievable for those of us who have lived with and admired the divine right of the great cricket county for so long.
Cricket lore was handed down from Yorkshire dad to lad, so much so that in the end the family history itself was the enemy.
To obscure more recent failure, it was possible to dip back into the time when the championship-winning sides flowed.
Comforting images of Sir Len batting still fell like a warm velvet hood over Yorkshire eyes.
Naturally, the young cricketers of the present could never hope to match the deeds of the past.
Even so, who would have thought that Yorkshire would be seeking salvation by recruiting an 18-year-old from India?
This may depress some Yorkshire folk, especially those who opposed the overseas signing, but it should not.
Repeated failure had lowered the club's reputation in the eyes of opponents and had gnawed away at membership numbers.
In fact, Yorkshire have some good players and if Tendulkar plays as well as he can, he will provide extra runs at a lively tempo, so giving Martyn Moxon more chances to be in control of the game.
One of the most productive nurseries in the world, the Yorkshire League, has become almost barren and the time has come to pluck from another, rich in blossoms — Shivaji Park, Bombay, where you can stand on the roof-top of the small pavilion and watch 15 games going on at the same time.
I hope Tendulkar is given a kindly welcome by the Yorkshire spectators.
Some of the loudest voices there are not in the best tradition.
I have in mind the boorishness of the odd voice which told Viv Richards just how black he was.
The Yorkshire cricket fraternity have always loved to ‘let you have it’ and that includes their own team as well.
But without the cricket intelligence, straight-talking is a stupid pastime.
THE best Yorkshire crowds always gave you some stick when you deserved it.
They understood high standards.
It was at Scarborough that the ball shot between my legs for four at third man and I got: ‘Pick tha’ bluddy feet up, Mary Quant.’
Intimidating, but not as much as a first meeting with the famous former amateur captain, Brian Sellars, who gave a severe look and a scornful: ‘Na'then, you little Welsh bastard.’
Not bad for openers!
Of course, the smile followed and the wonderful Yorkshire folklore was intact; harsh judges who truly cared for the game.
Therefore, all we must hope is that Tendulkar hears the right voices in the crowd when he has edged a few seaming balls at Headingley into the gloves of the ‘keeper and when the tiny bundle of sweaters frozen in the outfield at Middlesbrough drops a catch.
Will Tendulkar's arrival mean the end of Yorkshire's perceived racial policy — no Yorkshire Asians have played for the county?
Did they ever have such a policy?
Only the insiders will know.
Some now believe that the road from Bradford will be lined with Asians bearing bat and pads.
It was once explained to me that most Asians in Yorkshire do not play cricket anyway, but that those who did were genuinely encouraged to join Yorkshire League clubs.
Some enjoyed themselves so much that they formed their own team in the league.
Next, they formed their own league!
The summer of ‘92 will be more attractive for Tendulkar's presence in Yorkshire, and there is no-one in the game who does not wish for the county's good health and an end to schism.
Oh!
And by the way.
Expect a Tendulkar fan club to form quickly.
Not only are the young maidens of India swooning in their thousands but a host of saris, long married, have suddenly developed the mothering instinct.
EULOGISING about an 18-year-old cricketer runs the risk of being wrong.
Even as I write I can hear Imran Khan sighing all the way from Lahore.
Last year, the precocious name on his lips was Waqar Younis, this year it is Inzamam-ul-Haq.
Inzamam, tall, languid, inventive and punishing, will also be fascinating to watch this season as Pakistan tour, but is he a better player than Tendulkar?
I am already one down to Imran, having declared that Waqar did not have the action of a genuine fast bowler.
A word from Graham Gooch soon put me right on that count.
But asking which of these young overseas players is the better is purely academic.
A more appropriate question is: where are our own Tendulkars and Inzamams?
The answer is shorter than the question.
There aren't any.
CANOEING
Battle for Olympic places
By Simon Hart
BRITAIN'S leading slalom exponents face a tense battle for the right to compete at the Barcelona Olympics when they take part in first-past-the-post selection races on the Olympic course in Seu d'Urgell tomorrow and Sunday.
The Barcelona regatta marks the return of slalom to the Olympic programme for the first time in 20 years and Britain have strong hopes of a string of medals.
Among those vying for a place in the British team are Canadian singles specialist Gareth Marriott, winner of last year's pre-Olympic regatta, and, in the individual kayak class, former world champion Richard Fox and current champion Shaun Pearce.
The trio, all with realistic gold medal aspirations, were originally pre-selected for Barcelona on the strength of their international records but, at a controversial meeting of the British Canoe Union slalom committee in November, canoe club representatives rejected the principle of pre-selection in favour of first-past-the-post trials.
Three places are up for grabs in each of the individual kayak, Canadian singles and women's kayak singles classes.
Four crews are also competing for places in the Canadian doubles category though none has yet reached the required Olympic qualifying standard.
The longest canoeing event in the world, the 125-mile Devizes to Westminster race, begins tomorrow with organisers predicting a close finish.
Low water levels should preclude any improvement on the course record of 15hr, 34min set by Brian Greenham and Tim Cornish in 1979, but the presence of a number of previous winners should ensure an exciting climax.
Wrestling: The night Big Boss Man muscled out The Berzerker in a gripping encounter SARAH EDWORTHY received a no-holds-barred initiation into the outrageous world of professional wrestling when superstars of
the European Rampage Again Tour paraded their machismo before a frenzied audience at Wembley Arena earlier this week
By SARAH EDWORTHY
‘WEIGHING 322lbs…from Iceland…it's The Berrr-zerrr-ker!’
The Master of Ceremonies and a capacity crowd of 12,500 welcomed a wild hairy caveman to Wembley Arena on Tuesday for the second night of the World Wrestling Federation European Rampage Again Tour.
The Berzerker walked towards the ring with a Don't-mess-with-me swagger, a horned Viking helmet on his bedraggled hair, an iron sword and shield by his side.
His frankfurter-coloured flesh shone with grease and sweat and, under his skimpy tunic, muscles rippled like an animated version of a butcher's chart outlining choice cuts of rump and sirloin.
He was grotesque.
Pitted against him in this bout was The Big Boss Man — 337lbs from Cobb County, Georgia — who, as fans of Sky TV's Wrestling Mania know, is a pumped-up hulk ‘on the side of the law’.
With a hop, skip and neat somersault under the ropes the crew-cut American cop was in the ring, brandishing his sawn-off rifle at Berzerker, as if to say ‘go ahead, punk, make my day…‘.
The next 10 minutes were tense ones for the superstar hierarchy.
Boss Man baiting Berzerker matador-style with a nappy, Berzerker charging into the ropes, ricocheting back onto Boss Man, Boss Man hurling to the floor, Berzerker chanting ‘Huss!
Huss!’,
Boss Man tumbling out of the ring, Berzerker dragging him back in, Boss Man pulling hair, Berzerker slamming Boss Man into the corner, Boss Man retaliating with biff-wham-pow punches, Boss Man belly-flopping onto the deck, Berzerker straddling him, yanking his head back as if to break his neck.
For four minutes they held this agonising pose.
It seemed like hours.
Would Big Boss Man's neck break?
The audience moved nervously in their seats, booing the villain, ‘Huss!
Huss!
Huss!
Huss!’ and chanting for the underdog ‘Big Boss Man, Big Boss Man’.
The referee glared at the crowd as if to ask for silence: how is a wrestler supposed to concentrate?
But, with brilliant timing, Boss Man shuddered and with an almighty roar he was up — and Berzerker was down, felled by a punch that did not seem to make contact.
So why was he rolling around like that, grimacing in pain?
And what was that?
A wink at the crowd?
What was all this hamming and cheating?
Before you could say Maradona, Boss Man had won and they had gone in a puff of Deep Heat vapour.
The truth is that the closer you are to the ring the worse it looks.
Nobody in wrestling ever loses, they are always cheated, and tactics are often clumsy.
‘The rules are loose,’ a WWF spokeman said, ‘you can get away with quite a lot.
These guys are pretty practised at illegal things.’
It is not so much martial art as cartoon brawling —‘Desperate Dan meets Superman,’ according to Harvey Goldsmith, the tour coordinator.
Far from being a sloppier form of boxing, American wrestling is a discipline nevertheless.
It is a very professional form of sport-entertainment.
The giants are experts on working the crowd up into ‘He's behind you!’ pantomime scenarios and on making the physical manoeuvres look and sound bruising.
Like Las Vegas money machines — where lights whirl, the jackpot flashes and the sound of cascading money plays for the smallest win — so the sprung plywood floor of the wrestling ring thuds and echoes with exaggerated effect.
One stamp of the foot sounds like 20 broken bones.
The referees too are comic figures, sliding on their stomachs in the thick of a floor grapple or desperately trying to part two hulks, looking as ridiculous as if Woody Allen were trying to separate Rambo and Terminator.
It is showbiz all the way, with each superstar capitalising on his gimmick.
Kato, the masked Japanese fighter, specialises in Kung-Fu deviousness; Jake ‘The Snake’ Roberts slithers around the ring and strikes like a viper.
Women play vamps and damsels in distress.
Shawn Michaels, a Larry Fortensky lookalike, is managed by Sensational Sherri (vamp) and Macho Man Randy Savage is always rescuing the lovely Elizabeth.
Wrestling proves the theory that people only believe what they want to believe.
The crowd, who had paid between £15 and £25 for a ticket, loved it.
Predominantly six to 14 year-olds and their parents, most wearing The Undertaker T-shirts, they shout ‘Go get him’ every second of the way.
On stage at least— far away from allegations of steroid abuse — it is good harmless fun.
Parents take comfort in the fact that even though their children are egging men on to beat the hell out of each other, it is all in the cause of good triumphing over evil.
But all is not good backstage.
Rivalry is hot; each superstar spends two hours a day in the gym and the rest of the time eating to keep up their colossal weight.
‘The goodies have to travel in one coach, the baddies in another,’ Harvey Goldsmith admitted.
‘Otherwise there'd be too much needling going on.’
Earlier this week there was a dust-up between Shawn Michaels and Bret Hitman Hart.
Insiders put it down to the pressure of competing for six and seven figure salaries.
For these are hyper-competitive athletes, all ex-pro American footballers or wrestlers, and not afraid to punish themselves in the cause of being The Best.
The remaining shows — at Belfast King's Hall and Glasgow's SECC on Friday and Saturday and Sheffield Arena on Sunday — are sold out.
Tuesday's big star was the ‘The Unn-derr-tay-kerr’— trademark finishing move: Tombstone Reverse Piledriver — who arrived in the ring in full Victorian mourning dress and gauntlets, following his manager Mr Paul Bearer to the death march.
Somehow it was hard to imagine him in the gym.
POWER BOATS
RYA back limited Cowes race action
By Ray Bulman
THE council of the Royal Yachting Association, the British power boat authority, have ratified a series of measures against the organisers of the Cowes-Torquay Classic, the biggest race on the British calendar.
An earlier proposal from the Powerboat Divisional Committee that the organisers and all officials of the event should be banned for five years was overturned by the RYA Council.
The announcement of the measures comes more than three months after publication of the Holman report, ordered following last August's event, when several racing boats drove at high speed in fog-shrouded Torbay — two hitting a holiday beach.
The measures include the withdrawal of two race officers from the list of RYA-approved officials.
Others suffer reprimands while the Cowes Organising Committee themselves face a structure review.
The RYA are unable to take action against the Italian drivers who maintained high racing speeds despite poor visibility, one colliding with a moored supertanker.
As they are foreign nationals, the Department of Transport are also unable to bring any action under the International Rules for the Prevention of Collision at Sea.
Tim Powell, chairman of the Cowes Organising Committee, feels the future of the race is now in doubt.
‘We were organising the race in clear visibility at Cowes over 90 miles east of Torbay and took the advice of local professionals who said the sea-mist would burn off before the leading boats arrived.
It seems the incidents last year will be used as an excuse to withdraw international status [from the Cowes-Torquay race]and hence survival.’
Leading officials of the Union Internationale Motonautique (UIM), the world authority of power boating have announced the final two rounds of this year's world offshore championship will be switched to Dubai.
Originally scheduled for the United States in October, the switch has been made because of the current state of anarchy in American offshore politics, particularly in the eyes of championship promoter, Mario Revenna, of Italy.
Dubai now stages the world's most valuable offshore events, inlcuding the recent Emirates Airlines Gold Cup with a purse exceeding £500,000.
AMATEUR BOXING
Stone still aggrieved
By Steve Bunce
ADRIAN STONE reached the ABA light welterweight final with a predictable but impressive second round defeat of Welsh teenager Jason Williams on the final night of the semi-finals at the Gateshead Leisure Centre.
Stone's form in this year's championship reinforces his claim that he should have represented England in the recent Olympic qualifying tournament in Milan.
Instead, the selectors opted for Peter Richardson, who silenced the critics by qualifying for Barcelona but suffered a first round knockout by Stone 12 months ago.
‘I've won for England and I've beaten Richardson,’ reasoned Stone after Tuesday night's win.
‘Richardson had a chance of qualifying in the world championships but he failed and now he has won his place the officials think that their choice was justified, but it was not.’
The semi-finals were marred by a disputed majority points decision when Londoner Chris Henry, who looked a convincing winner, was adjudged to have been beaten by Welsh champion Richard Fenton.
ABA SEMI-FINALS (Gateshead Leisure Centre).
— Fly: M Horobin (St Pancras) bt N Swain (Gilfach Goch) pts.
Bantamweight: P Mullings (St Patrick's) bt R Vowles (Llanharan) rsc 1.
Feather: A Temple (Hartlepool) bt B Jones (Highfields) pts.
Light: M Newton (Coed Eva) bt A Green (Phil Thomas) pts.
Light-Welter: A Stone (Empire) bt J Williams (Gwent) rsc 2.
Welter: B Thorogood (Highfields) bt P Burns (Gemini) pts.
Light-middle: J Calzaghe (Newbridge) bt D Francis (Basingstoke) ko 2.
Middle: L Woolcock (Canvey) w/o.
Light-heavy: K Oliver (Bracebridge) bt D Hitchings (Pontypridd) rsc 1 Heavy: R Fenton (Pentwyn) bt C Henry (New Enterprise).
Super-heavy: D Holness (St Pancras) w/o.
WOMEN'S GOLF
Jones puts brave face on mishap
By Lewine Mair in St-Nom-la-Breteche
ESTEFANIA KNUTH was a resounding four shots better than any of the other returns with a 73 after a wet and windswept first qualifying day at the French Juniors Championship here last night.
In her wake four English players also came in with scores on the right side of 80.
Of that quartet Caroline Hall was the best-placed on 78 with Rachel Bolas, Joanne Hockley and Nicola Buxton all returning 79.
Bethan Jones of Wales was among those to finish on 80 with her outward half a one-over par 37.
Hers was a brave effort for one who had to be whisked off to hospital on Tuesday after a painful accident.
In sitting down on an antique bench in the locker-room, the Welsh teenager had been lanced by a wooden splinter.
According to colleagues, whose judgment of distance had been honed over a day spent working on yardage charts, the sliver of wood was four centimetres long.
Its removal was far from easy and the medical men ended up applying a row of stitches, which left Jones sore, stiff and struggling to walk any sort of distance.
Where Wales have sent over four representatives, and Scotland three, England have an official party of 10.
The European Junior Team Championships, which England last won in 1988, are to be played here from July 8–11 and all the governing bodies are looking on this week's championships as the ideal trial run.
The English Ladies' Golf Association, with typical attention to detail, arranged for their national coach, John Garner, to be in attendance on the first two practice days.
The former Ryder Cup man was not here to work on swings; merely to pass on some of his knowledge on course management.
‘He has given us the feeling that we could not have been better prepared,’ said Hockley after her opening round.
FATHER & SON FOURSOMES
Betts' show their mettle in the rain
By Ted Barrett
TERRY and Richard Betts, from Mannings Heath in Sussex, issued a statement of intent by reaching the turn in the fourth round of the Father and Son tournament at West Hill in 34 — level par in wind and pouring rain — despite a seven at the par-four third.
Their victims, the Bathursts, of Hankley Common, had the figures of one under fours after 15 holes at which point the Betts won 4 & 3, needing three fours for a 69.
They could not keep it going in the quarter-final, though they gave Richard and Jonathon Lavelle, of The Berkshire, five shots and beat them 3 & 2 after blue skies gave way to one of the most vicious snow squalls I have seen on a golf course.
It met the first two of the quarter-final matches head on as they tackled the shortish par-four 12th which, for a few minutes, became a monster and odd routes were used to reach the green.
The winning ways of the Yorkshire pair, Deric and Ian Baxter, were explained laconically by son Ian: ‘I belt them and he prods them.’
Deric, whose back problems prevent his pivoting, prods to some purpose for his 79 years and is mustard round the greens.
The Baxters romped to the last four 7 & 6 and meet the Sykes in today's semi-finals.
The Baxters won here in 1970.
The Betts take on the Piggotts in the other semi-final.
The consolation Stableford event pits fathers against their offspring and who can blame the organisers for combining the Sparrows and the Larks.
The fathers scored the most points.
Cyril Ibbotson, who has died aged 78, served Derbyshire golf for many years.
He was president of the county in 1964 and 1965 and was honorary secretary for 26 years until his death.
He represented the county as a golfer and was the first Derbyshire official to become president of the Midland Counties — in 1971–73.
He served as county captain in the 1960s and led Mickleover, for whom the was this year's president, in 1954 and 1956.
ATHLETICS
Olympic rivals may race again
By John Hiscock
ZOLA Budd-Pieterse of South Africa and Mary Decker Slaney are likely to compete against each other later this year.
The meeting would be their first on an American track since their collision eight years ago at the Los Angeles Olympics.
Both runners have expressed an interest in running in the 2,000-metre Prefontaine Classic in Eugene, Oregon, on June 6.
Budd-Pieterse plans to run in Eugene and Indianapolis if the International Amateur Athletic Federation, as expected, grant South Africa provisional membership.
Decker Slaney, 33, who lives in Eugene, said a race with her former rival ‘is appealing.
It's probably unnecessary attention at this point in my career but it would be good for the sport in this country.
That's what makes it have an appeal for me,’ she said.
Following their Olympic collision in the 3,000 metres, Decker Slaney tumbled out of the race in tears and Budd-Pieterse — running for Britain — finished seventh.
They raced four times in Europe the following year, Slaney beating her rival on every occasion.
TABLE TENNIS
England settle for silver
By John Woodford in Stuttgart
ENGLAND men failed to turn their silver into gold in the European Championships in Stuttgart last night as they were brought down to earth 4–1 by Sweden in the final of the men's team event.
But it was an honourable defeat, the best performance by the England men since they reached the final in Paris in 1988.
Delighted with their silver medals for reaching the final against the world champions, England saw the match open with an expected win by the world champion Jorgen Persson over English champion Chen Xinhua 21–8, 21–18.
Persson dominated the first game and his venomous top spin attack proved too strong for even Chen's defences as they were breached 21–8 but Chen held on to an even scoreline in the second game.
When it seemed Chen might force a third, Persson fired an explosive backhand winner to lead 19–18.
Chen, always the skilful extrovert, responded with a ‘cartwheel’ as the ball whistled past him.
Carl Prean, the dedicated technician, levelled the score at 1–1 with another ice-cool display that left Mikael Appelgren gasping as the Swede was well beaten 21–19, 21–16.
Jan-Ove Waldner, generally accepted as the world's most talented player, opened up a 2–1 lead for Sweden, scorning Matthew Syed's backspin to win 21–14, 21–10 in 17 minutes.
The Swedish victory was forged with a doubles win by Waldner and Appelgren over England's top pair, Prean and Alan Cooke, and ended with Persson overcoming a gallant Prean 21–18, 21–13.
The individual event starts here today with a rest day tomorrow.
France put future prospects before personal glory when they were beaten 4–1 by Germany in the play-off for the bronze medal.
While Germany, seeking revenge for a 4–1 defeat in the group match between the two countries on Monday, selected their strongest possible team, France left out their world No 3 Jean-Philippe Gatien.
GOLF
Davis edges into lead at halfway
By a Special Correspondent
THE boy internationals of England, Wales and Germany offered much information to their respective selectors about their reactions to stormy, water-logged conditions when the Peter McEvoy Trophy started yesterday.
So much rain fell at Copt Heath that, as nine of the scheduled 72 holes were washed out, three ducks arrived for a paddle on the 18th green.
Despite the weather the under-18s succeeded in keeping alive the prestigious tournament now reduced to 63 holes.
The 27-hole overnight leader was Brian Davis (East Herts) who won the Hertfordshire boys title at Nevill last Friday when he recorded a course record 65.
Davis achieved, in the circumstances, a remarkable feat of nine pars in his opening nine holes but then, in starting his second round of 18 holes, threatened to lose his way with three bogeys in his first four holes.
‘I thought my game was going to disappear so I just concentrated on getting solid pars and dropped only one more shot,’ he said.
The East Herts club were well-represented as Davis's club-mate, David Hamilton, an England cap, was also in the leading group on 115.
The merit of this could be gauged from an observation by a local challenger, Steve Webster, who scored a fine 73 for a 117 overnight total.
‘When I stood on the first tee in the morning I could hardly see the fairway,’ said the Atherstone club-mate and friend of Paul Broadhurst, the Ryder Cup player.
‘By the time I reached the first green my clubs were soaked.
They were the worst conditions I have experienced,’ he added.
Another local, Gareth Jenkins, was joint second.
He recently won the EGU Ten Counties Junior tournament.
One member of a contingent of four German boy internationals was also among the leaders, Herbert Forster, adding a 78 to a nine-hole first round 38.
SPORTS ROUND-UP Harlow underlines England potential
GREG HARLOW won the Robert Hutchinson Opticians Masters bowls title last night emerging from a field which had included 13 internationals from England, Scotland, Wales and Jersey none of whom succeeded in reaching the final.
In a marathon match Harlow defeated his Ely club colleague Kevin King by 9–8, 7–9, 9–8, coming back from a 8–6 deficit to engineer a last-end three.
Harlow's 9–5 semi-final victory over John Ottaway, one of England's team of five for the outdoor world championships in August, followed similar earlier form on Monday when he defeated Mervyn King, the national title-holder.
England have selected five new internationals, Ann Hayward, Betty Mackerness, Wynn Sowerby, Sheila White and 1991 national singles winner Jean Evans, for the British Isles Women's Championships at Bournemouth from July 13–16.
ENGLAND SQUAD (British Isles Ch'ship, July 13–16).
— N May (Cornwall), A Hayward (Herts), A Snelling (Kent), N Shaw (Durham), J Howlett (Notts), M Wellington (Devon), I Molyneaux (Oxon), B Fuller (Herts), J Baker (Derbys), B Mackerness (Devon), M Osborne (Cambs), M Steele (Middlesex), W Sowerby (Cumbria), B Atherton (Notts), S Page (Herts), M Heggie (Cumbria), B Till (Hants), S White (Middlesex), E Bessell (Somerset), M Price (Bucks), J Evans (Hunts), A Pascoe (Devon), G Daniel (Cornwall), W Line (Hants).
Reserves: B Stubbings (Yorks), C Wessier (Surrey).
SWIMMING: Mike Fibbens meets two of his conquerors at last year's European Championship at the Edinburgh International Meet which starts today.
The duo from the CIS are Alexander Popov, the 100 metre freestyle champion, and Gennadi Progoda, who won the silver medal when finishing one place ahead of Fibbens in the 50m freestyle.
This year's meet incorporates the super final of the Uncle Ben's Rice British Grand Prix series where Fibbens, the reigning sprint freestyle champion, is just one of nine defending champions.
CYCLING: David Cook (Darlington) and Simeon Hempsall (Sheffield), the 1989 and 1990 national amateur road race champions who are both now based with French clubs, have been called into Britain's team for the Grand Prix Liberazione one-day event and the Giro Regioni stage race in Italy from April 25 to May 1.
SPEEDWAY: Joe Screen, who won the British under-21 championship in 1990, will start favourite for this year's title as he chases a £10,000 bonus from sponsors Homefire.
Soccer: Extra pay would clear the way for replays, say police SOCCER
Clubs and the FA asked to foot the bill for solution to problem in the wake of Liverpool's controversial shoot-out success
By CHRISTOPHER DAVIES
FA CUP semi-final shoot-outs could be eliminated if clubs or the Football Association were willing to pay the extra police costs for staging replays at short notice, writes Christopher Davies.
Inspector Reg White, of Holloway Police, said yesterday that his force, which was in charge of the drawn Portsmouth-Liverpool semi-final the Sunday before last, would have been happy to stage another replay at two or three days notice provided that certain financial requirements were met.
The amount concerned — about £30,000 — is insignificant given that such a tie would bring in £1 million in gate receipts and television revenue.
Portsmouth and Liverpool drew 1–1 at Highbury, and the replay in Birmingham had to be put back when police said they could not cope with it the day before last week's General Election.
It meant that a penalty shoot-out was needed to settle the tie, and the FA faced a barrage of criticism when Liverpool became the first team to reach and FA Cup final on penalties.
Five ties have been settled on penalties this season following the introduction by the FA of the ‘eight-day ruling’.
The new ruling was a financial consideration to prevent ratepayers from, in effect, subsiding replays played within a few days of the original game.
When that happens, police have to cancel leave, pay overtime rates and give officers a lieu day.
This proves expensive for the police, who receive no subsidy from soccer sources for officers on duty outside the stadium.
The FA, faced with fixture congestion with a gap of eight days between each match, reluctantly agreed that Cup ties would be decided by penalties after one replay.
But they are willing to consider investigating the possibility of ‘speculating to accumulate’.
Inspector White said: ‘Providing the club [Arsenal]were happy, staging a second replay ay Highbury would not have been a problem for us.
‘From a planning point of view it would not have been a major worry, although only the force staging the original tie could police the second replay because all the liaison work for the first match would have been done.
‘At the Highbury semi-final there were just over 300 officers on duty.
Half of those would be on leave for a quickly arranged replay and I estimate the cost would be in the region of £30,000.’
It may be impractical for all clubs to ‘invest’ in another replay in this manner earlier in the competition.
But with so much at stake in the semi-finals, the clubs concerned, or the FA, from a central pool, could pay the police to guarantee a second replay.
Under the eight-day ruling the first available date for another replay between Portsmouth and Liverpool was May 4.
There was good news for Portsmouth yesterday when defender John Beresford pledged his future to the club.
Highly-rated Beresford, named as the best left-back in the Second Division in the recent PFA awards, was rumoured to be leaving in the summer when his contract expires.
As Jim Smith's side recovered from their epic tie with Liverpool, Beresford said he was misunderstood when he revealed he wanted to play Premier League football next season.
After being criticised by manager Mr Smith for the timing of his announcement, 24 hours before the Villa Park match, Beresford said: ‘I don't want to leave Pompey — in fact it's quite the reverse.
‘I do want to play Premier League football next season, but with Portsmouth and not with anyone else.’
Bryan Robson is likely to be a spectator again tonight when Manchester United play Southampton.
United, attepting to regain the leadership of the First Division, begin a demanding run of four games in seven days and Robson, who has played in only two of the last five matches because of a calf problem, is still troubled by the injury.
Celtic have unveiled plans to build a new £100 million stadium complex at Cambuslang in south east Glasgow.
The club have submitted an application for outline planning permission to Glasgow District Council following extensive feasibility studies.
The focal point of the ambitious project is a circular stadium seating 52,000 in two tiers, which should be ready by the summer of 1994.
Soccer: Russell's late intervention
By David Horridge
Leicester C1 Tranmere R0 A GOAL in the last minute by substitute Kevin Russell lifted Leicester into second place in the Second Division to give their promotion hopes a timely boost.
Despite adequate possession, Leicester had rarely threatened to pierce a Tranmere defence who fought as if they were also involved in the top of the table excitement.
But with seconds remaining Leicester captain Steve Walsh played a ball up to Russell — introduced 11 minutes earlier — and he ran clear to shoot into the corner of the net.
Leicester went into the game inspired by four wins in five games, a run that had opened up the possibility of a hat-trick of promotion successes for manager Brian Little after taking Darlington from the Vauxhall Conference to the Third Division in the last two seasons.
Leicester endorsed their form with an aggressive opening that three times promised a goal in the opening 15 minutes.
When Ormondroyd sent Oldfield clear he forced Nixon to make a low save, then the goalkeeper needed two attempts to parry Thompson's fierce 25-yard free kick.
Oldfield excited the crowd with a long run from the halfway line and when he back-heeled the ball to Mills the full-back hit his shot against a post.
Tranmere were restricted to the occasional breakaway which usually ended with an offside decision and Nixon came to their rescue again when he swooped to his right to hold Wright's shot.
The lanky Ormondroyd was proving to be a nuisance and when he chested the ball down to Thompson he was unlucky to see his shot flash wide.
The watching Kenny Dalglish, manager of Blackburn Rovers who Leicester visit on Saturday, must have been impressed with their football although they had failed to turn possession into goals by half-time.
There was a momentary scare that Tranmere might snatch the lead just before the break when Aldridge, scorer of 38 goals this season, had a shot-on-the-turn blocked by a defender.
Urged on by an expectant crowd, Leicester continued to press forward and Thompson's 20-yard shot was tipped over the bar one-handed by Nixon to concede one of several successive corners.
Despite Leicester's pressure the Tranmere goalkeeper was not as active as he should have been although his defence must take some credit for that.
Ormondroyd should have beaten him when he scooped the ball over the bar from six yards, then the goalkeeper ran to the edge of the penalty area to clear off the Leicester forward's toes.
As the game progressed Tranmere's defenders became more composed and, in the closing minutes, they went in search of a winning goal and caused some heart-flutterings among the home supporters.
Leicester City: Poole; Mills, Platnauer, Hill, Walsh, Grayson, Thompson, Oldfield (Gordon, 79), Wright, Ormondroyd (Russell, 79), Gee.
Tranmere Rovers: Nixon; Garnett (Branch, 77), Nolan, Irons, Hughes, Vickers, Martindale, Aldridge, Malkin, Muir, Thomas.
A 73rd-minute goal by substitute Andy Payton helped Middlesbrough to a 2–1 home victory over Oxford United that will have an enormous bearing on the Second Division's promotion and relegation issues.
Oxford took the lead when Magilton's 20-yard shot looped off Proctor and over the head of goalkeeper Pears.
But a shot from Ripley levelled the scores and, after United defender Penney was sent off for a professional foul, Payton, a £750,000 signing from Hull, scored from the resulting free-kick.
Payton had been hauled down by Penney, so justice was seen to be done when he hit Mohan's free-kick past Veysey.
Soccer: Barcelona so nervous in reaching third final
By Christopher Davies
BARCELONA will play Sampdoria in the European Cup final at Wembley on May 20, ensuring there will be a new holder of Europe's most prestigious club competition.
The Catalan side last night beat Benfica 2–1 in the Nou Camp stadium to top Group B of the competition's semi-Finals while Red Star's 3–2 defeat by Anderlecht meant that Sampdoria would finish first in Group A whatever their result against Panathinaikos.
In the event, the Italians drew 1–1.
Barcelona, having lost the 1961 and 1986 finals, hope it will be third time lucky.
It has to be said, however, that despite passionate support from 105,000 fans in the Nou Camp, their performance did not bear the hallmark of European champions.
In 90 minutes they managed two shots at the Benfica goal and scored twice.
Right-back Ze Carlos mis-hit a 12th minute back pass, allowing Stoichkov to drive a left-footed shot, which Benfica goalkeeper Neno could only help into the net.
Barcelona looked to be comfortably on the Wembley Way when, 11 minutes later, Eusebio fed Stoichkov on the left and the Bulgarian cut the ball back from the by-line for Bakero to score.
But even though Johan Cruyff had diluted his attacking creed by fielding an extra defender, Benfica stressed Barcelona's defensive vulnerability when a simple pass through the middle allowed Cesar Brito to reduce arrears in the 28th minute.
For the remaining hour Barcelona, encouraged by the news from Kiev where Dynamo beat Sparta Prague 1–0 before a crowd of just 3,000, played a speculative game vastly at odds with their attacking image, to the extent where veteran defender Alexanko was sent on to replace striker Laudrup in a side defending with eight players in the area.
Sampdoria fell behind in Genoa to a goal by Maragos of Panathinaikos in the 27th minute — the Greeks' first goal in five games in the tournament.
That reliable striker Mancini equalised nine minutes later.
Defending Champions Red Star lost in Brussels thanks to goals from the Anderlecht trio Bosman, Oliveira and Degryse with Pancev and Cula scoring for the Yugoslavs.
Werder Bremen will play Monaco in Lisbon on May 6 in the European Cup-Winners Cup final.
Bodo and Bockenfeld scored Werder's goals as they overcame a 1–0 first leg defecit but tension was high in Bremen, both on and off the field.
Police arrested 12 people in the city centre before the match and fireworks continued to explode throughout the game.
One German fan was seriously injured after being injured by a rocket.
Monaco became the first French club to reach the final when they drew 2–2 in Rotterdam with Feyenoord, going through on away goals after the 1–1 draw in the Principality.
Weah and Rui Barros gave Monaco a two-goal lead after 50 minutes.
Witschge pulled one back after 51 minutes and Damaschin equalised with three minutes to go.
Ajax, three-times winners of the European Cup, reached the UEFA Cup Final for the first time when last night's 1–1 draw with Genoa gave the Dutch club a 4–3 aggregate win.
Genoa never really looked like overcoming the 3–2 defecit from the first leg in Italy even when Iorio gave them the lead in the 39th minute.
Bergkamp equalised for Ajax a minute after the interval although they had several opportunities to add to their score.
Ajax will play Torino in the two-leg final after the Italians defeated Real Madrid 2–0 to win 3–2 on aggregate.
An own-goal by Rocha in the seventh minute put the Italians on the way and Fusi's 77th minute strike proved decisive.
Soccer: Gabbiadini continues Derby run
By Martin Smith
Brighton1
Derby2 DERBY COUNTY, whose recent sorties into the transfer market have proved of great profit, consolidated their position among the front-runners for a Second Division play-off place with a record-equalling 11th away win of the season at the Goldstone.
Marco Gabbiadini, a £1.2 million buy from Crystal Palace two months ago, claimed both Derby goals, but it was Tommy Johnson, signed from Notts County for £1.3 million last month, who ran Brighton's defence ragged and lifted Derby into fourth place.
It should have been no surprise: Johnson scored two of the goals in last season's play-off final against Brighton and was booed every time he touched the ball by home fans with good memories.
As early as the 17th minute, Johnson sold McCarthy an extravagant dummy and hit a 20-yard shot that just cleared Digweed's crossbar.
He was later denied the goal his performance deserved by Munday's superb tackle as he lined up a shot.
Gabbiadini was credited with the opening goal after 36 minutes, his fourth for the club.
Simpson, another big-money signing from Oxford, split the defence for Gabbiadini to take on Munday, and cross low, where the ball went in off one of three defenders supposedly guarding the near post.
Gabbiadini claimed the goal, but television replays seemed to show that the ball had deflected off Chivers, the Brighton captain.
The winner, a minute after Gall had equalised with 12 minutes left, was more clear cut.
Simpson crossed to the far post where Gabbiadini glided in to side-foot home.
Brighton remain next to bottom in the table and relegation back to the Third Division after four seasons looks a distinct probability.
They paid dearly for wasting goalscoring opportunities.
Gall equalised when he towered above the Derby defence to head in Munday's free-kick, but Meade should have brought them level immediately after Gabbiadini's first goal but slid the ball wide six yards out.
Brighton: Digweed; Munday, Gallacher, Chapman, McCarthy, Chivers, Barham, Meade, Gall, Codner, Walker.
Derby: Sutton; Kavanagh, Forsyth, P Williams, Coleman, Comyn, Johnson, Micklewhite, Gabiadini, Ramage, Simpson.
Soccer: Ware puts Stoke in final
By Sue Thearle
Peterborough0 Stoke1 (Stoke win 4–3 on aggregate) A SINGLE goal by Stoke City secured their place in a Wembley final for the first time in 20 years on a night when defender Lee Sandford required six stitches in a cheek wound following a clash with Peterborough captain Mick Halsall.
Paul Ware scored the goal which won the Autoglass Trophy Southern Area final for Stoke after they had drawn the first leg against Peterborough 3–3.
They will meet Stockport County in the final next month.
The incident between Halsall and Sandford led to another after the match.
Suspended Stoke striker Wayne Biggins clashed with Halsall after the final whistle and police were forced to intervene.
Both were both questioned by police officers before a police spokesman confirmed that they would be taking no further action and that the matter would now rest with referee Martin Bodenham, who will be reporting the matter to the Football Association.
Stoke City manager Lou Macari said afterwards: ‘I didn't see it but there was an incident and Lee Sandford has got stitches in his cheek.
Biggins became involved and will be reported to the FA with Halsall, but I'd rather not dwell on it.’
Peterborough manager Chris Turner added: ‘Evidently one of their players caught one of our players and it was handbags at 10 paces and then someone threw a punch.’
Stoke started well and Stein sliced a shot wide following good work by Beeston and Heath, but as the half progressed Peterborough began to dominate.
Halsall's ambitious 29th minute, 40-yard free kick forced Fox to scramble anxiously across his goal.
Stoke made the breakthrough in the 51st minute, when Paul Ware scored from a 20-yard free kick after being fouled by Cooper.
Peterborough: Bennett; Luke, R Robinson, Halsall, D Robinson, Welsh, Sterling, G Cooper, Riley, Charlery, Edwards (S Cooper, 60).
LAST NIGHT'S RUGBY
Hillman, Roberts sent off
By Edward Bevan
Newbridge21pts
Newport3 NEWBRIDGE moved to joint third place in the Heineken League with their ninth win in an ill-tempered game where David Roberts, the Newbridge flanker, and Frank Hillman, the Newport prop, were sent off midway through the second half for fighting.
It was the third time Hillman has been sent off in his career and having been suspended for 20 weeks for his last offence, can expect a lengthy suspension for his latest misdemeanour.
The referee had earlier issued four warnings and with players involved in their private feuds there was little constructive rugby.
Fealy's try gave Newbridge the lead after Hayward had missed with two earlier attempts.
Hayward then increased the home team's lead with two penalties in the space of five minutes.
Hayward kicked his third penalty on the stroke of half-time though Harries reduced the deficit with a penalty for Newport.
Midway through the second half Perry scored Newbridge's second try from a lineout, and the lock added a third near the end when he supported Fealy's break.
Newbridge: D Rees (capt), D Manley, S Crandon, R Brown, S Hill, B Hayward, S Fealey, J Rowlands, K Waters, S Jenkins, A Perry, A Sutton, D Roberts, P Crane, H Taylor.
Newport: S McCracken, A Harries, R Bidgood, R Jones, A Lewis, M Yendle, D Llewellyn, F Hillman, I Jones, M Sibthorpe, K Moseley, D Waters, M Arthur, A Carter, K Withey (capt).
Penalty goal: Harries.
Soccer: O'Neill the happy Wanderer
By SUE THEARLE
MARTIN O'NEILL, the Wycombe Wanderers manager, emerged cheerfully to face the press, extolling the virtues of what had been, by his own admission, one of the most gruelling 90 minutes he had endured this season.
It had not been spent on the football pitch, however, nor the training ground.
Instead, he had been answering a barrage of questions from an invited audience of supporters, who passionately implored the amiable Irishman to guide their side into the Fourth Division.
Mr O'Neill, 40, dealt carefully with each inquiry, gently assuring his interrogators that he would do his best.
The evidence in the two years since he took over at the club suggests Mr O'Neill's best efforts will be enough to secure promotion from the GM Vauxhall Conference.
His record at Adams Park speaks for itself.
He coaxed his side to FA Trophy success over Kidderminster Harriers at Wembley last season.
Vauxhall Conference Championship Shield and Bob Lord Trophy victories this season have been achieved while his side have been engaged in a relentless struggle with Colchester United for a place in the Fourth Division.
As the season enters its last month, the two sides are neck and neck, with Colchester leading on goal difference after beating Slough 4–0 on Tuesday.
As Mr O'Neill regularly agrees, it has been a remarkable effort by his side.
He said: ‘It's incredible when you consider that my team of part-time lads have had to compete against a side that is full-time.
‘I've had to make amazing demands on them by asking them to take time off work.
Colchester don't have that problem and, in all honesty, with their set-up, they should win the league by 10 points.’
Less than a month ago, Colchester headed the Conference by 11 points, and despite games in hand, Wycombe's promotion campaign looked to have floundered.
But a fine run of only one defeat in the last eight matches has propelled them back into contention in a duel that looks set to go to the last game.
Mr O'Neill said: ‘On paper, Colchester United have got the easier run-in, with four games at home, and two away.
We've got three at home and three away, but I always say that not many games have ever been won on paper, and I still think we've got a great chance.’
Should Wycombe fail in their promotion campaign, there will doubtless be a number of League clubs clamouring to employ the Wanderers manager, who last summer turned down the opportunity of going to Bristol Rovers.
‘The offer was nice, but I stayed here because I think Wycombe have got great potential.
The club have some great facilities, a marvellous ground, some fantastic support, and most important of all, we're in a sound financial position,’ he said.
‘It will be frustrating to have to stay in the Vauxhall Conference for another year, especially when so many clubs in the lower divisions are struggling to stay afloat.’
Mr O'Neill does not disguise the fact that he holds strong personal targets.
‘I am ambitious, and without any disrespect to the Vauxhall Conference, I don't want to remain a non-League manager for ever.’
Rugby Union: S Africa told to halt tours
By John Reason and Ross Dunn
THE National Olympic Council in South Africa have asked the South African Rugby Union to postpone the five-match tour of Romania and Italy in June.
The Council feel that SARU should concentrate on raising money for the development of rugby in the townships rather than spend it on overseas tours to countries which cannot afford to finance the visits.
But Dr Danie Craven, the executive president of the SARU, brushed aside the threat last night.
‘The tours will definitely go ahead.
They can't force us out, or tell us what to do,’ he said.
Some in the Republic believe, though, that the decision to call off the tours would suit the SARU, who have been made aware that three matches in four days in Bucharest in the middle of June followed by two in a week in Rome could leave very few survivors from heat stroke.
Also the sporting community in South Africa is now uncomfortably aware that their cricketing authorities have asked far too much of their players this year.
Captain Kepler Wessels has complained of the indecent haste in agreeing to play the series in the West Indies so soon after the World Cup in Australia and New Zealand.
If the SARU do not want to make the same mistake, they could organise a tour of South Africa by their proposed national team to prepare for the visits of New Zealand and Australia in August.
Those internal tour games would all raise substantial revenue.
The National Olympic Council indicated that they do not object to the tours by New Zealand and Australia and neither would they do anything to prevent the Springboks from touring France and England later in the year.
Cricket: Gooch stays in charge throughout the summer CRICKET
The England captain leaves sick-bed to accept renewed ‘honour’ and talk about Pakistan challenge
By Peter Deeley
GRAHAM GOOCH has been re-appointed England captain for the five-Test summer Cornhill series against Pakistan and the five one-day Texaco internationals.
Offered the job by the England Committee at their Lord's meeting yesterday, Gooch had little hesitation in accepting.
After England's winter successes, a Test series win in New Zealand and runners-up to Pakistan in the World Cup, the announcement was little more than a formality.
Since first becoming captain in 1988, Gooch has led England to victory 10 times in 23 games.
He described it as ‘an honour’, adding: ‘I look forward to another wonderful summer's cricket against one of the top sides in the world.’
Gooch was absent from Lord's on Tuesday, where Essex are playing England A in the opening game of the season.
But he rose from his sick-bed to be on hand when the committee reached their expected decision.
Well wrapped-up against the cold, Gooch said he was feeling better ‘but not 100 per cent’.
Ted Dexter, chairman of the England Committee, commented: ‘Graham has led the side in the best possible way during the winter and we are delighted he has again accepted the captaincy.’
Gooch, now 38, has dropped hints in recent months that he might be approaching the twilight of his playing career but declined to speculate on his future beyond this summer.
If he plays in all five Pakistan Tests, he will be one short of 100 appearances for England, and that includes three years in the middle of his career when he was banned from selection for involvement in a rebel tour of South Africa.
In any case, this is no doubt the last time the Gooch–Micky Stewart partnership will be operating for England.
Alan Smith, chief executive of the Test and County Cricket Board, said the England team manager's contract would expire on Sept 16 — the day after the end of the season and Mr Stewart's 60th birthday.
‘I don't think he will stay on in that role,’ Mr Smith added, ‘but we will consider the future in our own time.’
Of the World Cup final defeat, Gooch said that England ‘didn't play well that day’.
Although Pakistan had talented players and were formidable opposition ‘we have the ability to beat them’.
‘We also have a very talented side and if we can play consistently we can win.
We have put in a lot of hard work to get our cricket back to a level where we can compete with the best sides in the world.
Pakistan, certainly one of the best on their day, will provide a big challenge for us.’
Asked about the possibility that Imran Khan might not be leading Pakistan, Gooch said: ‘I think if he didn't come, having won the World Cup, it would be a blow to their team.
It would be a loss because he is a very good cricketer.’
But he said Pakistan had something of a history of men playing, after having said they were not fit.
The England captain singled out the Pakistan pace attack — Wasim Akram, Waqar Younis and Aqib Javed — for special mention.
‘Assuming Waqar is fit, all have a fair degreee of experience and success in English conditions.’
Gooch recalled playing against Waqar at Chelmsford: ‘The first impression was that he seemed to have a very long run-up but he is obviously a very fine fast bowler with the ability to swing, particularly the old ball.’
The England captain will have a voice in the selection of a vice-captain, if one is formally appointed.
Although Surrey's Alec Stewart is an obvious candidate, Lancashire's Michael Atherton, who was the unofficial holder of the post last summer, is now fit again.
GOLF
New clubs struck by recession
By Michael Williams
ANOTHER of the grand golf developments which have been planned for Britain has run into financial difficulties, the receivers being called in at Quietwaters, a £20 million complex being built between Colchester and Maldon in Essex.
Among the minority shareholders is the PGA European Tour, who last September held one of its qualifying schools at Quietwaters for potential tournament players.
The club also staged a televised match last year between Nick Faldo against the better-ball of Ian Botham, Nigel Mansell and Daley Thomson on a new Lakes course designed by Neil Coles, chairman of the Tour's board of directors.
However, the rest of the complex, claimed to be the biggest in Europe and including a hotel, conference centre and extensive facilites for other sports, has, through contractual difficulties, still not been opened six months after the planned date.
Among the sportsmen whose names are linked with the project are David Leadbetter, Faldo's golf coach, Mark Cox, the former Davis Cup player, bowls player David Bryant, and Steve Davis, the six-times world snooker champion.
The administrative receivership is in the hands of Touche Ross, who will continue to run the company as a going concern with a view to finding a new buyer from the majority shareholder, Bob Curry.
Negotiations with the De Vere hotel group, which were at an advanced stage, have recently broken down and precipitated the receivership.
Touche Ross have three months in which to find a new buyer before reporting to Quietwaters creditors.
This is not the first time golf has stumbled on its projected step into the 21st century.
Slaley Hall, in Northumberland, also had to call in the receivers, development of a new complex at Loch Lomond has also halted while East Sussex National has had its problems.
Each has been the victim of the recession, the debenture memberships of several thousands of pounds being beyond the pocket of most golfers.