

Just what the curry addict ordered to take away pain
By Christine McGourty, Technology Correspondent
CURRY lovers who regularly put themselves through the pain of eating hot, spicy food may be physically addicted to the ‘high’ it gives, according to new research.
A study showed that capsaicin, the ‘hot’ ingredient in chilli, enhances the appreciation of food and may stimulate the body's natural painkillers in a way that could be addictive.
Found in red peppers and chilli peppers, capsaicin causes a sensation of burning pain in the mouth by triggering the trigeminal nerve, which has branches in the eyes, nose, tongue and mouth.
But it does not activate taste buds and has no intrinsic flavour.
Dr John Prescott of the CSIRO, Australia's national research organisation, and colleagues at the Sensory Research Centre in Sydney looked at how different amounts of capsaicin affected the flavour and intensity of solutions of sugar and salt.
The researchers selected 35 people who ate spicy food regularly and gave 19 of them 32 solutions containing different amounts of capsaicin and sugar.
The others were asked to taste and rate 32 solutions of capsaicin mixed with salt.
They found that even small amounts of capsaicin increased the perceived strength of the solutions.
Dr Prescott said in New Scientist today that it gave a ‘big boost’ which salt or sugar alone could not provide.
This may be caused when capsaicin triggers the release of endorphins, the body's natural painkillers.
These can create a sense of pleasure or well-being, so that when food contains capsaicin, the experience of eating is more intense and the food seems more highly flavoured.
‘It's possible that people are getting a bit of a high from eating hot food,’ said Dr Prescott.
‘It gives your mood a bit of a lift.’
Because people could become used to increased levels of the endorphins it stimulates, eating spicy food could be addictive.
Studies showed that people accustomed to eating a lot of hot food had cravings for it when denied it, and people became more tolerant of spicy food the more they ate.
‘The first bite of mild curry leads on to the vindaloo,’ he said.
Cancer link to halogen lamps
By Christine McGourty, Technology Correspondent
PROTECTIVE covers should be mandatory on halogen lamps to prevent users contracting skin cancer, researchers say today.
The lamps emit ultra-violet radiation which has powerful cancer-causing abilities, according to a small pilot study on its effects on mice.
Dr Silvio de Flora and Dr Francesco D'Agostini, of Genoa University, exposed four mice to a 50 watt halogen lamp for 12 hours a day.
Another four mice were exposed to the same lamp with a glass cover on it.
The unprotected mice began to develop tumours after three months.
Those exposed to the covered lamp remained normal after a year.
In a report in Nature magazine, the researchers say the results are ‘striking’.
Doses and lengths of exposure time were high but ‘not so far from the levels to which some people are exposed, particularly in the workplace’.
They said the light emitted was much more dangerous than sunlight.
The Consumers' Association, which produced a report on the lamps two years ago, found that seven out of eight desk lamps exceeded international safety limits for ultraviolet radiation.
A spokesman for Osram, which makes halogen lamps, denied there was a risk to people in offices or homes.