

City: Funds set to favour British equities
By Roland Gribben
INTEREST among fund managers in buying British shares is the highest for 16 months, according to a post-election survey published today.
A large majority of the 95 managers canvassed by Gallup for stockbrokers Smith New Court say they intend to increase their holdings, compared with only 15 p.c. in March.
The report pinpoints a substantial increase in the number of managers planning to run down cash balances, consistent with the move into equities.
Fund managers will also be more heavily in the market for government securities although holdings of index-linked gilts will continue to be run down.
The election result has made fund managers ‘much more confident’ about the outlook for the equity market: all but a handful believe the economic situation will ‘get a lot or a little better’over the next year.
Optimism about the prospects for European equities is also high, although the level of interest lags behind the United Kingdom, while the slide in Tokyo has significantly reduced interest in Japanese equities.
Managers still maintain the ‘negative stance’ they have held on American equities since September.
City: Eagle Star in £130m sale of Australian businesses
By Karen Cooper
EAGLE Star, the troubled insurer owned by BAT Industries, is withdrawing from the Australian insurance market with the sale of its Australian Eagle general and life businesses for an expected £130m.
News of the disposal and the £75m profit BAT will reap from the deal sent shares in the tobacco and financial services conglomerate up 9p to 745p.
BAT inherited the Australian outpost when it bought Eagle Star in 1984.
Australian Eagle, described by a BAT spokesman as a ‘second division player’ in a competitive and over-broked market, made a £5m profit last year from £156m of premium income and is being sold in two parts.
The life operations will go to Lend Lease, Australia's third largest life office, for about £76m, while the loss-making general side of the business is being bought by QBE, a big general insurer, for £58m.
Eagle Star, one of Britain's major composite insurers, had a disastrous 1991 like the rest of the general insurance industry.
Badly hit by £213m of losses on domestic mortgage guarantee insurance, it nearly trebled its pre-tax loss to £301m and saw the departure of chairman and chief executive Michael Butt — once considered heir apparent to BAT chairman Sir Patrick Sheehy.
With further losses expected this year, strategy has been overhauled under the guidance of chairman Brian Garraway, who hands over to financial services managing director, Martin Broughton, in July.
It has already sold a business in Belgium and closed one in France because they lacked ‘critical mass’.
The main focus now will be on the domestic operations, which are taking a more ‘selective’ approach to general insurance, and on expanding its life operations, particularly in Europe where it is still a relatively minor player.
In Australia, the spokesman said, ‘it was difficult to see how we could get to a position of influence in the market without spending a lot of money.’
The latest sale has sparked speculation that Eagle Star's South African operations could be the next to go.
However, unlike the Australian interests, the business there is a market leader and makes profits.
Nyren Scott-Malden, an analyst at stockbroker BZW, said the cash raised from the sale would boost Eagle Star's sagging solvency margin 7–8 points above its 39 p.c. level at the year-end.
He has upgraded his profit forecast for BAT from £1.49 billion to £1.56 billion given that the profit on the deal will go above the line in the second quarter.
Last month, the group announced a 1991 profit of £1.05 billion.
That included an overall profit from insurance of £232m, helped by good performances from its other insurers, Allied Dunbar and Farmers in America.
City: New £400m sea gas scheme
By Roland Gribben
THE post-election rush of new energy-linked projects continued yesterday with the announcement of a North Sea gas gathering scheme, designed to tap undeveloped reserves in the southern sector.
Two companies, Conoco (UK) and Total Oil of France, are investing £400m in developing the Murdoch and Caister fields with a new 112 mile pipeline link to the Conoco terminal at Theddlethorpe, Lincolnshire.
The project was the last to be approved by the Department of Energy before it disappeared.
Conoco also disclosed it has started a review of offshore maintenance operations could lead to a jobs rundown.
One platform in the Viking field has already been turned into an unmanned unit.
Total recoverable reserves in the Murdoch and Caister fields are estimated at 620 billion cubic feet of gas and 5.7m barrels of condensate.
Peak production, expected to be achieved in 1994, is likely to be about 280m cubic feet of gas a day.
But with the pipeline capable of handling 750m cubic feet of gas a day there is scope for a rapid expansion.
Conoco estimates total reserves in the area could reach 3 trillion cubic feet and is talking to a number of companies, including Lasmo, Sovereign and Atlantic Richfield about tying in their undeveloped discoveries.
Murdoch is the bigger of the two fields.
City: Lossmaker Lilley in stake sale
LILLEY, the Glasgow-based contracting and construction group, has agreed to sell its share in three commercial property joint ventures to its partner, London & Edinburgh Trust.
Lilley also reported a pre-tax loss of £5m for 1991, compared with a £14m profit last time, struck after a £12m provision for property development and house building.
The final dividend, payable on July 1, is cut to 1p (1½p) making 2p (2½p) for the year.
Lilley is selling its stakes in developments at Stoke Poges (Bucks) and Chelsea; and in Caledonia Land, which owns property in Scotland.
But it is also acquiring its partner's stakes in an industrial development in Surrey, and a housing development in Ilford, Essex.
The net effect is an £18m payment to Lilley.
Together with some smaller disposals, the deal will substantially reduce Lilley's debt burden.
It will halve off-balance sheet debt to £23m.
City: Power deals to be altered
NATIONAL Power and PowerGen, the privatised power generators, are making changes in the way they account for direct sales to industrial companies to reduce the risk of discrimination and cross-subsidies.
Prof Stephen Littlechild, the electricity industry regulator, has pressured the companies into changes following complaints from electricity distributors and major energy users.
A complaint from London Electricity following the loss of the London Underground supply contract to National Power more than a year ago triggered the issue.
London's complaint that National Power had breached non-discrimination rules was rejected by Prof Littlechild.
But his investigation has resulted in changes.
National Power has agreed to operate its supply business as if it were a separately financed company to ease concerns.
A similar agreement is being discussed with PowerGen.
City: BP pushes for tax changes
By Roland Gribben
BRITISH Petroleum is to press Chancellor Norman Lamont for a reduction in North Sea taxes and is making additional cuts in capital spending to avoid the risks of further cash and dividend pressures.
Chairman Robert Horton disclosed the moves at yesterday's annual meeting where analysts felt the tone of his address to shareholders provided further indications that BP would hold its first quarter dividend in the face of bleak results.
BP has already made one unsuccessful attempt to make use of its £500m in surplus advanced corporation tax with a North Sea-based scheme that was vetoed by the Treasury.
But with tax payments to the Government last year of £755m eating into slim profits, Mr Horton is to see Mr Lamont shortly to try to produce a change of mind.
BP is believed to be considering two approaches, one based on a reduction in petroleum revenue tax that would raise the group's exposure to corporation tax but open the way for an advanced corporation tax offset.
The second is a variation — a return a system abolished in 1986 where advanced corporation tax could be offset against production taxes inside the North Sea ‘ring fence’.
BP and Shell account for a large slice of petroleum tax payments because they operate mature fields that have lost their tax shelter.
Last year BP paid £451m against £746m in 1990.
Mr Horton warned shareholders that there was no sign of immediate improvement in the business and said that oil prices could remain flat ‘for some time.’
The latest capital spending review could result in a near 20 p.c. cut in total investment to $6½ billion (£3.7 billion) against $8 billion (£4.6 billion) last year although after allowing for the purchase of Petromed in Spain the figure is nearer 7 p.c.
City: American trade gap reduced by 43pc
By Jonathan Confino in New York
A SURGE in American exports to record levels was responsible for a dramatic improvement in February's trade deficit to the lowest level in nearly nine years.
The gap between exports and imports narrowed by 43 p.c. from the previous month to $3.4 billion.
Exports rose 6.8 p.c. to a high of $37.8 billion, while imports fell modestly.
The sale of commercial aircraft provided a powerful boost to overseas sales, but, even excluding this volatile component, the increase was broadly-based.
Economists yesterday disagreed on whether exports could maintain their strength at a time when many other industrial nations are in the doldrums.
Stephen Roach, a senior economist at Morgan Stanley, said: ‘The numbers show export resilience continues to be intact and exports will continue to support the recovery.
‘The US was able to pump up exports, dispelling the notion that poor economies of its major trading partners would slow the trend.’
However, Robert Brusca, chief economist at Nikko Securities, said February's figures were inflated by seasonal factors and are likely to prove to be temporary.
He said: ‘It will be much harder to penetrate markets which are suffering a sharp slowdown in growth.
Yesterday's figures also show that these markets are extremely competitive with exporters unable to increase their prices.’
In a separate report, the government disclosed that applications for unemployment benefits dropped to a five-month low in the week ending April 4.
It represented the second successive decline and was viewed as another sign that the economy is growing, albeit slowly.
City: Public borrowing at £6.4bn largest ever
By Sonia Purnell
THE public sector borrowing requirement rose to £6.4 billion in March, by far the highest monthly figure ever recorded although broadly in line with Chancellor Norman Lamont's predictions in last month's Budget.
The borrowing requirement for the whole of financial year of 1991–92 was £13.9 billion, after £7.9 billion of proceeds from privatisations.
This figure compares with a net repayment of £400m in the previous 12 months after £5.4 billion from privatisations.
Although they were gruesome, the markets virtually ignored these widely expected figures to concentrate instead on a few signs of impending economic recovery, such as improved unemployment figures.
One economist said: ‘The Treasury forecast at the time of the Budget growth this year of 1 p.c. and a PSBR for 1992–93 of £26 billion excluding tax cuts.
But if growth were downgraded, the PSBR would go up very quickly indeed.’
Details released yesterday on the Government's cash receipts last year underlined the effects of the recession.
The Inland Revenue raised £79.4 billion, down 3½ p.c., while Customs and Excise receipts rose by only 11½ p.c. to £61.8 billion despite a 17 p.c. increase in the rate of value added tax to 17½ p.c., reflecting low sales of consumer items attracting VAT.
Total cash receipts for 1991–92 were £201½ billion, up 3½ p.c., with £15.6 billion in March alone.
Total cash outlays last year rose 11 p.c. to £213 billion, including £19.3 billion in March.
The local authority borrowing requirement fell to £1.8 billion last year from £3.4 billion, suggesting higher poll tax receipts.
Institutional investors made their biggest ever switch from short to long-term assets in the final quarter of 1991, abandoning £3.8 billion of cash deposits for gilts and equities.
City: Shops feel the pinch from theft
GOODS stolen from retailers accounted for 1.1 p.c. of turnover last year, down by a quarter compared with 1989, according to the latest survey by accountants Touche Ross.
But when average shrinkage — the retailers' word for shoplifted goods — is expressed as a percentage of net profit before tax, the position is much worse, reflecting the reduction in profits over the last two years.
The average shrinkage level for 1991 is 24 p.c. of net profit, up a third over two years, and retailers expect it to grow in line with inflation.
The highest shrinkage were reported by booksellers, newsagents and DIY outlets.
City: Trail of ‘missing £4.5m’ lengthens
By Duncan Hughes
A SECOND company has been suspended in connection with investigation by police and regulators into the whereabouts of at least £4½m in client money managed by a London-based financial adviser, Wentworth Investment Services.
Kenneth Renton, the director, yesterday appeared before the City of London Magistrates Court charged with obtaining £1½m by deception.
He was arrested at Heathrow Airport on Wednesday.
Mr Renton, whose company has been suspended by the Financial Intermediaries and Managers Brokers Regulatory Association, was remanded to appear in the court on Monday
Fimbra yesterday also suspended Edinburgh-based Waverley Fund Management, another company of financial advisers of which Mr Renton was a director until February 6.
Last September the company changed its status from being able to handle client money to only offering advice on personal finance products.
It is believed the company was suspended after investigators were unable to locate £500,000 alleged to have been invested with the company by Wentworth Investment Services.
It is believed that the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation has also launched an investigation into another subsidiary, Waverley Unit Trust Management.
City: Bosch £72m for boiler maker
By David Wighton
IN THE first of the predicted flood of bids following the election, gas boiler maker Worcester Group yesterday agreed to a £72m takeover by Bosch, the German electrical appliances and car parts giant.
The deal, which would have gone ahead whatever the election result, is Bosch's second major investment in Britain following last year's opening of its £100m car alternator plant in Cardiff.
The terms are 225p cash a share — 20 times brokers' 1992 earnings forecasts — but five of Worcester's top managers, including chairman Cecil Duckworth, are exchanging most of their holdings for a 32 p.c. stake in the new Bosch subsidiary that will own the business.
Bosch will be able to buy them out in 1996 for 20.4 times average earnings per share in the previous three years up to a maximum of 394p.
Bosch has acceptances for 51.4 p.c. of Worcester's shares, including 13 p.c. owned by institutions.
Mr Duckworth said: ‘I hope outside shareholders think it is a good deal though one or two may have thought we should have waited.’
‘In three years' time we might have still been in very good shape but we must take steps to protect the UK as a manufacturing base.’
Worcester is the leading combination boiler maker in Britain, where sales are growing from a low base.
But the single European market is expected to bring stiff competition from bigger continental rivals.
‘We feel we must be part of a much larger group,’ said Mr Duckworth.
Bosch, with total sales of £12 billion last year, has 40 p.c. of the German market for wall-hung boilers and its products, some of which Worcester will make in Britain, are said to be complementary.
Mr Duckworth said the deal was good for staff.
Worcester's only independent director, Michael Davis, is recommending shareholders to accept.
Former Cabinet Minister Peter Walker, a non-executive director of Worcester, will join the board of the new subsidiary.
City: Eurotunnel man partner in Maxwell firm
By Sonia Purnell
A FRENCH director of Eurotunnel who is also a close member of president Franois Mitterrand's ruling elite has emerged as Robert Maxwell's partner in la Grande Arche de la Defense, a Parisian property company part-owned by Maxwell Communication Corporation.
Robert Lion, general manager of the powerful state-owned investment bank Caisse des Depots et Consignations and a former head of the prime minister's office, represented the French government in its investment in 27½ p.c. of la Grande Arche.
His close involvement threatens to embarrass Mitterrand's government, although there is no suggestion he was involved in any wrong-doing.
Mr Maxwell backed the 1987 flotation of Eurotunnel, where Mr Lion was already a director, by sub-underwriting about a tenth of the £350m British tranche.
Samuel Pisar, a well-connected French lawyer who advised the Maxwells, brought Mr Maxwell and the French government together in la Grande Arche, which has investments in some of Paris's most prestigious buildings.
One investigator into the Maxwell scandal said: ‘Maxwell was seduced into investing in Paris.
He had a big love affair with France and tried to buy his way into political circles.’
New directors led by chairman Roy Barber, a company doctor, have now been installed at la Grande Arche and have ordered an independent review of its properties, some of which are to be sold.
Meanwhile, investigators are understood to be examining an uncompleted property transaction between the French company and a Leichtenstein trust connected with Robert Maxwell.
City: Trafalgar House caught in wrangle over Expo bill
By David Millward
THE opening of Britain's £25m pavilion at the Expo 92 exhibition in Seville on Monday has been overshadowed by a dispute between Trafalgar House and the firms it hired to complete the project.
Tubeworkers, the largest of the sub-contractors, is taking High Court action over money it claims is owed by Trafalgar.
Others are understood to be considering similar action.
The dispute is bound to embarrass the Department of Trade & Industry, responsible for the British pavilion, which hired Trafalgar to manage the project.
The Warwickshire-based Tubeworkers, which provided 1,000 tons of steel, also invested nearly £130,000 for the right to be named as one of the sponsors of the British pavilion.
Director Charles Hurst has claimed Trafalgar House had held back £120,000 of the contract price as well as the sponsorship money.
‘We should be in Seville, but we cannot afford the air fare,’ he said.
According to Mr Hurst, Trafalgar House has held back money because it claims sub-contractors were responsible for delays in completing the project.
Another sub-contractor, Amalgamated Tanks International from Great Yarmouth, confirmed last night it is also in dispute and has sought legal advice.
A spokesman for the company, which provided cooling and water tanks, tanks for the pavilion said last night: ‘I cannot comment further because the situation is legally delicate.’
City: Premier falls to £8.9m on year
By Ra Tickel
PREMIER Consolidated Oilfields yesterday reported a 24 p.c. fall in full-year profits to £8.91m pre-tax, on turnover 24 p.c. lower at £32m.
However, the company had adopted a new accounting policy on the treatment of exploration and development expenditure and changed its year-end to the calendar year used by the industry for exploration budgets and profits cover just nine months, against 12 last time.
Chairman Roland Shaw said the effect of the change in accounting procedures benefited the profit comparsion of the company by about £2.4m.
He said the company had not called on shareholders for funds since 1985 and had spent recent years chasing funds to build up income producing assets.
‘But we now have a strong cash flow able to fund substantial development programmes, and decided it was time to tidy up the balance sheet.’
Mr Shaw said oil production rose from 9,290 to almost 11,000 barrels a day.
He believes oil prices will strengthen in the second half of the year.
Again there is no dividend.
City: Olivetti chief faces jail over fraud role
By Bruce Johnston in Catania
CARLO de Benedetti, chairman of the Olivetti group, was sentenced yesterday to six years and four months in jail for his part in the fraudulent collapse of Roberto Calvi's Banco Ambrosiano.
The bank crashed in 1982 with debts of more than $1 billion, seven months after Mr de Benedetti resigned as vice-chairman.
He had been in office for only 65 days, ending in January 1981.
The Milan court held Mr de Benedetti had profited unfairly by receiving a £20m share package in an Ambrosiano subsidiary, as well as the 2 p.c. share value in the bank which he sold at the end of his tenure.
Mr Calvi was found hanging below London's Blackfriars Bridge in 1982 with 10 pounds of bricks in his pockets, two months before the crash in which 39,000 small investors lost their savings.
According to‘Mozzarella’ Mannoia, a Mafia informer, Mr Calvi was murdered by an Italian mafioso because he had failed to repay a large Mafia investment of dirty money.
Mr de Benedetti is one of Italy's foremost business figures, with interests from typewriters to Italy's La Repubblica newspaper, which in turn has a part share in Britain's Independent.
He was convicted on fraud charges together with 32 others, including the former chief of the now outlawed P-2 Masonic lodge, Giuseppe Ciarrapico, a soft drinks-to-restaurants businessman
Mr de Benedetti has protested his innocence and is to appeal, a process that could take two years to complete.
In the meantime he will continue as chairman and chief executive of Olivetti.
City Comment: There's spring in the step of the stock market
AT LEAST last Friday's post-election stock market surge was not a one-day special offer for the professionals only.
Prices have remained high-indeed the FT-SE index has risen another 55 points since then — allowing even the most passive of private investors, including unit trust holders, to take advantage of the market.
The 10 p.c. gain since election day is looking increasingly sustainable.
It is not that prospects for earnings are 10 p.c. better that they were in the middle of last week, but it is possible to argue that prospects are that much better than they would have been under a Labour government and that the market was discounting such a result.
The FT-SE failed to hold its gains yesterday but shortly after opening it was only six points away from last September's previous record closing level.
Wall Street has been hitting new peaks this week too, which has given support to the London market (and even Japan's Nikkei index, in a typically erratic period, has gained nearly 800 points while London added its 245) but London has real strengths of its own.
The City view is that the fall in corporate earnings has stopped and that next year's increase could be around 15 p.c.
The market's price-earnings multiple was 16 last night but it would drop below 14 if that increase in earnings really happens.
The increase will not be matched by dividend rises — too many companies have been paying more than they could afford over the past two years and need to repair their reserves and ratios — but 7 p.c. growth looks reasonable.
The market yield, a historic 4¾ p.c., could return back above 5 p.c., therefore giving basic-rate taxpayers a real return with the prospect of real growth too.
Not all problems have gone away of course: yesterday's £6.4 billion public sector borrowing requirement is not much higher than expectations, but it is almost as large as the deficit for the previous 11 months and — with this year's deficit forecast to be double last year's — shows why the Bank of England so eagerly sold £2 billion or more of gilts on election night and why it needs a regular stream of massive sales.
The change in employment may not always be so favourable as yesterday's either, but the market is now starting to feel bullish and looking for a FT-SE of 3,000 by next year.
City Comment: Industry starts to advance on tax
INDUSTRY is preparing for another assault on advance corporation tax.
BP fired the first salvo yesterday and chairman Robert Horton has arranged to see Chancellor Norman Lamont to try to assess the prospects for change.
Mr Lamont raised hopes in the Budget that the Treasury may be prepared to think again about giving companies access to the estimated £2 billion of unrelieved advance corporation tax waiting in their balance sheets for an offset.
But with the tax collectors anxious to get their hands on every ha'penny, the Chancellor cannot afford to be generous.
Recession has added to the howls of anguish traditionally generated by the issue.
The slump in profits has limited the scope for corporation tax offsets but economic recovery should help ease the problem.
BP's case for a reduction in North Sea taxes to provide room for manoeuvre smacks of special pleading.
It is one of the few companies exposed to the full blast of petroleum revenue tax but, as a recent National Audit Office report showed, the whole offshore tax system is in a mess.
Mr Lamont should deflect the BP attack and put the whole North Sea taxation house in order.
Gold's standard still flagging
LAST time gold's price was fixed at yesterday afternoon's level Prince Andrew and Lady Sarah Ferguson had just announced their engagement.
The price is now back to the $336.70 an ounce which cut the cost of their wedding ring six years ago and nothing seems set to put the shine back on bullion.
World economic and political uncertainty once caused gold to twitch up like a kneecap tapped with a hammer.
Now Saddam can invade, the Soviet Union can fall apart and Japanese asset values can collapse without gold showing any reaction.
The $800 an ounce of 1980 looked ridiculous then, but impossible now.
The world has changed of course: European currencies no longer fluctuate against each other and Russia and South Africa — two great producing areas — have found a political stability of sorts.
Even most of South America has conquered inflation and gold-loans have effectively smoothed the market.
Gold has been stripped of the magical investment properties once ascribed to the metal, leaving it to the merciless forces of physical supply and physical demand.
On the consumption side, that means industrial usage (which is hit by the recession) and to an even greater extent, jewellery (which is even harder hit by the recession.)
On the other side of the equation, the producers show no strong wish to stop mining.
The outlook is bleak.
When gold was last at this level in April 1986 Chernobyl was about to rumble: there are no encouraging noises in 1992.
City Comment: Encouraging us to look away
NORMAN Lamont will be in good company at next week's IMF and G7 meetings.
He will be surrounded by finance ministers who have forecast the green-shoots of recovery but who have yet to see their crop flourish.
The message they will tell the world is that recovery really is about to show — but they will be conscious this is the message they broadcast last year too.
Perhaps it is for that reason that Britain will find greater interest in discussing the problems of the former Soviet Union and in establishing the rouble stabilisation fund—even though it will mean us pledging about $600m to help keep the Reds out of the red.
Ever since Mr Gorbachev attended our G7 meeting last year and Mr Lamont went to inspect the Russian chaos, Britain has effectively adopted the Soviets and we will be pressing hardest to help — even George Bush is now jumping on this bandwagon.
Like Britain, Mr Bush may find Russia a useful diversion from talking about a recession.
The fiscal package promised in his State of the Union speech is now lost in Congress: Britain and France are in no position to attempt such a stimulus and the exchange rate mechanism prevents monetary intervention.
Japan may still want to try exerting control but is likely to be alone.
City: Extra time on MCC
THE administrators of Maxwell Communication Corporation have been granted an extra two months by the American courts to prepare a reconstruction plan for the company.
They have until the end of June to decide if MCC can be rebuilt around its American publishing subsidiaries, Macmillan and Official Airline Guide, in a deal that would involve 43 banks converting their loans into shares in the new company.
American investment bank JP Morgan is advising accountant Price Waterhouse, appointed administrator by the High Court in London.
Most of MCC's businesses in Europe have now been sold, with Italian sports sticker business Panini and compact disc manufacturer Nimbus likely to go within six weeks.
Cino del Duca, the French printing group, is also for sale.
City: Dealer in £1bn GM fraud case
By Jonathan Confino in New York
A FRAUD of staggering audacity has allegedly been perpetrated against General Motors by a Long Island dealer who, prosecutors claim, borrowed $1¾ billion (£1 billion) from the car company last year alone to finance vehicles ‘that never existed’.
The alleged scheme, in which old loans were paid back to General Motors by ever-escalating new loans from its own finance subsidiary, dates back to 1980.
John McNamara, 52, has been charged with defrauding General Motors of more than $400m.
The case comes at an embarrassing time for the world's largest industrial company, which is already deep in the red and under attack for its bureaucratic management style.
The company has refused to explain why its auditors started becoming suspicious only a few months ago and why the dealership was lent $425m as recently as December.
Bail was set at a remarkable $300m, one of the highest on record.
Even so, Mr McNamara, who is a prominent philanthropist and contributor to the Republican party, managed to meet the terms after pledging as security his homes and businesses.
These securities include more than 100 properties, such as shopping centres, in five states.
He is also pledging his private jet and everything else his family owns.
Mr McNamara is alleged to have borrowed money from General Motors to buy custom-built vans which were then re-sold to a company based in Cyprus.
Prosecutors claim to have found that all the companies involved in the transactions, including the shipper, were companies owned by Mr McNamara and allege that no vehicles were ever involved in the transactions.
About 70,000 vehicles are alleged to have been so financed last year and, by December, this figure was said to have risen to 17,000 a month at $25,000 (£14,200) per vehicle.
If found guilty, Mr McNamara, who has been charged with mail fraud, wire fraud, and money laundering, could face up to 30 years in jail, the seizure of all his assets and fines amounting to more than $800m.
City: Heron holders urged to keep calm
HERON International, the troubled property company, has warned the holders of its £465m worth of bonds not to take hasty action to recover their money while it is negotiating the restructuring of its debts.
In an information memorandum, Heron warns it has ‘developed a detailed strategy to protect group assets from precipitate action by individual creditors’.
The document, posted to bondholders this week, says that the company intends to formulate a proposal ‘aimed at ensuring equitable treatment between the bondholders and the banks’.
It says it hopes to formulate a proposal for the holders in due course.
The 18-page communication is made-up of extracts from a much lengthier document presented to banks on April 3.
It was sent after bondholders complained they were not getting as much financial information as other lenders.
It says Heron is considering extending the maturity of its debt and redesignating it into ‘A’ portions, where interest would continue to be paid, and ‘B’portions, where it would be deferred.
That could result in the redesignation of about 60 p.c. of the bonds as ‘A’ debt.
A Heron adviser said yesterday the asset protection measures had been put in place to prevent somebody ‘charging in and acting in a way that doesn't benefit all creditors’.
‘There are certain people who are potentially disruptive of the process,’ he added.
Gary Klesch, the American financier, has been mentioned as a possible negotiator on behalf of bondholders.
City: Lloyd's members fail in bid to protect cash fund
By Karen Cooper
MORE than 800 Lloyd's of London members on syndicates managed by the loss-making Gooda Walker agency have failed in their legal attempt to prevent Lloyd's and members' agents from drawing down their funds.
Michael Freeman, the solicitor who advised the members on court action, said yesterday: ‘This will cause the most dreadful hardship.
There is going to be a great deal of pain in the market place now.’
In an earlier than expected Commercial Court judgment, Mr Justice Saville found that the members had not produced enough evidence of irregularities in the ‘LMX spiral’, which sends catastrophe risks swirling round the market to stop the usual process of calling on cash deposits to make good syndicate losses.
However, he suggested there was perhaps a need to look into the system more closely.
Costs were awarded to the members' agents but not to Lloyd's.
The members, many of whom are unable to fulfil the latest £101m cash call due on March 2 to cover 1989–90 losses on syndicates were seeking an interim injunction to stop members' agents and Lloyd's dipping into their security.
They were challenging the ‘pay now sue later’ principle at Lloyd's, which says names should pay cash calls first and fight them later.
Lloyd's chairman David Coleridge welcomed the judgment.
‘We have every sympathy with those who have made substantial underwriting losses in recent years but Lloyd's owes its first duty to policyholders with valid claims which must be met,’ he said.
Mr Freeman said an appeal was ‘most unlikely, because we are not going to get any more evidence.’
Earlier this month, preliminary findings from an investigation by Kenneth Randall found that the Gooda Walker agency may have overstated its syndicates' profits between 1981 and 1988 through the use of time and distance policies, about which it had failed to inform its auditors in at least one syndicate.
Peter Nutting, who led the association of Outhwaite members to a succesful settlement, said he sympathised with Gooda Walker names, but ‘if the names were not going to pay these calls, who did they think was going to pay them?’
Meanwhile, members who were not part of the £116m Outhwaite out-of-court settlement have voted to press their claims for compensation through the 1992 Outhwaite Names Association.
It plans to issue a protective writ but is hoping to achieve a settlement.
City: Rush for credit by shoppers
APPLICATIONS for credit have risen sharply in the wake of the Tory's election victory, while the used car market is showing signs of improvement.
Infolink, the independent credit information concern, yesterday reported that there had been an increase of 5½ p.c. in the number of consumer credit inquiries after the election.
‘It appears that consumers are already returning to the high street and are also beginning to consider major financial decisions which were postponed in the uncertain period before the election,’ said Dr Brian Bailey, Infolink chairman.
In another survey, HPI, the vehicle information organisation, has monitored a 5.7 p.c. rise in the number of inquiries for used vehicles from dealers, auction and finance houses.
City: Peugeot down to £578m net
PEUGEOT, the French motor giant which also makes Citroen cars, suffered a 40 p.c. fall in net profits last year to Ff5½ billion (£578m) but remained the top French exporter, selling nearly two-thirds of its production overseas.
Car production fell by 8 p.c., reflecting sluggish demand, but still topped 2m vehicles of which three out of five were Peugeot.
City: NTT jobs axed
NIPPON Telegraph and Telephone, the Japanese telecommunications group, is reducing its workforce by 20,000 to 230,000 over the next two years as part of an 80 billion yen (£343m) cost-cutting programme.
Most of the jobs will disappear through hiving off divisions and seeking voluntary redundancies.
City: Friendly fall
FRIENDLY Hotels is lifting its dividend total 10 p.c. to 5½p with the payment of a 3.3p final, despite a 35 p.c. fall in 1991 pre-tax profits to £3.89m.
Henry Edwards, chairman, said trading in the early part of the current year remains difficult but market share is being maintained.
The shares closed 9 higher at 193p.
City: Martin rights
ALBERT Martin Holdings, the Nottingham-based supplier of underwear to Marks & Spencer, is calling on shareholders for £4.17m with a 1-for-3 rights issue at 70p a share, against a price of 88p, down 2, in the market.
The company, which wants the money to reduce net debt — currently standing at about £13m — and fund development, saw pre-tax profits rise 17 p.c. to £2.38m.
A 2.7p final dividend on July 1 takes the total on from 4.2p to 4.4p.
City: Bowater loss
AMERICAN newsprint and paper products manufacturer, Bowater Incorporated, enlarged by the $300m acquisition of an 80 p.c. stake in Great Northern Paper at the end of 1991, tumbled from a $16.7m profit to a $17.7m (£10.1m) net loss in the first quarter of the year, despite a 15 p.c. rise in sales to $373m (£214m).
City: Quicks in black
THE shares of Quicks Group raced ahead 22 to 90p yesterday after the Manchester-based car distributor announced a return to the black in 1991 and that it was maintaining its dividend total at 3p, with a 2p final on July 10.
The company turned round from a £896,000 loss to a £58,000 pre-tax profit, struck after exceptional charges of £1.19m against £23.58m last time.
City: Dwyer swap call
DWYER, the property investment group, is asking its convertible preference shareholders to swap into ordinary shares on a 1-for-1 basis, under a capital re-organisation, to help reduce the drain created by the cumulative nature of preference dividends, on the group's resources.
With the ordinary shares tumbling 9 to 39p, the preference shares closed 2 higher at 36p, having leapt 10 to 44p initially.
City: BMW sales up
THE North American arm of BMW, the German motor manufacturer, announced yesterday that sales in March rose by nearly a fifth from the same month last year to 5,500 cars.
It was BMW's best month in North America for 15 months.
City: Krupps go-ahead
THE German Federal Cartel Office has approved Krupps' takeover of its steels rival Hoesch, after Krupp promised to sell its auto-suspension operations.
City: Credit Agricole
FRENCH bank Credit Agricole increased net profit to Ff4.93 billion (£518m) from Ff4.70 billion despite provisions jumping by Ff2 billion to Ff13.9 billion.
City: Tapie sells
FRENCH socialist millionaire Bernard Tapie has sold his 1.6 p.c. stake in Societe Television Franaise and has resigned as managing director of Bernard Tapie Communication.
City: Critchlow goes
CHRISTOPHER Critchlow, finance director of European Leisure, is leaving the group to become finance director of a division of a listed company in the leisure sector.
City: Scantronic stake
AUTO Security holdings has sold its 26 p.c. stake in Scantronic, the electronics company.
City: Clarke's £425,000
ROBERT Clarke, the new chairman of United Biscuits, saw his salary rise from £233,000 to £425,000 last year.
City: Unit trusts
UNIT trust prices, traded options and commodities prices will appear in tomorrow's editions.
The Market: Institutions take profits
By Paul Murphy
THE signs of relief were clearly audible around the institutional sales desks at Hoare Govett.
After two fruitless days spent trying to place 60m shares in Midland Bank, owned by the Kuwait Investment Organisation, at 362p apiece, a decision to chop the the offer price back to 356p, together with the rise in Hongkong & Shanghai Bank's share price in Hong Kong overnight (increasing the value of its paper offer to 394p), eventually convinced arbitrageurs both here and in the Far East it was worth taking the stock.
Suggestions that the Kuwaitis know something no-one else does were played down by analysts, still desperately clinging to fading hopes of Lloyds Bank emerging with a rival offer next week.
The KIO retained a 2.5 p.c. stake.
Midland's market quote lost 2 to 362p, while Lloyds fell 9 to 393p.
Elsewhere, equities boiled over in spectacular fashion.
On the back of Wall Street's overnight strength, the FT-SE 100 cash index rose 33 points at the outset and, with the futures index opening at a hefty premium, looked poised to turn in a record-setting performance.
The unravelling of cross-holdings and cross-directorships in the security sector continued yesterday, with BZW placing Automated Security Holdings' 26.4 p.c. stake in Scantronic with institutions at 40p a share.
The latter's market price firmed 2 to 48p, while ASH sat at 93p.
Gardiner Group, where Scantronic sold 15 p.c. and ASH sold 17 p.c. a year ago, was untouched at 25p.
While still chairman of both Gardiner and ASH, Tom Buffett has now stepped down as head of Scantronic.
But, with dealers looking gullible, word spread that Hanson's 2.8 p.c. stake in ICI was being placed.
Having risen to £13.59, the price wobbled before the story was refuted and the shares ended 2 easier at £13.45.
That heralded a sudden wave of institutional profit-taking-the first serious bout in two months — aggressively pushing the market back to the 2,650 level by late morning.
A cautious opening in New York produced a further round of price-cutting in the afternoon and, with investors setting off early for the Easter break, the Footsie drifted in to a 2638.6 point close, down 1.6 on the day.
Volumes of almost 900m shares reflected not only the Midland placing, but also a sizeable number of program trades, where institutions inject or extract large blocks of funds across a range of stocks at a pre-arranged time and at pre-determined prices.
The rumour-mongers were out in force, causing particular damage to the price of Arjo Wiggins Appleton.
Market gossip suggested finance director Tony Isaac was about to resign.
The story was quickly denied, yet the shares were languishing at 255p, down 15, by the close.
Mr Isaac said he had no idea who had started the chatter, or why.
Reuters had an active session after announcing a launch date for its Dealing 2000–2 system for foreign exchange trading: April 29.
The shares jumped 40 points on the news, but later settled at £11.60, up 28.
Initially, about 20 banks in New York and London will use the system, which automatically matches currency trades between annonymous counter-parties.
Turnover in the world foreign exchange markets is estimated at more than $700 billion a day.
A Reuter spokesman said the company has reached an agreement with Japan's Ministry of Finance on reporting requirements, but it will be several months before the system goes live in Tokyo.
Against the market trend, dealers reported continuing speculative support for potential bid targets.
Glynwed International ran on 10 to 273p, Fisons gained 15 to 384p, Guardian Royal Exchange gained 6 to 142p and Kwik Save, which reports figures at the end of the month, was up from 573p to 588p.
The 7 point rise in Lex Service — which recently lost its Volvo contract — to 233p also reflected takeover hopes.
Having been floated at 585p, Waste Management succumbed to profit-taking, the shares easing 11 to 644p.
It has begun to dawn on some investors that Waste Management is set to finance its growth by acquisition through the issue of paper.
Yesterday, speculators decided Wessex Water might be the target, pushing the shares up from 463p to 477p.
After Wednesday's dreadful figures, speculative support also returned to Tarmac, up 7 at 146p.
Followers are convinced that Johnson Matthey (rising 10 to 414p before settling at 410p) will eventually emerge as the predator.
Tate & Lyle benefited from a broker recommendation — reportedly by Warburgs — and the shares rose 16 to 421p in active trade.
Brokers' upgrades of RMC, in the light of its figures earlier in the week, continued to support the shares, up another 15 at 645p.
Tiphook moved on 7 to 356p, following news that American investors now hold 4 p.c. of the stock.
Gilts had a very quiet session, with the market slipping back in sympathy with German bonds.
Long-dated issues lost about £⅜.
The Market:
The unravelling of cross-holdings and cross-directorships in the security sector continued yesterday, with BZW placing Automated Security Holdings' 26.4 p.c. stake in Scantronic with institutions at 40p a share.
The latter's market price firmed 2 to 48p, while ASH sat at 93p.
Gardiner Group, where Scantronic sold 15 p.c. and ASH sold 17 p.c. a year ago, was untouched at 25p.
While still chairman of both Gardiner and ASH, Tom Buffett has now stepped down as head of Scantronic.
Questor Column: Stockpiled Ibstock Johnsen works on firm foundations
Edited by Marc Popiolek
STOCKPILES of bricks sufficient to build a city the size of Norwich are lying idle on the forecourts of Britain's brick manufacturers.
So the surprising feature of Ibstock Johnsen is that it continues to make any money at all.
Profits in 1991 dropped from £23.6m to £10½m before tax.
There were losses of £1.08m from brickmaking in the United States and £1.34m from wood pulp, but brickmaking in this country made £9.79m at the still respectable margin of 15 p.c.
The British brick industry is hit by overcapacity.
Many rivals to Ibstock are suffering, and the Redland bid for Steetley, ditching a rival plan from Tarmac, demonstrated a strong and widespread desire for rationalisation and consolidation in order to remove some of the spare capacity.
Ibstock, however, as one of the largest and lowest cost producers, says that all bar one of its bricks plants are in the black.
The exception, at West Sussex, has an attractive location in the South East and is set to be modernised and automated.
Either by good fortune or good planning, the Ibstock balance sheet is strong.
A rights issue 12 months ago, raising £44m, saw to that, and left borrowings at the end of 1991 at just £14m.
At the time of the cash call the group promised shareholders unchanged dividends totalling 6p for the year, and that is what it is they are getting, the final of 3¾p payable on July 1.
Without the promise, it must be doubtful whether Ibstock would have held the dividend.
It is certainly not justified on the basis of the 1991 earnings per share — 2.58p — or the outlook for 1992.
The dearth of new commercial building projects means the stockpile — equivalent to 14 weeks sales for Ibstock — is not going to shrink in a hurry.
Glen-Gery in the US and the pulp side should turn around this year but David Taylor at UBS Phillips & Drew thinks that by paying interest instead of receiving it the group will make a much-the-same £10m this time, and may cut dividends to 4p.
If it did the yield at yesterday's 84p, down 5p, would be 6.3 p.c. and the multiple about 30.
Supported by the prospect of eventual recovery, and the possibility of a bid from a European building group, the shares are fairly priced.
Questor Column: Uphill task for Hunting Group
HUNTING Group is having trouble filling the crater left by the end of its contract for the JP233 runway-wrecking bomb.
But at least the hole in its order book is no longer growing so fast.
Defence profits fell from £15.7 to £10½m in 1991 — half their 1989 level — and are likely to slip a bit further this year.
But it is at present bidding on a lot of new contracts and chief executive Ken Miller believes defence profits could start to turn up in 1993.
Hunting has some steady on-going business — such as highly classified nuclear work — and is still hoping to see new orders generated by the lessons learned in the Gulf war.
It also has some promising projects applying its defence technology for civil applications.
However, for the group, short-term recovery depends on its other two divisions: aviation and oil and technology.
While group profits tumbled from £38½m to £21m last year — after £6m of exceptional closure costs — both the other divisions turned in better figures.
Aviation saw profits rise from £10.2m to £11.1m.
It may mark time this year, not least because of the drop in production of the British Aerospace Jetstream 31 aircraft for which Hunting makes the interior.
But Hunting has invested £10m of its own money in BAe's new Jetstream 41 which is now going into production.
The division's profits edged up from £10.6m to £11.3m thanks to an excellent performance from the Hammerite protective coatings business in Britain.
Following restructuring, coating profits are expected to show ‘a significant improvement’.
Earnings per share more than halved to 10.2p but dividends are being held at 10p with a final of 6p payable on July 3.
Profits could recover to more than £30m this time, putting the shares at 176p, up 8, on a single figure multiple.
Hunting still faces an uphill task but, backed by a yield of 7.6 p.c., the shares are worth staying with.
City Diary: Maxwell's car — at a squeeze
ROBERT Maxwell's former chauffeur, who wishes to be identified only as Ted, has a plausible explanation for the demotion of his official car from a Rolls-Royce to a Daimler.
The Daimler is entirely adequate for the needs of Mirror Group Newspapers' current chairman, Ernie Burrington, says Ted.
But when Maxwell tried one out for size he found it impossible to squeeze in.
‘The only car apart from a Rolls-Royce that he could fit into was an extra large Range Rover,’ says the driver, who also tells hair-raising tales of ferrying Maxwell about town.
‘If I missed a green light he would shout at me to go through anyway,’ continues Ted.
‘When I argued, he said if I lost my licence he would find another job for me in the organisation.’
Questor Column: Echoes of the great Armada
HINTS of differing ambitions are emerging from the clutch of North Sea gasfields currently being developed by a British Gas and a group of others.
British Gas has dubbed the project Armada but one group of partners has named their discoveries after Elizabethan heroes Drake, Hawkins and Howard — hardly the favourites of the original invasion fleet.
At the same time, another partnership, following a tradition to name its finds after women, has chosen the name Maggie despite pressure to keep the fields all male.
Questor Column: Speaking volumes about Patten
AT Books Etc in Victoria Street, opposite Victoria Station yesterday, I spotted Chris Patten, the Conservative chairman who, in the wake of losing his seat in the General Election, has now been offered the governorship of Hong Kong.
I don't know how seriously he is considering the offer, but he was buying every book in the shop on the subject of the Far East.
Questor Column: Sandwiches left on the plate
DESPITE its cost-cutting and job reduction programmes, British Petroleum went out of its way yesterday to keep shareholders happy at the group's annual meeting.
Last year, there were protests about a ‘smash and grab’ raid by one group who scoffed too many sandwiches.
‘Some people said they were fund managers but we can't really be sure,’ says a BP spokesman, darkly.
As a result, chairman Bob Horton ordered an increase in ‘refreshment points’ for the 800 shareholders who crowded into the Barbican Centre.
Meanwhile, BP staff watched the fund management contingent closely but were disappointed.
Perhaps their uncharacteristic restraint was something to do with what they heard from the platform about BP's business outlook.
City Diary:
PUING his own languishing share price in the context of the oil sector's collapse, Roland Shaw, the colourful chairman of Premier Consolidated Oilfields, says: ‘When the whorehouse burns down, the pretty ones run out with the ugly.’
City Diary: In the beginning there was salt
JULIAN Mathias, director of Foreign & Colonial, has a particular interest in his firm's position as the largest backer of the £49m management buy-out of Salt Union from ICI.
Salt mining was one of ICI's original core businesses and made the fortunes of the Mond family which owned the group.
Julian Mathias is the grandson of Robert Mathias, cousin and key lieutenant of Albert Mond who created the modern ICI at the turn of the century.
So there you are.
City Diary: On your marks for statues of Lenin
IN SEARCH of‘Socialist Realist’ art styles, New York art dealer Paul Judelson recently shipped two statues of Lenin from the Soviet Union to offer for sale in America.
The two 15-feet-high statues were manufactured at the state plant in St Petersburg but, following the soviet collapse, were never claimed by those who commissioned them.
He bought them ‘for a song’ but, although he claims to have had dozens of offers, Judelson says none would even cover his shipping expenses.
One such offer was from a theme park in Dogpatch, Arkansas, which is devoted to cast-off metal monuments.