

PROGRESS, CONSOLIDATION AND NEW DIRECTIONS: 1924–35
Context
The period covered in this chapter marked a watershed in the development of the WEA at national and District levels.
During these years, the status of the WEA as an ‘Approved Association’ and its Districts as ‘Responsible Bodies’were confirmed through legislation and the first set of Board of Education Regulations specifically designed to provide financial support for liberal adult education provision.
The earlier sought opportunities for growth and development of liberal adult education became available on a scale hitherto impossible for voluntary organisations, and for the universities through their extra-mural functions.
Under the Adult Education Regulations of 1924, all existing sixteen Districts of the WEA became eligible for direct, specific grant-aid from the Board of Education and the status of the WEA as an integral part of the national framework in a putative educational system was recognised.
Not only did the WEA have providing rights and responsibilities in negotiations with the Board of Education and LEAs but it enhanced its position and status in seeking funds from philanthropic bodies to support pioneering, experimental schemes for the provision of adult education, particularly in rural areas.
This latter development led to the breaking of new ground and organisational maturity through the introduction of well-founded resident tutor projects which characterised much of the activity in the Eastern District during this period and which flowered in the following and subsequent decades.
In addition, recognition of the WEA's Districts as Responsible Bodies also strengthened its national status as the major voluntary organisation in the provision of liberal adult education — in recognition of the vigour and influence of its earlier activity and the quality of the provision made through its Tutorial Classes and other courses.
Further, tacit acceptance of its reputation and credibility in that role was visible through the disinclination of most LEAs to assume direct and full responsibility for liberal adult education and their acceptance of the legitimacy of the provision already being  made by the WEA and the universities.
Of course, many LEAs actively supported the work of the two major providers, but even without explicit support the field of liberal adult education was not seen as attractive territory for LEA participation or control until the implementation of the Education Act 1944 in the early nineteen fifties.
The period was also notable for the creation of new university extra-mural departments in recognition of the importance of liberal adult education as an integral, natural and legitimate function of universities.
The WEA fully supported these developments which had earlier occurred on an ad hoc basis in universities.
Close, mutually supportive partnerships existed through the joint responsibilities for Tutorial Classes and between WEA courses and university extension provision from its own establishment in 1903, and the identification of shared objectives developed through the 1908 Oxford Report.
For the Eastern District, the partnership had existed through the Cambridge University Syndicate's joint Tutorial Classes Committee from 1913.
Nevertheless, in these stimulating developments of the mid-twenties lay several, although initially dormant, problems for the WEA.
Firstly, the attitude of the Board of Education was later to favour the provision made by university extra-mural departments, whose functions developed rapidly during this period, rather than the WEA.
Secondly, and particularly in the Eastern District, the former, mutually supportive relationships between the Cambridge Board of Extra-Mural Studies and the District gradually shifted to become uneasy collaboration when the 1924 Regulations were interpreted and applied more flexibly as provision expanded.
The culmination in the favouring of university provision is clearly recognisable in the 1932 Adult Education Regulations through the approval of the appointment by universities of Article 11 tutors for rural areas.
Undeniably, the Board's regulations of 1924 and 1932 exerted a powerful beneficial influence on the nature and extent of provision for liberal adult education throughout the period and proved to be a major factor in facilitating the rapid increase in the scale of activity.
They also powerfully helped to shape the subsequent roles and responsibilities of the major providers during the period in the District.
A Note on the Regulations for Adult Education, 1924 and 1932
Prior to 1924, the Board of Education's Regulations for University Tutorial Classes, 1913, defined the standards and requirements for grant-aid for these classes.
But other courses provided through university extension and WEA initiatives were discretionally grant-aided by the Board and LEAs under regulations linked to the Technical Instruction  Act 1889 and modified by others arising from the Education Acts of 1902, 1918 and 1921.
No clear, specific regulations for these adult education classes and courses existed before 1924.
Under such improvised arrangements, the Adult Education Committee's Final Report, 1919, had confidently predicted that:
We do not think that local authorities will, generally speaking, take bold steps to provide facilities for the study of non-vocational subjects.
Indeed, we believe that they are more likely to provide vocational studies.
By 1922, the accuracy of this view was confirmed by the Board of Education's own Adult Education Committee which claimed that no scheme submitted by any LEA under the terms of the 1918 Education Act had included an extensive programme for liberal adult education.
The reluctance of LEAs to use their powers under the 1918 Education Act to make direct provision for liberal adult education and the Board of Education's powers under the 1921 Education Act to grant-aid university and national voluntary organisations providing liberal adult education led the new Ramsay MacDonald minority government to issue, somewhat hastily, the 1924 Adult Education Regulations effective from 1 August of that year.
As a nationally ‘Approved Association’ under the 1921 Act, the WEA's Districts were recognised in the 1924 Regulations as ‘Responsible Bodies’because they organised, controlled and provided courses and classes, as did the universities.
Thus, each District became accountable to the Board of Education for the observance of the Regulations, for the efficient conduct of instruction together with the organisation of the provision which included approval of tutors and syllabuses.
In addition, each District was required to submit annual financial statements to the Board; a major increase in the administrative workload and responsibility for district secretaries.
The grant-aid formula for Responsible Bodies provided 75% of fees paid to tutors but no contribution was made through grant-aid towards the costs of administration, organisational expenditure or other promotional educational activity at District level.
The Regulations were presented in five ‘chapters’.
Chapter II dealt with university extra-mural provision while Chapter III applied to those courses arranged by Approved Associations.
Under Chapter II, the Regulations also subsumed the 1913 Regulations for Tutorial Classes but reduced the maximum size of classes from thirty-two to twenty-four students.
To earn full grant-aid the student attendance requirement of 66% of the possible total was continued as was that for written work at a university honours course standard.
For the first time, preparatory  Tutorial Classes became eligible for grant-aid and the Advanced Tutorial Class extending into a fourth year was formally recognised for financial support.
The overall responsibility for all these classes continued as a joint University/WEA partnership.
More significantly, under Chapter II university extension courses were now recognised as eligible for grant-aid — after an existence of more than fifty years.
The importance of their eligibility lay in the opportunities which became available to universities, stimulating new policies for, and provision of, adult education.
As extra-mural departments were established at several universities during the mid-nineteen twenties, the conjunction of the new Regulations and the entrepreneurial activities of departments such as Nottingham and Cambridge (where the Board of Extra-Mural Studies replaced the Syndicate in 1924) led to a rapid growth in both scale and range of university provided courses.
Under the 1924 Regulations, university extension courses which aggregated tuition over a minimum of eighteen hours were eligible for grant-aid and were somewhat similar to WEA Terminal courses.
Additionally, other university extension courses extending over forty-eight hours and comprising twenty-four meetings were almost identical to WEA One-Year courses, matters which were to become of concern to the WEA in subsequent years.
The Regulations for Chapter III prescribed arrangements for Approved Associations.
Undeniably, they offered possibilities for assured if modest financial support for the WEA, a position which it had sought for several years.
With the introduction of the Regulations in August 1924 the District saw a solution to its perennial financial problems and believed attractive prospects existed for expanding provision in its large geographical area through the three types of courses eligible for grant-aid: One-Year, Terminal and Vacation.
One-Year courses represented a prestigious category and the formal requirements for grant-aid were similar to those for preparatory Tutorial Classes without the expectation that they would be precursors of three-year Tutorial Classes.
For full grant to be earned, One-Year courses extended over twenty-four weeks, each meeting of two hours' duration with an equal division between instruction and class activity.
The maximum permitted enrolment was thirty-two students and written work was an explicit expectation.
In the District, many of these One-Year courses stemmed directly from earlier Terminal courses and some, in turn, led to three-year Tutorial Classes.
The increase in the number of One-Year courses during the period under review was a gradual one in the District, averaging twenty-five to twenty-seven  courses a year between 1925 and 1935.
Significant growth in the District following the introduction of the 1924 Regulations occurred in the Terminal course category.
This category was clearly intended to introduce and promote study opportunities in liberal adult education.
To earn full grant-aid, Terminal courses had to extend over a minimum of twelve meetings, and aggregate twenty-four hours of attendance for a minimum of twelve students.
Although encouraged, written work by students was not a formal requirement.
In the District, recognition of its Terminal courses in full or truncated form, provided new opportunities for expansion of its provision and were particularly attractive for the development of pioneering, exploratory adult education activity in towns and villages.
Through these courses,nuclei of students were created, some of whom proceeded to undertake more rigorous and extended studies following the formation of WEA branches.
However, prospect was more encouraging than reality.
From the early years following the introduction of the 1924 Regulations, experience showed that the net income derived from grant-aid, coupled with the District's policy of setting its student fees at the lowest possible level to encourage enrolments, failed to lead to financial self-sufficiency and the District's financial difficulties, although eased initially, were not eradicated.
The annual statements of accounts indicated that the costs of organising and mounting courses were frequently in excess of the combined income from total grant earned and student fee-income.
Nevertheless, Terminal courses increased steadily throughout the following decade, doubling in total numbers between 1925 and 1935 and reaching a total of fifty in the latter year.
They represented the main category of course provision in the District and provided the major area of growth in student numbers and geographical expansion.
Above all, they facilitated particularly the development of resident tutor-organiser initiatives within the District in the decade following 1924, and consolidated the independent, autonomous status of the District as a provider of liberal adult education.
Finally, the distinctions between Chapter II and Chapter III extended into the category of Vacation courses.
Originally, these were developed in connection with university extension courses in the late-nineteenth century and established the tradition of summer meetings for study at Oxford, Cambridge and at other universities.
Later, vacation courses were extended to provide intensive residential study opportunities for Tutorial Class students which expanded in post-1918 with the growth in provision of these three-year courses.
Under Chapter II, grant-aid was  available for these arrangements and similar but separate arrangements were introduced for vacation studies and ‘summer schools’ attended by students who had attended WEA classes and courses under Chapter III regulations.
In the District these were organised and developed by George Pateman at Cheshunt College for several years, and became a distinctive feature of summer programmes.
Thus, with the distinctions made between Chapters II and III, the Board of Education sought to establish clear, demarcated responsibilities for each of the two main providers of liberal adult education; with the universities engaged in more academic levels of study.
However, in the years following 1924, some universities, among them Cambridge, extended their activities into Chapter III course provision and encroached on territory which the WEA perceived as its own.
The encroachment in the District occurred notably over the resident tutor-organiser scheme in Bedfordshire in 1930 and further overlapping and competitive situations arose following the issue of the revised Adult Education Regulations in 1932.
The Adult Education Regulations of 1932 addressed a major problem which had not been resolved under the Board's 1924 Regulations.
Quite simply, the earlier Regulations had failed to meet adequately the needs of liberal adult education in rural areas.
The inaccessibility of rural areas, the lack of public transport facilities, the dispersed and sparse population had all contributed to the failure of many courses to enrol students at levels within the prescribed minima for grant-aid and the thresholds for the Board's Regulations were demonstrably too high under such circumstances.
As elsewhere, the District recognised that a practicable solution lay in the appointment of resident tutor-organisers in rural areas.
The Eastern District had already experienced some success in its early years through the appointment of Sophie Green in the Kettering district and John Newlove in Norfolk as resident tutor-organisers.
During the late nineteen twenties and early thirties, the District was to pioneer rural areas schemes in Bedfordshire with Harold Shearman and in East Suffolk through William Whiteley.
In seeking to formulate an adequate policy for liberal adult education in rural areas, the demarcation between Chapters II and III over course provision was patently unrealistic.
The Board of Education's own Adult Education Committee in their Paper No.9 published in 1927 recognised both the nature of, and solution to, the problems of rural areas:
In the countryside a nucleus of full-time tutors is indispensable for the full development of the work;…
We think it desirable that the same type of teacher should be employed in these courses (One-Year, Terminal and less formal) as in University Tutorial Classes and that arrangements should be made whereby staff-tutors appointed for extra-mural work by the Universities should be encouraged to devote part of their time to less formal work, not only in the interests of the work, but also in order to provide a variety of occupation for the tutor and to ensure that he keeps in touch with all phases of the adult education movement.
The 1932 Adult Education Regulations enshrined these principles and permitted the appointment of full-time salaried tutors under Article 11 who were eligible for grant-aid purposes.
But such appointments could be made only to the staff of university extra-mural departments and Approved Associations were excluded.
As a natural corollary of this initiative, extra-mural departments were permitted to provide courses at standards lower, and of shorter duration, than under the 1924 Regulations.
These changes were to lead eventually to competition and dissent between the two main providers, particularly in the Eastern District as it was a predominantly rural area.
Another modification intended to assist course provision in rural areas, but also applicable in urban areas, was the inclusion of Short University Extension courses for grant-aid under both Chapters II and III.
In the former category, university extension courses of between six and nine meetings, each one of ninety minutes duration, could be grant-aided.
Under Chapter III, Short Terminal courses were introduced of between six and eleven meetings.
For both types the minimum number of students enrolled qualifying for grant-aid was fixed at nine.
The appointment of Article 11 Tutors and the blurring of distinctions between Chapter II and Chapter III provision in rural areas meant that university extra-mural departments could encroach upon the earlier explicitly legitimate function of the WEA as the main organiser of student demand through its branch structure.
Resident Article 11 tutors in rural areas were inevitably involved in the stimulation, promotion, organisation and provision of courses in liberal adult education.
Crucially, there was also assured financial support for the permitted grant-aided maximum of two such tutors at each extra-mural department in that the Board of Education grant provided for 75% of the salaries of tutors or a maximum of £300 per annum for each appointment.
In sharp contrast, the WEA financed its tutors through student fee income, grant-aid from the Board of Education which was derived only from the number of qualifying classes provided, and from fluctuating, unsecured donations and subscriptions.
For its full-time resident tutor-organisers the WEA was almost entirely dependent upon financial  support from philanthropic bodies such as Carnegie, Cassell and Thomas Wall.
All three bodies provided support during this period for pioneering WEA activity over relatively short periods, usually for three years, although some were renewed to sustain encouraging developments.
perhaps the most enduring of these funded arrangements was the Cassell Fund's support for Miss Green's appointment in the Kettering district, which with Miss Stocks as personal guarantor and additional fund-raiser, support from employers, and modest contributions from the LEA, extended over a period of some twenty years.
For the District it was a period of the funded-tutor enterprise which was later to be challenged through the gradual development of a new regional policy by the Cambridge University Extra-Mural Board.
The Kettering District Scheme — II
Further renewals of the Cassell Trustees grant in 1924, 1927 and 1930 were in recognition of the successful work of Sophie Green, and the influence of Helen Stocks with leading figures of the WEA as well as her indefatigable energy in raising monies among her friends to support the scheme.
By 1929, ten WEA branches existed in the area — seven more than in 1920.
In addition to the original three (Kettering, Northampton and Wellingborough) new centres were established at Corby, Daventry, Desborough, Peterborough, Raunds, Rothwell and Rushden.
Although not all had a continuous existence, Miss Green figured in their formation, or revival, often through providing or arranging introductory, short or Terminal courses to arouse interest and create student groups.
Much of her success came through her recognition of the importance of social activities.
Unlike some of the more academically qualified tutors, Sophie Green believed that if the WEA was to succeed among manual workers it had to be perceived as a social movement striving for a democratic state through its educational purpose.
For her, restriction of activities to programmes of formal course provision could not satisfy the wider objectives of the WEA.
Her numerous social activities were always linked with the branch, class or study group.
For example, for several years she arranged regular Saturday evening social gatherings in Kettering for young people.
The average attendance was about a hundred and had particular appeal to young women factory workers and those in domestic service.
Similarly, she arranged and encouraged folk dancing groups in the town, monthly reading circles and visits to theatres.
Many new members of her classes were enrolled in these ways and if assessed only on numerical growth and continuous class activity, Miss Green's success was impressive in comparison with other more conventional  branch activities in the District in the mid-late twenties.
She also regularly accompanied groups of her women students to the Cambridge Summer School.
In 1926, eleven of her students attended Newnham College's summer school for working women and a further three joined the summer school at Cheshunt College, where George Pateman and his wife were in charge of the arrangements.
A glimpse of her commitment, pride and satisfaction is apparent in her letter to Pateman in August 1926:
When I saw all my people at the station, I felt completely overwhelmed.
I know they are all going to get a great deal out of this experience, I am deeply grateful for all the help that is being given them, they have had such a worrying time, I do not think one of them could have had a holiday this year without help, but I have faith to think it will be a good investment for the WEA.
Later, and in recognition of her own achievements, Sophie Green was awarded a scholarship to attend a summer course at Bryn Mawr College, Pennsylvania in 1928 and in the following year she became a co-opted member of the Kettering Education Committee.
Because she lacked academic qualifications, Miss Green never conducted a Tutorial Class, but she revelled in her Terminal and, less frequently, One-Year courses.
Nevertheless, she was unequivocally ambitious for her students, both men and women, and unfailingly encouraged them to proceed to Tutorial Classes.
In this ambition, she was unquestionably influenced by the attitude of Helen Stocks who believed Tutorial Classes were the only genuinely worthwhile courses of study.
The partnership appeared to work well.
For example, at Desborough in 1926–27, Miss Green provided a Terminal course in Industrial History which she believed ‘…was one of the best I have taken…and it will almost certainly develop into a Tutorial class under Cambridge next winter’.
It did: the subject was European History and the tutor was her mentor, Miss Stocks.
A similar pattern occurred at Peterborough.
In 1927–28, Miss Green revived the ailing WEA branch there with a Terminal course, followed by a One-Year course in the following year which led to a Tutorial Class from 1929–32.
Under the Kettering Scheme, the sequence of these and other similar developments was remarkable and the combination of the unflagging effort by Miss Green and the guiding influence of Miss Stocks was demonstrably successful over several years.
With students, Miss Green had a sure touch and showed great personal sensitivity.
perhaps unsurprisingly, her most valuable asset lay in her own limited educational background.
From personal experience she knew and understood  the problems of individual study, the difficulty of sustained reading and written work following long hours of manual labour.
She gave much of her own time to helping those encountering problems with their studies through individual tuition at her home, frequently during the summer months in preparation for autumn courses.
But she was not uncritical of tutors and students who were perceived by her as failing the wider aims of the WEA.
Of one Tutorial Class tutor she complained to Pateman:
He does not understand the WEA point of view, of desiring to draw out the individual in speech and written work.
I am sure no WEA tutor would pass open criticism on the essays…this habit lost the class several students this year.
She was equally severe on students from her own branch who withdrew from their Tutorial Class commitment:
I feel we are students , if humble ones…
The thinning out process has been a great shock to me, I had a higher opinion of working class thought — but it is that where the weakness lies, not in our efforts of propaganda.
Her 1929–30 report on the work of the scheme reflected continuing pleasure in her teaching role when describing her experience of a jointly organised One-Year course by the WEA branch and the local Cooperative education committee in Bedford:
In many respects this class was quite the best I have taken.
It was a mixed class and the students…regular in attendance and conscientious about the work for the class…. although the amount varied, one student produced some written work every week, two or three others did eight or nine papers…enough was produced for me to know that a real interest was being taken in the class.
Of course, there were inevitable disappointments.
She worked strenuously to establish the Corby branch and provided courses there in an attempt to sustain a WEA presence in the then new steel town but it became inactive in the early thirties.
At Wellingborough, branch existence fluctuated.
Its original foundation as an Oxford Delegacy WEA branch pre-dated the formation of the District and in 1919 its membership exceeded seventy-five, but by 1923 it had become dormant.
Miss Green revived interest in 1924 and the branch was re-constituted but foundered again in 1927.
Ever determined, she helped to re-establish the branch in 1930 and a Tutorial Class in Psychology was launched successfully in 1931.
But a major setback for Miss Green arose in 1931 with the appointment by the Cambridge Board of Extra-Mural Studies of Frank  Lee as its staff tutor in Northamptonshire.
As his appointment preceded the 1932 Adult Education Regulations, Lee was not an Article 11 tutor but represented the new regional policy for provision developing at the Cambridge Board, which included the 1930 appointment of Harold Shearman as its tutor in Bedfordshire, and W. P. Baker in Cambridgeshire the following year.
In Northamptonshire, Lee's ostensible role was primarily for the development of Tutorial Classes and for co-operation with voluntary organisations.
Although his appointment was officially welcomed by the WEA District Committee, its officers, and WEA branches in Northamptonshire, there was private disquiet.
It was not without significance to the WEA (and presumably of similar importance to the Cambridge Board and its secretary, G. F. Hickson) that the Eastern District already had thirteen of its twenty-five Tutorial Classes in that county: several reflecting the combined efforts of Miss Green and Helen Stocks.
Thus, it appeared to be a curiously odd appointment to the District as the most active and successful Tutorial Classes already existed in Northamptonshire while there were large tracts of East Anglia where, from the WEA standpoint as a Responsible Body and as joint provider of Tutorial Classes with the Cambridge Board, much valuable work might have been undertaken by a university resident tutor.
For Miss Green, Lee's appointment was perceived as an explicit threat simply because in the previous year, renewal of the Cassell Trust's grant had not been easily secured and had been made on the understanding that the 1930 renewal was to extend only for a further and final two years.
The problem had been compounded in 1929 when, in preparing its anticipated difficult bid for further renewal of the Cassell grant, the District had sought to bolster its ‘pioneering tutor’ case by persuading Miss Green to consider offering her preliminary courses in Huntingdonshire, a county without any adult education provision.
For Miss Green her new area was to be along a ‘corridor’ accessible from railway stations on the Kettering, Huntingdon, Peterborough line, in ‘…a poor county, thinly populated, neglected by all organisations other than Women's Institutes…’.
The confluence of the difficulties over a further Cassell renewal of funding; the prospect of the focus of her work shifting to Huntingdonshire, and the arrival of Lee in 1931 was perceived by Miss Green as an indication of preparations for her displacement in Northamptonshire and eventual redundancy; for which there appears to be no documentary basis.
She and Lee were never close colleagues but as WEA tutor-organiser she continued to play a key role in attracting students to her short courses and from these developed a  few Tutorial Classes for which Lee was the tutor.
Eventually, and after considerable discomfiture for the District committee and Pateman, Miss Green accepted the de facto position in both counties.
She continued to provide courses in her original area around Kettering and pioneered several new ones in West Huntingdonshire and, with Shearman's encouragement, in North Bedfordshire such as at St. Neots and at Wymington.
At the end of the supposedly final two-year period, considerable pressure by Helen Stocks and A. S. Firth, then General Secretary of the WEA, led to a further renewal by a somewhat reluctant Cassell Trust for another three years.
Although the renewal appeared to secure her position as tutor-organiser into the mid-thirties, Miss Green's personal relationships with the District and Pateman became formal rather than enthusiastic after 1931, but her commitment to her students continued undiminished.
In summary, the developments under the Kettering scheme, especially between 1924 and 1931 were of considerable importance to the provision made in the District.
Table 3.1 presents its relative importance in outline statistical form.
The Bedfordshire Scheme
The relative decline in the percentage of the District's courses and classes in Northamptonshire towards the end of the decade was attributable to the introduction of the WEA tutor-organiser scheme in Bedfordshire in 1927.
Perhaps the most important single decision taken by the District during the twenties was to accept the Carnegie Trust's offer to support financially the appointment of a tutor for the development of rural adult education.
For a variety of reasons, Bedfordshire presented the most attractive possibilities.
The county town had a large, vigorous WEA branch with an impressive record of activity which had extended throughout the previous decade.
The District Chairman and a senior member of the Bedford branch was Henry Wash who, as early as 1924, had secured the co-operation of the county LEA.
In that year, the LEA had established an Adult Education Sub-Committee and had agreed to provide financial support for WEA courses in Bedford, Luton and Biggleswade where active branches existed.
Further, the LEA had agreed to introduce a scheme of ‘county scholarships’ to enable working adults to attend WEA summer schools, mainly at Cambridge.
Several WEA students had benefited from the LEA's support and at least two, E. W. Gurney and Arthur Kempster, were to become prominent figures in the civic life of the county in later years.
Most of the early activity was confined to urban areas, but in 1927 the Carnegie Trust offered to finance a National WEA scheme to promote new developments through rural adult education and mid-Devon, the North Riding and Bedfordshire were selected.
Ironically, the terms of the appointment of the tutor-organisers were very similar to those later approved exclusively for university resident tutors when the 1932 Adult Education Regulations were introduced.
For the District, perennially in financial difficulties, the £500 annual Carnegie grant over a three-year period was accepted on the understanding that the Bedfordshire Scheme would be financially self-sufficient.The scheme was welcomed by the LEA and the Cambridge Extra-Mural Board and a Cambridge teacher and part-time WEA tutor, Harold Shearman, was appointed.
In September 1927, Shearman's work began from his home, initially at Willington and subsequently from Caldecote.
It was given a prestigious launch at a conference arranged by the Bedford WEA branch and attended by many supporters including Messrs. Liddle (Headmaster of Bedford Modern School and Chairman of Bedford's WEA branch), Baines (Director of Education for the LEA), Glazier (County Librarian and a former part-time WEA tutor), Wash (WEA District Chairman) and, of course, Pateman as District Secretary.
An Oxford graduate, Shearman brought skilled professionalism to the role — the first occasion on which the District had enjoyed the benefit of an academically well qualified tutor with experience as a WEA tutor and someone with considerable administrative talents derived from his war service experience.
Even more important were his sensitivity, tact and diplomacy in an entirely novel situation.
During his first year, Shearman, in his Morris, established contacts in villages throughout east and north Bedfordshire, holding public meetings, giving evening lectures, conducting short courses all with the objective of creating student groups as nuclei of future WEA branches.
At Rushden, he also gave a One-Year course in history for Sophie Green and established good, non-threatening working relationships with her.
To publicise his pioneering work Shearman produced an excellent leaflet on the scheme and its potentialities.
This leaflet Towards a Brighter Countryside (which is reproduced as an appendix in this volume) comprised notes on the objectives and work of the WEA as well as a prospectus of some twenty lectures and short courses.
Initially, Shearman provided lectures and courses within the originally planned twenty-mile radius of Bedford.
However, it was quickly realised that this area was much too extensive and the southern part of rural Bedfordshire remained largely unvisited during the three-year period.
As shown in Table 3.2 Shearman undertook most of the teaching of the courses.
As he had a car he invariably conducted those in the more remote villages such as Carlton, Dean, Millbrook and Riseley.
But during the three-year period of the initial scheme he also engaged eighteen part-time tutors, some of whom were also car-owners, who visited the more accessible centres such as Biggleswade and Ampthill.
He assumed full personal responsibility for all organisational work, made every initial contact with villages, and constructed a network of social links among the village groups and established WEA centres.
By 1930, more than 500 students had enrolled in classes at some twenty-six rural centres.
To provide cohesion and identity among them, he encouraged the formation of a county federation of WEA branches, student groups and affiliated societies — the first in the District.
Formed in March 1930, to unite rural student groups with those urban WEA branches not included in the Bedfordshire Scheme, the federation reflected Shearman's experience of the organisation of Baptist chapels in rural Northamptonshire.
The son of a Baptist minister, he was familiar with regular district meetings for small chapel groups to provide a sense of unity and broader identity with the larger movement of the Baptist Union, through regular contact and fellowship.
He applied these principles in the Bedfordshire rural scheme and held his first meeting of student groups at Bedford Modern School in 1929.
By 1935, the Bedfordshire Federation had developed into the most effective student organisation in the District attracting much attention from other areas within and beyond the District.
The Federation stimulated and promoted membership of the WEA — an important consideration in the county as the tenet of every student being also a member of the WEA was not realistic simply because in the initial phase most of Shearman's activity was in rural ‘centres’ rather than in WEA ‘branches’.
In 1931, there were only four WEA branches in the county: Bedford, Biggleswade, Dunstable and Luton.
By 1935, only one other WEA branch had been established, at Sandy, but by then the Biggleswade branch had disbanded.
In 1931, there were twelve Student Groups in villages and by 1935 the number had increased to twenty-one.
The importance of the Federation to the District was considerably increased when the Cambridge Board assumed responsibility for the Bedfordshire Rural Scheme and appointed Shearman as its resident tutor in 1930.
Between 1927–30, in the quickening of the slow pace of social change, the WEA rural scheme in Bedfordshire through Shearman's tact, diplomacy, energy and skills as a teacher committed to the role of the WEA in adult education clearly established the credibility and importance of the resident tutor model.
It also indicated its potential for meeting the latent demand for adult education which existed in rural areas, at that time handicapped by geographical isolation.
Further, during these years the possibilities of the wireless as a teaching medium was being explored through the BBC's ‘Listening-in’ groups.
Although reactions to the role of radio published in The Highway were initially dismissive, Shearman responded positively.
Using skilled tutors, such as Mary Adams from Cambridge, who shared in the group-listening sessions and then extended the broadcast themes through discussion and supplementary material, the BBC programmes at Harrold and Goldington led directly to longer courses.
Shearman also offered opportunities to existing organisations to join forces with the WEA in the rural scheme.
For example, he provided  co-ordination and stimulation for the Leighton Buzzard Rover Scouts Troop which affiliated to the District to undertake a course on local government.
Three other villages arranged short courses in conjunction with local centres of the League of Nations Union.
Other villages linked with Young Farmers' Clubs for joint activities and the social purpose of the WEA was exemplified through course-linked visits to theatres in Cambridge and Oxford while other visits were arranged to Parliament.
Shearman's experience in the county was disseminated through a special National WEA conference on adult education in rural areas held in London in May 1929.
Most of the WEA Districts were represented as were the major philanthropic trusts which supported educational enterprise.
The District was represented by Wash, Pateman and Sophie Green as well as Shearman who had prepared the main conference document and gave the keynote talk.
Shearman's paper provided insight into his experience in Bedfordshire.
An important perception was that in villages with fewer than 500 inhabitants interest in adult education had to be generated within the whole community with the intention of creating a social movement, rather than in appeals to sectional interests in such small communities.
Therefore, subjects of study required a broad approach which initially in Shearman's view were likely to be local history, central government or local government issues.
Further, whatever subjects were chosen, it was the tutor who was the critically important factor in success or failure.
For successful work in rural areas, the tutor had to be sensitive to, and well-informed about, both the locality and its people so that a genuine rapport emerged as a basis for mutual confidence and support.
Thus, for Shearman, the tutor had  pastoral as well as pedagogic responsibilities in villages.
The conference was a successful occasion for the WEA and particularly so for Shearman and for the continuation of his work in Bedfordshire.
In 1930, a conference in Bedford reviewed the progress of the District's rural scheme.
For the 200 or so who attended, everyone appeared to have been unanimous in believing that the scheme had been wholly beneficial in broadening cultural life in villages.
Mansbridge, who was present, caught precisely the collective sense of gratitude and optimism.
Apparently, the address was vintage Mansbridge — messianic, inspired and characteristically generous and encouraging.
The conference resolved that every effort should be made to retain the services of an outstanding tutor-organiser, the architect and pilot of the rural scheme, to ensure its development on a secure, permanent basis.
The possibility of a permanent appointment for Shearman to the LEA's staff as an adult education tutor was immediately explored.
The conference decision arose from an implicit assumption by the Carnegie Trustees that following a three-year funding of successful pilot schemes, subsequent responsibility would be assumed by LEAs.
The Trustees made a recommendation to that effect to the Bedfordshire LEA in 1930 which was accepted by the county's Adult Education Subcommittee as the scheme ‘had been conducted on sound lines, was distinctly encouraging, that the particular tutor-organiser was exactly the right person required’.
However, the county council was reluctant to establish a post for a tutor in adult education and other options had to be considered.
Hickson, the Secretary of the Cambridge Board, proposed a shared responsibility for the scheme with the LEA as it offered an opportunity for the Board to extend its role and influence within its region — a new policy stance linked to the Board's gradual withdrawal from its traditional national university extension role.
The Board's proposal was received enthusiastically by the District and the LEA.
For both organisations, it offered continuation of an outstandingly successful project which had been initiated by the former and supported by the latter — both bodies had continuity as the central imperative.
For the LEA, and somewhat untypically of most LEAs at that time, it was not a problem of finance for the scheme which had been difficult but the reluctance to establish a precedent through appointing a tutor for adult education.
For the District, although regretting the loss of its major development in a rural area, the main preoccupation was to secure the retention of its outstanding and only full-time tutor who commanded both academic and experiential respect at all levels.
In the District, Shearman symbolised academic status and enjoyed enthusiastic  acceptability among students and providing agencies in adult education.
The District was painfully aware that it could ill-afford his loss, but because of its continuing impecunious position it recognised his services could not be retained.
Thus, the Hickson solution resolved the immediate and pressing difficulties for both the LEA and the District.
Under the new arrangements, from the autumn of 1930, the LEA and the Board shared the cost of Shearman's salary.
With a revised scale for its deficiency payments, in effect a reduction of 50% grant-aid to WEA classes in the county, the LEA with only marginally increased costs was seen to be acceding to public demand for continuity and simultaneously responding to the recommendation of the Carnegie Trustees.
For the District, the assured continuation of the Bedfordshire scheme meant that the Carnegie Trustees would provide a similar three-year grant to finance a WEA appointment in another rural area in the District — identified and launched as the East Suffolk scheme in September 1930.
The outcome of the negotiations appeared to have satisfied the wishes of everyone involved.
Nevertheless, a major policy decision had been made, or was forced upon, the District.
No record appears to exist of division within, or hesitation by, the District over the surrender of its providing powers in rural Bedfordshire under Chapter III of the 1924 Adult Education Regulations.
This appears especially curious as the issue of providing powers was assuming considerable national importance for the WEA which in 1929 was pressing for retention of its Chapter III providing powers during the Board of Education's review of the 1924 Regulations.
Other than the exceptional arrangements approved by the Board of Education for Nottingham University, no other WEA District had conceded this fundamental encroachment on its providing powers.
It is possible that in the Eastern District, the committee and officers were not fully aware of the implications of the Bedfordshire arrangement in their natural anxiety over the immediate issue of continuity of the rural scheme.
However, as members of the Cambridge Board Committee, both the District Chairman and Secretary were fully apprised of the details of the new arrangements and, presumably, acquiesced in the explicit transfer of providing powers under Chapter III for One-Year and Terminal courses in rural areas so that the complete scheme in Bedfordshire could be maintained as it had developed from 1927.
It was only later that the significance of the surrendering of providing powers in 1930 became fully apparent to the District.
Thus, from 1930–31, the District's providing powers in Bedfordshire were limited to urban areas and the Cambridge Board assumed Chapter  III powers in those rural areas which had been included in Shearman's territory between 1927–30.
To administer the new arrangement, the Cambridge Board established its own ad hoc rural areas committee in February 1930 in conjunction with other developments in Cambridgeshire and which reflected the Board's interest and developing policy for course provision under both Chapters II and III.
The Cambridge Board of Extra-Mural Studies: A Contextual Note
These developments within the Cambridge Board were undoubtedly related to the concurrent measurable, irreversible decline in traditional university extension courses provided by the Board of Extra-Mural Studies on a national scale and which by 1939 had reached the point at which there were only five Cambridge university extension centres beyond East Anglia.
Thus, the transfer of initiatives from a national to a regional scale appears to have been a conscious, logical policy decision by the Cambridge Board, using the example of the successful Nottingham University scheme devised by professor Peers, whom Geoffrey Hickson admired.
With Cranage's resignation in 1928, the links with the tradition of university extension on a national scale at Cambridge were gradually replaced by new opportunities for regional development which became available under the 1924 and, later, the 1932 Adult Education Regulations.
Following the recommendations of the Report of the Royal Commission on the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge in 1922, the Board of Extra-Mural Studies was established in 1924 and moved into its new premises at Stuart House in 1928.
Another recommendation of the Commission was for increased funding for adult education and with gradual increases in its budgetary provision, the Board in 1931 was able to appoint three full-time lectures: Lee in Northamptonshire, Baker in Cambridgeshire and Hardman for university extension local lectures.
Thus, the Cambridge Board had secured resources to begin the development of its policies for the regional provision of adult education prior to the introduction of the 1932 Regulations.
As it sought to serve a predominantly rural region in which the WEA in earlier years had found its own main strength in urban areas, the rural areas were relatively untouched and open to university initiatives when the 1932 Adult Education Regulations were introduced.
The Board's role had been afforced through its assumption of providing powers under the Bedfordshire scheme and through its close co-operative relationships with the Rural Community Council (RCC) in Cambridgeshire and for which it provided a series of courses in that county.
From 1927 in Cambridgeshire, the Board, with the assistance of a three-year Cassell Fund grant, had assumed responsibility for the RCC's own programme of village lectures and short courses for which the latter received grant-aid from the LEA.
For example, in a dozen or so villages during 1928 and 1929, Pateman and a young teacher, W. P. Baker, provided short courses of the Chapter III type on rural history.
When the Cassell Fund's grant ended in 1930, the Cambridge Board and the LEA jointly financed the scheme with Baker becoming a Board tutor for the development of rural adult education in the county.
It should not be assumed that relationships between the Board and the District were adversarial or competitive at that time.
Not only did Pateman undertake lectures and courses for the Board, he was also chairman of the RCC's adult education committee.
Further, and in acknowledgment of his work as joint secretary of the Tutorial Classes Committee and for his duties in connection with the annual Cambridge Summer School Pateman also received a substantial honorarium which provided him with some security as his salary as District Secretary was not infrequently in arrears.
When Stuart House was opened in 1928, Pateman had a room there to undertake Tutorial Class administration and organise arrangements for the annual summer school.
It is therefore perhaps unsurprising that the problem over the loss of providing powers in Bedfordshire did not appear to be a major one in the context of such close co-operation and joint endeavour to promote the growth of rural adult education at that time.
However, within the Cambridge Board's committee there was some initial resistance to the extension of its activity into Chapter III work to pioneer courses in rural areas of a lower academic standard than under its Chapter II powers.
But the argument which carried the day in favour of providing more elementary studies was that courses of the Chapter III type in rural areas would prove to be attractive and would lead to more demanding studies and higher standards in subsequent years.
An indication of the Board's hesitancy and internal division can be gauged from the decision, in February 1930, being agreed only after a vote was taken and that only three of the eight listed recommendations in Hickson's confidential memorandum were approved.
As part of the decision-making involved the assumption of responsibility by the Board for the Bedfordshire scheme, it is not surprising that the two WEA members of the Board and Frank Salter, the District Treasurer, who was a University nominated member, cast their votes in favour of the rural areas scheme.
However, two other university members voted against the rural areas scheme although one of whom, Professor Ernest Barker, later  became chairman of the Board's Rural Areas Committee.
With the appointment of Shearman as the Board's resident tutor in Bedfordshire and Baker's appointment to a similar post for Cambridgeshire for the development of rural adult education, the Board's rural areas sub-committee had emerged as a de facto permanent committee of the Board — a position constitutionally confirmed in 1932 through its formal designation as the Board's Rural Areas Committee with Professor Barker as its chairman.
The East Suffolk Rural Scheme
The acknowledged success by all participants in the Bedfordshire scheme led in 1930 to the Carnegie Trust offering to continue the £500 annual grant for a further three-year period to finance a tutor-organiser appointment in another rural area in the District.
The reasons for the decision to appoint a resident tutor-organiser in East Suffolk are not well documented.
It is possible a feeling existed that too much attention had been given to development in the western and most populous counties in the District.
It is also possible that with the decline in activity in Norfolk, other eastern counties were considered attractive for the next phase in development, perhaps because the ground in the west appeared to have been secured through Shearman and Miss Green.
In addition, the appointments of Lee and Baker by the Board and its emerging plans for rural areas development may have prompted the District to consider developing other parts of its region.
In East Suffolk it appeared that the Ipswich branch could provide a nucleus around which another successful enterprise might be constructed.
It was undeniable that the Ipswich WEA branch was one of the most active, vigorous and successful centres in the District.
It had a large membership with several members influential in local civic life and an enviable record of continuous educational activity over several years through its courses and conferences.
Further, in earlier years the branch had attempted to extend its WEA social and educational activity into surrounding villages and it is possible that the branch had pressed the District for the appointment of a resident tutor in East Suffolk — although the documentary evidence on this point is somewhat unclear.
However, it is a matter of historical record that in the twenties the Ipswich branch had opposed the development of a district organisation and viewed the period following the introduction of the 1924 Adult Education Regulations as one of increasing centralisation.
It was a branch which was highly resistant to any tendency perceived as likely to vitiate the traditional autonomy of WEA branches.
Because of these  attitudes, there were no established or informally close relationships between officers of the District and the WEA branch.
Unlike Bedfordshire, there was no commitment by the LEA to provide financial support for the scheme when it was proposed in 1930.
William Whiteley, a former Tutorial Class student at Rugby and a James Stuart Exhibitioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1929–30, was appointed as WEA resident tutor in East Suffolk and moved to Ipswich in September 1930.
With the enthusiastic support of the WEA branch, he followed Shearman's initial policy of making personal contact and establishing his presence through a demanding programme of single lectures and short courses in villages in the county.
By the end of his first year, more that sixty village lectures had been provided, about one-third of them at Women's Institutes, and five short courses were arranged in villages near Ipswich.
Demand for his services exceeded his capacity to meet the many requests and in the second year of the scheme he acquired a car to provide greater mobility.
In the second and third years, he concentrated on more sustained studies through arranging short and Terminal courses under Chapter III arrangements as well as continuing to provide many village lectures.
For example, short or Terminal courses were provided at Middleton, Yoxford, Haughley, Hollesley Bay and Stratford St. Mary.
At Leiston, Whiteley engaged A. S. Neill to provide a well-attended course in Psychology.
However, notwithstanding his extensive programme, no courses longer than the Terminal type were arranged, possibly because student groups were not formed in the villages of people who would have accepted responsibility to stimulate, organise and sustain local demand.
The absence of student groups led to a relatively small growth in WEA activity in most villages during the three-year period and the scheme suffered, perhaps inevitably and unfairly, in comparison with the earlier success achieved in Bedfordshire.
Concurrently with his rural work, Whiteley became a prominent member of the Ipswich branch and his support of some of its antipathetic policies and attitudes towards the District distanced him somewhat from Wash, Pateman and Shearman, who became District Vice-Chairman in 1931.
Unfortunately, the East Suffolk scheme also suffered from a reduction in Board of Education grant-aid for courses which occurred in the period 1931–34.
This had serious implications for Chapter III courses as the LEA was not prepared to make any substantial financial contribution in support of rural adult education activities, even though the county's Secretary for Education, H. M. Spink, was a part-time WEA tutor.
The District was experiencing yet again a deficit on its  Chapter III course programme and thus was not in a position to contemplate an expansionist stance in East Suffolk.
It was also aware that a further renewal of the Carnegie Trust's grant was extremely unlikely.
Nevertheless, Pateman sought a renewal of the grant and received a reduced, conditional offer from the Trust of renewal for one year if the District could secure alternative funding for a further two years.
But in 1934, the District managed to obtain only a promise of a mere £70 in grant-aid from the LEA for those courses provided by Whiteley — a wholly inadequate offer.
An attempt by Pateman to negotiate a tripartite arrangement for the payment of Whiteley's salary by the LEA, the Cambridge Board and the WEA also failed.
The Cambridge Board was fully committed to its existing developments in the other counties, considered earlier in this chapter, and the LEA were averse to contributing to the salary of the tutor until the scheme had become firmly established in the county — a Catch 22 situation — and the scheme petered out in 1934.
The East Suffolk scheme thus ended disappointingly and in 1936 Whiteley left the District on appointment as an adult education tutor in the Manchester area.
The collapse of the scheme served to emphasise yet again the dependence of the District's initiatives in rural areas on adequate financial support from philanthropic bodies and LEAs.
It was also clear that the creation of a network of village centres for the provision of classes and courses was a necessary but insufficient basis for a well-founded adult education movement.
A genuine social consciousness, motivated at least to some degree by idealism for the attainment of an educated democracy was an indispensable factor in a self-sustaining, progressive momentum for the growth of the WEA in rural areas.
It clearly existed in Bedfordshire, because of Shearman's perception of its importance; it was evident in the Kettering scheme because Miss Green instinctively knew its significance to fellow disadvantaged adults; it appears not to have emerged in East Suffolk possibly because it was not assiduously pursued.
The Norfolk Scheme-II
It will be recalled from the previous chapter, that other than in Norwich the educational activities of the WEA in Norfolk were confined to John Newlove's courses in the north of the county at Dereham, Melton Constable, Wells and King's Lynn.
Unfortunately, in 1925, John Newlove became ill once more at the start of the autumn term and hurried, improvised and not entirely satisfactory arrangements were made to provide tutors for his two Tutorial Classes and three One-Year  courses.
A planned scheme for WEA village lectures, to be provided by some of Newlove's students, foundered with his illness and were abandoned.
Although he made a partial recovery in 1926, he could only conduct the One-Year course at Wells, where he lived.
With the continuing uncertainty over Newlove's health and teaching capacity, the LEA withdrew its financial support for Chapter III courses but continued to meet the costs of the existing Tutorial Classes.
The LEA decision meant that it was unlikely that any new centre would enter a three-year commitment without a preliminary period of less demanding study and consequently, the Norfolk scheme tapered to its end.
Although discussions took place about a possible return to the former scale of activity, Newlove's health did not improve and he was physically limited to Wells where either One-Year or Terminal courses continued until 1934 when the WEA branch became inactive.
A decade of initiative and early success in Norfolk ended somewhat disappointingly, and distressingly for Newlove.
It had been of considerable importance to the development of the District's confidence and reputation in East Anglia in the early twenties.
Crucially, it had been a notable enterprise in demonstrating the altruistic spirit of co-operative endeavour between a WEA District and a large county LEA which had established the broad principles of role differentiation between voluntary and statutory bodies in the provision of adult education as delineated in the Final Report, 1919.
The early success of adult education arrangements in Norfolk, together with the almost contemporaneous Kettering scheme, had unquestionably buttressed the District's early and somewhat insecure position vis a vis some other LEAs in fostering co-operation and in establishing its credibility with philanthropic trusts over grant-aid for subsequent enterprises.
District Development, 1924–35
By 1924, the District had established some twenty branches and more than 1,000 students had attended its classes and courses.
They were distributed across nine Tutorial Classes, twenty-five other courses and ten study circles.
It was also in a serious financial position but believed the new Regulations would lead to a general amelioration of the deficit position through the ability to earn increased Board of Education grants for its Chapter III work.
By 1925, this early optimism had disappeared and the District continued to struggle at a financial subsistence level throughout the whole period, apparently incapable of seriously addressing the resolution of the problem of financial self-sufficiency.
In its educational work the financial deficits were masked by the  encouraging developments in Northamptonshire, Bedfordshire, and, initially, in East Suffolk.
Undeniably, forward momentum was maintained during a decade characterised by severe political, economic and social problems amongst the majority of those for whom the WEA had an appeal and with whom it had initially prospered.
In the District, and in contrast to the national trend, Tutorial Classes virtually doubled between 1925 and 1931 — from thirteen to twenty-five and their membership was composed of about one-third of students from manual occupations.
About one-half of these classes were to be found in the footwear and clothing towns in Northamptonshire with other noteworthy Tutorial Class continuities in Bedford, Cambridge, Halstead, Ipswich, Luton and Norwich (see Table 3.3).
In all, there was evidence of an active, cohesive social movement typically visible in the programmes members arranged for cultural activities, local winter and summer musical and drama evenings, summer rambles and weekend schools.
All these contributed much to a sense of fellowship and corporate social identity as well as providing opportunities for personal development and individual enrichment.
The percentages shown are for all Cambridge University/WEA Tutorial Classes which included some arranged beyond the Eastern District, e.g. Nuneaton and Rugby.
But the majority of classes were  arranged at District branches and the statistics are considered representative of the proportion of occupational groups within the District.
1.
No classification is entirely satisfactory and was not consistent over the period represented here but the category included: engineers, railway employees, carpenters, building trades and labourers, tailors and dressmakers, boot and shoe operatives, printing trades, postmen, policemen, blacksmiths, farm labourers, textile factory workers, gardeners and caretakers.
2.
Non-manual categories included: clerks, typists, shopkeepers and assistants, civil servants, overlookers and foreman, insurance agents and commercial travellers, ministers of religion, nurses and social workers.
3.
Teachers, always prominent in Tutorial Classes in the twenties, are given a separate category here to avoid problems of distortion in the percentages of the non-manual category.
Although enrolled student numbers increased during the period in all types of classes, membership of the WEA gradually declined, an indication perhaps that it was more for personal educational value rather than support for a wider social movement that adults attended District classes.
Thus, the District gained little direct financial benefit from increased enrolments as the capitation fee which branches paid to District funds was calculated not on student enrolment but on WEA membership.
The slogan ‘Every Student a Member’ was as much a financial appeal as an ideological one and in this respect the District was broadly unsuccessful.
In 1926, income from branches received by the District was a mere £49; in the following year it was £46.
By 1929, the National WEA reported that ten of its sixteen Districts had lower branch membership totals than in 1924, averaging 59% of all enrolled students, which represented a decline of at least 20% on the 1924 figure.
The District was one of the ten mentioned and the national statistics almost exactly reflected its own position.
By 1929 also, the District's educational provision appeared to have reached a plateau for One-Year and Terminal courses but new developments in 1930 and 1931 suggested that expansion beyond the funded tutor-organiser schemes was imminent.
The optimism lay in the potential for development in the hitherto largely neglected extra-metropolitan southern fringe of the District.
In conjunction with the WEA London District and the London Co-operative Society, six Terminal courses were provided at Southend (three courses), Rayleigh, South Benfleet and  Watford.
The success of these courses at centres whose natural affinities lay with the London rather than the Eastern District led to the latter's willing agreement to transfer its expanding, populous southern commuter zone to the former in the summer of 1930.
The southern boundary of the District was accordingly modified from the mouth of the Blackwater River in Essex westwards to the Buckinghamshire county boundary.
With this re-alignment, Cheshunt, Barnet, Southend and Watford became part of the London District, with Chelmsford in Essex and the rest of Hertfordshire remaining within the District.
It was also agreed between the two Districts that if any courses were proposed within a zone extending about three miles on either side of their new, shared boundary the Districts would confer to determine how the demand might best be met.
As in Bedfordshire, interest in the possibilities of broadcasting were explored elsewhere in the District.
According to Welch, an approach was made by the BBC to the Cambridge Board in 1926 about the possibility of establishing a local radio station in Cambridge.
In 1927–28, the Cambridge and Ipswich Tutorial Classes in Biology participated in a six-talks broadcast on The Problems of Heredity given by Mary Adams, then tutor to the Cambridge branch.
An illustrated booklet to accompany the series was prepared by a member of the Ipswich Tutorial Class and questions which arose during the post-broadcast class discussion were forwarded to Mrs. Adams who dealt with them during the following week's transmission.
In spite of various difficulties over these early broadcasts and the general absence of supplementary printed material for class use, together with some antipathy towards this innovatory form of teaching, the Cambridge branch persisted with radio programmes into 1929.
However, this was an exceptional attitude as there was widespread scepticism of radio as a teaching medium and its possibilities did not really materialise for at least another decade.
In other ways, too, the early nineteen thirties marked a period of hesitancy and some pessimism within the District both over its future growth and even its survival.
The emergence of the Cambridge Board, well funded and of high status, as a legitimate and major provider of adult education through its new rural areas policies presented problems of overlapping, competitive interests for the District, however well-intentioned the co-operative arrangements might appear to have been.
Some LEAs, notably through Henry Morris in Cambridgeshire and Baines in Bedfordshire, were explicitly supportive of the enterprise being developed by a prestigious university body in adult education.
For them, linkages with the Cambridge Board represented an attractive partnership between academic altruism of the university and pragmatic local authorities for the development of educational opportunities for adults.
Further, the District was perceived by some as an amateur, rudimentary, low status voluntary body whose aims were, at best, quasi-political and, at worst , subversive.
Nevertheless, officers and most members of the Cambridge Board and the District's Executive Committee believed, initially at least, that competition over provision could be avoided during a pioneering phase of development in East Anglia where little adult education provision had been made: in Cambridgeshire, Essex, Huntingdonshire, Norfolk and Suffolk.
But the general satisfaction with close and successful cooperation evident through the easy, harmonious transfer of responsibility from the District to the Cambridge Board of the Bedfordshire scheme in 1930 began to evaporate when in the following year, the Cambridge Board asked the District to cede its Chapter III providing powers in rural Cambridgeshire to the Board.
In September 1931, Hickson wrote to Wash, then District Chairman:
Since the Board are entering into a Scheme for adult education in co-operation with the LEA in Cambridgeshire much in the same way (as) had been done in Bedfordshire it seems as if it might be best for the Board to be recognised as the Responsible Body for this type of course.
Although not intransigent, Wash was clearly uneasy about the specific link with Bedfordshire as the precedent to establish a principle.
He forwarded the letter to Ernest Green, then Organising Secretary of the National WEA and in the accompanying covering letter wrote:
Personally, I think that if we can obtain in Cambridgeshire a federation of WEA student groups which will be represented on the Rural Areas Committee of the Extra-Mural Board in the same way as we are represented by a kindred federation in Bedfordshire, there will not be anything lost from the WEA point of view, in the Board being recognised as the responsible body.
But it is a development of the work of the Extra-Mural Board which needs thinking out.
In his genuine wish to continue to co-operate with the Board in the cause of the development of liberal adult education, Wash missed the substantive threat to the District's future as the Responsible Body for Chapter III provision.
The possibility of a ‘domino’ effect in all counties in the District could not be ignored and Hickson had also left open the possibilities for further expansion in his original letter to Wash:
I do not think the situation arises at the moment outside these two  counties .
Of course, we hope that Baker will undertake pioneer work and organise courses in neighbouring rural areas but probably for the moment any courses under Chapter III could be arranged in the usual way.
(i.e. through the District as the Responsible Body)(emphasis added)
From Ernest Green's response it is clear that, as Organising Secretary for the National WEA, he had been unaware of the details or significance of the original Bedfordshire transfer agreement and later that month, when writing to Pateman about the Board's proposals for Cambridgeshire, he claimed:
I am afraid I never understood until I saw Hickson's letter to Wash that even in Bedfordshire the Extra-Mural Board had become the recognised body under Chapter III.
It may have been my stupidity, but I had not realised it.
I think it is unfortunate, and I think the Universities are undertaking a form of work which is going to have the affect (sic) of reducing their reputation for the maintenance of high standards.
They are rather too prone to accept the point of view of reactionary educational committees which are afraid of the WEA.
If the LEA were to lay down as a condition of grant that we should have nothing to do with the University body, we should refuse the grant, and I do not see why Universities should not show the same loyalty to us.
The last sentence refers to an earlier conversation between Green and Hickson in which the latter had claimed that the Cambridgeshire LEA would not be prepared to support the work of the District, whereas the Board had been offered a grant of £100 for 1931–32 and the prospect of increased grant-aid in subsequent years.
For Green, the proposal of the Cambridge Board had major implications at national level and he sought to arrive at a local compromise to prevent a more widespread set of problems for the WEA.
His own proposal, accepted some months later, was that both the Board and District should become Responsible Bodies for Cambridgeshire and that mutually negotiated and harmonious arrangements for local provision be agreed between them, with financial deficits being met from the LEA grant.
For Green, the flexibility of the proposal allowed for the meeting of local demand by either or both organisations, it encouraged further co-operative endeavour between them and facilitated the WEA role over the establishment of a county federation of students as an organisational framework to help overcome the perennial difficulty of isolated university extension centres.
At a meeting in London in February 1932, which was chaired by Tawney, the membership of the Cambridge Board's  Rural Areas Committee (RAC) was agreed and Green's proposals accepted.
The RAC was to comprise: three members nominated by the University, three nominated by the WEA and a further three to represent LEA interests.
At that time as only the Bedfordshire and Cambridgeshire LEAs were involved, the third LEA place was allocated to the Bedfordshire WEA Federation to represent the student body.
It appears that having agreed on the structure, the meeting did not address the question of functions of the RAC and the development of jointly planned activity, outlined in Green's original proposals, was ignored and led subsequently to competitive activity in Cambridgeshire, Essex and Norfolk.
In the first few years of the informal concordat under the RAC, there appears to have been a tacit agreement that in Cambridgeshire the WEA attempted to provide few courses, largely it is thought because of its financial problems.
Equally, it appears that the Cambridge Board also tacitly accepted that although he was its tutor, Shearman's personal commitment to the WEA meant that provision of courses in Bedfordshire was arranged through the WEA county Federation and thus exclusively organised by the District.
This uneasy compromise was not a major difficulty during the first few years as the national economic problems of the early thirties, reductions in public expenditure and depressed employment conditions all led to severe restrictions on the development of adult education.
Thus provision in rural areas was concentrated in Bedfordshire and Cambridgeshire with some minor reconnaissance of possibilities and experimental pioneer short courses elsewhere.
Until 1936, the other rural counties in the District were regarded as ‘open territory’ but in that year a partial relaxation over public expenditure restrictions occurred and the issues inherent in the compromise over the rural areas agreement between the Cambridge Board and the District emerged in sharply focussed ways.
The Workers' Educational Trade Union Committee (WETUC)
It was also during the period 1924–35 that a forging of closer relationships between the WEA and the Trade Union movement was attempted.
Formed in 1919, the WETUC was represented in each WEA District through divisional committees of affiliated trade unions and WEA members.
In the District, Pateman acted as secretary to the WETUC's divisional committee.
Although never destined to flourish as an active conduit for combined activity, Pateman linked District students with the WETUC scheme for the remission of fees where appropriate — in aggregate usually never more than £20 a year.
The only  noteworthy joint activities were weekend schools for trade unionists which the District helped to organise, such as Kingsley Martin's weekend schools on Public Opinion in Gorleston in 1924, G. D. H. Cole's on Trade Unionism at Norwich in 1925 and Harold Laski's Bedford weekend school on Economics in 1926.
In most other respects Pateman's WETUC role was a passive one.
There was little demand from local trade unions and the Divisional Committee appears to have been only modestly active, probably because where well-established trade union organisations had members interested in educational opportunities, links between them already existed through the WEA branch organisation and were especially effective in Northamptonshire, Bedford, Luton and Ipswich.
Elsewhere, the trade unions appear to have been weakly organised in the District.
Even the General Strike of May 1926 had little impact as the five unions represented on the District's divisional committee were not among the major participants at national level.
Public support for the General Strike was most evident in Cambridge where students and members of the University were openly supportive and where Pateman arranged a WEA class in public speaking.
By 1930, only five or six members of affiliated unions who attended Cambridge summer schools were supported by WETUC funds.
Others who attended District courses not infrequently failed to submit claims for the remission of fees — all during a period of high unemployment and short-time working which suggested that in this District at least, the WETUC was of little perceived interest or known value to those it existed to support.
District Finance
Yet again, throughout this chapter there have been repeated references to the precariousness of the financial position of the District, notwithstanding the introduction of grant-aid under the 1924 Adult Education Regulations.
The core of the problem lay in the costs of administering and organising the District's functions.
No grant-aid was available for administrative work, of which Pateman's salary represented the largest single item.
Further, 25% of tutors' fees were not grant-aided and thus had to be met from other sources principally donations, subscriptions and through appeals to branches, with some assistance from the National WEA when its own difficult financial position allowed, usually about £50 a year.
As already noted, the Cambridge Board from the autumn of 1924, paid Pateman an honorarium of £150 for his services as joint secretary  to the Tutorial Classes Committee and in connection with his organising work for the annual Cambridge summer school.
By May 1925, the District owed Pateman £115 in salary arrears which amounted to almost one-half of his salary for the year and owed an even larger sum elsewhere.
Arising from this unresolved difficult and unsatisfactory position, Pateman's appointment was renewed for only one further year in 1925–26 and at the reduced annual salary of £200.
A further unsuccessful appeal was made to WEA branches in the District in an attempt to secure Pateman's salary for future years and the existing arrears for Pateman were cleared only through the negotiation of a bank overdraft.
Pateman naturally sought, and was given, assurances that his reduced salary, which was only one-half of the National WEA's prescribed scale of £400 a year for District Secretaries, would be paid in full and on a regular basis throughout the year.
But in spite of the assurances of the District's Executive Committee, his salary was almost continuously in arrears up to 1930.
In addition, because of increased opportunities for course provision under the 1924 Regulations the administrative costs of the District almost trebled between 1925 and 1931.
In a period when the number of courses increased, WEA membership in the District declined by 150 and in 1931, capitation fees from branches had slumped to a mere £44.
Throughout the period, the District appeared to develop a policy of containment of its gradually mounting deficit and became habituated to an existence of permanent indebtedness.
In 1929, the position reached its nadir when the District's financial deficit was greater than that of any other WEA District.
Frank Salter, the District Treasurer from 1918, believed that financial appeals for new income in a sparsely populated region with a low wage economy and high unemployment, was an insuperable task and in 1931 he was succeeded by Lionel Elvin, Fellow of Trinity Hall, as the District's honorary treasurer, and who brought much vigour and commitment to resolving the perennial financial problem.
Continuity and Change
In 1934, Henry Wash resigned as District Chairman as a new appointment took him to Kent and was succeeded by Harold Shearman who had been vice-chairman of the District since 1931.
At that time, the position in 1934–35 was superficially encouraging and thirteen new WEA centres were established.
In addition to the funded schemes, the position in Hertfordshire offered new opportunities.
New centres at Harpenden and Old Welwyn were established and Tutorial Classes were  arranged at branches in Letchworth and Welwyn Garden City.
The WEA branch at St. Albans and a student group at Ashwell also arranged shorter courses.
In Essex, the WEA branches at Harwich and Clacton arranged One-Year courses and, of considerable local interest, the National Institute of Adult Education selected Silver End to stage an art exhibition in a rural area.
In Cambridgeshire and the Isle of Ely and arising from initiatives by Bill Baker, new WEA centres were established at Sutton and Stretham and joined others formed a little earlier at Haddenham, Histon, March and Wilburton — most arranging Terminal courses during the year, while Cottenham founded a WEA branch.
In Norfolk, the District had only one branch, at Norwich.
However, the real strength of the District lay in its active urban branches: Peterborough, Rushden, Wellingborough, Northampton, Kettering, Cambridge, Bedford, Ipswich and Welwyn Garden City, and two-thirds of the District's Tutorial Class students were concentrated in these branches, a total of some 400.
Similarly, more than one-third of the students enrolled in the District's One-Year and Terminal courses were also to be found in these branches.
Thus, in spite of the importance of the pioneering work in rural areas, it was apparent even as late as 1935 that the District had made little substantial and quantifiable impact in its rural counties and among its dispersed population.
Tawney, on the occasion of the celebrations of the District's twenty-first anniversary in June 1934, perceptively recognised that the District ‘…was only at the beginning of their task…’ but was perhaps a little wide of the mark in claiming that the ‘…
District has been a pioneer in spreading education among working class students in rural areas…’
Some 700 delegates attended the anniversary meeting in Cambridge, and following speeches by Firth, Mansbridge and Temple, a tour of the colleges preceded afternoon tea at Trinity College.
The organisation of the celebrations on such a large scale was a major success for Pateman and although he could not have known it at the time he was in the final few months of his long and difficult years of service to the District and the WEA.
In the summer of 1935, George Pateman resigned following his appointment as Assistant Secretary to the Cambridge University Board of Extra-Mural Studies — a major surprise to many in the District and which precipitated a major re-casting of the District's policies and priorities.
The precise reasons for this apparently surprising appointment are not entirely clear as there appears to be no detailed documentation, but it is almost certain the initiative came from Harold Shearman, then  District Chairman.
Using the example of Cartwright at the Oxford Delegacy, Shearman sought to establish similar arrangements at Cambridge because:
We were in no position to ensure any security for Pateman…he had built up the District but had perhaps nearly exhausted his pioneering drive.
Shearman was also anxious to secure Pateman's future and was conscious of the debt owed to him by the District for many years of difficult, painstaking and often discouraging work.
There was also a pressing need to appoint a new District Secretary to re-vitalise and secure the future development of the WEA.
Shearman recalled that, at first, discussion with Hickson was unpromising but eventually the appointment of Pateman to the post, vacant from 1928, was confirmed.
For Pateman, the offer, at the age of 46, was understandably irresistible.
Apart from the cachet of a university appointment which followed the award of an honorary Cambridge MA the previous year in recognition of his many years of service to adult education, the post offered unprecedented security and an improved, assured salary.
Further, his duties were substantially a continuation of those which he had undertaken for several years in connection with Tutorial Classes and the annual summer school arrangements.
Significantly, he also became responsible for the development of the Board's Chapter III provision in rural areas.
All these duties were administered from a room at Stuart House which he had used from 1928.
The District acknowledged that the honorarium Pateman had received as District Secretary could not be continued and, of course, that the hidden subsidy of Pateman's accommodation at Stuart House would not be available to his successor.
Nevertheless, Shearman, as District Chairman, recognised that the District could not continue in its relatively impecunious way ‘sustained by a very small number of rather weak branches dispersed over a very wide area…most of the branches were struggling’.
Further, there was a clear, emerging imperative to establish an explicit and visible distinction between the functions of the District and those of the Cambridge Board as earlier close, co-operative relationships were being eroded through the operation of the 1932 Adult Education Regulations and the ad hoc agreement between both providers in rural Bedfordshire and Cambridgeshire.
New initiatives were required by the Chairman, Treasurer and, above all, through the appointment of a new, vigorous District Secretary.
H.C.
SHEARMAN, M.A.
Mr. H. C. Shearman, M.A., the Tutor-Organiser, for rural work, was born in an Oxfordshire village and attended the village school at Sulgrave.
He obtained A County Council Scholarship to Magdalen College School, Brackley.
During the war he served first in the ranks in Mesopotamia and subsequently obtained a commission in the Royal Air Force.
Later he went up to Oxford, taking his degree with first class honours in History.
He has since been engaged in teaching at Cambridge, and has obtained experience in W.E.A. lecturing there.
During most of his life he has been in close touch with village life in different parts of the country.
Sophie Green, tutor-organiser, Kettering Scheme, 1919–39
FROM CO-OPERATION TO PARTNERSHIP THROUGH Conflict: 1934–52
A New Phase
‘One of the finest appointments I have ever made’.
This was the opinion of Sir Harold Shearman, then Chairman of the Greater London Council, in 1965 when he recalled the selection of Frank Jacques as George Pateman's successor as District Secretary in July 1935.
Frank Jacques was appointed from a large and well-qualified field of candidates; one was later to become the General Secretary of the National Association of the WEA and another the chief Education Officer of a large county LEA.
His background was both appropriate and relevant.
He was an experienced member of the WEA in the Berkshire, Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire District as a student, part-time tutor, chairman of that District's Divisional Committee of the WETUC and a member of the Railway Clerks Association.
He had contested parliamentary seats in three General Elections and had been a member of Maidenhead Town Council and chairman of its Library Committee.
But perhaps above all it was that his candidature was unreservedly supported by Tawney, who knew him well, which convinced the appointing committee that Jacques had the background experience, commitment and personal qualities required by the District at a particularly difficult point in its existence.
Some of the immediate, pressing problems were resolved only on the day of his appointment.
for example, it was agreed that the District should have its own office and Jacques quickly negotiated the lease of rooms at Cambridgeshire House in Hills Road; an arrangement which extended over thirty years until the transfer to the existing and more appropriate premises at Botolph House.
He furnished much of the office from his own resources although his annual salary of £250 was some 20% below the WEA's nationally recommended minimum for District Secretaries — a reflection yet again of the District's precarious financial position, then in deficit in excess of £100.
Unfortunately, Jacques had the worst possible start to his new appointment.
He was involved in two serious motoring accidents in the District's car during his first eighteen months in Cambridge.
On both  occasions his injuries led to enforced absences during which Pateman generously assumed responsibility for much of the District's administrative work.
In spite of these major setbacks, Jacques gave first priority to the setting of new objectives for the District and with Lionel Elvin tackled the problem of financial self-sufficiency.
The solution to the financial problem began to emerge with the adoption of a forward-planned annual budget in which each branch and student group was allocated a financial target or ‘quota’ to be raised each year to eradicate existing deficits and prevent recurrence of indebtedness.
The introduction of a financial quota system inevitably placed unprecedented responsibilities on most branches and student groups to make tangible contributions to support their activities, and those of the District, which led to predictable objections from some branches and to genuine difficulty in meeting the allocated quotas in a few instances.
But it was a successful scheme and was much more effective than the generalised, unspecified financial appeals of earlier years.
By 1938, the District achieved a balanced financial position and thereafter began to accumulate small credit balances.
Initially, the quota system was based on a simple two-element formula.
A basic rate was fixed of 1s. 0d. for every thousand population in the area served by a branch.
In addition, branch and class members paid annual capitation subscriptions which were earmarked for three purposes: 20% was retained by the branch, 40% was remitted to the District and the other 40% was forwarded to the National Association.
For example, Cambridge, the largest branch in the District with a membership of 250, serving a population estimated at 67,000 in 1937 had a quota allocation of a little over £24.
The quota system and its responsibilities stimulated a variety of fund-raising social activities and some branches became unprecedentedly active as community foci which, in turn, led to a new sense of social unity through corporate activities and interests.
Additionally, to ease the crisis during his first two years of office when the District's finances depended on ‘monthly improvisation’, Jacques persuaded some tutors to accept reduced fees while others generously returned their travelling expenses as donations to District funds until the financial position was eased.
At the same time, and recognising the importance of building an active membership, Jacques sought to increase the number of branches which had vigour, enthusiasm and commitment to the WEA.
He was thus involved in extensive travelling throughout the District, addressing meetings of branches, trade unions and co-operative societies.
He also believed that greater  financial support for the WEA could be obtained from the LEAs in the region.
With the support of Shearman, District Chairman until 1936 when he was appointed as National Education Officer for the WEA, Jacques turned his attention to seeking co-operative relationships with LEAs who were beginning to expand provision of adult education through the establishment of evening institutes, mostly accommodated in secondary schools.
In his view, the presence of WEA classes in evening institutes were valuable indicators of the District's existence, attractive to potential students and demonstrated the contribution made by the WEA to liberal adult education in partnership with LEAs and their own emphasis on vocational courses.
Further, on appointment he had realised for the first time that the eastern parts of the District remained largely undeveloped by the WEA.
In his early months he sought to stimulate the interest of the Cambridge Board in the appointment of resident tutors to pioneer development in the eastern counties of the District.
In that advocacy, he was subsequently to acknowledge he had been unaware of the problems arising from the Cambridge Board's maturing plans for such appointments and the issue of providing powers which were to become particularly difficult and threatening to the District a few years later.
Indications of these future difficulties became apparent as early as October 1935 when, during Jacques' absence through injury, Lionel Elvin and Ernest Green combined to defeat a Cambridge Board proposal to discontinue the long-standing tradition that the new District Secretary should be appointed as Joint Secretary to the Tutorial Classes Committee.
The continued success of the two WEA County Federations in Bedfordshire and Northamptonshire stimulated Jacques to examine other possibilities for similar development.
Essex and Norfolk were obvious and attractive areas for development beyond the more urbanised counties and were to become the main foci of his activity until the outbreak of the war in 1939 and throughout its duration, although not in the way he envisaged in 1936.
Jacques was also fortunate in that within a few months of taking up his appointment, the government's public expenditure restrictions imposed in the economic crisis of 1931 were relaxed in 1935- 36 with the restoration of progressive grants and the encouragement of new provision in adult education, outlined in the Board of Education's Circular 1444.
The Circular exhorted LEAs to consider new ways of providing opportunities for adult education, including co-operation with universities and voluntary bodies.
It also suggested that a  mechanism was required to review existing arrangements so that the disparate needs of adults and appropriate types of provision could be met more adequately.
The Cambridge board clearly perceived the Circular; s exhortation as an opportunity to provide through its Rural Areas committee (RAC) both the forum and the mechanism called for and thus to develop its own role and expand its activities within a triumvirate of providers.
It began to plan accordingly.
However, in early 1936, the position was apparently discouraging for Jacques.
In Norfolk the decline in activity since Newlove's prolonged illness had been considerable.
the LEA offered no grant-aid in support of the four WEA Terminal courses Jacques arranged in 1936–37 although a grant of £40 was promised for 1937–38.
In 1935–36, the only tutorial Class in the county was at Norwich, in social philosophy, with a mere seventeen members although another Tutorial Class in psychology commenced in 1936–37.
In 1937, the Cambridge Board independently approached the Norfolk LEA to explore the possibilities of an appointment of a resident tutor in the county for adult education in rural areas.
In October of that year, Hickson and Jacques joined forces and met the Director of Education over the possibility of a combined approach to the development of adult education which would reflect the recommendations of Circular 1444.
Although initially encouraging, the approach proved to be fruitless and both bodies made independent arrangements within separately developed policies which were to lead to disagreement over the Cambridge Board's RAC scheme for liberal adult education throughout the region, and which is considered in the next section of this chapter.
In Essex, Jacques found very little WEA activity in rural areas although there were promising urban branches at Colchester, Harwich and Halstead.
Further, he became aware that the district has incurred a financial loss on most of the courses it had arranged in the county: in 1936–37 for example the seven courses it provided had led to an aggregated deficit of £92 for the year.
The LEA grant-aid for courses of only £45 left the district with a substantial deficit, a position which was to recur in later years up to 1940 when the LEA approved a block grant for the WEA to meet anticipated deficits on courses.
The 1940 block grant also helped to support the organisation of the Essex Federation of WEA branches which was formally established in the summer of that year.
The earlier failure of East Suffolk organising-tutor scheme cast a long shadow over the discussion between Jacques and martin Wilson, the new Secretary of Education.
Although Wilson was undoubtedly  sympathetic to the WEA he left East Suffolk on appointment as Secretary for Education in Shropshire and was succeeded by Leslie Missen who, at that time, knew little about the WEA and the discussions with the LEA had to be framed within a longer time-scale than Jacques had originally planned.
Other than in Ipswich, where the WEA branch was among the small group of vigorous, active and well-organised centres in the District, there appeared to be little prospect for development without LEA-funded support in the pre-war years and, as in West Suffolk, the development of a substantial WEA presence did not occur until after the 1939–45 war.
Jacques's visits to the LEAs and branches in the rural eastern counties confirmed his belief that without the continuing presence of high quality resident tutor-organisers in rural areas, few people would be prepared to accept responsibility for the organisation and maintenance of self-directing adult student groups in villages.
The position in the District was exacerbated by the absence of other cohesive groups such as trade unionists or co-operative societies in rural areas who might have provided cadres of people for active WEA membership.
In the western counties of the District problems of a different order existed.
In Northamptonshire, a sense of continuity existed in a WEA tradition from the earliest period of the Association's activities.
Many members of the District's branches, classes and courses were also active trade unionists; some of these and many others were linked with the substantial Co-operative movement in the industrial centres.
In addition, the considerable influence of Miss Helen Stocks together with the experience and commitment of Sophie Green had given sustained momentum to the District's educational provision and, of course , the Cassell Fund had provided invaluable financial support over many years.
The Cambridge Board also had its own resident tutor in the county even thus few opportunities for development were missed in the county even though thy LEAs support was limited to specific grant-aid for classes and courses provided by the district and the Cambridge Board.
In February 1935, and unknown to the district, the Cambridge Board had proposed the formation of a joint committee with the LEA to explore and promote new developments in adult education in Northamptonshire on the assumption of increased financial aid from the LEA.
a proposed meeting between officers of the Board and the LEA was cancelled as the county council had no clear policy over adult educational provision and the only result of the proposal was confirmation of the LEA's existing policy of specific grant-aid.
It was only some years later that Jacques learned of the Board's initiatives and that it had  failed because members of the county council had been deeply suspicious of the radicalism associated with liberal adult education in the industrial areas of the county.
Apparently, little distinction was made between the providers and the suspicion of some county councillors was linked with the views of other councillors who held antipathetic attitudes over any non-statutory expenditure on educational provision.
In Bedfordshire, the position was complex.
Although the most successful county in the District in demonstrating the effectiveness of a resident tutor through the considerable talents of Harold Shearman who had provided the building blocks for co-operative endeavour between the Cambridge Board and the WEA during the early thirties, the position began to change when he was succeeded by Harold Plaskitt as the university's resident tutor in 1936.
When Shearman was appointed National Education Officer for the WEA, questions were raised by the LEA over the continued appointment of a full-time resident tutor in the county and agreement was reached only on the understanding that the new resident tutor would concentrate his activities in the undeveloped rural areas in the south of the county.
The LEA continued its generous block grant in support of the scheme and Plaskitt established a number of centres in the villages in south Bedfordshire.
However, he sought to establish University Extra-Mural Groups or Societies rather than use the County Federation of WEA branches in the promotion of extension classes through gaining support of Women's Institutes and other voluntary organisations.
All this activity led to a loosening of the earlier close relationships with the WEA and it was believed within the Federation that the new tutor was pursuing the Cambridge Board's emerging policy for its rural areas programme.
It was a policy which led to considerable friction between the Cambridge Board and the District during 1938–39.
A unique set of difficulties existed in Cambridgeshire.
With the development of the village colleges, Henry Morris had launched an unparalleled concept of the importance of educational provision as a life-long experience.
Perhaps understandably, in view of the problems he encountered and the opposition of some members of the county council, his concern was to establish prestigious links between village colleges and the University of Cambridge in the provision of adult education rather than with the much less regarded WEA.
In June 1936, Jacques met Morris in an attempt to explain the ways in which the Cambridge Board and the District were co-operating over the provision of adult education in an attempt to persuade the LEA to increase its annual grant, then a mere £20.
As a result, Morris agreed to double the annual  grant in 1938–39 and to provide rooms for WEA classes in schools and colleges without charge.
Nevertheless, he was not an enthusiast for the work of the WEA and Jacques recalled only one exchange in their discussion with any pleasure:
Morris: Tell me; when is the WEA going to die as a voluntary body?
Jacques: When it ceases to be a voluntary body it is already dead!
Other than the later stimulating and substantial growth in Norfolk and Essex, and which is considered in later sections of this chapter, the major encouraging early development for the new District Secretary occurred in Hertfordshire.
In the previous decade WEA classes and courses were arranged on an intermittent basis at Hoddesdon, Letchworth, St. Albans, Stevenage and Welwyn Garden City but little had been possible in the organisation of interest or to sustain a social movement in the county.
As part of his early strategy to secure the co-operation of the LEAs, Jacques met the Director of Education, John Newsom, and secured agreement for an increase in grant-aid from the £35 in 1935–36 to more than £100 in 1938–39 and, in addition, the promise of a contribution by the LEA towards the District's administrative costs in arranging courses.
Expansion of the District's activity in the county began almost immediately although its significant increase had to await the outbreak of the war.
Following Jacques's discussions with LEAs the financial position gradually improved and is summarised below:
In addition, Cambridgeshire (£10), Hertfordshire (£45), Norfolk (£40) and Northamptonshire (£30) contributed the sums within brackets exclusively to aid District administration of classes and courses.
Although Jacques was gratified with the response of most of the LEAs he was aware that other LEAs such as Somerset, Dorset, Wiltshire  and Staffordshire were contributing annual sums in the order of £200-£300 in support of liberal adult education to their WEA Districts.
However, more discouraging from the District's standpoint was the development by the Cambridge Board of its Rural Areas Committee policies for the region.
The Cambridge Board and The Rural Areas Scheme
It will be recalled that following the mutual agreement over the continuation of the Bedfordshire scheme in 1930 and the exceptional arrangements made for Cambridgeshire, the Cambridge Board had established its Rural Areas Committee (RAC) in 1932 to expand its provision of Chapter III courses in both counties through the activities of its university resident tutors, Shearman and Baker.
That these were exceptional arrangements agreed during a period of acute difficulty for the District is revealed in the following table which summarises the provision of Chapter III courses in England and Wales in 1935–36:
Within the total for universities, seven were providing no Chapter III courses and of the five which did, most of the twenty-one listed in the table were arranged by Birmingham where this type of course had been offered in the industrial areas prior to the introduction of the 1932 Adult Education Regulations and which had continued under an established precedent.
Of the four university colleges, only Nottingham was a substantial provider of Chapter III courses, in the East Midlands, and here again as the provision pre-dated the 1932 Regulations, existing practice was recognised and approved by the Board of Education.
However, in 1933–34, and although the circumstances were quite different, the university college at Hull used the Cambridge Board's exceptional arrangement in Bedfordshire in an attempt to exercise  Chapter III providing powers in East Yorkshire.
The bid was vigorously resisted by the Yorkshire North District led by its energetic Secretary, G. H. Thompson, and a compromise solution was reached whereby both the District and the University College offered Chapter III courses under the aegis of a co-ordinating committee to avoid overt competition and unnecessary duplication.
Thus, from a national view, only the University of Cambridge through its Board for Extra-Mural Studies was undertaking a significant volume of new Chapter III activity and it was a matter of concern both to the National WEA and the District that its encroachment into the established and defined sphere of provision should be limited to the two counties in which earlier and exceptional arrangements had been agreed.
Nevertheless, following the Board of Education's Circular 1444 in 1936 it was increasingly clear that the provision of adult education was a legitimate responsibility of three providers: the universities, the LEAs and the voluntary bodies, principally the WEA.
In this triple partnership the universities could perceive themselves as occupying the middle ground between the LEAs as statutory providers and the voluntary bodies which traditionally existed to articulate and give shape to the aspirations and needs of individuals, groups and communities for liberal adult education.
Further, the universities were the acknowledged custodians of academic standards for Tutorial Classes as well as for other courses of broad intellectual and cultural interest.
On the other hand, the LEAs were expanding their provision through a diversified range of courses of ‘instruction’ in practical skills, many of which were provided for occupational qualifications at ‘night schools’or evening institutes.
Within the troika of providers, the WEA appeared to occupy an intermediate position through its Chapter III courses.
There was, of course, some overlapping of provision.
Tutorial Classes were firmly in the university sector and some LEAs were arranging classes which hitherto had been the preserve of the WEA, e.g. civics and esperanto, and even as early as 1936, the number was relatively substantial (see Table 4.2).
Thus by the mid-thirties the boundaries of the WEA's sector of provision were becoming somewhat ragged margins as the other two better-funded and organised providers developed their policies and encroached into the territory of earlier voluntary endeavour.
However, and central to its existence, the WEA had originally developed as the organised ‘voice’ of the needs of working people to secure provision for liberal adult education essential in its view to the emergence of an educated democracy.
In the absence of appropriate  provision by other bodies, the WEA had grown as a social movement which sought to provide those opportunities for people, denied access to further and higher education, either through its own efforts or cooperatively, but without patronage, in partnership with the universities, LEAs, and other agencies.
The prospect of encroachment by some universities without an explicit partnership with the WEA was held by successive General Secretaries of the National Association such as Mactavish, Firth and, later, Green to represent a direct threat to the autonomy of the student, the branch and to the WEA itself.
Indeed, as early as 1926 when the Universities Extra-Mural Consultative Committee (UEMCC) issued its first annual report, Pateman had written to Mactavish, then General Secretary of the WEA, expressing concern over the establishment of the inter-university committee:
If you look at the preamble you will see that it is a self-appointed body with only Executive officers of Extra-Mural Boards and Committees.
It has no representation of the demand side and is not representative of the Movement…
The position re (sic) Rural education in Cambridgeshire will need to be watched.
For the District the establishment of the UEMCC was of particular concern as Cranage was its first Chairman and Hickson a member.
In his reply, Mactavish was characteristically forthright:
I was not conscious of the existence of such a committee until I received the report…
No self-respecting working educational body, much as it may desire to retain close and friendly relations with the Board (of Education), Universities, etc., can go on being hampered in its work by the increasing number of organisations concerned either telling it what to do, what it should not do, or advising it in both these directions…there is a grave danger of our movement ultimately being strangled by our friends.
This letter from Mactavish reveals the assumption made in 1926 that it was the WEA's exclusive duty and responsibility to provide working class education, but had he read the 1926 UEMCC report more searchingly he would have realised that the universities' role was not merely advisory but intended to promote the development of liberal adult education independently of other providers.
The establishment of the Cambridge Board's Rural Areas Committee in 1932 to facilitate its extended role in Bedfordshire and Cambridgeshire may be interpreted as a natural development of the UEMCC's 1926 stance and officially endorsed by the 1932 Adult Education Regulations through the provisions for the appointment of Article 11 resident tutors in rural areas.
Following Circular 1444, the UEMCC believed the role of university  extra-mural departments should be further developed:
The mere increase in the variety of voluntary interests concerned in the demand for adult education implies new problems of planning and the need for increased participation by the Universities in the tasks of organisation.
This wider context of the developments at university and LEA levels is necessary for an adequate understanding of the difficulties which arose in the years immediately prior to the 1939–45 war between the Cambridge Board and the District as there were serious implications for the National WEA if the District's problems had not been resolved through protracted, patient and complex negotiations.
Involvement in the tasks of organisation in the UEMCC's 1937 memorandum mentioned above, implied,inter alia , the appointment of university resident tutors.
The Cambridge Board anticipated the publication of the UEMCC memorandum by declaring its intention to extend its rural areas scheme through the appointment of resident tutors in Essex and Norfolk.
The announcement led to informal discussion between the Board's officers, District representatives and the National WEA but failed to establish a basis for co-operation of provision in either county.
The failure to arrive at an agreement sufficiently alarmed the District to establish its own sub-committee to examine the District's future relationships with the Cambridge Board and LEAs in the region.
It appeared that the expedient solution proposed by the District in 1930 for the Bedfordshire scheme had led to a further concession in Cambridgeshire in 1932 and by 1937 had been developed into a strategy for the development of adult education in rural areas for which the Board ‘…visualised the Rural Areas Scheme as an eight counties one’.
The significance of the Board's policy was not confined to the District.
Thompson, the Secretary of the Yorkshire North District, and Littlecott, Secretary of the Western District, wrote to Jacques urging that a firm stand be taken on the issue and no further concessions be made.
Littlecott believed the District was ‘fighting a test case the result of which I feel confident will have far-reaching effects throughout the country’.
It was widely recognised within the WEA at least, that the Cambridge Board was seeking to implement the policies outlined in the UEMCC's 1937 memorandum;
whereby provision by extra-mural departments was not to be automatically mediated through expressions of need channelled through voluntary bodies, especially the WEA.
This policy posed a general problem for the National WEA, which lacked a clear view on its partnership with other providers, and was an  especially acute one for the District where important concessions had been made in earlier years to the Cambridge Board.
For the District a plan for the limitation of encroachment by the Cambridge Board was agreed during late 1937.
Three key issues were identified for negotiation between the District and the Cambridge Board.
First, there was an unresolved question over the constitutional position of Jacques as District Secretary as a member of the RAC from which he had been excluded.
Second, it was necessary to examine and define the ways in which an effective working relationship between both bodies might be agreed for the provision of adult education in rural areas.
Third, detailed consideration was required of the reasons which had prompted the Cambridge Board to consider seeking providing powers for courses of a lower academic standard than those traditionally offered by universities in counties beyond those for which exceptional agreements existed.
In the view of the WEA, and unlike the position elsewhere, the Cambridge Board appeared to be in an anomalous position which would create new and reprehensible precedents likely to threaten the traditional and unique role of the WEA as a recognised providing body for liberal adult education.
The WEA's attitude was not unreasonable as the practice in other universities was unlike that being proposed by Cambridge.
Elsewhere, at Bristol, London and especially at Oxford, for example, the partner WEA Districts were recognised as organising bodies for adult education provision and in these three universities financial support for District work was provided by the extra-mural departments.
In contrast, the District's perception of the Cambridge Board's policy was that its own work would be undermined and possibly replaced by expansion of the Board's providing powers for Chapter III courses through the appointment of a cadre of university resident tutors throughout the region.
With the apparent disinclination of the Cambridge Board to consider any major modification to its proposals the District sought to make similar appointments in Essex and Norfolk.
In the event, it secured a grant from the Cassell Trust to appoint an Organising Secretary for Norfolk and Norwich but a bid for adequate finance for a similar appointment in Essex foundered.
Through its representation on the RAC, the District engaged with the Cambridge Board in a variety of discursive negotiations during 1938 and 1939 about their fundamental differences.
While these were in progress, each body took unilateral action and in Norfolk the Board appointed John Hampden Jackson as its Article 11 university resident tutor in the summer of 1938.
In the autumn of 1938 the District  appointed Edmund Poole as its Organising Secretary for Norfolk and Norwich.
Over the Essex appointment the District objected to the establishment of the post of resident tutor as the terms of the appointment depended on joint funding between the Board and the Essex LEA.
Under this kind of joint responsibility the District foresaw that in undertaking the resident tutor's organising and teaching duties in north and mid-Essex some of the courses would fall into the Chapter III category.
It therefore refused to cede its authority as the recognised providing body to the Board.
Here, the District was in a relatively strong constitutional position as London University already had a resident tutor in south Essex where all Chapter III courses were provided under the control of the WEA London District.
In a gesture of goodwill and co-operation, the District having established its official position as the Responsible Body for Chapter III courses with both the Board and the LEA, withdrew its opposition on the understanding that it was not conceding its providing powers in Essex.
In September 1938, A. E. Douglas-Smith took up his duties as university resident tutor in the county.
By an extraordinary stroke of good fortune, both resident tutors appointed by the Cambridge Board were supportive of the WEA as a democratic adult educational movement.
Equally important, close personal relationships based on mutual regard and trust developed between both tutors and Jacques.
The relationship was to be reinforced to a remarkable degree during the following year when the Cambridge Board's expansionist policies in both counties led to frequently acrimonious disagreements between the Board and District officers in Cambridge.
Contrastingly, close fraternal relationships existed between Poole, Hampden Jackson and Jacques in the development of District provision in Norfolk.
The period from the autumn of 1938 until the outbreak of the war in September 1939 was characterised by a series of devious stratagems as the Cambridge Board and the District sought to out-manoeuvre each other to gain supremacy in the development of adult education provision under the Board's rural areas scheme.
From the surviving documentation, annotations on meeting papers, careful notes made of verbal exchanges and copies of correspondence it is possible to reconstruct the broad sequence of events and the serial proposals and counter-proposals which marked a period of intensive and difficult negotiation with neither side being prepared to risk an open breach in relationships which would have been publicly damaging.
Arising from the resolute opposition by the District to the Board's  proposals, a sub-committee was also established by the Cambridge Board to consider its relations with the WEA and met for the first time in May 1938.
At a further meeting in July, Green, General Secretary for the National WEA, submitted a memorandum which, in effect, proposed a constitution for a joint University/ WEA Rural Areas Committee.
Green's memorandum reflected the WEA's dissatisfaction with its original 1932 representation on the RAC in that although the District was recognised by the Board of Education as the most important providing body for Chapter III courses in the region, it had less than 25% of the committee's membership which thus failed to recognise the WEA's national or regional status.
The reason for the imbalance had arisen from the subsequent addition of LEA representatives on the RAC.
For example, three representatives from the Isle of Ely sat on the committee although only four short courses had been arranged in that Authority.
Green argued that if the principle were extended to all eight counties the RAC would be controlled by the LEAs with a mere three members representing the WEA and only three representing the Cambridge Board with Hickson and Pateman as the committee's servicing officers.
The main thrust of Green's proposals was to modify the 1932 arrangements so that, as originally intended, a balanced committee would be established.
He also advocated the addition of Jacques as a committee officer, together with Hickson and Pateman, in recognition of the traditional partnership principle between the University and the WEA, as existed for the Tutorial Classes Committee.
The revised Rural Areas Committee would then comprise eighteen members: six from the participating LEAs, six from the Cambridge Board, six from the WEA and, of course, three servicing officers.
Further, and using a model in existence elsewhere, Green foresaw the functions of the RAC as an advisory, co-ordinating body with executive powers vested in existing mechanisms such as the Joint Committee for Tutorial Classes, the University Extension Courses committee for Chapter II provision and the Eastern District of the WEA for Chapter III arrangements.
Through these committees the RAC would be fully apprised of the demand for, and existing and planned provision of, adult education classes and courses in the eight counties.
In addition, an important function of the RAC would be its financial responsibility specifically for rural development for which it would receive and disburse hypothecated funds from LEAs and Trusts and from which it would be empowered to make deficiency payments to the relevant providing body where deficits occurred.
A crucial implication of Green's memorandum was that the District would receive formal recognition as the legitimate providing body for Chapter III courses in rural areas.
Further, the promotional functions of the existing RAC policy would be replaced by more limited functions of monitoring and reporting developments in rural areas.
Unsurprisingly, the Cambridge Board members were unable to accept Green's proposals as it involved weakening its own ad hoc position and strengthening that of the District.
The memorandum was remitted to the officers of both bodies for detailed consideration and report at a subsequent meeting.
At officer level, the Cambridge Board through Hickson and Pateman not unreasonably argued that its initiatives in rural areas had been successful; not least because of the financial support received from LEAs who were prepared to grant-aid provision of liberal adult education by the Board more generously than that provided through the District.
In addition, and as a result of the work undertaken by its resident tutors in Bedfordshire, Cambridgeshire and Northamptonshire, the Board had developed systematic provision of all types of classes and courses on a scale beyond that imaginable if the District had been the sole provider.
From every standpoint, the initiatives taken by the Cambridge Board had been entirely beneficial: to students, LEAs and, not least, to the District which had been relieved of significant administrative and financial burdens.
For example, in 1936–37 the costs of providing courses in rural Bedfordshire and Cambridgeshire had amounted to £330 in excess of grant earned under the Board of Education Regulations.
For the WEA, Green, Elvin, and Jacques could not adequately counter the authenticity of these claims nor deny the earlier co-operation in developments in all three counties.
The force of the District's argument lay in the clarification and negotiation of future arrangements which would not be dependent on exceptional agreements within the rural areas scheme in the other counties in the region and in subsequent discussion the WEA representatives concentrated on the three main proposals in Green's memorandum of July 1938.
First, the equitable representation of the interests in the triple partnership; second, the retention of the District's providing powers for Chapter III courses and, finally, the future role of the RAC as the co-ordinating and financial mechanism for the development of liberal adult education in rural areas.
A period of protracted negotiation followed in late 1938 and early 1939 during which proposals and counter proposals were intensively discussed in and beyond formal meetings in attempts to resolve fundamental differences without arriving at an open breach in formal  relationships.
During this period Green considered exemplars elsewhere which involved university extra-mural departments and the WEA in co-operative initiatives.
But examination of each one at, for example, Oxford, Bristol and Hull revealed their inapplicability to the Cambridge situation and Green was forced to continue to attempt to negotiate a unique arrangement, whereby both bodies might achieve agreement on a co-ordinated scheme for the development of adult education in rural areas.
On behalf of the District, Jacques counselled an unhurried pace and a moderate attitude as the developing rapport with Hampden Jackson and Douglas-Smith was immensely encouraging as were the early initiatives being taken by Poole.
The new university resident tutors were convinced of their ability to provide Chapter III courses organised by the District concurrently with their own duties to encourage the growth of Chapter II courses without role conflict or competitive interest.
Both were essentially concerned with the expansion of adult educational opportunities irrespective of the providing body, a cause in which both were legitimately involved as their duties were not prescribed in detail.
However, in the autumn of 1938, they informed Jacques that they had been asked not to organise any Chapter III courses in existing, or former, university extension centres, but both had refused to accept such limitation on their activities.
Even Poole, the District's own Organising Secretary in Norfolk and Norwich, had been asked by a Cambridge Board officer not to go ‘…into towns or villages where there was or had been Extension work’.
He had been given a list of Extension Centres marked ‘active’ or ‘dormant’to ensure there would be no misinterpretation over his activities within the constraints of the document.
He reported the matter to Jacques and the problem was quickly resolved in discussion and correspondence between Elvin, Jacques and Hickson.
In Essex, the position was more delicate and less secure for the District.
The Board's resident tutor, Douglas-Smith, was also accountable to the LEA which contributed towards his salary.
Here, the District had few branches and had failed in its bid to secure funding for its own tutor-organiser.
In addition, the LEA was beginning to establish its own network of evening institutes at secondary schools and J. K. Revans, the Assistant Director for Education, wished to learn how the proposals for the rural areas scheme were to operate in the county.
At a meeting in Saffron Walden in October 1938, arrangements for Essex were discussed by Revans, Hickson, Douglas-Smith and Jacques.
From notes of the meeting and subsequent correspondence it is clear that Jacques was  unequivocal in his view that the LEA evening institutes could develop as the ‘natural home for adult education activity’ and he wished the District's Chapter III courses to be accommodated wherever appropriate within the LEA's existing institutions.
In addition, he offered the services of the District's Office in Cambridge as a ‘clearing house’ for all applications for Essex classes and courses in both urban and rural areas of the county.
As the Responsible Body for Chapter III, the District would, after processing applications, pass on those within the rural areas scheme to the Board at Stuart House for the necessary action.
By these means there would be immediate recognition of the unity of purpose and co-operation between the Cambridge Board and the District and at the same time the work of the resident tutor would be facilitated.
He freely acknowledged that responsibility for the development in rural areas of Essex would lie with the RAC but he invited the resident tutor to expand, if he so wished, his activities into existing WEA centres at Chelmsford, Harwich, Dovercourt and Silver End.
In Jacques's view the indivisibility of town and country in liberal adult education might lead naturally to the formation of a county federation of WEA branches as had occurred elsewhere in the District and which had been entirely beneficial to the growth of adult education.
Both Revans and Douglas-Smith welcomed the offers made by Jacques, and the latter endorsed the position of the District as the providing body, an important indication of support for the WEA as the attitude of the resident tutor was crucial in the operation of any scheme involving co-operation between the University and the District.
Thus during the autumn of 1938, support for the District by the two new resident tutors in Essex and Norfolk was assured and known to both the Cambridge Board and to the WEA.
In Bedfordshire, the earlier agreement over the Board's assumption of providing powers for Chapter III courses in the rural areas was undeviatingly adhered to by Plaskitt, the university's resident tutor.
In Cambridgeshire, a middle course was followed by Baker who actively supported Chapter III courses in existing WEA branches and extended Chapter II activity in those villages in which WEA courses had never been provided.
In November 1938, the Cambridge Board produced two new major proposals for the development of its rural areas scheme.
The most significant and contentious was a geographical demarcation for each providing body.
The proposal centred on a definition of ‘rural areas, intended to confer exclusive providing rights for each body.
The Board would have exclusive responsibility in those ‘…centres of population less than 6,000 in the counties concerned’ with the larger urban centres  as the exclusive preserve of the District.
To avoid divisiveness the Board also proposed that ‘…it would be of advantage if Resident Tutors were kept informed of the activities of the WEA in the urban districts of their respective counties’.
In effect, this was merely an attempt to generalise the agreement reached in Bedfordshire in 1930, although the criterion adopted then was not based on population size of centres but on local government boundaries, a much more advantageous position for the District, than the 1938 proposal.
For the WEA it was an unacceptable proposal and was immediately rejected by the District.
Had it been accepted, the District would have been confined to only three centres in Norfolk — Norwich, Great Yarmouth and King's Lynn and would have withdrawn from at least ten other centres at which WEA branches had existed, some from the early twenties.
In Essex, the District would have been confined to provision in Colchester, Chelmsford, Clacton, Halstead, Braintree and Maldon.
Large tracts of Norfolk and north Essex would have been ceded to the Board and which, perhaps of immediate significance at that time, would have effectively prevented Hampden Jackson and Douglas-Smith from organising their growing number of WEA Chapter III courses and establishing branches in both counties.
Green and Jacques led the considerable opposition to the proposal.
In a lengthy commentary on the Board's proposal, Douglas-Smith wrote to Jacques:
I am strongly against this curious division of population at the 6,000 figure.
It does not in the least correspond to any difference in the type of population…
It is important to realise the fact of ‘dormitory’ villages now so widely spread over England; from any of the Essex towns one can see, as soon as works close down, a long string of bicycles returning to the villages outside…
But it is equally important to insist that the WEA is effective among an agricultural population…
I should view with great consternation any attempt to exclude Resident Tutors from any towns or villages…
But, indeed, the whole general effect is to divorce Resident Tutors from the WEA; the Resident Tutor would be excluded from urban areas, while on the other hand the WEA would be to say the least of it extremely circumscribed in rural areas.
The prospect seems to me unprecedented and highly undesirable.
In more astringent fashion, Hampden Jackson dealt with the realities of his appointment:
J. H. J. is thoroughly satisfied with the existing position which  suitable for the centre concerned.
As for confining his work to under 6,000 people areas, he would remind the Board that the terms of his appointment stated ‘he will be expected to exercise general supervision over the work of the Board in Norfolk and in particular to assist in the development of Adult Education in rural areas’; he would also remind them that the Board decided that his Statutory Tutorial Class should be in Norwich.
The other major new proposal made by the Cambridge Board in November 1938 was equally contentious.
It was that the Rural Areas Committee should have executive control over the appointment of tutors for classes and courses and thus, of course, approval of the syllabuses.
This was an issue over which neither the National WEA nor the District could afford to compromise.
Other than for Tutorial Classes, the WEA as a Responsible Body had not only traditionally provided the organisation for student demand but had also appointed its own tutors and approved syllabuses for courses within its Chapter III provision.
Here, Green saw an opportunity to negotiate an arrangement which could have resolved a number of problems.
He suggested that if the RAC were to be re-constituted with equality of representation and parity of esteem between the Board and the WEA, an arrangement which already existed in the University/WEA Joint Tutorial Classes Committee, the procedures followed by that committee over the appointment of tutors and approval of syllabuses would clearly offer a satisfactory solution.
As for the Tutorial Classes Committee, Jacques would become a joint Secretary of the RAC, a particularly difficult sticking point for officers of the Cambridge Board.
At this stage in the negotiations, Green was in a relatively confident mood.
Through informal contact with civil servants at the Board of Education, he learned that the Cambridge Board had not approached the Board of Education for approval to its plans to provide Chapter III courses in counties beyond its existing recognition in Bedfordshire and Cambridgeshire.
He was thus encouraged to believe that the Cambridge Board entertained some doubt over the strength of its case for unilateral action and was therefore anxious to reach a negotiated agreement with the WEA prior to making any application for additional Chapter III providing powers.
He was also aware that similar arrangements were being explored between Nottingham and the East Midlands District and that the Cambridge Board/Eastern District solution might set a national precedent.
Sadly, at this stage in the negotiations a degree of acrimony became  evident in personal relationships.
Hickson and Jacques severed direct contact with each other; Shearman and Pateman had a major disagreement over a question of loyalty to the WEA, and the two new university resident tutors were not informed of the proposed developments nor invited to comment on the proposals which might affect Essex and Norfolk.
Thus they viewed all the Board's moves with increasing misgiving and distrust and their personal relationships with Jacques and the WEA were consequentially further strengthened — a position reflected in the majority of their courses being arranged through the Chapter III providing powers of the District.
In 1938–39, Hampden Jackson and Poole working in harness established nine new centres of which five were WEA branches at East Dereham, Hingham, Swaffham, Walsingham and Wymondham.
The other four were Student Groups at Hockwold, Mattishall, Sheringham, and a revival of interest at Wells.
In April 1939, the Norfolk County Federation of WEA Branches was established to provide a sense of unity and cohesion among the scattered clusters of WEA students and members.
In Essex in his first year, Douglas-Smith helped to establish three new WEA branches at Dunmow, Maldon and Witham; Terminal courses at three other centres and encouraged the creation of the Essex County Federation of WEA Branches.
But during the autumn of 1938, the distaste that Hampden Jackson felt over the Board's machinations was expressed in a personal note to Jacques:
Every time I go to Cambridge I come back depressed as hell; then as soon as I am back to a Norfolk class spirits soar again.
At Board/WEA level, as neither body wished the impasse with which members found themselves confronted to continue interminably Hickson met Green informally.
Both agreed to modifications in the proposals which were then considered from December 1938 until February 1939.
These were incorporated into a re-drafted constitution for the Rural Areas Committee and discussed further by professor Barker, Chairman of the Cambridge Board and the Rural Areas Committee, with Elvin and Green.
Agreement to withdraw the proposals for the demarcation of rural areas on the 6,000 population criterion and a compromise over the provision of Chapter III courses was reached.
This was that although the District would be explicitly recognised as the Responsible Body for Chapter III courses throughout the rural areas scheme, if any class wished to have a Chapter III category course organised by the Cambridge Board the WEA would agree to the Board assuming providing powers for the purpose of meeting the wishes of the students in the class.
In practice this agreement reflected yet again the pattern adopted by  Shearman in Bedfordshire from 1930 onwards, and in effect it gave university resident tutors freedom to arrange both types of Chapter III courses.
The other major difficulty over the appointment of tutors and approval of syllabuses for classes and courses in the rural areas scheme was resolved by Professor Barker and Green who agreed that each providing body would submit for the information of the Rural Areas Committee its own approved panel of tutors and syllabuses of approved courses.
However, objections to the Barker-Green agreement were raised by the administrative staff at Stuart House and it appeared that no further progress could be made, when quite fortuitously and coincidentally Jacques received a letter from the Secretary to the Bedfordshire County Federation of WEA Branches.
It was a bombshell.
The Secretary of the Federation, C. G. A. Watts complained bitterly to Jacques about the recent decline in the provision of, and support for, liberal adult education courses in the county.
He presented ‘…a very gloomy picture of adult education in this county…’: the number of classes had declined from thirty-five in 1937–38 to twenty-five in 1938- 39 and the number of enrolled students had fallen by some 30%, and all at a time when activity in other counties was increasing significantly.
Apparently, the formation of University Extra-Mural Groups rather than WEA branches and student groups (on the Shearman model) was perceived by Watts as responsible for undermining the Federation's responsibility to, and involvement with, manual workers:
One class I proposed to visit, but was warned off as only one member was likely to be interested in a workers movement, all the others were retired from professions and it was thought I (a gardener) might offend them…
One must ask whether the University is aware that such a thing is possible, or do they know that such contacts are sought in order that a class should appear without any justification.
Or do they admit that the Rural Scheme is simply a rate-paid organisation to amuse well-educated people in their years of retirement.
Although written with unquestioned partisan commitment to the WEA, the letter reflected some of the fundamental weaknesses redolent of the earlier dissatisfaction which had prompted Mansbridge to write his historic articles in the University Extension Journal in 1903.
For Jacques and Green the issues raised by Watts were central tenets of belief and commitment and the raison d'être for their opposition to much of strategy embodied in the rural areas scheme.
For the District the contribution from Watts was of considerable and  immediate significance as Bedfordshire was the only county in the region in which the template for the proposed rural areas scheme had been at least partially developed.
It was claimed that the unsolicited letter from Watts revealed the extent to which the partnership principle had failed to secure active, purposeful and genuine co-operation between the Cambridge Board and the WEA.
Its disclosures also served to heighten the WEA's apprehension about the problems inherent in the RAC policy and confirmed the worst fears of those WEA members who were involved in the difficult protracted negotiations currently in hand in early 1939.
It also reinforced the District's resolve to protect its constitutional autonomy within any approved scheme.
Immediately, Jacques sent a copy of Watts' letter to Green urging him to use its contents in discussion with Professor Barker to demonstrate that ‘…his child is ailing and that seriously’.
In his view, the letter should be used to show that the Board's policy in the one county in which it had been implemented for at least two years was a misconceived, divisive one.
Further, he believed the Board had no evidence of other successful experience in partnership with the WEA which might offset or counter Watts's trenchant criticism.
No documentary evidence exists to indicate that Green acted as Jacques had urged, but a further set of modified proposals were drafted later that month on which agreement was reached by the principals: Barker, Green and Elvin.
Green was fulsome in his praise for Barker's determined and generous efforts to reach an equitable settlement and it is possible that Green did acquaint the Chairman of the RAC with the unhappy position in Bedfordshire.
Certainly, Jacques passed on Green's approbation of Barker's attitude to Hampden Jackson and Douglas-Smith a few days after the late February meeting:
There was evident a very strong determination on the part of Prof. Barker to remove all obstacles likely to prevent agreement being reached and, in the course of a subsequent conversation with Elvin, he said that he had recently come to the conclusion that it was of primary importance that the WEA should have the full assistance of the Extra-Mural Board in all its work throughout the whole of this District.
Detailed administrative and procedural arrangements were left with the officers of the Board and the District and, at last, Jacques was invited to attend subsequent meetings of the Cambridge Board pending his nomination as a WEA member.
It was an important concession by the Board as Jacques had been excluded since his appointment in 1935 even though his predecessor had attended in the capacity of District Secretary.
However, the concession to Jacques was made on a personal basis and clearly, the matter of his appointment as a joint secretary of the RAC was not to be considered.
Nevertheless, in conciliatory spirit, Jacques replied that:
Some of my colleagues will regard this gesture on the part of the Board with pleasure that will make for whole-hearted co-operation on their part.
Agreement was also quickly reached on earlier difficult constitutional matters such as the reduced representation by the LEAs, the autonomous approval of tutors and syllabuses by the providing bodies and, most importantly, confirmation of the District as the Responsible Body for Chapter III courses throughout the region.
It is possible to hypothesise that if the District had surrendered its providing powers under the rural areas scheme, the weakened position of WEA Districts elsewhere in the country might have tilted provision for liberal adult education decisively towards university control in conjunction with LEAs.
The conjecture appears to gain substance when one considers the time, energy and determination invested by Green, as the WEA's General Secretary, in the resolution of the District's difficulties with the Cambridge Board's rural areas scheme.
Green clearly perceived the protracted negotiations as a major national problem rather than a local skirmish over the retention of Chapter III providing powers by one WEA District.
Shortly after the agreement in late February 1939, he wrote to Jacques indicating the importance he had attached to the negotiated agreement with the Cambridge Board:
…that after paying at least a dozen visits to Cambridge and engaging in the most unpleasant negotiations I have ever had in my life, we have managed to retain recognition as a body which is normally recognised for Chapter III powers and obtained an agreement which the University people hate like poison.
The reference here to the ‘University’ is almost certainly exclusive to Cambridge but it is possible that Green had in mind its implications in a wider context.
There is little doubt that in his reference to ‘people’ he was excluding Professor Barker for whom he had a high regard.
But the WEA and District were not entirely clear of their difficulties and in March 1939 objections to the agreement came from an unexpected quarter — the District's own Executive Committee.
Under their Chairman, Arthur Allen, the District's committee raised a series of questions about the negotiated settlement and were unbending on the issue of retention of the District's autonomy in all its affairs and highly critical of the failure to secure the appointment of Jacques as a joint 
In magisterial style, Green dealt peremptorily with the committee's inflexible attitude, reminding them that on every substantive issue he had fully discussed its possible implications with them.
Through Jacques, he reminded the committee that in October 1931 the then District committee had argued:
…that it would be unwise to oppose the suggestion of Mr. Hickson in regard to the Board doing Chapter III work.
That is eight years ago, and the Board would now be doing Chapter III work, both in Essex and Norfolk, had I not made myself damned unpleasant…
The District committee relented; withdrew their objections and Jacques made it clear to Green it was only through his personal intervention and tenacity as the General Secretary that ‘the WEA had been saved from disaster, and that this agreement represented, in fact, the charter which gives us continued and autonomous existence’.
The following month, with the broad constitutional position of the RAC settled, Jacques and Hickson swiftly reached agreement on the outstanding administrative and procedural details.
It was agreed that Chapter III course fees arranged by the District would be retained by the WEA and details of the procedures for reporting approval of tutors and syllabuses by each providing body were devised, together with the mechanism for equal tripartite representation.
On the question of representation, an unwelcome flurry of dissent over the proposed reduction in LEA representation came from Bedfordshire and Cambridgeshire.
For Bedfordshire, Hickson and Jacques agreed to discuss a variety of difficulties with Baines but the rural areas scheme was not adopted formally by the county council until mid-June 1940 — the last LEA to approve the scheme.
In Cambridgeshire, Henry Morris was uneasy that the proposed constitution implied that the WEA had exclusive providing powers for Chapter III courses.
With the emerging pattern of village colleges, his LEA was providing its own programmes of liberal adult education and at the April 1939 meeting of the RAC he was successful in adding a clause to the constitution of the Committee to enable other ‘approved associations’ to provide courses of the Chapter III variety in addition to the WEA.
Somewhat ironically, in view of the detailed, convoluted negotiations of the previous year, the constitutional agreement was not put to the test in the ways intended as the outbreak of war in September 1939 set aside the anticipated position irrevocably.
At the beginning of the 1939–40 session, the predominant concern was the capacity and wisdom of  continuing to provide adult education in the region irrespective of constitutional proprieties.
Energies were devoted to the practicability of maintaining the existing framework of provision, and, not least, the ability to respond to an exceptional anticipated demand from a heavy concentration of military personnel throughout the strategically important counties of East Anglia.
Apart from persistent but unsuccessful applications to re-enlist as an active soldier once more, Jacques, then in his early forties, revelled in organising, improvising and expanding WEA classes and courses throughout the region.
In agreement with Hickson, Jacques organised the activities as though the rural areas scheme had been formally introduced and with the enthusiastic commitment of Hampden Jackson, Poole and Douglas-Smith, WEA provision in Norfolk and Essex expanded at an unprecedented pace throughout the war.
As Hickson and Jacques worked together during the war, their mutual regard and close co-operation under adverse wartime conditions grew into a genuine partnership through which the providing bodies came to recognise their inter-dependence.
In 1940, Jacques was finally appointed as a joint secretary to the Rural Areas Committee to represent WEA interests for the District's Chapter III courses and through this overdue gesture formal recognition was given to the District's indispensable position in the provision of liberal adult education in the region.
That it was also the major provider of adult education in the region was evident through the growth in its classes and courses from 156 in 1938–39 to more that 350 by the end of the war in 1945.
In 1941, the constitution of the Rural Areas Committee was finally approved.
It had been further modified to include in its membership all four university resident tutors and six education officers from participating LEAs.
The inclusion of the latter group was in recognition that local authority involvement was no longer merely passive through the grant-aiding of classes and courses but was now active in the planning of adult education provision and its shaping in conjunction with developing LEA policies.
In this important pointer to the future, the RAC gave substance to the new tripartite partnership in adult education in East Anglia.
Through the composition of the Committee it became legitimate for the Board and the District to negotiate with the LEAs jointly or independently over their provision — a new development which Jacques valued highly as it was an explicit, formal recognition of the District as the Responsible Body for the organisation of WEA classes and courses.
But it was not only officers and members of the WEA and the District who were pleased with the final agreement over the rural areas scheme  and the conclusion of negotiations of byzantine complexity extending over a period of four difficult years.
When introducing the final version of the constitution of the Rural Areas Committee in 1941, Professor Barker as its Chairman confessed:
I do not remember there having been given such consideration and discussion to the constitution of any other body with which I have been associated.
The full measure of that remark may be gauged when it is recalled that he was a senior member of the University Senate and a Fellow of Peterhouse, Cambridge.
The success of the ad hoc collaboration and co-operation between Hickson and Jacques during the war owed little to the elaborate mechanism of the RAC so tortuously constructed and thus led inevitably to its demise.
By March 1944 Hickson, as Secretary to the Cambridge Board which was then reviewing its future organisation for the post-war period, was sufficiently assured to write of the Rural Areas Committee:
The status and functions…are rather obscure, and the administrative arrangements are complicated, to say the least.
It seems necessary to try to simplify and improve the machinery in the interests of the Board's work, and also in order that the University and voluntary associations may be able to show to LEAs that their share in adult education will be effectively conducted.
He recommended that:
the Rural Areas Committee as at present constituted should cease to exist.
It has fulfilled a useful purpose, but experience shews that it is better fitted for consultation than for active concern with details of educational provision.
For future joint Board/WEA committees he believed that:
…such an arrangement would be to the advantage of the WEA, provided that the partnership in the Joint Committee is genuine and that the WEA retains and exercises the right of providing its own classes as may seem appropriate.
Subject to these provisos, the proposal is no more than a logical development of the original WEA practice of asking the University to provide teaching facilities through Joint Committee procedure.
Thus, in early 1944 the Cambridge Board finally tacitly acknowledged that the central issues over which the WEA and the District had refused to surrender any of their principles during the period 1937–39 had been justified.
The Rural Areas Committee formally ceased to exist in December 1945 and its functions were assumed by a new University/ WEA Joint Committee with responsibility for all liberal adult  educational provision including Tutorial Classes throughout the region.
The new committee was composed of equal representation of the University and the WEA.
Hickson and Jacques became its Joint Secretaries and Pateman was its administrative officer.
The new committee exemplified the intentions of the 1944 Education Act for closer co-operation, joint planning and participation in the organisation and provision of liberal adult education over which there was widespread anticipation of further expansion in the post-war period.
District Development 1935–1945
It is perhaps necessary to set the scene for this remarkable decade in the history of the District to show the ways in which the firm foundation for subsequent growth and consolidation was secured following a period of more than twenty years of uncertainty and improvision.
During 1935–36, the District arranged a total of 114 classes and courses, attended by 2,405 students, distributed among twenty WEA branches and thirty-one Student Groups.
The most active counties continued to be Bedfordshire and Northamptonshire which together provided 56% of the total number of classes and students.
In contrast, only 3.5% of the District's classes and less than 6% of enrolled students were in Essex and Norfolk.
By the end of the 1938–39 session, the number of classes and courses had risen to 156 and the enrolled student total exceeded 3,000.
The number of WEA branches had doubled to forty and thirty-six Student Groups existed.
The distribution of the District's activities was beginning to reflect the efforts being made in Essex and Norfolk by Hampden Jackson and Douglas-Smith and in that year some 20% of the District's classes and enrolled students were in these two counties.
At the end of the war in 1945, the growth in the District's educational activity was very impressive.
Some 355 classes and courses had been provided for about 7,000 students in 110 WEA branches and thirty Student Groups.
In every county, except Bedfordshire and the Suffolks, growth occurred in the District's educational activity and was most evident in Essex, Hertfordshire, Norfolk, Northamptonshire and the Soke of Peterborough which in aggregate accounted for 75% of the provision and enrolled students during the years of the 1939–45 war.
This remarkable and rapid growth was attributable to a relatively small group of full-time tutors and organising secretaries resident in these counties who demonstrated over several years the importance of their roles, personal qualities and ‘…their intimate association with members of branches and groups, which, in its turn, comes only from…active sympathy with those ends which they seek to achieve through adult education’.
But, as earlier sections in this chapter have demonstrated, a decade earlier prospects for the District's future prosperity and work were unpromising and its autonomous existence open to serious doubt on occasions.
That the District not merely survived but flourished is unquestionably attributable to the considerable skilled judgment, shrewd diplomacy and unswerving commitment of Frank Jacques to the principles of the WEA and its social purpose in the best tradition of a disciple of Tawney.
He would, of course, be the first to say that the consolidation, development and prospering of the District during the decade owed much more to others such as Harold Shearman, Mrs. Clara Rackham and Arthur Allen who were District Chairmen during the period.
He would pay particular tribute to Ernest Green, the General Secretary of the WEA, for his guidance and tenacity on behalf of the District, to Lionel Elvin and David Thomson not only for their unremitting service as District Treasurers but also for their personal support and wise counselling.
But above all, he would unreservedly acknowledge his profound indebtedness to the three tutors who were instrumental in the successful achievements in the later years of the decade: Douglas-Smith, Edmund Poole and Hampden Jackson.
In Jacques's view, without the considerable talents and skills which Hampden Jackson gave unsparingly to the WEA, the District would not have flourished during the war nor in the twenty-five year period of change and innovation following it and in which Hampden Jackson actively participated in partnership with Frank Jacques.
Development and growth in the District's work was, of course, not found or sustained in every part of the District.
Earlier in this chapter, reference has already been made to the decline in WEA activity in Bedfordshire and by the end of the war there were fewer classes in the county than had existed in 1935 and most of these were concentrated in the urban areas such as Bedford, Dunstable, Leighton Buzzard and Luton.
In Northamptonshire, Miss Green continued under the Cassell Trust's funding of the Kettering scheme but her relationships with Lee, the university resident tutor, continued to be formal and distant.
Her reluctant pioneering activity in Huntingdonshire led to courses at Eaton Socon, St. Neots and the county town.
With Miss Stocks's support, the Cassell Trust grant was renewed yet again, but Miss Green appeared to have lost her former enthusiasm for breaking new ground and she concentrated her efforts in established WEA branches with the exception of Corby which she helped to re-establish in 1936.
The final period of  the Kettering scheme came when in 1938 the Cassell Trustees agreed to renew their grant for a further two years on a reducing scale with a concluding sum of £50 in 1940 to extinguish their support.
However, it was not required as Miss Green resigned her appointment as District tutor-organiser in December 1939.
Although Miss Stocks and many members of the Kettering and other branches protested at her resignation, it was accepted by the District.
In many ways it was a sad ending for a tutor who had given some twenty years to the cause of workers' education in the county and perhaps the most sincere and apposite appreciation of her many qualities came most appropriately from a member of the Kettering branch:
Miss Green means the WEA to hundreds of people.
In her largeness of heart and her sincere desire to help all who needed it, Miss Green has never spared herself.
Nevertheless, the active County Federation of WEA Branches and the collective strength of the members in the established branches such as Northampton, Kettering, Raunds, Rushden and Wellingborough ensured continuity of Tutorial Classes and other WEA courses and about thirty classes were arranged in the county in each year throughout the decade.
During the war, the enlistment of many tutors in HM Forces was partly overcome through the appointment of young women graduates as WEA resident tutors to provide a variety of courses.
In Northamptonshire, four such tutors were appointed by the District and as a result the number of courses increased from thirty-two in 1942–43 to fifty-two in the following year.
(See Appendix B)
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, Jacques had been much encouraged by the attitude of the Hertfordshire LEA and the negotiated increased grant-aid for classes and courses.
Between 1936 and 1939, activity in the county expanded from nine to eighteen courses.
During the war, the District continued to extend its provision in Hertfordshire through the support of Jack Longland, the Assistant Director of Education.
A former WEA tutor, Longland agreed that Hertfordshire would join the rural areas scheme in 1941 on the understanding that the District retained full providing powers throughout the county until an Article 11 university resident tutor was appointed.
In the event no university appointment was made during the war, but the District appointed an Organising Tutor, p.
N. Molloy, in 1941, and its own resident tutors in each of the following two years: Miss Jolliffe in 1942 and Miss Savage in 1943.
In addition, the LEA provided £100 a year towards the administrative costs of the District.
The effect of these arrangements was dramatic.
Classes and courses in Hertfordshire  increased from twenty-six in 1940–41 to more than sixty by the end of the war; yet another reflection of the importance and value of the resident tutor arrangement.
However, the most significant impact of the resident tutor model was seen in Essex and, especially, in Norfolk.
The growth in the provision made by Douglas-Smith and Hampden Jackson in the year before the war was endangered by the rapidly diminishing availability of part-time tutors after September 1939.
In 1938–39, the District's approved list contained 224 tutors but by 1941–42 the total had fallen to seventy-two.
In addition, restrictions on the mobility of available tutors through the combined effects of severe petrol rationing and the withdrawal or serious unpunctuality of public transport services further curtailed the list of those tutors who were available for teaching.
Jacques produced an ingenious and effective solution to the problem.
Through established links with a few Oxford Colleges, he visited Oxford annually during the war and offered appointments as WEA full-time tutors to several outstanding young women graduates.
No salaries were guaranteed and their income depended almost entirely on a proportion of fees from enrolments in classes and courses at civilian and military centres.
This cadre of full-time resident tutors was supplemented by other part-time tutors usually resident within the localities of branches and centres at which courses were arranged.
Known as the District's ‘Sabine Women’ these young graduates not only held together the framework of the District's organisation in the counties throughout the war, but added substantially to the number of courses provided by the District and helped to establish new WEA branches and centres among the civilian population.
In addition, their experience in the role of full-time resident tutors provided the basis for post-war appointments of resident tutor-organisers throughout the District.
In Essex, the framework for organisation and provision was in the hands of Douglas-Smith who with the assistance of two young women graduates and various part-time tutors expanded the District's course provision from nineteen classes in 1939–40 to almost fifty by the end of the war.
In Norfolk the scale of expansion was even greater.
With the co-operation of Edmund Poole, until his enlistment in the RAF in 1941, Hampden Jackson and seven young graduates augmented by about thirty part-time tutors increased course provision from thirty-five classes in 1939–40 to almost ninety in 1945.
For example, in 1942–43, of the sixty-six classes in that year, forty-five (68%) were taken by the then six full-time tutors.
The considerable success of these young, enthusiastic  and high quality tutors in Norfolk laid the foundation for the District's future activity in the county which, when Jacques was appointed in 1935 had only one class, a Tutorial in Norwich.
Altogether, during the years between 1941 and 1945, the District appointed a total of nineteen women graduate tutors to provide courses and develop the activities of the District in Cambridgeshire, Essex, Hertfordshire, Norfolk, Northamptonshire and Suffolk.
(See Appendix B for the complete list.)
In aggregated terms, they were responsible for undertaking approximately 40% of the teaching duties in these counties by the end of the war, in addition to a variety of organisational and administrative tasks.
At the end of the war, because of the sustained activities of Jacques and his core of full-time tutors throughout the District, the herculean efforts of both university resident tutors in Essex and Norfolk and the five WEA organising tutors, the District had reached a position in which it occupied the pre-eminent place in the region as the major providing body for adult education provision.
Further, during a decade of considerable and protracted difficulty it had secured its autonomous position in co-operative partnership with the Cambridge Board and the LEAs in the region through its own strenuous efforts to expand educational activities in an endeavour to serve the anticipated post-war democratic state.
The Post-War Period to Ashby
For the provision of adult education in the post-war period the way forward had been indicated broadly by the Education Act 1944.
It was more closely mapped in the new Regulations for Further Education in 1946, with Local Education Authorities given responsibility for initiatives in conjunction with the universities and voluntary bodies.
In addition, the new regulations continued the pre-war advantages for university-provided liberal adult education which further weakened the relative position of the WEA so much so that the Ashby Committee reported that university income for adult education had exceeded £550,000 in 1951–52 in contrast to the WEA's income of little more than £130,000 for that year.
Further, under the new Act, LEAs rapidly expanded their own providing roles and Fieldhouse estimates that nationally there were about 5,000 evening institutes in 1947 and by 1950 more than 11,000 existed providing a wide range of social and recreational classes most of which were accommodated through the evening use of school premises.
Thus, in the immediate post-war years the WEA came under  considerable pressure from two more powerful providers and doubts were raised about its future as a recognised Responsible Body — an issue which was closely addressed by the Ashby Committee in 1953, and again raised by the Russell Committee some twenty years later.
In 1947, Tawney in his preface to The future in Adult Education , raised many of the post-war problems facing the WEA in a changing society.
He called for responsive adaptation to the new post-war society in which the WEA's ‘primary function to cultivate powers and to form intellectual habits which are the necessary basis of good citizenship and social activity…’ should be pursued.
To ensure the achievement of that objective he stressed the importance of informing fully the post-war generation of these basic principles and of securing the co-operation of the universities through their extra-mural departments.
Co-operation with the LEAs was equally important and was to be sought on a basis of complementary provision rather than through competitive relationships.
Through an important earlier development, the providers in the Eastern District had already anticipated the trend.
Although the 1944 Act did not provide detailed prescription for complementary relationships it was clear from the 1943 Education Bill that the LEAs were to be given the responsibility and duty to secure the development of adult education, in consultation with the universities and voluntary bodies.
Similarly, it was intended that the voluntary bodies would have a duty to consult with appropriate LEAs about activities which they planned to undertake.
The implications of the 1943 Education Bill were considered and accepted at a conference at Impington Village College in late January 1944.
On the initiative of the Vice-Chancellor of the University, a Regional Consultative Council was established to achieve the purpose of the proposed Act and to represent the legitimate interests of the providers of adult education.
All thirteen LEAs in the region served by the District were represented on the Council together with the University, the WEA, the YMCA and the Educational Settlements Association and formed the first consultative body of its kind in the country.
The future provision for liberal adult education was to be shared in ways which broadly represented existing arrangements with most, though not all, financial costs being borne by grant-aid from the Ministry of Education and the LEAs.
With the new Council established and working effectively, the original University/WEA Joint Tutorial Classes Committee and the Rural Areas Committee were replaced in 1946 by a new University/WEA Joint Committee which assumed responsibility for Tutorial Classes and One-Year Sessional classes extending over twenty  to twenty-four meetings.
The District became responsible for Terminal and Short courses extending over six to twelve meetings as well as a variety of informal, pioneering courses and discussion groups of fewer than six meetings; the last category attracting grant-aid for the first time.
Later, the East Anglian Regional Advisory Council for Further Education (EARAC) was established in 1947, with its secretariat provided by the Norfolk LEA, and the work of the Regional Consultative Council was absorbed into EARAC in 1953 when it became the Adult Education Sub-Committee of the East Anglian body.
Following Tawney's preface in 1947, the National WEA organised a ‘programme for action’ to stimulate forward planning and new responses to the opportunities provided under the 1944 Education Act.
The District responded with characteristic vigour.
Many branches and all the County Federations arranged special conferences and functions throughout 1948 leading to a national ‘WEA Week’ in late Autumn.
For the Executive Committee of the District and, especially, for Jacques it was also a fresh opportunity to strive for a rejuvenation of Tawney's basic principle that the WEA was a social movement endeavouring to promote political, social and cultural democracy in post-war England through the processes of liberal adult education.
But it was an uphill, unequal task.
The effects of post-war social trends became visible by 1952 when the number of Tutorial Classes and University Sessional classes declined relatively as the number of Terminal courses increased.
Fewer students were prepared to undertake the commitment to submit written work on a regular basis, or to study over long periods, and although the number of Article 24(a) Tutorial Classes rose from fourteen in 1947–48 to thirty in 1951–52 as a direct result of the District's programme for action, the totals for Article 24(b) Sessional classes declined from forty-one to thirty-two over the same period.
Article 24(c) Terminal courses increased from 235 to 282 between 1947–48 and 1951–52, but the number of students declined from 7,787 to 6,387 — a loss of 1,400.
Nevertheless, and a matter of considerable personal pride to Jacques, the District was not becoming a ‘middle class’ enclave of students.
It was still predominantly a rural District and although the numbers of manual workers were slowly declining the full impact of mechanisation in agriculture, workshop and factory lay some years ahead.
The characteristic occupational categories, and the relative strength of each of the seven county Federations in the immediate post-war period up to Ashby is shown in summary form in the following tables for the 1949–50 session:
Geographically, Table 4.4 indicates that the main provision in the District was essentially in rural areas.
For example, in 1949–50, nine new branches were formed in villages in Bedfordshire, seven in Essex, five in Norfolk and three in Fenland.
In urban areas during that year only three branches were established; two in Hertfordshire and one at Felixstowe in Suffolk.
As noted in annual reports in the late forties and again in the early fifties, the main problems in the development of WEA provision lay in the urban areas — a reversal of pre-war conditions when accessibility of rural areas was difficult and prevented significant growth until the appointment of resident tutors.
Now, in the post-war years there occurred the onset of new problems through the increased availability of the cinema, radio and, in the 1950s, television.
Further, the expanding provision by LEAs of vocational and recreational classes in rural schools and at urban technical colleges siphoned-off potential WEA students, although the long tradition and attractiveness of the WEA programmes in Norwich and Cambridge enabled both cities to withstand the counter-attractions.
Elsewhere, urban centres did not experience the anticipated post-war expansion in liberal adult education.
In the winter of 1948–49, a general area survey of studies in Public Affairs was undertaken in Hertfordshire by His Majesty's Inspectorate  (HMI) which included liberal studies offered by the four Responsible Bodies, of which the Eastern District was one, and the LEA.
It revealed a relative lack of interest in such studies and that ‘the tendency to ignore the problems of everyday life is symptomatic of the general malaise of our times…
The reluctance to undertake serious study is equally widespread, but is significant in this area to provide a challenge to all those concerned with promoting adult education’.
More encouraging was another survey by HMI in 1950–51 of the adult education provision made by the Responsible Bodies in Norfolk viz. the Board of Extra-Mural Studies and the Eastern District, both grant-aided by the Norwich and Norfolk LEAs.
The tutors of both the District and the Cambridge Board were much praised and a particularly handsome tribute was paid to the District's vision in expanding its activities in the county during the war to create a network of classes throughout the area.
The value of the Norfolk Federation and its WEA magazine The Democrat was also noted.
The conclusion of the report was that the resilience and vigour of adult education in the county during the previous twenty years had placed it in a good position to consolidate earlier effort and made HMI confident that further development in the provision of liberal adult education would build on the foundation of the established tradition of co-operative endeavour between the LEAs and the Responsible Bodies.
The grant-aid earned under the new Regulations was adequate but it was not generous and although class programmes were extended to new centres and programmes expanded in existing branches, the costs of provision also increased and the District required overdraft facilities until 1950 when a small surplus was secured.
Grants fluctuated in reflection of the provision made and the support it attracted through enrolments.
Deficits were offset through membership subscriptions, which declined in the late forties, and through sums remitted to the District which were calculated annually as per capita branch quotas.
In addition, the National WEA provided small specific grants such as those towards the salaries of resident tutor-organisers and a few LEAs made grants towards the administrative costs of the District's organisation.
However, in the following year the District experienced two substantial setbacks.
The first arose from the government's decision to impose a standstill grant for that year — in effect a reduction in the District's planned programme in the 1952–53 session at a time when much patient work to gain support from trade union branches and members had succeeded particularly in Norwich and Northamptonshire.
The success of this liaison could be seen through the arranging of seventeen day schools and six residential WETUC weekend schools.
At the same time, to joint classes with branches at Colchester, Ipswich and St. Albans.
The other major setback came in the shape of the winter's East Coast floods which had led to the loss of some branch members and severe dislocation of classes in Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex.
In 1953, the National Association celebrated its Jubilee and the District its fortieth anniversary.
It also marked the breaking of a link with the past through the death of Miss Helen Stocks who had done much to promote and sustain the work of the District and the WEA in its early years in Northamptonshire.
The Jubilee was celebrated by a District Rally held at the Guildhall in Cambridge and reflected the wide support the WEA continued to attract through speeches made by the Chancellor of the Exchequer (R. A. Butler), the Provost of King's College (Sir John Sheppard), the Director of Education for Norfolk (Dr. Lincoln Ralphs), the National Secretary of the WEA (Harry Nutt) and the former Chairman of the District (Arthur Allen, MP for Wellingborough).
Nevertheless, and as had occurred on previous celebratory occasions for the National Association and the District, considerable apprehension and anxiety over the future of the movement existed as the  achievement of ambitious post-war objectives remained unrealised.
ASHBY AND AFTER 1953–58
In the early 1950s there was lively debate among adult educationists about the future roles of the various agencies in the field.
During 1952, for example,The Highway carried articles on the subject by the eminent Oxford historian Alan Bullock (who had experience as treasurer of the Berks., Bucks.
and Oxon.
District), by G. D. H. Cole (elected President of the Fabian Society in the same year), by Richard Hoggart (then a staff tutor at the University of Hull) and by Maurice Bruce (Director of Extra-Mural Studies at Sheffield), all proposing something different for the WEA.
Bullock, following suggestions in S. G. Raybould's recent book,The English Universities and Adult Education , argued that the universities should stick to Tutorial and preparatory-Tutorial Classes, leaving the WEA as the country's main provider of less advanced courses in liberal studies; for this expanded role, the Association would require increased government aid to finance additional full-time posts and would also need to ‘get rid of those characteristics to which its critics have often pointed…conservatism, parochialism and class-consciousness’.
Cole wanted the WEA to maintain, and where necessary restore, its position as the educational representative of the working-class movement, responding to demands for classes by trade unions and other workers' groups, even if this meant some reduction in the number of courses taught.
Hoggart, claiming with some justification that ‘in the WEA today…we are suffering from an uncertainty of purpose and recurrent feelings of guilt’ advocated the raising of academic standards in courses and a readiness to seek working-class students regardless of their commitment to trade unionism or political emancipation: ‘as an educational association our business is to educate not to train social reformers’, and accordingly courses in literature were as valuable as those in the social sciences.
Bruce, defending the expansion of university extra-mural work since the war, saw the future role of the WEA primarily as a student-body rather than as one with a teaching responsibility, ‘an organisation of all adult students’ with little or no emphasis on the working-class element: ‘in the general interest, it would seem best …for the WEA to concentrate its attention upon the stimulation and organisation of demand…all but the most elementary pioneer work could become the responsibility of Extra-Mural Departments or local authorities’with the WEA left as ‘the mouthpiece of lively, conscious student demand’.
Following this came The Jubilee Highway of April 1953, commemorating the Association's fiftieth anniversary.
Here, R. H. Tawney took a traditional line, asserting that Tutorial Classes and, at the very least, One-Year courses constituted the WEA's real work, that those who had left school at or about fifteen were its most important target and that as a movement it should be largely under the control of its voluntary student members.
‘The Association is not a universal provider…its mission…is in the first place to the educationally underprivileged…it must include a substantial body of work sufficiently intensive and prolonged to exercise a permanent influence on students.’
This was echoed by J. H. Matthews, recently-retired Southern District Secretary, who called for fresh efforts to recruit manual workers as voluntary branch members and held that, ideally, Tutorials were the courses which should be provided: ‘what the WEA has emphasised and needs more thoroughly to practise is the importance of substantial and continuous study, particularly in the social sciences, as the major element in its work’ although ‘well conceived short courses will have their place’.
Both Tawney and Matthews saw education for trade unionists as a growth point of great potential.
The debate about what the WEA was and should be doing had particular point in 1953, the year the government initiated its own enquiry into adult education.
Given the Association's fall in membership since the late 1940s, and given the views canvassed by some who worked in the field, exemplified by Bruce in The Highway, there were real fears that the WEA would lose its status as a Responsible Body.
The origins of this enquiry lay in an attempt by the Minister of Education, Florence Horsbrugh, to economise on departmental expenditure.
In January 1953 the universities and the WEA were told of the Minister's intention to cut grant-aid towards their adult education work by 10% for the educational year beginning the following August.
This unleashed such a storm of protest, in which branches in the Eastern District played their full part, that the government quickly backed down.
In March the Prime Minister Winston Churchill, replying to a letter from the TUC Education Committee, gave an assurance that nothing had yet been settled and reserved some memorable prose for a concluding tribute to the value of liberal studies in adult education:
There is, perhaps, no branch of our vast educational system which should more attract within its particular sphere the aid and encouragement of the State than adult education…
I have no doubt myself that a man or woman earnestly seeking in grown-up life to be guided to wide and suggestive knowledge in its largest and most uplifted sphere will make the best of all the pupils in this age of clatter and buzz, of gape and gloat.
The appetite of adults to be shown the foundations and processes of thought will never be denied by a British Administration cherishing the continuity of our Island life.
But these are no reasons for not looking through the accounts, and making sure that all we can give is turned to real advantage.
The last sentence was the cue for Miss Horsbrugh to announce to the House of Commons in April that the 10% Cut would be withdrawn and a Committee of Enquiry into adult education established instead.
The composition of this committee was made known in June.
Dr. Eric Ashby, vice-chancellor of Queens University, Belfast, was named as chairman; one of his advantages was that he had avoided publicising his personal views on adult education in the past, although he later emerged as a staunch defender of voluntaryism and a critic of those university extra-mural departments which had expanded by lowering standards.
The WEA could take some comfort from the presence among the remaining six on the committee of Alan Bullock, who had expressed his sympathies for the movement in the previous year's Highway , and of G. B. Thorneycroft of the General Council of the TUC.
Although over half the students in Responsible Body classes were women, every member of the Ashby Committee was a man.
The WEA presented its evidence to the Committee of Enquiry in November 1953.
Among the six members of the sub-committee responsible for drafting this submission was the Eastern District's former full-time tutor Harold Shearman, by then Academic Adviser to the Department of Extra-Mural Studies at London and a WEA vice-president.
The Eastern District also featured prominently among the appendices to the evidence, where there were several tables of information about selected Districts: the Eastern was a good choice for inclusion here because it embraced almost twice as many branches as any other District, it covered a distinctive part of the country and its relatively-high level of students' and members' financial contributions tended to show the WEA in a good light.
Thus, it can be calculated from the figures that in 1951–52 over 72% of all WEA ‘centres’ in the Eastern District were in places with populations of less than 5,000; only 10% were in places with over 20,000 people.
Comparative figures for the West Lancs. and Cheshire District, for instance, were 39% (under 5,000 population) and 36% (over 20,000).
The only national figures quoted on this were for 1939–40 but these showed 48% and 24% respectively.
On finances, a table appeared summarising the income and expenditure of branches in the Eastern District for the year ending 31 March 1953.
This was impressive, showing considerable commitment on the part of the voluntary members and a high level of financial responsibility among the branches.
No less that £3,559 had been raised by the branches in various ways — £2,616 from members' subscriptions and students' fees, £617 from socials, rummage sales and other fund-raising activities, £53 from sales of literature and so on.
After £2,067 had been handed over to the District, branches had been left with a net income of £1,492, just one pound less than the £1,493 spent on publicity, room rents and other local organisation and administration.
It was estimated that the average sum raised per branch member to finance the work of the Eastern District and its branches as a whole for the year had been £1 3s. 4d.
Figures such as these fuelled the arguments put forward by the WEA in the main body of the text.
Voluntary members made more than a fair ‘consumer contribution’ to the costs of adult education, their unpaid efforts helped to keep those costs down and they were entitled to more grant-aid from public funds.
It was in the nation's interest to have a better-educated populace and the WEA had the tradition and the expertise to achieve this, if an expansion of its work could be financed and more full-time staff appointed; in particular, it had a major contribution to make to trade union education.
Tutorial Classes continued to be seen as the most important element in the WEA's programme and there had been some increase in their provision in recent years.
Although many alternative methods of financing and administering adult education could be envisaged, none would be as efficient or as economical, none would evoke a better response than those already in operation, ‘untidy’ as these might seem: the Responsible Bodies (primarily the universities and the WEA) and the local education authorities were managing to avoid an overlap in provision and should be left to continue their work.
The Ashby Committee considered this and other evidence and eventually published their report,The Organisation and Finance of Adult Education in England and Wales , on 31 August 1954.
The WEA received unstinted praise for upholding ‘two precious ingredients of education in a free society: objective discussion, free from propaganda or indoctrination, of social and economic problems; and the full  participation of the student in organising and conducting classes’.
The Report echoed some of the criticism advanced by witnesses that the WEA could not decide on its future and, at least in some Districts, had lost the pioneering spirit, but concluded nonetheless that ‘voluntaryism as exemplified by the Workers’ Educational Association is essential if the spirit of adult education is to be preserved'.
It therefore recommended that the WEA should continue as a teaching as well as an organising body, while suggesting that some increase in financial contributions from voluntary sources ‘would materially help to preserve its independence and its status as a voluntary body’— a hint that the WEA could not expect to rely too heavily on government or local authority aid and that its members and friends must continue to dig deep into their pockets.
As with the WEA, so in its treatment of adult education as a whole, the Report was cautious, considered, fairly conservative in tone.
It recognised that, with educational provision as a whole in a transitional phase, still recovering from the war and still adjusting to the requirements of the 1944 Act, it was inappropriate to ‘set a course for adult education over the rest of this century’: ‘our recommendations apply to the present transitional period’.
It was in favour of retaining the existing partnership in adult education between voluntary bodies (notably the WEA), the universities, the local education authorities and the Ministry of Education; the Ministry should continue to grant-aid the teaching costs of Responsible Bodies, local authorities (if sympathetic) their administrative costs (Recommendations 1, 4, 13).
It did suggest, however, some broadening of the concept of ‘teaching costs’ eligible for Ministry grant, with such ancillary duties as running a library service, guiding junior colleagues and giving pioneer lectures included (Recommendation 14).
It advocated increases in payments to tutors, with the removal of maximum salary limits for full-timers and the raising of fees to part-timers (Recommendations 7, 8).
More controversially, it proposed greater flexibility in the allocation of Ministry grant-aid to Responsible Bodies.
Instead of the present fixed ceilings on grants, Responsible Bodies ‘should each be given an allocation representing the maximum amount of grant available for the year, limited to 75% of the teaching costs, after consideration of the quality and standards of work being done by the responsible body, as well as its proposed programme, the needs of the region in which it operates and the activities of other interested bodies in the region’(Recommendations 5, 6).
This would mean an amendment of Further Education Grant Regulations ‘so as to give less prominence to the length of course as compared with other and equally important criteria’ such as the quality of teaching and the  amount of written work done by students (Recommendation 10).
It suggested that in some places students' fees could be raised and that the Ministry and local authorities should take account of students' contributions when deciding the level of aid (Recommendations 16, 17).
Finally, the Report suggested that the Minister might establish ‘a small committee to advise her from time to time on the subjects and types of adult education courses which should receive priority in qualifying for grant’(Recommendation 18).
In general, the Ashby Report received modest praise from the press.
The Times Educational Supplement , for example, called it ‘a soothing but useful report in which the evidence is interpreted with good sense’ and summarised the conclusions as ‘leave well alone’.
The leader writer depicted the Minister of Education Florence Horsbrugh as having been ‘hoist with her own petard’: if she had hoped that her Committee of Enquiry would recommend financial cuts she had been disappointed, for if anything the proposals made some increase in expenditure likely.
Within the adult education profession at large, there was gratification that the existing providers had been commended for their work, but some fears lest the proposals for future grant allocation might lead to increased governmental control over courses taught.
The WEA shared both the relief and the reservations: duly expressed as a gathering of District Secretaries in September, at the National Conference in October and at meetings of the WEA Central Executive Committee which had the responsibility for formulating an official response.
One reservation was that the proposed amendment to grant regulations in Recommendation 10 would be such as to omit all reference to Tutorial Classes.
Another was that, while Recommendations 7 and 8 had proposed higher payments to tutors, the Report had seen 75% of teaching costs as the maximum grant available, leaving the prospect of a widening gap to be filled from voluntary sources — 25% of a salary of (say) £700 being greater than 25% of one of £600.
Also, under current regulations 75% was the minimum grant to Responsible Bodies; although in practice the Ministry had treated this as the standard proportion, not to be exceeded, it was worrying that the Ashby Report gave 75% as the maximum .
A further cause for concern was Recommendation 6, with its proposal to base grant for the coming year to each Responsible Body not only on the standards of its own work but also on the needs of the area it served and on the provision made by others.
Recommendation 18, meanwhile, with its suggestion of a committee to advise on grant priorities, was seen as threatening to introduce a dangerous element of state supervision over what students ought to study.
Accordingly, the WEA Central Executive  the retention of Tutorial Classes in the grant regulations, in favour of an increase in Ministry grant-aid above 75% of teaching costs (90% was proposed), and in favour of permission steadily to expand provision through further full-time appointments without all the conditions laid down in Recommendation 6.
On Recommendations 6 and 18, the Eastern District found itself out of step with National WEA policy.
A memorandum by Frank Jacques to the District Council of 12 March 1955, and an address he gave to that Council, made it clear that he was in favour of both Recommendations.
He felt that the Eastern District, serving a widely-scattered, largely-rural population, working generally in co-operation rather than competition with Cambridge University Extra-Mural Board, and always seeking to maintain high standards, had nothing to fear from the amendment of grant regulations proposed in Recommendation 6, an amendment which took into account quality of work, the needs of the region as a whole and the provision made by other interested bodies.
In his view, the WEA's Central Executive Committee, by opposing this Recommendation, had been far too defensive.
On the proposal in Recommendation 18 to set up a committee to advise on priorities for grant-aid, he argued that this would help to keep the WEA on its toes, true to its traditional concerns for rigorous study of subjects appropriate to understanding contemporary society.
‘All of us should be able to withstand investigation and accept advice and correction if we need or deserve it’.
The District Council endorsed these opinions and Jacques wrote to National Secretary Harry Nutt the following week to tell him so — adding that the Council had also supported the plea for an increase in Ministry grant-aid to 90% of teaching costs, which was of course in keeping with National WEA policy.
On 28 March 1955 WEA representatives met Sir David Eccles, who had succeeded Miss Horsbrugh as Minister of Education in a government reshuffle the previous October.
Eccles told the WEA that he was opposed to the establishment of an advisory committee, preferring to leave discrimination between courses to the Responsible Bodies themselves: that was the end of Recommendation 18.
But he also said that, with this exception, he intended to act in the spirit of the Ashby Report.
There would be some increase in grant-aid to Responsible Bodies in the next two years; grant regulations would be amended in line with Recommendation 6 and the Ministry would discuss and review work with Responsible Bodies individually before allocating a block grant for the year to each.
He shared the Ashby Committee's appreciation of  voluntaryism in adult education and did not wish to encourage a substantial increase in the numbers of full-time staff.
Needless to say, there was no promise of 90% grant-aid which was not in the Ashby Report anyway, but the Minister did agree to reconsider the proposal to omit Tutorial Classes from the grant regulations.
On all this, he was as good as his word.
The amended regulations which came into force on 1 August 1955, included two long sentences following the lines of Recommendation 6:
In determining the amount of grant the Minister will have regard to the general standards of the courses maintained by them, the needs of the areas, the activities of other bodies providing further education in the area and the fees paid by students.
In considering the standards maintained the Minister will consider, in addition to the syllabuses and the quality of the teaching, the length of courses, and the arrangements for written work, reading under guidance and other forms of private study to be done between meetings.
But they also retained Tutorial Classes as one of the types of course eligible for grant; incidentally they also defined terms long familiar to the WEA —‘Sessional’(‘courses lasting for one educational year comprising not less than twenty meetings’) and ‘Terminal’(‘courses comprising not less than ten meetings’), to describe other courses.
75% disappeared from the regulations altogether, whether as a minimum grant-in-aid of teaching costs as in the old regulations or as a maximum as proposed in the Ashby Report: an explanatory memorandum from the Ministry said that the Minister would continue to use this figure as a guide while bearing in mind all the other factors concerned with quality, need, students' fees and so on.
The definition of ‘teaching costs’ was extended as in Recommendation 14 of Ashby to include ancillary duties such as guiding junior colleagues.
However, the operation of these regulations during the rest of the decade kept the WEA on a tight rein.
In its evidence to the Ashby Committee, the WEA had asked for more grant-aid to finance ‘a considerable increase’ in the number of full-time staff.
In a letter to the Ministry of Education at the beginning of 1955, in the midst of the negotiations following the publication of the Report, the National Secretary had actually put a figure on this, saying that the various Districts would like thirty more full-time tutors.
But the necessary finance was not forthcoming and the appointment of additional full-timers remained exceptional throughout the 1950s.
Similarly, those who hoped that the more flexible regulations would qualify them for grant well in excess of the traditional 75% were doomed to disappointment.
Within the Eastern District, Jacques and his voluntary officers felt especially strongly on this point.
In their view, the District was meeting the criteria set out in Ashby's Recommendation 6 and in the 1955 regulations quite admirably: was it not entitled to a higher proportion of grant-aid than those whose standards were poorer, whose students' fees were lower and who were meeting the needs of their areas less successfully in relation to other providing bodies?
In fact, there was some flexibility and the proportion of grant-in-aid of teaching costs to the Eastern District did rise a little, actually reaching 79% in 1957–58.
But what the District continued to seek was the 90% grant which the WEA's national negotiators had raised unsuccessfully with the Ministry in 1954 and early 1955: this goal became a recurrent theme of District meetings and literature through the second half of the decade.
In his 1955–56 Annual Report, for example, Jacques wrote that if only this level of grant could be achieved, something could be done to raise part-time tutors' fees and so reduce the glaring disparity between the minima of £1 110. 0d. for teaching a WEA Terminal class and £3 10s. 0d. for taking a University Sessional class.
The Eastern District submitted a motion to the March 1960 National Conference at Brighton, calling on the government ‘forthwith to increase its normal rate of grant-in-aid of voluntary Providing Bodies from 75% to 90%’.
The District's Annual Report for 1959–60 said that, although the WEA's national officers were still trying to achieve this increased grant, the Eastern had exceptionally-strong claims and accordingly ‘we are now pressing for special consideration’: in other words, Jacques was arguing with the Ministry that, even if it could not afford 90% grant to the WEA as a whole, could this not be allowed to the Eastern District individually?
In June 1960 he went so far as to write to Ashby himself — by then Sir Eric and the Master of Clare College, Cambridge — setting out the case and asking whether he would make personal representations to the Minister to secure unilateral treatment for the Eastern District.
Statistics were enclosed showing that the average student fee per class meeting (12.45d.) was higher and the teaching costs at least 50% greater in the Eastern than in any other District.
Ashby sent a sympathetic but non-committal reply.
The campaign was to no avail: the 90% grant was never received and the District's Annual Report for 1960–61 was the last to mention the issue.
The Ashby Report did not make a dramatic impact upon the Eastern District, but it was important nonetheless.
After all, it did help to save the WEA as a Responsible Body at a time of serious threat.
It also contributed to a shift in opinion at the Ministry of Education away from the curtailment or freezing of grant towards modest and flexible expansion — and the Eastern District was able to take advantage of the new grant regulations which followed the Report in 1955 to achieve a level of aid a few percentage points higher than the 75% hitherto regarded as standard.
It was disappointing, given the stress in these new regulations on quality of courses, the needs of the area and the amount of students' contributions, that an even higher proportion of grant-aid could not be given: but the Ashby Report itself had talked of only 75% and that as a maximum, so any advance on this was an achievement, and a tribute to the District's work.
Equally important, one may argue, was the boost which the Report gave to the District's morale through its praise for the WEA's voluntary and democratic traditions.
Although the Minister could use this as a reason not to finance the appointment of additional full-time staff, the success of the Eastern District in serving far-flung rural communities, too numerous and too widespread for full-timers to cover efficiently, has always depended primarily upon the strength and zeal of the voluntary members.
As it happened, it was in the years immediately following the Ashby Report that the implications of voluntaryism, and the role which professionals should play as part of a voluntary movement, became matters of major concern within the District.
Decisions taken on these issues were to have a lasting effect on the geographical deployment of full-time staff.
The Voluntary-Professional Dilemma
In a world noisy with the organs of mass communication and riddled with propaganda, modern man is hard put to it to preserve his status as an individual.
To help to preserve this status is (in my view) the contemporary task for adult education…
[But]…any system which weakens the small voluntary group will in the end defeat its purpose…
I believe it is vitally important to preserve voluntaryism in Britain.
I believe this cannot be done by local authorities, however well meaning they are, nor by universities, however efficient, but only by voluntary bodies.
Many people believe that voluntary bodies as they are today cannot be entrusted with this national responsibility.
My thesis is that the remedy is not to discard voluntary bodies but to infuse them with a new purpose and to make new demands upon them; and I have suggested that the new purpose is nothing less than to preserve the individuality of man.
This might have come from a WEA rally.
In fact the words are those of Eric Ashby: while others were digesting his Committee's carefully-worded  Report, he gave vent to his personal opinions in the Will Harvey Memorial Lecture, delivered at Fircroft College, Birmingham on 24 March 1955 under the title The Pathology of Adult Education .
He criticised the WEA for allowing some branches to be ‘swallowed up by the vortex of gentility’, failing to engage in serious study and neglecting their mission to manual workers: he wanted such branches closed.
But he criticised at greater length those university extra-mural departments which had expanded since the war through bypassing the WEA and putting on their own programmes of courses, courses with popular appeal to the already well-educated and.of a quality below that traditionally associated with universities.
He was obviously very impressed by the WEA at its best, where courses mounted were those the voluntary members themselves had chosen and where high standards were sustained by tutors and students alike; he saw the growth of university extra-mural work as a threat to all this.
If we are not careful adult education may become a social service like national insurance, ‘laid on’ by the university in a spirit if efficient paternalism.
I have a vision of resident tutors beating up classes with the cheerful persistence of a sports organiser on a trans-Atlantic liner; of extra-mural directors deploying their forces through the English countryside, themselves deciding what classes are suitable for the people of Swindon and Banbury and Slough; of district organisers calling on mill hands in the remotest dales of Yorkshire with the regularity of the man who collects the rent…
Imperceptibly the voluntary spirit would  distil away from adult education…
The mainspring of voluntaryism is that initiative lies with the volunteers.
They are free to be energetic and enterprising; they are equally free to be lethargic and dilatory; the self-respect of the voluntary group depends on the fact that any success it has is due to its own efforts.
Now the wise extra-mural department would doubtless maintain a facade of what appear to be voluntary committees.
But if the extra-mural department has a budget of the order of £50,000 a year, and a salary bill of the order of £40,000 a year, adult education has got to go on whether so-called voluntary committees want it or not; and since a good deal of the teaching is done by full-time tutors, even the subjects taught will inevitably be dictated to some extent by the department and not by the voluntary groups.
A clever organiser with a history tutor on his hands may persuade the citizens of Chipping Camden that they do not really want a class in biology, they want one on Queen Victoria: but (make no mistake) that very persuasion will to some  extent have injured the mainspring of voluntaryism in adult education in Chipping Camden.
Frank Jacques quoted the Harvey Memorial Lecture extensively and approvingly in his 1954–55 District Annual Report.
He added his own comments that Ashby's tributes to voluntaryism present us with a very serious challenge — to the professional to be patient in service, to aid and abet but not to take over from the voluntary worker any of the tasks or decisions which he should do and make: to the voluntary worker to recognise that the only sure safeguard against injury to the mainstream of voluntaryism is that that mainstream, which is himself, shall never slacken.
This went to the heart of a question which the WEA is never able to ignore and which the Eastern District had particular cause to ponder in this period: how should the full-time professional tutor-organiser fit into a voluntary movement?
Ashby's warnings of the dangers of professionals, although apparently directed against those in extra-mural departments, could also be applied to the staff of the WEA.
This implication was not lost on some members of the Eastern District, notably several in Essex where the views of leading WEA activists were such that the District eventually decided to do without a tutor-organiser for the county altogether.
By the early 1950s, the Essex Federation had become one of the strongest in the District, in terms of the enthusiasm and sense of purpose of its Executive Committee, composed of members elected from constituent branches at the annual general meetings.
To quote the Federation's annual report for 1948–49, ‘one purpose of the Federation’ is ‘that of bringing together in a friendly atmosphere the members of different Branches and Groups and thereby strengthening the unity and spirit of the WEA in Essex’.
Another purpose, as expressed in the 1949–50 report, was ‘to act as a link between the Essex branches and the Eastern District’.
It was to further these aims that the Federation launched a newsletter, E.F.
and mounted a varied programme of weekend and one-day schools.
The county tutor-organiser from 1948 to 1951, Arthur Brown, remained in Essex as a committed voluntary member and notable part-time tutor and, as Federation chairman from 1953 onwards, also encouraged the Executive to develop as a forum for lively debate on matters of WEA policy.
The opinion gained ground — an opinion with which Eric Ashby would evidently have had some sympathy — that the employment of a full-time tutor for the county, whether by the WEA or by the University Extra-Mural Board, placed constraints on branches' freedom to choose subjects of study because of pressure to  find a viable programme for the full-timer to teach.
It was also thought that the presence of a WEA officer such as the tutor-organiser at branch AGMs and committee meetings was liable to bring improper influence to bear on behalf of the District Secretary.
Beyond these specific issues, there was an acute sense within the Essex Federation of the general threat posed by professionalism to the WEA's essential character: and several leading voluntary members came to feel that through their own initiative they could advance the movement more effectively than any tutor-organiser.
Elsewhere in the District around this time, a gap between the resignation of one full-time officer and the appointment of another provoked distress and urgent resolutions to the District Council.
This was so in Bedfordshire, for example: in 1952 the District Council carried a motion deploring ‘the withdrawal of the services of a full-time officer of the WEA from Bedfordshire when so large a proportion of branches in the area are so recently formed and still in need of assistance and encouragement that only a full-time organiser or tutor-organiser can give’.
There was a similar reaction in Hertfordshire when the resignation of the University's resident tutor in the county, Vivian Ramsbottom, to become Administrative Officer of the Joint Committee, led the District AGM of 1955 to carry a motion expressing ‘belief that the presence of a Resident Tutor in the County is vital to the growth of the educational work which the WEA and the University do together’.
But no similar resolutions came from Essex.
The views of prominent members here are best expressed in a motion originating from Wickham Bishops branch, passed at the Essex Federation AGM in May 1957, considered by the District Executive in the following month but eventually withdrawn from the agenda of the subsequent District Council:
That it is in the interest of the Workers' Educational Association that the organisation of its activities and its expansion, and the direction of its policy, should continue in the hands of its members; that the work of the professional officers in the field should be supplementary to that of the Branch and Federation members and not a substitute for it, and that all constitutional impediments to the holding of any Branch or Federation office by voluntary members of the WEA should be removed.
Although not every member of the Essex Federation Executive shared these views, Brown's successors as tutor-organiser for the county understandably found the context a difficult one to work in.
Janet Walters, an Oxford history graduate who had previously served as a full-time tutor in Northamptonshire in 1943–45, arrived in August 1952  but resigned two years later: she went on to a successful career in adult education, eventually retiring as principal of Hillcroft College, Surbiton, in 1982.
Kate Collingwood, who had read Modern Greats at Oxford and was well-known as a luminary of the Kelvedon Players, gave up her seat as a Labour county councillor, was appointed in November 1954 but eventually resigned in December 1957.
Both left with warm appreciations from the District Executive and District Council, both managed to win the friendship and confidence of many voluntary members in Essex: but it is clear from their correspondence with the District Office that they came to feel frustrated at having less freedom to use their initiative than tutor-organisers in other counties.
The District's response was not to appoint a successor to Mrs. Collingwood but to give the Essex Federation Executive the opportunity to take on the tutor-organiser's work, leaving all teaching to part-time tutors: an arrangement which was still in force at the District's seventy-fifth anniversary in 1988.
The controversy which surrounded these events, and which periodically exercised the District Executive and enlivened the District Council, took place at a time when tutor-organisers were less established figures than they were to be in the 1960s and 1970s.
For example, in March 1955 at the time of Ashby's Will Harvey Lecture, there were only five tutor-organisers employed by the Eastern District, those in Essex, Fenland, Norfolk, Northamptonshire and Suffolk: the posts in Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire were vacant and there were as yet no tutor-organisers with special responsibilities over several counties.
In June 1956 the number was temporarily down to four, with Norfolk also being without.
Restrictions by the Ministry on grant made available for new appointments also meant that vacancies between the resignation of one tutor-organiser and the arrival of a successor could be prolonged.
Bedfordshire lost the services of its professional officer (actually a non-teaching organiser) Gwen Rawlings late in 1952 and did not receive a tutor-organiser to replace her, Evan Richards, until August 1956.
The Fenland (covering Cambridgeshire, Isle of Ely, Huntingdonshire and the Soke of Peterborough) was without a tutor-organiser from the time Frank Cossey resigned in July 1956 until the appointment of Robert Darby in July 1959: here it was the decision not to reappoint in Essex following Collingwood's departure at the end of 1957 which allowed the District to negotiate with the Ministry for a new tutor-organiser to be assigned to the Fenland instead.
In these circumstances, voluntary WEA members such as Rachael Evans in Bedfordshire and (successively) Barbara Brenchley and Margaret Bland in the Fenland took on the task  of Federation secretary and, along with other enthusiasts, did their best to fulfil the non-teaching duties of a tutor-organiser.
This left the way open for those prominent in the Essex Federation to argue that if such arrangements were acceptable during a temporary absence of tutor-organiser, there was no reason why they should not apply on a more permanent basis if the voluntary members wanted to give their ‘voluntaryism’ full rein.
Accordingly, since the beginning of 1958, a succession of volunteers from Leslie Tilbury onwards have served as secretary to the Essex Federation, a post which would otherwise have been held ex officio by the tutor-organiser.
Even the District Secretary was not averse to reminding his tutor-organisers that they were dispensable.
In his 1955–56 Annual Report, at the end of a year when insufficient Terminal courses had been provided to use up all available Ministry grant, he commented that ‘we may find it increasingly difficult to resist a reduction in the number of tutor-organisers we now employ, let alone claim a further appointment, if additional Terminal courses are not successfully organised in both established and new centres’.
A complicating factor in all this was that despite the opposition of the Eastern District Council, expressed both before and after the decision had been taken, Cambridge University Extra-Mural Board resolved in December 1955 to withdraw its resident tutors from some of the counties it served.
Those in Norfolk, Northamptonshire and Suffolk were to remain but the tutors in Bedfordshire and the Cambridgeshire area were to be withdrawn and there was to be no replacement for the one in Essex who had resigned in the previous year.
The post in Hertfordshire, also vacant, was left for further consideration and was eventually filled in 1959.
There were advantages for the Board in deploying all but a few of its full-time teachers as subject-specialist staff tutors based in Cambridge — notably the fact that there would be little problem in constructing a viable programme for each one, with the whole of the Board's area to cover.
But resident tutors were much appreciated by the WEA: they were admirable colleagues for the tutor-organisers, doing what they could to help and advise the branches in their counties, and they had a particular responsibility for promoting Tutorial Classes.
Coming on the heels of the Ashby Report, which had lacked conviction in Tutorials and had recommended that the reference to them in grant regulations be dropped, the Board's decision seemed to be another blow to what had traditionally been regarded as the apex of WEA work.
Syd Robinson, a vice-chairman of the Eastern District, was so incensed by this move that he resigned as one of the District's three representatives on the Extra-Mural Board forthwith.
But the new policy  went ahead from the following autumn, 1956, with the former resident tutors for Bedfordshire and Cambridgeshire being redeployed as staff tutors and with Vivian Ramsbottom as Administrative Officer of the Joint Committee given a roving commission to encourage WEA branches in those counties now deprived of resident tutors.
So here was another demonstration to WEA members that the resident professional officer, whether Extra-Mural Board tutor or WEA tutor-organiser, need not be regarded as essential.
If anything, however, these developments had an opposite effect, for the Eastern District was able to argue with the Ministry of Education that the withdrawal of resident tutors, far from calling tutor-organisers into question, made their appointment even more necessary than before.
Of course, the tutor-organisers of this (as of any) period were well aware that in trying to serve the voluntary movement they were walking a tightrope between doing too much, so depriving branch members of their rightful participation in and control of affairs, and doing too little, so appearing idle and inefficient.
In January 1956 Jacques requested from each tutor-organiser a summary of the previous six months' work, in order to prepare a general report for the Ministry of Education.
Among the questions to which he invited replies was one on whether tutor-organisers had done anything (other than teaching) which voluntary members could not have done.
Some of the responses to this, although informally phrased because never intended for publication, are worth quoting.
Bruce Cooper, tutor-organiser for Suffolk, made some very honest and perceptive remarks on his organising work:
Technically all could be done by voluntary workers with the possible exception of (arranging) Weekend Schools.
But one has greater resources of time…and contact with more people of all walks of life and those in the movement too.
Mark you it's a very bad thing if Federation or branch officials merely rubber stamp the efforts of an enterprising TO.
It's a very difficult position.
As a TO one wants to do as well as one can, and the paradox is that the better one does in a sense the worse it is for the voluntary movement, who should be persuaded to do the maximum rather than the minimum.
And so they become willing aiders rather than initiators.
And I, instead of following and recording, tying up, smoothing, lubricating, find myself providing a great deal of the steam and piston work.
Kate Collingwood, writing as tutor-organiser for Essex with a Federation Executive highly committed to voluntary participation, felt that  ‘any of my organising work could be done by voluntary branch members if they had the time.
A considerable amount of such work is done by officers of the Federation area’.
As Federation secretary she was much involved in arranging Saturday lectures, concerts, jumble sales, theatre visits and suchlike for the branches: ‘these would probably be arranged by the Federation officials without me, but perhaps not on so large a scale’.
Henry Parris, tutor-organiser for Northamptonshire who had previously served in a similar capacity in Yorkshire North District, also acknowledged that most of his organising work could have been done by voluntary members, given the time and opportunity to travel around the county.
But he also considered it important that a full-time professional should represent the WEA when dealing with other professional organisers such as local authority officers, representatives of management and trade unions, and the warden of the county's residential college Knuston Hall.
‘The tutor-organiser is on a par with them; the voluntary officer feels — and is sometimes made to feel — inferior.’
Similarly, he felt that part-time tutors were more likely to respond to advice from a professional tutor than from someone not involved on the teaching side.
The tutor-organiser was also best-placed to counsel WEA students considering full-time higher education on adult state scholarships (of which there were two in Northamptonshire at the time); he was also in a position to attend daytime meetings of local bodies, on behalf of the WEA.
The issues raised by these comments are as relevant today as they were at the time.
As Cooper implied, a tutor-organiser's success in encouraging rather than destroying the voluntary movement is largely, matter of degree — of knowing how much to do to advance the WEA here and there, while leaving as much as possible to the voluntary members.
Over the years, sensitive tutor-organisers, with the personality to work harmoniously with Federation and branch officers, have consistently been able to promote rather than to threaten voluntaryism.
But as the replies from Collingwood and Parris make clear, there is more to a tutor-organiser's success than this: for success has to be measured by different criteria according to the context of the work.
Whereas in Northamptonshire the tutor-organiser saw himself as a professional liaising with other professionals in areas where voluntary participation was barely appropriate, his colleague in Essex was apparently expected to spend a lot of time in routine organising work which voluntary members could readily take over when she eventually resigned.
What the WEA's voluntary membership really wants from its tutor-organisers remains a profitable subject for debate — as does the basic question of  whether such appointments should be made at all.
Having been without a tutor-organiser since 1958, Essex Federation representatives on the District Council have suggested from time to time that other counties might benefit from following their example.
The strong points in their argument have been that they exhibit voluntaryism in its purest form, that they are free of any obligation to find a programme for the tutor-organiser to teach and that, in managing on voluntary effort alone, they are saving the District that portion of a full-time salary which would not be covered by government or local authority grant-aid.
The principal counter-argument has been that Essex has enjoyed the benefit of a former tutor-organiser as Federation chairman and that, in the absence of an equivalent person to give a lead elsewhere, tutor-organisers have continued to be essential.
Apart from that, a more general argument may be advanced in favour of tutor-organisers — or any other professional field officers such as non-teaching organisers for that matter.
It is this.
In reality, despite its justifiable pride in its voluntary and democratic principles, the WEA cannot simply allow its members to decide policy and to act however they like.
The WEA has obligations which at all costs it must strive to fulfil.
Some of these relate to its heritage — its traditional concern for rigorous academic study of socially-relevant subjects and its traditional mission to the educationally-underprivileged.
Others relate to its receipt of government and local authority funds, which are granted in the expectation that the WEA is providing a public educational service in the liberal studies: that courses will be run not merely for the benefit of existing members but will be widely canvassed and advertised to attract as many of the adult population as wish to take part.
A tutor-organiser (or equivalent) who as a professional employee is susceptible to discipline if he or she proves negligent or misguided, can help to ensure that the voluntary movement lives up to its obligations — through advice and encouragement as far as possible, through seizing the initiative himself if there is no alternative.
Equally, voluntary members of branch and Federation committees, many with far longer service to the Association than their tutor-organiser, can see that he remains true to the traditions of the WEA.
So in normal circumstances the WEA is a voluntary movement up to a point, but also a partnership between voluntary and professional members — and a partnership which usually achieves the best results in a context of mutual respect.
Grassroots
Against the background of national and local tensions, the more routine work of the District carried on.
1953 brought not only the Ashby  Committee of Enquiry but (as already mentioned) the WEA's fiftieth anniversary: the celebrations to mark the Jubilee provided welcome relief from the anxiety of awaiting the Report.
Within the Eastern District, Berkhamsted branch (Hertfordshire) hung a banner proclaiming ‘1903-WEA-1953’ in the High Street for a week, using the hoardings protecting the new site of Woolworths, and also sold literature and distributed publicity from a stall in the marketplace; Sprowston branch (Norfolk) arranged an exhibition of Victoriana in the village school, with local firms and libraries as well as members themselves lending material; Peterborough branch held a garden party at the Bishop's House, featuring addresses by Lady Simon, one of the WEA's vice-presidents, and by Dr. Charles Morris, chairman of the National Foundation for Adult Education.
The climax came with a Jubilee Rally in the Guildhall, Cambridge, organised by the District Office and attended by over six hundred people: ‘universally agreed to be one of the finest meetings that the District has ever seen’, according to the Bulletin of the Fenland Federation.
The main speaker, the Chancellor of the Exchequer R. A. Butler, was warm in his tribute to the WEA:.
The idea of siphoning the matured learning of the Universities to the industrial and agricultural areas is as fresh and germane as if it had first been thought of last night.
In the Eastern District of the Association, I know, you are behaving as though the idea were a brand-new one; and with something of the enthusiasm of your founder-members you are carrying it into the countryside.
The praise was well-deserved, but this was no time to be resting on laurels.
Taken as a whole, the 1950s can be seen as a decade in which everyone had to work very hard just to keep the District on an even keel: it reflects great credit on all concerned that, in statistical terms, the decline of the early fifties was halted so that ultimately an expansionist phase could begin.
One major worry was finance: in the years when deficits were avoided, it was as a result of stringent economies, such as unpaid overtime in the District Office and restrictions on the course programme.
The financial year ending 31 July 1956 showed an alarming excess of expenditure over income in the general account of £2,238.
Although this looked worse than it might have done since it covered fourteen months instead of twelve — the result of an adjustment to a different financial year — such figures demanded a response.
Peter Laslett, who had succeeded his fellow-historian Edward Miller as District treasurer three years before, made a further point to the District Executive when it considered the financial position early in September: the local education authorities had recently received a circular from the  Ministry asking that students' fees for courses be raised to 10s. 0d. per term.
So a special meeting of the District Council was summoned for 22 September and — on the very eve of the new academic year — agreed to some swingeing increases in course fees.
For Terminal courses, the fee for a non-branch member (covering course and registration) went up from 7s. 0d. to 10s. 0d.; for a branch member (whose subscription was added to the fee) it rose from 10s. 0d. to 12s. 0d.
For Long Terminals, Sessionals and Tutorials, non-branch members who had previously paid 11s. 0d. now had to pay £1; instead of 12s. 6d. branch members had to find £1 4s. 0d.
The District Council also agreed to a 50% increase in the Quota, the extra sum paid by branches to the District on a sliding scale according to the populations of the communities they served: branches in places with a population under 1,000, for instance, were now expected to pay £3 per annum , those where the population was between 5,000 and 7,000 £5 5s. 0d., those in places of between 50,000 and 75,000 £9 and so on .
The introduction of higher fees in 1956 did not solve the District's financial problems, only make them manageable.
In January 1958 the District Executive agreed to further increases for 1958- 59 to 12s. 0d. for a Terminal (branch members 13s. 0d.) and £1 2s. 0d. for long courses (branch members £1 5s. 0d.).
This time the District Council was less amenable: the March meeting rejected the new fees, while promising to meet the higher remittances required by the District.
In other words, branches agreed to retain less than before of what they had collected from students, and if necessary raise extra funds through special events.
It was understandable that branch members should be reluctant to risk a fall in recruitment through another increase in fees: yet the rises of 1956 had had no discernible effect.
Student numbers within the District as a whole remained remarkably steady through the middle years of the decade: totals of 5,241 in 1953–54, 5,433 in 1954–55, 5,295 in 1955–56, 5,298 in 1956- 57 (the first year of higher fees) and 5,539 in 1957–58.
More relevant to the figures in 1956–57 than any increase in fees was the introduction of petrol rationing in December 1956 as a result of the Suez crisis: this severely hit the following spring term's programme.
The District Office obtained some extra coupons to keep tutor-organisers mobile and part-time tutors showed splendid generosity in using up their own allowances to fulfil their commitments: indeed, not one course in the whole of the District had to be abandoned part-way through the spring term because the tutor could not travel.
But student attendances after Christmas were appreciably lower, as cars stayed at home and public transport was withdrawn, and several branches  decided not to start a spring course at all, or to restrict them in length.
The petrol shortage even caused that rarest of events, the cancellation of the March District Council.
But for this problem, the encouraging increase in student numbers in 1957- 58 — which was maintained in subsequent years and so marked the beginning of an upward trend — would probably have been apparent one year earlier.
Branch membership also remained steady, following a period of decline since the immediate post-war years.
In 1953–54 the figure of 2,982, down from 3,151 in the previous year, dismayed the District Secretary, especially since branches had been asked to make a drive to recruit new members in Jubilee Year, 1953.
His calls in the District's Annual Report for renewed efforts to encourage students to become members were echoed in the Norfolk Democrat , the magazine of the Norfolk Federation among whose branches there had been a particularly serious loss of membership.
For the Autumn 1955 issue, Mary Short of Norwich wrote an article entitled ‘Compel them to Come in’ predicting that the WEA would die a natural death unless more young members were recruited and advocating adventurous experiment: ‘it may mean holding afternoon classes, or running a baby-sitter service so that young couples with children can come…has any Branch tried to recruit new members by advertising courses on child psychology at ante-natal clinics and infant welfare centres?’.
Happily, the trend was reversed: 2,926 members in 1955–56, 2,984 in 1956–57, 3,197 in 1957–58, with further growth thereafter.
This was attributable mainly to an increase in the number of branches, from 158 in 1953–54 to 189 in 1957–58; losses in Bedfordshire (15 branches down to 11) and the Fenland (23 down to 15), both of which had been without a tutor-organiser for much of the period, were more than offset by gains everywhere else, notably in Essex (27 branches up to 40) and Suffolk (14 up to 32).
A few more statistics will suffice to show the trends of the time.
Advanced courses held up very well indeed: in 1953–54 there were 33 Tutorials and 34 Sessionals in the Eastern District, in 1957–58 there were 35 and 29.
But taking all courses together there was a steady decline in the proportion of manual workers attending and a gradual drift away from subjects regarded as ‘Social Studies’.
In 1953–54 nearly 40% of all male students were classified as manual workers; men as a whole made up 45% of the total number of students.
By 1957–58 only a quarter of male students were manual workers and men were down to 42% of the total student body.
Against this, the attendance of ‘housewives’ increased: by 1957–58 53% of women students and 31% of all students were placed in this category.
On subjects, whereas ‘Social  Studies’ made up 67%, ‘Arts’26% and ‘Natural Sciences’7% of the course programme in 1953–54 by 1957–58 the proportions were 64%, 26% and 10% respectively.
Broad classifications of this sort are rarely satisfactory, but the trend away from social studies in favour of science (with arts remaining steady) was a consistent one in the intervening years, despite violent fluctuations in demand for individual subjects within all three categories.
The clearest pattern was that for local history and archaeology (both counted among ‘Social Studies’) which were rapidly gaining in popularity, with 58 courses between them in 1957–58 compared to only 26 four years earlier.
To those with a commitment to the WEA's traditional mission, there was cause for concern in some of these statistics, but certainly not for dismay.
Nearly 2,000 students in 1957–58 — approaching two-fifths of the total — were in the category of either ‘manual workers’ or ‘non-manual, technical and supervisory workers’.
In the same year, there were 91 courses on international affairs, international history, current social or economic problems, political theory or machinery of government — well over a quarter of the District's total programme.
With figures like these the WEA, here as elsewhere, was a long way from being the body of ‘middle-class’ students pursuing ‘soft options’which its critics liked to allege.
If the Eastern District was less successful in some respects than it would have liked to be, it was not for want of trying.
With its finances balanced precariously, with Ministry restrictions on the appointment of tutor-organisers and the withdrawal of some of the university's resident tutors, it had to rely heavily on voluntary effort — and no-one who reads the branch or Federation literature of this period can fail to be moved by the zealous commitment of ordinary WEA members, a commitment based upon the sheer love of learning and an earnest desire to offer something worthwhile to society.
During the 1950s, most of the Federations managed to publish magazines two or three times a year, composed of articles by both professional and voluntary members.
Of these the Norfolk Democrat and Suffolk Punch , both printed and carrying advertisements, were particularly impressive.
In spring 1957, for example, the Norfolk Democrat , edited by Grace Thicknesse of Diss, herself a specialist on the Middle East, ran an ‘international affairs’ number.
This included articles on Nigeria by former tutor-organiser Robin Hallett, on Kenya by current tutor-organiser John Smith, on West Germany by Anna Multhampt of Cambridge branch and on Russia by Irene Baczkowske of Long Stratton; publication coincided with a series of single lectures arranged by the Federation on trouble-spots around the world, such as Cyprus, Jordan and Algeria.
For its part, the Suffolk  Punch of March 1956, under the editorship of tutor-organiser Bruce Cooper, included contributions on the Aldeburgh Festival by Ronald Blythe (Akenfield was still thirteen years in the future) and on oral history by George Ewart Evans, then coming to be recognised as a leading authority on the subject.
Beyond this, the Federation magazines served to publicise forthcoming meetings and courses, to inform branch secretaries of one another 's addresses and to provide a forum for members to exchange ideas: for instance an article by George Tweed of Cambridge branch in the Fenland Bulletin of spring 1956 and another by ‘Cesnoh’ in the Hertfordshire Parcel of autumn 1957 both stressed the importance of personal canvassing as a means of recruiting students to courses.
But the publication of these magazines was of course very demanding both in time and money and several faded away in the following decade, to be revived from time to time in spasmodic bouts of enthusiasm.
As for the branches, it is perhaps invidious to focus upon a chosen few since in some places merely to carry on unheralded was a considerable triumph.
But among those with special achievements to their credit were the branches at Knebworth (Hertfordshire), Kelvedon, Manningtree and Wivenhoe (Essex), all of which published village histories during 1953–54; at Hemel Hempstead which duplicated and sold Welfare and the State , the log-book of weekly discussions in a Long Terminal on ‘Economic and Social Problems’ held in 1956–57; at Linton (Cambridgeshire) which followed up a music course by helping to launch the Linton Music Festival in July 1957, destined to become an annual event; and at Colchester where a Tutorial on archaeology from 1955 to 1958 led to the formation of the Colchester Archaeological Group.
Otherwise, two detailed reports of the mid-1950s allow us a glimpse of more usual branch activity.
The first of these, an HMI Report on local history classes throughout the Cambridge Extra-Mural Board's area in 1954, commented very favourably upon the general standard of teaching in both university and WEA courses and was also complimentary about the quality of students' work.
Of the classes visited, it can certainly be said that those in which the teaching and the interest of the students revealed vitality, enthusiasm and the promise of sustained interest in the subject far outnumbered those in which a short and superficial survey…seemed all that the tutor was prepared to offer or the class prepared to accept.
Norfolk had a particularly strong tradition in the subject and the  university's resident tutor, Rachel Young, was given due credit for this, albeit anonymously: ‘her work is outstanding and has influenced not only many students, but also some part-time tutors.’
The second report was one composed by Suffolk tutor-organiser Bruce Cooper, for the benefit of HM Inspectors, on the eve of his departure for a new post in July 1956.
This was a remarkably-thorough and penetrative survey of the WEA's work in a predominantly-rural area; worth citing at some length because it encapsulates much of the spirit of the Eastern District at this time.
Cooper outlined the work of the twenty-two branches in East Suffolk and six in West Suffolk, all but three of which (Ipswich, Southwold and Sudbury) ran only one course at a time.
Eight branches (Bungay, Burgh Castle, Hollesley, Ilketshall St. Lawrence, Kersey, Leiston, Walberswick and Wrentham) had been founded since the New Year, although the first of these had previously been a Student Group.
Most of the courses planned for the forthcoming autumn term of 1956 were 12-week Terminals, although there were also two 21-week Long Terminals and five 24-week Sessionals; local history, literature and art were the most popular subjects.
Among the tutors who would be taking courses were three employed full-time by Cambridge University Extra-Mural Board, plus a fourth full-timer in the person of the newly-appointed tutor-organiser Robert Johnson.
Of the part-time tutors, about a quarter were local schoolmasters, and there were also a number of parish clergy, local government officers and retired professional people; only two of those so far booked for courses were women, although when the programme was finalised there were three.
The recruitment of part-time tutors was a matter of concern: The area is small in population and particularly academic population.
This (combined with the fact that in the great majority of branches one has to find tutors who possess cars on account of the very poor public services) multiplies the difficulty of providing the Branch with the class they desire…
Increased tutorial fees would not, I think, attract a great deal more people to our work.
Either one likes the work or doesn't.
He went on to reflect on the foundation of new branches.
These usually arose through personal contact:
Picking a village which seems suitable or where someone lives who has been recommended, and talking to as many people as possible: later sending a letter to these people and others calling a meeting to form, one hopes, a WEA branch.
Occasionally the initiative comes from local sources, an enquiry or request for information about WEA provision and sometimes a keen local person will take upon  himself the responsibility of calling a meeting.
On branches' publicity for their courses and other events, he commented:
With some branches this is by word of mouth, with others personal letters by the secretary to members and those who might be interested.
Some branches go in for quite lavish posters, some make do with local draughtsmanship.
Some advertise in the local papers — to my mind quite the most profitless form of contact or recruitment.
The only worthwhile way is by personal contact.
Occasionally some Branches open the year with a One-Day School by a celebrity or an opening talk.
Lowestoft started their Music course by a lecture from Imogen Holst.
Then he came to the difficulties faced by the WEA in a large town:
One of the reasons why it is harder to run classes in Ipswich is not so much the diversity of entertainment provided but the overlapping of cultural activity, The WEA offers a broad cultural front, and a Branch in a village is the fount of all learning, but in a large town the musicians…artists and dramatists…historians and archaeologists have respective organisations catering for their taste, even the natural scientists do…
Also [WEA branch members]have the reputation in official circles of being so ‘dreadfully earnest’— more an indication of the frivolous attitude that all education must be made palatable to be consumable than a valid criticism of their activities.
He ended by trying to convey the essence of the WEA in Suffolk, offering a description which reads as an affectionate tribute:
The WEA takes its pattern partly from the history of the movement but quite largely I think from the county in which it is implanted.
I think you would draw a different picture of it here than you would in Manchester or the Derby area.
It is not so demonstrative or assertive.
Socially it is mixed and unreforming.
So very many of its members are foremost parish councillors, chairmen of the British Legions, WIs, village hall committees, Football Clubs.
But they benefit much from the subjects they study.
If it does nothing more than act as an educational lubricant or leaven, it serves its purpose well, by enriching minds, broadening outlooks, removing prejudice and opening vistas.
Pointers to the Future
One of the WEA's abiding characteristics is that it dare not become complacent, can never afford to stand still.
Even as this portrait of the  work in Suffolk was being painted, the Eastern District stood on the threshold of a major new development, which was to become a source of considerable pride.
This was the launching of courses of twelve 1 hour meetings in liberal studies for young workers (mostly craft and commercial apprentices) employed by different firms within the District.
The first of these, under the title ‘In Search of Democracy’, ran in the autumn term 1956 for seventeen apprentices with the Marconi Company in Chelmsford, and the experiment was repeated on a regular basis thereafter, usually with one course in each of the autumn and spring terms.
Later titles included ‘Behind the Headlines’(autumn 1957), ‘International Affairs’(spring 1959) and ‘English Social History Since 1900’(autumn 1960).
Similar courses were provided for Hoffman Manufacturing Company, Chelmsford, from spring 1957 and for English Electric at Stevenage from autumn 1958; by the end of 1961 no less than eight firms were on the list, among them De Havilland, Imperial Chemical Industries and International Computers and Tabulators.
A 22- meeting course on ‘The Making of Modern England’ was also run for Police Cadets in 1957–58.
Although arrangements differed in detail from one place to another the usual practice was for the management to allow a preliminary meeting in works time at which the aims of the WEA could be explained and for those apprentices interested to stay behind to plan a course.
Normally, classes were held on works premises but at least partly out of works time, with the apprentices themselves paying some or all of the fees, electing their own voluntary officers and choosing their own subjects of study.
This work was of course in addition to, and quite separate from, the long-established provision for trade unionists run in conjunction with the WETUC, which also enjoyed some expansion during the 1950s: in 1953–54, for example , there were five residential weekend schools for trade unionists, in 1958–59 there were eight.
Particularly close links were forged with the National Union of Boot and Shoe Operatives, whose head office was in Northampton and whose Assistant Secretary in these years, Syd Robinson, was chairman of the regional WETUC, chairman of the Northamptonshire Federation and vice-chairman of the District.
Most of the students in a Tutorial Class in Northampton on political Theory, launched successfully in 1955- 56, were members of this union.
For the promotion of this work, with apprentices and with trade unionists generally, a new tutor-organiser was needed.
Jacques had already put in a plea to this effect in December 1954, when asked by the National WEA officers to state his ideal requirements at the time of negotiations with the Ministry following the Ashby Report.
On that  occasion he had made a case both for a tutor-organiser to increase provision for trade unionist students and also for one to develop work in the New Towns of Harlow, Stevenage, Hemel Hempstead and Hatfield.
The eventual appointment, in June 1957, was a compromise between the two: a tutor-organiser to work with trade unionists and industrial personnel over the District as a whole, but with emphasis on the New Towns in one of which he would live.
The man chosen was Russell Butler, a research student in social history at the University of London, who as a part-time tutor had taken the first course for apprentices at Marconi and had greatly impressed both here and in other courses for the branches in Hemel Hempstead and St. Albans.
The Development Corporation of Harlow New Town made a flat available, but unfortunately he had little opportunity to make his mark because of recurrent illness and eventually resigned his post in September 1958.
He subsequently came briefly into the national spotlight when, fighting Bexley for Labour in the 1966 General Election, he gained only 2,333 votes fewer than Conservative leader Edward Heath in a 54,826 poll.
His successor, John Carthew, was able to make a bigger impact within the District.
The advent of work with apprentices gave a new dimension to the Eastern District's overall programme: alongside the expansion in trade union provision and the increase in branches and branch membership, they contributed to the growing self-assurance of the District by the later 1950s.
That assurance, derived from the conviction that the WEA had a major role to play in society and that the Eastern District was successful in fulfilling it, was apparent in the paper, ‘A Consideration of Aims and Purposes’, written by former treasurer Edward Miller in 1956.
This started from the premiss that fundamental changes in the nature of government and politics since the foundation of the WEA over fifty years earlier fully justified the Association in redefining its aims.
The increased range and penetration of government activity, the tendency for specialised administrative departments to function with little political control, the growing complexity in the affairs of trade unions and other voluntary organisations which led to greater dependence upon professional experts — all these made it imperative that the general public should be better informed than ever before.
A democracy…demands a dissemination of political understanding wide enough to make the people's will in government an effective thing…the uninformed citizen…can be misled by the easy halftruth and the persuasive slogan; or he can feel that understanding will always be beyond him and fall into that apathy  which leaves everything to authority.
So the true task of adult education these days ought to be first and foremost to equip a sufficient body of ordinary citizens so that they are capable of forming rationally grounded opinions upon matters of public importance.
This was best fulfilled by a voluntary association independent of all authority so free to criticise it, and prepared to conduct a mission against apathy and escapism aware that there would be small returns for great effort.
Because of its traditions and expertise, the WEA was best equipped of the voluntary bodies to play this part.
There was an acceptance here that the WEA was not necessarily educating for political and social action: its task was to create a better-informed citizen democracy, whether or not its students went on to join pressure groups or assume civic office.
There was also an acceptance, as the implications were worked out later in the paper, that Terminal courses with ‘a good deal of teaching at quite an elementary level’ were ‘a most important part’of the WEA's work; that university graduates, who usually had a narrow academic education, could benefit from the breadth of learning offered by the WEA quite as much as manual workers; that courses in literature and the arts were clearly a valid part of the WEA's total provision because they attracted new members, taught the processes of serious study and by enriching lives helped ‘in raising the quality of the public which has the power of judgement upon those set in authority over it’.
Of course the paper was not totally iconoclastic.
Although Terminal courses would probably remain as the bulk of provision —‘the breadth of the base of the movement amongst ordinary folk’—‘the Tutorial Class must be the demonstration that real understanding, whatever the purpose, requires sustained effort; and a significant expansion of activity at this level is the true index of a significant expansion of a genuinely informed public.’.
Again, courses in politics, society and economics retained priority in the task of educating for citizenship; for the WEA ‘it must be the acid test of the extent to which it is doing its job that the primacy should lie in these fields’.
But Miller's achievement was to liberate the District from feelings of guilt that the bulk of its provision really ought to be Tutorial Classes for manual workers in political and social studies.
He boldly asserted that while courses with these characteristics remained goals to be aimed for, there was genuine value in shorter courses for people of all backgrounds in a wide range of subjects — and that in offering such courses the WEA was furthering the spread of an educated democracy.
The paper was discussed by branches and Federations during the academic year 1956–57 and at the District Council of July 1957.
Out of all this came a resolution passed at the District AGM the following November.
The original motion was proposed by Frank Jacques as an Individual Member but the various amendments from the floor were sufficiently substantial to make the final version a fair representation of majority opinion among the voluntary members.
The motion as carried read as follows:
That the Workers' Educational Association recognises its particular responsibility for the furtherance of liberal studies, at a time when stress is increasingly laid on the need to encourage and aid the development of technical education.
It sees no antithesis between the liberal and the technical and contends for the wider acceptance of the truth that the latter will be of no lasting value to the community unless the people of this country are adequately equipped to participate actively in its government and culture.
It declares that
a)
it seeks as students in its classes all who feel, and can be caused to feel, the need to understand the way our society works, to assess its values and to comprehend the problems which confront it now, in order to discharge more effectively their duties and responsibilities as citizens;
b)
it considers such an education to be the greatest safeguard against the dangerous growth of State power, to be indispensable for the preservation of an effective democracy and to be the one, moreover, which can only be the province of a voluntary independent movement;
c)
it therefore determines to provide increasing opportunities for the study of the social sciences and the arts in courses of such type and standard as will demand of students the effort essential to understanding;
d)
it will carry its campaign with increasing vigour among all classes of people, whatever their professions and occupations, but particularly among members of trade unions, seeking their interest in and active association with the achievement of its aims.
In one sense, this can be read as the Eastern District's response to the Ashby Committee's vote of confidence in the WEA little more than three years before.
In another sense, it was a manifesto for the 1960s.