

INTRODUCTION
Many of us from the so-called developed countries are engaged in advising developing countries on their rural and other development problems.
Even more people from developing countries come to developed countries for education and training.
Very few of them, however, visit the backward, disadvantaged areas of these countries, and it is even less usual for them to be asked to share their own experience with those who are working there and comment critically on what they are doing.
The Arkleton Trust, which was established in 1977 for the study of new approaches to rural development, with emphasis on education and training, believes that it is useful to encourage this new type of dialogue between developed and developing countries.
Its second seminar, in 1979, was devoted to the subject of the developing world of Europe.
Prior to its third seminar, in 1980, it invited five experts from developing countries to study and evaluate a number of development programmes in the United Kingdom.
With its Seminar Centre in Scotland and close contact with many Scottish institutions, the Trust naturally has a particular interest in rural development in Scotland.
The first meeting of its Advisory Committee, from 29 September to 3 October 1980, was therefore held at Uig, on the Isle of Lewis in the Western Isles.
This provided the opportunity for the members of the committee to see something of the rural development problems and programmes in Lewis and Harris, and discuss them with some of those working on them.
Four of the committee members are from developing countries, and the experience of several of the others has been mostly in these countries.
Some of the impressions we gained during our short visit are described here, with emphasis on such similarities and differences as we observed in comparison with the rural development problems and approaches of developing countries that are more familiar to most of us.
This account is not, however, intended as a report of the Arkleton Trust Advisory Committee, but is simply an informal record prepared by one of its members.
As well as his own impressions (and further reading), it draws on the comments made by his colleagues on the field trips and especially during a whole day's discussion that we were privileged to have, at Uig Community Centre on 2 October 1980, with many of those most closely involved in the development of the Western Isles.
The participants in this impressive gathering of almost 40 people in a remote part of the already remote Isle of Lewis are listed in Appendix 1.
After only five days in the complex and, to almost all of us, unfamiliar environment of Lewis and Harris, our views cannot be anything more than initial impressions.
Above all, as was wisely observed by one of our members, the time was far too short to master the intricacies of the crofting system, which is so basic to the rural development of the area.
But we hope that these impressions will at least bring some encouragement to the many friends we made who are working there, and that they may perhaps even help them by opening their eyes to some new possibilities based on experience elsewhere.
Since we also hope that this account may be of interest to those who do not know the area, it includes, especially at the beginning, some historical and other background information about Lewis and Harris, in the wider contexts of the Western Isles as a whole and of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland.
HISTORY AND BACKGROUND
A principal characteristic of the Highlands and Islands is their sparse population.
They contain just under half the land area of Scotland but only 6% of its population, with a density of about 14 per km 2 .
This density is very much less than in similar areas in continental Europe; for example, in Basilicata, the most sparsely populated region of southern Italy, the figure is 61 per km 2 .
Rather unexpectedly, the Western Isles are somewhat less sparsely populated than the rest of the Highlands and Islands, having almost 10% of their population as against about 8% of the area.
Lewis now has just under 21,000 people (almost 6,000 of them in the town of Stornoway), and Harris nearly 3,000.
Not only are there few people in the Highlands and Islands, but they are much fewer than in the past (see Appendix 2).
The tragic depopulation of the area by emigration had its roots in the collapse of the ancient clan system after the battle of Culloden in 1746, and the subsequent ‘clearances’ or evictions of small tenants and sub-tenants to make way for much larger tenants to take up extensive sheep farming requiring very little labour.
The population nevertheless went on increasing until the decennial census of 1851, when it reached a peak of about 424,000.
The greatest emigration came after the famine years that began in 1846.
Potatoes had become the staple food around the middle of the 18th century (relegating the traditional oatmeal to second place), and the results of the outbreak of potato blight in 1846 were only slightly less terrible than those of the much better-known one in Ireland the year before.
In Lewis and Harris (and consequently in the Western Isles as a whole) the fall in population began much later.
The clearances for sheep farming were delayed by the temporary prosperity of the kelp industry, which required abundant labour for the arduous work of collecting and burning seaweed to extract alkali for use in the manufacture of glass and soap on the mainland.
Even after the kelp boom had ended, fishing sustained a continued expansion of population.
Thus, in spite of substantial emigration, the population of Lewis more than trebled during the course of the 19th century.
The peak population in Lewis and Harris and the Western Isles was not reached until the 1911 census, and the decline began with the big losses incurred in the 1914–18 war.
By 1966 the population of the Highlands and Islands had fallen by about 30% from the 1851 maximum to only about 300,000.
The delayed decline in the population of Lewis and Harris and of the Western Isles amounted to rather more than 30% over a much shorter period.
There has recently been a limited recovery.
Part of this has come from an influx of retired people, and it has therefore accentuated the already very unbalanced age composition of the population resulting from the emigration of the younger people.
Statistics of the structure of employment in the area are misleading because of the large numbers of crofters with two or more part-time sources of employment.
The proportion of total employment coming from primary production and also from construction and services is, however, certainly much greater in the Highlands and Islands than in the rest of Scotland, and the share of manufacturing industry correspondingly smaller.
Much of the available employment is seasonal, not only because of the importance of tourism but also because the harsh winter restricts such activities as construction, farming and fishing.
Unemployment is higher than the average for Scotland.
In the Western Isles it was estimated at about 16% in 1976, or more than double the already high rate for the Highlands and Islands.
Although the depopulation of the Western Isles has resulted at least partly from such malign human interventions as the clearances, it is doubtful if they could support anything like the past numbers at levels of living acceptable by present-day standards.
The physical environment is extremely difficult, and natural resources limited.
Most of Lewis is acid peat bog, and much of Harris bare rock.
Their only naturally fertile soil is the small areas of ‘machair’ on parts of the Atlantic coast, where wind-blown shell sand has mixed with the peat.
Otherwise, tiny patches of fertile soil have had to be created in the oddly inappropriately named ‘lazy-beds’, which are made by digging two trenches, two metres or so apart, for drainage, and piling the ‘soil’,(consisting of peat combined, if available, with shell sand and seaweed) in a ridge between them.
Thus there is only limited scope for crop and livestock production in Lewis and Harris.
They import about 80% of their liquid milk, and much of the rest of their food supply.
The isolation of the Western Isles brings many problems.
Any  exports to the mainland have to bear high transport costs.
Since so much has to be imported, the local cost of living is high.
The development of tourism is severely hampered.
With a difficult terrain and scattered population, the provision of essential infrastructure like education and health services is obviously a problem.
This challenge appears, however, to have been admirably met in Lewis and Harris, where we were told there are about 400 teachers and about 20 doctors.
Although such numbers are obviously justified by the particular circumstances of Lewis and Harris, eg in the developing world they would be regarded as lavish for a much larger population.
Children from all over the Western Isles come to Stornoway to finish their secondary education accommodated in hostels at the Nicolson Institute or the Lews Castle Technical College.
It is in fact the commercially provided infrastructure that is most lacking, and many people live a long way from a shop, although this is to some extent made up for by mobile shops.
Most of the land is held under crofting tenure.
A croft consists of a croft house (usually provided by the occupier) and a small plot of land (always rented).
The crofts are generally grouped in small, linear ‘townships’ along the coast, with their ‘inbye’or individually rented land between the seashore and the township's common grazing land.
A crofter was defined in 1883 by the Napier Commission (the first of several Royal Commissions on the subject) as ‘a small tenant of land with or without a lease, who finds in the cultivation of his holding a material proportion of his occupation, earnings and sustenance, and who pays rent directly to the proprietor’.
In the first legal definition, in the Crofter's Holdings (Scotland) Act of 1886, it was added that he resides on his holding, the annual rent of which does not exceed £30 in money, and which is situated in a ‘crofting parish’.
This is a parish in the counties of Argyll, Inverness-shire, Ross and Cromarty, Sutherland, Caithness and the northern islands where there  was in 1886, or had been in the previous 80 years, holdings of arable land with rights of common pasture.
LAND REFORM
It came as a surprise to some of us to discover that, far from being an ancient, traditional system of land tenure, crofting is quite a recent phenomenon.
Although subsequently repudiated by them, it was brought into being by the landlords, mainly from the early 19th century, to serve their own interests.
These interests were to replace traditional joint or ‘runrig’ tenancies by individual ones, to remove small tenants to other areas to make way for sheep farming, and to ensure the availability of cheap labour for kelp production.
The crofters were obliged, by the small size of their new holdings, to supplement their incomes by such activities as fishing, weaving and construction work, as well as kelping.
It is also hard to grasp that the main problem in the Highlands and Islands was once the exact opposite of the present one of depopulation.
Many of the already tiny crofts were subdivided on inheritance, and there were large numbers of ‘cottars’ or landless squatters.
Congestion and land hunger were particularly acute in Lewis, because of the rapid population increase.
When the kelp industry collapsed, the landlords, who had themselves set up the crofts in the first place, tried actively to get rid of them.
After much agrarian unrest, especially in the 1880s, some degree of land reform was gradually achieved.
The Napier Commission favoured the enlargement of holdings to economically viable size.
However, the first legislation, the Crofters' Holdings (Scotland) Act of 1886, guaranteed security of tenure to crofters as defined above, enabled them to bequeath their holding to a family member, and gave them the right, on relinquishing a holding, to compensation for improvements.
It also established the first Crofters Commission as a permanent body empowered to fix fair rents and administer crofting legislation.
This was a considerable step forward.
In particular it made certain that there could never be a repetition of the evictions that had originally brought the crofts into being.
It was certainly regarded as a very radical measure at the time.
However, its benefits were confined to those already holding land, and it did nothing to relieve the problem of landlessness.
The Highlands Congested Districts Board was set up for this purpose in 1897, but it was able to achieve very little.
Some new crofts were eventually established on land purchased by the Government, mainly for ex-servicemen returned from the 1914–18 war, under the Land Settlement (Scotland) Act of 1919.
EARLY DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS
Before discussing current programmes, it may be useful to recall some earlier development efforts.
Sir James Matheson, who had made a fortune in the China trade, bought the Isle of Lewis in 1844, and at least part of the large sums he spent there (in addition to famine relief and assistance for emigration) appears to have been of direct benefit to the islanders.
Much more significant, however, were the activities of Lord Leverhulme, who bought the Lewis estate in 1918, and subsequently Harris as well.
He came to Lewis with a reputation as a philanthropic employer, and with ambitious development schemes for the island.
These principally involved the fishing industry, but they also included many other activities — even the construction of railways.
Unfortunately, as has often happened in developing countries as well, he completely underestimated the people's desire for land, and went so far as to oppose the implementation of the Land Settlement Act.
His own development proposals were regarded as alien and imposed from outside, again as has happened in developing countries.
Thus, although he provided a substantial quantity of employment, he was (like the Matheson family before him) beset by land agitation and raiding.
In 1923 he transferred his development projects in some disgust to Harris.
Here they met with a better reception and Leverburgh was renamed in his honour, but they were not continued after his death in 1925.
One of his more lasting memorials is the Hattersley domestic loom, which since he introduced it into the islands in 1920 has produced almost the entire output of Harris tweed.
NEW HOPE
It is since the disappointments of the short-lived Leverhulme period that much of the emigration from Lewis and Harris has taken place.
In addition to emigration out with the United  Kingdom, many of the best products of their excellent education system have gone to the mainland for university studies, and then stayed on to work because of the dearth of suitable employment opportunities in the islands.
By all accounts, not many years ago the Western Isles must have been among the most depressed of the peripheral areas of Europe.
According to the conventional economic indicators (and particularly the level of unemployment), they are still depressed in relation to the rest of Scotland and the United Kingdom.
However, to the visitor in 1980 it is obvious that there have recently been big changes.
The main causes seem to be the activities of the Highlands and Islands Development Board (HIDB), the reorganisation of local government, and North Sea oil.
The HIDB has brought a substantial injection both of development capital and of development expertise since its establishment in 1965.
In 1971–79 it approved financial assistance amounting to £87.5 million (at 1979 prices) for the Highlands and Islands as a whole, of which £52.2 million for loans and shares (including projects directly administered by the Board) and £35.4 million grants (see Appendix 3).
It also acts as an advisory body on all aspects of economic and social development in the Highlands and Islands, and as an advocate for such development.
The main emphasis of the HIDB has been on halting depopulation by the saving and creation of employment.
Financial assistance per head of the population in 1971–79 averaged £147 in the whole area and £146 in Lewis and Harris.
These figures are much higher than those for comparable regional development organisations elsewhere, not only in developing countries but also, for example, in the United States.
The reorganisation under the Local Government (Scotland) Act of 1973 made the people of the Western Isles much more directly responsible for their own development through the elected ‘Comhairle nan Eilean’ or Western Isles Islands Council (WIIC).
We were privileged to be received at the fine new Council Offices in Stornoway.
With a council chamber equipped for simultaneous interpretation between English and Gaelic, they are an impressive symbol of the new spirit.
The WIIC is a unitary authority, responsible for most local services, which elsewhere in the United Kingdom are divided  between two separate tiers of local government.
It is thus a powerful body.
Its establishment has helped to rationalise the administration of development and the provision of public services.
It has already prepared a detailed Regional Report and a number of other planning documents, indicating that its major development objectives are the reversal of the decline in population, and the provision of more employment and improved services.
With its strong commitment to economic and social development, combined with bilingual education and the promotion of Gaelic culture, it is likely to be a major force in the future.
An especially important result of the establishment of both the HIDB and the WIIC is that at long last there are professional jobs in the Western Isles for at least some of those who have gone to university on the mainland and have previously had to stay there to work.
We met a number of young field-workers and others who had recently come back to work in Lewis and Harris, and were most impressed by their ability and devotion.
They would be the envy of most developing countries.
In the last few years, North Sea oil has brought new employment opportunities to Lewis and Harris, through a Steel Fabrication Yard at Stornoway.
Other recent influences have been the job Creation programme, the Special Temporary Employment Programme and the Youth Opportunities programme, sponsored by the Manpower Services Commission.
In view of the high rates of unemployment in the Highlands and Islands and especially the Western Isles, these programmes have been taken particularly seriously there.
They have been strongly promoted by the WIIC, and many projects have been assisted by the HIDB.
They have included the construction or improvement of recreation and other community facilities, fishing piers and jetties, fencing, roads and sheep ‘fanks’ or pens.
RURAL DEVELOPMENT PLANNING
It seems likely that greatly increased development funds from the European Economic Community (EEC) may soon be channelled to the Western Isles.
Integrated Development Programmes (IDPs) are to be prepared for areas where agricultural  development depends on simultaneous investment in infrastructure and other sectors.
The Western Isles have been chosen as one of only three areas in Europe for the preparation of an experimental IDP.
Such plans would be designed to deploy EEC agricultural, regional and social funds in an integrated manner.
It has been suggested that the Arkleton Trust, with its interest in new approaches to rural development, might become involved in the further elaboration and the evaluation of the IDP for the Western Isles.
This could be both through research work and through the organisation of more lengthy round-table discussions, of the kind held at Uig last October, between representatives of the various organisations engaged in the development of the area and some experts from outside.
CROFTING IN THE MODERN WORLD
Rural development in Lewis and Harris remains closely bound up with the complex question of crofting.
As has been seen, while the Napier Commission favoured the enlargement of the crofts to improve their economic viability, the legislation passed only a few years later tended instead to perpetuate them in their existing form.
The debate has continued ever since on whether the main emphasis should be on their economic or their social role.
Like the Napier Commission, the latest Royal Commission to meet on the subject (the Taylor Commission, which reported in 1954) proposed that existing crofts should be amalgamated into economically viable units.
Amalgamation has been approached with caution, however, as it would hasten depopulation.
The new legislation of 1955 and 1961 emphasised the need for economic viability mainly through the provision of generous cropping and agricultural improvement grants.
Substantial financial assistance is also available for housing improvements.
About 77% of the land in the Western Isles is held in crofting tenure.
There are about 6,000 crofts, but (because of multiple tenancies) the number of working units is about 5,400.
Their agricultural output was recently estimated as about £2 million, or an average of some £370 per working unit.
As many as 94% of the working units provide less than 100 standard man-days of work per year (or two per week).
In Lewis and Harris there are 3,986 crofts (grouped in 192 coastal townships), 292 ‘eligible occupiers’(small tenants not legally defined as crofters), and 13 other agricultural holdings.
Some 95% of the crofts have labour requirements of less than 100 standard man-days per year.
Croft sizes range from 0.4 to 3 ha.
Information on crofting income is limited, but we were given data for two examples, which we were warned are not typical.
Data for an intensive sheep croft of 3 ha, with a share in 21 ha of improved common grazing, indicate a net income of only £868 from sheep production, as compared with £5,460 from weaving 2.5 tweeds per 4U-hour week.
On the basis of partly theoretical data for an extensive sheep croft, enlarged to 10 ha by subletting adjacent crofts, with 20 ha of improved grazing as well as a share of common grazing, the net income from sheep farming goes up to £1,598.
Total income is slightly reduced, however, since tweed production goes down to 2 per week (£4,368).
These figures clearly indicate the overwhelming importance of nonagricultural employment in total crofting income.
It is possible in fact that the extent to which agricultural work is carried out depends greatly on the availability and profitability of alternative sources of employment.
Nevertheless, it is also clear that there is scope for increasing the agricultural production of the crofts.
Some of us felt that more attention could be paid to this aspect, particularly in order to obtain a greater economic return for the heavy expenditure on government assistance.
The principal way in which the agricultural production of the crofts has been increased is through the improvement of pasture by fencing, planting shelter-belts, liming (usually with shell sand), fertilizing and surface seeding.
Although such improvement has been vigorously promoted by the North of Scotland College of Agriculture (which is responsible for agricultural extension and training in the area), the response has, after some initial enthusiasm, been extremely disappointing.
By 1979 only about 6,000 ha in Lewis and Harris (no more than 4% of the total common grazing) had been the subject of the grants available under the Crofting Counties Agricultural Grants Scheme.
Only about 350 ha have been improved since 1975, and much of the land improved earlier has been allowed to deteriorate.
Pasture improvement can be undertaken either by the individual crofter, after obtaining the ‘apportionment,, of his  share of the common grazing, or on a township basis.
Initially, the area improved under township schemes in Lewis and Harris greatly exceeded that improved individually, but in the last few years there have been hardly any new township schemes.
1 his rather sudden change has still to be explained, although the huge reduction in the overall pace of pasture improvement is clearly linked with the stagnation in the market for cattle and sheep.
By far the more economic method is obviously improvement on a common basis.
Indeed, many of us thought that more emphasis should be placed on the cooperative use of the land resources of the crofts, perhaps on the lines of the ‘joint managements’ developed in southern Italy by the Cassa per il Mezzogiorno.
An exchange of visits has in fact already been initiated between those working on rural development in the Western Isles and in southern Italy.
Cattle (mainly dairy cows) were traditionally the mainstay of crofting agriculture in Lewis and Harris, but their numbers have greatly declined.
Even the ubiquitous black-faced sheep are far less numerous than in the past.
The cropped area has fallen to about 1,500 ha.
That it was once much greater is attested by the many traces of former lazy-beds to be seen on the grazing land.
The main crops are still potatoes and oats.
The figures of crofting incomes quoted earlier exclude the money equivalent of the crops and livestock products produced for the subsistence or ‘self-provisioning’ of the crofters and their families.
Their value, as well as that of peat cut to provide the family's fuel, must add considerably to the economic returns from crofting.
It would be particularly appropriate at the present time to pay more attention to this aspect, and to obtain better information about crofters' levels of living, including the subsistence component and remittances from emigrants.
Many young people are now attracted to the idea of producing a large part of their own food.
Self-provisioning is also more appreciated at a time of economic recession like the present.
Moreover, few families can have such secure or cheap fuel supplies today as those who can obtain their annual needs from only a few days work spent cutting, drying, hauling and stacking peat.
Other advantages enjoyed by crofters include a secure house, favoured access to grants and loans, and low rates (local taxes) as agricultural holdings.
The latest developments in the intricate history of crofting  concern the possibility of ownership by the crofters themselves.
In 1968 the Crofters Commission proposed that crofters be given full rights to the ownership of their crofts.
The Crofting Reform (Scotland) Act of 1976 did not go quite as far as this, but it did give the crofters the incontestable right to purchase their house and garden, and the optional (though not incontestable) right to purchase their land for 15 times the annual rent.
So far, however, the crofters in the Western Isles have preferred to purchase only the house sites and pass on their rights to their families, although in other areas where the land is better there has been greater interest in purchasing whole crofts.
In theory at least, ownership should enable them to use their crofts as security in raising finance, for example to make a matching contribution in projects assisted by the HIDB, but in practice the situation is more complex.
The crofter who purchases his croft becomes in law the landlord of a vacant croft, of which he is also the de facto tenant.
Should he sell (or a sale be forced to realise the security) to someone unacceptable as crofting tenant (because of non-residence, for instance), the Crofters Commission could require the croft to be re-let by the new landlord in order to protect the crofting system.
This obviously reduces the value of croft land, including its value as security.
The crofter could apply for the ‘de-crofting’ of his land, but if this were approved he would no longer be eligible for the many special rights and privileges enjoyed by crofting tenants.
SOME RECENT DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVES
Most of the main recent agricultural development initiatives have already been discussed in connection with crofting.
In addition, among several projects for livestock improvement and marketing promoted by the HIDB's Livestock Improvement Working Party, a lamb marketing scheme was set up in Lewis in 1978 for the transport of store lambs to the mainland and their sale at auction.
It was originally operated by the HIDB itself, but a marketing cooperative (Lewis Livestock Ltd) was established for this purpose in 1980.
As regards other economic sectors, forestry is very limited in  the Western Isles, although important in the Highlands and Islands as a whole.
Lewis was almost treeless from quite early times until Lady Matheson planted up the grounds of Lews Castle in Stornoway in the middle of the last century, largely on soil imported from the mainland as ballast.
More recently, the Forestry Commission has planted most of the 721 ha of plantable land it owns in the Western Isles (almost all of it in Lewis), but it apparently does not plan to acquire further land for commercial forestry.
The lack of a forestry tradition was strikingly demonstrated recently, when no tenders were received for the thinning of a Forestry Commission plantation in Lewis.
A number of crofters have, however, successfully established a few trees around their houses, and this initiative would seem to merit further encouragement.
In contrast to forestry, fishing (including shellfish) is a major industry in the Western Isles.
In the Highlands and Islands as a whole it received 24% of all HIDB assistance in 1971–79.
Most of the assistance has been for the purchase of new or secondhand fishing boats, including the virtual rebuilding of the Western Isles fleet.
Recently there has been more emphasis on shore-based facilities, and a fishing pier, fish drying factory and ice plant have been established at Breasclete on Loch Roag in Lewis as one of the Board's biggest strategic projects.
The investment in the drying factory alone amounts to £1.7 million.
The aim is to exploit the plentiful resources of such fish as ling, saithe, tusk and blue whiting in the waters to the west of the Western Isles (which are so far free from restrictions), and to export dried ‘stockfish’ to traditional markets in Europe and Africa.
The fish have to be caught by longlining to preserve their quality for drying, and landings have not yet been at the level that was hoped for.
Considerable assistance has been provided by the HIDB for fish farming.
About 40% of the potentially farmable sea water identified by the White Fish Authority in the whole of the United Kingdom is in the Western Isles.
Weaving plays an important role in the economy of the Western Isles, particularly because home weaving fits in well with crofting.
There is a strong, though fluctuating demand for Harris tweed, the production of which is unique to Lewis and Harris.
Production however, declined by two thirds between the peak year of 1966 and 1975, the numbers of home weavers dropping from 1,200 to 600 and of mill workers (who produce  the yarn for the home weavers) from 900 to 400.
The decline of home weaving appears to stem mainly from the ageing of the work-force in a physically exacting industry, the fluctuations in demand, and the movement of some workers to oil-related jobs.
In the mills additional factors have been rationalisation and the use of more modern machinery.
A 12-week training course is planned for new weavers, and the HIDB has established a Loom Fund to assist weavers to purchase a recently developed loom which is less physically demanding and thus within the physical capacity of women and older workers.
The production of knitwear and of craft work in general has continued to increase in the Western Isles, although knitwear has had little success in Lewis and Harris.
Both tweed and knitwear find it difficult to compete with production in the lowlands of Scotland, because of the high transport costs from the Western Isles.
The HIDB and the Scottish Development Agency have established Highland Craftpoint as a new centre to provide a comprehensive range of services to the craft industries, for instance in marketing, design and technical training.
The largest share of the HIDB's investment (29% in 1971–79) has been for tourism.
This is in line with the industry's contribution of about a quarter of the ‘Gross Highland product’.
As already noted, tourism in the Western Isles is hampered by the high cost of transport from the mainland.
Many crofters in Lewis and Harris are, however, able to derive supplementary income from the provision of ‘bed and breakfast’ for tourists.
One of the most interesting development initiatives is the community cooperatives.
These are an unusual type of multipurpose cooperative, based to some extent on the model of those in the Gaelic-speaking areas of Ireland.
They have been encouraged since 1977 under a pilot scheme of the HIDB, which provides matching grants as well as technical and other financial assistance.
The members purchase shares for cash, and among the most promising results have been the emergence of a new entrepreneurial confidence, and the identification of investment possibilities that had not previously been perceived.
We were able to visit two of the eight cooperatives that have been set up so far.
The Harris community cooperative, ‘Co Chomunn na Hearadh Ltd’, is engaged in a variety of activities, including the operation of a Craft Centre constructed at Leverburgh by the HIDB, coal distribution, and a horticultural  programme.
The Craft Centre at present contains a craft shop, a tearoom and an exhibition devoted to the Harris tweed industry, and a main problem is to find suitable uses for it outside the short tourist season.
The cooperative's future plans include fish farming (for which EEC assistance is being sought), a bakery, and possibly a laundry.
The activities of the Ness community cooperative, ‘Co Chomunn Nis Ltd’, appeared less unusual to those of us familiar with cooperatives in developing countries, being based mainly on the supply of agricultural requisites, agricultural machinery hire, and a horticultural nursery.
In both cases we were very impressed by the quality of the members of the management committee whom we met, and in particular by their obvious commitment to the community development aspects of the venture.
The present managers of both cooperatives are from out with the Western Isles, although in Ness there had previously been a local man.
It seems likely that the future of the cooperatives will depend greatly on the identification and training of managers from within the local communities, which would not only strengthen the ties with these communities but also provide useful employment opportunities.
Another initiative of great importance for the future is the Community Education project.
This was started in 1978 after a feasibility study in Ness in 1976, and is financed by the Bernard Van Leer Foundation in the Netherlands.
It is exploring new approaches to education which emphasise the needs of the community and the relations between the school and the community, and includes a family education project and training sessions in such practical subjects as horticulture.
There is also a closely related Bilingual Education project, financed jointly by the Scottish Education Department and the WIIC.
The aims of these projects are very close to some of the main interests of the Arkleton Trust.
GENERAL IMPRESSIONS
This account was mainly intended to bring together some of the comments made by the members of the Arkleton Trust Advisory Committee on what they saw of rural development in Lewis and Harris.
In the event, these comments have tended to be swamped by the large amount of mainly descriptive material it  has been necessary to include.
This reflects the complexity of rural development in Lewis and Harris and its (to us) unusual features like crofting.
Not only has much explanation had to be included, but it is also difficult to make many useful comments after a visit of only a few days.
It is also clear that it is difficult to draw comparisons between the Western Isles and the developing countries.
Even the excellent discussions at Uig consisted much more of question and answer than of comment and comparison.
Comment is perhaps easier on a more general level than that attempted above.
The complexity of rural development everywhere, whether in the developed or the developing world, is not always realised.
Our short visit to Lewis and Harris sharply reminded us that, although there are always some common features, it is also necessary to understand many special local factors.
Often, as in the case of crofting, these are related to land tenure systems and their legal basis.
Another complicating factor is the large number of organisations that are inevitably involved in all the different aspects of rural development, although on the small scale of Lewis and Harris they would appear already to be somewhat better integrated than in many other places.
By our standards the parts of the Western Isles that we were able to visit are not a particularly depressed area.
We were greatly impressed by the high level of development expenditure in the area, its social infrastructure, and the quality of those working for its development.
Obviously it was once a depressed area and equally obviously much remains to be done, but things have certainly changed since the advent of the HIDB and WIIC.
Yet, like the developing countries, the Western Isles are clearly a peripheral area.
Indeed, the past history of their relations with the mainland has some similarities with colonialism.
Another reason why they are peripheral is that they are so largely rural — in the developing countries too, the rural areas are in a peripheral relation to the urban centre.
Again as has occurred in the developing countries, the reduction of their former isolation by modern transport and communications has brought new problems, most notably the outflow of young and active people, and the disruption of traditional cultures.
Lewis and Harris share with the developing world a long and troubled history of agrarian problems and unrest.
But we were surprised that not once during our visit were the words ‘land  reform’ so much as mentioned, although what has happened there most certainly counts as this, and would have been of interest to the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development held by FAO in 1979.
Emigration has transformed the former congestion and landlessness into the opposite problem of depopulation.
This is hardly likely to be repeated in the developing countries.
But they could probably learn something from the occupational pluralism practised by crofters as an adaption to living on agricultural holdings too small to be economically viable.
It will be apparent that we were fascinated by the phenomenon of crofting, as we presume most other newcomers to it must be.
In spite of all its anomalies, it is difficult to see what other system could have retained even the present small population.
It has been particularly effective in providing a secure home base for families that have been physically scattered by emigration and it seems quite possible that small-scale farming of this kind may enjoy a new vogue, with the greater appreciation of self-provisioning, especially for fuel, to say nothing of the scenic beauty of the places where it is carried on.
Because of the special circumstances of the Western Isles, we were able to find rather few useful comparisons with the rural development problems and approaches in other parts of the world.
The most relevant comparison is probably with southern Italy, where there has been substantial depopulation and many individual agricultural holdings are of economically unviable size and highly fragmented.
This comparison is also appropriate because southern Italy is the only other disadvantaged area of Europe where there is at present a regional development organisation (the Cassa per il Mezzogiorno) in any way comparable to the HIDB.
There are many differences between these two bodies, but a detailed comparative study could be useful not only for the two areas involved but also for the southern European countries about to join the EEC.
Rural development in the Western Isles periphery depends heavily on finance from the mainland centre.
This comes particularly through the HIDB, but in addition about 85% of the revenue budget of the WIIC is from the central government.
Increased development funds from the EEC may also be expected if the proposed IDP is accepted.
In view of this dependence on outside finance, some of us felt that there could  perhaps be more concern with the economics of what is being done.
This would help to ensure that the financial support is continued in the future.
for the same reason, it might be useful to provide a fuller account of rural development policy than is at present available in the WIIC's planning documents or the various reports of the HIDB.
possibly the IDP document might serve this purpose.
As regards the substantial outside assistance to the Western Isles, one wonders whether a small part of it might not usefully be redirected to subsidising the high costs of transport between them and the mainland.
These costs make imports and exports expensive and also limit the tourism which is one of the area's greatest potentials for development.
The future success of rural development in the Western Isles will depend not only on continued support from outside, but also on the full support and participation of the local people.
Since so much assistance comes from outwith the area, there is a danger that what is being done may be regarded by them as alien, like Lord Leverhulme's ill-fated projects.
The policy document suggested here could also be of use in this regard, by facilitating local discussion and thus helping to keep the development effort in line with the wishes and aspirations of the people.
This is where the WIIC has a particularly crucial role.
It is essential that its members, who are at present without political affiliations, should stay in close touch with the people who elected them.
They should also be in frequent contact with all of the somewhat numerous organisations involved in the rural development of the Western Isles, and with the admirable young people who have come back from the mainland to work at the grass-roots level.
The necessary contact could partly be maintained by means of meetings and round-table discussions of the kind so successfully organised at Uig for the Arkleton Trust, but it would be desirable to give it some more concrete, institutional form as well.