

Evening
two
ON THE WAY to the pantry to get the Christmas cookies, Nina got lost.
The house was big and old, with a lot more corridors and rooms and unexpected turns than seemed necessary, but she had done enough of these ‘entertainments’ to be familiar with the lower storeys.
The route from the den to the pantry was quite simple, she thought.
She had to take a walk down a short corridor from the main hallway, go down a few steps to the kitchen.
The pantry was just a walk-in alcove off the kitchen.
Easy.
But somehow, she found herself in a large, empty room.
There were wall-sized French windows through which she would in daylight have been able to see the back garden.
Now, it was in darkness.
There was the vague suggestion of orange light beyond the high wall that marked the rear boundary of Amelia's property; the streetlamps were already on.
Nina sat on the floor and cried.
She was in a state.
Why was Clive not here yet?
The stomach cramps had been coming back, off and on, all day, but so far she had been able to keep them under control.
In her flat with Anne, and in the taxi, she had been able to conceal her pain from the older woman.
Now, the spasms were worse than ever.
She was shaking with the cold, but the fire in the den had been irritating and overbearing.
Under her heavy clothes, she felt filthy, as if there were a layer of vermin-ridden earth between her naked skin and the fabric.
Things were moving all over her.
She scratched and pulled, but could never find the leeches under her blouse or the spiders crawling inside her tights.
She doubled up in pain, and rested her forehead on the carpeted floor.
She willed the pains to recede, and gradually they did.
She needed to eat, to shower, to rest, to sleep.
Most of all, she needed some smack.
She needed Clive.
She needed help.
When Amelia had had her serve the drinks, Nina realised just how far gone she was.
She had found it difficult to read the labels on the bottles.
The delicate glasses had felt thick and awkward in her hands, soft as putty but covered in cutting edges.
When pouring, it had been impossible to line up the bottles with the glasses, no matter how close she held the neck of a bottle to the rim of a glass.
She had soaked her hand and cuff with creme de menthe , and the sticky liquid seemed to have crept up her arm.
Her fingers felt as if they were encased in cool wax.
Where was Clive?
Good old Clive?
Clive the dealer.
Clive the healer.
Where was Clive?
She scratched her arm, but could not find the stickiness.
Her needle tracks were not that bad.
Yet.
Really, she could wear sleeveless dresses if she wanted to.
But not in winter.
Of course, she would have to get off smack in the long run.
Or else she would look like that girl in the adverts.
But she could handle that later.
Right now, she needed a fix.
Just one more fix, perhaps, then she would stay away forever.
Maybe she would have to do it gradually, taking less each time, taking more time between each time.
Perhaps she could get something on the N.H.S.?
‘Lady, how about two packs of your old heroin for one of your new improved biological methodone?’
But right now, she needed Clive.
Her stomach clenched like a fist, but there was nothing in there to come up.
Her bowels opened like a tulip, but there was nothing there to come out.
Her head throbbed like a burst boil, but there was nothing there…
Nothing.
She was empty, and only Clive could fill her up.
Where was Clive?
Eventually — after how long?— the pains passed, and she was able to stand up.
She could feel nothing, as if her entire body were mummified in thick wads of flavourless chewing gum.
Moving was difficult, but at least it did not hurt.
Like one of the shambling dead, she left the room and returned to the main hall.
Then, without thinking, she found the right corridor.
She floated down the steps and opened the door into the kitchen.
Anders was there, supposedly supervising the preparation of an assortment of mixed salads for the buffet.
A lumpish Belgian girl called Lise who did menial tasks about the house but hardly ever spoke was grating cheese over a rice dish.
Anders was playing with Daeve.
He had the writer laid out, face down with his baggy trousers around his knees, on a marble-topped kitchen table, and was anally violating him with a large, unwashed carrot.
Anders held Daeve down with a clever grip on the back of his neck.
Nina now knew what the expression ‘squealing like a stuck pig’ really meant.
Anders looked up at Nina and laughed.
He was stripped to the waist, and she could see the lunar map of dead skin and fresh scars that was stretched tautly over his Schwarzenegger musculature.
The squealing stopped as Anders plucked out the carrot.
Nina knew, as her stomach hit her again, that he was going to take a bite out of it.
‘Nyaaah,’ he said, chewing, ‘what's up, doc?’
three
IT WAS ALL rather pathetic really, not at all the orgy of degradation she had half-imagined.
Amelia had left off quoting from the wit and wisdom of her favourite mass murderers, done a few lines of cocaine, and started to whizz around the room.
She was demonstrating aerobic movements and hostessing for her guests as they arrived.
Anne was sort of expecting blubbery cabinet ministers and worn clergymen, slavering and ready to practise their secret vices, but the guests turned out to be unidentifiable nobodies.
For a while, she thought she could have been at any moderately boring Christmas party.
The women wore Laura Ashley or Ghost dresses, the men wore expensive jeans.
Anne realised that the younger, prettier members of both sexes had been bought and paid for.
She was supposed to blend in with that group.
There were no obvious freaks, transvestites, monsters or exotic creatures.
Well, not any more than usual.
The guests greedily snuffed cocaine, ate platefuls of designer salad, listened to Amelia's Jean-Michel Jarre CDs, smoked ordinary cigarettes and weedy joints, and talked about cars and mortgage rates and money and dry rot and Eastern Europe and computers and their weight and Christmas and sex.
It was all very '80s, the young, rich and shallow turning middle-aged, tax-assessed and empty.
None of this had anything to do with Judi.
Derek Douane was being cooed over by a pair of predatory women in their fifties, not minding their tanned fingers in his hair, on his face or twanging his braces.
Daeve was lecturing a bank manager on the stylistic differences between  Bolt Thrower, Odin and Meat Market.
Anders was playing major-domo outside.
She was trapped, pinned to a bookcase by two smoothly stupid, slightly drunk young men.
One, Toby Farrar, was a career army officer out of uniform, the other, Baz Something, was a cricket-playing travel agent.
Farrar was short with livery lips and thick black eyebrows, and Something was prematurely bald and thought he was really cool.
They were both assholes, and they were both boasting about their early sex lives.
Anne stopped listening while they were comparing their masturbatory records, and watched for new arrivals.
‘Six times a day,’ said Something, ‘that was my personal best.’
‘Piss on that,’ said Farrar, ‘that was my mean average.’
Nina seemed to have lost contact with Planet Earth.
Earlier, she had taken Anne aside to ask her if she knew when Clive was coming.
The girl had not quite forgotten who she was, but had got her mixed up with her sister.
Now, she was out in the hallway, stationed eagerly near the front door.’
A veiled woman, with scarlet fingernails, was challenging every man in the room.
‘You want to arm wrestle?’ she kept saying, ‘beat me and you can do whatever you like to my body.’
Anne was surprised that nobody was taking her up on it.
The woman had a figure like the young Jane Russell.
Farrar was surprised too.
When the challenge got through to him, he disobeyed the first rule of the services and volunteered.
‘This is his first time here,’ said Something.
‘He doesn't know any better, the daft bollock.
Watch this.’
Farrar and the woman — whose name, funnily enough, was Jeane Russell — were seated either side of a small desk.
Someone put a paper hat on Farrar's head, and he straightened it.
She unpinned her veil, and Anne saw she had different-coloured eyes, one blue, one hazel.
Everyone crowded around.
Something put his hand on Anne's bottom, but did not seem to mind too much when she peeled it off and  gave it back to him.
Everyone quietened and Amelia turned off Jean-Michel.
In the hallway, Nina was asking someone about Clive.
Jeane Russell held her hand, dainty but thick-wristed, up, and flexed her fingers.
She put her elbow down firmly on the desk and leaned forwards.
‘Hold on,’ said a computer-designing nonentity, ‘the final touch…’
He put two ashtrays full of smouldering butts either side of the field of combat, and sprinkled a few drops of fuel from his lighter on each.
Little flames grew.
Burning cellophane crackled.
Farrar did not look too happy.
Jeane Russell flexed her fingers again.
Farrar drained half a glass of vodka and orange, and grasped Jeane Russell's hand.
Someone said ‘go for it’ and was promptly ignored.
Farrar and Jeane Russell looked at each other.
Jeane Russell smiled, and crushed the man's hand as if it were an eggshell.
Farrar yelped at the sound of grinding bones, and looked around in dazed fury.
Jeane Russell brought his arm down as easily as a barmaid pulling a pint and dropped his hand into a burning ashtray.
Someone who knew what she was doing produced a pitcher of iced water for Farrar's hand.
She also used it to put the fires out.
‘Shit,’ said Farrar, ‘you bitch!’
He tried to slap Jeane Russell with his left hand, but she backed out of the way and just laughed at him.
‘Anyone else?’ she asked.
No one came forwards.
‘How does she do that?’
Anne asked Something.
‘I don't know,’ he said, holding up his own once-ruined hand, ‘she just does.’
Farrar came after his friend.
‘You bastard, you could have warned me.
Look at this…’
The officer held up his wedding ring between thumb and forefinger.
It was a squeezed oval, and cracked top and bottom.
‘Cathy will do her fucking nut….’
four
CLIVE DID NOT like the idea of spending the early evening with Amelia Dorf's crowd of goat rapists and rich sickies, but as an entrepreneur he knew the importance of maintaining a personal relationship with his best customers.
Besides, there was a good chance of turning up tonight's cunt at Amelia's ‘entertainment’.
Then he could leave early, and get on with the Business.
He was listening to electro-funk on the car stereo.
He liked music with a rhythm.
The Sergeant Major had handled Coral pretty well.
Since it was two-in-a-row time, he had taken a lot more precautions with this one.
By the time she showed up in that rubbish dump on the Isle of Dogs, there would be little left that was recognisable.
With luck, she might be buried forever under the wet newspapers, stinking food remnants and empty cornflake packets.
Mr Skinner would be very pleased.
This job was one of his ‘specials’.
He had certainly got his money's worth.
Later, Clive had to go to a club and watch the Sergeant Major and some of his army mates.
They were very well organised.
They would pretend to get pissed and start a fight.
There would be a lot of damage and a few people would get hurt, but the lads would be away by the time the police could get round to the place.
The manager had been trying to set himself up in the Business when he knew full well that Clive had the franchise.
He needed to be reminded of the way the world was arranged.
Also, it would be a thrill for the cunt.
‘Want to go to a club and see some damage done?’
That would be a good pick-up  line.
Very good.
Clive wanted to see the manager with a broken nose, blood on his dicky bow and frilly shirt front.
Maybe the Sergeant Major would go in for some Greek dancing, and smash all the house DJ's records instead of plates.
He was buzzed through the gates, and parked neatly in front of the house.
There were quite a few cars ranked in the drive.
Someone with safe sex on the brain had draped a pillow-case over the glans of Amelia's silly dick-shaped bush.
He set the car alarm, and went up to the door.
Before he was even inside Amelia's hallway, some harridan was leaping him, kissing his face with dry lips, pulling at his lapels.
Her breath was foul.
‘Clive.
Oh God, Clive, it's been so long…it's so good to see you.
Clive, you've got to…
I need…
I can pay…
Clive, I…’
It was Coral's old flatmate, Nina Kenyon.
Luckily for him, Amelia's bodybuilding freak had been handling the entryphone and was there to pull her off him.
He put her down.
‘It's all right, Anders,’ Nina said, ‘I'm sorry.
I just need to…could we be alone, please?’
‘Clive?’ he asked, obviously awaiting orders to hurt someone.
‘It's okay, Anders.
I can deal with this.’
‘Fine.’
The muscle mutant waddled off.
Nina was all over him again, but more ingratiating this time, controlling her desperation, soothing the wrinkles she had put in his coat, unwrapping his scarf.
‘Clive, I'm sorry.
I didn't mean to come on so…
I need you…
I need a hit…please, Clive…’
He had dealt to her fairly steadily.
When she was flush, she had been stupid enough to pay over the odds.
When she was broke, she had been stupid enough to plead for credit.
She used to be a good cunt, now she was a dressful of dead fishmeat.
‘Let me get my coat off, for fuck's sake.
It's expensive.
Used to walk around on a camel's hump.’
She pulled his topcoat off, and took the scarf.
She fumbled, dropping them on the floor and picking them up, sorrying wildly, before shoving them onto the rack with the others.
Clive reckoned she was well past skin-popping.
She was up to two or three needles a week, and had gone without for maybe 48 hours.
She would cut off her right arm and give it to him if he came over with as much as a single bag.
‘I can't do business here,’ he said.
‘It's a party.’
‘Clive, come on.
Clive, please.
I need some smack.
Not much, just enough.
It's the last time.
Please…please …’
‘Nina, fuck off.
You still owe me from the last time.
Remember.
You don't have a tab any more, it's all used.
You have to clear that before I can even think about transacting with you again.
Now, leave me alone….’
She had dragged him into a room that turned out to be empty.
At least she had the sense not to do her grovelling and pleading in front of other people.
She would not let him go.
She opened her purse.
‘I've got money.
Look.
Anne gave it to me.
Here…’
‘I don't know any Annes.’
‘Here, look…’
She held out two freshly crumpled ten pound notes, one in either fist.
He prised them free, smoothed them, and pocketed them.
‘Fine, Nina.
Now we're even.
I'm glad to see you're learning a little responsibility.
It's important…’
‘No, Clive,’ she screeched at him, ‘it's not for last time.
You don't understand.
It's for this time.
Now.
Clive, please…’
‘No, Nina, that was for last time.
The last time.
I should never have extended credit to you then, and I won't do it again.
‘I don't have any more.’
‘Then I don't make a sale.’
‘You don't understand, Clive…’
‘I think I do, Nina.’
‘Clive, what about if I were to…’
‘No, that won't do.
It'll have to be cash.
You've depreciated  recently, gone down against sterling.’
‘Clive, I…’
He left her babbling and crossed the hall to the party.
He kissed Amelia and gave her a Christmas card.
It was a privately printed cartoon of Santa Claus having sex with Rudolf the Red-Nosed Reindeer.
Amelia tore the envelope open and laughed.
In the den, Clive calmed down and practised his charm again.
He exchanged a few pleasantries with Jeane the Amazon, and collected on a small cocaine deal with a Senior Lecturer in Romance Languages.
There were some people you could trust, after all.
Cocaine.
There was another staple seller.
Like Moet et Chandon or Chanel No. 5.
The preferred drug of old money, and, by extension, of the nouveau mob.
His most loyal cocaine customers were in the City, Whitehall and the Palace of Westminster.
Nina came in soon after, flapping her arms like pterodactyl wings, and pounced on a girl he had never seen before.
Anne?
She looked like a good cunt.
Nina had her hand in the other girl's handbag, and was begging her for money in exactly the same terms she had used on him while begging for heroin.
Even if she came up with the money, Clive was not about to hand over a bag in the open.
She was so far gone she had got seriously stupid.
But it was all his own fault really.
Now, he had the Sergeant Major and his sales force to deal in person with small customers like Nina.
She was a hangover from the old days, when he had had to hustle the stuff himself.
He had several like her and they were very nearly impossible to ditch.
Of course they died from time to time, so there was a light at the end of the tunnel.
‘We got totally wrecked yesterday,’ said one of his old-fashioned die-hard dope customers, ‘and rented out Santa Claus — the Movie on video.
It was the most moving experience I ever had.
They ought to hand out gear instead of ice cream to the kids’
‘Yeah,’ said his Tonto-hairstyled girlfriend, ‘we had a megalaugh.’
A deep-voiced character with five o'clock shadow all over his face and fists like Popeye the Sailor grabbed the girl by her Indian beads and slammed her up against the mantelpiece.
‘I just hate it,’ he growled, drooling between yellow teeth, ‘when people misuse the suffix mega.’
He banged her head backwards, knocking down a domino row of Christmas cards.
‘It denotes quantity, not size,’ he growled, dropping the girl.
He stumped off, in search of split infinitives and incorrect usages of the adverb ‘hopefully’, and the Last of the Hippies picked up his Moonchild or Starbeam or whatever, and calmed her down.
Nina was back, with a fiver and some change.
‘Clive, I'm really sorry about earlier…’
He would not take the money.
She put it in his lap.
He picked it up and dropped it in a bowl of fruit punch.
The coins sank between the bananas, apples and mushrooms.
‘Nina, just fuck off will you.’
‘Clive, I need you.
I'll do anything.
Please…’
He stood up and slapped her.
Hard.
Everyone shut up and looked at them.
‘Now look what you've done, you stupid cunt.
You've spoiled the party.’
‘Yeah,’ said somebody drunk who just wanted to be nasty, ‘you tell her.
Break the cow's arm.’
This, thought Clive, might be fun.
He took a double handful of Nina's jacket, above her breasts, and tore.
Tiny buttons flew, and she clutched herself.
She shook her head wildly.
Her hair was a frightful mess.
Her make-up was streaked.
The man who had agreed with Clive grabbed Nina's jacket collar and tried to rip down her back.
Someone else pulled her necklace, and imitation pearls spread underfoot.
There was a lot of screaming and laughing.
Nina was passed from person to person.
Everybody tried to take something — a scrap of clothing, a lock of hair, a false eyelash, a brooch.
They pinched and kissed and cuddled and laughed and swore.
Nina was beyond hysterics.
Her mouth opened and closed, but Clive could not tell whether she was making any noises.
Everyone else sounded pained and crazy enough.
He stood back and watched.
Someone started singing ‘Oranges and Lemons’, and everybody joined in.
Clive was surprised that he remembered the words.
All those years of Listen With Mother must have sunk in.
‘Oranges and lemons,
Say the bells of St Clements,
I owe you five farthings,
Say the bells of St Martins…’
Amelia was in there, jostling and tugging with the worst of them.
And Anders, showing off his strength by tearing only at the thick material of Nina's suit.
Only Nina's friend, Anne, stayed out of the game, and she was not doing anything to stop it.
Clive looked at her, and she looked at him.
He poured a drink.
Chateauneuf du Pape.
It was supposed to be very good, but all wine tasted alike to him.
Nina was on the floor now, sobbing, and the others had a rugby scrum over her.
Already, there was blood.
The girl had had her hands over her face and was rolling from side to side.
She could do little to protect herself.
Soon it would get out of hand.
But it had got out of hand before, and Clive had coped with it.
Judi and Coral.
Now,that was out of hand.
And Clive had coped with that.
He would ask for even more money this time.
One of the men had his fly open and his dick out.
He was going to take a leak on the girl, but Amelia pulled him out of the circle with a cry of ‘not on my carpet’.
Everybody backed off now.
It was the last verse of the song.
Jeane the Amazon picked Nina up.
The girl was a mess.
‘Here comes a candle
To light you to bed,
And here comes a chopper…’
Then Mr Skinner came down.
five
‘TO…’
This was sick, sick.
Anne knew she ought to do something, ought to intervene.
But…
‘…chop…’
She looked at the young man, Clive.
He was anonymously handsome, studiously calm and trying to be detached.
He wanted to be apart from the humiliation he had engineered.
Men like this, a man like this, had taken Judi apart…‘…off…’
Was this man to blame?
Judi's ex-.
Ex-what?
Boyfriend?
Pimp?
Drug pusher?
Here he was, enjoying the party, watching the games.
And Judi was dead.
She could see him sweating.
She guessed he was almost bursting with pleasure…
‘…your…’
Then, he came into the room.
The Monster.
But he could not be the Monster.
He could not…
‘…
HEAD!’
The Monster parted the circle of people, and took Nina from Jeane Russell.
No, not the Monster.
Just a man.
He held Nina.
Everyone shut up, except the girl.
The man stroked her face and hair, soothed her whimpering, kissed her bruises, shushed in her ear.
No one interfered.
‘Mr Skinner…’
Amelia's sentence trailed off into empty air.
The man had looked at her, and shut her up.
Skinner.
Anne had heard of him, and not just from Nina.
One of the guests had been talking about him.
He was supposed to be someone you were afraid of.
She could understand that.
Of course, he was not the Monster.
He was not Hugh Farnham.
Actually, the resemblance was minimal.
He was a big man too, and his face had that same patched-together lizardy look.
But that didn't make him Hugh Farnham.
He was conservatively dressed, in a dark, three-piece business suit.
He wore a tarnished gold watch chain across his waistcoat.
He had a dark, fur-collared coat draped like a cloak over his shoulders.
He included Nina in his coat, an angel wrapping a child in its wings.
He looked at Anne, smiling slightly, then at everyone else.
He spoke, in accentless English.
‘A specimen, I suppose.
Of what, though?
Vice unrewarded?’
‘Mr Skinner,’ said Clive, ‘we…’
‘Yes.
I know.
You were playing.
Just playing.
You know I don't like you to play games without me, but you went ahead regardless.
You know you need your Games Master.
Without me, you do crude, unimaginative things like this…’
He showed them Nina's face, lowering his fur collar away from it.
She was empty, used up.
‘You don't understand pain.
You can't appreciate it.
You let nasty little personal grudges creep in, and you taint the experience.
You have to go beyond that, transcend revenge and pique and cruelty and cowardice.
Pain is of and for itself alone.
I've told you this before, but you are a small-minded lot, really.
I despair of you.’
Anne looked around her.
The guests were completely cowed, like golden calf worshippers contemplating shards of Moses' broken tablets.
This was astonishing.
Skinner released Nina from his protection and set her down in an armchair.
She allowed herself to be posed like a mannequin, but drew in on herself when he let her go.
Anne had met presidents without a tenth of what Skinner was using.
And she knew that he was barely stretching himself.
These were just make-believe decadents.
‘She was bothering us,’ said Clive, almost whining, ‘she wanted…’
‘Yes,’ Skinner paused, ‘what did she want?
What did she want that you have but wouldn't give her?’
Clive did not want to answer.
‘The drug?’
Clive swallowed.
‘Yes, she never paid…’
‘Never.
I think not, Clive, but let that pass.
Heroin is interesting stuff.
You supply only the finest, don't you…’
Someone made a joke Anne did not get, ‘…only the best, because graded grains make finer flour…’
And Daeve said, ‘Heroin, it's what your right arm's for.’
There was only one sceptic in the crowd.
Toby Farrar.
It was his first ‘entertainment’, Anne remembered.
He had not learned the applicable procedures yet.
He stepped forwards.
‘Who the fuck are you, fruitbat?’
He pulled at Skinner's empty coat sleeve.
The expensive item slithered off his back like a shed snakeskin.
It fell to the floor.
Skinner's shoulders expanded.
He grew taller.
The circle reformed, around Skinner and Farrar.
Anne was part of it now, with Derek Douane on one side, and Jeane Russell on the other.
Should they join hands?
Farrar knew what he had got into now, and stood to attention.
He was still holding the coat sleeve.
Skinner prowled around the man, his head in close like a drill sergeant chewing out a quivering private.
‘Who the fuck am I, friend?
I'm just another fruitbat, Major Farrar.’
His head bobbed independent of his body.
‘No one at all really.’
Skinner raised his hand to Farrar's face, and put his thumb in the officer's left eye.
He pressed, just hard enough, and drew back from the falling man.
Farrar swore, and got up, holding his hand over his face like an eyepatch.
Red tears stained his cheek.
The hand came away bloody.
He had not lost the eye, but the upper lid was neatly sliced.
Toby Farrar's wife would think he had been in the wars.
‘Clive, what is your complaint against this girl?’
‘Credit…she wanted credit…’
‘And?’
‘…and that's not the way…not the way I do business.’
‘Of course not.
You all know Clive Broome, don't you?
He's an honest businessman.
His terms are hard, but equitable.
Cash for drugs.’
Clive winced.
‘Or cash for sex.
Cash for pain.
Cash for anything, really.
Anything you want.
He provides quite a service.’
Someone muttered, ‘…the swindling bastard!’
It was the man who had first joined in when Clive started on Nina.
Obviously, he wanted to see blood, and didn't much care whose it was.
Now Clive was in the circle with Skinner.
Farrar was back with the rest, holding a handkerchief to his eye.
He had been converted.
Anne did not like Clive, did not care what happened to him.
If he had had anything to do with the way Judi died, then she wanted him to suffer as much as possible.
Did that make her the same as Amelia as the others?
‘What's wrong?’
‘I told you, Clive.
I'm disappointed.
You are promising.
But you don't have a philosophy.
You don't have purity.’
Skinner put a hand on Clive's shoulder.
Anne knew he was not disappointed or annoyed or anything.
He was just playing.
He was just hurting people for his own amusement.
Or maybe there was more to it?
‘What do you want from me?’
Skinner asked everyone.
‘What do you want from your Games Master?’
There was quiet.
‘Do you want to be entertained?
Do you want to be hurt?
Or do you want to learn?
Do you even know what you want?
You must want something, or else you are nothing.
Nothing at all.’
He stood by Nina.
She was curled up in her chair, head down, coughing a little.
‘This girl, Nina.
You want to see this girl suffer?
You want to see this girl hurt?
To see this girl hurt herself?
You want to see…to feel…what?’
It was Amelia who came forwards.
She was the representative.
‘Yes, Mr Skinner,’ she said, ‘take her.
Then show us something.
Show us something we will never forget.
Help us know ourselves.’
‘Very well.
Clive?’
‘Yes.’
‘Give me some heroin please’
‘What?’
‘Heroin.’
‘But…’
‘I think you can trust everyone here.
They all know what you do for a living.’
Clive searched his pockets, as if looking for a train ticket.
Someone laughed.
It was obvious he did not have pockets full of drugs.
‘You have some, of course?’
‘My car…’
‘Yes.
The compartment under the passenger seat in the front, right?
Very clever.
The keys please.’
Clive fished them out of a pocket, and handed them over.
Skinner looked around, and picked his man.
‘Major Farrar?’
Farrar came forwards.
He was not in pain now, but he still had a red tear of blood on one cheek.
He looked like a lopsided clown.
‘It's the BMW.
You'll have to peel back the carpet.
It should be easy.
Clive?’
‘It's in a malteser box.’
‘Good.
You understand, Major?
Bring the heroin here.’
Farrar knew how to obey an order.
Skinner crouched in front of Nina.
‘Now you'll get what you want.
I'll look after you.’
She shrank in her seat.
Again, Anne felt she ought to do something but could not think of anything.
They all stood around in silence.
The computer salesman suggested they play ‘Twenty Questions’ or ‘I Spy’, but a glance from Skinner shut him up.
Farrar came back with a small boxful of heroin.
Skinner picked out three sachets.
‘That's too much,’ said Clive, ‘she might…
‘So?’
The dealer almost smiled, and visibly relaxed.
He was out of the circle.
Nina was in it again.
Skinner gave Nina's handbag to Amelia.
She emptied it on the floor, and picked out the junkie kit.
Bent sugar spoon, a length of rubber tubing, and hypodermic needle.
She dumped them on the arm of Nina's chair.
The syringe was a proper hospital model, not a disposable pipette.
Skinner laid out the sachets in a row next to the kit.
Nina was too far gone, too traumatised, to pay any attention.
Even heroin could not reach her.
‘Clive,’ said Skinner, ‘do the honours.’
‘I'm not very good at this.
I just sell it, I don't use it.’
‘Very wise, I'm sure.
But you must be familiar with the business end.’
‘Yes.
I'll need a bigger spoon.’
Amelia handed him something from a silver service.
He examined it.
It was unusual, a dinner-size replica of a teaspoon, with a carved apostle at the end of the handle.
Clive spilled some of the powder as he heaped it in the spoon, and could not hold it steady over his lighter flame, but finally he got it liquefied.
The spoon would be ruined.
‘It's a good idea to mix it with citric acid,’ he said.
Nobody offered him a lemon slice from their perrier.
Amelia rolled up Nina's torn sleeve and tied the tourniquet tight around her upper arm.
Veins stood out bluish against pale skin.
Anne saw the beginnings of tracks.
Nina was still pliable, uninterested in her situation.
Clive drew the heroin into the syringe, filling it to capacity.
‘She'll overdose,’ he warned.
‘Not if she's strong enough,’ said Skinner.
‘Give it to her.
She doesn't have to use it.
The decision is hers.’
Nina bent and unbent her bare arm.
She looked around.
She was coming back.
‘Clive…’
‘I'm here, Nina.
Here's your smack.
It's all right now, all right.’
‘Uh?’
‘You don't have to pay.
It's all been taken care of.
Now, be a good girl and take your medicine.’
He put the syringe in her hand.
It rolled in her fingers, but she quickly got a hold on it.
She smiled.
‘Nina, it's up to you,’ said Skinner.
‘Nina,’ said Anne, ‘don't…’
Skinner swivelled to look at her.
His eyes were nothing special, but he was fearsome.
Perhaps he was the Monster?
‘Don't what?’ he said, smiling.
‘…don't…’
Anne tried to say.
‘Don't die ?’
‘…no…yes…’
‘It's up to her, isn't it?’
Anne could not say anything.
Skinner was looking at her, and she felt a caress of terror.
Was she to be next in the circle?
The Games Master was taking an elaborately casual interest in her.
After a long moment, he turned away, and paid attention to the current victim.
Nina held the syringe properly now.
A drop appeared at the tip of the needle.
No air bubbles.
She looked at the others, she looked at the syringe, she looked at Anne.
‘Don't…please.’
Nina broke.
She erupted out of her chair, yelling, and charged for the door.
She shouldered her way between Anne and Derek.
The child, laughing, fell over.
Anne was jolted, but Jeane Russell held her up with a painful grip.
Nina was out of the door, and the syringe gone with her.
The cry receded, and her clattering footsteps became distant.
She had gone upstairs.
Nobody moved.
It was a big house.
Anne knew Nina could easily find a place to kill herself in private.
Poor thing.
‘Clive,’ said Skinner, ‘you, and this girl — Anne, isn't it?— you go and bring Nina back.
Stop her from wasting herself if you can.
It's important.
We'll keep the party going while you're gone.’
Clive knew enough to do what he was told.
He took Anne's arm and dragged her out into the hallway, towards the stairs.
She did not fight.
Inside, she was cold.
The Games Master knew her name.
Skinner knew who she was.
SIX
HE DID NOT know why but, upstairs, Amelia's house reminded him of a jungle.
It was remarkably clean and well-maintained, and all the lights worked but Clive felt as if he ought to be wearing a pith helmet, and carrying a hunting rifle that could bring down a charging rhino at fifty paces.
With the American girl as a bearer, and that dopey cunt Nina as rogue quarry, this was a skew-whiff safari.
Every time he had been led through the house previously, it had been different.
The mix of the original architect's unusual commitment to the concept of asymmetry, the previous inhabitants' rabid fetish for amassing ridiculous quantities of Victorian bric-à-brac and '30s kitsch, and Amelia's own declared desire to keep her environment in a state of constant flux had turned the place into a confused and confusing labyrinth.
‘We'll never find her,’ he told the girl, Anne, ‘let's just hang about out of earshot for a few minutes and go back.’
She looked at him in a queer, incisive way he did not like at all.
He wondered who the fuck she was.
‘I don't think that guy Skinner would like that.’
‘So?’
‘So you're scared of him.
All of you are.’
‘That's not true.’
It was not true.
Was it?
Mr Skinner was weird, unpredictably dangerous, even, but he was just…
Just what?
If anything, Mr Skinner should be scared of him.
After what Clive had done for him, he would be forever in his debt.
In his power.
‘I can handle Mr Skinner.’
‘Yeah,’ she said, unconvinced, ‘right.’
‘Let's try and find the second floor.
The lights are on up there.’
‘This is the second floor.’
‘Not in England.’
‘Oh yes, you people have to have a nothingth floor.’
There was something about the girl.
She was not a loser, like Nina, or a sickie, like Amelia.
She was sharp.
Clive had got so used to being able to fool everyone in this circle that he was unnerved by her obvious clear-sightedness.
The rest were wrapped up in a fog, from drugs or cracked minds, but Anne knew exactly what was going on.
Of course, there were some things she could not know about.
She had got him on Mr Skinner, though.
Really, he had to admit that the man scared him.
Clive liked to hurt people as much as the next person, felt the need to confirm his power over others, but Mr Skinner was a specialist, an expert.
He could hurt capriciously, pointlessly, even against his own interests…
Like now.
Mr Skinner needed Clive, and yet he was punishing him, making a great show of his obsolescence.
This search party was crazy.
‘Why you?’
Anne asked him as they climbed the stairs.
‘You're his type.’
Christ, did she know everything he was thinking?
He suppressed the urge to respond, to tease an answer to the question out of himself.
He did not want to think about it.
For what was he being punished?
The second floor landing was spacious, a gallery almost, but much less cluttered than the lower parts of the house.
Passages fed off left and right.
As far as they could see, the walls were plain white, with evenly spaced-out black doors.
It all looked like an enlarged version of those laboratory mazes they let rats loose in.
He decided that Anne was probably a very good cunt.
Americans were all easy.
Except Judi.
She had been difficult.
Perhaps this expedition did not have to be a total waste.
He had screwed girls who hated him before, and had always got something out of it.
He stepped near the girl, and put an exploratory hand on her hip.
He tried his nicest smile, and prepared to whisper his suavest come-on line.
‘You have a lovely smile,’ he said, ‘may I taste it?’
She took his wrist between thumb and forefinger, and held his hand up between them as if gripping a putrid fish by the tail.
She turned her thumb- and fingernails in and pinched, probing for painful pulses between the bones.
She let go.
‘Look, Clive, I don't like what you do for a living, I don't like the way you treat girls at parties, I don't like your taste in shirts and I don't like the way you look.
Therefore, I suggest we concentrate on finding Nina.’
He could not help asking himself: what was wrong with his shirt?
‘What's the point?’
He said, rubbing his cuff over the place she had gored him.
‘Maybe we can stop her hurting herself.’
‘It's too late for that.
I know a lot of smackheads.
She's got to have stuck it in her arm by now.
She's dead, only she'll be able to move around for a bit longer.
Not much longer.’
‘You kill many this way?’
‘Fuck off,’ he said, suddenly angry.
‘Who do you think you are, Joan of Arc?
I'm just like anyone else.
I sell people what they want.’
‘But you have to make them want it first.
You have to make them want to die.’
What was this girl doing at one of Amelia's dos?
She certainly did not blend it with the crowd.
Clive thought she might be a rare type of pervert who gets off on vociferously condemning all the vices she actually practises.
He had heard of that brand of peculiarity before.
But she did not strike him as a girl who would get much pleasure out of flagellating herself with self-loathing and trembling hypocrisy.
She was more the grit in the cream type, born to be a pain in the backside, always getting at you.
‘Okay,’ he said.
‘Let's stop arguing and find the girl.
I still think she's on this floor.
She'd want the lights on.’
‘Fine.
But the corridor is lit up both ways.
Which did she take?’
‘It doesn't matter.
She'll be in one of the rooms.
We can go through them easily.
I reckon they only have one door apiece, so she'll be trapped.
Not that she'll be able to do much about running away.
She'll be on a bed somewhere, out of her skull.’
They took a passage to the left, opening each door in turn and flicking on the interior light-switches for each room.
This floor apparently was a private gallery of some sort.
The first room was hung with explicit 18th century paintings, depicting the classical rapes of chubbily nubile girls by an assortment of animal and half-animal deities.
The second was a showroom for garish '50s juke boxes.
‘Have you noticed,’ said Anne.
‘There are no windows.’
‘Amelia is nutty.
She's always having the builders in to fiddle around with something or other.
She must have had this whole floor bricked up from the outside.’
‘Why?’
‘I told you, she's nutty.’
The next room was full of mounted animals.
They were stuffed and posed in all manner of positions, demonstrating sexual unions between incompatible species.
It was supposed to be funny, but Clive thought Amelia's kinkiness could get monotonous after a while.
Anne did not pass comment, and he shut the door.
‘What is it with this Skinner?’ asked Anne.
‘What does he do?’
‘He's just…just rich, I suppose.
Rich and twisted.’
‘There's a lot of that about.’
‘I know.’
Clive wanted to go on.
He had never had anyone to whom he could talk about Mr Skinner.
Not even the Sergeant Major.
Not even Judi.
There was no one he could really trust.
‘But he's different…’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Amelia and the others.
They're just playing.
Mr Skinner  is serious.
With him, all this…all this stuff is important, almost as important as being alive…’
‘And you?
Do you like these games?’
She was good at asking questions, he realised, good at getting answers.
Just like Judi.
He did not like that.
Judi had always tried to rub his nose in parts of his life he just wanted to let lie there and be profitable.
He was glad he had got rid of her.
Admittedly, she had been the one who left, but, in the end, he had been the one to do the getting-rid-of. poor Judi.
Poor old, dead Judi.
He opened a door.
‘Jesus Christ!’
The room was a walk-in freezer.
Hanging from ceiling hooks were butchered human carcasses.
The opened door jarred one, and they swung to and fro, bumping into each other like the elements of an executive toy.
Lifeless knuckles scraped the floor.
Anne reached in and turned on the lights.
The fridge was not as cold as it ought to have been.
‘Bacon, I suppose,’ she said.
She touched a corpse.
He could see now that it was a distorted  papier maché sculpture, luridly coloured in red.
The ribs were wooden struts, thinly papered over.
The cooling coils on the walls and the spreading stains on the floor were painted.
‘Francis Bacon, I mean.’
‘It's fucking sick!’
Clive had thought it would be Judi and Coral again, on a much larger scale.
Even the Sergeant Major would have problems with this much cuntmeat.
Actually, after the first shock, the sculpture did not look real at all.
The limbs were out of proportion, and you could read the newspaper headlines under the thin red paint.
But, somehow, it was worse than real.
Who the hell had Amelia got to make this anyway?
‘Nina,’ Anne shouted.
‘It's Anne.
I want to help you.
It's all right.’
Her voice did not even echo in the passages.
Around the next bend was darkness.
The lights were not burning.
‘She must have stopped here,’ Anne said, ‘or doubled back.’
‘No, we'd have run into her.’
‘Maybe.’
Anne called out again.
There was no answer of any kind.
Clive wondered why they had not heard anything from downstairs.
It was odd that the party should get so quiet.
There was no music, even.
Then, he felt the world shift on its axis, and knew that a new reality had slotted into its place.
New physical laws, new moral dictates, new topographical patterns.
It would be a major adjustment, and he did not know how to cope with it yet.
‘There's something wrong here,’ he said.
‘She could be on another floor.’
‘I don't think so…
Let's give up and go back downstairs.’
He turned his back on the darkness to argue with Anne.
That was when, with a glass-cracking shriek, the harpy brought him down from behind.
A talon punctured the flesh under his chin, and tore….
seven
CLIVE SPUN around and collapsed at the same time, heaving from his shoulders in a spasm which threw Nina off his back.
Anne tried to catch the girl, hoping to embrace her from behind and pin her arms, but missed getting a sure hold on her.
She was slammed into a wall by Nina's weight and momentum, and felt the shock of the impact in her teeth.
Knots of pain throbbed in her spine.
Nina was still screeching.
It was an inhuman, continuous sound, containing hatred, rage and triumph beyond expression in words.
It was a horrible sound.
Anne remembered her brother's première.
Cam's concert should have started by now.
She reached for the back of Nina's ripped jacket, but only managed to get a handful of hair.
Nina stood up, and the hair was pulled through Anne's fist.
It was as if a steel rope had been scraped across her palm.
She looked up at Nina and could see that the girl did not recognise her.
She was completely feral, a tie-dye splash of blood across her front, her fingers bent into claws.
She turned away, and ducked into the darkness.
Out of the light, she shut up.
Anne heard rapid, birdlike footsteps.
Then nothing.
She looked across the passage at Clive.
He was half-sitting, half-slumped against the wall, vainly trying to move.
Nina had stabbed him with the syringe.
It hung unpleasantly from his ruined throat, broken.
The glass was cracked, the handle loose, and the needle bent.
It had been emptied, but was more than half full now.
With blood.
Clive's jacket and shirt were stained, and little squirts rose and fell from his wound with each heartbeat.
Anne guessed that he had a severed artery.
She got up, steadying herself against the wall, and took a few experimental steps.
Her back did not ache that much.
She had not been damaged.
Clive rolled his eyes, and tried to speak.
Blood leaked out of his mouth, but nothing else.
It had happened too quickly to be absorbed.
Anne knew that Nina had stabbed Clive, but she was not sure whether she had doped him as well.
He was an ugly mess, and he was still alive, but Anne could find no emotion to feel for him.
She had seen her sister ancient and dead on a stretcher this morning, probably because of Clive or someone like him.
She did not even have any squeamishness left over.
He moved feebly, trying to lift a hand to probe his wound.
She felt uncomfortable, watching him die and unable to care about him.
She did not know what, if anything, to do for him.
So she left, and went after Nina.
She did not want to think about him any more.
eight
IT DID NOT hurt, so he knew it must be serious.
He saw Anne look away from him and leave his field of vision.
He could not turn his head.
A light came on, banishing the darkness around the corner.
She was following Nina, the stupid…
Everything was clear.
He was trapped in his body, as surely as a crashed motorist could be held in a wrecked car by a locked seat belt.
Unless he got himself free soon, he would die….
He concentrated on trying to stand up.
There was some feeling, not much, in his knees and upper thighs.
He pulled, and managed to bend forwards at the waist like an oarsman.
He could touch his toes.
He got hold of the polished tip of one of his shoes, and tried to pull himself away from the wall.
His head was between his knees and he could smell the blood.
The wetness was pooling in his lap.
Then, for a moment, his back and shoulders were working properly.
He achieved some sort of upright position, although his treacherous legs deserted him immediately.
He staggered through the open doorway, into the painted freezer, feeling his knees giving out with each inept step.
To steady himself, he hugged a sculptured torso.
An arm came loose and fell off, revealing scrunched up newsprint where there should have been ligament, bone and muscle.
He knew he was bleeding all over the work of art.
Someone else came into the room and sat down on a plain wooden chair to watch him struggle.
It was Mr Skinner, calm and hungry.
The man's face gave nothing away.
He was neutral.
He was not going to help Clive out of his  crumpled BMW, but he was not going to kick the bent door shut on him either.
He knew Nina had poisoned him as well.
He had never had heroin before, but he knew enough junkies to recognise the effects.
Although the pins and needles in his legs could perhaps have been from loss of blood.
Purple lines floated on the surfaces of his eyes, coming briefly into focus, then retreating into vague smudges.
Purple haze, he thought.
Finally, the pain came,
First it hit him where Nina had, just below his jaw.
From this nucleus, it swiftly spread throughout his head and trunk, leaving only his limbs in an unfeeling limbo.
He almost passed out, but his eyes would not close.
He kept on fighting...
Fighting for what?
…kept on fighting to stay upright.
The lumpy statue in his arms was crumbling.
Large chunks fell around his feet.
Something gave way like the bottom of a carrier bag, and the bulk of the  papier maché was squeezed out.
He realised that in the centre of the soft fake torso was a hard real butcher's hook.
The remains of the sculpture slipped through his arms, and he sank onto the sharp iron prong.
It went into his upper belly, and caught under his ribcage.
He felt himself pulled out of shape, his innards adopting new alignments.
The hook was a curved icicle.
It was uncomfortable rather than agonising.
The ice spread through his chest, forming around his beating heart.
His hand and arms were free, but his knees and ankles had long since given out.
He could feel nothing at all below the hook's point of entry.
He jerked downwards, his entire weight on the hook and chain.
It held.
He did not fall.
He swung his left arm up in a reverse backstroke, and grasped the chain.
He felt the links pressing into his palm.
He hauled, taking some of the weight off the hook, but not enough.
Then he felt for the pain in his neck.
His hand seemed like a flesh mitten, fingerless and clumsy.
He wrapped it  around the syringe, ignoring the jagged glass which tore his skin.
Mr Skinner had come closer.
Now, his face was only inches away from Clive's own.
He was as near as a lover or a parent could ever come.
Clive felt delicate feelers worming through his mind, draining his pain, his fear.
It was a great relief.
He felt arms around him, lifting his body up, easing him off the hook.
He pulled the syringe out, and weakly flung it away.
The bottom half of Mr Skinner's face was suddenly reddened.
Clive heard the fountain, and knew that he had torn something important.
He saw an arc of blood, and knew that it came from his own neck.
It was oddly like going cross-eyed and seeing the bridge of your nose.
Then, the blood got in his eyes.
Clive shook his head, and cleared his vision.
Mr Skinner was smiling an impossibly wide smile.
Fifty or sixty perfect, pointed teeth gleamed between his parted lips.
Then his face faded until, at last, only his smile was left behind.
nine
‘NINA!’
The girl had darted into a dark stretch of the corridor, and could not be found easily.
Anne trailed her fingers along the wall at shoulder height, but there were no switches or dangling cords.
She could still see, dimly, which meant that there must be a light source somewhere near.
Somewhere.
‘Nina!’
She went forwards, step by step.
The floor proved untrustworthy.
She had already found a few unexpected steps, up or down, and slammed a toe against a new level.
It was all fairly pointless, like the needless ha-has of a carnival funhouse.
She stopped and listened.
The house was silent.
It was as if the whole place were deserted and derelict.
What were Amelia and her guests doing?
She hoped that they had not dispersed from their downstairs room.
Could they be playing some sadeian variation on hide and seek?
Could they be in the dark, waiting for her?
‘Nina, it's me.
Anne.’
The girl must have calmed down.
She must be within earshot, but she was keeping quiet.
She had been hysterical, now she was probably close to catatonia.
Anne thought Nina had found a hiding place and was lying low.
She could imagine the girl curled up in a cupboard, trying to breathe noiselessly, willing her heartbeat to be less loud.
God, the house was quiet!
Admittedly, this was a placid residential district, but there should be some exterior noise: occasional traffic, water dripping from the eaves, distant carol singers, murmuring electrical appliances.
There was nothing.
The walls must be ten feet thick.
She found the light.
It came from a tributary passage that lead off from the main corridor at a curious angle.
The rooms must be not quite square.
A funnel of light fell from a circular ceiling hole, drawing attention to the skeleton of an ornate spiral staircase.
It was a rickety old piece of work; presumably intended for servants banished from the regular stairs.
It could not have been easy to hump awkward loads up and down the wobbly death trap.
There were grinning gnomes worked into the iron filigree, running downwards helter-skelter.
Nina would have been drawn to the light, just as Anne had been.
She must have gone upstairs.
Anne started upwards on the shaking staircase, but had to stop abruptly.
The hole extended a foot or so above the level of the ceiling, and then ended.
There was a dim fluorescent tube in the recess.
She could not go up, only down.
The floors below were dark.
Carefully, she descended into an unknown, unlit room.
She stepped off the bottom stair onto a carpeted floor.
The light above her was remote and useless, blocked off by the triangular edges of the staircase.
In the dark, she took little steps, her hands out before her.
She found a wall, and hugged it.
She edged sideways, clockwise.
After getting into and out of three corners between stretches of flat wall, she found a door.
And by it there was a switch.
She turned on the light.
The room was bare, except for the staircase, and a pair of indifferent watercolours of dead flowers that hung on the wall opposite the door.
The paintings were at eye level.
Why had she not jostled them while feeling her way around?
It did not make sense, so she gave up thinking about it.
The door was not locked.
The passage outside was unlike the ones on the floor above.
It was as wide as a small room, but there were bulky pieces of old furniture against the walls between the doors, and Anne was forced to squeeze through a narrow and irregular middle path.
Hard wooden angles pressed into her.
‘Nina.’
On the floor, she found a scattering of porcelain shards.
Several ornaments from a displayed collection of unpleasant little figurines had been swept off a small table.
The girl had  come this way, she was sure.
Again, Anne started looking into every room for Nina.
All the doors were unlocked.
The rooms beyond were filled with more forgotten furniture.
This must be where Amelia shifted everything when she was having building done.
A few of the pieces were properly stored, with dustsheets and numbered tags, but most of the stuff was just crammed in every which way.
Progress was slower than it had been upstairs.
Welsh dressers and tallboys kept getting in her way.
And she was alone.
Would Clive die?
Could she have helped him?
This was not much of a party.
Anne knew she had to expose Amelia and her friends.
The magazine would not go for it; they could not afford the lawsuits.
But she had friends on the tabloids, the News of the World , the Daily Mirror .
Pop stars and society hostesses in S and M games that led to death.
Deaths?
She could keep Judi out of it, but ruin a good few careers, businesses and marriages.
There would probably be multiple prosecutions.
The Global Peace Whatever would lose a lot of credibility, she reflected.
Maybe not: those far right moralists had plenty of ways of surviving nasty revelations and expelling offenders from their ranks.
She now believed that her sister had died, if not through the direct actions of the people downstairs, then at least through her unhealthy associations with them.
What she had seen done to Nina would have wrecked anybody.
Scum.
Scum.
Scum.
The rooms were like the passage, packed with antiques.
Most of them were in states of disrepair.
Crippled chairs with missing feet and tufts of stuffing coming through the cracks; dead, useless grandfather clocks with faces but no hands; embroidered hangings eaten with mould patches that made hunt scenes resemble maps of unknown worlds.
But there was no dust, no dirt, no cobwebs.
All this was looked after, preserved in its current state of decay.
She opened a door, and found herself in the Bacon room.
…but surely that was upstairs.
No, she must have invisibly ascended through those upwards-sloping corridors  and irritating little steps, and come down again on the spiral staircase.
For the last few minutes, she had been travelling in parallel to her previous route.
The junk rooms alternated with the gallery chambers like the opposing teeth of a zip-fastener.
Only the Bacon room interconnected both strata of the house.
It had two doors.
Clive would be beyond the other.
Dead?
Despite everything, she had to see him.
She could not immediately do anything for Nina.
Perhaps she would be able to stop the bleeding.
Maybe even save his life.
Save him for the Old Bailey and whichever penal dustbin they locked dope peddlers in.
Anne had once written a piece about prison conditions.
After a tour and a few interviews with convicts, she was in favour of sweeping reforms.
But she wanted Clive to get dumped into a grand guignol Devil's Island with whip-wielding guards, running filth in the cells and neanderthal yard bosses.
She hoped he would be gang-raped in the showers every night.
A liberal, she remembered someone saying, is just a reactionary who has not been mugged yet.
Tomorrow, she realised, she would be socially conscious again.
Tonight, she would have elected Dirty Harry as chief of police.
Shit, she wanted out of this mess.
She opened the other door…
‘Clive?’
…and found herself in a part of the house she had never seen before.
It was either a passage or a long, thin room, a stone-walled storage space lined with gunpowder plot-style wooden barrels.
It was more like some sort of cellar than an upstairs room.
Obviously, there was more than one Bacon room.
She looked around, carefully this time.
One of the dummies was fully dressed.
She should have noticed it earlier.
It was not at all like the others in the room, like all the ones in the other room.
They were all dismembered portions, with exposed ribs and piglike pink hides.
It was the figure of an old, dead man.
She was reminded of Dorian Gray at the end of the book, unrecognisably decrepit, identifiable only by the rings sunk into the fleshy fingers.
This statue was shrivelled inside its suit, hanging from a hook in its chest.
She did not want to touch it, but she had to.
She had expected it to be weighted, to feel cold and heavy.
But it was an obvious fake, papier-  maché light.
The wrinkled skin, while rubberised to lend some semblance of naturalism, was dry and fragile.
It was a repulsive piece of work, but paradoxical.
The concept was violently unpleasant, extravagantly horrible.
But there was a bland expression worked into the prune-like face.
It was like a sentimental 19th century vision of peaceful repose after protracted suffering, the miserable on Earth rewarded in Heaven.
Of course, the statue was in modern dress.
A suspiciously stained smart dark suit, just like Clive's.
In fact, the costume was exactly like Clive's, down to the horrible shirt and expensive shoes.
It was another of Amelia's bad taste jokes.
And now the effort would be wasted, since its subject was in no condition to be either offended or amused.
Anne was tired, and fed up.
It could only be about eight o'clock — her old-fashioned watch, unwound this morning, had stopped — but she felt as if she had been up all night, working to meet an insane deadline.
All she wanted was to get this whole thing over with, so she could go home to Kentish Town and sleep in her own bed.
It would be cold though.
There was no one in the apartment to turn on the electric blanket.
Downstairs.
She would go downstairs and tell Amelia what had happened to Clive.
She knew what would happen.
Skinner would take over.
The guests would disperse.
Ambulances and doctors would be called, the right people would all be bribed, and the sordid mess would be efficiently covered up.
She would never be able to prove a thing.
Whatever.
She did not care.
Leaving the Bacon room, she made her way through the junkyard corridor.
She thought the spiral staircase would lead her down to the party.
…but she could not find the room.
It had been distinct from the others.
It was comparatively empty.
She turned corners she was sure she had never encountered before.
Had she taken the wrong route?
Every room she looked into was the same.
She came full circle around the house, and opened a door to find herself looking up again at the dangling corpse statue.
Now, she could see that it even looked like Clive.
Or rather, as Clive would look if he were to live to the age of one hundred and fifty and then die.
It really was a wretched thing.
She tried to picture the door of the room with the stairs.
Had it been disguised to blend into the wall?
Could she have missed it by mistaking it for one of the panelled wardrobes?
Did it have an exterior handle?
She could remember nothing.
Anne felt an urge to throw the kind of temper tantrum she had been able to get away with when she was six years old.
She wanted to whimper in frustration and break something.
But there was no one around to be made uncomfortable, or be coerced into helping her out.
She was on her own.
Anyway, her father and Cam had invariably known when she was faking.
The Nielsons had always been a family of know-it-alls.
She walked through the Bacon room again, avoiding the central figure, deciding to try the place with the barrels.
…but now here was a main passage beyond the door, spacious and well-lit.
A few yards down, the passage broadened out and became a mezzanine.
There was the main staircase she had climbed with Clive a while — how long?— ago.
Could there be Bacon rooms, more or less the same, dotted throughout the house in order to create confusion?
If so, then Amelia Dorf was an incredibly subtle and sadistic bitch.
But, of course, she had known about the sadistic part.
As for the subtlety, that seemed quite alien to the woman who coochy-cooed over children she wanted to mutilate.
It was now obvious that Amelia had never been in charge.
Anne knew exactly whose fault this, all of this, was.
She remembered his unremarkable eyes.
And she remembered that he had known immediately who she was.
Whatever game was being played now, it was between them, between her and Skinner.
Now, the walkabout was over.
The rest of the party was just a flight of stairs away, in the room off the main hall.
She heard a tinny phonograph.
The record was ‘Mr Sandman’ by The Chordettes.
It always gave Anne goosebumps, especially when the unidentified male voice answered the girls' plea for Mr Sandman to bring them a dream with a drawn-out, ever-so-slightly creepy ‘ye-e-es?’
…but the main hall was not one flight of stairs down.
Peering over the balustrade of the mezzanine, Anne saw a huge conservatory, thronged with man-sized plants.
The far wall was a large expanse of ornamented glass, with pitch blackness beyond.
Heat rose from the depths, and every smooth cold surface was damp with condensation.
Shit, this house was crazy!
Anne realised now how jumbled up and contrived the interior was.
The architect must have been an opium fiend.
The Chordettes finished.
Something rustled in the undergrowth.
Anne cautiously went down the stairs.
‘Nina?’
Tropical blossoms turned towards her, stamens quivering.
It was some species of voice-activated flytrap she had never heard of.
There was a crackle of static, like a public address system at a church social, then another record started.
Mama Cass crooning ‘Dream a Little Dream of Me’.
Anne was annoyed.
‘Stop playing stupid games, assholes!’
There was no answer, just the song.
‘Clive is hurt.
He might be dead.’
She knew it was not a game any more.
She wished she had a gun, the more powerful the better.
She would have been happiest with a flamethrower.
Something clattered on the tile floor, behind a frothing bed of shrubs.
The flesh of the plants was waxy, with green highlights from the directional lamps.
The whole place was  artistically lit.
Anne glimpsed a different shade of green, moving among the vegetation.
She looked around for a blunt instrument.
Something heavy and barefoot was padding around the conservatory.
Something not human.
Then, the foliage parted.
A giant cat's head poked out.
Its eyes gleamed as if the irises were neon rings.
It was a tiger, dyed green.
Its fur was arranged in punkish spikes.
She made it to the staircase, and dashed at random back into the bulk of the house.
This could not be happening.
Could not, could not, could not !
ten
AFTER CLIVE, he was full but unsatisfied.
And he knew in his bones what that meant.
This had all happened before.
It was time to make a new start.
He would need to feed beyond the point of gluttony, and then retreat to await the change.
He would have to build himself up, because the change would take it all out of him.
There had not been much to Clive.
But he had been young and in good condition.
His physical substance had been a tonic, but already the hunger was coming back.
His clothes were too small now, pinching him at the neck, the waist and the crotch, stretched tight over the shoulders, the chest and his muscled limbs.
It would not last.
The feeding he had had from Clive was only a momentary boost.
Already, he felt himself dwindling in his suit.
Soon, he would be completely spent.
As for the rest of it, Clive had been a disappointment.
At the moment of extinction, he had held the young man's mind up like a pierced coconut and let all the thin milk trickle out.
Compared with Judi, there had been almost no yield.
Down deep, Clive was unimaginative, inactive, petty, unquestioning.
Judi was still with him, still struggling against the dark.
Clive was already less than a ghost, less than a memory.
Still, the surges of animal strength pleased him.
He scooped a handful of marble out of a bannister as if it were plasticine, and briefly enjoyed the traces of the many fingers that had brushed over this patch of cold stone down the years.
He dropped it, and it bounced down the stairs.
Someone was coming up.
‘Mr Skinner?’
It was Amelia, looking eager.
She was forever busily seeking out new gratifications, forever unaware of the weasel he always discerned nestling in her skull.
‘Amelia.
I asked you to stay downstairs with the guests.
There are rules, you know.
It would be much simpler if you obeyed them.’
‘But…’
‘I know I don't always explain myself, but you must always do what I say.
I have reasons.
These things are vitally important.’
She stepped over the marble chunk, and walked up to him.
Even standing on the same broad step as him, she seemed pitifully small.
‘Clive and the girl.
It's been at least an hour.
And Nina…’
‘I found Clive.
He's gone.
Anne is lost, but I know where she is.’
‘Nina?’
‘She'll turn up.’
‘Shouldn't we…?’
‘No.
There is no point now.’
‘You look flushed.
Have you been overexerting yourself?’
She reached up and touched his cheek.
He felt a slight tickling as his old skin blistered.
There was no pain, but he flinched from the contact.
Amelia's unsubtle lust for him darted out of her like static electricity.
He was repulsed by the scramble of images in her mind.
She reminded him of the Objectivist.
They were standing on the main staircase, two flights up from the party room.
He could hear the nervous chatter of the guests.
He could make out all the separate conversations.
Other sounds caught in between the meaningless words.
Drinks being poured, a plastic cup crumpling, someone beating a fingertip tattoo on a table.
He had them all fixed in his mind.
There were sixteen people in that room, standing, sitting, lying.
Anne was getting out of the conservatory.
Nina was curled up under  a bed upstairs.
Amelia was with him.
Clive was used.
There was no one else.
The nearest house was empty.
No cars or people moved in the street outside.
Beyond the garden was a fairly busy road, but all the passing drivers were wrapped up in their tin cans, insulated by Christmas drinks and trivial pursuits.
It was perfect.
He held up his right hand, stretching his fingers, and took Amelia's face in his grip.
Her puzzled expression was covered.
The thumb hooked under her chin, and the fingers pressed the top of her head an inch above the hairline.
His nails grew, curving into her.
She could not speak, but he saw her panicked eyes staring from the spaces between his long fingers.
Her cold nose pressed into his palm.
Muffled sounds came from her throat.
‘Shhh, Amelia.
It's over.
You'll always be with me now.
Isn't that what you've wanted?’
He squeezed and pulled, taking off the front half of her head.
He ignored the raw, splintered mess, and leaned forwards as if to kiss where her lips had been.
He caught the weasel escaping as an insubstantial wisp, and inhaled it in through his nostrils.
He was not interested in the meat, just the flavour.
She was sour, but strong.
Not as nourishing as Judi, but an excellent appetiser for what was to come.
She had always been ruled by her desires.
He savoured the weasel on his palate for seconds, and then breathed her into his lungs.
She was still startled, but almost comfortable.
She had been easy to incorporate.
He threw the face away, and went downstairs to join the party.
He was ready now.
Ready to give in to his feeding frenzy.
eleven
HERE BE TYGERS .
In St John's Wood?
She had seen it, but she did not believe it.
On the mezzanine again, she turned and looked back, down into the conservatory.
There was no animal that she could see.
The shrubs were not even disturbed.
The song finished, and the loudspeakers just hissed.
The place was completely undisturbed, if not completely undisturbing.
Anne wondered.
Had she somehow been drugged?
She had drunk only perrier at the party, and eaten nothing.
But she could have been slipped something somewhere, through a pinprick.
Had Clive done anything?
And what kind of dope produced that kind of idiotic but vivid hallucination?
She did not want to think about it; that would only make her more disorientated.
The time is out of joint, she thought.
‘Oh curse/d spite,’ she said aloud, ‘that ever I was born to set it right.’
There was nothing awry in her mind now.
She could remember Hamlet and the dates of important battles in the Revolutionary War and the names of Disney's Seven Dwarfs and the telephone numbers of old boyfriends and the faces of people she had known in college but not seen in years and the deadlines for the three pieces she had been working on…
Millions and millions of bits of information were still in her head, correctly labelled and neatly stored, but she could not work out the geography of this house, she was seeing green tigers and she was afraid in a way she had not been since childhood.
She was afraid that the Monster was going to get her.
In another part of the house, the screaming started.
She could not work out how far away it was, but the shrill  was enough to hammer into her skull like nails.
There were many voices, screaming differently, loudly raised in a badly orchestrated cantata.
Somewhere, violence was being done.
If there was a tiger, it was loose now among the party guests.
Loose and hungry.
It was time to get out.
She could call the police — call Inspector Hollis — make a fool of herself, level hysterical accusations, have a breakdown, go to bed for weeks, miss Christmas.
But first, she had to get out.
She had to get out of this house.
The main staircase must be near, somewhere in the centre of the house.
If she could get to the main hall, she could automatically open the gates from the instrument panel by the front door.
That would mean getting past the party, getting past whatever was happening to the guests.
The screaming was dying now.
A few stragglers kept it up for a few seconds, then there was nothing.
Just quiet.
She had not been able to work out where the noise had been coming from.
It might even have been just another sound effect.
Presumably…
She stopped thinking, and turned away from the mezzanine, plunging back into the corridor maze.
twelve
UNDER THE four-poster bed, Nina was safe, curtained from the nightmare by the bedspread.
The monsters could not get her here.
But, cling as she might to the bolster she had taken with her to stop her screams, she could not stop shaking.
She did not know whether she had used the smack.
She remembered the needle going into flesh, but she was not sure that it had been her own.
Her right arm had gone to sleep below the tourniquet.
In the dark, she imagined red-eyed rats scurrying around her, lashing her with their tails.
She heard her own heartbeat, alarmingly rapid, and she heard the sea in her ears.
She was crying like a baby, sobbing for her Mum.
The monsters were prowling in the bedroom, searching for her.
She heard their hissing breaths, and the hard, sharp noise of their hooves on the polished floorboards.
She prayed they would not think of looking under the bed.
Mr Skinner was inside her mind, whispering, alternately cajoling and scolding her.
He held his coat open, and called her to him.
He had everything she needed.
If she got to him, she would never have to worry again, never have to want again.
She tried not to listen to Mr Skinner.
She tried.
But he was persuasive, kindly, paternal…
The rats nipped at her flesh, biting through her ripped clothes, sinking sharp little teeth into her skin.
The monsters argued among themselves in monster language, tails lashing.
Mr Skinner was calling for her.
Her heartbeat was still quickening in a crescendo.
Soon, it must peak, and stop….
Mr Skinner's coat was warm, welcoming.
Wrapped in it, she would be able to sleep again, to dream sweet dreams, to wake up refreshed between clean sheets.
The rats got to her face, and she screamed inside herself, pressing her face to the bolster.
The vermin were inside the pillow, biting outwards, clawing at her tight-shut eyes, scratching her tear-tracked cheeks, forcing their furry heads into her mouth.
One monster wanted to lift the bedspread, but his friends were contemptuous.
They locked grinding horns, and scuffled.
Mr Skinner was singing, old songs from the '30s and '40s.
He was like the bandleaders her Gran remembered, in a crisp collar, soothing through a megaphone.
Nina wanted to go to him.
‘Yes,’ she said aloud, ‘yes, yes, yes!’
Mr Skinner finished his song, and bowed.
Flashbulbs went off from the audience.
She was his.
As soon as she got to him, she would be his.
She tried to get up on all fours, and bumped her head on the underside of the bed.
Her heartbeats were like a constant patter now, and she felt pains inside her chest and head.
The curtains parted, and light gushed into the dark space.
Under the bed, Nina realised, was where the monsters lived.
They were not afraid to come in after her.
Her heart stopped.
For an eternal moment, she waited for its next beat…
thirteen
ANNE HAD GIVEN up the rational approach, and picked a passage at random.
When she came to an intersection, she had ignored it or taken a new direction without bothering to think about it.
She had passed through a few rooms.
Now that she was looking closely, she realised that most of the rooms in the house had two doors.
Each was a fat little passage in itself.
She had not found any more Bacon rooms.
Most of the decor in this part of the house was modelled after Hollywood's idea of elaborate period furnishings.
Nobody real seemed to live here.
In a Versailles bed-chamber, attended by dressmaker's dummies in brocade jackets and periwigs, she found Nina.
She had unconsciously put into practice the Winnie the Pooh principle, which rules that the most effective method of searching for a lost person or object is to get lost oneself on the assumption that some force of nature brings all forgotten things together in ignored niches and unfrequented locales.
Of course, now they were both lost.
Nina was half-hidden under a four-poster bed, trailing silk sheets behind her like a bridal train.
She was sprawled, hugging a sausage-shaped pillow like Linus' comforter.
Anne could see that she was biting deeply into the pillow.
Earlier, Nina had been stretched a good many notches too tight; now, she had snapped, and was flapping limply.
Her cuff was still undone, and the tourniquet had made her hand and lower arm into white marble, but Anne could see no new puncture.
She guessed Nina had been too overwrought to shoot up.
Maybe, she had successfully fought the need.
‘Nina…’
The girl cringed at Anne's voice, and chewed the pillow.
She had been crying, and was still shaking badly.
It was difficult to tell whether she was retching or sobbing.
She rocked back and forth.
Anne crouched, and gently tried to pull the pillow away.
Nina was reluctant to give it up.
Anne coaxed, and stroked her hard jaw.
Finally, the girl let her teeth unclench, and relinquished a wet mouthful of cotton.
She put the pillow down, and hugged Nina.
The girl responded, gripping Anne in a desperate embrace.
It was like a wrestling hold.
She tried to soothe the girl, and Nina relaxed.
Anne unknotted the rubber tubing from her arm, and pulled the tourniquet loose.
Nina's upper arm was ringed with red, but she bent her elbow and wriggled her fingers, getting the circulation going again.
They stood up, and Nina half-sat on the edge of the bed.
She stretched and lay back.
She was nearly asleep.
‘No,’ Anne said.
‘We have to get out of the house.
We can't stay.’
‘I'm tired.’
‘I know.
So am I. But we can't stay.
This is a bad place.’
Anne knew she was treating Nina like a four-year-old, but could see no other way to cope with her.
‘I think something's happened downstairs.
Did you hear the noise?
I don't think we're safe here.’
‘Then…let's…go home…’
‘Yes, let's.
Home.
Come on, get up.
I'll help.
Here…’
She lifted Nina, getting the girl upright.
Anne made sure the girl was not hurt.
Nina had given up completely.
She did not protest when she was led towards the door.
‘This house,’ said Anne, ‘it doesn't seem to make sense.
Where is the main staircase?
Do you know?’
Nina smiled wanly.
‘Through that door, turn left…’
‘Are you sure?’
Nina was waking up.
For a moment, she was supremely confident.
‘Of course.
Come on, don't be a slowcoach.’
Anne found herself being led.
Nina was right.
The main staircase was there, and two flights down, so was the main  hall.
The place was empty, quiet and normal.
‘That's crazy,’ Anne said, ‘I'm sure I came this way…’
‘Crazy?
How?’
‘It's nothing.
Nothing really.
I just got lost.’
They went downstairs, carefully and without incident.
‘Anne?’
‘Yes?’
‘Hold my hand.’
‘Sure.’
They touched fingers, and got them entwined.
Anne kissed Nina on the cheek.
‘Eugh,’ the girl croaked, ‘don't get soppy.’
‘I won't.’
They were downstairs now, in the hall.
It was not a fake.
Anne saw her own coat hanging up on the rack with the others.
There was no noise of any kind from the party room.
The door was closed.
She knew she would have to take a look.
‘Stay here,’ she told Nina, letting her hand go, ‘this will be over in a moment.’
She held the doorhandle, took a deep breath, and opened the door.
…the room was a mess, but there were no people there.
Drinks stood abandoned.
The Christmas tree was broken, having shed a layer of needles and broken baubles onto the presents.
Food and cigarette butts had been trodden into the precious carpet.
The open fire had practically died.
The lights were still on, and a cassette was clicking in a tape deck.
Nina took her hand again, and tugged her away from the open door.
‘Has everyone gone?’ she asked.
‘I think so.’
‘Should we find someone to say goodbye to?’
Anne turned away from the party room.
‘Let's not bother.
Let's go.’
‘Amelia usually pays.
A hundred pounds.
Sometimes more, if you've been…’
‘We'll bill her later, okay?’
‘Okay.’
They got their coats.
Nina wanted to keep holding hands, and hurried the sleeves over her arms so they would not be out of contact for long.
It was a bit embarrassing but Anne was glad of it.
The instrument panel looked complicated, but all the switches were neatly marked.
The monitor showed the street outside in snowy black and white.
There was no one about.
Anne flipped the switch that opened the front gate, and the ironwork brushed the bottom of the video image.
‘There,’ she said.
‘Easy.’
Nina opened the front door by hand and stepped outside, pulling Anne after her…
It was very dark, and Anne felt something slap into her face and stay there.
She lifted it aside — it felt like a heavy curtain — and still could not see anything.
Nina's grip tightened.
The door had shut behind them.
‘Anne, where are we?’
She did not know.
In her coat pocket, she had a pen with a little light in it, for taking notes in theatres and other dark places.
She felt for it, and brought it out.
The glowworm lit up both their faces.
Nina was frightened again.
There were mobile shadows above her nose and eyebrows.
They were in a large wardrobe.
The curtain had been a crinoline, hanging from one of two rails that ran just above their heads.
‘This…’
‘…doesn't make sense.
I know.’
There was no handle on this side of the door.
Anne tried to get her fingers into the jamb, but could not.
It appeared to have locked itself.
‘We'll suffocate,’ said Nina.
‘I don't think so.’
Anne pushed aside an armload of dresses, finding only another rank of old clothes.
‘I don't think this is a regular closet.
It's deep.
More like a passage…’
‘There's a way out?’
‘At the other end.
Right.’
On Anne's side, there were women's clothes — elaborate ball gowns with mock jewels sewn into the bodices and rustling, puffy sleeves and skirts.
Nina faced a succession of sombre gentleman's wear — black evening suits, heavy overcoats.
A few brass and silver buttons gleamed in the minimal light.
There was not much space.
They could not go side by side.
Anne took the lead, and dragged Nina.
The girl's hand was cold now, although it was quite stuffy in the passage.
It was not an easy progress.
The clothes had not been disturbed for a long time and were as thick and tangled as jungle foliage.
There would be untold vermin nesting in the folds of material.
Anne would have had good use for a machete.
A few of the wooden hangers had rusted wire hooks which bent and broke as they passed.
Bundles fell down, stirring up dust.
Nina had a coughing fit.
The fallen clothes were as difficult to wade through as thick mud.
They must have penetrated twenty feet into the passage, and there was still no hint of an end within reach.
Anne felt the wind knocked out of her.
She had blundered into a suit that was much more solid than most.
She staggered back, and had to be steadied by Nina.
A dark, hanging shape blocked the way.
Holding up her light, Anne saw a cavernous opera cape with a Mephistophelean magician's tailcoat hanging inside it.
And inside both was a large corpse.
Nina had a minor convulsion.
Anne's hand felt crushed.
‘Anders!’
It was, but, for all his weight, he looked hollow.
Anne touched his dead white face, and felt nothing that had been alive.
‘No,’ she said, ‘it's a sculpture.
I've seen them before.
Look, it's supposed to be Anders grown old…’
The hair was white, the neck muscles flabby.
The face was minutely wrinkled, the flesh beneath semi-liquid.
‘Let's go on.’
Nina was hesitant.
‘You don't have to touch it.’
They ducked, and squeezed past.
There were others.
Some were unrecognisably altered or mutilated, but most were obvious caricatures of people Anne had seen at the party.
Not only were they made to look lifeless and tormented, but they were crammed into mouldering fancy dress costumes.
Toby Farrar wore the braided tunic of a Hussar, and even had a jaunty helmet perched on his head.
Jeane Russell was an unsuitably voluptuous fairy queen with gossamer wings and golden spangles on her bare, withered arms.
Derek Douane was got up as a Dickensian urchin, with a broken neck and a dirty face.
Daeve was a knobbly-kneed schoolgirl in a navy blue pinafore, with red spot freckles on his cheeks and straw-coloured ropes attached to his beret.
It was hot in the thin corridor, and the hanging husks made going forwards practically impossible.
The two girls paused, grimy and breathless, in the middle of the sick display.
Nina tugged Anne back, towards the way they had come from.
‘We can't give up now,’ Anne said.
‘Try to ignore these things.
They're not real.’
‘There's a thing in here with us.’
‘What?’
‘A thing.’
Anne listened, but there was no noise at all.
‘It's an animal,’ said Nina.
A tiger?
‘I don't think so,’ said Anne.
‘Let's go on.
It can't be much longer.
We must be nearly there.’
They struggled a little further.
Baz Something dangled absurdly, in the ballooning pants, curly-toed slippers, tiny waistcoat and bulbous turban of an Arabian Nights eunuch.
His paunch bulged over a sash.
At the end of the line was the computer salesman, dressed up as the Queen of Hearts.
His death was supposed to have been messy, and there was a lot of realistic blood all over his costume.
In the centre of his chest, where there was a heart motif on his tunic, there was a ragged hole disclosing his real heart, which looked to have been squeezed by an iron fist.
Nina screamed, horribly loud in the confined space.
‘One of them touched me,’ she said.
‘Touched my hair.’
She tried to put her arms around Anne, but could not.
A body got in the way.
Anne banged her elbow on a solid wood wall.
‘They're just statues.’
Anne pulled Nina along.
They left the bodies behind them.
The passage was wider now, with room for four racks.
There were enough costumes here to keep the Paris Opera going for five successive seasons.
But it was easier to move forwards.
‘They're after us.
They're not dead.’
Nina was whining.
Anne wanted to slap her.
She was at the end of her patience.
None of this was helping.
Her light was carried forwards.
It picked out a face, and they stopped.
Nina's hand-grip was painful again.
The face smiled.
‘Good evening, Anne.’
It was Skinner.
He looked more like Hugh Farnham now.
There was some scarring on his cheek.
Anne thought it was growing as she stared at it.
She had nothing to say.
‘I knew your sister, you know.’
The bastard did not even look evil.
‘Intimately.’
She could not look away from him.
He smiled blandly again, without much enthusiasm.
He was as tired as she felt.
‘Skinner, what the fuck are you playing at?’
‘Playing?’
She remembered it was not a game any more.
‘Playing?
That's for imbeciles like Amelia Dorf.
You and me, Anne, we don't play games.’
‘Yeah, right.’
Nina yanked her arm hard, pulling Anne's shoulder painfully.
She turned away from Skinner.
The other girl had plunged behind a curtain of fur coats.
Anne was pulled into the clothes and lost her balance.
Then she was down, and Nina was on top of her.
The pen-light rolled away.
Nina let go of her hand.
Anne felt fingers in her throat, squeezing hard.
She reached for Nina's hands, and grabbed what she hoped were her little fingers.
She bent the fingers back.
There was a squeal, and she was released.
Anne tried to get up, pulling on a coat, but Nina was still pinning her to the floor.
There was still some light.
Looking up at Nina, Anne saw a dead face.
Just like the other effigies.
The scuffle at the Club Des Esseintes aside, she had not been in a fight since elementary school.
The trick with the little fingers was the only thing she remembered from a piece she had once written on self-defence courses for women.
She was no good at this.
She rolled from side to side, trying to get the Nina Thing off her chest.
She got hold of a fallen ulster and stuffed it into Nina's face.
It wrapped around her head.
The Nina Thing tore at it, but Anne was released.
She pushed the girl hard, and heard her fall over.
The struggle had been silent.
Neither girl had grunted or sworn.
There had only been a few sharp yelps of pain.
Skinner might not even have been there.
Skinner?
Free of Nina, Anne got her head down and charged.
She did not connect with Skinner as she had expected, and fell down.
She scrambled along on leftover momentum, using her hands and knees more than her feet.
It was dark, and the passage was narrower now.
She brushed the walls with both shoulders, and even banged her head when she tried to stand up.
There was something behind her, coming after her, coming to get her.
The Nina Thing.
And it was not alone.
The others, the guests, were there too, in a pack.
They were not alive, but they were not dead enough either.
She considered lying down on the floor, covered with fallen dresses, and waited for their touch on her neck.
But she could not make herself give up.
She kept on.
She kept on until she ran into a wall of loose boards.
They fell apart, wood splintering, nails wrenching, and she burst out of the side of a building.
She stumbled and fell, her palms striking wet, dirty concrete.
She felt cold night air on her face.
Entr'acte
one
IN HIS DREAM, Cameron Nielson Jr saw life as a motion picture, unspooling steadily in the white-hot gaze of the bulb, the past piling up like celluloid string on the projection booth floor.
CAMERON NIELSON in The Cameron Nielson Story .
A Cameron Nielson Film.
From the Cradle to the Grave with CAMERON NIELSON.
‘It'll run and run,’ Cameron Nielson.
His early years had been mainly montage.
The young composer practises his scales while waiting for a big break.
The young composer at odds with his family, who want him to follow a less daring course.
The young composer working late into the night, notes flowing from his stylo.
Women, leaving.
Landlords knocking on doors, demanding money.
Dishes piling up in a sink.
Fingers in close-up, struggling with a recalcitrant piano.
Electrical equipment accumulating around the traditional musical instrument.
The reflection of a soldering iron in protective goggles as the musical weapons are forged.
Variety headlines spin out of the  papier maché mist and chart the rise of a career.
Fatherly, distinguished men scoffing at the hero's genius in smoke-filled clubs, plotting his come-uppance, but ultimately being swept away by the rollercoaster force of his obsessive talent.
Early successes are built upon, as different audiences are superimposed, each clapping a little louder than the last, a crescendo rising.
The young composer called out of his electronic cocoon after a performance and taking his bows with the other musicians, a rare grin on his sweating face.
A devoted woman, her face a blur, clapping from the wings.
And throughout it all the music, first heard as an eerie sketch inside the hero's head, skeletally indistinct and bone china fragile.
Then, as the young composer experiments at his consoles and keyboards, taking on some meat, becoming stronger, deeper.
Finally, in a triumphant climax, bursting forth strong and unforgettable, exploding from his mind into reality, in THX sound, blasting at the acoustics of every concert hall in the world.
Then, amid the frenzy of music and applause, a clinch with the devoted woman and a fade to a painless old age.
The composer, with talcum powder-white hair and a young face, dying content in his bed, surrounded by adoring and grieving children, his music living on.
Under the end title, a pan across a series of busts in some Elysian hall of music.
Palestrina.
Bach.
Beethoven.
Mozart.
Brahms.
Wagner.
Mahler.
Stravinsky.
Schoenberg.
Stockhausen.
CAMERON NIELSON.
The End , in curlicue letters.
A CAMERON NIELSON PRODUCTION.
‘Cam?’
‘Uh?’
He jumped a little as Alexia slipped the boutonnière into the lapel of his tailcoat.
‘You were dreaming,’ she said.
He concentrated.
He was calm.
Before a concert, some people went to pieces, chain-smoking, hands trembling, shaking whisky out of the bottle.
Cameron Nielson Jr became the still centre of a hurricane, as collected and single-minded as a great neurosurgeon before an operation.
‘I'm sorry.
I have to carry the whole piece in my head.’
Alexia smiled.
His boutonnière matched her corsage.
She had been his personal assistant throughout the preparation for the performance of the Telemachus Symphony , and they had slept together, three times.
He was beginning to find the sex interesting, and had already started to wonder whether he should try to make her position permanent.
The English girl was efficient and brought him just the right touch of warmth.
He knew that he could be an ice-cube at times — God knows, Beethoven, Mozart and Wagner had not been easy to live with either — and Alexia took the chill off him.
She patted his lapel, straightening the flower, and kissed him like a little girl.
She was very English.
His father had married an English girl, after divorcing Cameron's mother.
The Nielsons were all drawn to this country.
Perhaps it was a genetic thing.
In all likelihood, Anne would settle for an Englishman.
And Judi…
He drove his family out of his head, and let the music flood back.
As a boy, he had been certain that he was adopted, or that his mother had taken a lover.
Once, well after her marriage to his father was over, he had even asked her, but she just laughed at him.
He remembered the red-cheeked embarrassment, and his subsequent determination never to let it show again.
For a while, he had even resisted his name, scratching out the Jr on any documents with his full name on them, and signing himself C. Eugene Nielson.
Now, that seemed cowardly.
He simply had to stake his claim and fight for it, making sure by his works that everybody knew who Cameron Nielson really was.
The brilliant young composer, not the burned-out playwright.
‘Not long now.’
‘No.’
‘Nervous?’
Alexia did not know him well, he realised.
‘Of course not.
It's too late for that.’
Performing this piece was as complicated as launching a space shuttle, involving synchronised computer systems, traditional orchestral instruments, African drums and as many technicians as trained musicians.
Cameron was not merely the composer and conductor, but a theremin soloist and the director of operations.
There were human elements involved, and that would give the piece an immediacy, but so much of it was pre-programmed, with tapes played and sounds conjured by infallible computers, that most of the work was already done.
The performance itself was important, but it was almost of academic interest.
Telemachus was already a thoroughly achieved work.
Presenting it to the public was like unveiling a finished sculpture.
‘Then why are you whistling?’
He realised he had been, and clamped his lips.
It was a habit he had had as a child.
A bad habit.
His nanny had scolded him over and over, but he had never been able to stop.
She conjured up a bogeyman, Mr Whistle, who pulled out the voices of little boys who whistled, leaving them only with their whistles.
That had been before Dr Spock.
He had been terrified, but still unable to stop.
He had dreamed about Mr Whistle, picturing him as a child-sized man in a Little Lord Fauntleroy outfit, with floppy velvet bows and knickerbockers, his head a white eggshape, featureless but for a shark's gash of a mouth.
He knew that he still whistled sometimes, but the bogeyman could not scare him any more.
‘It's an old thing with me, Alexia, I'm sorry.’
‘Don't be,’ she said, smiling.
‘I think it's cute.’
‘Cute?
That's not an English expression.’
The girl stepped back, away from him.
‘Obviously I'm being polluted by an American.’
There were good luck cards on the dressing room table, from tutors, colleagues, a few friends.
There was nothing from Dad, of course, nor Anne.
He could not expect their interest.
But there was a note, heart-stoppingly cheerful in its brevity, from Judi.
It must have been mailed a few days ago, with a second class stamp.
It had stopped him dead, for a moment.
‘Here's another one,’ Alexia said, producing a square envelope, ‘delivered by hand.
Sorry it's a bit bent.’
He slit it open with his finger, and glanced at it.
‘Best wishes for your career,’ it read, ‘from…’
Mr Scribble?
‘Mr…
I can't make this out, Lex.
What do you think?’
‘Begins with a W,’ she laughed.
‘Looks like Whistle.’
Before he could stop himself, a piercing howl was forced through his teeth.
‘Sounds like Whistle too.’
He suffered a flashback, an out-of-place reel from an old dark house horror movie, or maybe a nightmare being offered for psychoanalysis to Ingrid Bergman.
The young composer  wanders through a haunted mansion, trying to exorcise the spirits of his tyrannical father and castrating sisters.
Molten watches tumble out of wardrobes, cellos sprout spider-legs and scuttle musically in the shadows, faceless conductors lash out with scorpion-tailed batons.
All very symbolic, with theremins on the soundtrack.
And also in the house is the Monster, Mr Whistle, obscene drool leaking onto his embroidered vest.
He dispelled the images, and hugged the girl, almost desperately.
‘That was a surprise,’ she said.
‘I knew you weren't the composing machine they say you are.’
They?
Who were they?
Who had been talking?
‘I'm sorry,’ he said, embarrassed.
‘It's all right.
This is a big night.
You have a right to be nervous.
What with your father, and your sister.
No one could blame you.’
Was she already making excuses?
Did she know something about the performance he did not?
He let her go, and walked to the mirror.
As always he wore the traditional evening clothes.
He liked the reference to the classical tradition.
His white tie was perfectly tied, his shirt-front stiff with starch and studded properly.
Alexia whistled this time, off-key.
A wolf whistle.
Cameron forced a smile.
The digital clock was counting down towards the performance.
On the closed-circuit monitors, he saw the technicians taking their places at the instrument banks.
The stage was dominated by a cracked mask with blank, blind eyes.
Telemachus, himself.
Cameron thought the face looked like his father.
The instrument monitors were reading normal as the equipment started up.
Alexia brought him his headset, which he slipped on like a minimalist space helmet.
He was becoming part of the machinery of the piece.
He checked his watch against the clock, and mentally ticked off the functions as they were performed.
7:31.
‘It's nearly time,’ Alexia said, needlessly.
The orchestral musicians were filing out, also formally dressed.
Minerva Beaton, the cellist, had resisted Telemachus at first, refusing to become part of the machinery of the piece, but those arguments, hateful to Cameron's memory, were over now.
She had had to be converted, but now she was a true believer.
She would serve the symphony.
‘Who's that?’
Alexia pointed to a shape moving on one of the monitors, just behind Minerva.
It was shadowed, and small.
‘There shouldn't be any children backstage.’
There was a gleam in the dark, as if reflected off a large eggshell.
Then the shape was gone.
‘There's no one there,’ Cameron said quietly.
‘No one at all.’
‘No,’ she said.
‘There was…,
‘It was just a glitch,’ he said, too forcefully.
Alexia held his glance for a few moments, a furrow between her eyebrows, and dropped the subject.
7:33.
Light was flooding the monitors as the curtains rose.
There was polite applause as the mask came into view, and the performers settled.
‘Ready?’
He nodded, and left the room, Alexia a few steps behind.
The door was held open for him, and he threaded his way through all the backstage equipment.
Alexia took her canvas chair in the wings, her bug in her ear so she could relay if necessary his almost subaudial commands to the technical people.
7:34.
Cameron Nielson Jr stepped out on the stage just as the initial applause was dying, and climbed the dais with leisurely ease, settling down behind the theremin stand.
He nodded to each of the performers.
There was a flicker of applause for his appearance, but it faded away on schedule, leaving him three seconds of silence by the clock on the theremin before the first tonalities sounded out.
Then at precisely 7:35, the nightmare began.
two
IN HIS NIGHTMARE, the device with the beeping alarms misfired because, by 7:59, the audience was laughing too loud for their watches to be heard.
The tittering started during the first five minutes of the piece, and grew.
The music was his, and emerged as written from the apparatus he had designed for it, but it was changed.
The effects he had carefully measured were misjudged, comical, obscene, absurd.
Minerva Beaton could hardly keep her long face straight as she sawed her cello.
The eerie, longing notes of his Telemachus theme sounded like whoopee cushions.
Beyond the lights, Cameron got the impression of audience members thronging the exits, trying to get out of the concert hall.
He tried to keep going, his hands wringing sounds from the theremin.
Painful feedback boomed from the amplifiers, and he realised he was whistling again, the sound dreadfully enlarged by his headset and hurled out into the auditorium.
Telemachus looked down blindly on his humiliation.
And the childsized intruder shifted in the shadows around the stage, mocking him from the darkness.
He started coughing, and blood spatted across the note-dotted creaminess of his score.
Somehow, he made it through to the end.
There was no crescendo of applause, just a lone volley of claps.
Alexia was trying to make him feel better.
He wrenched off his headset and fled the spotlit stage, pushing past the girl, hiding his red face in the dark.
When the last resonances of the symphony had died, all that was left was an electronic whine.
It sounded like an idiot child whistling.
Somebody turned it off.
The film sped up as Cameron ran out of the building, still in his tailcoat, and tried to lose himself in the streets around the Barbican.
His shiny shoes pounded the sidewalks, and neon signs flashed the names of increasingly seedy nightclubs at him.
It started raining in sparkling sheets, the technicians pouring water down from above his eyeline onto him.
Rich, orchestral music, a kitschy concerto in the style of Erich Wolfgang Korngold, thundered on the soundtrack, vibrating his teeth.
Mr Whistle was still dogging him, not pursuing but just keeping up.
I he bogeyman did not need to do anything more to him.
His fate was complete.
In the space of a few cuts, he had a thick growth of stubble, his shirtfront was soiled with liquor, his hair was wild and his tails were tattered.
He had a bottle of cheap booze in his hand, and was swigging from it.
He was in a flophouse, his coatsleeve wrinkled up above his left elbow and his shirtsleeve ripped away.
The vein pulsed in his arm as the makeshift tourniquet drew tighter.
Judi, her face white with Gothic make-up, handed him the glowing syringe.
As the needle slid into him, he whistled sharply, hurting his ears.
Rain washed Judi's face away.
Then, the sun came up and the nightmare shifted gears.
He was in a gutter, cold clean water running around him, washing the grime and sleep from his face.
A figure loomed over him, haloed by the sunlight, and picked him up, her arms slipping tight around his chest.
Her blonde hair shone gold.
‘Lex?’
She did not try to soothe him, but she took him away from Skid Row, pulling him into a kingsize bed with freshly-laundered sheets.
He was naked and clean again, his pains salved.
The music came back.
Things were not as bad as they seemed…
In the long run, they were much worse.
The night before the wedding, Cameron Nielson Jr burned his manuscripts, one by one.
Alexia stood by and watched him do it.
Acting as his agent, she had got him a commission to score a 15-minute TV documentary about autumn leaves.
He thought he could do it.
A sub-Elgar theme was whistling in his mind.
In the burning pages, he imagined his electro-acoustic instruments sparking and self-destructing like a spaceship set at the end of a low-budget science fiction film.
He reached for a more conventional musical palette, strings and woodwinds.
They were married in church, in the West Country village where Alexia had grown up.
Her parents were delighted.
Anne was there, representing his family, and his Dad, his spirits lifted by his recent turn for the better, sent a cable of congratulations to the groom and a mash note to the bride.
Turning from the altar, Cameron could not see Mr Whistle among the congregation, but did think he glimpsed Judi, loitering embarrassed near the back.
After the ceremony, Alexia kissed him and loved him.
He was enfolded by warm feelings.
There was gentle applause, and flashbulbs popped.
The orchestra played only harmonic music.
Everything was easy.
After the honeymoon, Alexia was pregnant and he was progressing well on the film score.
His work proved acceptable, and further commissions resulted.
No one knew his name, but people hummed his tunes.
He wrote the theme music for a British television serial adapted from a Barbara Cartland novel.
He wrote a 30-second piece for a shampoo commercial that enabled him to buy a house in the country.
With his wife and Cameron Nielson III, he had a comfortable life, cocooned by money and anonymity.
He never thought of performing again, or of serious music.
If there was something lacking in his life, he did not know what it was.
Meanwhile, thanks to a series of startling medical breakthroughs, his father was recovering from his debilitating strokes.
He almost literally returned from the dead, and his personal memoir,Facing Death , was the strongest thing he had written since the '50s.
A 75-page essay, it climbed the New York Times bestseller list and was the talking-point book of the year.
Following that, there was a revival of interest in Cameron Nielson Sr, and most of his theatrical works were staged in New York and London.
The Rat Jacket broke box  office records on Broadway with Dustin Hoffman and Al Pacino,The Crunch was directed by Peter Hall on Shaftesbury Avenue, and On the Graveyard Shift at Sam's Bar-B-Q and Grill was remade by Steven Spielberg with Marlon Brando as Sam, Robert DeNiro in Brando's old role and Meryl Streep as Angela.
Cameron's father began writing plays again, and managements competed for the rights to stage each new mature masterpiece.
He was pleased for his Dad, and things were better between them.
When Martin Scorsese filmed The Rat Jacket , Cameron Nielson Sr tried to get his son the job of writing the score, but the deal fell through.
Cameron did not mind about that, even when Harvey Broadribb, who had been at Juillard with him, won the Academy Award for his work on the movie.
Anne sent him a signed copy of her first book,Remembering Judi .
A non-fiction account of their sister's last years,Remembering Judi won the Pulitzer Prize and was a hardback bestseller.
It was turned into the highest-rated Made-for-TV movie ever produced, catapulting Nina Kenyon, the young unknown cast in the lead, to multiple awards and international stardom.
After that, Anne became a novelist, won the Booker and the Whitbread in the same year with different books, and was given her own television show.
He wrote the opening and closing signature tunes for the program, but they were dumped after the first season and replaced with ‘something a little more distinctive’.
He wrote more shampoo, hairspray, deodorant and sliced bread commercials.
On a visit to England, Cameron's Dad met Minerva Beaton at a dinner party arranged by Alexia and wound up marrying the cellist.
She reminded him of someone he had known as a young man.
At the age of forty, Cameron was presented with a baby brother, Todd Nielson, upon whom everybody doted.
When his own son was old enough to go to school, Alexia took up painting, working her way away from representational landscapes into suggestive abstracts based on the British countryside.
Her work was too unconventional for immediate popular acceptance, but Cameron could tell how good she was, and was supportive even when she  was discouraged.
Anne and Dad both bought her paintings and displayed them prominently, and Cameron used his fee from a sanitary napkin commercial to finance an exhibition in London.
Alexia was critically acclaimed, and several major galleries purchased her, but she did not become immediately collectible.
She joked that she would only make money fifty years after she was dead, and he told her that money did not matter.
Cameron went to a lot of receptions, private views, book launches, first night parties, movie premières and testimonials.
His father, sister, wife and stepmother — Minerva became a much-in-demand soloist and had a big-selling jazz-classical crossover album — were always being honoured, and he always tried to turn out to support them.
He got used to people asking him ‘and what do you do?’
He needed less and less to work, his commercial and film scores earning him a steady residual income.
He did not miss his music, and could barely remember his performing days.
Alexia and Cameron III gently chided him for his whistling habit, and he developed an aversion to his own work.
Even when Alexia, who remained a young woman even as her hair silvered, tried to point out the strengths of his pieces he mentally tuned out.
He had spent his life designing inoffensive wallpaper, he realised, and he was not really ashamed of that.
Cameron III asked for a guitar for his 13th birthday.
Cameron wanted to give him a computer, but Alexia prevailed and soon the house was full of twangs and scales again.
His son was obsessive about music, mastering classical, folk and rock modes with alarming rapidity.
At sixteen, he put together his first group and, with a cash present from his grandfather, put out a record of his own songs.
It got a lot of airplay from John Peel, and was written up extensively by the music press.
A major company signed him up, and he had a series of top ten hits while building a serious reputation.
Elvis Costello called him a genius, and Jonathan Demme made an in-concert film of his appearance at the Hollywood Bowl.
Cameron III was embarrassed by the Smash Hits following and tried not to be a teen idol, whereupon he  was celebrated all the more.
Cameron knew how good his son really was, and encouraged him to break free of the pop straitjacket.
Cameron III recorded duets with Stevie Wonder, David Byrne, Frank Sinatra and Kiri Te Kanawa.
Then, he wrote a West End musical based on his aunt's Remembering Judi and it transferred to Broadway, with Nina Kenyon making an impressive singing debut in her original role, finally outgrossing everything written by Andrew Lloyd Webber.
On The Tonight Show , Johnny Carson did a whole monologue on the theme of, ‘yes, but who is Cameron Nielson the Second ?’
Todd Nielson became a medical researcher, and finally did something about the ageing process.
Their father was one of the first beneficiaries, and the whole family was able to gather at his 100th birthday party.
Cameron talked with Minerva, who was being magnanimously tolerant of her husband's much-publicised affair with Nina Kenyon, and with Anne, who was well into the tertiary stage of her fourth marriage (to Didier Bishopric, a society restaurateur ) and just back from the Betty Ford clinic after a spell of amphetamine dependency.
The family had asked him to compose a tune for the party, but he had declined.
He did not do that any more.
Finally, his son stepped in and wrote a song, ‘Not Out’, that would become an anthem for the new generation of active centenarians.
However, thanks to a nervous disorder, Cameron Nielson III was unable to play at the party and, at the last minute, Cameron agreed to step in.
After his son's band, joined for the occasion by Minerva, played ‘Not Out’, with Nina handling the vocal, Cameron sat at the piano.
Everybody sang ‘Happy Birthday to You’, drowning him out.
It was a great occasion.
Cameron III's condition got worse, and his uncle Todd recommended specialists.
Alexia was tormented, and poured her feelings out on canvas, producing some of her best work.
Cameron spent a lot of time sitting at his piano with the lid down, his fingers resting on the wood, whistling unconsciously.
The specialists tried increasingly radical treatments, but his son did not recover.
In the nursing home, Cameron III wrote an album's worth of his very best material, railing against the darkness that was crowding in on him.
At the funeral, Cameron's stepmother played the cello while he stood with his arm around Alexia, feeling drained and empty.
Anne overdosed alone in her penthouse, describing herself in her last note as just another dead junkie.’
Their father wrote a tragic play about his daughters, and Nina, grown old enough, played ‘Amy’, the character based on Anne.
There were characters equivalent to Victoria Page, Judi and Todd, but no one in An American family resembled Cameron.
There were new arts by now, shared dreams that could be shaped by the skilled.
Susan, Anne's daughter by Didier, became one of the first geniuses of the form, moulding her night fantasies into unforgettably affecting tapestries of emotion and narrative.
The Museum of Modern Art in New York held a major retrospective of Alexia Nielson's paintings, but his wife did not live to see it.
She succumbed to an unexpected cerebral haemorrhage at the easel two weeks before the opening.
Her last, unfinished work was uncharacteristic: a portrait of her husband, prepared as a birthday surprise.
He insisted it be exhibited, although it lacked a face.
Several journalists who covered the event assumed that Alexia was Cameron Nielson's daughter and that he, despite his name, had married into the family.
Hugh Farnham was discovered in a retirement home in Florida, living under an assumed identity, obsessively chewing on his rusks.
He agreed to a televised debate, hosted by Dan Rather, with Cameron Nielson Sr. Farnham was still feisty on the show, but Cameron Nielson, looking younger now than his son, was as skilled as a great matador, and finally evened the score with his former tormentor, driving him to tearful contrition.
Waving a fist at the camera, Cameron Nielson recited the names of those blacklist casualties he had avenged at last.
At the reception after the show, Todd, learning for the first time of the ancient history of his family, spat in Hugh Farnham's face.
The  old inquisitor slunk into the night, spittle still dripping from his cheek.
Cameron, needing nothing, sat around the house, surrounded by other peoples' books and music and art.
A journalist interviewed him for a book about his family, and when The Nielsons appeared, it made no mention at all of his professional life.
He did not mind.
He whistled, tunelessly.
Alone, with no worries, lie whistled.
The whistling became louder, more piercing, more painful.
Sitting at his piano, he howled.
He looked down and saw he had battered his fingers bloody against the wooden lid.
He was coughing.
The whistling sounded like feedback, and his hammering on the piano became a dying round of applause.
He was in the light, but there was darkness all around.
One of the perils of dreaming too much was that you got flashbacks afterwards.
He tried to clear the phantoms from his head and grasp reality.
He looked up and saw Minerva at her cello, and Alexia, young and alive again, in the wings.
He was not sitting at a piano.
It was a theremin.
The whistling stopped, and the music began.
three
HIS HANDS hovered above the instrument, refusing to move, but the opening notes of the symphony came from the theremin.
Nobody noticed that he was not contributing.
Tapes cut in and overlaid the unearthly siren-call of the electro-acoustic instrument, and Minerva's cello answered the melodic tonality with a delicately offhand echo.
Cameron was sweating.
His hands were stuck in space, a foot away from the theremin.
He felt as if he were pressing against a strong, polarised magnetic force.
But the theremin played its part by itself, as if it were programmed to.
The Telemachus Symphony swelled.
The audience were hypnotised by the piece, each member, even those cynical about ‘so-called ‘’ modern'’music', knew they were present at a historic event.
This was a première that would be remembered forever.
It was for Judi, Cameron decided.
He must make that clear to the press.
And for Dad.
Now, perhaps, they would understand.
His wrists began to ache, and his nails were empurpled with blood.
Anne.
He must tell Anne.
He was not a total ice-cube.
This music proved that.
The symphony continued, greater than anything he had ever done.
It was greater than him.
He was not needed any more.
His hands were released, and he dropped them to his lap.
The theremin was playing itself with passion, with feeling.
For the first time, he understood his own work.
His face was wet with tears.
Minerva's solo came and went.
The trick with the watches was more than a technical stunt, it actually worked in the context of the piece, sucking the audience even further into the spell.
Quietly, humbly, Cameron took off his headset and set it down on the floor.
He slipped off his stool and backed away from the theremin stand.
No one noticed.
The music had them all.
He turned.
A single globular tear crept from the white blank of Telemachus' eye and ran down the giant mask.
Alexia was sobbing gently in the wings, stifling herself into silence.
The music went on, and on.
Cameron left the stage, unremarked, and stepped into a carpeted, brightly-lit corridor.
He could still hear his music, as if it were very far away.
He needed a cigarette.
He felt light-headed, as if he had been awake for days on end.
Looking for a concession stand, he turned a corner.
The bogeyman was waiting for him.
It was a long time since he had seen Mr Whistle.
They had both grown up.
Mr Whistle's clothes had grown in size with him.
He was a tall, broad man now, but he still wore knickerbockers and velvet.
His face was different, almost human, but he still had a shark's mouth.
‘Hello, Cam,’ he whistled.
‘Long time, no see…’
Cameron felt small again.
The music was fading.
Mr Whistle seemed to be growing to giant size, his huge head scraping the ceiling.
He was forced to bend at the waist, looming over him.
‘You have such an interesting family,’ he said.
‘So varied, so talented…’
Cameron remembered his dream, remembered the thickly-populated nightmare life he had led, trailing off into a bland and dusty future.
Mr Whistle smiled, teeth cutting his lips.
He wiped his  mouth with the back of his hand and tore away a ragged stretch of skin.
‘Just think of me as the Ghost of Cameron Yet to Come…’
Could he hear laughter from the auditorium?
He was clutched by dread.
Was it all coming true?
‘We stand at a crossroads, Cam,’ Mr Whistle said.
‘You, and your entire family.
You know how I served your father, and let him live.
You know how I loved your sister, and made her die.
They each had a choice.
As do you…’
He was held fast again, his whole body wrapped in an invisible field.
‘And Anne?’ he asked.
‘Her too.
I'm dealing with her even as we speak.
As a ghost, I'm not really here.
I could tear you in two, but I'm not really here.
It's one of my many talents.’
Cameron did not doubt his old bogeyman.
He remembered Mr Whistle's ways.
‘You're whistling, little boy,’ the Monster told him.
He was.
He could not stop himself.
His half-heard symphony was a background for his tuneless whistle.
‘You know what I do to little boys who whistle?’
Cameron was a child again, the hell of life before him.
Growing up, exams, acne, practice, arguments, girls, alienation, scales.
He could not go through it all again.
‘I take their voices!’
The whistle died in Cameron's throat.
‘That's better.
You won't need to speak.
This is a yes or no question.
You can nod or shake your head.’
Cameron realised that Mr Whistle looked a little like Hugh Farnham.
He was a bogeyman for all the family.
‘Consider yourself lucky.
I've given you all a choice, but you're the only one who is getting it straight, all cards on the table.
There are no subtle, metaphorical struggles here.
This is a simple deal.’
Cameron tried to hear his symphony, strained his ears for it.
The music was there, but very faint.
‘You've seen a possible future, stretching out from this evening.
I can't guarantee it will be exactly like that, but you must have got the picture.
You can expect a long and happy life if you give up serious music.
Simple, isn't it?
Which would you rather died, you or your music?
You know how your father chose.
He has had the benefit of a fine son and beautiful daughters, but there have been no more great plays.’
The music was growing louder.
It was inside his head, but throughout the building too.
He tried to get a fix on it.
It was strong and clean.
It expressed the feelings he had never allowed himself.
He could not let it go.
‘So, let's get this clear.
Nod your head if you want to live, without music…’
Cameron held still.
‘Live?
Die?
Music?
Happiness?
It doesn't mean much to me.
I get mine either way.’
Mr Whistle rested a large hand on Cameron's shirtfront.
He flexed his fingers.
Cameron felt an electrical tingle.
He had decided.
Not until now had he really known how much it all meant to him.
He was older now than Mozart had been when he died.
He still had a lot more to write but, considering that he was bowing out with Telemachus , he thought that he would not leave a negligible oeuvre behind him.
‘Well, Mr Ice-cube…?
What can I do?’
Cameron's throat started working.
It was agony, but he got the words out.
‘You…’
Mr Whistle knew what his decision had been.
Static crackled between his fingers, and Cameron felt the bolts charging into his heart.
‘…can…’
The killing force came.
It exploded inside him just as the last notes of his symphony died away.
As he fell, a smoking black handprint on his chest, he heard the standing  ovation building.
They were calling for him, whistling shrilly, stamping their feet.
He smiled as the life went out in him, looking up at the already transparent Monster.
‘…you can whistle !’
Night
one
‘BA-BA-BOMP-BA-BA,’
Anne tried to stand up.
It was not easy.
She nearly lost a shoe pulling her foot out of the hole behind her.
‘BA-ba-bomp-ba-ba,’
It was dark in front, but there were indistinct swirls of painfully bright colours to the left and right.
Stained glass and neon, Technicolor and Dayglo, fireworks and foil-embossed paperback covers.
’ BA-ba-bomp-ba-ba,’
The scat-singing was loud, but it was fighting several other pieces of music in an arrangement that was less contrapuntal than cacophonous.
It was merely the nearest and loudest of five or six clashing noises.
The scum skimmed off the top of an ocean of din.
‘Ba-ding-a-dang-ding,’
This was not St John's Wood.
‘Ba-ding-a-dong-ding,’
This was somewhere in the centre of town.
The West End.
Soho.
It did not make sense.
‘Blue MOOOOONNN !’
Her eyes hurt.
She covered them, blinking purposefully.
‘Dib-da-dib-da-dib-dib,’
It was dark inside her head.
‘…moon, moon, moon…blue moon…’
Each ‘moon’ from the backing vocalists was a needle pushed through the bridge of her nose, probing for the forepart of her brain.
It did not hurt as much as it should have.
She took her hands away from her eyes, and looked again.
The world got clearer, as if someone were twiddling the focus of her retinae.
Her eyes tuned in, but her mind could not match them.
She leaned against a rough, damp wall, feeling an icy draft on her ankles.
It was very cold, and she was very tired.
She felt hung over, and a million miles from the bed she wanted to be asleep in.
How the hell had she got here?
And where was here?
She was in a narrow passage that crookedly connected two busy streets.
It was irregularly paved, and lit only by an open window a few storeys above.
There were no doors in the walls, but she could tell from the noise that the building she thought she had come out of was a pub.
The boards she had broken through were an entrance to the cellar.
She tried to superimpose this place on Amelia Dorf's house, but could not make the images jibe.
There was nothing coming after her any more.
She thought that the cellar was empty.
It was dark down below, but she could make out the shapes of beer kegs.
No monsters, no people.
They had given up.
But it had all been real.
She could still feel the points in her throat where the Nina Thing's fingers had fastened.
She must have plenty of other scrapes and bruises.
She got out of the passage, and found herself somewhere she recognised.
She was back in Brewer Street.
There were crowds of people about.
Ordinary, real, non-monstrous people.
The pubs had not let out yet, so it must be not be later than eleven.
She had thought it must be well into the small hours.
The streets were not exactly reassuring, but they were safer than the old dark house, or the wardrobe of death.
Next to the pub was a loud strip club.
Bare coloured bulbs flashed on and off around a come-on sign.
‘Beautiful Girls XXXXXXX Totally Naked.’
There were black and white posters under glass, just a shade more indecent than allowed by the law.
So much for the Clean-Up Soho Campaign.
The silver paper stars pasted over nipples had peeled and slipped  to the bottom of the case, leaving the pouting, overdeveloped girls with gluey smudges on their breasts.
‘Come in and slobber over our fat ugly bimbos,’ bawled a fat ugly young man in jeans and a windbreaker, standing in the middle of a yellow-lit foyer.
His breath was steaming in clouds, and he stamped his feet in a crooked little tap-dance step to keep his doubtless numb toes warm.
‘Get your rocks off as they get their clothes off.
Sex, sex, sex.
Get your lovely, steaming, thirst-quenching, piping hot, country-fresh sex here!
You can't get things like this in Russia, you know.
It's a free country here.
Sex, sex, sex.
God save the Queen, and all who sail in her…’
The bored black woman in the club's ticket booth looked up from her knitting magazine and laughed.
Nobody was being lured in.
The spieler noticed Anne.
‘Fuck off back to your own turf, lovey,’ he shouted, ‘you're putting the shits up the punters.
You've got a look on you like Dracula's bleeding daughter!’
He raised his hands, crossing his fingers to make a crucifix.
‘Back!
Back, I thay!’ he adopted a Karloffian lisp.
‘Begone hellthpawn!’
Anne retreated, and was jostled along the pavement by a group of colourfully-dressed Chinese kids with '70s punk haircuts.
They chattered and laughed, being rude about Western passersby who could not understand their language.
Anne knew she was being discussed, anatomised as a freak.
She wondered just how awful she did look.
She did not feel all right inside.
She realised that she had not eaten properly in twenty-four hours.
Just half a breakfast and a sandwich in the Nellie Dean ages ago.
The Chinese kids piled into a pub, pushing and kicking each other.
A gust of beery hot air hit her.
She wanted to be sick.
A young man in a smartly hideous jacket tried to come out while the kids were trying to go in.
He was buffeted from side to side, and swore in what Anne thought was an Australian accent.
He pushed her, and headed off on a determined course for somewhere.
She tripped, and tottered at the edge of the kerb.
She  stepped into the gutter and got her balance.
A McDonald's carton crumpled lousily under her shoe, and her heel squelched into a half-eaten Egg McMuffin.
The music mix was more offensive out in the open.
Anne could pick out random snatches of disco, Derek Douane, reggae, acid house, rhythm and blues, funk, Kylie Minogue and '60s oldies.
The result was a sweaty medley, harsh and brittle on the surface, but cheesy and rotten underneath.
Every shop in sight was open, selling sex.
She walked towards Wardour Street.
That would be quieter, calmer.
She could get her bearings.
There were a few clubs at the lower end of the street, but it was mostly owned by monolithic movie companies.
She went past displays of posters and stills for upcoming films, gradually calming herself.
Heroes posed with guns: Sylvester Stallone, Kurt Russell, Rutger Hauer, Clint Eastwood.
If she could get to Tottenham Court Road tube station, she could get home almost on automatic pilot.
First, she needed to make herself human again.
She crossed the road, dodging a limousine with a personalised number-plate, and squeezed into a long, thin pub called The Ship.
It was full of leather and PVC-clothed young people, banging their heads in time to the music.
This was one of the overspill places for The Marquee, just down the road.
Daeve Pope would have been in heavy metal heaven.
A battered man in a woollen hat, one eye almost closed by a bruise, was appealing to the drinkers.
‘Are there any East End boys here?’
He was ignored.
Anne tried to get past.
‘Come on now.
East End boys.
I need some help.
One of our own's been done over.
Gimme some help.
Come on.’
Some of the patrons were getting annoyed.
The would-be lynch mob leader grabbed an arm and was shaken off.
‘Where's the old East End?
I need some fucking help.’
‘Listen,’ said a cockatoo-plumed girl, ‘we wouldn't fight for our country.
I don't see why we should go to war for our fucking post code.’
‘Bitch.
One of our own is bleeding….’
Anne got out of the mini-drama and went upstairs to the Ladies.
It was empty and relatively clean.
She locked herself into a cubicle and took a leak.
It was good just to sit down, and she was tempted to rest her head against the partition and get some sleep.
It would be so easy just to give up for a while.
She pulled herself back together again, and hauled herself out of the cubicle to make full use of the facilities.
A girl with a superheroine costume was holding her face up to the mirror, tracing a cobweb pattern on her pale cheeks.
Anne looked at her own face.
It was pretty ghastly.
She washed.
The dirt and the make-up came off easily, and there were no obvious bruises underneath.
Even her neck, which still hurt, was unmarked.
She had lost her handbag somewhere, but her wallet was still in her inside jacket pocket, and she had some make-up things in her coat.
The coat, mercifully, was large enough to cover the clothes she had borrowed from Nina.
She lipsticked in her usual modest mouth and combed her hair.
Her reflection looked like her again.
She even practised smiling.
Walking to the station, past the brightly-lit boutiques, cinemas, remainder bookshops and tatty souvenir stalls, all decorated for Christmas and building up to the January sales, she found herself having to think about what had happened to her.
Drugs.
It was something to do with drugs.
Maybe they had doped her perrier at Amelia's, with LSD or some other hallucinogen.
Then, after she had taken her tour of Nightmare City, they had brought her into the middle of town and dumped her.
But it did not feel like drugs.
She had done acid once, at college, and it had not been anything like this evening's entertainment.
What she had just been through was insane and illogical, but also unambiguous and actual.
It felt real.
Not LSD, then.
Maybe something a good deal weirder.
Something expensive and experimental, like Inspector Hollis' designer dope.
Hollis.
She must call him in the morning, give him all the names she had found, and let the police handle any  investigation.
This evening had proved her incompetence as Philip Marlowe.
A taxicab cruised by with its light on, and she decided to signal it.
It would be faster than the underground.
But, as she pulled her hand out of her pocket, she remembered.
She had given Nina all her cash, and the girl had thrown it at Clive.
If she wanted to get home in comfort, she would have to find a cashpoint.
The taxi was gone.
There was no point in bothering.
She turned her back on the street and descended into the underground station.
Underground.
The tube.
That was how she thought of it.
Not as the subway.
She was turning British.
Writing a piece a few weeks ago, she had had to think very hard before remembering the American expression for council housing.
It was still quite busy.
She found her travel pass in her top pocket, and slipped it into the automatic gate, muttering ‘open fucking sesame’ to the machine.
It refused to accept the bent card, and she had to find a barrier run by a human being.
The robots were doing a lot of turning people back, and the guard-manned point was thronged with a wedge-shaped queue of complaining travellers.
Anne hung back, but got past in a minute or so.
She would take the Northern line to Kentish Town.
It was only six stops.
Her flat was only a few minutes' walk away from the station.
Then, she would sleep.
She was underground.
Going down.
Please mind the gap.
As she descended the escalator towards the platforms, she noticed the digital clock in the ceiling.
In the station, the time was 10:37.
She did not have to wait long for a train.
two
THE MAN opposite her was nodding, muttering to himself, just this side of being asleep.
There were dusty stains on the lapels of his suit jacket, and his too-small cloth cap was creeping backwards on his scalp with each roll of his head.
He had a bald spot, under a straggle of brown hair, and a ratty Fu Manchu moustache.
His arms were wrapped around a full carrier bag on his lap.
Anne could see bottle-necks and wrapped sandwiches.
A stick of French bread stuck up, resting against his head like the neck of a cello.
He did not look well at all.
There was no one else in the carriage; unusual on this part of this line and at this time in the evening.
In Central London, this was a peak travel hour.
The restaurants and movies and theatres would be starting to turn people out.
A lot of service workers would be clocking off.
The train should be at least half full.
She should still have been able to get a seat, but she should not have a carriage practically to herself.
It was unusual, strange; but unusual and strange were not words she was prepared to apply to anything short of a surreal Hell on Earth after her day.
Tomorrow, it would all seem crazy.
Next week, she would have talked it through with three or four different people.
Hollis, Mark, Nigel and Clare at the office, maybe even Cam.
She would prod them, and they would rationalise things, give explanations, make jokes, suggest she calm down.
It would all start to seem more like a bad trip, a bad dream.
Now, she knew that it had not been a hallucination, it had been real.
Soon, she knew she would be thinking in terms of shock, stress, guilt reaction, grief, anxiety, a clouded mind.
Eventually, she would convince herself.
But...
At the next stop, Goodge Street, a young couple and an old man got on.
The girl wore tiny earphones, and had a Sony walkman slung in a holster from her belt.
Anne heard the tinny thrash of muted music.
A demon drum solo was turned into the nagging p'tum-chk p'tum-chk of a dripping tap.
The two kids stayed by the doors, necking.
The boy stroked the girl's side, twisting the walkman lead around his fingers in a one-handed cat's cradle.
The old man, shabby and bearded, sat one seat away from her.
He stank of paint-stripper.
She knew she was about to be hassled.
‘Excuse me…’
She was too tired.
She ignored him.
‘'scuse me !’
She really did not need this.
She looked up at the advertisements above the windows.
A faded bra ad was dotted with circular orange ‘this poster degrades women, stickers.
Right on.
This city degrades women.
The old man touched her sleeve.
He had spider-shaped scabs on his knuckles, and several beercan tab-pulls bunched on his ring finger.
‘Miss?’
She gave up, and turned to him.
He smiled.
His beard was grey-white, but discoloured yellow around his mouth as if he had been drooling thin custard.
He had ill-fitting false teeth like the Civil War issue dentures Walter Brennan used to wear in Westerns where he was the feisty old-timer.
Walter Brennan never pissed in his pants, though.
Walter Brennan never gargled with methylated spirits, or wore the same ragged T-shirts for months on end, or slept in a cardboard cocoon in a condemned house, or bothered young women on the subway.
‘Miss?’
‘Yes,’ she said, non-commitally.
‘Miss, do you have…’
His voice did not quite work properly.
His beard and teeth got in the way.
He hawked phlegm, and started again.
‘Do you have a sister at home…just like you ?’
She did not understand.
‘I'm sorry?’
‘A sister.’
She tried to make out an expression on his creased face.
There were lines of dirt embedded in his skin.
His nose was red.
He was a clown, a bum.
But there was something almost intelligent in him somewhere, something deliberate and malicious.
She had to get rid of him.
‘Fuck off, creep!’
‘Ssssssisster!’
The train stopped again, Warren Street.
There was a pause, the automatic doors unclenched.
More people got on.
The wino looked away from her.
There was quite a crowd.
Please, she thought, let someone sit between me and him, let someone sit next to me.
Someone did, but it was no relief.
The new man was young and huge.
He smelled of stale faeces and tomato sauce.
He wore an army greatcoat, not big enough to cover his blubbery belly although it was buttoned across his chest.
He was a skinhead, and had a line of swastikas tattooed around his neck.
His hand was deep in a damp newspaper parcel.
‘Want one, darling?’
He said, shoving a bundle of vinegary chips up to her face.
The stodgy strands were long and thick and twisted, spotted with mobile gobbets of ketchup.
Looking at the food was like staring into an abdominal incision.
‘No thanks.’
‘Go on.
You could do with some building up.’
‘It's okay, thanks.’
‘You'll need all your strength.’
She had heard that the British ate fish and chips out of old newspapers, had seen it in films about the blitz.
But  that was a long time ago.
Now, fish and chips came in plain white paper.
But the skinhead's food was wrapped up old-style.
The wino leaned and leered at her from behind the cover of the chip man's mighty stomach.
The rails were bumpier than usual this evening.
She was being shaken thoroughly.
The strap-hangers were swaying unsteadily, as if the metal floor were running in wavelets.
The wino chuckled silently.
She realised that the strange thing about him was that he was not drunk.
Anne looked away.
The carriage was pretty much full now.
Almost every seat was taken, and there were plenty of standees.
The necking kids had gone.
Most of the passengers looked down-and-out, or rowdy, or indefinably depraved.
By the doors, where the couple had been, three teenage boys were scuffling and messing around.
One swung from a chromed pole like an ape.
They had rosettes and long tartan scarves.
One wore an oversize silk jockey's cap with a little teddy bear pinned to it.
She thought they were Scots.
Football fans, she supposed.
Football hooligans, they called them over here.
Dear old staid, conservative, non-violent Britain.
Soccer fans were its contribution to the global tradition of random violence.
Back home in the States, sports followers were fanatics, exercising an insane competitiveness on the stands, pouring out aggression through their team's performance.
But outside the stadium, the hostility evaporated.
Over here, ‘what team do you support?’ was tantamount to a declaration of war.
This sceptre'd isle, this happy breed, this bunch of foul-mouthed assholes…
One of the kids started winding his scarf around his head, mummifying himself.
His mates laughed, and helped him tie the topknot.
The teenage monster lurched and bounced a beercan off his head.
One of his mates took the dented tube away from him and opened it, splashing froth over a window.
The mummy staggered stiff-kneed down the aisle, arms outstretched in a drunken monster impression.
He was laughing.
The man opposite woke up suddenly.
His cap fell off.
The mummy tripped over his legs, and only saved himself from falling by grabbing one of the row of dangling blackjacks above the seats.
‘Mind my bloody chips,’ shouted the NF paratrooper, hugging his food.
The man opposite was holding on tight to his groceries.
His bag was ripped, and tins fell out.
The mummy clawed blindly with his free hand, groping for the chip man's voice.
He clutched air in front of Anne's face.
She tried to recede into her seat, to keep out of it.
‘You a fucking bloody Nazi boy, Jummie?’ burped the mummy in an unmistakable Glaswegian accent.
‘You a pansy for Hitler, Jummie?’
‘He bends over for the SS,’ said the mummy's cap-wearing friend, making an obscene fist, ‘you can tell.
He's a glove puppet.
It's official.’
The mummy tottered over her.
His scarf was loose at the chin.
He took the flapping, tasselled end and slowly unwound.
Anne looked up to see his face.
The scarf came away and fell on the floor, twisted in a multiple S.
His face was dead.
He was a noseless, lipless, leather-cheeked horror-comic-from-the-'50s dead person.
Eyes like red poached eggs rolled in their hollows.
A pink, healthy tongue stuck out between the exposed teeth.
‘Hey, you, Jummie,’ he said to her.
‘Gissa kiss, love.’
Anne knew she was back on the Nightmare Express.
She tried to stand up, but the chip man held her arm, pinning it to the seat rest.
He had the face of a potato now, coarsely vegetable with pitted depressions instead of features.
Something pressed her right shoulder down.
She was completely stuck.
She looked, and found that the shoulder-holder was Jeane Russell from Amelia's party.
She had a belted trench coat over her fairy queen outfit.
Her face was full and red now, almost bursting.
She was evenly speckled with silver glitter.
The zombie hooligan leaned over her.
‘Gissssa kissss!’
The tongue was impossibly extended, pointed and wet and more alive than the rest of the thing.
It poked out and wriggled like a slug.
He bent to kiss her.
She squirmed.
The trained stopped again.
Mornington Crescent.
The doors opened and closed impersonally.
The hooligan froze, and withdrew.
The holds on her arm and shoulder eased.
‘Gissa kiss?’
It was whining now, pathetic.
‘Uh-huh,’ she said, ‘not on a first date.’
From now on, she had decided, she would fight back.
She did not like being a victim.
She was going to take back the night.
At least, she was going to try.
The station was not Mornington Crescent.
As the train pulled out, she saw gleaming white, bare walls slide past the windows.
No movie posters, no multi-lingual Telecom ads, no London Transport signs.
More passengers had got on.
Her travelling companions had quietened, as if someone in authority had arrived.
Anne knew that she was the only live person in the carriage.
She recognised a few faces from Amelia's party, but most of the dead people were strangers.
One startling apparition a few seats away was masked, and got up like a Chinese mandarin, with clacking claws for hands emerging from generous silk sleeves.
There were plenty of vile smells, and the train was colder than it ought to be.
The wino pulled his clothes apart, exposing old wounds.
‘See,’ he said, ‘stigmata!’
The chip man kept lifting handfuls of soggy potato to his head, but instead of shoving them into a mouth he was plastering them onto the featureless mass, sculpting himself a parrot nose, acromegalic brows and a Kirk Douglas chin.
But it was still a tube train, grubby and battered.
Those advertisements were still there, plugging temp agencies, breath fresheners, computer dating, a lurid paperback about anthropophagous slugs, holiday firms…
‘Okay,’ she said, looking about at the others, ‘what comes next?’
At the other end of the carriage someone started moving, coming towards her, weaving past the standing dead, eyes fixed on her.
It was a girl, in a better state than the others.
She could almost pass for human.
Almost.
Anne stood up.
‘Judi?’
three
ANNE STARTED forwards, to hug her sister.
She thought better of it, and held back.
She felt awkward.
Judi smiled.
‘I know what you mean, Annie.’
Judi looked better than she had in the morgue.
Actually, she looked better than the last time Anne had seen her alive.
She had been on drugs then.
Now, she did not need them.
‘The only thing I shoot into my veins these days is formaldehyde, Annie,’ she said.
Anne stepped backwards, the train rocking under her feet, making her unsteady.
Judi had always tended to know what she was thinking, but now she knew her sister really could read her mind.
‘You don't know the half of it, Annie,’ Judi said.
Her ironic smile and quizzically raised eyebrows excluded the rest of the dead people.
The sisters had instantly re-established their old understanding and intimacy.
‘It's weirder than you think.’
Anne could have laughed, but did not.
‘I don't fucking believe it, Ju.’
‘You'd fucking better try, because there's a lot more coming your way.
I'd hate to spoil it for you.’
‘Skinner?’
‘Yeah, Skinner.
It all comes down to him really, but I guess you knew that already.’
‘I suppose so.
How…’
‘…did I get into this?
Don't ask, Annie, don't ask.
It's a shitty story.’
Judi had her young face back again, and it looked good.
Her punk/kabuki make-up was professionally applied and striking; her black short hairstyle was stylish and street chic.
She was ready for a dusk-to-dawn party, self-possessed and poised enough to appear in a hairspray commercial.
‘I had your bag,’ Anne said, but I left it somewhere.
At that club, or at Nina's flat.
I don, t remember.’
‘That's okay.
I don't need those things any more.’
She was perfectly turned out: patterned black tights, black pointed ballet shoes, snug black mini dress, and an expensive Marlon Brando black leather jacket with the arms hacked off to turn it into a waistcoat.
Her arms looked pink and strong.
She wasn't feeling the cold.
‘It's a shame about Nina,’ Judi said.
‘She was a good kid.
Dumb as hell, but a good kid.’
The waistcoat was slashed with unnecessary zips that glistened like moist scars.
The shoulders were padded like a flak jacket, with fringed epaulettes.
Useless straps hung undone.
peace signs and Anarchy symbols were picked out in steel studs.
Judi's hands were in Kangaroo pouch pockets over her stomach.
Her fists pushed the leather out.
Anne could make out the ridges of her sister's knuckles.
‘Annie, did we have a good childhood?’
Anne looked away exasperated.
Only Judi could get to her so quickly, and only this discussion could push her over the edge.
It always came up at the very worst of times.
They had last gone through the pointless business in the visitors' room of a police station.
Now they were practically in the afterlife, and here it all was again….
‘On a scale of one to ten, how would you rate our parents?
Individually and as a combination?
With regards to each other, to us as a combination, to us as individuals, and to society as a whole?
Could they have been any worse, do you think?’
‘Ju,’ Anne realised they were back to their little kid names now, ‘Ju, I don't really think it matters any more.’
‘Maybe not, but it's interesting.
Do you think we would have been better off if Dad had been a small-time failure.
As opposed to that special big-time type of failure who looks like a success until the last reel and then turns yellow and 
It was embarrassing, having this talk again, and in public.
The dead were listening intently, enjoying the psychodrama.
Any moment now, Judi would be turning them into a Jury, appealing for their verdict on the Nielsen family.
What a ridiculous way to behave.
Ju, I'm sorry.’
‘What for?’
‘All of it.
Dad, Cam, me, Vicky.
I'm sorry.
We should've…’
‘It's too late for should've, Annie.
Should've, could've, would've.
It was all so complicated, you know.
Even before Skinner.
We came into it all too late to make any difference.
Dad could never write it out, you could never think it out…’
Anne was crying now; not just politely staining her cheeks, but leaking profusely from her eyes and nose.
She got a handkerchief from somewhere, and wiped herself, but it did little good.
‘You know who we should have had as a father, Annie.
I thought it out once.
Ibsen.
Old Henryk wouldn't have fallen apart in front of Farnham's Witchfinders, Annie.
Or screwed up his kids like we were screwed up.
Or written that fucking awful Graveyard Shift thing.’
Judi was crying too.
Little, disciplined tears that ran beautifully over her make-up mask without ruining it.
The death-faced hooligan had his arm around her now, comforting her, consoling her.
He looked reproachfully at Anne, huge eyes moving in their orbits.
‘We should stick with our own kind, Annie.
Stick to your own kind.’
Judi accepted the hooligan's chaste cheek-touch of a kiss.
‘And you can see what my own kind is these days….’
Jeane Russell also cuddled up to Judi, patting a shoulder with a diaphanously gloved hand.
The whole carriage was behind Judi.
Anne was alone.
‘Ju…’
Judi gently shrugged free of her attendants, and came towards her.
Anne realised that she had backed against the  end of the carriage, against the door to the driver's cabin.
Judi came to her, smiling with closed lips.
‘Annie,’ she breathed, ‘let's give up and go with it.
Get it over with.’
Judi took her hands out of her pockets, and brushed her fingers up and down the front of her waistcoat.
She tugged at her zips, opening little pouches in the leather.
Some of the zips crept open by themselves, tooth by tooth.
Silver-edged lips twisted slightly, and opened.
Things were moving inside the waistcoat, pushing outwards, distending the leather, reaching for the air.
The first one came out of a mouth just under the right epaulette.
It was a tongue, then it was a crooked finger, then a snake-headed tentacle.
The lump at the end was shaped, but featureless.
The tentacles were blind and probing.
They were not part of Judi, but they came from her.
Judi diminished, as her substance flowed into the protuberances.
Anne could see the blobs of unformed flesh moving down the tentacles through peristalsis.
‘You have to go with it, Annie.’
Judi's face was shrinking again.
She was starting to look as she had done in death.
Old and unidentifiable.
The bulbs were swollen now, turning a fleshy red.
Trails of yellowish fluid dribbled from the pockets, and ran down the waistcoat.
Judi was leaking badly.
‘Come on, Annie.
Let's make up.’
Judi was feeble now, unsteady.
She was not up to coping with the motion of the train.
Tentacles from the region of her waist wrapped around poles, and she stayed upright.
The new growth looked strong.
They had the power of constriction, and Anne guessed they would be sticky to the touch.
A tentacle waved towards her.
It was like a bloated anemone frond.
The train was slowing down, coming to a station.
Anne grabbed the tentacle, and yanked hard.
It was warm and unpleasant in her grip, but it did not slide free.
She felt a mild nettle sting.
Judi gasped, and bent double.
The tentacle came out of her body as easily and unendingly as a roll tape  measure.
Anne swallowed the gulp of hot bile that came up in the back of her mouth.
Judi was coming apart inside her waistcoat.
Anne pushed the thing that had been her sister away.
It went into the crowd, deflated and insubstantial, and was caught as they surged forwards.
‘Annie!’
The shout died as Judi's emptying clothes fell on the floor.
Rivulets of yellow filled the grooves in the floor.
The dead were coming for her.
She kicked out in imitation of martial arts movies, putting her hip behind the blow and landing her foot sideways into the hooligan's stomach.
It did not give, but bones broke like sticks somewhere inside him.
He was in the way of the rest of them.
The train was in a station.
The single door beside her slid open, and she pushed herself out of the carriage.
She stumbled on the steady stone of the platform, and put a hand out to stop herself slamming into the curved wall.
She took the impact on her wrist.
‘Mind the gap,’ said an automated voice, ‘mind the gap.’
The train moved out, its doors still open.
She saw hateful faces pressed to the windows.
Judi looked lost among so many dead people.
Sparks flashed under the wheels.
The noise of the train receded and went away.
She had stopped crying.
four
IN THE DARKNESS of the Dream, he floated.
His feeding frenzy exhausted, he was torpid, unable to pay attention to the rat in her maze.
For the moment, he was the shaper of her world, the worker of her destinies; but he was too tired, too caught up in his own changes, to follow her progress as conscientiously as he should have done.
A swarm of ghosts gyred around him in a multiple helix, allowed some measure of self-determination by his preoccupation, furtively snatching their existence from his body and his mind.
The strongest of Amelia Dorf's guests had already been processed and were settling into their new shapes, raw recruits in his army of phantoms.
The lesser personalities — Clive, Anders, Amelia — were completely absorbed, gone forever unless he should choose to make the effort to reassemble them.
They would do his bidding, more or less, and for the present they would have to cope with Anne.
Of course, she had her own ghosts, as she must almost be ready to realise.
She would hardly have been able to get as far as she had already without a very strong image of the outlines of the world, of her own personal dream.
She had even been able to effect an imperfect superimposition of her reality upon his own.
He had come across very few others not of the Kind, with that strength of vision.
He wondered whether it was a hereditary factor, passed down from her father, gained by him through osmosis.
After all, he had been one of Ariadne's  protegés .
Anne Nielson was an extraordinary woman, as he had known for years.
Her father, when he came up before the  Farnham Commission, had proved extraordinarily resilient, but he had still caved in, and then he had proved richly satisfying.
More recently, the lesson had been reinforced by delicious, dangerous Judi.
Even the son had had a tang to him, although he had proved surprisingly hard to digest at the end.
It was a varied and satisfying meal, but the last dish would be the most exquisite, the most sustaining.
He would need to fast, to recuperate, to change, before he would be ready to take her.
He had sifted through Judi's memory, had scooped into Anne's mind, but could find no traces of Ariadne.
The girls had never met their father's one-time patron, had never even heard of her.
Cam had a vague memory of a glamorous ‘aunt’, who had once taken a remote interest in his father, but it was no more than a shadow.
He was disappointed somehow.
Perhaps he should seek out Ariadne.
By the standards of the Kind, their sole meeting had been almost yesterday.
It was probably too soon to see if she had changed in her opinions of him.
No, the best he could do was to fortify himself with the Nielson family, and wait a century or two.
Everything would change in time.
Things changed faster as time progressed, he had noticed in this dizzying century.
He would meet Ariadne again.
Things would be different between them.
Like an Elizabethan tickling the back of his throat with a peacock feather to induce vomiting so he would be able to face the next enormous course, he brought up another cloud of ghosts.
Insignificant, meagre, thin and tasteless presences who could safely be ignored, who could safely be set free.
Most of them came apart like butterflies in a whirlwind and were dispersed; some struggled for infinite moments, trying to summon up enough reserves of strength to achieve reality, before they were spent.
A few tried vainly to coalesce into a hardier entity.
Amelia fluttered against his lips, entreating to be let back in.
He blew her away.
He had only sampled Cameron Nielson Sr during the hearings, then let the man live out a diminished, unproductive life.
There were no more prizes for Cameron, no more  Pulitzers, Critics Circles, Nobels.
And he had never taken home a statuette on Oscar night.
He had had the playwright in his power, and been tempted to astonish the court and the television audiences by sucking him dry on the stand.
But, rather than feed, he had just taken away Nielson's reputation, his genius, his worldly stature.
He had even been rather touched by The Rat Jacket , that last flare of Cameron's talent, and had been amused by the author's recreation of his Hugh Farnham persona as the intellectual, bullying cop.
Had he known that the man should be allowed to father his children?
Or had he been too cautious, too frightened of his increasing visibility?
This was a strange century.
He could no longer run his course in one place, and simply leave a continent to start again.
The faces, manners and origins of notable men were too highly publicised.
He could change his appearance, but not enough to become immediately unrecognisable.
From now on, he would have to devote himself to private achievements.
That would limit his amusements, but nevertheless he was confident in his ability to find purposes to suit him, enthusiasms to pursue, people to relish…
It would be a long while before he turned into one of the Elders, hiding away in a living death, nurturing their effete Dreams, too fastidious to get involved with the tumult of humanity.
A wraith approached him, and latched on like a bat, suckling greedily from his surplus, desperate tor a shape, for an identity.
It was Judi; she had been seriously ruptured.
He let her have her fill.
She was important to him, a link with Anne, a shared ghost.
He touched Judi's conscious memory, curious about the meeting on the train.
She put up a token resistance, but, knowing that she only existed on his sufferance, opened her mind to him and let him prowl.
The train scene was fresh and painful inside Judi.
His admiration was excited by Anne.
She was picking up the knack.
It was such a simple thing, to go against the consensus reality, but so few human beings could work up the willpower.
Given time, she could learn to shape the Dream to  her will.
But, of course, he would not give her time.
Hers would be an untried talent, an unfulfilled potential.
Even in its protean state, however, it would make the business of feeding off her protracted and tiring.
But incomparable.
He twisted, and descended in his dream.
He delved deeper in Judi's memories.
He considered Anne as a child, as a schoolgirl, as a college student, as a would-be parent substitute, as a journalist.
Judi had read practically everything her sister had ever written, including an uncharacteristic series of pieces on tin toy collecting, sofa beds and other arcane subjects published under a pseudonym (Angela Buonfiglia) taken from one of their father's plays.
Further back, Judi had envied Anne her college boyfriend, had always tried to impress and amuse the older girl, had briefly tried to copy her clothes and food preferences, had longed to be asked to share her toys so that she could express her devotion through generosity.
He tried to dilute Judi's images of her sister with objectivity, with his own observations, with Cam's tightly-guarded feelings, with the pathetic and stupid judgements of Clive, Amelia and a few of Amelia's guests, and with the slight tastes of her he had sampled at the entrance to the maze.
He had less than a tenth of the jigsaw puzzle pieces, but even the fragments of a picture he was able to put together made him ache for Anne.
He was motivated, he would have to exert himself….
His feet settled on the concrete of the tube platform.
He reined in his multitudes, incorporating them.
Even Judi.
He was alone.
He had seldom been more powerful this close to a change.
Anne had gone.
There were no egresses in the featureless white tile walls.
The tunnel was the only way out.
She had chanced the darkness.
She was a clever girl, to realise that there would never be another train in this station.
Already, the rails were softening, the circular tube was becoming ovoid.
His presence froze the decay, but it would start again when he followed Anne into the tunnel.
In time, the station would resolve itself, healing as invisibly as a  wound in the deep of his brain.
The overhead lights started going out, but that did not matter to him.
He stepped off the edge of the platform, onto the track.
He knew which way his rat had bolted.
Balancing on the dead third rail, he tightrope-walked after her, into the tunnel.