

The Children Act: Looking Forward, Looking Back JEAN PACKMAN and BILL JORDAN
The 1989 Children Act is a major piece of legislation, tidying up a tangle of previous law (including the Wills Act, 1837 and the Mines and Quarries Act, 1954), and setting a new agenda for British public child care practice.
It is also the culmination of a fifteen-year period in which the care of children had become a major political concern, the focus of media attention and public outrage, and an ideological battleground for rival pressure groups and experts.
Given the context — a decade in which a radical, market-minded government had restructured almost all of the public services, in an endeavour to ‘roll back the frontiers of the state’ and introduce commercial principles in the provision of social welfare — its contents are surprising.
It sets out a comprehensive and coherent range of services for supporting the families of ‘children in need’ including (for the first time) children with disabilities, children in hospital and even those in independent boarding schools.
It says nothing about privatization or individual ‘packages of care’, unlike the Community Care legislation which was passing through parliament at much the same time.
Instead its concepts — like sharing responsibility between parents and the state, reaching agreements and partnerships — have a surprisingly communitarian or even collectivist ring about them.
It does not, in other words, bear the hallmarks of Thatcherism.
In this paper we shall argue that the Act must be understood in terms of themes, issues, developments and conflicts that emerged in the 1970s, and worked themselves out in the 1980s.
These were complex and largely intrinsic to the care of children.
It is not easy to find parallels in other areas of public policy, even though the underlying question of the relationship between the family and the state is similar in several spheres.
In the conclusions we shall argue that the origins of these issues   can be found in the earlier post-war period of child care policy, and that it remains doubtful whether this new legislation alone can resolve them.
LEGACY OF THE 1970s
In retrospect, the public recognition of child abuse as an extensive social phenomenon can be seen to have caused a break in the policy tradition under which child care services had been developed since the Second World War.
Those services had been first transformed — by ambitious attempts to prevent family breakdown in the early 1960s, and to absorb juvenile delinquents into the public care system at the end of the decade — and then merged with local authority services for elderly people and people with disabilities in 1971.
Yet it was the Maria Colwell Enquiry (DHSS, 1984) and the subsequent depressing line of similar enquiries that followed in its wake, that interrupted a continuity of optimism and expansion, and destroyed some long-standing assumptions about the positive role of social work interventions in family lives.
The implicit basis of child care practice up to that point was that no fundamental conflicts of interest between parents and children, or between families and the state, were at stake in such interventions.
Thus statutory removal of children was perceived as exceptional, and good practice aimed at minimizing it.
Substitute care was seen as supporting parents as well as providing for children's needs, and practical assistance as preserving the family unit.
The recognition of parents who intentionally harmed their children could not be easily accommodated within the understanding of what these services were there to do: the scandals and the subsequent enquiries revealed time and again that social workers could not see what to lay people was painfully obvious, and what lawyers and other professionals (with the benefit of hindsight) constructed to be their duty to recognize.
The processes of rethinking and reorganization set in motion by the scandals over unprotected children were slow and painful.
At first, new multi-disciplinary machinery and the procedures associated with it were seen as providing social workers with the necessary change of perspective.
But deaths and injuries still occurred, and blame continued to be attached to ineffective, unfocused or misguided practice.
As public attitudes towards abusive parents hardened, and media campaigns against social work attitudes and processes gathered momentum, a more fundamental set of changes in policy and practice took place.
Indeed, in the wake of the scandals the professional world of child care was itself politicized, just as the relative political protection enjoyed by practitioners before Maria Colwell's death disappeared  (Parton, 1985).
Rival interpretations of good practice — especially over child abuse — became organized within competing systems of attitudes, beliefs, and principles (ideologies) and in pressure groups.
Child care became something of a battleground, and policy-makers and practitioners were influenced by the battles of ideas that raged over their activities.
These developments were linked with more critical and hard-edged research into the outcomes of interventions.
In the early 1970s research into substitute care revealed lack of attention to planning and continuity, resulting in ‘children who wait’(Rowe and Lambert, 1973); these criticisms were taken up by a number of organizations.
Drawing on other research from the United States (Goldstein et al .,
1973) which emphasized the damaging effects of ‘drift’ in care, they came to constitute a formidable ‘Permanence Movement’, campaigning for early decision-making over whether a child entering care was to return to parents or be placed in permanent substitute care.
Against this lobby was ranged another, dedicated to defending hard-pressed parents against premature judgements about their competence and commitment, the largest organization of which was the Family Rights Group.
The ways in which this politicization of their field influenced social workers were quite complex.
One obvious result was that they became more self-conscious and defensive, aware of the dangers of making mistakes.
But they were also more directly influenced — through training, publicity, seminars and literature — by both these rival groupings.
On the one hand, the greater prominence given to notions of rights made workers more wary about informal arrangements and voluntary negotiations, more legalistic and hence more inclined to use statutory means.
On the other, workers wanted more control, believing this would help them plan better, and court orders were seen as providing this.
The emphasis on permanence gave a high profile to (and often statusful careers in) adoption work and substitute care, including the identification of children whose links with natural parents should be broken.
Hence the world of the late 1970s and early 1980s child care was more polarized between competing values than the relatively consensual period between 1948 and 1975.
Furthermore, social workers were much more involved in adversarial work processes.
The perception of conflicts of interest, concern about lack of planning and ‘drift’ and — above all — pessimism about the outcomes of admissions to care, all changed the basis of practice.
Work with offenders tended to reinforce these trends.
The 1969 Children and Young Persons Act had aimed to divert them from custody and care, but paradoxically had managed to draw increased numbers of  youngsters into both systems.
By the late 1970s, a coherent critique of the ‘welfare’ orientation towards delinquency had been developed (Thorpe et al., 1980; Morris et al .,
1980).
It argued — again on evidence from the United States as well as from the British experience — that focusing on offenders' family histories and relationships led to excessive measures, which widened the ‘net’ of care and (ultimately) punishment, and hurried minor delinquents ‘up the tariff’.
In the name of justice (proportional response to petty offending), social workers were severely criticized, and encouraged to adopt non-intervention (diversion), or action focused on offending behaviour, not family issues.
This reinforced both a legalistic approach, conscious of conflicts of interest, and pessimism about the results of welfare-orientated admissions to care.
Of course the other major factor that had an impact on policy and practice in the later 1970s was resource constraints — the end of the long expansion of local authority staffing and budgets since 1948, and of the rapid growth of the early 1970s.
At the same time, cutbacks in services, and the sharp increase in family poverty (families with children replaced pensioners as the main component of the lowest income group) meant that need and demand were increasing, just when services were having to be rationed.
Finally, certain vulnerable groups were most affected by these changes, notably black families living in inner city deprived areas.
Thus the more restrictive approach coincided with increased expressed need by black parents, and began to highlight issues about ‘race’ and child care, which became important in the 1980s.
DEVELOPMENTS IN THE 1980s
It was against this background that (towards the end of the 1970s) both the DHSS and the ESRC developed complementary programmes of child care research.
Each funded several different but related enquiries which together would provide a comprehensive review of contemporary child care.
The picture that began to emerge in the early 1980s was not encouraging.
In spite of the increased emphasis on planning and focused decision-making, admission to local authority care was often hasty and ill-planned.
Suspicious of voluntary admissions, social workers regarded court orders as giving them more control: yet the perverse outcome of more adversarial methods was to introduce an increased element of crisis.
The vastly increased use of Place of Safety Orders — a quarter of all admissions in one study (Millham et al., 1986), a third in another (Packman et al .,
1986)— meant that substantial numbers of children entered the care system in a dramatic, precipitate and probably traumatic way.
This in turn contributed to the number of placement changes and breakdowns to which children in care were subjected.
Social workers and their managers generally held negative views about care.
This produced a defensive posture at the gateway to the system: admission was to be avoided if at all possible, and only used as a ‘last resort’.
But the crisis nature of so many decisions to admit, and the compulsion involved in the route into care reinforced this negative view, and gave it the features of a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Poor care in turn begat defensiveness and so on, in a vicious circle.
Some of the studies considered the parents' perspective, and a few that of the children.
Their findings echoed many of the criticisms by the family Rights Group and the National Association of Young People in Care, over the adversarial and high-handed approaches adopted by social workers once they decided on admission (thus on a court order), and over the care experience for children and links with parents.
Researchers pointed out the connections between compulsion, the last-resort mentality and the problem of children left in an emotional limbo.
The Dartington study (Millham et al .,
1986) highlighted children with no meaningful links with their natural families and no satisfactory substitute homes to replace them — echoing ‘Children Who Wait’(Rowe and Lambert, 1973), but recognizing a different causal chain to the same result.
Yet even as these studies were being published, major enquiries into child care scandals, such as those on the deaths of Jasmine Beckford,(London Borough of Brent, 1985), Tyra Henry,(London Borough of Lambeth, 1987) and Kimberley Carlile (London Borough of Greenwich, 1987) continued to criticize social workers for not being sufficiently quick and firm in their interventions to protect children.
Far from perceiving social work as too adversarial, they insisted that it remained too bland, welfarist and optimistic in its assumptions and operational strategies with potentially abusive parents.
The reports offered hard scientific knowledge about ‘dangerousness’, and the framework of the law, as its remedies.
Perhaps the strongest statements to this effect can be found in the report relating to Jasmine Beckford's death: ‘We are strongly of the view that social work can in fact be defined only in terms of the functions required of it by their employing agency operating within a statutory framework’(London Borough of Brent, 1985, p. 12).
The picture which began to emerge in the mid-1980s was therefore confusing and contradictory.
But a series of other official reports, emanating from Parliament and central government, began to recognize a pattern, and make sense of these contradictions.
The House of Commons Social Services Committee's report Children in Care had started this process in 1984 by calling for ‘a thorough-going review of the body of statute law, regulations and judicial decisions’(para 119), in order to  produce a simplified and coherent body of law.
This had been carried forward in an inter-departmental ‘Review of Child Care Law’(DHSS, 1985a) and a White Paper on ‘The Law on Child Care and Family Services’(DHSS et al .,
1987).
In these documents, a new synthesis of the research findings and the reports on the deaths of unprotected children was accomplished, making a new sense of the apparently conflicting evidence.
What had been recognized was a kind of mismatch between the very different elements in the work of services for families and children, and the unhelpfulness of the legalistic and adversarial approach to most of this work.
By nature, the enquiries into child abuse scandals were focusing on extremes — the ‘hard cases’ of child care, and the ones in which a negotiated approach with parents had disastrously failed.
By contrast, the research studies were looking more broadly at the whole child care service, and seeing the remedies prescribed by previous reports on similar scandals spreading over the whole system, and informing a confrontational, antagonistic and defensive approach to work requiring a more collaborative and inclusive spirit.
Furthermore, they were pointing out that legalism and the exclusion of parents would have paradoxical consequences: the last-resort philosophy and pessimism about care could lead to reluctance to recognize the signs of abuse, which in turn — especially in a hard-pressed and under-resourced situation such as that faced by many inner-city authorities — could have fatal results.
One of the key issues was how parents' messages about their needs were being heard, and here the researchers were able to shed some light.
In general, they found that parents regarded care on a voluntary basis as helpful and positive — a service to families in times of difficulty that should be more readily offered, not treated as a last resort.
This applied both to parents of young children who were themselves in emotional or material crises, and to parents in conflict with their older children about their behaviour.
In contrast, however, parents told the researchers that the compulsory removal of children or — at the other end of the scale — refusal to take children into care when, in their eyes, there was a desperate need, alienated and frustrated them.
From their perspective, family problems were often underestimated by the agencies and their sense of parental responsibility, exercised in trying to ‘get something done’, was violated by social workers who misinterpreted it as lack of commitment to their children's needs (Fisher et al .,
1986).
Thus what social workers thought of as ‘prevention’(keeping children out of care) was perceived by many parents as refusal to offer any positive support, and indeed refusal to give any help at all.
Yet once children were taken into care, and especially if this was by a compulsory route, parents frequently felt ignored and excluded, and there was  evidence that they were often left to cope alone with the practical and psychological barriers that divided them from their children.
‘Care’, particularly by that route, threatened to rupture relationships that were already strained and fragile.
It should be emphasized that not all the research findings were so gloomy and critical: the studies found much evidence of good decisions and good practice which were appreciated by parents.
Furthermore, a more comprehensive national picture of child care placements, carried out on a sample of over 2,000 such decisions by Rowe in the mid-1980s (Rowe et al .,
1989), showed less evidence of the trends identified by those earlier studies, and particularly of the use of Place of Safety Orders.
But at the same time it reinforced the message that children in need were not characteristically children whose parents were abusive or neglectful.
It showed a preponderance of admissions due to material crises (homelessness, debt) or behavioural problems, with parents motivated by their children's welfare, and social workers responding in a supportive way, via negotiation and agreement.
By this period (1987–8), the DHSS had taken the unusual step of organizing an elaborate exercise of disseminating the results of the research studies, using the summarizing ‘pink book’(DHSS, 1985b) as a focus for examining local policy and practice.
The research messages had reached a wide audience of professionals in this way, and they were echoed in the language and recommendations of the White Paper.
Thus opinion in the child care services was prepared for major change, in attitudes, policy, and practice, to be introduced in a new legislative framework.
At this point there occurred another scandal, but one with several different elements, and an entirely contrary impact.
The issue was sexual not physical abuse — a problem that had been gaining momentum in terms of recognition and response throughout the 1980s — and it also concerned not just one child tragedy but many.
In June 1987, local newspapers in Cleveland published accounts by parents who complained that their children had been removed from their care by the local authority on the basis of disputed diagnoses of sexual abuse by two local paediatricians.
In the wake of coverage by the national media, and the campaign of a local MP, it emerged that over a hundred children had been removed on Place of Safety Orders or by means of Wardship Proceedings in the space of less than 3 months.
An enquiry, chaired by Mrs Justice Butler Sloss, was set up in July 1987 and reported exactly a year later (DOH, 1988).
The tone of the report and its recommendations were in marked contrast with those of earlier enquiries into child care scandals.
Although no opinion could be expressed about the propriety of interventions in particular cases — the  enquiry was not a court of law — the report recognized that sexual abuse was no myth, and that it had indeed occurred in Cleveland in many cases.
But the child protection system had broken down in this instance, not because of the excessive timidity or woolliness of social workers who missed the warning signs and failed to act, but because of their over confidence in medical diagnoses and their ready reliance on compulsory measures to remove the children.
In contrast with earlier enquiries — especially Beckford — they were criticized for paying too little attention to parents and for having ‘a strong focus on the needs of the child in isolation from the family’(DOH, 1988, para. 4. 57).
Thus they were missing out a vital dimension of proper assessment — a family diagnosis — and in the process were leaving parents anxious, uninformed and isolated.
The children, on the other hand, were the focus of much anxious attention — often of an intrusive and insistent kind that in itself became a kind of professional abuse.
‘The child is a person and not an object of concern’(Recommendation 2).
In other words, statutory interventions, whether or not they were justified on legal grounds, needed to be located in a moral and human framework of compassion, care, and empathy.
The report was asserting the responsibility of social workers and doctors to deal with the alleged victims and their parents in a way which paid respect to their feelings, loyalties and values, as well as their legal rights.
It was the opposite of the message of legalism.
Though it interrupted the flow of official reports leading to legislation, and delayed the passage of the Act by adding a further — and highly political — dimension to the debate, the Cleveland Report was the final piece of the jigsaw.
It showed that family support and child protection were not two necessarily conflicting and incompatible priorities: both required similar attitudes, approaches, and skills.
Even parents who were suspected of abuse retained a sense of responsibility for their children which should be nurtured, not crushed; and even the implementation of legal powers required respect, communication, the willingness to listen, and the desire to reach agreements — not least with the victims themselves.
THE ACT
After Cleveland came the 1989 Children Act.
One of its striking features is the way in which it grapples with the many difficult and conflicting issues which that report — and all the other soul-searching reviews of the 1980s — had highlighted.
The simplified and more rational legal framework that it introduced is unified by some powerful  principles that speak to those issues.
In the process, some old, well-established concepts, are radically reframed.
As many commentators have observed, a change in attitude is a large part of what the Act is about.
Thus ‘parental rights’— for so long argued and fought over — are superseded by ‘parental responsibilities’.
The unpleasant notion of children as the ‘property’ of their parents — or as ‘objects’over whom adults assert or contest each other 's rights is abandoned in favour of a term which emphasizes the obligations they have towards their children.
A child becomes thereby ‘a child in trust’: parental responsibilities cannot be easily extinguished or ‘assumed’(local authority powers in this respect are abolished): only through their legal transfer to others, by means of adoption, can they be snuffed out.
So, in the Act parenting is for life, because children need continuity, security, and a sense of identity.
But it also asserts that parents may need assistance in exercising their responsibilities, and here the Act takes a quantum leap from the old, restricted notions of ‘prevention’, to a more positive outreaching duty of ‘support for children and families’.
A whole range of means of assisting families of children ‘in need’ is spelled out in the legislation, giving some substance to the local authority's duty to promote the upbringing of children by their families.
Furthermore, for the first time the planned and negotiated sharing of a child's care, through local authority provision of ‘accommodation’ is reframed as a form of support.
‘Prevention’ is recast in terms of preventing harm, preventing offending and preventing the need for compulsory intervention in families' lives through court orders: but no longer as preventing children being ‘looked after’on their parents' behalf.
The ‘last resort’ has now shifted from the broad gateway of the child care system, to the locus of the courts, and the imposition of care or control.
The messages from researchers and families alike have been heard and understood.
Partnership between parents and local authorities is also to be encouraged in other ways.
The latter, stripped of their powers to assume parental rights or to demand notice of a child's removal from ‘accommodation’, must work on the basis of negotiation and voluntary agreement.
Even when negotiation fails and children are removed compulsorily there is an assumption that parents will be kept fully informed and only exceptionally denied access.
In other words, they are to be accorded ‘the same courtesy as the family of any other referred child’ that the Cleveland Report required (Recommendation 3a).
But the child still remains centre stage.
The child's welfare is paramount and must be considered in the broad context of his physical, emotional and educational needs, his age, sex and background and the capacity of those who look after him to care adequately.
The legal  process, when invoked, has to be speeded up in the interests of the child.
Emergency Protection Orders will be of short duration and courts and their officers must work to timetables to avoid the damaging effects of delay and long drawn-out decision-making.
A child is a person, but a person with a different developmental time-scale that should not be jeopardized by ponderous, Dickensian proceedings.
Above all, the child's wishes and feelings must be ascertained and taken into account in all decisions that are made.
Here is another sense in which the child is not ‘object’ but ‘person’, with a right to be heard, without an accompanying and inappropriate responsibility to decide.
Again, the influence of Cleveland is clear, and even more so in the child's new right to refuse a medical examination, if of an age and understanding to do so.
Finally, the Act aims at balance.
It treads a tightrope between children and parents, the state and families, courts and local authorities, and where power is unequal it tries to safeguard the weak.
Thus the needs of children come first, because of their dependence and vulnerability, but the role of parents and other significant adults in their lives is given increased respect and consideration.
The state's duty to support families in their task of bringing up children and its duty to protect children from significant harm are both enhanced.
The arena for shared decision-making, based on partnership between families and local authorities — and between parent and parent in the case of divorce — is expanded.
Lastly, a better balance may be achieved by the expansion of independent representation for the child in court and by means of the new procedures available to any child or interested adult, wishing to make complaints to the local authority
CONCLUSIONS
As the Children Act waits, poised for implementation, it remains to speculate on how significant and successful it is likely to be: and it is tempting to do so with benefit of hindsight in the context of all the discarded child care legislation of the past forty years.
Its scope, vision, and promises are large, yet history tells us that the issues it addresses will not be resolved easily.
Extending support for children and families is one of the major issues.
The positive tone of Part III of the Act finds astonishing echoes in the Ingleby Report of thirty years ago
Everything within reason must be done to ensure not only that children are not neglected but that they get the best upbringing possible….
It is the duty of the community to provide through its social and welfare services the advice and  support which such parents and children need…such help should always be directed towards building up the responsibility of the parents whenever this is at all possible (Home Office, 1960).
True, the 1963 Act that followed the Report was only narrowly defined — to prevent admissions to care or court appearances — and local authority powers were strictly limited.
But it had a profound effect on the child care service of the time.
It opened the floodgates to a deluge of referrals, altered the whole balance of its work and confronted it with the enormity of ‘need’ in terms of family poverty and homelessness.
Faced with such demand and having only limited powers and minimal resources the service was quickly forced on the defensive, making invidious distinctions between those who were amenable to (deserving of) help and those who were not.
The days of the ‘coercive children's officer’ had arrived (Handler, 1968).
The parallels with today are uncomfortably close.
‘Support’ in the Act is not intended as a universal service for all, but one selectively applied to ‘children in need’.
Since numbers of children on the streets or living in poor families have increased dramatically over the last decade and the extra resources for the Act's implementation are likely to be strictly limited, demand for services is certain to outstrip supply.
The danger must be that the assessment of ‘children in need’ will, perforce, become another rationing device albeit of a more sophisticated kind than the ones used in the sixties.
The task of child protection is, in a sense, the other side of the coin and one that cannot be made easy for social workers, despite the sharper and hopefully more effective legal tools they will now have for the job.
There can be no going back to an age when dealing with child abuse was a grave but minor aspect of a child care worker's caseload, exciting little public interest.
But the anxiety and fear it engenders might be less (and the dangers of the Scylla and Charybdis of paralysis or overreaction might be reduced) if the attitudes of the public, media, and scrutineers of scandals are modified.
Here, the Cleveland Report reaches a fresh and encouraging level of understanding.
It perceives the full complexity of the protection task, encroaching as it does on private family territory with an uncertain knowledge base and poor predictive instruments; and it deplores the hostile climate in which such delicate work must be carried through.
We are…concerned about the extent of the misplaced adverse criticism social workers have received from the media and elsewhere.
There is a danger that social workers…will be demoralised.
Some may hesitate to do what is right.
Social workers need the support of the public to continue to do the job the public needs them to do.
It is time the public and the press gave it to them.
‘(DOH, 1988, Final Conclusions, para. 17).'
Like children and families, social workers also need support and this cannot be guaranteed by Act of Parliament alone.
Indeed, can legislation, of itself, change attitudes in the way that clearly is intended?
The 1948 Children Act suggests that perhaps it can, though the task for the post-war reformers was a far simpler one.
Then there were truly new beginnings, a hated Poor Law, dead and buried; a single, uncluttered task — to improve the quality of public care; and a specially recruited (and largely newly trained) new band of professionals to take on the exciting role of pioneers.
In the 1990s the tasks are far more complex and conflictual and the social workers who must take them on are already part of the system that has to change.
Perhaps the best hope for progress lies in the many examples of good practice that already exist and which the Act simply reflects and builds on.
Amongst these would be flexible respite care for disabled children that might be more widely applied; family centre models based on partnership and participation and high quality direct work with children.
In conclusion, the 1989 Children Act can only go part of the way towards changing the direction and ethos of child care in the nineties.
Realistic resources for its implementation; training and research to spread the more hopeful messages about good practice; and a social and political climate that values the ideals of partnership, participation and respect for persons — child and adult — would add immeasurably to its impact.
The New German Children and Young People Act WALTER LORENZ
On 1 January 1991 a comprehensive new Child Care Act, the Kinder- und Jugendhilfegesetz (KJHG), came into force in Germany.
This Act represents the result of twenty-five years of continuous efforts to reform the existing legal basis for all provisions in the areas of child care, family support, youth work and non-school based education.
This study assesses the significance of this Act in the context of general social policy traditions in Germany and gives a brief overview of its main sections.
German child care and youth policy has been largely determined by the particular approach taken to ‘youth problems’ in the legislation of the Weimar Republic.
At the beginning of that period the devastating experience of the First World War and the abolition of the monarchy had created a hiatus in the self-confidence of the bourgeoisie which necessitated the founding of the legitimacy of the state on welfare principles (Offe, 1984).
The Reichsjugendwohlfahrtsgesetz (RJWG, Youth Welfare Act) of 1922 enshrined the right of every young person to fully develop his or her potential with the support of society.
This developmental ideal is expressed in the German term ‘Erziehung’(pedagogy) of which school-based education is therefore only a partial aspect (and obviously not the concern of this legislation).
Pedagogy in this sense encompasses notions of developmental support particularly to pre-school children and to children with learning difficulties, care activities in day and residential settings, welfare support for material shortcomings, accommodation, etc., aspects of formal and informal education, socialization, vocational preparation, and leisure activities in a rather fluid way.
Bismarck's social legislation of 1876 had already introduced statutory residential care for wayward or delinquent youth which was termed   ‘Zwangserziehung’(compulsory education).
The orientation changed to ‘Fürsorgeerziehung’(literally ‘welfare education’) in the first comprehensive national law reform of 1896 (the Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, BGB) which came into force in 1900 and which still forms the basis, for example, for involuntary reception into care in cases where parents ‘abuse their parental power’(s. 1666).
The rationale for care measures had shifted from control to prevention and re-socialization, hence the increasing reliance on pedagogy as a science and as a conceptual framework.
Parallel to the increasing ‘pedagogization’ of care and control measures had developed the basic outlines of a youth policy with an equally pronounced pedagogical orientation.
‘Jugendpflege’(literally ‘care of youth’) was largely in the hands of private organizations and clubs, covering every conceivable orientation and activity from scouting to sport, leisure, and political formation.
But youth was too important a force in society to be left to the sometimes romantic, sometimes subversive trends of the multi-faceted ‘Jugendbewegung’(youth movement) at the turn of the century.
A decree of 1911 makes youth work a national task stating ‘the aim of youth work (Jugendpflege) is to assist in the formation of cheerful, physically able, morally strong youth full of community spirit, reverence to God and love for their home country.
It is intended to support, supplement and augment the pedagogical mandate of parents, school, church, masters and employers’(quoted in Wendt, 1985, p. 216).
The RJWG made youth policy the second pillar of its pedagogical intentions and set up youth departments in every region.
Local youth offices had been in existence in a few cities as early as 1909 in Mainz (founded by the mayor Georg Schmidt) and 1910 in Hamburg.
Their original function was to represent the welfare needs of children and young people separately from the general poverty alleviation system (Armenfürsorge), but they tended to develop mainly programmes in preventative medicine (Sachsse and Tennstedt, 1988).
One of the aims of the RJWG, unrealized until the 1990 legislation, was to unite Jugendpflege and Jugendfürsorge (youth welfare), not by way of creating centralized state provisions, but by giving local youth offices the task of stimulating and supporting the co-ordinated growth of both strands.
The RJWG itself represented a compromise between social democratic and conservative centrist ideologies.
Together with the Reichsjugendgerichtsgesetz (RJGG, Juvenile Court Act) of 1923 it tended to replace punitive measures with pedagogical, child-oriented principles and to set standards for national youth departments in every part of the country (Sachsse and Tennstedt, 1988, p. 99).
At the same  time, the primacy of the educational role of the family is strongly underlined as is the crucial function of private welfare associations in the delivery of the entire range of services, including statutory provisions.
In the early decades of this century the diverse private welfare organizations (freie Verbände) began to firm up their organizational structures which resulted in the founding around 1920 of the major welfare organizations which dominate the German welfare landscape today: Side by side with the Protestant ‘Innere Mission’ and the Catholic ‘Caritas’, which date back to the nineteenth century, and the Jewish central welfare association (Zentralwohlfahrtsstelle der Deutschen Juden, 1917) there developed the secular welfare associations of the labour movement (Arbeiterwohlfahrt, 1919)— despite the socialist principle of the primacy of public welfare!— of the German Red Cross, and of the independent hospitals and nursing institutions (today called the ‘Deutscher Paritätischer Wohlfahrtsverband’).
Between them they built up a dense network of services, institutions and training and campaign centres with inevitable duplications and therefore the constant need for co-ordination.
But the scene was set in the political climate of the Weimar Republic for political and functional devolution, a system of checks and balances between individual, sectional, and national interests.
The Act of 1922 had never been fully implemented due to the fiscal restrictions of the Weimar Republic and later the fascist infringements of democratic rights.
The Nazi regime made a travesty of welfare and of youth policy and subjected every conceivable aspect to ideological purposes and to control by central government even where private organizations were allowed to continue operating.
The RJWG formed however the basis of the first post-World War Two Act of 1962 (Jugendwohlfahrtsgesetz, JWG) which expanded and amended it but left its basic philosophy intact.
The German approach to child welfare was and remains characterized by three fundamental principles:
(i) All activities, methods and institutions in support of the welfare of young people are subsumed under the term ‘pedagogical’(‘erzieherisch’).
In its present usage this concept differs considerably from the English notion of ‘educational’ and is perhaps better accessible as a parallel to the French term ‘formation’.
The concept is defined more strongly by criteria derived from developmental psychology and from concerns with socialization than by institutional considerations (schools as the ‘seat’ of education).
It acknowledges that pedagogical functions are dispersed among a range of people and influences which assume significance in a child's life, ranging from family members to peers, formal and informal educators as well as organizations like the churches and the media.
‘Pedagogy’ means the entire process of guided growth and development which prepares young people for playing a meaningful part in society (Mollenhauer, 1988).
Child welfare legislation therefore potentially addresses all aspects of a child's development not covered by school legislation.
(ii) German social policy remains firmly based on the principle of subsidiarity.
This principle limits the degree to which state agencies and provisions in the area of welfare can take over responsibilities from individuals or from smaller, ‘natural’ units, upholding instead the rights of individuals to secure and shape the means with which they shape their role in society autonomously (von Nell-Breuning, 1976).
The principle has its origins in liberal state philosophy which gives primacy to the entrepreneurial spirit of individuals and restricts the influence of the state to ‘last resort’ interventions when free market principles fail.
It had been re-affirmed as a centre-piece of Roman-Catholic social philosophy in the Encyclical ‘Quadrogesimo Anno’ of 1931, some time after it had been enshrined in various pieces of German social welfare legislation in the 1920s.
Through this device the first German republic sought to preserve the role of the so-called ‘free’ welfare associations, foremost the established churches, which had become the key providers of welfare services (Sachsse, 1988).
Today it means in terms of a hierarchy of pedagogical responsibilities that the individual and the individual family have a primary role, which they carry out through contracting and engaging for specific purposes the services of ‘free’ organizations according to their private ideological orientation, and only as a last resort does the state intervene directly.
The state's main welfare function is to support the ‘smaller units’ of the tree associations and the family to carry out as wide a range of functions as possible themselves.
Subsidiarity has become a (still at times contentious) means of regulating areas of competence and especially of financial responsibility between state and private services rather than the rallying call of privatization.
Indeed, the growth of self-help movements in recent years was facilitated by the principle of subsidiarity as an established political instrument.
Combined with the federal structure of Germany this means that services are de-centralized as far as the political and administrative levels of national state (Bundesstaat), federal state (Land), district (Kreis) and local authority are concerned and additionally dispersed over an almost indescribable multiplicity of semi- and non-statutory organizations.
(iii) Germany is constituted as a ‘Rechtsstaat’, a state ‘ruled by law’, according to the German Basic Law (Ford, 1987).
This has far-reaching implications also for social work across the entire range of activities as it has to be based very firmly on an elaborate statutory framework which spells out possibilities and responsibilities for intervention in considerable detail.
All functions which draw on public resources (and most of the work by ‘free organizations’ is heavily subsidized out of public funds) require a legal basis for their legitimate operation, and this also applies when statutory responsibilities are delegated to non-statutory services.
Citizens have recourse to the courts, administrative courts or social courts which have considerable constitutional significance in upholding the rights and entitlements of individuals as well as limiting the powers of the state (Flamm, 1983).
SHORTCOMINGS OF THE JUGENDWOHLFAHRTSGESETZ OF 1962
1.
In spite of the intentions of the legislation of 1922 to bring together Jugendfürsorge (youth welfare provisions) and Jugendpflege (general youth and leisure provisions) the division had persisted and the former had continued to carry stigmatizing implications, even where care was becoming largely voluntary.
This contradicted the underlying intentions of the legislation which sees all young people as needing pedagogical support irrespective of their social condition.
2.
The JWG assumed a model of the intact family (mother, father, and children) as the norm.
This family carries out its child rearing and educating functions inevitably at the expense of career opportunities for women.
Such families would therefore have no legitimate claim to nursery provisions and other facilities.
Conversely, in families where this norm does not apply the Act stipulated the use of alternative care provisions and could not authorize the use of support within such family units.
3.
With the continued growth of non-governmental services and initiatives in the 1970s and 1980s, not just of the ‘established’ kind but also of self-help and ‘alternative’projects, the complexity of the task of coordination exceeded the potential of the legislation and became at times messy.
It also resulted in inequalities of provisions across different regions and in duplications of responsibilities.
New service developments had to be undertaken frequently with insufficient legal backing which rendered their financial basis rather insecure.
The long period of gestation of the new legislation which began in the climate of reform typical of the 1970s but became entangled then in the  fiscal and ideological retrenchment of the 1980s, reveals the complexity of the political debate and the variety of interests that had to be reconciled in drafting a new legal reference point that would modernize Germany's approach to all questions of youth while at the same time express continuity.
BROAD CHARACTERISTICS OF THE NEW KINDER- UND JUGENDHILFEGESETZ (KJHG)
The eventual thrust of the reform of the German child care legislation has been largely directed towards remedying the above shortcomings of earlier legislation rather than towards grounding the new Act in completely different principles.
Politically this represents an affirmation of conservative continuity and a final departure from all attempts during the 1970s to radically reform the principles of German child welfare (Merchel, 1990).
The outcome was that the KJHG preserves the overall approach to welfare, its pedagogical orientation, the principle of subsidiarity and within this the primacy of the family.
Given this rather narrow political agenda the KJHG seeks, however, to address and overcome previous limitations primarily in the following areas:
1.
Support for the family's own pedagogical tasks remains the avowed cornerstone of the Act.
But this applies now even where the particular family no longer conforms to traditional standards and takes account explicitly of the rise of one-parent families in German society.
The emphasis passes from provisions that substitute for family functions to those that supplement and strengthen them.
2.
The Act treats youth services as a continuum containing educational, recreational, advisory, supportive and therapeutic facilities by putting forward an open-ended catalogue of measures and initiatives which had become ‘custom and practice’ or indeed signs of good, innovatory practice in some parts of the country without having had legal backing.
The recourse to social control measures has been entirely removed from this Act and can now be invoked only under general statute that regulates powers to suspend individual rights (Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch. s. 1666).
Instead, the variety of functions of the youth services are described in pedagogical rather than purely bureaucratic terms, giving for the first time recognition to the specific professional skills and capacities of social workers (Gernert, 1990).
Which type of support a young person receives should be determined entirely by the needs of that person rather than by slotting her or him into inflexible institutional alternatives.
Indeed, young people have the  right to approach the youth department for assistance without needing the mediation of other adults or even without the consent of the parents (although the subsequent intervention by the youth department requires parental consent), and the youth department in turn is obliged to consult young people in the development of new initiatives.
3.
Whilst endowing the local youth department (Jugendamt) for the first time with full and central responsibilities for the well-being of children and young people in their area and for the maintenance of high and uniform standards of services, the Act envisages that these responsibilities be discharged through the co-ordination of private and public agencies and organizations.
Central to this co-operative intention are four models of local committees and consortia which the Act determines to be composed of officials from various government departments, local political representatives and delegates from non-governmental organizations.
This should promote the co-ordinated and ‘consumer-led’ development of a variety of provision in every area, especially since financial incentives favour projects which show evidence of user participation at the planning stage.
It also expresses support for self-help initiatives and a move away from the dependency of users on public and private services.
4.
The Act brings child care and youth work practices fully in line with recently introduced data protection legislation with clearly prescribed rights of access to data and procedures for preserving confidentiality.
5.
The application of all facilities under the KJHG to children of foreign nationality is explicitly legalized where previous legislation had only referred to German young people and children.
Nevertheless, these entitlements are limited to the recipients having legal residence in Germany and the new law on foreign nationals (Ausländergesetz 1990) can make the receipt of unauthorized assistance a reason for deportation (Münder, 1990).
6.
Young people with learning difficulties are for the first time fully included in all the provisions of youth support services rather than being treated under separate legislation.
MAIN PROVISIONS UNDER THE 1990 KJHG
CORE TASKS AND PROVISIONS OF ‘YOUTH SUPPORT’(JUGENDHILFE)
The Act replaces the previous distinction between specific welfare measures and general youth work by listing four broad areas of professional responsibility for youth departments:
(I) YOUTH WORK, SOCIAL WORK WITH YOUNG PEOPLE, PROTECTIVE AND EDUCATIONAL SERVICES FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE (SS. 11–14)
The wide scope of these sections which spell out a variety of pedagogical, recreational, preventive, advisory, and supportive social work tasks is indicative of the Act's intention to reduce stigma, stimulate early intervention and motivate and enhance the capacities of ‘natural carers’.
Social work with young people in the transition to or in search of alternatives to employment is one specific task singled out (s. 13) and makes reference to material provision (accommodation) as well as to counselling and advice.
(II) SUPPORT FOR THE EDUCATIONAL ROLE OF THE FAMILY (SS. 16–21)
In these sections the existence of ‘non-standard families’ is explicitly acknowledged and the youth department is, for instance, charged with the responsibility of providing a counselling service to divorcing couples (s. 17) focused on the needs of the children which will eventually become obligatory in divorce procedures.
While the emphasis is on counselling services generally, a wide variety of supportive measures is envisaged including day centres for entire family units and home support services to obviate reception into residential care.
(III) SUPPORT FOR CHILDREN IN NURSERIES, PRE-SCHOOL UNITS, DAY-CARE CENTRES ETC.
(SS. 22–6)
Much controversy surrounded the finalization of this part of the Act centred on the question whether all 3–5 year olds should become entitled to a place in a nursery or pre-school.
Financial considerations played as important a role as ideological dogmas.
In the end, the compromise reached stops short of making nursery places a universal entitlement but does acknowledge the changing role of mothers in the labour market.
Section 24 delegates the decision on the extent of preschool provision to the individual federal states, allowing their expansion programmes to square financial limitations with demands (‘bedarfsgerechter Ausbau’).
‘Social problems’ are no longer the qualifying criterion for families to obtain places.
All types of facilities are given a pedagogical mandate in addition to their care function in the explicit sense of fostering the development of autonomous and socially competent (‘gemeinschaftsfähig’) characters (s. 22).
(IV) SPECIFIC SOCIO-PEDAGOGICAL SUPPORT MEASURES (SS. 27–410)
While not representing a complete list of provisions these sections map out the range of professional social work services which should become available at the local level to deal comprehensively with difficulties that might arise in the life of a young person.
Different categories of services are no longer‘reserved’ for categories of problems such as delinquency or the notorious ‘Verwahrlosung’(waywardness) but are meant to be geared to the specific needs and circumstances of individual children.
So as to underline that all measures are intended to benefit the young person, provisions for involuntary care have been removed and the views of the young person have to be taken into account in deciding on a form of assistance, although no steps can be taken against the wishes of the parent or guardian (except in an emergency, s. 43).
The range of provisions mentioned includes individual counselling, social groupwork, social skills training, also as a condition of supervision orders to juvenile probation officers, intensive family support projects and foster care with a pedagogical orientation.
In addition, sections 36–40 detail principles of good social work practice like client participation in decisions and long-term planning to underline the professional orientation of the Act and to prevent clients from regarding themselves as victims of bureaucratic decisions (Habermann and Tries, 1990).
As in other parts of the Act, co-operation with natural parents is a central feature of this section particularly in relation to residential alternatives and to foster care.
The youth department not only supervises the quality of substitute care provided in professional terms but is mandated to involve natural parents in the assessment of the relevance of a programme to the needs of their child.
Section 41 regulates the extension of all these provisions to juveniles up to the age of 21 even when support was not previously received below the age of 18.
OTHER STATUTORY RESPONSIBILITIES
The remaining sections of the Act deal with a variety of mandatory duties of which the following aspects are most significant:
(i)
Involuntary reception into care: if a child or young person is in a situation of acute danger the youth department is entitled to intervene, but parents or guardians have to be informed immediately and the case be brought before a court for a care decision before the end of the day following the admission (s. 42), Where force is necessary, the police  department must act but under the professional guidance of the youth department.
(ii)
regulations concerning the licence for third persons or private homes to care for children.
With certain limited exceptions all care provisions require a permit by the youth department in order to be allowed to function.
This extends the inspectorial role of the department considerably and affirms the interests and well-being of the young people in care as paramount criteria.
CRITICAL REVIEW
The 1990 Act remains firmly within the philosophy and structure of welfare provision characteristic of Germany for the past 100 years.
Its main aim is to clarify, legalize and standardize what has become de facto social work practice with children and young people over the past decades.
The critique voiced during the protracted political debates that accompanied the drafting of the new legislation centred on two major issues:
(I) THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE STATE AND THE FAMILY
The ideological importance attributed to the family as a basically self-contained unit clashes with attempts to portray access to ‘supplementary pedagogical resources’ as a universal right.
The official governmental explanation of this legislation sets out unambiguously that unlike the school system, the youth support service does not have an autonomous pedagogical mandate but can derive this only from the primary mandate of parents (Bundestags-Drucksache, 1990).
Critics like Münder regard the KJHG therefore as a means not of easing the burden of families but of increasing their responsibilities (Münder, 1990).
(II) THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CHILDREN AND THEIR PARENTS
Equally ambivalent seems the treatment of the relationship between children and their parents where the compromise struck between the rights of young people to independent pedagogical support and the insistence on the consent by parents appears to result de facto in greater dependency of under-age youth on parents.
Kiehl (1990) regards this as a return to the hierarchical mentality of the legal code of 1896 (BGB) which declared parents to be the subjects and children the objects of education.
The KJHG epitomizes the current state and philosophy of German social policy.
The system represents a minutely balanced interplay of interests between state and individuals, political right and left, church and state, private and public welfare.
The emphasis is very much on continuity rather than radical reform, and despite the daunting complexity and forbidding pervasiveness of the law regulating every aspect of welfare in German social work practice, this Act also represents an acknowledgement that German social work practice particularly in relation to children and young people has managed to develop highly creatively and run ahead of the bureaucracy.
Furthermore, social work (or social pedagogy) in its variety of different approaches has become firmly established as a cornerstone of the German welfare system and a vital part of the legitimacy of the state.
This legitimation function is also its limitation in as much as it is tied to the prevailing ideology of the family which will inhibit the articulation of problems as structural, societal deficits: children and young people will become problems because their parents failed them.
It awaits to be seen whether German social workers will find a way forward beyond the horizon drawn by this Act as they managed to do with the previous Act.
The Social Policy Contexts of Prevention in Child Care PAULINE HARDIKER, KEN EXTON and MARY BARKER
If half the funds and the intellectual effort which has gone towards developing strategies for finding alternative families had been put into what we can only lamely call preventative work there would be unquestionable advantage to all concerned.
(House of Commons, 1984, p. xix)
SUMMARY
This paper presents a conceptual exposition of prevention in child care, which is examined in relation to four models of welfare.
Different types of preventive activity are then explored in relation to four levels of intervention.
These models and levels are then combined to locate three profiles of prevention: primary/developmental, secondary/ institutional, and tertiary/residual.
The paper concludes with a brief discussion of implications for social work practice.
The rallying cry of the ‘Short Report’, evocative and important as it is, oversimplifies many complex political and social realities.
This paper explores the social policy contexts of prevention, as developed in a research study carried out for the Department of Health (Hardiker et al .,
1989a).
The term ‘prevent’ is relatively unproblematical (that is, to stop or hinder), but problems arise when more specific issues are raised about what is to be prevented (Parker, 1980).
In the history of child care prevention has had varied meanings.
It has referred to ‘the stopping or   hindering’ of deprivation and neglect, admission to care, appearance before the courts, family breakdown and child abuse.
More recently, prevention underpinned by a Fabian value system urging greater state support for families has been contrasted with permanency planning (Equality for Children, 1983; Holman, 1988).
The meaning of prevention in the new Children Act is multifaceted and it remains to be seen how it will be operationalized.
Functions of personal social services cannot be considered, however, in isolation from the values which underpin the political, economic, and social systems, from which welfare departments derive their legitimacy.
MODELS OF WELFARE
Values in social policies can best be grasped through a consideration of models of welfare.
In relation to each model, the following themes will be examined:
Theories of the state and society
The role of the state in the provision of welfare
The aetiology of social problems and the function of social work
THE RESIDUAL MODEL OF WELFARE
Theory of the state and society .
This is a radical right or radical consensus model of society, in which values of individualism and freedom are emphasized, and inequality is accepted as a necessary consequence of the latter.
Consensus arises from the absence of any fundamental challenge for change in society; individuals judge what is in their best interests within a basic framework of laws.
Economic and social inequalities are viewed as positive and constructive forces.
The operation of a free market economy is upheld within a framework of minimalist state intervention .
Economic forces act as a check on political power and promote the greatest good of the greatest number.
Role of the state in the provision of welfare .
Emphasis is placed on the responsibility of individuals to provide for their own welfare needs and those of their dependants.
Individualistic forms of self-help are preferred to collective intervention through social policy (Pinker, 1979).
Sources of welfare are the family, the voluntary sector and the private market rather than central or local government agencies.
The state's role in welfare is to provide a basic social minimum .
Any government provision beyond this damages economic growth and undermines individual effort and self-reliance (George and Wilding, 1985).
The aetiology of social problems and the functions of social work .
This model acknowledges that social problems still arise, but the cause is located in the personal or social pathology of a minority of individuals and families whose behaviour or non-conformity must be controlled.
The predominant judicial ideology stresses due process, the protection of the innocent, the punishment of the guilty, and rights over needs (Hardiker, 1981).
Social work's function constitutes a relatively coercive form of social control , supporting the role of the family, the work ethic, and obedience to the law.
The care of children is not seen to be the proper business of the state, given the emphasis placed on individual freedoms and parental rights and duties.
Parents are seen as responsible for any difficulties in coping with their children.
The state intervenes as a last resort or safety net when parenting leads to dangerous or inadequate levels of child care.
The legal rights of children are emphasized, as are the prosecution and punishment of negligent or abusive parents.
This residual approach adopts a simplistic explanation of social problems and has faith in the inherent validity of the existing social system (Callahan, 1985).
THE INSTITUTIONAL MODEL OF WELFARE
Theory of the state and society .
Society is based on consensual values, but conformity is achieved through social integration rather than individual choice.
Social institutions are interdependent and social stability is achieved through gradual and minor accommodations.
The need for some form of state regulation to mitigate the worst consequences of economic and social arrangements is accepted; for example, income distribution policies aim to reduce poverty rather than to achieve equality.
The role of the state is to maintain the status quo rather than to promote major economic and social change.
The state may make good the deficiencies of the free market to tackle avoidable ills (Beveridge, 1944).
State welfare services supplement the efforts of individuals and families to provide for their own needs.
The role of the state in the provision of welfare .
This model establishes a significant, albeit still circumscribed , role for state welfare, since social services are seen as a functional necessity in promoting social integration.
Nevertheless, the state collaborates with the private and voluntary sectors in the provision of services as the major co-ordinator or social care planner (Barclay, 1982; Griffiths, 1988).
Its role is, however, reactive rather than promotional.
The crucial distinction between the  residual and the institutional model is that, in the latter, the state accepts responsibility for the provision of rather more than a basic minimum.
This is where the concept of social needs gains over that or legal rights, since social services are regarded as social utilities to be used by all individuals and families as necessary (Smith, 1980; Wharf, 1985).
The aetiology of social problems and the function of social work .
This model assumes that the welfare state can combat the worst injustice of modern capitalist societies.
Social problems arise through the incapacities of individuals or families to make use of services or the failure of welfare agencies to deliver them.
Remedial interventions may restore personal and family functioning (Rutter, 1978; Stone and Warren, 1988).
The role of social work is to provide services following professional assessments of needs.
A welfare ideology develops this function beyond the narrow, protective remit of the residual model to encompass rehabilitation and prevention (Hardiker, 1981).
The normality of difficulties in rearing children in a complex and changing society is recognized.
The form of social control is more humane , aiming to reintegrate children and families into society rather than to rescue children and punish parents.
The central purpose of social services remains the adjustment of individuals rather than any fundamental change in their social environment.
THE DEVELOPMENTAL MODEL OF WELFARE
Theory of the state and society .
This model is closely associated with a democratic socialist perspective (George and Wilding, 1985).
Whilst conflicts of interest between social groups are recognized, there is a fundamental belief in the capacity of parliamentary democracy to create greater social justice and equality.
The growth of the welfare state after 1945 partly reflected developmental social changes.
There was a belief in government's ability to modify the injustices of the private market and to extend powers to the wider public.
The proactive role given to the state is the antithesis of the residualist perspective.
The role of the state in the provision of welfare .
The system of state welfare is seen as one of the central means whereby society moves towards the creation of social equality.
Social welfare is seen as ‘…a major integrative institution in society, providing universalist services outside the market on the principle of need’(Titmuss, 1974, p. 31).
Thus, a positive, promotional role is given to state welfare , where  services are provided as of right to all citizens.
The terms ‘needs’ and ‘rights’avoid judgements about personal or social pathology.
The aetiology of social problems and the function of social work .
Personal and social problems are explained in terms of the unequal distribution of power and resources in society.
Social disadvantage is addressed structurally, not simply by improving the efficiency with which services are provided or taken up.
The stresses of family life and difficulties in parenting lie in structures of disadvantage and social policies which reinforce inequalities.
The focus of social work shifts from a concern with achieving personal change to social change , so the targets of intervention become the economic, social, and political processes which generate social problems.
Thus, one of social work's central purposes is to develop institutional means of representing the interests of underprivileged sections of society through positive discrimination.
Leonard describes this approach as the mediation model of social work (1976, p. 263) which emphasizes empowerment, advocacy and community participation (Rappaport, 1981; Richards, 1987).
THE RADICAL/CONFLICT MODEL OF WELFARE
Theory of the state and society.
Social conflict is endemic in capitalist societies until social transformation creates conditions for greater justice and equality.
The state predominantly serves the interests of powerful ruling groups within society, but also has a role in mounting an irreversible challenge to the existing social order and ultimately replacing it.
Thus, it stands in an interim, compromise position along the road to social transformation.
The role of the state in the provision of welfare .
The state is given an even greater role than in the developmental model in creating conditions for justice and equality.
Social services meet needs and are universal.
Participation of users in service provision is emphasized while the power of the professions is curtailed (Mishra, 1981).
The aetiology of social problems and the function of social work .
The structural explanation of social problems is pursued more thoroughly than in a developmental model.
The relevance of social inequalities is certainly addressed, especially in respect of child care, but these are explored in greater detail in relation to social class, race and ethnicity, gender, disabilities and age (Ahmed et al .,
1986; Frost and Stein, 1989).
The role of the welfare state in masking existing oppressions and reinforcing social inequalities is also addressed.
Social workers have an  important role in raising clients' consciousness of the structural sources of their difficulties so that they can achieve greater influence and control over their lives.
This approach has many parallels with empowerment in the developmental model, the main differences lying in the social worker's level of commitment to the existing social order.
This is why Leonard describes this as an adversary model of social work, in which practitioners ‘work the system’ with and in the interests of clients (Leonard, 1976, p. 262).
The developmental and radical models share a common purpose, primarily through collective action, in seeking to change systems rather than people.
The models differ in their treatment of consensus and conflict, and in the thoroughness with which they explore the nature of social inequalities and the prospects for anti-oppressive practices.
SUMMARY
Four models of welfare were expounded to demonstrate the different values underpinning the social policies of the state.
These values influence ways social problems and the functions of social work are viewed.
However, other social influences are also important (Lee and Raban, 1983).
For example, voluntary organizations played, and will continue to play, a central role in the provision of children's services; they were also influential in shaping new child care legislation (for example : The National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children and the Children Act, 1908; Association of British Adoption Agencies and the 1975 Children Act).
LEVELS OF PREVENTION IN SOCIAL WORK
The concept of primary, secondary, and tertiary levels of prevention originated in public health (Hardiker et al .,
1989b), and is widely used in social work.
According to Fuller (1989):
Primary prevention would prevent the emergence of a problem, secondary prevention would refer to working on a problem in its early stages and tertiary prevention would limit the damaging effects of a problem already established (p. 9).
In attempting to relate this schema to social work in child care, it became apparent that the secondary level includes a very wide spectrum of client situations and work undertaken.
This is demonstrated if Parker's definition of secondary prevention in child care is added (1980):
Secondary prevention is more specific.
Once problems have actually arisen help of various kinds may supply a remedy or at least forestall something worse.
At this stage, services are liable to be restricted to those assumed to be at special risk' or whose circumstances warrant special priority (p. 45).
Parker then defines tertiary prevention in terms close to the public health idea of rehabilitative services:
Tertiary, prevention…would aim at avoiding the worst consequences of a child actually having to spend long periods in substitute care.
At the very least it would ensure that no further harm is done to the child and at best, that his wellbeing was enhanced in every possible way (p. 45).
Working from these definitions, it seemed that secondary prevention included two very different situations, that is, early identification of comparatively mild problems with a hopeful outcome, and more serious problems involving risk, in which amelioration and containment might be all that could be achieved.
In our feasibility study, we found that these two types were both represented in the samples of social work offered to us as examples of secondary prevention, and a distinction between them made sense to the practitioners.
Accordingly, in this section we shall expand the three levels of prevention to four, that is, primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary.
PRIMARY LEVEL OF PREVENTION
Stage of problem development .
Primary prevention is normally understood in terms of universal needs and services: sufficient income, adequate housing, appropriate health care.
Parker (1980) associates primary prevention with efforts to prevent problems from ever arising which begs questions regarding the nature of the problems under review.
In social work these can be defined as difficulties in personal and social functioning.
However, since personal and social difficulties are experienced by most people, the problems addressed in primary prevention in social work also include those complex processes whereby individuals become separated out from the general population, entering client careers with welfare agencies (Greenley and Kirk, 1973; Hardiker and Barker, 1985).
The decision to ‘open a case’ marks a critical difference in the construction of and response to a person's problems, and confers potential gains and losses; the latter includes the danger of being drawn into increasingly intrusive interventions that may threaten a person's autonomy.
Consequently, primary prevention within a social work context may be seen as action which prevents the need for allocation of client status (Benn, 1976; Richards, 1987).
Targets for intervention .
Primary prevention is thus directed towards the improvement of social conditions, in order to avert client status.
This may be through universal services which reduce social and economic risks in the community, or specific services aiming to improve the circumstances of vulnerable individuals and families.
The very broad scope of primary prevention raises questions about the boundaries of social work's permitted and required endeavours.
There is general recognition that, although social workers and their agencies cannot combat the structural causes of social problems, their knowledge of the effects of poverty and other disadvantages places them in a unique position to influence social policies (Wharf, 1985; Townsend et al .,
1987; Hardiker and Barker, 1988; BASW, 1988).
There are also a range of approaches which offer more personalized forms of help to people in difficulties without the stigma of becoming a client.
For example, self-help and community projects may provide support to parents and families, empower vulnerable people and develop informal networks in neighbourhoods (Collins and Pancoast, 1976).
Other approaches advocate positive discrimination in the allocation of resources, such as day care, to vulnerable groups and communities (Parker, 1980; Equality for Children, 1983).
Efforts to divert people experiencing minor difficulties from becoming applicants are further dimensions of primary prevention; for example, advice, guidance and signposting services provided through patch-based offices or attachments to health centres, schools, and hospitals (Sundel and Homan, 1979).
SECONDARY LEVEL OF PREVENTION
Stage of problem development .
Secondary prevention may take place when an applicant is accepted as a client of a social work agency.
For example, a normally well-functioning family may be thrown into an acute state of crisis through a traumatic event; a social work assessment may indicate the need for intervention, of a short-term nature, with a view to restoring non-client status (Sainsbury, 1977; Wharf, 1985).
Duty assessment and intake teams occupy a prime position to provide such a service (Buckle, 1981; O'Hagan, 1986).
Sometimes, though, these teams provide a gatekeeping or goalkeeping service for the agency rather than crisis-intervention for clients.
Some writers argue that, once client status has been allocated, it is no longer appropriate to use the term prevention, since the agency response is one of treatment and rehabilitation (Albee, 1982; Schinke et al .,
1986).
However, a central value of social work is to restore individuals to autonomy and to retain and support their social links.
This is  in keeping with Parker's dictum that ‘…prevention must be an objective at all stages of intervention’(Parker, 1980, p. 44).
Still, intervention is not always benign.
Given the inescapable rescue and control functions of social work agencies, client status may lead to increasing interference in their lives, particularly in situations of risk and vulnerability.
Thus a prime objective at every stage is to prevent the necessity for increasingly intrusive interventions, thereby maintaining autonomy and family integrity.
Targets for intervention .
These targets vary depending on the particular approach of the agency and practitioner.
Traditional family casework focuses on the identified members as clients, whereas the targets of unitary interventions range more broadly from non-client members through to neighbourhoods and other social systems.
Some of these targets are similar to those identified in primary prevention, but the purpose of the intervention differs; in secondary level work, the focus is on identified clients or their families, schools, doctors, employers, not on structures indirectly related to clients.
TERTIARY LEVELS OF PREVENTION
Stage of problem development .
Tertiary prevention can be illustrated by the work of professionals in the children's departments in the fifties and sixties, who increasingly intervened in family situations before the point of a child's admission to care (Donnison, 1975).
The concept of prevention also began to embrace wider concerns for the well-being of all deprived children, not only those at immediate risk of entry into care (Leissner, 1967; Runnicles, 1968).
However, today's social services departments are again concentrating resources on families whose difficulties are severe and well-established and whose children are at high risk of entry into the care system.
Action at this level aims to avoid the worst effects of chronic family difficulties and to prevent clients from being drawn into increasingly intrusive interventions (Wharf, 1985).
The work often occurs within a statutory framework because levels of risk and vulnerability are high.
Targets for intervention .
The complex and damaging situations of many of these families and the degree of anxiety they generate in health and welfare agencies increase the likelihood of statutory interventions (Dingwall et al .,
1983).
The emphasis on the needs and best interests of the child in legislation, plus the traditional, case-based, local government structure of accountability generate a model of practice which focuses on the individual child and family.
The relevance of community-based  approaches at this level is also illustrated in recent literature (O'Hagan, 1989; Smale et al .,
1988).
QUATERNARY LEVEL OF PREVENTION
Stage of problem development .
Those writers who share Parker's view of prevention as an objective at all stages of intervention pursue the concept beyond the tertiary level.
This broader view is associated with a more positive approach to the use of local authority care, which is partly enshrined in the new Children Act (Aldgate et al .,
1989a; Ryan, 1989).
Preventive action beyond the point of a child's admission to care is seen as a fourth level of prevention.
Rehabilitation is the first aim, minimizing and reversing the damage that might arise from the separation of parents and children; loss of self-esteem, threats to identity and reduction in power over decision-making (Richards, 1987).
The importance of maintaining links and collaborating effectively with parents and children is also indicated in the literature (Department of Health and Social Security, 1985; Aldgate et al .,
1989b).
Targets for intervention .
The main focus of intervention is typically individual children and their families (Aldgate and Simmonds, 1988).
However, interventions with other agencies and community development may be as relevant at this stage as they are at earlier levels of intervention.
The difference lies in the object of the work, that is, they minimize the damage that may arise as a result of entry into the care system and to restore vulnerable families to ‘good-enough’ personal and social functioning.
SUMMARY
Prevention as a unitary concept is rejected in this section, as it is a relevant aim at each of the four levels identified.
Objectives and interventions vary with the stage of problem development and client status and also with the values underpinning the work.
In the next section, we shall bring together the models of welfare and levels of prevention which have been expounded in this paper so far, and attempt to relate them to child care policy and practice.
PROFILES OF PREVENTION
The framework developed distinguishes between different ways in which prevention may be understood.
Models of welfare help us to  comprehend the value systems underlying social policies.
levels of prevention serve to identify stages in the development of problems and targets of intervention.
This is a reminder of the breadth of the concept of prevention and the absence of any real consensus in our society about the values underlying social policies or preventive child care.
The analysis can be focused more precisely if models of welfare and levels of prevention are combined in a two-dimensional grid (Figure I).
The cells suggest sixteen possible contexts for prevention, though not each cell has equal operational purchase on policy or practice.
The diagonal line suggests three ‘ideal types’ of preventive work, typifying the level of prevention associated with three models of welfare.
In a society where a developmental model holds sway, the ideal level of prevention is primary: improve social conditions so individuals do not need to become clients.
Where an institutional view is predominant, preventive efforts are pitched at the secondary level: early intervention to prevent problems worsening.
Under a residual value system, prevention typically takes place at the tertiary level: work with children and families in imminent danger of separation, often through court proceedings.
This typification does not imply that work would not take place at each of the four levels, in each policy context (though it may, indeed, take different forms and receive different priorities).
It does, however, test the arguments being put in this paper, by pushing them to their logical conclusion: that the preferred level of preventive work will vary according to the model of welfare espoused.
PRIMARY/DEVELOPMENTAL
This approach is illustrated in the minority contribution to the Barclay Report by Brown et al .
(1982).
Welfare services are given a promotional role taking into account social inequalities and the need for universal provisions.
Preventive work has the following characteristics:
1.
Accessible, localized services.
2.
Proactive provision in relation to locally-identified issues.
3.
Resources to support and develop existing helping networks; for example, mutual-support groups, family centres, child-minding facilities.
4.
Community development through day-care facilities for children.
5.
Advice, information and advocacy services.
6.
Decentralized management structures, which involve consumers in decision-making about services and resources.
These services are illustrated generically in Benn (1976) and Beresford   and Croft (1986).
Their relevance to preventive child care is described in Beresford et al .
(1987) and Pugh (1987).
Pugh outlines the work of the Pen Green Family Centre in Corby, Northamptonshire.
This Centre can be located as primary developmental because it provides community resources to local families with children; its objective is:
to create an environment where programmes of nursery education and social care combine in partnership with parents and children to offer a service to the community.
The Centre also aims to provide a supportive learning environment for the community.
Programmes include: political campaigns and social action to develop play facilities for children aged 4–14 years; a drop-in facility for anyone in the local neighbourhood; a ‘family friends’ group; a ‘kidscape’project; parents' groups; use of volunteers; a home-school liaison project; a scrap project providing employment and resources to the local community; a health initiative.
Other services are of a secondary-institutional nature: day care and nursery education, family room, toy library, local play group, and welfare rights clinic.
SECONDARY/INSTITUTIONAL
These services are illustrated by post-war developments in children and social services departments, and the growth of the social work profession (Barclay, 1982 — Majority Report).
Their features include:
1.
Advice and information services.
2.
Duty and intake systems to detect incipient problems early and to provide a rapid response.
3.
Short-term social work methods: crisis intervention, task-centred and contractual approaches.
4.
Family support services.
5.
Social care planning to mobilize packages of care.
6.
Practical and material support linked to helping interventions.
Much work commonly understood as preventive child care illustrates this: traditional family casework; use of financial aid; access to day-care facilities; support groups for vulnerable parents; projects in disadvantaged neighbourhoods; long-term supportive visiting to families; child-guidance services (Jones, 1985).
The ‘Family Support Exercise’ illustrates such preventive child care projects (Goldberg and Sinclair, 1986; Cook et al .,
1987).
The aim is to support families experiencing difficulties by:.
assisting families rather than individual members 
focusing on difficulties in parenting, family relationships or the practical tasks of daily living
maintaining contact with families over a period of time
avoiding prolonged use of residential or respite care
The approaches range from individual methods to day-care, group work, and packages of care.
Several of the cases submitted to us by social workers who participated in the feasibility study illustrated this type of family support work.
For instance, one family living in good material circumstances but under many stresses, was referred because of their two-year old daughter's failure to thrive and their nine-year old son's serious underachievement at school.
Family casework was the main approach adopted, using counselling methods, modelling and play.
Several resources were used: childminder organizer, health visitor, psychiatric services, the boy's teacher, School Psychological Service, a voluntary agency offering family therapy.
The overall aims of the work were achieved because the girl's development picked up, the boy's behaviour was better understood, and the mother's confidence improved.
‘At risk’ registrations were avoided, though the girl's well-being continued to be monitored.
TERTIARY/RESIDUAL
This perspective was recognizable in the Poor Law era and has reappeared in its modern form in contemporary welfare (Pinker, 1982; Dale et al .,
1986; Bunyan and Sinclair, 1987).
The characteristics of service are:
1.
Interventions exclusively directed towards families whose children are in imminent danger of admission to care.
2.
Rigid gate-keeping on entry into care systems.
3.
Exclusive concentration on statutory social work.
4.
Task-centred casework.
5.
Short-term interventions.
The development of the Child Care Strategy in Department X, described in our feasibility study, illustrates aspects of work at this level.
Area panels to consider the case of every child at serious risk of reception into care, were set up.
The main problems of children referred were: ‘beyond control’; families unable to provide care or at risk of abuse; parents requesting a break; children with school-related problems.
Receptions into care were tightly controlled and alternative services offered, such as an intervention package or a place at a Family Centre, where time-limited, highly focused work was planned.
A case in the feasibility study illustrates this type of work.
The T family were involved with the agency for many years; Mrs T had a serious and long-term psychiatric condition and there were difficulties with their adolescent children.
Mrs T had recently been readmitted to hospital following a psychotic episode; Mr T (retired) was under a lot of pressure and, following an incident when he slapped his daughter, S, her name was placed on the At Risk Register.
A short-term intervention was arranged because S was at risk of coming into care.
Concerns were expressed about S's time-keeping, non-school attendance and friendships.
Further requests were made to receive S into care.
To cut a long story short, the social worker focused on S's non-school attendance, transferred the case to the education welfare officer and recommended removal of her name from the register.
SUMMARY
This section presented three profiles of preventive child care and highlighted major features of each type of work.
There are many overlaps between the approaches, though their specific orientations are quite distinctive.
Child care agencies may offer preventive services at several different levels.
However, it is not simply the type of service or resource which distinguishes one form of prevention from another.
For instance, family centres may take many forms, from a primary developmental role to an institutional or even a residual one, providing supplementary care, teaching parents better parenting, monitoring children's progress and providing increased professional surveillance of vulnerable and disadvantaged families.
Our hypothesis is that it is consideration of the value base underlying the intervention which helps towards greater conceptual clarity about preventive work.
In the next section, implications for social work are briefly explored.
SOCIAL WORK IMPLICATIONS
The framework for the analysis of prevention in child care outlined above locates some of the social policy contexts of social work.
This concluding section explores selected implications for practice.
First, policies in some social services departments bear the hallmarks of residualism and tertiary level work, though such terms are not used (McCarthy, 1989).
For example, one social services department studied targeted its preventive services on those families with severe problems whose children were on the threshold of care, that is , tertiary level.
Another department studied was explicit about the residualist nature Of its services:
The SSD's preventive strategy is directed towards those children and their families where there is likelihood of damage…bringing them into care at some achieve the minimum amount of intervention necessary to preserve the child's place within the family.
(Departmental Policy Statement)
Secondly, analysing preventive work in this way may help social workers to locate the contexts of their practices and priorities.
Some practitioners equate preventive work only with population-based outreach services, whereas our analysis indicates that preventive aims are relevant at every level of intervention.
The underlying aim may be briefly conceptualized as preventing the need for more intrusive interventions.
This presents great challenges in work with very vulnerable families.
For example, a short-term foster placement was used for a mother and her four handicapped children while work was undertaken with the father in relation to his plans for himself and his family.
Thirdly, there is a divergent trend in contemporary social services departments which has implications for preventive work: diversion and minimum interventions for vulnerable families where child abuse is not an issue compared with net-widening and multidisciplinary interventions when child abuse is identified.
Preventive work spans these contrasting situations because child abuse cases are those where there is more likelihood of separation.
In our research study, we found many examples of social workers actively engaged in delabelling families and deregistering children in these preventive cases.
Fourthly, the skills and methods which social workers developed during the welfare state era are relevant as never before (Department of Health and Social Security, 1985; Parsloe, 1988; Department of Health, 1989): psychosocial assessments, direct work with children, maintaining links, interprofessional collaboration.
These skills may build on families' coping capacities and lessen coercion, especially in situations where risks and needs are great.
Finally, our analysis can be applied to the very different language of the 1989 Children Act (Hoggett, 1989; Ball, 1990).
The preventive duty is broader than Section I of the 1980 Child Care Act, but it is owed to a restricted group of children (Masson, 1990).
The duty is phrased more positively in terms of support for families rather than diminishing the need to take children into care; the duty is, though, owed to ‘children in need’, defined in terms of disability, significant impairment of health or development, and failure to achieve or maintain a reasonable standard of health or development without the provision of services.
The language of ‘needs’(institutional model of welfare) sits oddly in our new residualist era, and it remains to be seen how it will be operationalized.
Local authorities will, of course, differ in the breadth of their need ideologies, but there will be identifiable boundaries to their activities under these provisions (Streather, 1989).
Taken together, this restricted definition of support for families and children in need constitutes the new ideology of residualism and this will continue to provide a challenge for good practices in child care.
A 24 Hour Duty System: Using Practitioner Research to Manage Stress HELEN MASSON and TONY MORRISON
SUMMARY
Following a sharp annual rise in the number of referral received, the Rochdale NSPCC Child Protection Team decided to research its referral and investigative service.
Using a questionnaire to collect data, a much fuller picture of the team's work in this area was developed.
This enabled the team to feel more in control of a stressful and unpredictable sphere of responsibility.
the process of the research is briefly described, an analysis of some of the findings is offered and the team's reactions to the research are discussed.
The advantages of having practitioner-researchers are highlighted.
This article describes research conducted into the referral and investigative work of the Rochdale based Child Protection Team (CPT) of the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC).
The research was conducted by the authors of the article, one of whom (TM) was then Team Manager of the CPT and the other (BM) on a full-time secondment as a team member from her post as Senior Lecturer in Social Work at Huddersfield Polytechnic.
ORIGINS OF RESEARCH
The impetus for this research came from two sources.
Firstly, the team had become increasingly aware of the need to evaluate its work since external researchers were already conducting research into child sexual abuse investigations and case conferences.
The team felt it important to extend the evaluation to all investigative work.
Secondly, during the twelve months preceding the research, the team had experienced an   eighty-three per cent increase in referrals for investigation in Rochdale.
This sudden increase had been very difficult to manage because it was unexpected and the team wanted to analyse these new demands on its investigative service.
The research effort was also, at a process level, a way of gaining some control over work which was highly stressful and difficult to predict.
The team realized that little effort had ever been made to look at an area of activity which tended to be regarded as a ‘necessary evil’ and one which was very time consuming and most invasive of their private lives.
CONTEXT AND FUNCTIONS OF THE ROCHDALE NSPCC CHILD PROTECTION TEAM
The CPT was established in 1980 on a jointly funded basis, shared between the NSPCC and Rochdale Social Services Department.
Its functions at the time of the research were as follows:
1.
To provide a 24 hour child protection line and investigation service (see below).
2.
To maintain the child protection register, and to chair review meetings for registered children.
3.
To convene, chair and minute child protection case conferences.
4.
To provide a 24 hour consultation service for all professionals.
5.
To provide a specialist assessment and treatment service.
6.
To contribute to multi-disciplinary child protection training.
The 24 hour child protection line received referrals from members of the public in Rochdale, Bury, and Oldham.
With regard to Bury and Oldham, arrangements existed for referrals to be passed on to the respective social service departments.
Where a family in Rochdale was the subject of concern, the team had responsibility to take action.
The type of action taken depended on the nature of the concern.
However, the NSPCC distinguishes between two main types of referral, primary and secondary cases.
Primary cases involve any allegation that a child is being physically or sexually abused, neglected, is failing to thrive, is left alone, or is severely at risk of being abused.
In these cases the team would investigate within 24 hours.
Secondary task cases include referrals concerning child behaviour, marital problems, and the provision of advice.
These cases may be referred to another agency without the NSPCC investigating.
SCOPE AND AIMS OF THE RESEARCH
As we began to develop a feasible research design we had in mind initially the broad aim of developing a clearer picture of the referral and investigative work of the team.
Without such basic information we realized it was all too easy for myths and fantasies to develop about the demands of the investigative service.
For example, in the context of complex and time-consuming workloads team members were beginning to feel that when on duty at night or at weekends (what is called out-of-hours work) they were as busy as when they were on duty between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m.
Monday to Friday (in-hours work).
One of the aims of the research was to test this impression out.
More specifically the research included the following aims:
a)
To analyse the nature of public referrals in Rochdale.
What sort of referrals did the team get?
How many were received in-hours and how many out-of-hours?
b)
To analyse and quantify the process and demands of the investigative service.
How did the team investigate and how long did it take?
c)
To analyse the quality of referral information.
Were there ‘malicious’ referrals and how often was public concern substantiated?
Other aims were identified and researched in the course of the study but discussion of these is beyond the scope of this article.
RESEARCH DESIGN
The team co-operated fully in the planning and execution of the research and this was much appreciated.
As indicated in the literature (Crocker and Fisher, 1974; Fischer, 1978; Calam and Elliott, 1987) the practitioner-researcher relationship is not always an easy one and it was particularly useful that the two researchers were part of the team in terms of giving feedback, answering queries, searching out missing information and reporting on the progress of the research.
RESEARCH DESIGN
The research was conducted through the collection of data at the conclusion of an investigation or once a referral had been dealt with and closed via other action.
An investigation was considered to have been concluded once a judgement had been made about whether the allegation(s) had been substantiated or not and decisions made about how to  proceed to an outcome, for example, to close the case, offer treatment, call a case conference, etc.
Thus all public referrals from within Rochdale received by the team between 1 October 1987 and 31 March 1988 were monitored and evaluated via the completion of a pre-coded questionnaire.
The team member on duty who had completed the initial referral form was also responsible for completing the pre-coded questionnaire.
The questionnaire was designed to be largely self-explanatory and relatively quick to complete.
In relation to the aims of the research previously outlined the following information was elicited from it:
a)
Details of the opening and closure of the referral or investigation.
b)
The activities involved in the referral or investigation (telephone calls, home visits, office interviews, meetings with other professionals, medical examinations, legal action) and the time spent on these activities.
c)
How far the referral information received (and categorized on the initial referral form) was substantiated on investigation or at the outcome to the referral.
The research number included on the questionnaire was made up of three parts:
1.
the NSPCC case number
2.
information as to whether the referral commenced in or out-of-hours
3.
the nature of the referral being made, for , an allegation of physical abuse.Thus the three parts of the research number allowed for subsequent analysis of all the referrals received (a) as a group,(b) according to whether they were received in or out-of-hours and (c) according to the nature of the referral received.
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS — A SUMMARY OF KEY FINDINGS
THE AMOUNT OF WORK GENERATED AND ITS TYPE
Between October 1987 and March 1988 the team dealt with seventy-nine public referrals.
Table 1 provides information on how many of the referrals started in or out-of-hours each month.
In total, over the six month period, 59 per cent of the referrals commenced during week days and 41 per cent after 5 p.m. or at weekends, two commencing after 11 p.m.
Not all referrals received out-of-hours, however, were completely dealt with out-of-hours — at least some were concluded in hours.
Thus in total the team spent approximately 253 hours on referral and investigative work between October 1987 and March 1988, of which approximately 74 hours (29 per cent) was out-of-hours work and 6 hours (2 per cent ) was work after 11 p.m.
As regards the nature of the referrals dealt with, Table 2 offers a breakdown of the information received at the point of referral and recorded on the Society's initial referral form.
Approximately 77 per cent(61 out of the 79 referrals) comprised primary task cases though there was only one public referral of failure to thrive.
Presumably it is much more likely that such a problem would be picked up by professionals involved in a family, but it underlines the fact that children who are failing to thrive are very much at risk unless they are being taken to the clinic, for example, or are being seen regularly in the home by a Health Visitor.
The association between the nature of the referral and whether the referral was received in or out-of-hours was explored for any interesting patterns.
What was found was that referral types were spread fairly equally across both time periods except in the case of sexual abuse referrals where 9 out of 12 referrals were received in hours.
THE STRESSES OF DUTY WORK — MYTHS AND REALITIES
Being on duty was generally acknowledged by the team to be stressful and disruptive of one's home life, but the figures indicated that in relation to referral and investigative work at least, the amount of time in active work was not great.
253 hours over a six month period gave a total of only 8.4 hours per team member per month (or only 5.5 hours per month client contact if telephone calls and professional meetings were ignored).
If just out-of-hours work was considered the figures are 2.5 hours per team member per month, of which hardly any active work occurred after 11 p.m.
Not a massive workload, even when it is remembered that consultation time and documentation time were not included in the data.
Even allowing for other work the team covered during out-of-hours duty (acting as a consultant to other professionals, checking the register and forwarding referrals for other Local Authorities) the overall total per team member per month was still only 4 hours per month out-of-hours work.
A modest amount.
Given these relatively small amounts of out-of-hours worked we wondered why duty was seen as so stressful?
A number of reasons we felt were relevant:
1.
The unpredictability of being on duty, the anxiety arising out of being unsure whether anything substantial is going to happen and being in a constant state of readiness in case it does, is one of the stresses associated with duty periods and referral and investigative work generally.
For example in one three month period subsequent to this research (September, October, November 1988) the team received referrals which resulted in five sets of care proceedings being instituted.
In one period of three days, out-of-hours work involved  three workers in 44 hours of work, on a Friday night, Saturday and Monday night.
The above highlights the unpredictability of duty work and the problems generated for workers and workload management alike when such time consuming emergencies arise.
For example, regular work has to be postponed or cancelled as a result and, because of the knock-on effects, there is never space for team members to take time off in lieu, in order to recuperate from overtime working dealing with highly stressful situations.
2.
Being in a state of readiness for the unpredictable does seem to result in it being less easy to use the quiet periods of duty time productively, which includes relaxing and taking care of oneself.
3.
And (as will be shown later in this section) when a physical or sexual abuse investigation, for example, does develop, such investigations are often time consuming and stressful and have to be conducted in the context of other duty work.
Clearly flexible team management is needed at such busy periods.
4.
Even small amounts of out-of-hours work are disruptive of one's home life , the quality of which is of vital importance given the stressful nature of the team's regular work.
5.
There is an increased awareness and concern about the possibility of violence to staff which adds to anxiety levels.
During 1987, two members of the team were physically assaulted during a joint home visit.
THE TEAM'S RESPONSES TO REFERRALS
Returning now to the referral and investigation work undertaken by the team between October 1987 and March 1988, Table 3 provides some   detail about the range of activities on which the total time of 253 hours was spent and shows that the bulk of the activity time was spent in direct contact with children and/or their caregivers.
In addition to these activities, legal action was taken in three cases.
All three were sexual abuse investigations and resulted in Place of Safety orders being obtained.
However, within these totals, the numbers of hours spent on different types of referrals varied considerably as Table 4 indicates.
Most referral time was spent on primary task cases (225 hours out of a total of 253 hours, or 89 per cent) but there were interesting patterns within the data.
Physical abuse and sexual abuse investigations were particularly ‘labour intensive’.
Interestingly though, whereas physical abuse investigations took up a substantial amount of home visit time, the sexual abuse investigations were heavy on office interview time.
This is accounted for by the rather different procedure adopted in child sexual abuse investigations when there is an urgent need to protect the suspected victim and her or his evidence from outside pressure which may well emanate from the victim's family.
Moreover, the joint police-social worker approach to sexual abuse investigations in Rochdale adds enormously to the professional meeting time (during the investigation and pre-conference).
This is a matter of good practice and it is expensive on time.
However, although the averages given in the last column of Table 4 are of some value they do not convey the reality of referral and investigative work.
How long a physical abuse referral takes to deal with, for example, will depend on factors such as the quality of the referral information, whether the case was currently open to another agency already and the circumstances found on investigation.
Thus the time spent on the physical abuse referrals varied from 30 minutes to 20 hours.
In relation to the sexual abuse referrals the range was between 30 minutes and 15.5 hours.
Again, the uncertainty involved in investigative work and the stress associated with it cannot be emphasized enough.
THE REFERRALS AND ISSUES OF SUBSTANTIATION
Of the total 79 referrals received between October 1987 and March 1988, the NSPCC team dealt with 50 cases alone, jointly investigated one with social services department staff and referred the remainder on for various reasons for example, secondary task work.
Table 5 provides data on how far the allegations made at the point of referral, which were investigated by the team alone, were substantiated on investigation.
As regards malicious referrals, what seemed to be the case in a very few instances was that at least some of the allegations had substance to them    and were worthy of investigation, but in discussion with the parents it seemed possible that the referrer might be using the allegation to progress some dispute with them.
With hindsight probably a fifth rating to the substantiation scale ‘partly or completely substantiated and malicious referral suspected’ should have been included.
As Table 5 shows, 66 per cent of the investigations conducted alone by the Team resulted in partial or complete substantiation, 20 per cent were judged to be unsubstantiated and well intentioned and 14 per cent were unsubstantiated and suspected of being maliciously intended.
In 86 per cent of referrals (43 cases) there was legitimate reason to investigate even if in 10 out of the 43 cases it was judged that the public concern was inaccurate.
It could be argued even so that in 10 cases the investigative work turned out to be a waste of time and caused great distress to the families investigated.
Surely, however, the public has a right to forward well intentioned concerns?
In 66 per cent of the public referrals anyway this concern was validated on investigation.
As the DHSS publication Working Together comments (DHSS, 1988):
There is a need to investigate whenever a case is referred alleging abuse.
All allegations should be regarded as serious, especially those made by close relatives, friends or neighbours, or by children or parents referring themselves for help, and investigated urgently (p.21).
The seven malicious referrals were a cause of great concern, particularly given the amount of distress caused to the families investigated.
However, there seems to be no way of preventing these, especially given the need to accept anonymous referrals.
In the USA some interesting research (Zuravin and Watson, 1987) has been conducted into anonymous reports of child physical abuse, which indicated that reports made by anonymous sources were more likely to be unfounded than reports made by professionals and nonprofessionals.
However, those few anonymous reports (15.5 per cent) that did get substantiated seemed to represent equally as serious incidents of physical abuse as reports from the other two sources.
Professionals are often more sceptical and reluctant to respond to anonymous referrals — in the light of the above research this is potentially dangerous behaviour.
This research demonstrates the need to take all referrals seriously and questions how feasible it is to prioritize child abuse referrals by source in deciding whether to investigate some more urgently than others.
TEAM RESPONSES TO THE RESEARCH
As we have described the research was initiated following an 83 per cent increase in public referrals between 1985/86 and 1986/87.
A number of factors combined to produce a very positive relationship between the research, the researchers, and the team.
Firstly, undertaking the research represented one of the only positive steps available to respond to such an increased demand.
It made the team feel they had regained some control over this area of work, and by focusing in such detail, highlighted its importance and the skills involved in investigations.
As already indicated, having the researchers on the spot meant that there was good communication between the researchers and the team, which in turn enabled any ‘bugs’ in the design to be ironed out immediately.
The researchers could chase up forms, and keep the motivation going even when team members were hard pressed.
The ‘form’ was linked to real people, not distant ‘researchers’, and the whole project was owned by everyone involved.
The research ‘form’ was easy and quick to fill in, and itself gave immediate feedback to members about the investigation process.
It validated what had previously only been personal impressions: that the work was variable, time consuming, complex and required considerable skill.
The results of the research were similarly important and positive for the team.
The data revealed that few referrals, however flimsy they appeared, were malicious, reducing for the team a sense of a ‘wasted  journey’ in such cases.
The data which showed that only two per cent of calls came after 11 p.m. provided useful reassurance that statistically a broken night's sleep was rare.
This helped to reduce anxiety about having sufficient energy to last through one's duty period.
Finally, the information about the numbers of referrals which turned out to be substantiated cases of abuse assisted in lessening the process of wasting precious energy in anticipating that every referral would involve a horrific case of abuse.
Thus the research impacted on the team in several important and positive ways.
The team became more accepting and realistic about the time demanded by the investigation service.
In that sense investigations received a higher priority as a result.
The team also began to analyse the skills required in investigative work and became involved in training courses on investigation.
More recently one of the researchers and a member of the team have written a practice booklet about investigating physical abuse and neglect (Erooga and Masson, 1990).
In simple terms the team came to feel good about its investigation service.
CONCLUSION
We would argue that the kind of research conducted into the referral and investigative service of Rochdale NSPCC Child Protection Team could usefully be repeated in other social work agencies, particularly social services departments.
This would, we believe, have the effect of facilitating the professional response to such work and make a contribution to the management of worker stress.
Investigating allegations of child abuse is skilled and stressful work and should be the focus of greater interest on the part of researchers.
Research Note Social Work and Police Response to Child Sexual Abuse in Scotland LORRAINE WATERHOUSE and JAMES CARNIE
BACKGROUND
The research studied fifty-one cases of child sexual abuse randomly selected from Child Protection Registers of four local authority social work departments in Scotland in 1987 (Waterhouse and Carnie, 1990).
The overall purpose of the study was to examine the way in which familial child sexual abuse was identified and responded to by social workers and police officers in the early investigative stage.
Of major interest was the nature of their inter-agency practice, their respective expectations and the range of problems encountered.
Case records were examined and one hundred individual interviews, divided equally between police officers and social workers involved in the sample, were carried out.
Each front-line practitioner was asked to trace the development of the case from her or his point of view.
By this means attitudes towards, as well as experiences of, investigating child sexual abuse were elicited.
REFERRALS
It is useful to conceptualize referral as a process depending upon a series of linkages between different organizations and individuals who bring cases to public attention (Gough et al .,
1987).
The ‘referral chain' can comprise both individuals acting as private citizens and professionals operating on behalf of agencies.
The number of links needed to   complete referral may be few or many; the speed at which connections are made may be swift or protracted; and the order may be sequential to concurrent.
For these reasons it is often difficult in many cases to trace a single primary source.
However, three broad trends in the referral process are discernible: first, referrals emanating from the child or within the family, which amounted to 60 per cent of the sample; second, referrals emanating from health and educational services, which amounted to 28 per cent; and third, referrals emanating from other welfare agencies.
which amounted to 12 per cent.
In only 10 per cent of cases did social work or police ‘discover’ the problem on their own although they are the main carriers of the interrogative role.
The data also indicated that 61 per cent of cases took two or three linkages before referral was established with social work departments and police forces.
Fifty per cent of cases involving three or more links were rated by social workers and police officers as ‘poor communication’ compared with only 10 per cent in cases of two links or less.
This suggests that length of referral chain has some association with the quality of exchange to develop between police officers and social workers.
VICTIMS, PERPETRATORS, AND THE NATURE OF ABUSE
Data revealed the majority of victims to be female (94 per cent).
Nearly half the cases (49 per cent) involved abuse of adolescent girls between 12 and 16 years; 37 per cent involved abuse of children aged between 6 and 11 years; while the remaining 14 per cent involved children of preschool age.
In one-third of cases there was either suspicion or definite knowledge that a sibling had also been abused (cf.
Finkelhor, 1986; Baker and Duncan, 1985; La Fontaine, 1988).
Perpetrators were overwhelmingly male.
Only one female offender appeared in the sample, involving a young mother with a psychotic illness.
The age of the perpetrator varied widely: the youngest offender was 16 while the oldest was 78.
Just under one-third of abusers were the natural father, while a further one-third had adopted the role of father, either by law or by common consent.
Another 25 per cent of abusers were close family relatives such as brothers, uncles and grandfathers.
The type and duration of abuse were not consistently recorded in social work records.
Seven cases in the sample (14 per cent) had gone on for four years or longer.
At the other end of the scale three cases allegedly had been limited to one isolated incident.
Care, of course, has  to be taken not to equate, by necessity, duration with severity, for a child might be just as traumatized by one incident as by a succession of repeated incidents over time.
Just under half of the fifty-one social work records examined did not contain a specific reference to the exact nature of the abuse, making opaque references to ‘sexual abuse’, ‘interference’ and ‘molestation’.
However, where more detail was available abuse was found to include touching of genitals; fondling of breasts; exposure to pornographic material; oral sex; overtures for intercourse; and vaginal and anal intercourse.
Touching and fondling were by far the most common complaints.
In just over one-quarter of cases (14) a Place of Safety Order was sought, while in another 10 per cent(5) the child was already in care and under supervision.
The remainder either stayed at home or moved voluntarily to a relative, neighbour, or friend.
Convictions were secured in 10 per cent of cases.
Custodial sentences ranged from two months to eight years.
The majority of alleged perpetrators, however, were not subjected to criminal proceedings due largely to insufficient evidence and denial of the allegation.
PRACTITIONERS
Information collected on the professional experience of front-line practitioners revealed that the majority of police officers w&re more experienced than their social work counterparts.
Seventy-seven per cent of officers in the sample had ten years or more service to their credit; some 50 per cent of social work practitioners had less than five years experience.
Marked contrasts were also noted as to whether it was an individual's first case.
For 55 per cent of social workers it was their first case while the remaining 45 per cent had dealt with a case before; 90 per cent of police claimed prior experience of investigation.
Greater specialization within some regional police forces may account for such a strong discrepancy.
TYPICAL CASES
Cases of child sexual abuse lacked objective evidence in the face of persistent adult denial.
Hard and fast information was very restricted because abuse occurred privately.
Forensic evidence to support or refute allegations proved the exception not the rule.
Alleged perpetrators usually denied allegations but even when admission was forthcoming full personal responsibility for events was not necessarily  accepted by the perpetrator who might allege that he was provoked.
Perpetrators had a strong investment in withholding information for fear of legal repercussions.
Non-abusing parents — mainly women — in the majority of cases stated they had no prior knowledge of untoward sexual behaviour prior to investigation.
Alleged events often coincided with their temporary absence from the household.
Children or young people were responsible for instigating the complaint and consequently social workers and police officers were highly dependent on children's testimonies.
Cases fell into three main types.
‘Grey cases’(the majority) where uncertainty remained high as to whether sexual abuse had occurred were characterized by perpetrator denial; by an absence of medical investigation or medical evidence; by no police involvement or follow-up and by allegations of touching only.
‘Black cases’(the minority) where comparatively high levels of certainty existed about the probable occurrence of sexual abuse included, by comparison, either denial or admission of wrong-doing; medical investigation leading to supporting evidence; police investigation resulting in the perpetrator being charged and by allegations of sexual intercourse.
‘White cases’(exceptional) where reasonable confidence existed that child sexual abuse had probably not occurred differed by the availability of medical evidence to refute the child's specific complaint.
RISK EVALUATION
Social workers defined their main purpose when investigating referrals of alleged sexual abuse as the evaluation of child care risk; judgement about children's well-being was justifiable and necessary even if the reasons which motivated referral were unproven or no longer relevant.
Despite professional emphasis on treating each case on its individual merits, consistent similarities were found between social workers from different regions in the criteria they used to assess the likelihood of further sexual abuse.
Whether these common benchmarks are effective predictors is not clear, but they capture accurately how social workers tried to judge the child's circumstances.
Criteria were divided between two types: primary (child care) criteria which concentrated on assessing familial circumstances likely to pertain if a child were to remain at home; and secondary (disclosure) criteria which either substantiated or refuted children's and young people's disclosures.
Primary criteria included, for example, extent and type of abuse; non-abusing parent's dependence on the perpetrator; non-abusing parent's attitude towards the abused child; opportunity for access  between child and perpetrator; parental willingness to co-operate with investigation.
Secondary criteria included, for example, the abused child's attitude towards remaining at home; presence or absence of physical signs of abuse; psychological or behavioural signs of disturbance in the abused child; parental criminal or psychiatric history including alcohol or drug abuse.
EVIDENCE
Social work inclination to try to verify the occurrence of sexual abuse was often at variance with the police desire to be involved as early as possible in the investigation of a case.
The police needed to obtain firm evidence to support a possible prosecution in court and the underlying fear was that untimely or precipitous social work intervention could compromise vital testimonies or material productions.
Police activity centred around the offence and the apprehension of a perpetrator.
Consequently, a real anxiety prevailed about pre-emptive social work action in relation to the accuracy and reliability of evidence obtainable thereafter from the child witness, the alleged perpetrator or any corroborating witnesses.
INTER-AGENCY CO-OPERATION
In twenty per cent of cases problems were uncovered in inter-agency communication.
Five factors created difficulties: delays in passing on information; competing professional objectives (criminal investigation or assessment of child protection risk); unrealistic expectations of the powers and responsibilities of social work departments; disputes over control or management of a case; and procedural inexperience.
Satisfactory inter-agency communication, however, was present in the remainder of the sample and was associated with the establishment of informal lines of communication between agencies.
Social work deferment to the police or clear specification of which agency was to lead the investigation also contributed to good contact and communication between agencies.
Inter-agency activity ranged across a continuum from the perfunctory to the innovative.
Three models were found: a minimalist model based on limited contact between police officers and social workers through formal channels strictly according to the minimum demanded by procedural dictates; a collaborative model involving close consultations on an informal as well as formal basis, about progress and proposed courses  of action; and an integrated model involving joint simultaneous investigation as a single operational entity.
The integrated model applied in only one locality as an experiment; the minimalist model was present in a sizeable minority of cases; the collaborative model was most common (cf.
HMSO, 1988; Metropolitan Police, 1987; Conroy et al .,
1990).
RECOMMENDATIONS
Stress undoubtedly proved a major problem for social workers whose responsibility extended beyond investigation of child sexual abuse referral to a determination of child care outcomes.
A lack of easy access to informed consultations; the novelty and nature of the problem itself; the uneasy relationship between priority cases and other workload service commitments; and the lack of clear cut evidence to confirm or refute allegations all contributed.
Two approaches might assist in tackling the problem: first, the introduction of stress management in police and social work training; and second, specific to social work training, clear specification of child protection criteria to aid decision-making about likely child care risk.
Treating cases of child sexual abuse as a first priority needs to be matched with improvements in planning which will permit practitioners to meet this service demand.
Procedures can only be used effectively and efficiently in the context of a team structure which has accounted for the systematic management of top priorities and emergencies.
Back-up services together with improved access to good quality consultation may be one path to consider.
Much still needs to be done to improve inter-agency response.
Assumptions and expectations which lie behind an inter-agency approach require to be made more explicit in order that agencies, and individuals within agencies, are absolutely clear about where they stand, not only in relation to the paramount concern of protecting the child, but also in relation to each other.
The operational objectives of each agency have to be properly understood by the professional parties involved so that areas of conflict and compromise in practice can be identified and service provision improved.
Caring for Troubled Children in Flanders, The Netherlands, and the United Kingdom MATTHEW COLTON, WALTER HELLINCKX, ROGER BULLOCK and BENEDIKTE VAN DEN BRUEL
Dr Walter Hellinckx is the professor at the section of Orthopedagogics, Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, University of Leuven, Belgium.
Dr Roger Bullock is a Senior Research Fellow at the Dartington Social Research Unit in the School of applied Social Studies in the University of Bristol.
Benedikte Van Den Bruel is a researcher at the section of Orthopedagogics, Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, University of Leuven, Belgium.
SUMMARY
this article reviews research on residential care and other services for troubled children in Flanders, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom.
We begin by looking at Flanders and the Netherlands.
This includes an account of the organization of services and a critical evaluation of initiatives resulting from the growing dissatisfaction with residential care over recent years.
We can then compare the evidence from these two countries with the situation in the United Kingdom.
Notwithstanding important differences, there are clear similarities in the issues surrounding the residential care of children in the three countries.
We conclude by outlining likely future developments in residential child care.
Residential care has long been associated with care of deprived and delinquent children.
Within this tradition, however, there are many different histories of services found in the various European countries.
The historical antecedents in each case vary.
Fro example, in many countries residential services developed from religious organizations, in others charities have been important, whereas in England the Poor Law with its workhouse system established an elaborate care approach.
Similarly, residential care has been preferred at some times more than others, so until the eighteenth century in the Netherlands and Flanders   the foster family was seen as the best place for orphans, foundlings, and abandoned children and has long been extensively used to care for needy children in Scotland (Packman, 1975; Pinchbeck and Hewitt, 1973; Pyck et al .,
1985).
In the United Kingdom, of course, there is also a well-established system of private boarding schools which shelter twice as many children as welfare establishments and absorb much middle-class need (Lambert et al .,
1975).
Child care in the United Kingdom was, as indicated, more closely associated with the Poor Law, the system of care and financial relief for poor families.
At certain periods, institutional care in workhouses was common, although different parts of the United Kingdom, such as Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland, have their own welfare histories (Pinchbeck and Hewitt, 1973).
However, the first half of the nineteenth century witnessed a revolution in social practice in many Western societies: deviants and dependents were increasingly segregated into institutions — mental hospitals, prisons, reformatories, poorhouses and other such closed purpose-built institutions for control, treatment and punishment (Rothman, 1970; Foucault, 1977; Cohen, 1979; Melossi and Pavarini, 1981, Scull 1984).
During this period, a significant expansion in the existing supply of institutions for children occurred in Flanders, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom (Lammertyn and Antoons, 1990).
The orphanage's overriding function was not only to care for the destitute but also to protect society from dangerous children as there was a fear that roaming, unsupervised youngsters posed a threat to social order.
This was to be achieved by subjecting the child to a rigidly regulated regime based on discipline, training, and religion (Ruyter and Van Weelden, 1986).
Life within the walls was often severe and monotonous (D'hoker, 1986; Willemse, 1987).
Yet by the end of the 1960s, institutions had once again become places of last resort, and over the past thirty years the numbers of youngsters admitted to institutions has declined sharply in all three countries (Lammertyn and Antoons, 1990; Ploeg, 1986).
This article outlines recent research on residential care and its alternatives for troubled youngsters in Flanders, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom.
We begin by examining services in Flanders and the Netherlands and the characteristics of the children looked after.
We first look at the macro-organization, that is the organization of services on a national or regional level, including their geographical distribution and overall capacity (Ploeg, 1986).
We next look at the meso-organization of services, which includes care processes and practices (Ploeg, 1986).
We then compare the evidence from these two countries with the situation in the United Kingdom.
Finally, we sketch likely future developments in residential child care.
FLANDERS AND THE NETHERLANDS
Some 4,000 troubled young people in Flanders, and 10,000 in the Netherlands, are in residential care because of their psycho-social problems (Lammertyn and Antoons, 1990; Ploeg, 1990).
These are the equivalent in the United Kingdom of youngsters in special residential schools for children with emotional and behavioural disorders (EBD schools) and in many community homes.
The majority live in private institutions, authorized and subsidized by the government.
A small number of youngsters are accommodated in state provision.
These are regarded as a ‘safety net’ for the most difficult or disturbed youngsters.
Concern has been expressed about the ways in which residential services are classified (Ploeg, 1981 and 1986; Hellinckx and Munter, 1990).
In Flanders, services are classified simply in terms of the age of the youngsters looked after or the type of service offered (for example, observation and assessment).
Whilst a more sophisticated classification system operates in the Netherlands, the precise nature of the services offered often remains unclear (Ploeg and Scholte, 1988).
Half of all children in care in the Netherlands are placed with foster families (Kampen, 1988), against only thirty-one per cent in Flanders (Lammertyn and Antoons, 1990).
In recent years the provision of alternatives to residential care, such as independent living under supervision, placement at home and day-care centres, has increased.
CHILDREN'S CHARACTERISTICS
In both Flanders and the Netherlands boys comprise an estimated 60 per cent of the residential population.
Over half of the youngsters in residential care in Flanders (56 per cent) are aged between 13 and 18 years.
In the Netherlands the largest category of young people in residential care (59.9 per cent) is aged between 14 and 17 years.
Children under 13 years in Flanders tend to be placed with foster families rather than in residential care.
The average length of stay at a single residential facility is markedly longer in Flanders (3 years and 4 months) than in the Netherlands (14.6 months).
The majority of youngsters in residential care have experienced at least one previous placement.
Again, the proportion of such children is significantly higher in Flanders (68.8 per cent) than in the Netherlands (54.3 per cent ).
Fostering breakdowns account for an increasing number of admissions to residential care.
Research also shows that many youngsters in residential care have experienced difficulties with schooling; for example, over half of all boys  in residential care have stayed down a class at least once.
Moreover, some sixty per cent of children in residential care manifest serious behavioural problems including, absconding, truancy, vagrancy, aggression, sexual problems, and offending.
The family backgrounds of youngsters in residential care are often multiply disadvantaged, which includes problems concerning relationships, mental and physical health, and financial and housing difficulties (Hellinckx and Munter, 1990; Lammertyn and Antoons, 1990; Ploeg, 1986 and 1990; Ploeg and Scholte, 1988).
CAPACITY
There has been a significant reduction in the numbers of young people placed in residential settings over the past two decades.
In Flanders a 33 per cent cut in overall capacity occurred between 1978 and 1987, while a 46 per cent reduction took place between 1970 and 1987 in the Netherlands.
The factors underlying this drop in capacity included research findings on the poor quality, adverse effects, and high financial costs of institutional care (Hellinckx, 1991; Hellinckx and Munter, 1990; Ploeg, 1986).
The decline in residential capacity has been accompanied by a growth in community based alternatives such as specialist foster care, independent living under supervision and day-centres aimed at supporting, rather than supplanting, families.
In the Netherlands the latter are called ‘Boddaertcentres’.
By 1983 there were some 49 such centres in the Netherlands (Landelijke Stichting Dagcentra, 1983).
There are currently an estimated 45 day-centres in Flanders, many of which are linked to residential facilities.
However, despite their steady growth, the provision of day centres and independent living under supervision remains limited.
In early 1990 only five per cent of children in care in Flanders were using such services (Lammertyn and Antoons, 1990).
Whilst the proportion of youngsters placed with foster families in Flanders barely changed between 1981 and 1988, there was a clear shift from direct foster placements to placement by foster care referral services (Lammertyn and Antoons, 1990).
In the Netherlands, the number of foster placements rose by 22.7 per cent between 1980 and 1986 (Kampen, 1988).
Efforts have also been made to improve the quality of foster care through measures such as regional referral agencies, providing foster families with advice and practical help and financial remuneration, and by encouraging co-operation between children's birth and foster families (Harten-Oudijk, 1988; Weterings, 1984; Ruyter and Weelden, 1986).
Attempts are also being made to refer the more difficult cases to foster families.
In the Netherlands ‘therapeutic foster  families’, which receive intensive assistance, have been established.
By 1988 there were some 290) such families (Hellinckx and Munter, 1990).
However, despite the generally positive reception given to the growth of community alternatives, concern has been expressed that the decline in residential provision means that young people with the most serious problems do not always receive appropriate help (Hekken et al .,
1987 — 8; Kampen, 1988; Ploeg, 1986).
RATIONALISATION
The current literature on residential care emphasizes the principle of ‘regionalization’; that is, on ensuring that target groups in each region are adequately served by the full range of services so that youngsters do not have to be placed away from their home localities.
In the Netherlands steady progress has been made towards this objective, with a significant drop in numbers of extra-regional placements between 1970 and 1983 (Ploeg, 1986).
However, the geographical spread of services in Flanders remains uneven (Hellinckx and Munter, 1990).
SMALL SIZE
Since the 1970s efforts have been made to organize residential care into small, autonomous units accommodating no more than ten youngsters.
However, only about twenty per cent of residential homes in Flanders are of this type (Hellinckx and Munter, 1990).
Whilst comparable figures are not available for the Netherlands, it seems that the provision of small scale residential homes in the Netherlands is more extensive than in Flanders (Kampen, 1988).
GROUP WORKERS
Recent years have also seen increasing recognition of the key role performed by the groupworker in social care (Ploeg, 1986; Hellinckx and Munter, 1990).
Between 1978 and 1987 the numbers of groupworkers employed in Flanders rose by 25 per cent(Hellinckx and Munter, 1990), and the number of Dutch groupworkers doubled between 1959 and 1982 (Ploeg, 1986).
This trend has been accompanied by improved professional training and a significant rise in the numbers holding professional qualifications.
For example, between 1955 and 1982 the proportion of groupworkers in the Netherlands without the most basic qualification fell from 67 per cent to 25 per cent (Ploeg, 1986).
However, despite general agreement about the need for groupworkers to be supervised by university trained personnel, this occurs in only 30 per cent of services in Flanders (Hellinckx and Munter, 1990).
ADMISSIONS
Greater attention is also being paid to the process of admission to residential care.
This has included the introduction of intake teams, intake meetings, and preparatory interviews with parents and children (Ploeg, 1986; Hellinckx and Munter, 1990).
However, requests for admission are not always supported by adequate information, which makes it difficult to assess whether admission is appropriate (Bastiaansen, 1976; Schelvis, 1977; Knorth, 1987).
Moreover, a sizeable minority of services (18 per cent in Flanders, and 9 per cent in the Netherlands) still fail to involve young people in decisions about admission (Hellinckx and Munter, 1990; Ploeg and Scholte, 1988).
Written admission criteria are often vague and unspecific, and criteria for rejection are enormous (Hellinckx and Munter, 1990).
CARE PLANS
Considerable stress is currently placed on the need to formulate care or ‘treatment’ plans in order to ensure effective interventions (Knorth, 1987).
Yet research reveals that a large number of services in Flanders (40 per cent) operate without such plans (Hellinckx and Munter, 1990).
Services that do work to plans tend to be those employing professionally qualified staff, who act as advisers or consultants with regard to pedagogical methods and policy, or provide direct help to youngsters.
Some 40 per cent of services in Flanders do not employ such staff (Hellinckx and Munter, 1990).
FAMILY-ORIENTED ACTION
Since the mid-1970s there has been growing recognition that residential care can only be effective when it is part of a package aimed at helping the family as a whole, and where parents are involved in all aspects of the care process.
However, these aspirations have yet to be fulfilled.
For example, in Flanders less than 20 per cent of files examined in a population study of young people in residential care contained evidence of family-oriented care (Hellinckx and Munter, 1990).
The situation is more encouraging in the Netherlands, where parents were found to be involved in the care process ‘to some extent’ at least in 90 per cent of cases; intensive involvement is, however, limited to 39 per cent of cases (Ploeg and Scholte, 1988).
AFTER CARE
Finally, there is considerable concern about the need to provide after care for children and their families.
Dutch research shows that as many as 79 per cent of young people experience difficulties following discharge from residential care (Meulen and Uhm, 1981).
But Flemish data suggest that the provision of after care is by no means universal.
Although over 80 per cent of services claimed to offer after care, only half of these were found to offer help ‘systematically or always’(Hellinckx and Munter, 1990).
SUMMARY
So far we have summarized contemporary research on residential care and its alternatives for troubled youngsters in Flanders and the Netherlands.
Whilst developments have followed a similar path in both regions, the Netherlands has invariably led the way.
Initiatives undertaken in response to the widespread dissatisfaction with residential care have led to a general improvement in the quality of services.
Nevertheless, much remains to be done.
Despite a good deal of lip-service being paid to the need for appropriate admissions procedures, properly formulated care or ‘treatment’ plans, and professionally qualified and adequately supervised groupworkers, these objectives have not been fully realized.
The same can be said about the goal of family-oriented intervention and the provision of after care.
Furthermore, the overall reduction in residential capacity sometimes means that the most troubled youngsters do not get the help they require.
COMPARISON WITH THE UNITED KINGDOM
This paper has focused on residential services for youngsters with psycho-social problems.
Naturally, it is difficult to make direct comparisons with the situation in the United Kingdom because psychosocial problems is a broad category and children who meet this criterion are sheltered by different services, such as education, health, and social services.
Nevertheless, it is remarkable that despite administrative differences, the problems facing residential care in Flanders and the Netherlands and the recent changes in policy are very similar to those found in the United Kingdom.
Indeed, those with knowledge of the British scene will recognize many of the points made about Flanders and the Netherlands.
For example, the regional distribution of residential and foster care services in the United Kingdom is known to be uneven  with some local authorities using EBD schools and residential care far more frequently than others (Fuller and Stevenson, 1983).
Hence, whether a child is placed with a foster family or in residential care may not so much depend on the child's needs but on where he or she happens to live.
One local authority in England, Warwickshire, has closed all its residential provision for children in care.
Further, the age and gender distributions of children in residential and foster care in the United Kingdom are not unlike those in Flanders and the Netherlands.
Boys appear more likely to be accommodated in residential settings than girls, and younger children tend to be placed in foster homes (see DHSS, 1988).
The populations of children in residential care in the United Kingdom, Flanders, and the Netherlands seem equally heterogeneous in terms of their previous histories and presenting problems (see Berridge, 1985), though most come from multiply disadvantaged backgrounds (see Packman et al .,
1986).
There also appears to be a high incidence of educational retardation and school problems among the children in all three countries (see Heath et al .,
1989; Colton et al .,
1991).
Equally familiar to the British observer will be the discontinuity and instability experienced by the children as a result of welfare interventions (see Fisher et al .,
1986), and the problems compounded by the difficulty in maintaining contacts between children and their birth parents (see Millham et al .,
1986).
Also echoed in the British research literature is the unsatisfactory nature of many admissions to care in Flanders and the Netherlands (see Packman et al .,
1986), and the common failure to formulate adequate plans to guide interventions into the lives of children and their families (see DHSS, 1985).
In addition, the British reader will recognize the declining role of the residential sector, particularly reform schools and assessment centres, and the growth of alternatives such as specialist foster cars (see Hazel, 1981; Rowe et al .,
1988), independent living or placement with relatives under supervision and the provision of various forms of day care and after care.
Yet, as is the case in Flanders and the Netherlands, the residential sector in Britain has continuing relevance, not least in performing a valuable ‘fail safe’ role in substitute child care, which includes helping to deal with the aftermath of fostering breakdowns (see Berridge, 1985; Berridge and Cleaver, 1987).
Indeed, despite the fall in numbers of children living in residential care at any one time, some 25 per cent since 1971 in the United Kingdom but far higher for some types of care than others, recent research shows that residential care is still experienced by many troubled adolescents.
Well over half the adolescents in care experience residential placement at some time (Rowe et al .,
1988), and a residential option follows 60 per cent of foster  home breakdowns compared with 25 per cent fostering again only 11 per cent the other way (Millham et al .,
1986).
Child care policy and practice in the United Kingdom, Flanders, and the Netherlands appear to be converging towards family and community-oriented services, although the pace of change seems to be slower in Flanders than in the other two countries.
the 1989 Children Act in the United kingdom has given legislative expression to the idea of shared care between social work agencies and parents and greater involvement of parents and children in decision making.
There also seems to be a parallel development towards smaller scale residential provisions (see Colton, 1988), coupled with similar calls for improved training and more adequate supervision and support for care workers, and the provision of after care.
Finally, it seems that attempt are being made in the United Kingdom, Flanders, and the Netherlands to create a more positive image and role for residential care (see National Institute of Social Work, 1988).
Much here seems hinge on the residential sector being able to offer specialist help to that decreasing yet still substantial number of youngsters who are unable to live with families or independently.
Naturally, differences have also been highlighted by these comparisons.
for instance, residential care in Flanders and the Netherlands seems more closely tied to psychological assessment of children and to a diagnosis/treatment approach than in the United Kingdom — at least for social services cases.
In addition, there is more provision outside the state system and residential services appear less integrated into wider family and community approaches than would be the case in a generic social services department in the United Kingdom.
However, differences apart, the clear similarities in the issues surrounding the residential care of children in the three different countries suggest common situations in urbanized, wealthy West European societies that generate both the difficult candidates and the problems of meeting their needs effectively.
While we may agonize over practice guidelines and bits of legislation in our own country, it is important to remember that the sources of many problems facing residential care lie deep within contemporary social structures and so cross national frontiers.
Following the moves to fuller integration between countries of the European community after 1992, there will be more attempts to standardize services and establish common principles.
the European court has already influenced child-care in the United Kingdom through its judgements on terminating parental access to children in care and on the conditions for using secure accommodation.
these converging tendencies will undoubtedly increase in the coming decade.
What, then, are the likely future developments in the residential care of children?
Firstly, child care services in the future will be based around a balance between residential, community, and foster care.
Each will be part of a child-care process in which the strengths of one approach will be used to offset the weaknesses of others.
Each will expand to contribute to a wide variety of approaches to children and families, such as preventative work, rehabilitation, substitute care, and therapy.
There seems little probability of a resurrection of residential provision on a large scale although the number of specialist facilities may increase, mainly as a result of initiatives by voluntary associations.
Any additional pressures on services resulting from the growth in the number of adolescents in the general population will, therefore, have to be met without recourse to residential options.
What residential provision exists will have to adopt a specialist role within the gamut of available services.
Secondly, social work is likely to become more professional as training standards improve.
At the same time, it will have to be more accountable, both in response to media attention and the more rigorous legal testing required by legislation.
The simple provision of substitute care for children and an uncritical belief in welfare will not be enough as concerns with outcomes and standards increase.
Thirdly, along with increasing professionalization of child-care services, the clients will demand more information and rights.
This is part of a general social trend to increase customer choice and to limit the power of professionals.
Welfare services will have to respond to this and agencies will be increasingly required to produce clear written information on their services for parents and children and to ascertain and consider clients' views when decisions are made.
Fourthly, the growing awareness of the complexity of children's problems, coupled with an ecological perspective that views them as part of an extended family and local community with its own history and culture, mean that no single person or agency will be able to provide all the necessary services.
Thus, responsibility for a case will become increasingly separate from the provision of care and support.
Co-operation between state, private, and charity services will be essential.
Finally, research evidence, particularly longitudinal studies which relate children's present situations to future outcomes, will increasingly influence practice.
We live in an age of audit; the anecdotal evidence and zeal which sustained practitioners in the past will no longer be acceptable.
While some research findings, such as the intractability of persistent delinquency or the continual dangers posed to children by abusers, may depress practitioners, their ability to interpret and apply research will be a hallmark of the professionalism we foresee.
Research Note: Developing Outcome Measures in Child Care HARRIET WARD and SONIA JACKSON Harriet Ward is a Research Associate and Sonia Jackson a Senior Lecturer in the School of Applied social Studies, University of Bristol.
SUMMARY
The complexity of the concept of outcome has discourages research into the impact of the care experience on the child.
This Note summarizes the conceptual thinking behind a comprehensive system of assessment which is being piloted in four local authorities, and reports on the preliminary results.
In 1987, a group of researchers were asked to develop a viable means of assessing outcome in child care.
The theory of outcome measurement they constructed was then used to develop a comprehensive system of assessment which could monitor the development of all children for whom local authorities take responsibility.
The following Note describes how the system was produced and examines the preliminary results of a pilot study undertaken in four local authorities.
(The research is funded by the Department of Health, and supervised by Professor R. A. Parker.)
THE CONCEPT OF OUTCOME
Both here and abroad, most research on child care has focused on the service offered rather than on its consequences for individual children (see Hudson and Galaway, 1989).
Outcome, if considered at all, has been narrowly conceived as continuity or breakdown of placement.
Yet   this is only one intermediate event among the numerous reverberating consequences of social work intervention.
Unravelling these consequences and deciding which merit assessment is an exceptionally delicate task.
The issues involved have been discussed in depth elsewhere (Jackson, 1989; Parker, 1991).
Here, there is only space to enumerate the conclusions.
The 1989 Children Act replaces previous grounds for intervention by asking whether the child is receiving that care which ‘it would be reasonable to expect a parent to give to him’(S. 31(2) (b)).
Local authorities stand in loco parentis to the children for whom they are responsible, and should therefore be judged by the same standard.
The proposed system identifies a number of commonly recognized aims and then asks whether children are being provided with the type of experiences which a ‘reasonable parent’ would consider necessary to their achievement.
The emphasis lies in the area for which a local authority may be held accountable: the quality of care it provides.
By asking about the everyday tasks of parenting the schedules obviate the need for time-consuming psychometric testing.
DESCRIPTION OF SCHEDULES
First, a series of dimensions are identified which have been agreed both to be important aspects of child development and/or of particular relevance to separated children.
These are health, education, behaviour, identity, self-care skills, social and family relationships and self-presentation.
The children to be assessed are divided into six age groups.
In each of these, aims are specified, and linked to the type of parental action which, according to the best available research, is most likely to lead to their achievement.
For example, in the educational dimension, the aims for a child aged 3–4 are that s/he is provided with opportunities for intellectual growth and pre-school learning and is well-prepared for starting school.
The questions related to these aims ask about such matters as how often the child is read to and whether s/he is attending any pre-school facility: factors known to link with future success in school (Newson and Newson, 1977; Osborn and Milbank, 1987).
The questions on self-care at this age enquire about the child's ability to dress and feed him or herself in readiness for school.
The equivalent questions for eighteen year olds ask about specific skills which young people have been shown to need (and often to lack) when they leave local authority accommodation to live independently (Stein and Carey, 1986).
Although the dimensions remain the same, the questions are adapted to suit the age of the child, and can easily be changed to incorporate new insights or research findings.
When responsibility for a child is divided among a number of people there is always a risk that necessary actions will be overlooked.
Indeed, most of the shortfalls in public care occur through default rather than deliberate intention (see DHSS, 1985).
The schedules are designed to ensure that the task of assessment and subsequent planning is shared between all those involved in the care of a child, and that omissions are rectified as they become evident.
Those who use the schedules are asked to check off completed actions, to make plans for further work, and to explain omissions.
The 1989 Children Act imposes new, more stringent regulations for planning and reviewing the experiences of children looked after by local authorities.
The proposed system is designed to meet these requirements, and will be altered in line with future developments.
To be effective, it needs to be used on a regular basis.
It is intended for use in preparation for statutory reviews, and could form the basis for making formal plans about a child, also required under the new legislation.
DESCRIPTION OF FEASIBILITY STUDY
Once the schedules had been designed, plans were made to pilot them.
The first stage of this research, now completed, explored social workers' reactions to this method of assessment.
Four local authorities were each invited to nominate twelve social workers who would be asked to complete the schedules for one child on their caseload.
Designated children had to fall within the age ranges 3–4 years or 16–18 years and to have been under the care or formal supervision of the local authority for at least six months.
The children were assessed on two occasions, each separated by a three months interval.
The researchers met the social workers at the start of the study, and after each completion of the schedules, when they were also asked to fill in a brief checklist.
SOCIAL WORKERS' REACTIONS TO THE STUDY
Thirty-two social workers participated in the study; 13 used the schedule designed for 3–4 year olds, and 19 that for 16–18 year olds.
Nineteen social workers completed both assessments; thirteen others made one assessment, but were unable to complete the project.
Fifteen (83 per cent) of the older children assisted in the first assessment as did 23 (77 per cent ) parents, foster parents and residential  workers.
In the seven cases where no specific primary carer was named as participating, four social workers had been aides by unspecified ‘others’, and the remaining three had completed the form with the cooperation of the young person (16–18 year old) alone.
All social workers involved at least one other person in making the assessment.
After the second assessment, social workers were asked whether participation in the research had encouraged them to include other people more fully in decision-making.
Eight (32 per cent) stated there had been closer consultation with young people in care, five (20 per cent ) with foster-parents, four with residential workers, four with natural parents, and three with unspecified others.
Three participants said that the exercise had encouraged them to consult more with all of the above.
Of the five who reported that their practice had not altered, three said they already gave high priority to involving all the relevant people.
Several comments were extremely enthusiastic.
One social worker wrote: ‘[The]young person enjoyed completing [the]questionnaire and it was a very useful tool for bringing up a whole range of issues from the very practical (needing to arrange visits to the dentist/optician) to the very complex and emotional.’
One social worker completed the schedule on two occasions with a sixteen-year-old boy who thought it was ‘great fun’.
She said it had prompted more real conversation between them than she had achieved in all their previous encounters.
Several respondents commented that both foster parents and children had enjoyed participating in an exercise which provided them with concrete proof of achievements and which sought to monitor progress systematically.
Most adverse comments concerned specific issues in the design and layout of the form, rather than its conceptual basis.
At present the schedules are being extensively revised to take account of social worker's criticisms.
Other interested groups, such as Black and in Care.
National Association for Young People in Care (NAYPIC), Who Cares?, and Family Rights Group have also been consulted.
Participants were asked to rate the relevance of the questions in each dimension on a 1–5 scale in which 1=poor, and 5=excellent.
Over 50 per cent of social workers gave the questions in all dimensions a rating of 4 or 5.
Questions on health, self-care and education were all highly rated by over 70 per cent of respondents.
Five (15 per cent) of the participants rated questions on behaviour, identity or social and family relationships poorly.
These dimensions will be given particular attention in the revision process.
Over 50 per cent of respondents also reported that participation in the research had enabled them to think more clearly about development in every dimension; 75 per cent thought their awareness of health issues and 60 per cent their awareness of self-care  and identity had definitely increased.
Only one social worker among 25 respondents said there had been no change in any dimension.
POTENTIAL IMPACT ON PRACTICE
Although only tentative conclusions can be drawn from such a small sample, the content of the completed schedules does demonstrate the type of information that they are capable of engendering, and the ways in which it might be used.
The replies revealed a number of omissions.
At least 4 out of 16 (25 per cent) of the adolescents had reached the age of sixteen or more without receiving any information from adults about sexually transmitted diseases and contraception.
Ten out of 23 (43 per cent) children and adolescents had not seen a dentist since their last review.
In many instances social workers picked up practical points such as those mentioned above, and dealt with them immediately: arrangements were hastily made to provide counselling for those young people who were unaware of the dangers of AIDS and the importance of using contraceptives.
Dental appointments were booked for seven (70 per cent) of the children whose teeth had not recently been inspected, and at least four of these had been carried out within three months of the first assessment.
Thus this type of scheme, which evaluates the quality of care on a regular basis, can serve to heighten awareness of omissions, and form a basis for immediate improvements in practice.
It was encouraging to find some children apparently receiving a good standard of care: for example, GCSE results were higher than previously reported research had led us to expect (Fletcher-Campbell and Hall, 1990).
However, this was a very small sample.
A number of adolescents refused to take part in the study; this group might have proved less successful than those who participated.
Other information from the completed schedules does give cause for concern.
Two thirds of the younger children had experienced more than one change of carer.
Three quarters of the adolescent group were regular smokers.
Only two of the ten who had completed their education were in full-time regular work.
All but one of the most successful young people planned to remain with relatives, natural parents or foster carers after the local authority withdrew its support.
Those who had no qualifications and no regular occupation were also more likely to have little family support, and to find themselves at eighteen or younger, living on state benefits in lodgings, single bedsits, or flats shared with other young people.
The finding is in line with recent research which shows that those who are least able to cope tend to leave care with the least support (Bonnerjea, 1990).
A conflict may arise between the pressure to prepare young people for independent living, and their continued need for support.
At times the care they received seemed very far from that of a reasonable concerned parent.
At sixteen or seventeen many adolescents in the sample were considered old enough to make up their own minds about issues such as smoking, exercise, and diet; it was often left entirely up to them to contact doctors, dentists, and sometimes schools for undiscovered GCSE results.
As Stein and Carey (1986) have pointed out, independence is often thrust upon young people in care when they reach the age of eighteen, regardless of their readiness to cope alone.
The schedules require social workers to justify decisions not to act.
Supervisors would need to consider the validity of such explanations: where scrutiny of a number of schedules showed avoidance of particular areas to be common, this would have implications for agency policy and staff training.
CONCLUSION
The first concern of field social workers is inevitably to find and maintain placements for children who cannot live continuously with their own families.
Once placement is achieved the task of daily caring is passed almost entirely to the primary caregivers and the quality of care offered is essentially taken on trust.
Placement is outcome.
This view is reflected in the focus of most child care research.
A research approach which regards placement as incidental to the achievement of specified goals for the child puts a different perspective on the social work task and directs attention to a wider range of dimensions related to the child's current experience, longer-term development and future life-chances.
Such an approach enables active work to go on at all times, including those when no change of placement is contemplated or during periods of waiting for a suitable placement to become available.
Perhaps its greatest advantage is its ability to point social workers to the simple, practical steps they can take to improve the quality of life for children whose other difficulties may prove impossible to remedy.
The first stage of this research confirmed the hypothesis that when children have many different caregivers important aspects of their development are liable to be overlooked.
Preliminary results indicate that an assessment instrument which links specific aims and the actions necessary to achieve them can help to overcome this problem.
The schedules proved to be acceptable, Their major drawback was length, perhaps inseparable from comprehensiveness, and the fact that in this exercise they were not integrated with normal agency practice and  statutory six-monthly reviews.
In the second stage of the project the schedules have been redesigned to take account of suggestions made by social workers.
The focus now shifts to the impact on child care practice and the use of the schedules in assessing outcome for management, quality control and research purposes.
Maintaining the Links in Adoption JOHN TRISELIOTIS
In a previous article (Triseliotis, 1985) it was pointed out that the Adoption Act 1976 and 1978 (Scotland) might have to be changed to provide explicitly that adoption orders could be made with a condition of access, where desirable, for members of the biological family.
At that time adoption with contact had received only scant attention in the social work literature and the so called‘clean break’ approach was still in its supremacy.
Under this concept help was to be offered to members of the birth family to separate both emotionally and physically from the placed child.
This, it was also thought, would free the child as well to attach itself totally to its new family.
We do not know how many agencies and courts still adhere to this policy and practice.
The purpose of this paper is to examine further the issue of open adoption or adoption with contact.
BACKGROUND
In 1984, the Court of Session in Edinburgh (Hay/Briton against Central Regional Council) refused a 53 year old grandmother custody or access to her six year old grandchild, though it was agreed that the ‘most significant relationship’ the child had was with this grandmother.
The Court's decision was largely influenced by the evidence of a psychologist who claimed that to award custody or access to the grandmother would diminish the child's prospect of developing ‘a balanced personality’.
The report in the Scottish Law Times does not refer to any evidence to support the view that the maintenance of contact between a child and a birth relative to whom he or she has attachments would cause harm to the child's developing personality.
This example was far from being an isolated one.
Any evidence, as we shall see later, is increasingly in the opposite direction.
The modern ‘clean break’ approach has its roots in the nineteenth century which with varying degrees of application has continued throughout the twentieth century (Triseliotis, 1989).
The practice then was based on the Poor Law's philosophy of restricting or stopping altogether contact between children in public or voluntary care and their parents because, it was argued, the latter were a bad influence on the children (Checkland and Checkland, 1974).
Dr Barnardo, for example, required foster parents to sign an undertaking not to allow personal or written communication between a foster child and his or her relatives or friends except with the written authorization of the Director.
The ultimate in the clean break philosophy was the shipping of thousands of deprived children to Canada and Australia, ‘not all of them orphans and not always with their parents' knowledge or consent’.
Fratter (1989) adds that ‘the belief that the welfare of a deprived child was best served by his being prevented from having contact with his family — that their interests were in conflict — remained largely unchallenged’(p. 4).
At this point it would be useful to clarify some of the terms being used in this area of adoption practice.
The term ‘open’ adoption usually refers to baby adoption where the natural parent(s) meets and sometimes chooses the prospective adopters from an approved agency list.
After the handing over of the baby contact may or may not be maintained.
(Such an approach was introduced in New Zealand over 10 years ago.
See Dominick, 1988.)
When reference is made to older children moving to adoption from public care, the concept used is that of ‘inclusive’ adoption or adoption with contact.
However, not infrequently the terms ‘open’ adoption, ‘inclusive’adoption or adoption with contact are now used interchangeably.
In what follows an attempt is made to examine how adoption with contact (mainly of older children) affects each of the parties in the so-called ‘adoption triangle’.
THE CHILDREN
The basic questions posed are: First, can children attach themselves to psychological parents whilst they also maintain contact or links with a non-custodial birth parent or other relative? and second, would the maintenance of such links confuse the child and impair his developing personal and social identity?
Goldstein et al .
in their books Beyond the Best Interests of the Child (1973) and Before the Best Interests of the Child (1980) made two fundamental claims that were to influence child care practice considerably over the years.
These were that breaking the psychological bond between a child and a carer for example, parent and child, irretrievably  harms the child and therefore should be resisted.
In their view separation should only happen in extreme situations where the child is physically at risk.
Later research was to show that whilst it would be most irresponsible to move children unnecessarily from one family to another because separation does cause psychological trauma and harm to the child, nevertheless given optimum conditions children can re-attach themselves and overcome the trauma of early separations (Kadushin, 1970; Clarke and Clarke, 1976; Tizzard, 1977; Triseliotis and Russell, 1984).
Goldstein and colleagues also argued for the cessation of contact between a child and his birth parents once the child was with new carers such as in adoption or long-term foster care.
Otherwise, they claimed, the child would fail to develop bonds and attachments with his new carers.
They extended their warnings to children of divorce, claiming that such children would also experience great disruption in their lives if they were to live in two houses, that is, in the case of joint custody between the two former spouses.
They further claimed that the growth of bonding and attachment of the child to a step-parent would be impeded because of the continued contact with a non-custodial parent.
As a result they went on to argue for sole custody in step-parent situations on the assumption of children having one ‘psychological parent’ with whom they maintain a continuous relationship and bond.
In their words ‘the non-custodial parent should have no legally enforceable right to visit the child and the custodial (or psychological) parent should have the right to decide whether it is desirable for the child to visit’(Goldstein et al .,
1973, p. 38).
Another writer, Ward (1981), also argued against open adoption, again claiming that it could adversely affect the child's bonding to its new family.
None of these writers produced research evidence to back up their claims, basing them exclusively on clinical practice and theoretical projections.
Clinical practice is invaluable for developing ideas and hypotheses but dangerous when being cited to make conclusive statements without prior testing with general population samples.
To my knowledge there has been no research that has set out to study from the start how far a child's attachment to a new family or carer is impeded or not or whether ‘the child's personality will be damaged’ where a birth parent or relative keeps contact whilst the child is with psychological parents.
Most of the research evidence is indirect, being an off-shoot of other studies.
Yet the seriousness of the issue cannot be ignored in view of Thoburn and Rowe's (1988) findings that 20 per cent of the children in their survey, for whom adoption was planned, were said to need continued contact with a birth parent.
Research involving divorce, re-marriage and step-parenting has some  parallels with adoption especially in its reference to the impact on children.
It is useful, therefore, to provide a brief overview of some of these studies.
Overall, the studies suggest that the children's adjustment following divorce is related first to consistent and on-going relationships with both parents; and secondly, which is central to our discussion, to the parents' ability to co-operate in their respective parenting roles, that is, co-operation without rancour or conflict.
With regard to children's adjustment when there is a step-parent and a non-custodial visiting parent, the research evidence is less clear and obviously the age of the child can be a crucial factor which has not yet been properly researched.
Keshet and Rosenthal (1980) provide some evidence which suggests that children of divorced parents can relate positively both to their biological parents and to a step-parent.
Adolescents seem to find it harder, though, to relate to a step-father when they already have a good relationship with a non-custodial father.
The writers go on to say that the younger the children, the less difficulty they have in admitting a step-parent or step-sibling into their lives.
Another study from the divorce field by Hetherington (1979) also supports the view that provided the non-custodial visiting father is not ‘immature’ or the two parents are not in conflict, the frequent availability of the father is associated with positive adjustment especially with boys.
He goes on to add that children of non-custodial fathers who maintain contact after divorce generally demonstrate the most positive post-divorce outcome.
Schaffer (1977) from his studies on children also claims that even young children are capable of attaching themselves and loving more than one set of carers at the same time.
If this is true of young children it must be even easier for the older child who is in a much better position to discriminate between different types of relationships.
We also know from studies that foster children can relate to both birth family figures and foster carers (Thorpe, 1974; Rowe et al .,
1984).
Kibbutzim children too are reported to have no difficulty in relative to more than one parental figure at the same time (Pringle, 1972)
The evidence from adoption studies is still patchy and only tentative conclusions can be drawn from them.
Thoburn et al .
(1986) and Borgman (1980) have found from their studies that older children especially are not willing to move to a new family if contact with their biological families is to be severed, though of course some children may be unable to voice their reluctance and tend to go along with the plans.
Borgman (1982) in a later article added that the older child ‘who keeps in touch does not experience the guilt of having to choose between the adoptive and biological parents’(p. 218).
Similarly Sorich and Siebert (1982) suggest that contact can be a useful experience.
Bell, writing as early as 1959, concluded from a study involving older children that:
Our agency has found great value in a process which, to many agencies, may represent a new departure in adoption and the preservation of the child's relationships with certain selected members of his natural family.
Far from undermining the adoptive relationship, his keeping in touch with his relatives often strengthens it: the child knows that his adopting parents accept not only him but that which belongs to him and thus acceptance has a broader, surer meaning (p. 333).
Recent studies also claim that the stability of the placement for special needs children who maintained their links with members of their natural families was not threatened (Borland et al .,
1989; Wedge, 1989).
Fratter (1989), too, found no evidence that contact could lead to disruption.
Though in our recent study of Adoption Allowances which involved many older children we did not set out to test the issues under discussion, nevertheless some of the 52 children we interviewed maintained a link with a member of the original family whilst in the case of a few others a ‘clean break’ approach was followed by agencies.
In the case of the majority neither of these situations operated (Hill et al .,
1989).
As a result we tried to understand the reactions and attitudes, both of those who kept in touch with a member of the birth family and of those involved in the ‘clean break’ approach.
There were only three boys in whose case ‘the clean break’ approach was followed and obviously not too much can be claimed from such a small group.
At the time of placement one of them was twelve and the other two eight and ten respectively.
About four years later all three children told us in private conversations that they were missing contact with their respective fathers.
The 16-year-old whilst wiping the tears streaming from his eyes asked: ‘Will I ever be allowed to see my father again?’
A lad of 13 remarked:
Well I like my mum and dad here (adoptive parents) 'cause I've been with them for some years, but there again, I like my own father as well... we still think of him and would like to go and visit him.
He's been stopped and told not to write to us.
None of the children wanted to go and live with their birth parents, but simply to keep contact.
It was also obvious that the importance of the emotional links between these children and their respective birth fathers was missed or under-estimated by the social workers making the placement.
The adoptive parents had made no comments to suggest that they realized the children were unhappy.
We had doubts in our minds about the strength of these children's attachment to their adoptive parents and  though our sample group is very small, we would like to pose the hypothesis that ‘severing children's meaningful emotional links with members of their birth families limits their capacity for full attachment to their new families’.
Some evidence supporting this proposition is provided by the studies already quoted (Borland et al .,
1989; Wedge, 1989; Fratter, 1989).
In contrast, the few children who kept in touch with a birth parent or members of the birth family seemed to draw a lot of satisfaction from occasional communications or meetings.
Two girls maintained a contact, one with her birth father and the other with her birth mother.
They both insisted that this was very important to them and that it did not detract from their feelings towards their adoptive parents.
Neither of the adoptive parents in these cases felt threatened by the contacts.
Another 17-year-old girl kept up a regular correspondence with her natural mother and went to see her once or twice a year referring to her as an ‘auntie’.
It is like having an auntie in a way, but in other ways she is a mum because whenever it's anything special, she always sends up something... but it's as I said before, like an auntie.
At one stage, she said she had experienced some conflict ‘like being in two places at once’ but soon realized that her real attachment was to her adoptive parents.
A few children who had maintained links with grandparents, an aunt or a sibling, equally expressed satisfaction and pleasure from the contacts.
There were occasional visits and/or correspondence.
Where a grandparent stopped visiting, the children were left with feelings of loss.
Our small scale numbers confirm the earlier studies quoted, that is, that older children especially, seem able to distinguish between different types of relationships and to have the capacity to relate to more than one set of parent figures simultaneously.
It does not follow that the relationships with each of these figures is the same as different satisfactions seem to be derived from each.
As we have seen earlier, when a child's existing links to a birth parent or relative are severed on placement with a new family, the feelings involved are not eradicated but driven ‘underground’.
Furthermore such feelings can jeopardize the stability of the placement.
It may also make little sense for the social services to sever the birth links of say a ten or eleven year old, when the law gives that child the right on reaching the age of eighteen to seek out the birth parents and relatives.
Not infrequently, in fact, he or she may be assisted in his search by that same social services department (Haimes and Timms, 1985).
There was a group of children in our sample who either because they  could still remember harsh treatment at the hands of a parent, or because their parents had themselves ceased contact, deserted them, or showed no interest in them, had no desire to meet the parents or maintain a link.
These children felt let down by their parents, there was no emotional link and they now felt free of them.
Attempts in a couple of cases by parents to get in touch after years of no interest were not welcomed.
Sympathy though was maintained for birth parents who through no ‘fault’ of their own (for example, chronic mental illness) were unable to care for them or visit.
In conclusion, these are early days and there is a lot that still remains to be learned about adoption with contact as far as the children are concerned.
The New Zealand ‘open’ adoption approach has not used research to follow up the parties involved beyond the initial years following placement, and the children involved in the arrangement are yet to be interviewed.
However, there is tentative evidence from other studies which suggests that adoption with contact does not prevent attachment to a psychological parent, and it can also help the child to base his developing personal, social, and body identity on the reality of the two sets of parents, that is, the biological and psychological ones.
Through keeping in touch with the birth family the child is also able to ask questions and seek information about his adoption and genealogy.
Continuing parental contact and interest can also eradicate or at least minimize the sense of rejection felt by many adopted people because of the act of relinquishment.
However, on the basis of our general studies in adoption, children also need to feel secure where they are and have that security sealed by law (Triseliotis, 1983; Triseliotis and Hill, 1987).
THE BIRTH FAMILY
The basic question with regard to birth parents is first, whether they can or should be encouraged to release the child emotionally on the belief that this is the only way for the child to become attached to his new family.
Second and equally important, as Fratter (1989) also asks, can parents release and mourn a child to whom they are attached or to put it more bluntly, can parents mourn a child that is not dead?
The issues are obviously different for parents who relinquish a baby from those whose rights are later terminated by law and the child placed for adoption.
Studies which illustrate the pain and distress many relinquishing mothers experience for years to come (sadly, information about fathers is unavailable) would suggest a more inclusive form of adoption (Panor and Baran, 1984; Winkler and Keppel, 1984).
For some birth parents this would mean periodic up-dating of information from themselves to  the adoptive family and from the latter to the birth parents directly or through the placement agency.
Others may wish to keep up periodic or continuing contacts.
Kruk (1989) referring to non-custodial fathers in divorce, claims that those who arrived at some level of resolution of their grief were those who were in fact able to maintain regular contact with their child.
In the State of Victoria (Australia) the Adoption Law gives rights of access to birth parents and in fact a child cannot be taken abroad by the adoptive parents without the consent of the birth parent(s).
In our recent study of ‘Freeing Children for Adoption’ we wanted to test some of the questions posed above.
However, most agencies refused us access, except to a minority of birth parents whose children were freed for adoption, often against their wishes.
From the very few interviews we conducted we were given to understand that the birth parents would not have opposed adoption if the links could be maintained (Lambert et al .,
1989).
We have no way of knowing how much wider support this view would command among other birth parents so at the moment it remains a hypothesis for further testing, that is.:
that birth parents would be less reluctant to physically relinquish a child for adoption, if existing links could be maintained.
Of course, the possibility that an agreement can be reached with birth parents not to contest an adoption application on the promise of built-in contact is not enough by itself.
It also has to be demonstrated that it is in the best interests of the child.
Equally some parents in the study quoted above, wanted to say good-bye and relinquish their children in a positive sense.
Some children were also torn in their loyalties until the Court decided and some did not want further contact.
Policy and practice have to allow for the variety of possibilities as no blanket approach can respond to diverse needs and preferences.
THE ADOPTIVE PARENTS
The questions to be asked in relation to adoptive parents are: first, whether they can successfully parent a child and develop deep attachments to it without a feeling of ‘entitlement’ or of being in charge and whilst there are continued visits or contacts by birth parents or birth relatives.
Second, whether adoptive parents could be found who are willing to take on this new challenge.
Starting with the second point first, are we asking too much of would-be adoptive parents?
The appeal was made to them in the early 1970s to offer their home to ‘special needs’ children and they responded well, Now they are being asked to accept both the challenge of ‘special needs’children and the possibility of continuing contact with members of the original family.
The New Zealand experience suggests that there is no shortage of couples prepared to take an ‘open adoption with continuing contact’ as far as infants are concerned (Dominick, 1988) but evidence about ‘special needs’children is still scant.
The New Zealand study suggests that birth mothers are happier with the idea of initial introductions than adoptive parents and that fewer adoptive parents welcome the idea of continued visits compared to birth mothers.
In our recent study of ‘Freeing Children for Adoption’,(Lambert et al .,
1989) we asked those who had just adopted children whether they would be prepared or willing to accept or consider adoption with contact.
(Our sample was obviously biased because we only spoke to couples who felt secure in the knowledge that the adoption had just been completed.)
The picture that emerged was of couples predominantly against the idea of adoption with contact.
Though very sympathetic and sensitive to the needs of the birth family most adopters did not feel they could cope with contact.
A few qualified their reluctance by adding that much would depend on what kind of people the parents were, for example, disruptive or stable.
Some former foster parents were not too worried about continuity of contact.
Fratter's (1989) study indicates that provided practitioners are convinced about the importance of contact, adoptive families may not be too difficult to find.
The idea that adopters would be unable to commit themselves fully to a child without a feeling of ‘entitlement’ may seem abhorrent to some.
Such an expectation on the part of adoptive parents, they would argue, is self-centred and also takes no account of the birth parents' feelings.
Perhaps what we are talking about is adoptive parents who need to feel in charge, secure and ‘in control’(Tizard, 1977).
Being in charge and feeling legally secure seems necessary for whoever carries out the parenting role.
Our studies point strongly to the need of adopted children (and all separated children in long-term arrangements) to feel legally secure to enable them to develop a sense of belonging to their psychological family (Triseliotis, 1983; Triseliotis and Russell, 1984; Triseliotis and Hill, 1987).
Adoption workers need to accommodate in their thinking and practice more than one concept simultaneously, that is, the achievement of ‘open’ adoption or adoption with contact where it is in a child's interests but within a framework of legal security.
It is of interest to refer in this context to Beckett's (undated) empirical work on the adoption practices of Torres Strait Islanders where adoption has traditionally been open.
He comments:
The adopted child can count upon help and friendship from a larger circle than the ordinary child.
They grow up to respect both sets of kinfolk.
The two families, usually related, are drawn closer together.
However, a quarrel  between parties may have deleterious effects on the adoption or the child itself may be the cause of disagreement.
Beckett goes on to add that ‘it is developments such as these that render adoption unstable’.
Disputes between natural and adoptive parents are not unusual and a fair proportion of arrangements break down.
In other words the personalities and character of the two sets of parents are important in maintaining a constructive relationship.
It is perhaps not coincidental that the same Islanders, whilst wishing to keep their traditional forms of adoption, are also seeking legal security to protect them from undue interference from the natural family.
Tizard (1977), whilst rightly arguing that new families need to be totally in control of the way they bring up their adopted children, is also prepared to concede that ‘just as there are some couples willing to adopt handicapped children, others, especially if given the support of other adoptive parents, may be willing to adopt children who retain links with their natural families’.
The New Zealand experience suggests that those who proceed with ‘open’ adoption are not altogether the same as those who would have done so under the more traditional approach.
Even so, two years later not all of them were satisfied with open adoption.
THE ATTITUDE OF THE JUDICIARY
The attitude of the judiciary towards adoption with contact has been inconsistent; hence the need for greater legal clarity.
More recently a move has been detected towards an acceptance of contact, provided that all parties are agreed.
In fact, if all parties are agreed, possibly they do not need the sanction of the court.
On the other hand, it could be argued that if it is considered necessary to make an adoption order with a condition of access, then this may be seen as being imposed on the two or three parties and possibly of little value.
For a long time, though, not only was contact thought of as inappropriate and as transgressing the traditional image of adoption, but there was also the view that the Adoption Act did not provide for access or contact.
The Adoption Act of 1958 (s. 7(3)) did provide that ‘The Court in an adoption order may impose such terms and conditions as the Court may think fit’.
Subsequently the Adoption Act of 1975 (s. 8(7), later section 12(6) of the Adoption Act 1976) made it more explicit that ‘in making an adoption order a Court may impose such terms and conditions as it thinks fit’, but it was interpreted that any ‘condition imposed should not impinge on the autonomy of adoptive parents ’.
(Set out by Cairns, L. J. in Re S — 1976.)
In spite of these provisions, not infrequently Courts conveyed the view that the Act did not give them power to make orders with a condition of access.
Yet as early as 1973 (Re J) Form 106 a condition of access was attached to an adoption order.
In 1974 In re: S (a minor) the Court of Appeal granted access to the father of a non-marital child following the adoption of the child by the birth mother and her husband.
Their lordships held that ‘they had jurisdiction so to do in the exceptional circumstances of the case provided the conditions were specific’(The Times , 24 Oct., 1974, p. 10).
A similar case in 1988 was resolved differently.
The putative father of a boy of two was ‘banned’ by a High Court judge from seeing his child ‘grow up’because the boy's mother planned to marry another man and in the words of Mrs Justice Heilbron ‘The boy might suffer emotional upheaval by having two fathers’(The Times , 23 March 1988, p. 3).
The decisive factor in this case seems to have been the fact that there had been no previous contact between the child and the birth father.
In other words, no meaningful ties existed between parent and child.
This was confirmed also in a case involving Ewbank J. in Coventry City Council V T (1986) ELR 299 ‘that access had to be shown to be beneficial to the child ’.
In 1976 (Re S) the principle of making a condition for access was set out by Cairns, L. J. as follows: ‘Clearly no condition should be imposed which would be regarded as detracting from the rights and duties of the adoptive parents’.
In the celebrated case of (Re: M) quoted in The Times , 9 May 1985, the Court of Appeal ruled that an adoption order with a condition giving rights of access to the natural mother would only be made in the most unusual and exceptional circumstances.
Probably such a combined order was only appropriate where all the parties agreed to it being made and to the conditions.
In another case an application by foster parents to adopt was initially refused although all parties were in accord, because the Judge disapproved of an agreement for continued visiting between the adopters and birth parents (Adcock and Levy, 1983).
Social Work Today (3 March 1988, p. 3) welcomed as a ‘legal first for adoption’ a Law Lord's ruling on an adoption order allowing an adopted girl aged thirteen access to her natural brother.
The girl's wish to be adopted while maintaining contact with her brother had been refused by a previous High Appeal court ruling.
Yet a year earlier the Court of Appeal decided that a different girl of ten should not be adopted by her foster parents to whom she was attached because of her birth mother's objections that adoption would result in the loss of contact between brother and sister (The Times , 19 February 1987, p. 3).
The mother's objection was not found to be unreasonable and no suggestion was made to allow adoption with a condition of access so as not to deprive the ten year old of the security that goes with adoption compared to long-term foster care.
(For the advantages of adoption over long-term  foster care see Triseliotis, 1983 and Triseliotis and Hill, 1987).
Though custodianship has not been used to any appreciable extent yet, the same arguments would apply as with long-term fostering.
Like long-term foster care, custodianship orders can be reversed at the discretion of the Court.
A similar decision was reached in re B — Court of Appeal, 10 June 1988 when the court found that the mother was not unreasonable in withholding her consent to adoption in order not to be deprived of contact with the child in spite of the fact that the twelve year old wanted to be adopted.
Again no mention was made of the possibility of making an adoption order with a condition of access.
In fact, there is a view that agencies too opt for long-term foster care instead of adoption with contact where there is continued parental interest.
On the positive side, at least one court recently has made an adoption order with a condition of access to grandparents with whom the child had important links.
The final point to be made is that in Re G (a minor) 1988 (A11 FR p. 7(15) the House of Lords upheld the argument that adoption orders can be made with access but that these should only be made in exceptional circumstances although a distinction may be drawn between the position of birth parents and other relatives.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
There is no doubt of the need to understand more about the impact of access or termination of access on children, adoptive parents, and birth parents.
What evidence there is, however, suggests that provided the parties involved can handle the situation in a constructive and positive manner and without acrimony and recriminations there is no reason why contact should be harmful to the child.
On the contrary, the maintenance of meaningful links with the birth family appear to be beneficial to children, to their sense of identity and self esteem and for gaining a better understanding of their genealogical background and adoption circumstances.
There is no indication or evidence that under such circumstances contact can be confusing or lead to divided loyalties.
It is important to stress though that the adults' attitude can be the decisive factor in how such arrangements will work out.
No doubt there will be would-be adopters who are likely to find the possibility of inclusive adoption threatening and not wish to proceed.
Their wishes should be respected.
Others though are likely to proceed towards such an arrangement.
As with the adoption of special needs children, the attitude of agency staff towards inclusive adoption can be crucial.
So much can depend on the kind of expectation on which an arrangement is entered  upon.
Because greater openness increasingly characterizes many social relationships and because of the other changes taking place within the institution of adoption, open adoption, adoption with contact and even shared parenting are likely to become a more permanent feature within the institution of adoption.