

When Captain Pugwash retires from active piracy he is amazed and delighted to be offered a Huge Reward for what seems to be a simple task.
Little does he realise what villainy and treachery lurk in the little town of Sinkport, or what a hideous fate may await him there.
It was business as usual in the ancient seafaring town of Sinkport.
There were the usual minor excitements: a murder in the churchyard, a few muggings in the back-streets and alleys, and the election of a new Mayor with all the bribery and corruption which accompanied such an event.
But the citizens of Sinkport were far too busy with fishing, boat-building, buying and selling and making money out of the tourists to take much notice of such happenings.
So the arrival at the Grand Quay of that famous pirate ship the ‘Black Pig’ caused no excitement, and Captain Pugwash, the Mate, Barnabas, Willy and Tom the cabin boy attracted little attention as they stepped down the gangplank and set off to view the sights of the town.
For Captain Pugwash it was, he hoped, the end of a long and infamous career.
He had done well out of piracy and had even, with the help of his cabin boy, escaped the fury of his arch-enemy Cut-throat Jake.
Now, home from the Caribbean Sea, he was seeking a comfortable spot in which to retire, and Sinkport, with water all around its ancient houses and its church crowning the hill, seemed as good a place as any.
His crew too were happy at the thought of leaving the sea.
They had always found buccaneering terribly alarming, and felt seasick at the slightest sign of bad weather.
And Tom the cabin boy had a favourite aunt in Sinkport and was glad to have an opportunity to visit her.
‘Funny sort o' joint,’ grunted Pirate Barnabas as the little party started up Barmaid Street, ‘Kinda old ennit!’
‘Don't fancy these 'ere cobbled streets,’ grumbled Willy.
‘Us'll 'ave to start wearin' shoes if we're goin' to stick around these parts!’
‘Shame on you, fussin' over such mundane matters,’ pronounced the Mate grandly.
‘Sinkport is hysterical.
Werry hysterical indeed.’
‘You mean hist or ical, Mister Mate, but you're right of course,’ said the Captain.
‘Look at that, the ancient Barmaid Inn, rebuilt in 1420 and still as good as new!’
Soon the pirates had reached the top of the street.
‘In there’, pointed Tom, ‘is Mutton House, the grandest dwelling in the town.
Over there, beyond the church, is Witchball Street.
That's where my Aunt Clarabel lives.
She runs the Jolly Jailor Inn.’
‘I hope it's more comfortable than that place!’ remarked Captain Pugwash, pointing to a dark fortified building further on.
‘That's the Baddie's Tower,’ said Tom.
‘It's the town jail now.’
‘Ugh!
I wouldn't care to spend a night there!’ said the Captain.
‘What else is there to see, Tom?’
So Tom took them along past the new Pump House, the old Turkeycock School and down Main Street to the ancient Sand Gate.
Then back again up Soap Walk and Least Street towards the top of the town and the fine new Town Hall.
By it a small crowd was gathered.
They were reading a notice which proclaimed the names of the newly elected Mayor and the officials appointed by him:
Mayor Jas.
Mutton Esquire of Mutton House, Best Street.
Parson Reverend Solomon Slype, DD.
Dragoons Commander Colonel Stodge Braggart-Blodge.
Jailer Master Dreadlock Doom.
Town Clerk Saml.
Slipshod Esquire.
And it seemed to Tom, at any rate, that not everybody was best pleased by the election.
But Captain Pugwash wasn't interested in the new Mayor.
His attention had been taken by another notice outside the Town Hall.
It said:
A HUGE REWARD £10,000 is offered by HIS GRACIOUS MAJESTY THE KING to any person helping to capture any of the NOTORIOUS BANDS of SMUGGLERS trafficking off our Coasts So heinous are their crimes, so urgent the necessity of checking their activities that ALL ARE INVITED TO
even convicted Miscreants including Pickpockets Footpads Pirates etc
‘I'm not sure’, remarked the Captain, ‘that I care to be coupled with mere pickpockets and footpads…but that Huge Reward sounds interesting!’
‘Sounds risky to me, Cap'n,’ muttered Barnabas.
‘These 'ere smugglers is a dangerous bunch from wot I've 'eard!’
‘If only we could devise a safe way of laying our hands on all that money,’ murmured Pugwash, whose greed was as proverbial as his cowardice.
And the pirates were so busy discussing the problem, and what they would do with the reward if they won it, that they didn't notice that they were being observed from the window above by none other than the new Mayor and his entourage.
‘Perfect,’ said Mr Mutton.
‘I seem to recognise that well-known adventurer Captain Pugwash.
He's the very man for our purpose.
Let us invite him up, Mr Slipshod.’
A moment later the slithery figure of the Town Clerk emerged from the Hall.
He touched Pugwash on the arm.
‘Pray excuse me,’ he said, ‘but our distinguished new Mayor wishes to make your acquaintance.
Be so good as to enter.’
Soon the Mayor was shaking the Captain by the hand.
‘I am honoured indeed, Sir,’ he said unctuously.
‘Coffee for the gentlemen please Mr Slipshod.’
‘I happened to observe you reading that notice below and it does seem to me that this challenging task might well be of interest to you.
These smugglers, it appears, are led by a retired buccaneer, ‘Jake’ somebody or other…‘
‘He's a villainous fellow with an eye-patch and a great black beard…
Why, whatever is the matter, Captain?’
For Pugwash had turned deathly pale and seemed about to faint.
‘Pray let me reassure you,’ went on the Mayor hastily, ‘There would be no danger to you personally in this affair.
The actual arrests would be made by Colonel Bodge and his excellent Dragoons.
All you would have to do would be to lead them to the smugglers' rendezvous and supervise the action.’
‘And the Huge Reward?’ asked the Captain, hastily recovering his composure.
‘It would be yours entirely,’ replied the Mayor.
‘Mr Slipshod here has all the details.
The rest is up to you.
Au revoir, and good luck!’
‘It is like this,’ said the Town Clerk as they left the Town Hall together, ‘This arch-smuggler,Cut-throat Jake they call him, is apparently planning to receive a load of contraband liquor this very evening, at dusk, by the rocks below the Baddie's Tower.
Merely lead the Dragoons to the spot and the Reward is yours.’
‘Ar, but why us ?’ asked Barnabas suspiciously.
‘Why don't you lot do it all an' claim the lolly?’
The Town Clerk held up his hand.
‘We, that is our most worshipful Mayor and his associates, are determined to see an end to this plague of smuggling.
But we do not wish to appear personally involved in such unsavoury matters.
So we must leave it to some other group of His Majesty's loyal subjects, such as yourselves, to carry out the task.
The Dragoons by the way are stationed at the Sand Gate.
The Colonel awaits your instructions.
And the Mayor will be waiting at Mutton House tonight for news of your enterprise.’
And Mr Slipshod slithered back into the Town Hall.
‘Tottering Turtles!
This is too tremendous to be true,’ breathed Captain Pugwash.
‘Money…money…
MONEY!
And a chance to do away with that old blackguard Jake once and for all…and NO DANGER!
Come, me hearties, we must prepare for the evening's adventure!’
‘But Cap'n…’ interrupted Tom the cabin boy.
‘But nothing, Tom!’ replied Pugwash sternly.
‘Nothing to do with you that is.
This is man's work.
Run along now.
Time you went to see your Aunt Whatsername.’
So Tom went off to Witchball Street.
With the Captain in his present mood, there was nothing else to be done.
The Jolly Jailer was filled with merry customers, drinking, laughing and shouting.
As Tom made his way to the door he noticed a particularly evil-looking group lurking at the entrance of a narrow alleyway.
He thought he caught a glimpse of an eyepatch and an immense black beard.
He told his aunt about it.
‘No good ever came out of Catgut Alley, that's for sure,’ said Aunt Clarabel as she sat him down to fish and chips for lunch.
‘But never fear, Nephew Tom.
We'll keep an eye on 'un.’
She was an enormous woman, strong as an elephant, well-built to deal with troublesome customers at the inn, ‘and maybe to help the Captain if he gets into trouble,’ thought Tom.
At the entrance to Catgut Alley, Cut-throat Jake rubbed his great hairy hands.
‘Rich  pickins' tonight, me 'andsomes,’ he chuckled.
‘I knew we was onto a good 'un when we comes to Sinkport, but I never guessed as the old scallywag 'imself 'ud be 'ere.
At dusk it is then, by the Baddie's Rocks.
A-haarr-h!’
That afternoon, Captain Pugwash stood his pirates a slap-up lunch at the Barmaid Inn.
So certain was he of the Huge Reward that he was feeling unusually generous.
‘Now put your feet up, me hearties,’ he cried, ‘We shall need all our strength this evening.’
‘Don't mind if I do!’ muttered Willy, ‘After all them cobbles!’
‘Colly-wobbles more like!’ groaned the Mate, who had eaten too much lobster too fast.
And the Captain, after a brief visit to the Sand Gate and a conversation with the Colonel, returned to the Inn for his own afternoon nap.
He was well pleased.
Nothing now, it seemed, could stand between him and the Huge Reward.
That evening, as the sun sank over the marsh and the sea an odd group gathered in the dusk.
Captain Pugwash, the Mate, Willy and Barnabas, with five splendid Dragoons and their Colonel, set off through the town, over the hill-top past the church, and through the churchyard and the Gingarden to the Baddie's Tower.
Owls hooted and bats fluttered, and the pirates were glad to be past the eerie gravestones and the gloomy prison door.
Beyond the tower a narrow path led down to the rocky shore below.
‘This is the spot,’ whispered the Captain.
‘Hide your men by the water's edge, Colonel.
We'll keep well away on the other side so as not — ahem — to hinder your movement when the moment comes.’
Then there was silence except for the lapping of the rising tide.
A mist drifted over the marsh as the moon rose slowly over the tower above.
‘Shh!’ whispered the Captain, ‘Someone's coming!’
Sure enough, down the steps another group was approaching, and Pugwash shook with fright as he recognised the heavy shape and huge beard of his greatest enemy.
‘But the soldiers will do the dangerous part,’ he reassured himself, and looked anxiously over to where the Dragoons were concealed.
Then he heard Jake growl softly: ‘Right.
We'll wait here.’
And again silence fell over the Baddie's Rocks.
Minutes passed; the night grew darker.
The Captain could almost hear his heart beating, not to mention the Mate's teeth chattering.
Then out of the watery mist came a low call and a light flashed once, twice, three times.
From Jake's party an answering signal.
Then the sound of muffled oars.
The French craft was approaching.
‘I m-m-must wait until the contraband is actually handed over,’ thought the Captain, and at that moment a boat loomed into view out of the misty night.
Then with an exchange of broken English and French, the Captain saw four large brandy barrels being handed over to Jake and his gang.
‘N-now!’ thought Pugwash, and ‘TRAPPED IN THE VERY ACT!’he shouted loudly.
‘ARREST THOSE MEN IN THE KING'S NAME!’
There was a brief struggle, and then, surprisingly quickly, it was over.
The French boat slipped away as silently as it had arrived.
Cut-throat Jake and his fellows were held in the powerful grip of the Dragoons, and the incriminating barrels lay on the rocks before them.
For Captain Pugwash it was a moment of total triumph.
Not only had he earned the Huge Reward but for once, indeed the only time without Tom's help, he had outwitted his most terrible enemy and he could not resist cocking a very vulgar snook at Cut-throat Jake as he went over to shake the Dragoon officer by the hand.
‘Stuttering Starfish!
That was stout work, Colonel,’ cried the Captain.
‘You could hardly have done it without us , of course, but never mind that.
Be so good now as to march these miscreants to Mutton House.
We will look after the brandy.’
It was soon after that that Tom the cabin boy's Aunt Clarabel asked him to put the cat out.
The bar was still full of happy drinkers, but none saw what Tom saw as he opened the door into Witchball Street.
Marching through the churchyard came a strange lantern-lit procession.
It was led by Captain Pugwash with a large barrel of brandy and a look of extreme self-satisfaction on his face.
There followed Cut-throat Jake and the ugly group which Tom had spotted in Catgut Alley, hands high in the air and escorted by a Dragoon apiece.
After them, each carrying his barrel, followed the Mate, Barnabas and Willy.
The Colonel brought up the rear.
‘Well I never,’ thought Tom, ‘The Captain really seems to have pulled it off this time!’
And he went back inside.
It was no distance to Mutton House.
Soon Pugwash was knocking on the door.
It was opened at once by the Town Clerk.
‘Ah — welcome,’ said he.
‘The Mayor will be most gratified to see you.’
In the main reception room a merry party was in progress.
The Mayor looked highly delighted as Captain Pugwash, still clutching his brandy barrel, ushered his captives, their guards and his crew into the room.
‘Your Worship,’ he cried, ‘My mission is complete.
Permit me to deliver to you the infamous smuggler Cut-throat Jake, his vile accomplices in crime, and the contraband spirit which, with our own eyes, we saw them bring on shore!
I hereby claim the Huge Reward!’
But then something strange happened.
The Mayor burst out laughing.
The Colonel laughed.
Even Parson Slype and Doom the jailer laughed.
Jake and his men gave a loud guffaw and so did the Town Clerk and the Dragoons.
And now, to his horror and surprise, Pugwash realised that his enemies had lowered their hands, that drinks were being served to them and that the soldiers were transferring their attentions to himself, the Mate, Willy and Barnabas.
‘Well, well, well, Captain,’ said Mayor Mutton when the laughter ceased, ‘So you are apprehended at last…caught in the very act of importing illicit French liquor into His Majesty's Realm, a heinous crime for which there is but one penalty.’
‘B-but this is m-monstrous…iniquitous!’ spluttered Pugwash.
‘Certainly smuggling is monstrous and iniquitous,’ replied the Mayor smoothly, ‘and we are indeed fortunate to have stamped it out at last.
It is fortunate also that I, as Mayor, have full powers as a Magistrate.
So why waste time?
I hereby declare this a Court of Law with myself as judge and those present as jury.
Be so good, Captain Jake, as to act as foreman.’
‘Of witnesses we have no need, and as for the evidence, why…four barrels of brandy obligingly carried in by the accused themselves.
Do we find the prisoners guilty…or not guilty?’
‘You must be jokin', Mister Mayor,’ roared Jake, ‘Them's guilty, o'course, guilty as guilty can be!
And might I’, he added with a nasty grin, ‘apply forthwith for the post of town executioner?’
‘Why of course,’ said the Mayor, placing a large black pocket handkerchief on top of his wig.
‘Horatio Pugwash, you and your ruffianly companions having been found guilty of the abominable crime of smuggling, I sentence you to be taken from here to the Baddie's Tower, and at dawn to Gallows Marsh, and there hanged by the neck.
And a good riddance too!
Oh, and by the way,’ he added smugly, ‘I and my friends here will be claiming the King's Huge Reward.
The town's finances, and ours needless to say, are as usual at a low ebb!’
When Tom the cabin boy went out again into Witchball Street, to fetch the cat in this time, he saw a very different procession making its way across the churchyard.
Captain Pugwash, the Mate, Barnabas and Willy, hands held high and heads low, were being escorted by guards and jailer towards the Baddie's Tower.
He heard the hollow slam of the prison door.
Then only the singing and laughter from Aunt Clarabel's bar.
‘Oh dear,’ thought Tom, ‘He didn't pull it off after all!’
But when he told his aunt what he had seen, she grinned all over her broad features.
‘I never did trust that new Mayor Mutton nor none of his creatures neither,’ said she.
‘Wot's more, one of my customers at the Inn 'as proof positive that the election was rigged.
As for that lot from Catgut Alley, why, now it seems that the big beardy one you saw is an old accomplice o' Mutton's.
But never fear, Nephew Tom.
Your Aunty ain't lived alongside this 'ere graveyard all these years for nuffin'.’
In a deep dungeon beneath the Baddie's Tower sat Captain Pugwash and the Mate and Willy and Barnabas.
The Captain was still dazed at the shock of the sudden change in his fortunes.
One moment he had been looking forward to a happy and wealthy retirement and now, minutes later, he was a condemned criminal with only a few hours left to live.
He saw now what had happened.
The Mayor and his friends were themselves the criminals, hand in glove with the smugglers whose leader Jake was clearly an old ally.
The whole elaborate farce had been staged so that it would seem that the wanted miscreants had been arrested, whereas in fact they were still free.
The smuggling would continue and the evildoers would get the Huge Reward.
‘If that's what comes o' supportin' lor'n'order,’ complained the Mate gloomily, ‘I'm goin' back to piracy.’
‘Not for long you ain't,’ growled Barnabas.
‘It can't be many hours to dawn, an' we's condemned prisoners, remember?’
‘Aye, an' no sign o' no 'earty breakfast neither,’ grumbled Willy.
Then, in the silence that followed, they heard a faint scratching sound.
Then a knocking.
Then a grinding and then all of a sudden Captain Pugwash fell flat on his face as the stone he had been sitting on swung upwards, revealing a dark space below.
And out of the space came Tom the cabin boy.
‘Tom!’ cried the Captain, but ‘SHH!
Quiet all of you,’ whispered the boy, ‘Listen.
There's an underground tunnel that goes from here to an empty tomb in the churchyard.
It was dug by an escaping prisoner in the old days; my aunt knows all about it.
If we can get you out through it, you're free.
Come on, who's going first?’
It was hard work.
None of the pirates were exactly slim, and once more the Mate wished he hadn't eaten so much lobster for lunch.
But they all tightened their belts and after a great deal of grunting and squeezing and pulling and pushing they emerged, one by one, into the moonlit churchyard.
Tom followed last.
‘Help!
A ghost!’ gulped Willy.
‘That's no ghost,’ whispered Tom, ‘that's my Aunt Clarabel.
Stand clear while she puts the stone back.’
‘You're right, Tom,’ chuckled his aunt, ‘none of 'em's ready for buryin' yet.
But what do I 'ear!
Keep down!
There's some'un comin'.’
There was indeed.
Dreadlock Doom the jailer had discovered the loss of his prisoners and, cursing horribly, was running back to Mutton House.
‘Quick now, Cap'n!’ breathed Aunt Clarabel, ‘Back to your ship and away!
Take 'em along Witchball Street, Tom, and down to the quay that way.
I'll stay here an' settle a few old scores with our precious Mayor an' all!’
As Tom hustled Pugwash and the pirates away, she ran back to the Jolly Jailer.
‘Out with 'ee all!’ she called to her customers in the bar.
‘We all knows as Mayor Mutton an' 'is men rigged the election.
Now's the time to give 'em their cumuppance.
Follow me!’
And she led the noisy group out into the churchyard.
‘Quiet all off 'ee!’ she ordered.
‘Hide behind the tombstones an' attack when I tell 'ee!’
They were just in time…
…for moments later the Mayor, the Parson and the Clerk, along with Jake and his gang, the jailer and the Colonel (whose Dragoons had been dismissed), all came stumbling into the churchyard.
‘At 'em!’ shouted Aunt Clarabel and, with whoops of delight and yells of derision, she and her friends dashed at the new arrivals.
All were somewhat fuddled with drink but none more than the Mayor and his party.
In a few minutes it was all over.
Armed with sticks and bottles and bare fists the sturdy folk of Sinkport made short work of their opponents, and Aunt Clarabel herself ended the contest by knocking Cut-throat Jake senseless with a rolling-pin.
‘Now!
Into the jailhouse with the lot of 'em!’ she cried, and, one and all, the Mayor and his friends were bundled along to the dungeons of the Baddie's Tower.
For the second time that night the prison door slammed shut.
‘And none o' them knows the secret o' the tunnel,’ thought Aunt Clarabel happily as she led her followers back to the Jolly Jailer and handed out free drinks to all.
Meanwhile, Captain Pugwash and his crew and Tom had reached their ship.
The quay was deserted; soon the Black Pig was floating out on the falling tide, and for once as they hoisted the mainsail the crew were well pleased to be going back to sea.
But then the wind dropped, and by dawn the Captain was disappointed to see that they were still uncomfortably close to Sinkport.
The crew were demanding breakfast.
Reluctantly Tom, the only one who could cook, handed the wheel over to Pugwash.
Steering was never one of the Captain's strong points and the waters were notoriously treacherous.
Suddenly the ship came to a slithering halt.
The Black Pig was stuck on the mud.
‘Oh dear!’ said the Mate, ‘Wot now?’
‘I'll tell you wot!
Them's comin' after us, that's wot!’ cried Barnabas, pointing to a small boat approaching rapidly from the shore.
‘Ee!
They'll 'ang us after all!’ muttered Willy.
But poor Captain Pugwash remained silent.
He was speechless.
Fabulous good fortune, then disaster, escape and now re-capture.
It was all too much for him.
He was just about to sink into a state of total collapse when Tom cried:
‘I don't know what you're all fussing about.
It's Aunt Clarabel!’
And so it was.
Rowed by a team of friends she was soon alongside, aboard and tucking into a substantial breakfast.
‘Right, Cap'n,’ she announced, wiping her lips and smiling broadly.
‘You can come back now…if you can get the old tub off the mud, that is.
All is well.
In fact’, she went on, ‘much more than well.
Mutton an' 'is mates are under arrest and yours truly, that's me , 'as been elected rightful Mayor this mornin'!’
‘An' you Cap'n,’ she added, ‘bein' 'eld responsible for these 'appy events,and the capture o' Cut-throat Jake, are the hero of Sinkport!’
Captain Pugwash blinked.
‘A-and the Huge Reward?’ he asked anxiously.
‘Yours, all yours for the askin',’ replied Aunt Clarabel.
‘In fact, it'll probably be even huger by the time we've convicted Mutton on corruption charges,as well as Jake for smugglin'!’
‘B-but w-what about you ?’ stammered the Captain.
‘W-won't you want some of it?’
‘Not a penny!’ retorted Aunt Clarabel stoutly.
‘What would I be needing money for with a likely lad like Tom here to support me?’
‘Fabulous Fortunes!’ remarked Captain Pugwash happily as he contemplated the Huge Reward.
‘Perhaps I will retire to Sinkport after all.
I might even end up as Mayor myself…one of these days.’
John Ryan has spent most of his working life making books and TV films for children.
Captain Pugwash is probably his best-known character but there have been many others: Harris Tweed, Lettice Leefe, Mary, Mungo and Midge, Sir Prancelot, and Cardinal Grotti in the Catholic Herald .
Married with three children and several grandchildren, John Ryan now lives and works in Rye, Sussex.
Captain Pugwash has been appearing in picture-books, on television, stage and video ever since his creation for Eagle magazine in 1950.
He was in Radio Times as a strip cartoon for eight years and his portrait has hung in the Royal Academy.
This book is intended not only for present-day children but also for all who have ever enjoyed the Captain's adventures.
The story could have happened anywhere, but some readers may notice that Sinkport closely resembles a well-known coastal town in East Sussex.
‘One of the world's best-loved and least successful pirates’The Times 